eScholarship provides open access, scholarly publishing
services to the University of California and delivers a dynamic
research platform to scholars worldwide.
Electronic Theses and Dissertations
UC Santa Cruz
Peer Reviewed
Title:
Dark Matter Annihilation at the Galactic Center
Author:
Linden, Timothy Ryan
Acceptance Date:
2013
Series:
UC Santa Cruz Electronic Theses and Dissertations
Degree:
Ph.D., PhysicsUC Santa Cruz
Advisor:
Profumo, Stefano
Committee:
Jeltema, Tesla, Ritz, Steve
Permalink:
http://escholarship.org/uc/item/41d7v3qd
Abstract:
Copyright Information:
All rights reserved unless otherwise indicated. Contact the author or original publisher for any
necessary permissions. eScholarship is not the copyright owner for deposited works. Learn more
at http://www.escholarship.org/help_copyright.html#reuse

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA
SANTA CRUZ
DARK MATTER ANNIHILATION AT THE GALACTIC CENTER
A dissertation submitted in partial satisfaction of the
requirements for the degree of
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY
in
PHYSICS
by
Tim Linden
June 2013
The Dissertation of Tim Linden
is approved:
Professor Stefano Profumo, Chair
Professor Tesla Jeltema
Professor Steve Ritz
Dean Tyrus Miller
Vice Provost and Dean of Graduate Studies

Copyright c⃝by
Tim Linden
2013

Table of Contents
List of Figures
v
List of Tables
vi
Abstract
vii
Acknowledgments
ix
1
Introduction
1
1.1
Gravitational Signatures of Dark Matter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
1.2
Particle Properties of Dark Matter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.3
The Indirect Detection of Particle Dark Matter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
1.4
Astrophysical Backgrounds
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
1.5
Telescopes and Relevant Search Techniques
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
1.6
Outline
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
2
On the Origin of Gamma Rays from the Galactic Center
18
2.1
Analysis Procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
2.2
Properties of the Inner Emission
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
2.3
Possible Origins of the Observed Emission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
2.3.1
Cosmic ray Acceleration by the Supermassive Black Hole
. . . . . .
26
2.3.2
Annihilating Dark Matter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
2.3.3
Millisecond Pulsars . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
32
2.4
Constraints On The Dark Matter Annihilation Cross Section
. . . . . . . .
35
2.5
Discussion and Summary
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
3
The Morphology of Hadronic Emission Models for the Gamma-Ray Source
at the Galactic Center
51
3.1
Gas Density near the Galactic Center
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
3.2
A Qualitative Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
3.3
Propagation of High-energy Protons
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
3.4
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
3.5
Discussion and Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
64
iii

4
Exploring the Nature of the Galactic Center γ-Ray Source with the
Cherenkov Telescope Array
72
4.1
Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
75
4.2
Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
80
4.3
Discussion and Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
84
5
Dark Matter and Synchrotron Emission from Galactic Center Radio Fil-
aments
95
5.1
The Astrophysics of the Non-Thermal Radio Filaments . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
5.2
Synchrotron Emission From Dark Matter Annihilation inside of Non-Thermal
Radio Filaments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
103
5.3
Comparison to Speciﬁc Filaments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
109
5.4
Discussion and Conclusions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
117
6
Conclusion
124
6.1
The Status of Light Dark Matter Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
124
6.2
Observations Indicating Other Dark Matter Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
128
6.3
Constraints on WIMP Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
131
6.4
Future Progress . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
132
iv

List of Figures
1.1
Feynman Interactions for Interactions Between Matter and Dark Matter . .
17
2.1
γ-ray Fluxes from the Galactic Center as Observed by the Fermi-LAT . . .
40
2.2
Model of π0-decay emission from the Galactic Center . . . . . . . . . . . . .
41
2.3
Residual γ-ray emission from the Galactic Center . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
42
2.4
Models for the Point source at the Galactic Center . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
2.5
Fraction of Total Residual Stemming from Point Sourcel . . . . . . . . . . .
44
2.6
Dark Matter Fits to the γ-ray Residual
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
2.7
The Contribution of Dark Matter to the Total Residual
. . . . . . . . . . .
46
2.8
The Spectra of MSPs detected by the Fermi-LAT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
2.9
The Spectra of Globular Clusters Detected by the Fermi-LAT . . . . . . . .
48
2.10 Constraints on the Dark Matter Cross-Section for Contracted Proﬁles
. . .
49
2.11 Constraints on the Dark Matter Cross-Section for NFW Proﬁles
. . . . . .
50
3.1
Models of the Gas Density Near the Galactic Center . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
3.2
γ-ray Emission Spectrum Produced by Protons from the Galactic Center
.
70
3.3
γ-ray Emission Morphology Produced by Protons from the Galactic Center
71
4.1
Modeled ACT Observations of the γ-ray Morphology of the Galactic Center
89
4.2
Morphology of Photon Counts in Mock ACT Observations . . . . . . . . . .
90
4.3
Same as Fig 4.2 for Diﬀusively Propagating Protons
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
4.4
Cumulative Photon Morphology for Various Models of the Galactic Center
92
4.5
Angular Distribution of Photons for Various Models of the Galactic Center
93
4.6
Same as Fig. 4.5 for Diﬀusively Propagating Protons . . . . . . . . . . . . .
94
5.1
The Eﬃciency with which Non-Thermal Filaments Eject External Electrons
119
5.2
The Dark Matter Induced Electron Spectrum of Non-Thermal Filaments . .
120
5.3
The Dark Matter Induced Synchrotron Spectrum of Non-Thermal Filaments 121
5.4
Comparisons to Speciﬁc Non-Thermal Filaments
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
122
5.5
The Flux of Filaments as a Function of their Galactic Center Distance . . .
123
v

List of Tables
3.1
Diﬀusion Parameters in Our Galactic Center Model
. . . . . . . . . . . . .
58
5.1
Spectral Characteristics of Observed Non-Thermal Radio Filaments
. . . .
110
vi

Abstract
Dark Matter Annihilation at the Galactic Center
by
Tim Linden
Observations by the WMAP and PLANCK satellites have provided extraordinarily accu-
rate observations on the densities of baryonic matter, dark matter, and dark energy in the
universe. These observations indicate that our universe is composed of approximately ﬁve
times as much dark matter as baryonic matter. However, eﬀorts to detect a particle re-
sponsible for the energy density of dark matter have been unsuccessful. Theoretical models
have indicated that a leading candidate for the dark matter is the lightest supersymmetric
particle, which may be stable due to a conserved R-parity. This dark matter particle would
still be capable of interacting with baryons via weak-force interactions in the early universe,
a process which was found to naturally explain the observed relic abundance of dark matter
today. These residual annihilations can persist, albeit at a much lower rate, in the present
universe, providing a detectable signal from dark matter annihilation events which occur
throughout the universe. Simulations calculating the distribution of dark matter in our
galaxy almost universally predict the galactic center of the Milky Way Galaxy (GC) to
provide the brightest signal from dark matter annihilation due to its relative proximity and
large simulated dark matter density. Recent advances in telescope technology have allowed
for the ﬁrst multiwavelength analysis of the GC, with suitable eﬀective exposure, angular
resolution, and energy resolution in order to detect dark matter particles with properties
vii

similar to those predicted by the WIMP miracle. In this work, I describe ongoing eﬀorts
which have successfully detected an excess in γ-ray emission from the region immediately
surrounding the GC, which is diﬃcult to describe in terms of standard diﬀuse emission
predicted in the GC region. While the jury is still out on any dark matter interpretation of
this excess, I describe several related observations which may indicate a dark matter origin.
Finally, I discuss the role of future telescopes in diﬀerentiating a dark matter model from
astrophysical emission.
viii

Acknowledgments
I am in great debt to many people without whom this work never would have
been completed.
I’d ﬁrst like to thank my many collaborators over the last ﬁve years:
Brandon Anderson, Alexander Belikov, Eric Carlson, Ilias Cholis, Alessandro Cuoco, Jay
Gallagher, Dan Hooper, Tesla Jeltema, Vicky Kalogera, Elizabeth Lovegrove, Andrea Prest-
wich, Stefano Profumo, Jeremy Sepinsky, Jennifer Siegal-Gaskins, Tracy Slatyer, Francesca
Valsecchi, Vincenzo Vitale, Christoph Weniger, Farhad Yusef-Zadeh, and Andreas Zezas. I
would like to thank my graduate student compatriots for their help and support over the
last ﬁve years - especially my oﬃce mates Laura Fava, Chris Moody, Lauren Porter, and
Max Wainwright for always making the oﬃce an enjoyable place to work.
I would also like to thank Dan Hooper and Stefano Profumo for acting as my
advisors over the last 5 years. The results presented here are largely due to their insights,
optimism, encouragement, and energy. Over the course of these collaborative projects, I
have learned an important lesson about the passion necessary to contribute novel ideas to
this ﬁeld. I am also grateful to my undergraduate advisor, Vicky Kalogera, for her continued
support through my graduate years – as well as for her work and understanding in aiding
my scientiﬁc progression from a careless, bumbling undergraduate into a graduate student
capable of meaningful scientiﬁc research.
Most importantly, I would like to thank my family for their unwavering support
over the last ﬁve years. I would like to thank my parents Ted and Kelly, and my siblings
Andy and Caroline for cultivating my interest in math and science from a young age, for
keeping me focused through stressful adolescent years, and for providing support in instances
ix

to countless to remember, much less mention. Finally, and most importantly, I would like
to give my sincere thanks to my wife, Colleen, for her unwavering support during the last
ﬁve years. She has always been with me, through hectic travel schedules, long-distance
separations, and stressful exams, and without her constant support this would never have
been possible.
Reprinting of Previously Published Material
The text of this dissertation includes reprints of the following previously published
material: “On the Origin of Gamma-Rays from the Galactic Center” along with Dan Hooper
(Physical Review D, vol. 84, Issue 12, id. 123005. (2011)), “The Morphology of Hadronic
Emission Models for the Gamma-Ray Source at the Galactic Center” with Elizabeth Love-
grove and Stefano Profumo (The Astrophysical Journal, Volume 753, Issue 1, article id.
41, 6 pp. (2012)), “Exploring the Nature of the Galactic Center γ-Ray Source with the
Cherenkov Telescope Array” with Stefano Profumo (The Astrophysical Journal, Volume
760, Issue 1, article id. 23, 7 pp. (2012)) and “Dark Matter and Synchrotron Emission from
Galactic Center Radio Filaments” with Dan Hooper and Farhad Yusef-Zadeh (The Astro-
physical Journal, Volume 741, Issue 2, article id. 95, 9 pp. (2011)). Stefano Profumo and
Dan Hooper have supervised the research projects used in this dissertation, while Farhad
Yusef-Zadeh and Elizabeth Lovegrove give permission for these articles to be reprinted here.
x

Chapter 1
Introduction
1.1
Gravitational Signatures of Dark Matter
Dark Matter is all around us – literally. The most recent measurements by the
Planck Collaboration indicate that the total energy density of our universe is composed
of only 4.6% baryonic matter (Planck Collaboration et al., 2013). This number includes
all the stars, gas, dust, and radiation that we have ever observed. The other 95.4% of the
universe is “dark”, meaning it does not interact with photons with a typical electromagnetic
cross-section. A signiﬁcant percentage of this energy density (26.8% of the total) exists in
the form of “dark matter”, while the rest is composed of “dark energy”. While dark energy
is homogeneous throughout the entire universe, dark matter settles into clumps which then
form the dominant gravitational energy source of all galaxies.
If dark matter does not interact with light, then how was it ﬁrst discovered, and
how can it be detected today? The large energy density of dark matter allows it to have
a signiﬁcant impact on the structure of the universe on large scales, where gravity acts as
1

a dominant force. The eﬀect of dark matter was ﬁrst discovered by Fritz Zwicky in 1933.
Zwicky had analyzed the Coma Cluster, a nearby galaxy cluster hosting over 1,000 galaxies,
and found that that the orbital velocity of each galaxy around the center of the cluster was
far greater than would be inferred from the total luminous mass of the cluster. If only
the luminous mass were holding the cluster together, it would simply ﬂy apart! Zwicky
concluded that a large amount of “dunkle Materie” (dark matter) must be present in order
to hold the cluster together (Zwicky, 1933).
Several years later, Babcock (1939) observed that the rotation velocity of stars in
the outer region of M31 was unexpectedly high, and noted the possibility that missing mass
would be needed to account for these observations. At the same time, Jan Oort studied the
galaxies NGC 3115 and NGC 4494 and found the mass distribution to be almost unrelated
to the luminosity distribution (Oort, 1940). In 1959, Kahn & Woltjer (1959) calculated
amount of mass needed to bind the local group of galaxies (including the Milky Way and
M31) into a stable cluster, and found that the mass must be at least six times the luminous
mass of the local group. They posited that a large component of intergalactic mass must
be necessary in order to stabilize the orbits of local group galaxies.
However, advancements in this ﬁeld progressed slowly for several decades, due
to the lack of a smoking-gun signal indicating the need for a new (and dominant) source
of gravitational forces in the universe. This changed in 1970 when Vera Rubin produced
rotation curves of stars in the Andromeda galaxy, indicating that the rotational velocity of
stars at large distances from the center of the galaxy were nearly constant, instead of falling
oﬀas r−1/2 as would be expected if the luminous matter near the galactic center accounted
2

for the entire mass density of the galaxy (Rubin & Ford, 1970). This measurement, of
vastly higher quality than previous work, set the stage for serious investigations into the
source of this missing mass. Roberts & Whitehurst extended this measurement to the very
outer reaches of M31, where they found the mass-to-light ratio to be approximately 200
times larger than the typical value found in the Milky Way (Roberts & Whitehurst, 1975).
Meanwhile, Ostriker & Peebles (1973) found that a large spherically symmetric mass must
be present in galaxies to explain the stability of the galactic disk. Interestingly, van den
Bergh (1999) notes that this “second revolution” in searches for dark matter did not refer
to the earlier works by Zwicky and Oort – as they did not tie in this missing galactic mass
with the forces which controlled the motion of galaxy clusters.
If the anomalous rotation measurements identiﬁed by Zwicky, Oort, Babcock, Ru-
bin, and others indeed stems from a new “dark” addition to the stress-energy tensor of the
universe, then some new, and possibly detectable object must be responsible for this missing
mass. Some early eﬀorts concentrated on dim, but massive, objects such as solar mass black
holes, or red dwarf stars which would be diﬃcult to observe (see e.g. Roberts & Whitehurst
(1975)). However these were also excluded, as the large number density of black holes in the
galaxy would greatly increase the probability of that more distant stars could be observed
with light which passes near the black hole, brightening in the process (Paczynski, 1986).
This would create micro-lensing of visible stars, a process which has not been observed com-
monly enough to explain the dark matter densities with these massive objects (Tisserand
et al., 2007; Graﬀ& Freese, 1996)
Other eﬀorts focused on weakly-interacting particles such as the neutrino, as ev-
3

idence was emerging that the neutrino may have a non-zero rest mass (Kuchowicz, 1969).
Cowsik & McClelland (1973) noted that if the neutrino had a rest mass of only a few
eV/c2, this might be suﬃcient to explain the entire dark matter mass observed in galaxy
and galaxy cluster observations. A consequence of this is that the dark matter would be
“hot”, that is, it would have a relativistic mass far in excess of its rest mass (Doroshkevich
et al., 1981). However, White et al. (1983), utilizing their recent work on the evolution of
cosmic structure (Frenk et al., 1983), found that the scales on which hot-dark matter, such
as neutrinos, collapse to form gravitational potentials hosting galaxies does not match the
large coherence length found in observations of the formation of structure in our universe.
Notably, this was the ﬁrst argument (of which the author is aware) which employed obser-
vations about the cosmology of our universe, and used it in order to place constraints on
the unknown nature of a fundamental particle in our universe.
It was then posited that a particle heavier than the neutrino could exist, which
would make the dark matter warm (Blumenthal et al., 1982) or even cold (Blumenthal
et al., 1984), solving the structure formation problems indicated by White et al. (1983). A
number of papers posited that a cold dark matter (hereafter CDM) particle was capable
of explaining the missing mass of these galaxies, and simultaneously produced very good
ﬁts to current observations of cosmic structure (Bond & Szalay, 1983; Blumenthal et al.,
1984). Two convincing candidates were put forth, including the lightest supersymmetric
particle, which could be made stable through a conserved R-parity (Goldberg, 1983; Pagels
& Primack, 1982), as well as axions which had been previously posited in order to explain
the strong CP problem (Preskill et al., 1983; Dine & Fischler, 1983)
4

It is also worth noting that the addition of a new dark matter component was
initially only one solution which solved the anomalous rotation curves observed in both
galactic and extragalactic systems. Another possible solution was that gravity is a stronger
force at large distances than predicted by General Relativity. In terms of Einstein’s ﬁeld
equations:
Rµν −1
2gµνR + gµνΛ = 8πG
c4 Tµν
(1.1)
either the stress-energy tensor (Tµν describing the energy density which produces
a curvature of space time) or the metric tensor (gµν), describing how much space time
distorts due to the existence of a given energy density) could be modiﬁed in order to create
faster rotation from a given amount of luminous matter. The prior change corresponds to
the addition of a new dark matter component to the energy density of the universe, while
the latter component could describe a modiﬁcation in the gravitational ﬁeld responds to
the existence of a given energy density in the universe.
As an alternative to the dark matter hypothesis, several group of theories, col-
lectively known as MONDs (Modiﬁcation of Newtonian Dynamics) Milgrom (1983), have
proposed that the gravitational force may be modiﬁed for extremely small modiﬁcations.
As a consequence, the ﬂat stellar rotation rate at large diﬀerences from the galactic center
may be explained by the ﬂattening of the relationship between the acceleration and the
gravitational potential from the many sources very far from the outer halo of each galaxy.
While theoretical prejudice, along with the potential of dark matter to explain the
growth of cosmic structure, motivated most people to pursue a new dark matter particle,
5

there was, for some time, no smoking-gun which ruled out a MOND hypothesis. However,
in 2006 observations of the “Bullet Cluster” provided evidence for the interpretation of dark
matter as a new particle in nature (Clowe et al., 2006; Bradaˇc et al., 2006). Speciﬁcally,
astronomers found evidence for two galaxy clusters which had recently collided with a
relative velocity that was nearly perpendicular to our line of sight. During the collision
the collisional gases in each galaxy cluster interacted inelastically, while the dark matter
particles pass through without interacting. This leads to a spatial displacement between
the dark matter (and the center of the cluster gravitational potential) and the position
of hot gas, which is at odds with modiﬁcations to the strength of the gravitational force.
While some proponents of MOND have produced methods for overcoming this observation,
recent years have seen a growing belief in the CDM hypothesis. For the remainder of this
thesis, we will work within this framework, where the lightest supersymmetric particle is
the dominant component of our universes dark matter.
1.2
Particle Properties of Dark Matter
Any particle CDM candidate must have three critical properties: (1) it must be
electromagnetically neutral, (2) it must be stable (on the order of a Hubble time), (3) it
must be cold, which means it must have a large rest mass compared to its kinetic energy.
The ﬁrst property rules out many known stable particles (e.g. proton, electron), the second
property rules out massive neutral particles like the neutron, while the third rules out a
neutrino, or other extremely light particle.
An obvious candidate which fulﬁlls the three criteria above is the lightest super-
6

symmetric particle. While the properties of the supersymmetric particles are unknown, a
particle fulﬁlling all three above the above properties is theoretically motivated. In order for
all supersymmetric particles to have escaped observation, the most reasonable assumption
is that they have couplings which have so far escaped the detection of colliders such as the
Tevatron and LHC. This is not unreasonable, since a neutral, stable dark matter particle
will not itself show up in collider detectors, and instead must be observed as a signal
of missing energy, a notoriously diﬃcult measurement. Moreover, because supersymmetric
models don’t generically respect experimentally veriﬁed conservation laws (like conservation
of lepton and baryon number) a new symmetry is required to forbid couplings that would
violate these numbers. This “R-parity” naturally implies that the lightest supersymmetric
particle would be stable, as it could not decay to any combination of lighter particles while
conserving supersymmetric particle number. These qualities fulﬁll the second and third
criterion for a dark matter particle. It must, at this point, be assumed that the lightest
supersymmetric particle is electromagnetically neutral, although this is the outcome of many
supersymmetric models.
Interestingly, it was ﬁrst pointed out by Lee & Weinberg (1977) and Steigman
(1979a) that if the new particle (not yet at this point a supersymmetric particle) was a
Majorana particle with a weak interaction cross-section and a mass on the weak scale,
then the particle would interact with standard model particles in the early universe. In
this period, the dark matter particle would obtain an equilibrium density with the various
species of standard model particles.
When the temperature of the thermal bath in the
early universe dropped below approximately 1/20 of the particle mass, the number of dark
7

matter particles would lock in at the equilibrium rate. Amazingly, this current density of
WIMP particles was almost equivalent to the observed energy density of dark matter in
our universe! This discovery, termed as the “WIMP miracle” (Weakly Interacting Massive
Particle) Steigman (1979a) explained, for the ﬁrst time, why the energy densities of dark
matter and baryonic matter are relatively equivalent (instead of one dominating the total
energy budget of the universe by orders of magnitude.
The speciﬁed velocity averaged
cross-section when the particle freezes out of thermal equilibrium has a canonical value
<σv> = 3 × 10−26 cm3 s−1.
A natural consequence of this scenario is that some residual interactions between
WIMP particles should persist today, albeit at a signiﬁcantly smaller rate. By considering
a mock Feynman diagram, shown in Figure 1.1, where two Majorana WIMP particles
interact with two standard model particles, we can rotate the diagram to explain all three
variations of current WIMP interactions. First, two high energy standard model particles
could collide (in an experiment such as the Tevatron or LHC) producing two dark matter
particles.
Since dark matter particles are stable and don’t interact electromagnetically
(criterion 1 and 2), this would be seen as a signature of missing energy in particle physics
experiments. Secondly, a dark matter particle could pass by a standard model particle and
scatter through weak-scale interactions. This elastic scattering event would deposit kinetic
energy into the nucleus of the standard model particle, an eﬀect which can be observed
in low-background experiments where cold standard model particles are kept isolated from
any other energetic baryons or leptons. Lastly, two dark matter particles could collide and
annihilate into standard model particles. It is this ﬁnal process we will concern ourselves
8

with in the remainder of this thesis.
1.3
The Indirect Detection of Particle Dark Matter
If dark matter annihilates into standard model particles, Earth based observatories
could potentially detect their ﬂux. Since no single standard model particle can have a deﬁ-
nite dark matter or astrophysical origin, the determination of a dark matter signal must be
made on a statistical basis, using either the morphology and spectrum of incoming particles
in order to determine the dark matter or astrophysical origin. Telescopes can search for
either charged particle anti-particle pairs, such as electron/positron or proton/anti-proton
pairs, or can search for neutral particles such as photons and neutrinos. Charged particles
searches have two advantages. First, most models of dark matter annihilation distribute sig-
niﬁcantly more energy into charged particle pairs than into secondary γ-rays and neutrinos.
Secondly, anti-particles are often produced in relatively small quantities by astrophysical
processes, while Majorana dark matter models generically produce equivalent amounts of
matter and anti-matter - creating a clear signature of dark matter annihilation. However,
charged particles unfortunately isotropize quickly while moving through the random mag-
netic ﬁelds of the galaxy. Thus, charged particle detection yields no information about the
morphology of dark matter annihilations.
While neutrinos and photons occur farther down the decay chain of dark matter
annihilations and thus represent a smaller fraction of the total energy yield of each anni-
hilation, high energy photons and neutrinos which are produced promptly in these decay
chains then travel to the solar position relatively undisturbed. Thus, the observation of a
9

γ-ray photon from a dark matter annihilation event would yield information about where
that annihilation occurred in the sky. This information is extremely useful, as N-body simu-
lations and observations of astrophysical rotation curves give us detailed information about
where dark matter is clustered in the sky. The ability to compare that information with
observations is critical in separating any dark matter ﬂux from astrophysical backgrounds.
It is worth noting that this can become much more complicated for lower energy photons
or neutrinos which are produced via energy loss mechanisms from stable charged parti-
cles propagating through the interstellar medium (e.g. via synchrotron, bremsstrahlung, or
inverse-Compton scattering). These processes may still provide morphological information
of the dark matter density proﬁle, but this information must be carefully extracted from
the complexities of cosmic-ray propagation.
In order to search for evidence of dark matter annihilation into photons, we must
look in regions of the sky where the dark matter density is high. Due to its relative proximity
and high dark matter density, the Galactic center (GC) of the Milky Way is an optimal
location for these searches. Notably, simulations of dark matter structure formation almost
universally predict the center of the Milky Way galaxy to provide the most luminous source
of annihilating dark matter.
It is worth noting two concerns which immediately arise in searches for dark matter
annihilation at the GC. First, despite the very large density of dark matter (compared to
our solar neighborhood), the density of baryonic matter rises ever faster near the galactic
center, meaning that dark matter is a subdominant component of the mass density in the
inner region of the galaxy. Thus, gravitational models (i.e. of stellar rotation near the
10

galactic center) are unable to constrain the density of dark matter in this region. We must
rely on simulations of the dark matter density in order to determine the dark matter density
throughout the GC. This adds signiﬁcant uncertainty into our calculations.
This uncertainty is compounded by the fact that the large baryon density can
aﬀect the calculated dark matter proﬁle, a feature which was not implemented in early “dark
matter only” simulations of the dark matter density proﬁle. The addition of baryons can
aﬀect the dark matter proﬁle in one of two ways: baryons (unlike dark matter) can interact
electromagnetically and fall (condensate) into the GC. This change in the gravitational
potential can cause dark matter to infall as well, increasing the dark matter density very
near the GC, in a process known as adiabatic contraction (Gnedin et al., 2004a).
Alternatively, it has been argued that stellar feedback (e.g. from supernovae ex-
plosions or starburst driven outﬂows) can eﬀectively smooth out the dark matter proﬁle
on kpc scales, creating a dark matter “core” of nearly constant dark matter density in the
inner regions of the galaxy (Governato et al., 2010; Oh et al., 2011). This mechanism has
been modeled primarily in the context of dwarf galaxies, where it has been used in order to
help remedy the missing satellites problem as well as the too-big-to-fail problem (Walker &
Pe˜narrubia, 2011; Pe˜narrubia et al., 2012). Both of these challenges to the ΛCDM paradigm
examine the mismatch between the expected number and size of observed Milky Way dwarf
galaxies, compared to simulations. Typically simulations predict more massive satellites
than are observed.
In these cases, the predicted mass of the dwarf spheroidal galaxies
found in simulations would decrease, if baryonic eﬀects caused the central density of the
dwarf halos to decrease compared to the predictions from dark matter only simulations.
11

Applying models of supernova feedback to the GC, we ﬁnd that the high supernova
rate in this region (Crocker & Aharonian, 2011) implies that the dark matter density proﬁle
in the GC may also be cored. The ﬁnal eﬀect of the uncertain combination of adiabatic
contraction and supernova driven outﬂows is a large uncertainty in the proﬁle of the inner
galaxy.
Depending on the region of interest for diﬀerent observations, this can lead to
order of magnitude diﬀerences in the expected dark matter annihilation rate. These errors
must be considered carefully, especially when setting limits on the expected dark matter
annihilation cross-section, and comparing them between experiments.
1.4
Astrophysical Backgrounds
A second problem in searches for dark matter annihilation in the GC concerns
the dense astrophysical background1 In addition to being the brightest projected source
for particle dark matter annihilation, the GC also hosts diverse high energy sources such
as supernova remnants (Yusef-Zadeh et al., 1999), highly ionized gas (Wang et al., 2002),
dense molecular clouds (Ferriere, 2012), massive O/B stars (Sch¨odel et al., 2009) and both
young and recycled pulsar populations (Wharton et al., 2012).
Since many of these populations produce copious γ-ray emission, spectral or mor-
phological models of each emission class must be employed in order to subtract astrophysical
components and uncover any underlying emission from dark matter. Since this is extremely
diﬃcult (due to large uncertainties in models of astrophysical emission), the most promising
avenues often involve searches in regimes where the expected dark matter annihilation rate
1Of course, what is a annoying background in searches for dark matter annihilation may be a fascinating
signal for other astronomers!
12

forms a relatively large percentage of the total emission. One of the most promising energy
regimes is in γ-ray observations; assuming a standard model for WIMP dark matter (100
GeV particle annihilating to bottom quarks with a thermal cross-section and following an
NFW density proﬁle), dark matter is expected to produce ∼20% of the total γ-ray ﬂux be-
tween 1-3 GeV. Thus, simple astrophysical models (with signiﬁcant uncertainty) may still
place interesting limits on the dark matter annihilation rate.
1.5
Telescopes and Relevant Search Techniques
The indirect detection of particle dark matter depends on observations across the
electromagnetic spectrum. Since the ﬂux of photon changes by many orders of magnitude
between radio and γ-ray energies and the interactions between incoming photons and ma-
terials changes drastically as a function of photon energy, diﬀerent techniques are necessary
in order to measure astrophysical emission in diﬀerent energy regimes.
For the highest energy γ-rays, Atmospheric Cherenkov Telescopes (ACTs), such as
the High Energy Spectroscopic System (H.E.S.S.) and the Very Energetic Radiation Imag-
ing Telescope Array System (VERITAS) have been at the forefront in γ-ray observations of
the galactic center. These telescopes observe the sky by examining the Cherenkov radiation
produced when high energy γ-rays pair produce through interactions with virtual photons
from atoms high in the galactic atmosphere, creating highly energetic charged showers which
propagate through the atmosphere Hinton (2004). Unfortunately, due to the necessity for
incident γ-rays to make bright Cherenkov radiation from energetic showers in the upper
atmosphere, the sensitivity of ACT telescopes degrades quickly below energies of approxi-
13

mately 100 GeV, making them insensitive to dark matter annihilation from relatively light
particles.
Since the H.E.S.S. telescope is located in the southern hemisphere, it is in an
optimal position for long-duration observations of the GC region. These observations have
placed strong constraints on the annihilation cross-section of relatively high-mass (TeV
scale) dark matter models (Aharonian et al., 2006f; Abramowski et al., 2011; Aharonian
et al., 2006e). While these searches have not, thus far, ruled out the canonical thermal
annihilation cross-section for heavy dark matter particles, the parameter space of models
with enhanced annihilation cross-sections has been signiﬁcantly eroded. This has been a
critical development, as these observations have ruled out models of dark matter annihilation
which have been proposed to ﬁt a recently observed excess of high energy cosmic-rays at
the solar position (Adriani et al., 2009a; Abazajian & Harding, 2012).
The Fermi Large Area Telescope (Fermi-LAT) is a pair-conversion, space-based γ-
ray telescope, with an eﬀective energy range from approximately 100 MeV to 300 GeV At-
wood et al. (2009). Compared with previous missions such as EGRET Thompson et al.
(1993), the Fermi-LAT has a vastly superior eﬀective area (∼1 m2), energy resolution
(∼10%) and angular resolution (∼1◦at 1 GeV, and ∼0.1◦above 10 GeV). Since the
Fermi-LAT is based in space, it can detect signiﬁcantly lower-energy γ-rays than ACTs, al-
lowing the telescope to probe the vast majority of the theoretically motivated WIMP mass
range.
Additionally, radio telescopes have an important role in searches for dark matter
annihilation. Eﬀorts to employ radio telescopes in searches for dark matter beneﬁt from
14

the vastly superior angular resolution of radio instruments (e.g. VLA, 0.1”) compared to
γ-ray observatories. These give low energy missions a greatly superior ability to distinguish
diﬀuse emission from dark matter annihilation from point-source (or diﬀuse) astrophysical
backgrounds. However, as noted above, the majority of the radio signal from dark mat-
ter annihilation proceeds from the synchrotron radiation of energetic electrons produced
in dark matter searches. This means that the source of the synchrotron signal does not
correlate directly with the site of the dark matter annihilation. Many searches attempt to
simplify this assumption by evaluating regions where the synchrotron radiation from en-
ergetic electrons should be produced relatively quickly, validating the assumption that the
dark matter density should serve as a reasonable template for the synchrotron morphology.
Additionally, radio telescopes can focus on using their superior angular resolution to place
limits on astrophysical emission mechanisms, such as pulsars which may greatly contribute
to the astrophysical γ-ray background.
1.6
Outline
In the remainder of this dissertation, I will focus on several previously published
eﬀorts to compare our models of the dark matter induced photon ﬂux from the GC with
observations. Focusing primarily on γ-ray observations, in Chapter 2, I will describe an
interesting observation of an excess in spherically symmetric, diﬀuse γ-ray emission from
the region surrounding the GC. This signal has an energy spectrum and morphology well-
modeled by light dark matter models, and is diﬃcult to accurately produce with any known
astrophysical process. In Chapters 3 and 4 I will discuss models for the production of γ-rays
15

from the black hole at the center of our galaxy. We ﬁnd that while protons produced by
the central source provide an excellent observation for the spectrum and morphology of the
point-source observed in the GC, they are unable to reproduce the extended excess observed
in Chapter 2. In Chapter 5, I will discuss a radio study of the dark matter annihilation in
the ﬁlamentary arcs near the galactic center. We ﬁnd that dark matter annihilating within
these ﬁlaments explains the spectral signature observed in numerous radio ﬁlaments, and
additionally explains the luminosity distribution of the class of ﬁlaments as a function of
their galactic radius. Finally, in Chapter 6, I will note recent follow-up studies by validating
some of the conclusions in this work, and will look towards future studies which could further
elucidate the nature (dark matter or not) of photon emission from the GC region.
16

Figure 1.1 A Feynman Diagram depicting the three methods for the detection of dark mat-
ter. Reading the diagram with time moving from the left to the right shows the annihilation
of two dark matter particles (through some, currently unknown, interaction) into standard
model particles. Reading the diagram with time moving from the right to the left shows
the collider production of dark matter from the interaction of two energetic standard model
particles (e.g. quark interactions from the LHC or Tevatron). Finally, reading the diagram
with time moving from the bottom to the top shows the elastic scattering of a dark matter
particle oﬀof a standard model particle, which is detectable by direct detection experiments.
17

Chapter 2
On the Origin of Gamma Rays
from the Galactic Center
Since its launch in June of 2008, the Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope (FGST)
has been producing the most detailed and highest resolution observations to date of the
gamma-ray sky between 50 MeV and 100 GeV. Among the objectives of this experiment are
to increase our understanding of how astrophysical objects such as black holes and pulsars
accelerate cosmic rays, and to help identify the substance or substances that compose the
dark matter of our universe. For each of these areas of inquiry, the region surrounding
the center of the Milky Way represents a particularly interesting and promising target
of study. On the one hand, the Galactic Center is an extraordinarily rich and complex
region, containing our galaxy’s supermassive black hole, as well as supernova remnants,
massive X-ray binary systems, massive O and B type stars, and two young and massive
star clusters (Arches and Quintuplet) Wang et al. (2002); Yusef-Zadeh et al. (2000); LaRosa
18

et al. (2000a); Hooper et al. (2004a).
In this chapter, we follow previous work Hooper & Goodenough (2011a) and per-
form a detailed study of the spectral and morphological features of the gamma rays from the
Galactic Center region, with the intention of identifying or constraining the origins of these
particles. In particular, we produce gamma-ray maps which reveal the presence of both a
bright, approximately point-like, gamma-ray source at the Galactic Center, along with a
more spatially extended emission component. The spectrum of this extended source peaks
strongly between several hundred MeV and ∼10 GeV. We ﬁnd good agreement between our
results and those reported by other groups Hooper & Goodenough (2011a); Boyarsky et al.
(2011); Chernyakova et al. (2011).
In discussing the possible origins of this extended emission, we ﬁnd again that the
observed spectrum and morphology are consistent with that predicted from annihilating
dark matter particles with a mass of 7-12 GeV annihilating dominantly to leptons Hooper
& Goodenough (2011a) or a mass of 25-45 GeV annihilating dominantly to hadronic ﬁnal
states Goodenough & Hooper (2009). In either case, the normalization of the gamma-ray
ﬂux requires an annihilation cross section that is consistent, within astrophysical uncer-
tainties, with the value predicted for a simple thermal relic (σv ∼3 × 10−26 cm3/s). We
also discuss the possibility that the extended gamma-ray emission is produced through the
collisions of energetic protons which are accelerated by the supermassive black hole with
gas Chernyakova et al. (2011). While we consider this to be the leading astrophysical expla-
nation for the gamma-ray emission observed by the FGST, it is somewhat diﬃcult to assess
this hypothesis given how little is known or can be reliably predicted about the spectrum
19

or ﬂux of protons accelerated by the central black hole, and how little is known about the
history of this object (such as periods of ﬂaring and relative inactivity) and the properties
of the surrounding interstellar medium.
The remainder of this article is structured as follows. In Sec. 2.1, we describe
our analysis of the Fermi data and present gamma-ray maps of the Inner Galaxy and the
corresponding spectrum of this emission. In Sec. 2.2 we further describe the properties
of this emission and compare our results to those found by other groups. In Sec. 2.3 we
discuss several possible origins of this emission, including energetic protons from the central
supermassive black hole, dark matter annihilations, and a population of gamma-ray pulsars.
In Sec. 2.4, we derive constraints on the dark matter annihilation cross section which are at
least as stringent as those based on other observations, such as those of dwarf spheroidals,
galaxy clusters, the cosmological diﬀuse background, and nearby subhalos. In Sec. 2.5, we
discuss our results within the larger context of dark matter searches and summarize our
conclusions.
2.1
Analysis Procedure
We begin our analysis by generating contour maps of the region surrounding the
Galactic Center which describe the distribution of gamma rays observed by the Fermi-
LAT (Large Area Telescope) over the three years between August 4, 2008 and August 3,
2011. These maps were derived using only front-converting events (which have a superior
point-spread function compared to back-converting events) from the Pass 7 ultraclean class.
As recommended by the FGST collaboration, we include only events with zenith angles
20

smaller than 100 degrees, and do not include events recorded while the Fermi satellite was
transitioning through the South Atlantic Anomaly or while the instrument was not in survey
mode (e.g. during target of opportunity observations of ﬂaring sources). Each of the maps
has been smoothed out at a scale of 0.5 degrees (the contour maps thus represent the ﬂux
observed within a 0.5 degree radius of a given direction in the sky). These raw maps are
shown in the left frames of Fig. 2.1, for ﬁve diﬀerent energy ranges between 100 MeV and
100 GeV.
In each map, ten contours are shown, distributed linearly between 2.64×10−8 and
2.64×10−7cm−2 s−1 sq deg−1 (100-300 MeV), 2.45×10−8 and 2.45×10−7cm−2 s−1 sq deg−1
(300-1000 MeV), 1.07×10−8 and 1.07×10−7cm−2 s−1 sq deg−1 (1-3 GeV), 2.66×10−9 and
2.66 × 10−8cm−2 s−1 sq deg−1 (3-10 GeV), and 3.77 × 10−10 and 3.77 × 10−9cm−2 s−1 sq
deg−1 (10-100 GeV). Note that the 2.64 × 10−8cm−2 s−1 sq deg−1 contour appears out of
the ﬁeld in the upper-left and upper-middle frames.
The blue points shown in the maps represent the locations of sources contained in
the Fermi Second Source Catalog (2FGL) Nolan et al. (2012), and the size of each point is
proportional to the reported intensity of the source in the energy range shown. To account
for these sources, we have generated a template map of their emission (assuming the central
values for their intensity and locations as reported in the 2FGL), and taking into account
the point-spread function of the Fermi-LAT (as determined by the Fermi Tool gtpsf). In
the center frames of Fig. 2.1, we show the maps as they appear after subtracting this source
template.
Note that we have not removed the central bright source, as its emission is
diﬃcult to disentangle from dark matter annihilation products originating from the inner
21

region of a cusped halo proﬁle. We will return to this issue later in the article.
After subtracting these known sources, the dominant remaining component is the
diﬀuse emission associated with the disk of our galaxy.
This emission is dominated by
cosmic ray processes taking place throughout the disk of the Milky Way, which one must
look through in order to observe the Galactic Center. By studying the morphology of this
emission over the regions of 5◦< |l| < 10◦, we ﬁnd only a modest degree of variation with
galactic longitude. In Fig. 2.2, we show as solid lines the observed gamma-ray ﬂux as a
function of galactic latitude, averaged over the range of 7◦< |l| < 10◦(in order to avoid
any contamination with emission from the inner most degrees, we do not here make use of
the data within 7◦).
The gamma-ray emission from the disk of our galaxy is dominated by the decays of
neutral pions produced in cosmic ray interactions with gas, although inverse compton and
bremsstrahlung components also contribute. To model the morphology of the pion decay
component, we adopt the following distribution of gas Kalberla & Kerp (2009); Nakanishi
& Sofue (2003):
ρgas
∝
e−|z|/zsc(R),
R < 7 kpc,
(2.1)
ρgas
∝
e−|z|/zsc(R) e−R/Rsc,
R > 7 kpc,
where z and R describe the location relative to the Galactic Center in cylindrical coordi-
nates. We set Rsc = 3.15 kpc (as ﬁt to the data shown in Fig. 4 of Ref. Kalberla & Kerp
(2009)) and zsc(R) = 0.1 + 0.00208 × (R/kpc)2 kpc (as ﬁt to Fig. 4 of Ref. Nakanishi &
Sofue (2003)), in good agreement with observations of 21-cm surveys, which trace the den-
sity of neutral hydrogen. To estimate the ﬂux of pion decay gamma rays, we integrate this
22

distribution over the line-of-sight (and again smooth over a radius of 0.5 degrees). After ac-
counting for the Fermi-LAT point-spread function, we ﬁnd that this gas distribution leads
to the morphology described by the dashed lines in Fig. 2.2. This is in good agreement
with the observed morphology of the diﬀuse emission. We also note that the spectral shape
implied by the relative ﬂuxes in these ﬁve energy bins is consistent with that predicted for a
combination of pion decay and inverse compton scattering processes, as previously found in
Ref. Hooper & Goodenough (2011a). By subtracting this disk template from the gamma-
ray maps, we are able to remove the overwhelming majority of the diﬀuse astrophysical
background from our maps. We emphasize that in performing this subtraction, we are not
extrapolating any physical features of the inner galaxy, but are merely extrapolating the
line-of-sight gas densities along the disk from directions slightly away from the Galactic
Center to those more aligned with the Galactice Center.
In the right frames of Fig. 2.1, we show the resulting maps after subtracting both
the known sources template (again, not including the bright central source) and the line-
of-sight gas template.
In each energy range, the majority of the background has been
accurately removed by this simple subtraction. While this subtraction procedure does not
perfectly remove all likely astrophysical backgrounds, the residuals outside of the inner ∼2◦
are very modest, typically on order of 10% or less of the residual ﬂux in the innermost region
of the Galaxy. We include the observed spatial variations of the residuals as a systematic
error, which we propagate throughout this study.
The residuals in this innermost region include a roughly spherically symmetric
component centered around the Galactic Center, along with a sub-dominant component
23

that is somewhat extended along the disk. Due to its similar angular extent, we consider it
likely that this component is associated with emission from proton-proton collisions taking
place in the Galactic Ridge, as observed at higher energies by HESS Aharonian et al.
(2006a). The remaining spherically symmetric component could plausibly originate from
dark matter annihilations, processes associated with the Milky Way’s supermassive black
hole, gamma-ray pulsars, or a combination of these and other sources. We will return to
these issues in Secs. 2.2 and 2.3.
In Fig. 2.3, we show the spectrum of the emission from the inner 5 degrees sur-
rounding the Galactic Center, after removing the known sources and disk emission tem-
plates. The spectrum is clearly brightest between 300 MeV and 10 GeV, and drops by
nearly an order of magnitude above ∼10 GeV. Note that the spectral shape of this residual
is very similar to that (preliminarily) reported in conference presentations by the Fermi Col-
laboration Vitale et al. (2009a). In the following sections, we will explore the characteristics
of this residual emission and discuss its possible origins.
2.2
Properties of the Inner Emission
In an eﬀort to constrain the origin (or origins) of the gamma rays from the inner
region of our galaxy, we discuss in this section the spectral and morphological character-
istics of the observed emission Dodelson et al. (2008); Zaharijas & Hooper (2006); Hooper
& Dingus (2004). We begin by noting that the morphology of the observed residual is not
consistent with that of a single point source. In particular, we ﬁnd that above 300 MeV, less
than half of the residual emission shown in the right frames of Fig. 2.1 can be accounted for
24

by a single, centrally-located point source. This conclusion is also supported by the indepen-
dent analyses by Boyarsky et al. Boyarsky et al. (2011), Chernyakova et al. Chernyakova
et al. (2011), and Hooper and Goodenough Hooper & Goodenough (2011a), which each
found a spectrum of point-like emission from the Galactic Center which is considerably less
intense than the total residual emission shown in Fig. 2.3. In Fig. 2.4, we show the spec-
tra of point-like emission from the Galactic Center, as reported in each of these three prior
studies. We note that the intensity and spectral features of the Galactic Center point source
found by these three groups are very similar, despite the very diﬀerent analysis techniques
employed.
In Fig. 2.5, we compare this spectrum of point-like emission (as reported by Bo-
yarsky et al. Boyarsky et al. (2011)) to the spectrum of residual emission found in our
analysis.1 Between 100-300 MeV, there is good agreement, indicating that most or even all
of the residual gamma rays in this energy range could originate from a single point source.
At higher energies, however, the residual emission consistently exceeds the ﬂux attributable
to point-like emission; by a factor of ∼2-3 between 0.3 and 3 GeV, and by a factor of ∼5
above 3 GeV. When Boyarsky et al.
included a spatially extended component in their
model (with a morphology corresponding to that predicted for annihilating dark matter
with a distribution given by ρDM ∝r−1.34), they found that the ﬁt improved considerably
(reducing the log-likelihood by 25 with the addition of only one new parameter) Boyarsky
et al. (2011). The spectrum of this spatially extended component is also shown in Fig. 2.5.
The spectrum of the residual emission found in our analysis is in very good agreement with
1HESS Aharonian et al. (2004a); Braun et al. (2008); Aharonian et al. (2006b) and other ground based
telescopes Kosack et al. (2004); Albert et al. (2006) have also observed point-like emission from the Galactic
Center at energies above ∼200 GeV. This very high energy gamma-ray source may be associated with the
point-like emission observed at lower energies, as shown in Fig. 2.4.
25

the sum of point-like and extended components as reported by Boyarsky et al. From these
comparisons, we conclude that in addition to the presence of point-like emission from the
Galactic Center, a component of extended emission is also prominently present at energies
greater than ∼300 MeV.2
2.3
Possible Origins of the Observed Emission
A number of proposals have been put forth to explain the bright gamma-ray emis-
sion observed from the Galactic Center by the FGST. These possibilities include the cen-
tral supermassive black hole Chernyakova et al. (2011); Hooper & Goodenough (2011a), a
population of unresolved millisecond pulsars Abazajian (2011a), and dark matter annihila-
tions Hooper & Goodenough (2011a); Goodenough & Hooper (2009). In this section, we
discuss the morphological and spectral characteristics of the gamma-ray emission expected
from each of these potential sources and compare this to the emission observed by the
FGST.
2.3.1
Cosmic ray Acceleration by the Supermassive Black Hole
To begin, we reiterate that the morphology of the observed emission is not entirely
point-like in nature, but instead is somewhat spatially extended. This allows us to rule out
the possibility that gamma rays directly emitted by the Milky Way’s central black hole
are responsible for the observed emission.3 If, however, the observed gamma-ray spectrum
2The spectrum of our residual as presented in Figs. 2.3 and 2.5 denotes the residual within a 5 degree
radius around the Galactic Center, whereas the spectrum of extended emission reported in Ref. Boyarsky
et al. (2011) is taken from a similar, but not identical, inner 10◦×10◦region. Given the highly concentrated
nature of the morphology being considered, however, this diﬀerence is negligible.
3Further supporting this conclusion is the fact that the central emission observed by Fermi shows no
variability on month timescales Chernyakova et al. (2011), as would be expected based on the variability
26

originates from cosmic rays that have been accelerated by the black hole, then a spatially
extended distribution of gamma rays could result.
For example, it was previously proposed that the TeV-scale gamma rays ob-
served from the Galactic Center could originate from the inverse Compton scattering of
energetic electrons accelerated by the black hole Atoyan & Dermer (2004); Hinton &
Aharonian (2007). This scenario, however, predicts considerably less GeV-scale emission
than is observed by Fermi, and thus cannot account for the residual emission discussed
here Chernyakova et al. (2011). Alternatively, the black hole may accelerate cosmic ray
protons which then diﬀuse throughout the surrounding interstellar medium, producing pi-
ons and thus gamma rays through interactions with gas Chernyakova et al. (2011); Aha-
ronian & Neronov (2005a); Aharonian (2005). The spectrum and spatial distribution of
the gamma-ray emission resulting from this process depends not only on the spectrum of
protons injected from the black hole, but also on the diﬀusion coeﬃcient and distribution
of gas in the surrounding medium, as well as on the emission history of the black hole (oc-
currences of ﬂares and periods of relative dormancy). As none of these inputs are currently
very well constrained, it is diﬃcult to make reliable predictions for the resulting gamma-
ray spectrum and distribution.
That being said, it appears plausible that a reasonable
astrophysical scenario could potentially explain much of the observed emission.
Perhaps the greatest challenge in accounting for the observed emission with ener-
getic protons accelerated by the central black hole is the very rapid increase in the ﬂux of
spatially extended emission observed between approximately 200 and 700 MeV (see blue er-
of this source in X-ray and infrared wavelengths Ghez et al. (2004); B´elanger et al. (2004); Baganoﬀet al.
(2001). The emission from a ∼30 parsec source region would have any variability suppressed on timescales
shorter than R/c ∼100 years.
27

ror bars in Fig. 2.5). Even for a mono-energetic spectrum of protons, the resuling spectrum
of gamma rays from pion decay does not rise rapidly enough to account for this feature.
Perhaps this could be reconciled, however, if a sizeable fraction of the apparently point-like
emission in the 100-300 MeV bin is in fact somewhat extended and arises from cosmic ray
interactions.
Lastly, we also note that a sizable fraction of the high energy emission observed
by the FGST is likely to be associated with the HESS galactic ridge. This ridge emission,
as measured by HESS, possesses a power-law-like spectrum with a spectral index of 2.29 ±
0.07stat ± 0.20sys over the energy range of approximately 0.2 to 10 TeV. Due to the spatial
correlation of this emission with the locations of molecular clouds in the central 200 parsecs
of the Milky Way, the origin of the ridge emission is conventionally taken to be the decays
of neutral pions produced in the interactions of cosmic ray protons or nuclei with the
surrounding molecular gas. In order to generate a gamma-ray spectrum with this spectral
index, the responsible protons are required to have a spectral index of approximately 1.9 ±
0.2 Hooper & Goodenough (2011a). Based on an extrapolation of this spectral shape, we
estimate that on the order of 30% of the 10-100 GeV residual is associated with the ridge. At
energies below ∼10 GeV, however, the ridge emission constitutes a much smaller fraction of
the observed residual, unless the spectrum of cosmic ray protons in the region is signiﬁcantly
enhanced below ∼50 GeV relative to the power-law behavior we have assumed.
2.3.2
Annihilating Dark Matter
It has long been appreciated that if dark matter particles annihilate in pairs (as
predicted in most models of weakly interacting massive particles), the resulting gamma-ray
28

signal would be brightest from the direction of the Galactic Center Bergstr¨om et al. (1998);
Berezinsky et al. (1994, 1992). The energy and angular dependent ﬂux of such gamma rays
is given by
Φγ(Eγ, ψ) = dNγ
dEγ
σv
8πm2
DM
Z
los
ρ2(r)dl,
(2.2)
where σv is the dark matter annihilation cross section multiplied by the relative velocity of
the two dark matter particles (averaged over the velocity distribution), mDM is the mass of
the dark matter particle, ψ is the angle observed relative to the direction of the Galactic
Center, ρ(r) is the dark matter density as a function of distance to the Galactic Center,
and the integral is performed over the line-of-sight. dNγ/dEγ is the gamma-ray spectrum
generated per annihilation, which depends on the mass and dominant annihilation channels
of the dark matter particle (we use PYTHIA Sj¨ostrand et al. (2001a) to calculate dNγ/dEγ
for various dark matter scenarios in this study).
Modern numerical simulations of the evolution of cold dark matter predict the
formation of halos with a nearly universal density proﬁle Navarro et al. (2010). Within the
inner volumes of such halos, the density of dark matter varies as ρDM ∝r−γ, where r is the
distance to the halo’s center. The frequently used Navarro Frenk and White (NFW) proﬁle,
for example, features an inner slope of γ = 1.0 Navarro et al. (1996a, 1997). The results of
the Via Lactea II simulation favor a somewhat steeper inner slope (γ ≈1.2) Diemand et al.
(2008a, 2005), while the Aquarius Project ﬁnds a somewhat less steep value which varies
with r Navarro et al. (2004); Springel et al. (2008).
When considering the dark matter distribution in the central kiloparsecs of the
Milky Way, it is important to include the eﬀects of stars and gas, which are not taken
29

into account by dark matter-only simulations such as Via Lactea II and Aquarius, but
which dominate the gravitational potential of the Inner Galaxy. Generally speaking, as a
result of dissipating baryons, dark matter density proﬁles are expected to be adiabatically
contracted, resulting in the steepening of their inner proﬁles Blumenthal et al. (1986a);
Ryden & Gunn (1987a). The degree to which this eﬀect is manifest depends on the fraction
of the baryons that dissipate slowly by radiative cooling.
As hydrodynamical simulations which model the process of galaxy formation have
improved, eﬀorts to predict the eﬀects of baryons have begun to converge. In particular,
several groups (using diﬀerent codes) have consistently found that Milky Way sized halos
are adiabatically contracted, increasing the density of dark matter in their inner volumes
relative to that predicted by dark matter-only simulations (see Ref. Gnedin et al. (2011a)
and references therein). These simulations, which include the eﬀects of gas cooling, star
formation, and stellar feedback, predict a degree of adiabatic contraction which steepens
the inner slopes of dark matter density proﬁles from γ ≈1.0 to γ ≈1.2 −1.5 within the
inner ∼10 kpc of Milky Way-like galaxies Gnedin et al. (2011a, 2004a). The resolution of
such simulations is currently limited to scales larger than ∼100 parsecs Levine et al. (2008).
With this information in mind, we can compare the expected spatial distribution
of dark matter to the observed angular distribution of gamma rays from around the Galac-
tic Center. Making this comparison, we ﬁnd that the majority of the residual emission
observed between 300 MeV and 10 GeV can be described by annihilating dark matter with
a distribution given by ρ(r) ∝rγ, with γ ≈1.25 −1.40.4 In contrast, an NFW-like proﬁle
4Below 300 MeV, the observed emission is dominated by point-like emission, and the ﬂux of the emission
drops oﬀsigniﬁcantly above 10 GeV, leading us to focus on this energy range.
30

with γ = 1.0 would predict a considerably broader distribution of gamma rays than is found
in our residual maps. More quantitatively speaking, for γ = 1.0 we ﬁnd that for energies
of 300-1000 MeV, 1-3 GeV, and 3-10 GeV, respectively, no more than 22%, 18% and 27%
of the ﬂux found in the innermost half degree around the Galactic Center can arise from
dark matter annihilations without also exceeding the ﬂux observed at distances beyond
one degree. In contrast, if we select an inner slope of γ = 1.3, we ﬁnd that up to 72%,
74% and 100% of the innermost emission could originate from dark matter annihilations.
The remainder of the residual could easily originate from the central point source with the
spectrum presented in Fig. 2.4.
If a sizable fraction of the residual emission does originate from annihilating dark
matter, then we can use the spectrum of this emission to inform us as to the mass and
dominant annihilation channels of the dark matter particles. In particular, the rapid de-
crease in the ﬂux above ∼10 GeV suggests that the spectrum is being dominated by ∼30
GeV dark matter particles annihilating to quarks, or by ∼10 GeV particles annihilating to
leptons (among annihilations to leptons, those to taus produce far more gamma rays than
those to either muons or electrons). In Fig. 2.6, we show the range of dark matter masses
and annihilation cross sections for which dark matter annihilations can account for the ma-
jority of the observed residual emission (without exceeding the observed residual) in each
of the three energy bins between 300 MeV and 10 GeV, for three choices of the annihilation
channels. Interestingly, we note that the normalization of the signal requires us to consider
annihilation cross sections that are within a factor of a few of the value predicted for a
simple thermal relic (σv = 3 × 10−26 cm3/s). The precise value of the required annihilation
31

cross section depends on the quantity of dark matter present, and is thus subject to the
related uncertainties.
In Fig. 2.6 and throughout the remainder of this paper, we have
normalized the dark matter distribution such that the total mass of dark matter within the
solar circle is 3.76 × 1067 GeV, which is the value corresponding to the case of γ = 1.0 and
a local density of 0.4 GeV/cm3. This value is supported by a combination of microlensing
and dynamical constraints, although uncertainties exists Iocco et al. (2011); Catena & Ullio
(2010a). With these uncertainties in mind, one should consider all annihilation cross sec-
tions shown in Fig. 2.6 and elsewhere in this paper to be accurate only to within a factor
of a few.
Of course, it is also expected that astrophysical sources will contribute to the
Galactic Center’s gamma-ray spectrum between 300 MeV and 10 GeV. In Fig. 2.7, we show
three examples in which emission from a central point source (as shown in Fig. 2.4), along
with emission from the Galactic Ridge (as extrapolated from the higher energy HESS emis-
sion, assuming a spectral shape that results from a power-law spectrum of protons) combine
with a contribution from dark matter to generate the observed residual emission. Note that
the lowest energy emission is largely generated by the central point source (as suggested by
the observed morphology) while the highest energy bin is dominated by emission from the
Galactic Ridge. Only the 300 MeV-10 GeV range is dominated by dark matter annihilation
products.
2.3.3
Millisecond Pulsars
A population of gamma-ray point sources surrounding the Galactic Center could
also potentially contribute to the observed residual emission. Millisecond pulsars, which
32

are observed to produce spectra that fall oﬀrapidly above a few GeV, represent such a
possibility5 Hooper & Goodenough (2011a); Abazajian (2011a).
Observations of resolved millisecond pulsars by FGST have found an average spec-
trum well described by dNγ/dEγ ∝E−1.5
γ
exp(−Eγ/2.8 GeV) Abdo et al. (2009b); Malyshev
et al. (2010). Similarly, the 46 gamma-ray pulsars (millisecond and otherwise) in the FGST’s
ﬁrst pulsar catalog have a distribution of spectral indices which peaks strongly at Γ =1.38,
with 44 out of 46 of the observed pulsars possessing (central values of their) spectral in-
dices greater than 1.0 Abdo et al. (2010b) (see Fig. 2.8). In contrast, to produce a sizable
fraction of the spatially extended residual emission between 300 MeV and 10 GeV without
exceeding the emission observed below 300 MeV, the average pulsar in the Galactic Center
population would be required to possess a spectral index harder than Γ ≈1.0. And al-
though we agree with the author of Ref. Abazajian (2011a) that a small number of pulsars
(including J1958+2846, J2032+4127 and J2043+2740) have been observed with such hard
spectral indices, we do not believe that the existing data supports the conclusion that a
large population of pulsars (as would be required to generate the observed emission) would
produce an average gamma-ray ﬂux with a spectral shape able to account for the observed
emission from the Galactic Center.6 That being said, if the population of pulsars present
in the central stellar cluster were to diﬀer signiﬁcantly from the sample represented by the
Fermi pulsar catalog, a diﬀerent conclusion could potentially be reached.
5While young, single pulsars are known to have a similar emission spectrum to the MSP population, it is
diﬃcult for these sources to explain the morphology of the observed excess. The young pulsar distribution is
expected to be similar to the morphology of young, massive stars, which is known to fall oﬀas approximately
r−1.4 away from the GC. Pulsars may be slightly more dispersed due to the large kick velocities they obtain
during their supernova explosions. This is signiﬁcantly less peaked towards the GC compared to the r−2.6
distribution observed for the extended GC excess
6The error bars on the spectral indices of these three hardest pulsars are also quite large, Γ = 0.77±0.31,
0.68 ± 0.46, and 1.07 ± 0.66 Abdo et al. (2010b).
33

An opportunity to measure the emission from large populations of gamma-ray
pulsars exists in the form of globular clusters, whose gamma-ray emission is generally at-
tributed to pulsars contained within their volumes. Unfortunately, the gamma-ray spectra
of these objects have not been well measured. In particular, the eight globular clusters
with spectra reported by Fermi have an average spectral index very close to that of pulsars
(Γ ≈1.38), but with very large individual error bars which extend from roughly 0 to 2.5
(these values, including 1σ statistical and systematic errors are shown in Fig. 2.9). Perhaps
with more data, we will learn from these systems whether the spectral indices of large pulsar
populations can be hard enough to accommodate the emission observed from the Galactic
Center.
Lastly, we note that it is somewhat diﬃcult to accommodate the very spatially
concentrated morphology of the observed gamma-ray emission with pulsars. As originally
pointed out in Ref. Hooper & Goodenough (2011a), to match the observed angular distri-
bution of this signal, the number density of pulsars would have to fall oﬀwith the distance
to the Galactic Center at least as rapidly as r−2.5. In contrast, within the innermost parsec
of the Galactic Center, the stellar density has been observed to fall oﬀonly about half as
rapidly, r−1.25 Sch¨odel et al. (2009). Furthermore, even modest pulsar kicks of ∼100 km/s
would allow a pulsar 10 pc from the Galactic Center to escape the region, consequently
broadening the angular width of the signal. Annihilating dark matter, in contrast, pro-
duces a ﬂux of gamma rays that scales with its density squared, and thus can much more
easily account for the high concentration of the observed signal.
34

2.4
Constraints On The Dark Matter Annihilation Cross Sec-
tion
In this section, instead of attempting to determine the origin of the gamma rays
from the Galactic Center region, we use the observed spectrum and ﬂux to place limits on
the dark matter annihilation cross section. In doing this, we do not assume anything about
the source or sources responsible for the observed emission, but instead only require that
dark matter annihilation products do not exceed the observed emission (after subtracting
the known sources and line-of-sight gas templates, as described in Sec. 2.1). Despite using
this very simple and conservative approach, we derive constraints that are competitive with
or stronger than those placed by other indirect search strategies, including those from ob-
servations of dwarf spheroidals Ackermann et al. (2011); Geringer-Sameth & Koushiappas
(2011), galaxy clusters Ackermann et al. (2010); Dugger et al. (2010), the cosmological dif-
fuse background Abazajian et al. (2010); Abdo et al. (2010c), and nearby subhalos Buckley
& Hooper (2010).
In Fig. 2.10, we show the 95% conﬁdence level upper limits on the dark matter
annihilation cross section for several choice of the ﬁnal state, and for three values of the
halo proﬁle’s inner slope.
Based on the results of hydrodynamical simulations Gnedin
et al. (2011a, 2004a), we consider the γ = 1.2 to represent the minimal degree of baryonic
contraction, where as the γ = 1.3 and 1.4 cases should be taken as more central estimates.
The constraints we have derived from the Galactic Center region are indeed quite
stringent. Even in the case of only a very modest degree of baryonic contraction (γ =
1.2), we ﬁnd that dark matter particles with the canonical annihilation cross section of
35

σv = 3 × 10−26 cm3/s and which proceed to hadronic ﬁnal states are predicted to exceed
the observed gamma-ray ﬂux from the Galactic Center unless they are more massive than
approximately 300 GeV. In comparison, the Fermi collaboration’s combined analysis of 10
dwarf spheroidals only excludes such dark matter particles with masses below approximately
30 GeV Ackermann et al. (2011); Geringer-Sameth & Koushiappas (2011).7
In Fig. 2.11, we also show the constraints which result if the eﬀects of baryons on
the dark matter distribution are neglected (using a uncontracted NFW proﬁle). Even in
this case, we ﬁnd limits which are approximately as stringent as those derived from dwarf
galaxies.
2.5
Discussion and Summary
In this chapter, we have used the ﬁrst three years of data taken by the Fermi
Gamma-Ray Space Telescope (FGST) to study the spectrum and spatial morphology of
the gamma-ray emission from the region surrounding the Galactic Center. In doing so,
we have identiﬁed a spatially extended component of gamma-ray emission which peaks at
energies between approximately 300 MeV and 10 GeV. The origin of these gamma rays is
currently uncertain, although they could potentially be the annihilation products of dark
matter particles, or the products of collisions of high energy protons accelerated by the
Milky Way’s supermassive black hole with gas.
If this extended source of gamma rays is interpreted as dark matter annihilation
products, the spectrum of this emission favors dark matter particles with a mass in the range
7Unlike the central regions of Milky Way-like halos, the dark matter density proﬁles of dwarf spheroidal
galaxies are not generally expected to be contracted by baryons Governato et al. (2010); Oh et al. (2011). The
uncontracted NFW proﬁle adopted in the Fermi Collaboration dwarf spheroidal analysis is thus appropriate.
36

of 7-12 GeV (if annihilating dominantly to leptons) or 25-45 GeV (if annihilating dominantly
to hadronic ﬁnal states). The former of these mass ranges is of particular interest in light
of the observations reported by the direct detection experiments DAMA/LIBRA Bernabei
et al. (2010a), CoGeNT Aalseth et al. (2011c,a), and CRESST Angloher et al. (2012),
which each report signals consistent with an approximately 10 GeV dark matter particle
(see also, however, constraints from the CDMS Ahmed et al. (2011); Akerib et al. (2010) and
XENON Aprile et al. (2011); Angle et al. (2011) collaborations, and related discussions Col-
lar (2011a, 2010, 2011b)). Further motivating the dark matter interpretation of the Galactic
Center gamma rays is the fact that the annihilation cross section required to normalize the
annihilation rate to the observed ﬂux is approximately equal to the value required to gener-
ate the observed cosmological abundance in the early universe (σv ∼3 × 10−26 cm3/s). In
other words, in lieu of resonances, coannihilations, P-wave suppression, or other complicat-
ing factors, a particle species that will freeze-out in the early universe with a density equal
to the measured dark matter abundance is also predicted to annihilate today at a rate that
is similar to that needed to produce the observed gamma rays from the Galactic Center.
Additionally, we point out that if dark matter particles are annihilating in the
Inner Galaxy at the rate required to produce the observed gamma-ray ﬂux, then the result-
ing energetic electrons and positrons will diﬀuse outward, potentially producing observable
quantities of synchrotron emission. In particular, focusing on the case of 7-12 GeV dark
matter particles annihilating dominantly to leptons, the halo proﬁle and cross section re-
quired to produce the morphology and normalization of the observed gamma-ray ﬂux is also
predicted to lead to the production of a diﬀuse haze of synchrotron emission very similar to
37

that observed by WMAP Hooper et al. (2007); Finkbeiner (2004) (see Fig. 3 of Ref. Hooper
& Linden (2011a) for a direct comparison). It also appears that the excess radio emis-
sion observed at higher galactic longitudes by the ARCADE 2 experiment Fixsen et al.
(2011); Seiﬀert et al. (2011) possesses a spectral shape and overall intensity consistent with
originating from dark matter with the same mass, cross section, dominant channels, and
distribution Fornengo et al. (2011); Regis (2011). Lastly, we mention that 7-12 GeV dark
matter particles with the distribution and annihilation cross section favored here would be
capable of depositing the required energetic electrons into the Milky Way’s non-thermal
radio ﬁlaments Linden et al. (2011), providing an explanation for their peculiar spectral
features.
It is noteworthy that the diﬀerent explanations proposed for the observed gamma-
ray emission from the Galactic Center predict diﬀerent accompanying spectra of cosmic
ray electrons, potentially providing us with a way to discriminate between these diﬀerent
scenarios. Of the sources proposed for the observed gamma-ray emission, only dark matter
annihilations are predicted to produce comparable ﬂuxes of gamma rays and electrons, with
spectra that peak at similar energies. Pulsars, in contrast, produce gamma-ray spectra
which peak at ∼1-3 GeV and electron spectra which peak at several hundred GeV Zhang
& Cheng (2001). Perhaps future observations of the Inner Galaxy at radio and microwave
frequencies will be able to make use of this comparison to shed light on the origin of the
gamma-ray emission from the center of our galaxy.
Lastly, we have also presented conservative limits on the dark matter’s annihilation
cross section which are at least as stringent as those derived from other observations, such
38

as those of dwarf spheroidal galaxies.
39

Figure 2.1 Contour maps of the gamma-ray ﬂux from the region surrounding the Galactic
Center, as observed by the Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope.
The left frames show
the raw maps, while the center and right frames show the maps after subtracting known
sources (not including the central source), and known sources plus emission from cosmic
ray interactions with gas in the Galactic Disk, respectively. All maps have been smoothed
over a scale of 0.5 degrees. See text for more details.
40

Figure 2.2 The observed gamma-ray ﬂux (after subtracting known sources) averaged over
7◦< |l| < 10◦as a function of galactic latitude (solid), compared to that predicted from
the line-of-sight gas density (dashes). See text for details.
41

Figure 2.3 The spectrum of the residual emission from the inner 5 degrees surrounding the
Galactic Center, after subtracting the known sources and line-of-sight gas templates.
42

Figure 2.4 Fits for the spectrum of the central emission, assuming a point-like source mor-
phology, from the previous work of three diﬀerent groups Hooper & Goodenough (2011a);
Boyarsky et al. (2011); Chernyakova et al. (2011). Despite the diﬀerent analysis approaches
taken, these ﬁts are all in reasonable agreement. The dashed line is the broken power-law
ﬁt to this spectrum as presented in Ref. Chernyakova et al. (2011).
43

Figure 2.5 A comparison of the total residual emission found in this study (black) with
the spectra of point-like emission (red) and extended emission (blue) (as in the case of
annihilating dark matter with ρDM ∝r−1.34) as presented in Ref. Boyarsky et al. (2011).
This comparison supports our ﬁnding that this residual emission below ∼300 MeV is
consistent with a point-like source origin, while much of the emission at higher energies is
indeed spatially extended.
44

Figure 2.6 The range of dark matter masses and annihilation cross sections for which dark
matter annihilations can account for the majority of the observed residual emission between
300 MeV and 10 GeV, for three choices of annihilation channels (“leptons” denotes equal
fractions to e+e−, µ+µ−and τ +τ −). Also shown for comparison is the annihilation cross
section predicted for a simple thermal relic (σv = 3 × 10−26 cm3/s). Note that there is a
factor of a few uncertainty in the annihilation cross section, corresponding to the overall
dark matter density and distribution. See text for details.
45

Figure 2.7 Examples illustrating how dark matter annihilations and astrophysical sources
could combine to make up the observed residual emission surrounding the Galactic Cen-
ter. In the upper left frame, we show results for a 10 GeV dark matter particle with an
annihilation cross section of σv = 7 × 10−27 cm3/s and which annihilates only to leptons
(e+e−, µ+µ−and τ +τ −, 1/3 of the time to each). In the upper right frame, we show the
same case, but with 10% of the annihilations proceeding to b¯b. In the lower frame, we
show results for a 30 GeV dark matter particle annihilating to b¯b with an annihilation cross
section of σv = 6 × 10−27 cm3/s. In each case, the annihilation rate is normalized to a halo
proﬁle with γ = 1.3. The point source spectrum is taken as the broken power-law shown
in Fig. 2.4, and the Galactic Ridge emission has been extrapolated from the higher energy
spectrum reported by HESS Aharonian et al. (2006a), assuming a pion decay origin and a
power-law proton spectrum. See text for details.
46

Figure 2.8 A histogram showing the distribution of spectral indices, Γ, of pulsars in the
Fermi Pulsar Catalog.
47

Figure 2.9 The spectral indices (with statistical and systematic error bars) of the eight
globular clusters observed by the Fermi Gamma-Ray Space Telescope Abdo et al. (????).
48

Figure 2.10 Upper limits on the dark matter annihilation cross section for several choices
of the ﬁnal state and for three values of the halo proﬁle’s inner slope, γ. Also shown for
comparison is the annihilation cross section predicted for a simple thermal relic (σv =
3 × 10−26 cm3/s). Uncertainties in the overall dark matter density have not been included,
but based on the errors presented in Ref. Iocco et al. (2011), we expect that this would only
weaken our limits by about 30-50%. See text for more details.
49

Figure 2.11 Upper limits on the dark matter annihilation cross section for several choice of
the ﬁnal state, neglecting the eﬀects of baryons (using an uncontracted NFW halo proﬁle).
Also shown for comparison is the annihilation cross section predicted for a simple thermal
relic (σv = 3 × 10−26 cm3/s). Uncertainties in the overall dark matter density have not
been included, but based on the errors presented in Ref. Iocco et al. (2011); Catena & Ullio
(2010a), we expect that this would only weaken our limits by about 30-50%. See text for
more details.
50

Chapter 3
The Morphology of Hadronic
Emission Models for the
Gamma-Ray Source at the
Galactic Center
Since COS-B and EGRET ﬁrst observed a bright γ-ray source spatially coinci-
dent with the Galactic center (GC) Blitz et al. (1985); Mayer-Hasselwander et al. (1998),
subsequent observations by the Large Area Telescope onboard the Fermi space observatory
(Fermi-LAT) and by ground-based (imaging Atmospheric Cherenkov Telescope, ACT) γ-
ray telescopes have repeatedly observed the GC region at energies spanning 100 MeV to
100 TeV. Unlike both radio and X-Ray observations of the GC, no variability has been ob-
served in the high-energy regime, potentially indicating that the γ-ray emission mechanism
51

diﬀers substantially from the low energy regime Chernyakova et al. (2011); Aharonian et al.
(2009a). This distinction is especially stark in light of the order of magnitude increase in
X-ray activity from the region observed in 2005, which was undetected in γ-ray data Aha-
ronian et al. (2008a). This might be explained by models which generate the low-frequency
(X-ray, IR, radio) emission very close to the central black hole (BH), while γ rays are pro-
duced farther away from the BH by high-energy protons inelastically scattering oﬀof the
interstellar medium, a framework originally posited by Aharonian & Neronov (2005b), and
later by Liu et al. (2006a,c).
The strongest limits on the morphology of the gamma-ray source HESS J1745-290
are provided by Acero et al. (2010b) which used optical cameras mounted on each H.E.S.S.
dish to calibrate the high-energy array, reducing the systematic error in the spatial pointing
of the telescope. Using this technique, Acero et al. (2010b) found the source HESS J1745-
290 to be spatially coincident with the radio source Sgr A*, within a total error radius of
only 13”, excluding the supernova remnant Sgr A East as the dominant source of γ-ray
emission. However, the pulsar wind nebula G359.95-0.04 cannot be ruled out as a possible
source of the high energy emission, and it may play a secondary or even a dominant role in
the γ-ray emission observed from the galactic center. We note, however, that this possibility
would not aﬀect the analysis and conclusions presented here if the gamma-ray emission from
the PSR was produced via the injection of high-energy protons into the galactic medium.
HESS J1745-290 is found to be consistent with a point source to within approximately
1.2’ at the 95% conﬁdence level1. While this point source resides within a diﬀuse γ-ray
background which is itself centered around Sgr A*, the total residual ﬂux from the inner
1This corresponds to 2.96 pc under the assumption of a solar position 8.5 kpc from the GC.
52

0.1◦is constrained to be less than 15% of the point-source ﬂux Aharonian et al. (2006b).
Work by Aharonian et al. (2009a) further constrained this diﬀuse emission to be relatively
independent of the GC distance - indicating it may stem from cosmic-ray background events
rather than a diﬀuse signal corresponding to the GC.
The LAT has also observed a point source, 1FGL J1745.6-2900c, spatially coinci-
dent with the GC region Abdo et al. (2010a), although a conclusive identiﬁcation with Sgr
A* was impossible due to the relatively low angular resolution of the instrument (∼0.2◦at
10 GeV). There are indications, however, that the GC signal observed by the Fermi-LAT
is diﬃcult to model as a simple point source. While independent point-source analyses
by both Boyarsky et al. (2011) and Chernyakova et al. (2011) produced best-ﬁt models
assuming a point-source emission, the analysis of Hooper & Goodenough (2011a) found
that the γ-ray emission extends spherically out to approximately 50 pc from the position
of Sgr A*, falling oﬀwith a power-law of approximately r−2.6. Hooper & Linden (2011c)
pointed out two potential issues with GC point-source models at Fermi energies. First, a
point-source best ﬁt systematically over-estimates the source ﬂux in the presence of an ap-
preciable diﬀuse background. Secondly, even after accounting for surrounding point-sources
and Galactic plane emission, the excess emission observed in the GC and not associated
to the (best-ﬁtted) point source, exceeds the point source luminosity by approximately a
factor of three - in stark contrast to H.E.S.S observations at TeV energies. This second
ﬁnding is consistent with the observation by Boyarsky et al. (2011) that the log-likelihood
of the ﬁt increased by 25 with the addition of a spherical symmetric parameter describing
the spatial extension.
53

In addition to these morphological inconsistencies, the origin of the GC source
spectrum at high-energy γ-ray frequencies is puzzling. A relatively hard spectrum in the
0.1-1 GeV range signiﬁcantly softens in the 1-100 GeV region, then hardens again at TeV
energies, before cutting oﬀabove 10 TeV. Leptonic models have been proposed to explain
both the TeV emission Atoyan & Dermer (2004); Hinton & Aharonian (2007) and the GeV
emission Kusunose & Takahara (2012). However, no theoretically compelling scenarios have
been proposed to explain the entire gamma-ray spectrum a single leptonic source population.
Ballantyne et al. Ballantyne et al. (2007a) examined the possibility that the TeV
signal observed by HESS could be explained by a signiﬁcant emission of hard protons from
Sgr A*, producing the gamma-ray emission through interactions with gas in the galactic
center region, similar to the earlier models of Aharonian & Neronov (2005b).
In order
to examine the possibility that this emission be conﬁned to the region near Sgr A*, they
employed models for the morphology of Hydrogen gas in the GC from Rockefeller et al.
(2004), which include a large “ring” of overdense gas surrounding the GC at distances from
1-3 pc. This dense structure, aptly named the circumnuclear ring (hereafter CNR), has
long been observed by far-infrared instruments as a torus-shaped structure inclined 20◦
with respect to the Galactic plane and surrounding a relative underdensity of gas within
the inner pc around the GC Becklin et al. (1982a). Ballantyne et al. (2007a) then calculated
the diﬀusion of charged protons within tangled magnetic ﬁelds with strength proportional
to the local Hydrogen density. Using these models, they calculated the expected interaction
probability between high energy protons and the CNR as a function of energy, ﬁnding
approximately 73% of protons emitted from the GC to encounter the CNR for protons with
54

energies between 1-2.5 TeV. However they found this interaction probability to fall quickly
with increasing proton energy due to the increasing gyroradius of high energy protons -
only 47% and 5% of protons are found to encounter the CNR at energies of 10 and 100 TeV
respectively. Due to the extreme overdensity of hydrogen gas in the CNR, Ballantyne et al.
(2007a) assumed that protons encountering the CNR would lose energy quickly through pion
collisions, while protons which avoid the ring would lose energy at larger radii, producing
an extended gamma-ray emission at higher energy.
Recently Chernyakova et al. (2011) further examined the hadronic scenario, addi-
tionally positing that the whole GeV-TeV γ-ray emission may be explained by the injection
of high energy protons at the GC. This interpretation has several natural advantages in
explaining the entire γ-ray spectrum, including: (1) the hard spectrum below 1 GeV is nat-
urally explained by the inability of protons with kinetic energy below ∼300 MeV to produce
π0 in p-p collisions, (2) the bump in low energy γ-ray emission is produced by diﬀusively
trapped protons which lose signiﬁcant energy while propagating through the GC region,
(3) the ﬂat spectrum at TeV energies is explained by protons which propagate rectilinearly
through the GC region, without losing signiﬁcant energy in p-p collisions, which provides a
convincing match to the ∼E−2 γ-ray spectrum by using the E−2 proton injection spectrum
derived from ﬁrst-order Fermi acceleration, and (4) the turnover between the GeV and TeV
emission is naturally explained as the transition between diﬀusive and rectilinear motion -
creating a soft spectrum between these two energy regimes. Chernyakova et al. (2011) also
consider the possibility that two distinct proton populations are responsible for the low-
and the high-energy γ-ray emission.
55

In the present study we focus on the morphology of the GC γ-ray source. Specif-
ically, we introduce a detailed model of the interstellar gas distribution near the GC, and
demonstrate that the γ-ray morphology from hadronic emission is determined primarily
by the distribution of target gas rather than by the parameters describing the diﬀusion of
high-energy protons. We ﬁnd that in any scenario for cosmic ray diﬀusion, the bulk of the
high-energy emission falls within the point-spread function of all current γ-ray telescopes.
However, we note that this will not be the case for the proposed Cherenkov Telescope Array
(CTA), which will have the angular resolution required to observe a morphology in the γ-ray
source which shadows the observed gas density CTA Collaboration (2011). The outline of
this study is as follows: Sec. 3.1 describes the model we employ for the GC gas density;
Sec. 3.2 gives qualitative arguments to describe cosmic ray proton propagation in the GC
region, while in Sec. 3.3 and 4.2 we present our results for the proton population and for
the γ-ray emission in hadronic models for the GeV-TeV emission.
3.1
Gas Density near the Galactic Center
Detailed knowledge of the gas density is critical to accurately describing hadronic
γ-ray emission from the GC region. Here we employ the model of Ferriere (2012), valid
for the inner ∼10 pc around the GC. This model not only includes a diﬀuse halo, but also
contributions from the CNR, Sgr A East, M-0.13-0.08 and M-0.02-0.07 as well as bridges and
streamers connecting them. We make several necessary simpliﬁcations to the model before
utilizing it within our numerical code. First, we create a spherical model by calculating the
average gas density at each radius r. In doing this, we take a central value for the position of
56

M-0.13-0.08 and make geometric approximations for the position of the various streamers,
keeping the total volume consistent with Ferriere (2012). We note that this will have the
eﬀect of artiﬁcially making the γ-ray emission spherically symmetric. However, in the limit
that both the proton diﬀusion is spherically symmetric, and the probability of multiple
interactions between a single cosmic ray proton and the interstellar medium is low, the
total emission from within a given radial bin is conserved when the gas density is smeared.
We will discuss these assumptions in detail later, and we will show that they are valid for
the majority of the parameter space discussed. Secondly, we ignore the thermal distribution
of gas, which is valid in the limit where we only consider collisions with highly-relativistic
protons.
To extend our simulations beyond 10 pc from the GC in order to capture the
region relevant for the Fermi-LAT PSF, we adopt the model of Eqs. 18 and 19 of Ferri`ere
et al. (2007) and impose again spherical symmetry. With these assumptions, we obtain
gas densities which are lower than those in Ferriere (2012) by an order of magnitude at a
radius of 10 pc. Since the models of Ferriere (2012) are only suﬀering incompleteness at
radii greater than 10 pc (due to unmodeled sources), we assume the gas density at a given
radius to be the larger of the values quoted by Ferri`ere et al. (2007) or Ferriere (2012).
This causes us to switch between models at a radius of 19.2 pc. In Figure 3.1 we show the
resulting density of hydrogen gas in our simulation as a function of the radius from the GC.
We note that the morphology is dominated by the CNR, which provides a large boost to
the gas density between 1-3 pc.
57

Parameter
Value from Cherenkova
Value Adopted Here
Radial Size of Simulation Region
3 pc
50 pc
Duration of Proton Emission
300 - 104 yr
1010 yr
Proton Injection Spectrum
-1.9 – -2.0
-1.9
1H Density during proton diﬀusion
1000 cm−3
1000 cm−3
1H Density for γ-ray calculation
1000 cm−3
See Figure 1
Table 3.1 List of all input parameters which diﬀer between the assumptions of Chernyakova
et al. (2011) and the present work.
3.2
A Qualitative Model
In order to understand the morphology of the hadronic emission, we consider
propagation in four limiting regimes, controlled by two parameters. Protons may propagate
either rectilinearly or diﬀusively through the GC region, and they may either undergo
many, or much less than one, collision with the surrounding gas. While intermediate cases
are possible, we ﬁnd these four limiting cases to conﬁne the expected proton morphology.
We ﬁrst investigate the propagation of protons in the rectilinear regime.
This
can be thought of as diﬀusion with a mean-free-path exceeding the conﬁnement region of
the simulation, yielding a diﬀusion constant D = l2
sim/(6τ), where lsim is the region we
are considering, and τ is the propagation time out of the region.
For our 50 pc simu-
lation and assuming relativistic propagation velocities, this corresponds to a minimum D
> 7.7 x 1029 cm2s−1 for particles to propagate rectilinearly out of the simulation zone. We
can calculate the probability of a proton-proton interaction between the cosmic ray and a
target gas molecule as
Ppp = σpp(E)
Z ⃗r(t)
⃗r(0)
ρH(⃗r(t′))dt′
(3.1)
58

where σpp(E) is the cross-section between a proton with Energy E and a cold target
proton, ρH is the gas density as a function of position, and ⃗r(t) is the radial position as a
function of time from the injection of the cosmic ray until it leaves the diﬀusion zone. In
the case of spherical symmetry and rectilinear propagation out of the center of the diﬀusion
zone, we set r(t’) = ct’, r(0) = 0, and r(t) = rmax, and then using the gas density shown
in Figure 3.1, infer an interaction probability of ∼2.5% between a given proton and the
target gas before the proton escapes the 50 pc region. In this case, relativistic protons
lose little energy as they propagate through the region, and the proton spectrum mirrors
the injected spectrum. Since the number of protons in a spherical shell δr is constant for
rectilinear propagation, the resulting γ-ray morphology mirrors the gas distribution shown
in Figure 3.1. In this scenario 87% of the total γ-ray emission is concentrated within the
inner 3 pc surrounding the GC. If, as expected, this scenario describes the propagation of the
∼10 TeV protons responsible for the TeV γ-ray signal, then this ratio stands in excellent
agreement with HESS observations indicating at least 85% of γ-ray TeV emission to be
contained in the inner 3 pc. We note that so long as we assume rectilinear propagation,
this conclusion still holds in the case of a true 3D model of the gas density, and the ﬁnal
emission morphology is calculable by convolving the ρ(r) ∼r−2 density of protons with the
observed gas density (e.g., Ferriere (2012)) and integrating over the line of sight.
We note that for the gas densities and distance scales modeled here, the second
possible regime, where the diﬀusion is rectilinear but protons undergo more than one colli-
sion with the target gas is insigniﬁcant, since the probability of having even one collision is
only ∼2.5%. Thus we exclude the second regime.
59

A third regime exists when protons propagate diﬀusively through the region, but
interact with the Galactic gas fewer than once. In this case, we can assume that the energy
spectrum of protons remains constant with radius, and calculate the density of protons to
fall oﬀas ρ(r) ∼r−1, causing the number of protons within a radial bin to increase linearly
with radius. In this case, we can directly calculate the morphology of the resulting γ-ray
emission by using the gas density shown in Figure 3.1, but weighting the gas density by
the number of protons in each radial bin, which varies linearly with r. Weighted in this
manner, we calculate the average nH density as 410 cm−3, and ﬁnd the minimum diﬀusion
constant for which less than 0.1 interaction occurs to be 2.4 x 1027 cm3s−1. In this limit,
the expected γ-ray morphology results from convolving the gas density in Figure 3.1 with
a proton spectrum which is constant in radius and has an overall density ρ(r) ∼r−1: the
γ-ray morphology is therefore still dominated by the CNR, mirroring what was found in
ﬁrst regime.
Lastly, we evaluate the regime where diﬀusive cosmic rays are expected to interact
multiple times with interstellar gas before diﬀusing out of the GC region. In this case, the
ﬁnal cosmic ray energy spectrum is not radius independent, and cannot be easily computed.
Furthermore, we note that in this regime, the non-spherically symmetric nature of the gas
becomes important in determining the steady-state cosmic-ray density, as interactions which
occur while protons move through particularly high-density regions may have an eﬀect on
the surrounding proton distribution. However, we note that, so long as the injection proton
energy spectrum is suﬃciently steep that partially cooled high energy protons are sub-
dominant to the injected low energy population, this cosmic ray density is unambiguously
60

constrained to fall oﬀfaster with increasing radius than in the one-interaction regime above.
In order to provide more quantitative calculations, we defer to a numerical model for the
propagation of high energy particles throughout the GC region.
We note that the r−1 dependence of cosmic-rays propagating diﬀusively out of
the galactic center, closely mirrors the brightness proﬁle of gamma-ray emission calculated
by Chernyakova et al. (2011) (Figure 7) for cosmic rays of 1-10 GeV. This is expected,
as these models use a constant Hydrogen density, creating a one-to-one correspondence
between the proton density and the brightness proﬁle. Notice that the diﬀusion constant
at 1-10 GeV employed by Chernyakova et al. (2011) fall between 9.5 x 1026 and 7.6 x 1027
cm2s−1, which lands squarely in the regime of diﬀusion with fewer than one interaction
per cosmic ray (using a region with radius 3 pc and a gas density of 1000 cm−3). In the
lower energy bin of 0.1-1 GeV, the signiﬁcantly smaller diﬀusion constant leads to multiple
interactions between high energy protons and the target gas, leading to a more constrained
distribution, as predicted in our qualitative model.
3.3
Propagation of High-energy Protons
In order to simulate the propagation of protons from a central source, we adopt
the formalism of Aloisio et al. (2009), which seeks to model spherically symmetric diﬀusion
while avoiding the issue of superluminal propagation. We note that this cosmic-ray diﬀusion
model is nearly identical to that employed by Chernyakova et al. (2011) and we refer the
reader to that work for relevant details of our simulation parameters. In Table 3.1 we list all
diﬀerences between our model and that of Chernyakova et al. (2011). Most importantly, we
61

employ a much larger simulation region with a 50 pc radius, in order to capture the entirety
of emission within the Fermi PSF. In order to obtain a steady state diﬀusion solution over
this period, we must assume that the the emission continues for periods longer than the
104 yr assumed in Chernyakova et al. (2011). Since we are only concerned with the upper
limit for the source extension in this work, we allow the emission to continue for 1010 yr,
but note that the equation becomes steady state after approximately 106 yr.
We adopt a diﬀerential proton injection spectrum which follows a power law ∼E−1.9
with an exponential cutoﬀat 100 TeV. We normalize this injection spectrum in order to
obtain a γ-ray intensity matching the Fermi and HESS ﬂuxes reported by Chernyakova
et al. (2011) at a radius of 3 pc, and then extend our simulation from this point out to
50 pc. We ﬁnd that this translates to an injected proton luminosity of 8.8 x 1036 erg s−1.
For simplicity, we utilize an average target density nH = 1000 cm−3 in our calcu-
lation of the ﬁnal proton density (but not for the ﬁnal γ-ray emission, for which we employ
the target gas density given by Figure 3.1). This is an immaterial assumption, so long as
we reside in a limit where the average proton undergoes much less than one collision with
gas - an assumption which holds throughout the vast majority of our parameter space. We
calculate the γ-ray emission from the steady-state proton density distribution employing the
formalisms of Kamae et al. (2006). We note that we consider here only contributions from
γ-rays produced directly in the p-p collision, and ignore possible γ-ray contributions due
to the inverse-Compton scattering (ICS) of photons by leptons produced in the same colli-
sions. This approximation is reasonable both because ICS contributes at signiﬁcantly lower
energies than the direct γ-ray channel (and will thus be subdominant to the larger proton
62

ﬂux at lower energies), and because the magnetic ﬁelds are expected to peak strongly in this
region, forcing the ICS to be highly subdominant to synchrotron production Crocker et al.
(2010). We note that variations in the diﬀusion parameters are constrained by the tran-
sition between the GeV-TeV spectrum, and yielded no qualitative changes in the ﬁndings
outlined below.
3.4
Results
In Figure 3.2, we show the spectral energy distribution of the γ-ray signal within
cones corresponding to varying radii. We note that more than 50% of the residual emission
is found within 3 pc at all energies, and the majority of this emission is created between
1-3 pc from the GC, when the emitted protons interact with the dense CNR. In Figure 3.3,
we instead show the diﬀerential (top panel) and integrated (bottom) emission as a function
of radius at various ﬁxed energies. In the top panel, we show the total emission in radial
shells of 1 pc width, while in the bottom panel we show the integrated emission within a
given radius.
We note that these features correspond closely to the expectations from Section 3.2.
For instance, at energies of 10 TeV the emission is dominated by a proton population of
approximately 100 TeV, which propagates rectilinearly in our simulation. We ﬁnd the γ-
ray emission contained within 3 pc and 10 pc to be 87% and 95% respectively, matching
the expectations from rectilinear propagation.
At energies of 10 GeV, the γ-ray signal
is dominated by 100 GeV electrons which propagate diﬀusively but undergo Poissonian
interactions. In this case we calculate the γ-ray emission contained within 3 pc and 10 pc
63

to be 61% and 78% respectively, closely matching an r−1 proton density.
Finally, in Figure 3.3 (bottom) we show with vertical lines the approximate angular
resolutions of front converting events from the Fermi-LAT at 10 GeV (28 pc, orange solid),
and at 100 GeV (18 pc, gray dotted), HESS (11 pc, gray long-dashed Aharonian et al.
(2006f)), the HESS 95% conﬁdence limit on the maximum source extension(3 pc, gray
short-dashed, Acero et al. (2010b)) and the anticipated proposed resolution of CTA (CTA
Collaboration, 2011, 2.5 pc, light blue dash-dot). We note that the angular resolution for
the Fermi-LAT at 1 GeV is approximately 90 pc and is outside the plotted range. For all
existing telescopes, the modeled radial dependence could easily be confused with a point
source located at the GC. However, similarly to HESS, CTA will be able to place limits on
the source extension which are a factor of few smaller than the quoted angular resolution.
In this case, CTA will clearly detect structure in the γ-ray signal, including, possibly, bright
emission coincident with the CNR. We expect that this signature would provide extremely
strong evidence in favor or against the hadronic nature of this emission.
3.5
Discussion and Conclusions
We have shown that hadronic emission stemming from the inner 3 pc of the Galaxy
and following a power-law injection spectrum compatible with Fermi acceleration will nat-
urally produce an emission spectrum comparable to that observed by both HESS and the
Fermi-LAT. We showed analytically and numerically that the morphology of γ-ray emis-
sion is determined primarily by the gas morphology, and the majority of the emission falls
below the PSF of all current γ-ray telescopes. While this is in extremely good agreement
64

with HESS observations reporting 85% of the TeV emission to be conﬁned within 3 pc of
the GC Aharonian et al. (2006b), the hadronic model is currently in some tension with
Fermi-LAT observations which imply that the GC source may be extended.
Speciﬁcally, our models ﬁnd 71% and 86% of the 1 GeV γ-ray emission to fall within
3 pc and 10 pc from the GC respectively. This result stands, at face value, in some tension
with Fermi-LAT observations of the GC Hooper & Linden (2011c).
After background
subtraction, Hooper & Linden (2011c) ﬁnd a residual emission which is not well-modeled
by a point source convolved with the Fermi-LAT PSF. If modeled as an extended emission
from dark matter (but independent of any dark matter properties), they derive a best-ﬁt
power-law fall-oﬀto the emission ∼r−2.6, which indicates that roughly 32% and 53% of the
γ-ray signal should originate within 3 pc and 10 pc of the GC.
It is important to remark that it will be diﬃcult to deﬁnitively conclude that
hadronic models are ruled out by Fermi observations, as signiﬁcant background subtraction
is necessary in order to determine the residual background signal which should be observed
by the Fermi-LAT. This includes a dominant foreground from emission in the galactic plane
which lies along the line of sight between the solar position and the galactic plane Hooper
& Linden (2011c). This intensity of residual emission can be further complicated by un-
certainties in the modeling of point source contributions at the galactic center Boyarsky
et al. (2011). Lastly, the γ-ray morphology for hadronic models is neither point-like nor
power-law with radius, making it diﬃcult to directly compare these results with previous
works. Still, our results indicate that a substantial source extension in Fermi-LAT data is
not expected from hadronic emission models.
65

It may appear that the conclusion above can be circumvented if the hadronic
emission from the GC is highly polar, allowing protons to propagate out of the central 3 pc
while avoiding the CNR. However, this is diﬃcult to reconcile with TeV observations: with
purely polar injection, we ﬁnd that HESS would clearly observe an extended source above
and below the Galactic plane. Our conclusions would also be aﬀected if the GeV emission
mechanism were distinct from the TeV emission – either due to diﬀerent primary proton
populations or to multiple low-energy hadronic sources contributing to the GeV but not to
the TeV emission.
Notice that a time dependence in the hadronic emission could be engineered to
provide an energy-dependent source extension. Further multiwavelength observations will
be necessary to constrain this scenario.
Another alternative pertains to the possibility
that the CNR is not a stable feature of the galactic-center region, but is instead transient
in nature.
While studies of galactic tracers such as HCN and HCO+ found extremely
high gas masses of approximately 106 M⊙, which would be stable against tidal disruption
by the supermassive-black hole Christopher et al. (2005); Montero-Casta˜no et al. (2009),
very recent observations using the GREAT telescope to perform a CO excitation analysis
Requena-Torres et al. (2012) obtain a best ﬁt which reduces the total mass of the CNR by
approximately two orders of magnitude, and thus ﬁnd the CNR to be susceptible to tidal
disruption, implying that the feature could be transient. We note that the density used in
this chapter, based on the central value reported by Ferriere (2012) stands at 2 x 105 M⊙,
in between these extreme values. The implication of a transient CNR in the context of this
work is diﬃcult to positively determine, as it would depend sensitively on the eﬀect of the
66

CNR not only on the gas density, but on the diﬀusion parameters of the region as well.
If the latter eﬀect is neglected, then it is possible that the fall-in of the CNR would lead
to enhanced low-energy emission, as protons at this energy have built up without losing
signiﬁcant energy until the CNR moves into regions with higher proton density nearer the
GC.
We note that while our work considers a similar model for the gas density near the
GC to that of Ballantyne et al. (2007a), we obtain an energy dependence for the gamma-ray
morphology which is qualitatively diﬀerent. Speciﬁcally, Ballantyne et al. (2007a) calculates
the probability of a cosmic ray proton entering the CNR before it diﬀuses out of the target
region. Since this probability will decrease as the protons mean free path becomes larger,
they determine that the gamma-ray morphology should become more diﬀuse at high energy.
However, this implicitly assumes that gamma rays moving through the CNR eﬃciently lose
their energy before leaving the region.
However, employing the model for Hydrogen in
the CNR determined by Ferriere (2012), and using a model where the propagation of TeV
photons is rectilinear on the distance scale inhabited by the CNR, we ﬁnd that protons
escape from the CNR with only negligible energy losses. Additionally, we ﬁnd that these
energy losses remain negligible even through the majority of the diﬀusive regime.
This creates a signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the necessary proton injection spectra nec-
essary to match the HESS dataset in this work, compared to that of Ballantyne et al.
(2007a). In our work the existence of rectilinear proton propagation throughout the HESS
regime implies that the injected E−1.9 proton produces an almost equivalent E−1.9 gamma-
ray spectrum. However, in the work of Ballantyne et al. (2007a) the decreasing interaction
67

probability between high energy protons and the molecular gas requires a much harder in-
jected proton spectrum (E−0.75) to account for the observed gamma-ray spectrum. Finally,
we note that while the percentage of high energy emission contained within the inner 3 pc
in our model is similar to the probability of a 1 TeV proton encountering the CNR as de-
termined by Ballantyne et al. (2007a), this is fairly coincidental: the relative emission in
our model depends sensitively on the Hydrogen gas density outside of the inner 3 pc, which
is not taken to account in the model of Ballantyne et al. (2007a).
Finally, we note that the greatly improved angular resolution of CTA will provide
a much crisper picture than current instruments - potentially leading to the observation
of both a central deﬁcit of γ rays in the central pc from the GC, and of a bright ring of
emission coincident with the position of the CNR if the GC source is of hadronic nature. This
morphology would be diﬃcult to explain with leptonic or dark matter scenarios, which would
not be expected to correlate with the local gas density. Thus we believe that future CTA
observations will convincingly conﬁrm or rule out the hadronic emission scenario presented
here.
68

Figure 3.1 Gas density (nH/cm3) averaged over solid angle as a function of radius from
the GC (pc) obtained from a combination of the work of Ferri`ere et al. (2007) and Ferriere
(2012) (see the text). The major feature in the gas density stems from the circum-nuclear
ring (CNR, 1.2 pc to 3.0 pc) which contributes a gas density nearly two orders of magnitude
larger than any other structure.
69

Figure 3.2 Spectral energy distribution of γ-ray emission within radial cones of various size
ranging from r < 1 pc to r < 50 pc.
We note that the emission falls oﬀvery quickly
after 3 pc, with almost no additional intensity for additional radial bins beyond this point.
The overall intensity is normalized such that the emission within 3 pc matches the Fermi
and HESS ﬂuxes as reported by Chernyakova et al. (2011). Due to the higher nH in our
simulation and longer emission period, this corresponds to a lower proton injected luminosity
of 7.0 x 1035 erg s−1 into protons.
70

Figure 3.3 Diﬀerential (top) and integrated (bottom) radial emission for γ-ray energies of
1 GeV (solid black), 10 GeV (dotted red), 100 GeV (green dashed), 1 TeV (blue long dash)
and 10 TeV (purple dot-dashed). In the bottom panel we show vertical lines corresponding
to the angular resolution of the Fermi-LAT at 100 GeV (orange solid), Fermi-LAT at 10 GeV
(brown dotted), HESS (gray long dashed), CTA (projected, blue dash-dot), as well as the
HESS 95% conﬁdence limit on the source extension (HESS PS, gray short dashed).
71

Chapter 4
Exploring the Nature of the
Galactic Center γ-Ray Source with
the Cherenkov Telescope Array
Early observations from the High Energy Spectroscopic System (H.E.S.S) opened
a new window into γ-ray observations of the Galactic Center (GC) 1 region, including the
detection of a bright TeV point source localized to within 1’ of the GC. The spectrum of
the γ-ray source is fairly hard, following a power-law α = -2.2 +/- 0.09 (stat) +/- 0.15 (sys)
with a high-energy cutoﬀexceeding 10 TeV Aharonian et al. (2004b). Further observations
succeeded in localizing the center of the point-source to within 13” of the GC, and found
85% of the total γ-ray emission to be conﬁned within 3 pc (1.2’) of the GC Acero et al.
1Throughout this work, we will employ the term Galactic Center (GC) to refer to both the dynamical
center of the Milky Way, as well as to the position of the radio source Sgr A*, which we will consider to be
equivalent.
72

(2010a).
While the observed morphological details strongly suggest that the TeV γ-ray
signal stems from a point-source spatially coincident with the black hole at the GC, the
steady-state nature of the H.E.S.S. source indicates the emission may be originating farther
from the GC. While lower energy X-ray and radio observations have uncovered signiﬁcant
variability from Sgr A* on timescales stretching from minutes to years, no variability has yet
been observed in γ-ray observations Aharonian et al. (2009b). Most notably, a simultaneous
observation with H.E.S.S. and Chandra found that an X-ray outburst observed in 2007
was not correlated with any change in the γ-ray emission Aharonian et al. (2008b). This
implies that the source of the γ-ray emission may be distinct from the source of low-energy
photons. Several models have been posited which would naturally explain an intense TeV
γ-ray emission which is uncorrelated with the lower-energy regime, including photons from
dark matter annihilation Hooper et al. (2004b); Profumo (2005); Aharonian et al. (2006c),
as well as π0-decay resulting from the emission of high energy protons from the central
black hole and their subsequent collisions with Galactic gas Aharonian & Neronov (2005c);
Liu et al. (2006b,d); Fryer et al. (2007); Ballantyne et al. (2007b).
With the launch of the Fermi-LAT in 2008, the window was opened to observe
the GeV γ-ray spectrum with similar angular and energy resolution to that of H.E.S.S. At-
wood et al. (2009), unveiling a distinctly diﬀerent spectral shape from the very high-energy
regime. Speciﬁcally, an excess of 1-10 GeV γ-rays was uncovered in the GC compared to
that expected from an extrapolation of the TeV source spectrum to GeV energies Vitale
et al. (2009b); Hooper & Goodenough (2011b); Hooper & Linden (2011c); Hooper et al.
73

(2012b). Several models have been postulated to explain this excess emission, including
the annihilation of light, leptophilic dark matter particles Hooper & Goodenough (2011b);
Hooper & Linden (2011c) and emission from millisecond pulsars Abazajian (2011b). Re-
cently, Chernyakova et al. (2011) re-examined an extension of the hadronic scenario de-
scribed above down to GeV energies and found that the entirety of the GeV-TeV spectrum
could be explained by inelastic processes initiated by protons whose spectrum would follow
a single power-law. The softening of the γ-ray signal at energies ∼10-100 GeV was then
enforced by ﬁne-tuning the diﬀusion constant in order to produce diﬀusive propagation at
GeV energies and rectilinear propagation at TeV energies.
Subsequently, Linden et al. (2012) examined the expected morphology of the
hadronic emission model described by Chernyakova et al. (2011), using a realistic model
for the morphology of Galactic gas in the inner 10 pc around Sgr A* as determined by
Ferri`ere (2012). They found that the morphology of TeV emission closely matched obser-
vations byAharonian et al. (2006c) signaling that 85% of the γ-ray emission from the GC
was conﬁned to within ∼3 pc of Sgr A*. Additionally, Linden et al. (2012) found that the
energy dependence of this morphology is minimal, and thus the majority of GeV emission
detectable by the Fermi-LAT should also reside within 3 pc of the central black hole, which
may be in tension with an observed extension of the GeV γ-ray source at the GC Hooper &
Goodenough (2011b); Hooper & Linden (2011c). We note that disentangling an extended
emission in this region is especially problematic, given the poor knowledge of the diﬀuse
Galactic emission Vitale et al. (2009b). Finally, Linden et al. (2012) noted that while the
hadronic emission model should appear point-like to all current γ-ray instruments, the up-
74

coming Cherenkov Telescope Array (CTA), should observe an extended spatial morphology
which would distinguish this scenario from other point-source emission mechanism occurring
at the position of Sgr A*.
In this letter, we closely investigate several models for the TeV γ-ray emission at
the GC which may be observed by CTA, including a γ-ray point source at the position of
Sgr A*, p-p collisions due to hadronic emission from the position of Sgr A* Chernyakova
et al. (2011); Linden et al. (2012), and dark matter Hooper et al. (2004b); Profumo (2005);
Aharonian et al. (2006c). Speciﬁcally, we show that the improved angular resolution of
CTA can diﬀerentiate these scenarios with surprising accuracy based on morphology alone,
allowing for the construction of a rigorous model for the γ-ray emission from the GC center
source. In turn, the resulting morphology observed by CTA will stand as a crucial ingredient
in the understanding of high-energy emission from the entire GC region, including possibly
the extraction of a dark matter annihilation signal.
4.1
Models
The morphology of the γ-ray emission from π0 decay is dominated by the distri-
bution of Galactic gas. In order to produce a rigorous model which takes into account the
full 3D morphology of the target gas density, we employ the maps of Ferri`ere (2012) which
include not only contributions from a spherical diﬀuse halo, but also from structures associ-
ated with the SNR Sgr A East, from belts of molecular clouds, and most importantly, from
the high-density gaseous disk known as the circum-nuclear ring. This ring-shaped cloud
of gas is located between 1-3 pc from the GC, inclined 20◦with respect to the Galactic
75

plane, and contains gas densities approximately two orders of magnitude larger than in
the surrounding GC medium Becklin et al. (1982b); Bradford et al. (2005). In this work,
we assume the central position and gas density for each gas structure, and set the volume
ﬁlling factor of each structure to match those provided in Table 1 of Ferri`ere (2012). Given
the high energy of the injected protons in γ-ray models, we ignore all information on the
temperature distribution of Galactic gas, as it is inconsequential for γ-ray production.
In their analysis of the combined GeV and TeV spectrum, recent work by both
Chernyakova et al. (2011) and Linden et al. (2012) employed a diﬀusion constant tuned in
order to provide a sharp transition between diﬀusive propagation in the GeV energy regime
and rectilinear transport at TeV energies. This transition, which occurs at diﬀusion con-
stants of approximately 1.4 x 1029 cm2s−1 for a diﬀusion zone of 10 pc, must be ﬁnely set in
order to correctly explain the extremely soft emission spectrum at energies of approximately
100-500 GeV. Thus, a generic prediction of all scenarios which employ a single proton in-
jection spectrum to correctly match both the GeV and TeV γ-ray emission spectrum, is
cosmic ray propagation which is transitioning from the diﬀusive to the rectilinear regime
at TeV energies. In the rectilinear regime, the cosmic-ray density falls as r−2, while in the
diﬀusive regime the cosmic-ray density falls instead as r−1, due to the square dependence
of the escape time on the size of the diﬀusion region.
In either case, we will assume that cosmic ray protons in this energy range tend
to interact with gas less than one time before leaving the diﬀusion region, validating the
assumption that the energy spectrum of cosmic ray protons is position independent. For the
gas density maps provided by Ferri`ere (2012) this assumption holds so long as the average
76

value of the diﬀusion constant in the inner 10 pc of the galaxy exceeds 1.8 × 1027 cm2 s−1.
Under this restriction, coupled with the assumption that the γ-ray emission from the galactic
center is in steady state, our models for the morphology of the γ-ray emission depend only
on the radial density of cosmic-ray protons, rather than the exact diﬀusion scenario which
produces the proton morphology.
Throughout this work, we will calculate the expected γ-ray morphology for both
the diﬀusive and rectilinear models of proton-propagation, ﬁnding that the qualitative argu-
ments presented throughout this paper do not depend on the exact diﬀusion model consid-
ered. Furthermore, we can consider these two scenarios to bound the distributions expected
for relativistic particle motion due to interactions with magneto-hydrodynamic waves, and
can also be used as approximations of the expected eﬀect in scenarios involving either non-
homogenous diﬀusion scenarios such as those put forth by Fryer et al. (2007) and Ballantyne
et al. (2007b).
Finally, a signiﬁcant uncertainty in this model pertains to the angular dependence
of cosmic-ray injection from the GC point source: while a spherically symmetric distribution
was found by Linden et al. (2012) to provide a compelling match to the current H.E.S.S.
point source limit on the GC emission, other models are possible. We will comment on
the assumption of isotropy in the cosmic ray distribution in Section 4.3. Throughout this
work, we restrict our analysis to examining photons in the energy range of 1-10 TeV, which
yields several simpliﬁcations to the analysis. First, the spectrum in this region is relatively
ﬂat, following a best ﬁt spectral index Γ = 2.10 ± 0.04 Aharonian et al. (2009b). Secondly,
the PSF of both H.E.S.S. and CTA are relatively constant in this region Aharonian et al.
77

(2006e); CTA Consortium (2011).
The most up-to-date analysis of the GC with H.E.S.S. consisted of 93h of live-time
with the instrument operating in “Wobble” mode with a an average distance of 0◦.7 from the
position of Sgr A*, and producing events with a mean zenith angle of 23◦Aharonian et al.
(2009b). From (Aharonian et al., 2006d, Fig. 13) we infer an eﬀective area of 2 x 109 cm2,
with only negligible variation over the energy range 1-10 TeV. In this region, we adopt a
point-spread function which is constant in energy and follows the functional form given in
Aharonian et al. (2006d) of a two-component Gaussian where the probability of ﬁnding a
photon in a radial bin dθ is given by:
P(θ) = Aθ(exp(−θ2
2σ2
1
) + Arel exp(−θ2
2σ2
2
))
(4.1)
with σ1 = 0.046, σ2 = 0.12, Arel = 0.15 and A a normalization constant. However,
in this work, these parameters are set speciﬁcally to account for the spectral characteristics
of the Crab Pulsar and a 60◦zenith angle. These parameters provide a 68% containment
angle of 0.12◦degrees.
In the case of the GC, Aharonian et al. (2006e) yields a 68%
containment angle of 0.08◦, and we thus linearly scale down the parameters θ1 and θ2 to
the values θ1 = 0.031 and θ2 = 0.08 in order to obtain the correct 68% containment angle.
Finally, H.E.S.S. observations from Aharonian et al. (2009b) ﬁnd a best ﬁt intensity above
1 TeV of I>1TeV = (1.99 ± 0.09) x 10−12 cm−2 s−1. Given the calculated eﬀective area of
H.E.S.S, this implies a point source observation of 1332 photons with energy in the range
1-10 TeV.
In order to model the instrumental performance of CTA, we adopt best ﬁtting
78

parameters following the design speciﬁcations set forth in CTA Consortium (2011), noting,
however, that the ultimate design speciﬁcations for the instrument are presently unknown.
Speciﬁcally, we adopt an eﬀective area in the 1-10 TeV band of 2 x 1010 cm2, which exceeds
the H.E.S.S. eﬀective area by an order of magnitude, and we adopt an equivalent functional
form for the point-spread function as described in Eq. (4.1) for H.E.S.S., but rescale the
parameters σ1 and σ2 such that the 68% containment radius of the photon signal is 0.03◦.
This yields σ1 = 0.0115 and σ2 = 0.03.
While CTA contains additional improvements
over current Cherenkov telescopes, especially stemming from its signiﬁcantly lower energy
threshold, the poorer angular resolution in the lower energy regime mitigates the eﬀective-
ness of CTA to test the morphology of the dense GC region. In this work we evaluate
the performance of CTA after both 100 and 500 hours of observation, indicating both a
conservative lower bound and a targeted observation time for the GC region. This yields
an expected 14323 and 71613 photon counts, respectively.
In order to simulate observations of the GC with both the H.E.S.S. and CTA
instruments we employ Monte Carlo techniques to calculate the expected distribution of
observed photons. We ﬁrst calculate the 3D morphology for the true photon direction. In
the case of hadronic emission, we calculate this by multiplying the 3D distribution of gas
with both the r−2 and r−1 cosmic-ray densities assumed for rectilinear and diﬀusive trans-
port of TeV protons. For dark matter models we assume a density distribution ρ(r) = rα
and evaluate scenarios α={1.0, 1.4}, as we note that current hydrodynamical simulations
indicate the possibility that the inner dark matter density proﬁle is adiabatically contracted
(i.e. α > 1.0) Blumenthal et al. (1986b); Ryden & Gunn (1987b); Gnedin et al. (2004b,
79

2011b). These emission proﬁles are integrated over the line of sight, and then photons are
selected from this distribution and smeared with the PSF of each instrument. We run 1000
simulations of all models in order to achieve reasonable statistical accuracy, unless otherwise
noted.
4.2
Results
In Figure 4.1 we show γ-ray intensity maps depicting the actual emission morphol-
ogy (i.e. for a machine with perfect angular resolution) (top row), the emission as observed
by a machine with the angular resolution of the HESS telescope (middle row) and the emis-
sion as observed by a machine with the angular resolution of CTA (bottom row) in the case
of hadronic emission in the regime rectilinear proton propagation (left column), hadronic
emission in the regime of diﬀusive proton propagation (middle column), and point source
emission. In models employing the eﬀective area and angular resolution of the H.E.S.S. tele-
scope, the morphological features stemming from the gas density employed in the hadronic
emission scenario occur on angular scales signiﬁcantly smaller than the σ = 0.08◦angular
resolution of the telescope blurring out the angular features which distinguish the hadronic
scenario. Since these angular features are themselves centered around the position of Sgr A*,
diﬀerentiating between the point-source and hadronic models becomes extremely diﬃcult.
Calculating the average cumulative-distribution function over 1000 simulations of
both a GC point source and the hadronic emission scenario, we employ a K-S test and
ﬁnd that current H.E.S.S. results would only be able to diﬀerentiate between models with a
χ2/d.o.f. = 0.85, which falls far short of providing a minimum 2σ level of conﬁdence between
80

the emission proﬁles. In Figure 4.2 (top left) we provide a binned (at 0.01◦) sample of
photons collected by the H.E.S.S. telescope in each scenario. In realistic observations, this
result is further complicated by residuals stemming from both the Galactic plane integrated
over the line of sight, as well as from contaminating cosmic-ray backgrounds, both of which
should appear isotropic in the small region under consideration. While additional H.E.S.S.
observations time may slightly improve these statistics, these additional backgrounds make
it unlikely that the H.E.S.S. telescope will be capable of diﬀerentiating between the point
source and hadronic emission scenarios.
In the case of CTA, the improved angular resolution will provide a much sharper
view to distinguish between a point source and hadronic models. Furthermore, the greatly
increased eﬀective area will (in our simpliﬁed model where additional backgrounds are
rejected) increase the χ2 mismatch between models linearly. Using 100 hours of CTA obser-
vation, a K-S test provides a ﬁt χ2/dof = 208, which provides more than 14σ diﬀerentiation
between models. We ﬁnd that the improved angular resolution of CTA will allow for a
3σ rejection of the poorer ﬁtting model with only ∼5h of pointed observation!
In Fig-
ure 4.2 (top right), we again show a binned analysis for this dataset, noting speciﬁcally the
under-density of photons observed within the inner 0.01◦, which provides an independent,
statistically signiﬁcant indication that would be diﬃcult to explain with an additional dif-
fuse or cosmic-ray background. We note that over the projected lifetime of CTA, nearly
500h of GC observation are expected, which would lead to a 32σ diﬀerentiation between
models, with a result that is plotted in Figure 4.2 (bottom right). A wealth of information
on the nature of the GC source will clearly be available in this case, going well beyond
81

simply distinguishing between a point-source emission and a hadronic model.
In Figure 4.3 we show the same observations as in Figure 4.2, but under the
assumption that high energy protons travel diﬀusively through the inner galaxy, and thus
follow a density distribution ρ(r) ∝r−1 instead of ρ(r) ∝r−2. In this case, we ﬁnd that the
statistical diﬀerentiation between the Point Source and Hadronic scenarios slightly increases
in all cases, due to the more diﬀuse nature of the energetic protons. However, the qualitative
results are unchanged. Speciﬁcally, in the case of H.E.S.S observations this improvement is
still insuﬃcient to diﬀerentiate the two signals, as our K-S test obtains a ﬁt χ2/dof = 1.49.
In realistic models, additional emission sources must also be considered, including
an isotropic cosmic-ray background, a line of sight background through the Galactic plane2,
and unresolved sources in the region surrounding the GC – all of which will contribute
additional uncertainties to the diﬀerentiation of the point source and hadronic models.
One particularly interesting background could stem from the annihilation of dark matter
particles in the GC region. The morphology of the dark matter annihilation is partially
constrained to be spherically symmetric with a density distribution which follows a form
ρ(r) ∝r−α.
While a standard value, α = 1.0 is employed in the standard NFW dark
matter model Navarro et al. (1997), the dark matter proﬁle is highly uncertain in the GC
region, and the gravitational eﬀect from baryons in the GC may signiﬁcantly steepen the
dark matter distribution Blumenthal et al. (1986b); Ryden & Gunn (1987b); Gnedin et al.
(2004b, 2011b). This makes it potentially diﬃcult to diﬀerentiate between dark matter
models for TeV emission from the GC, and the possible combination of emission from both
point source and hadronic sources.
2We note that this is approximately isotropic for the very small angular regions considered here.
82

In Figure 4.4 we plot a projection for the cumulative distribution function of pho-
tons observed with 500h at CTA as a function of the angular distance from the GC, for
models of point source emission, hadronic emission, dark matter annihilation with a density
proﬁle α = 1.0 and with a density proﬁle α = 1.4. We note that the point source model
contains the fastest rising CDF possible, with a morphology uniquely determined by the
instrumental PSF. Any combination of emission from a point source and the hadronic model
must produce a CDF which lies between the individual models, and the relative contribution
of each source class can be accurately (to within ∼10% errors after 500h of observation) de-
termined by examining the CDF observed by CTA. However, a small contribution from dark
matter annihilation following an index α = 1.0 along with a dominant contribution from the
point-source, may be misinterpreted as emission stemming from important contributions of
both the point-source and hadronic models. Moreover, models where the emission is en-
tirely dominated by dark matter which is highly peaked towards the GC (such as α = 1.4),
may also be misinterpreted as some linear combination of hadronic and point source contri-
butions. This uncertainty is a standard result from an attempt to identify three unknown
intensities using only one constraint parameter.
A separate measurement is therefore necessary in order to constrain the relative
contributions from all three source classes.
An obvious choice is to model the angular
distribution of photons around the GC, noting that both the point source and dark matter
models are spherically symmetric. In Figure 4.5 we plot the expected azimuthal angular
distribution for both the point source and hadronic models, counting the number of photons
from a given angle φ = arctan(b/l), i.e. the angle formed between the Galactic plane and
83

the direction joining the GC and the photon location in the sky (see inset). We restrict
the counts to photons within 0.05◦of the GC, where contributions from the H.E.S.S. point
source are believed to be largely dominant. While a (spherically symmetric) point source
provides a ﬂat distribution in the incoming photon angle (as expected), contributions from
the hadronic scenario deviate signiﬁcantly, and are primarily aligned with the Galactic plane,
due to contributions from both the circum-nuclear ring, as well as a contribution at angles
of near 0◦from hadronic interactions within the molecular cloud M-0.02-0.07. We note that
with 500h of observation, an evaluation of the nature of the central TeV source can be made
with more than 11σ conﬁdence - without any reference to the radial distribution shown in
Figure 4.2. Most importantly, this implies that in cases where the point-source, hadronic
sources, and dark matter annihilation all contribute non-negligibly to the total TeV galactic
center source, we can determine the relative contribution stemming from hadronic emission
to within 20% with more than 2σ conﬁdence. In Figure 4.6 we show the same analysis as
in Figure 4.5, under the assumption of diﬀusively propagating protons and ﬁnd the results
to be qualitatively unchanged, with a χ2/dof which improves by about 25%.
4.3
Discussion and Conclusions
We have shown that while current TeV instruments are incapable of distinguishing
between point-source and hadronic emission models for the GC, the upcoming CTA will
deﬁnitively diﬀerentiate between the signals within its ﬁrst hours of observation at the
GC, and will determine the relative importance of each contributing source class at the
10% level over the course of its lifetime (see Fig. 4.2 and related discussion). These source
84

classes can be distinguished based on either their radial or angular morphology, yielding two
independent handles for the determination of the γ-ray source. The angular information is
particularly important, as it allows the hadronic scenario to be easily separated from any
combination of a GC point source and models of dark matter annihilation.
While in this work, we have considered only γ-rays with an energy exceeding 1 TeV
in our quantitative evaluation of the ability of CTA to distinguish between the hadronic
and point-source signals, we note that the discrimination power of CTA could be further
extended depending on the speciﬁc instrumental point spread function which the instrument
attains at lower energies. The continuation, or even softening of the E−2.0 γ-ray spectrum
to energies as low as 1 GeV has been demonstrated by the combination of HESS Aharonian
et al. (2009b) and Fermi-LAT Vitale et al. (2009b); Hooper & Goodenough (2011b); Hooper
& Linden (2011c) results. This has the potential to create a much stronger statistical test,
so long as the angular resolution of CTA remains on the same scale as the size of the
circum-nuclear ring. Moreover, the diﬀerentiation between the Hadronic and point-source
models improves in the diﬀusive regime, which is thought to control the propagation of the
protons which create the γ-ray signal below ∼100 GeV Chernyakova et al. (2011); Linden
et al. (2012).
We further note that while this study quantitatively examines only one speciﬁc
scenario for hadronic diﬀusion through the GC region where the diﬀusion constant was ﬁne
tuned in order to match the softening of the γ-ray spectrum at energies ∼100 GeV Chernyakova
et al. (2011), the model remains relevant for other physical models which have been proposed
to control the propagation of high energy protons in the galactic center region. Speciﬁcally,
85

Fryer et al. (2007) employs a model which allows rectilinear propagation out to approxi-
mately 1 pc, after which the shocked winds produce a proton density which remains rela-
tively ﬂat between 1-3 pc, corresponding with the region dominated by the circum-nuclear
ring. The comparison of our results in the case of both rectilinear (ρ(r) ∝r−2) and diﬀusive
(ρ(r) ∝r−1) propagation show that the overall change in the pion production morphology
is relatively unchanged by this factor of 3 change in the proton density at the outer edge of
the circum-nuclear ring. In fact, from our results, we would expect a marginal improvement
in the diﬀerentiation between the model of Fryer et al. (2007) and that of point-source
γ-ray production. The same is also true in the models of Ballantyne et al. (2007b), where
the diﬀusion constant varies inversely with the local gas density, producing a density of
cosmic-rays which increases greatly in the region of the circum-nuclear ring.
There is however, one important caveat to the scenario employed here. The mor-
phology of observed high energy gamma rays from the Hadronic scenario may become signif-
icantly less extended in cases where high energy protons are not isotropized by the galactic
medium through which they are propagating. In this case, γ-rays observed at the solar
position will preferentially stem from protons which were themselves originally pointed to-
wards the solar position, due to the relativistic beaming of pions produced in p-p scattering.
This complication may become important in scenarios where we have assumed rectilinear
proton propagation, which in the case of a simple, homogeneous diﬀusion constant, would
imply that protons do not become completely isotropized before leaving the diﬀusion zone.
In this scenario, we ﬁnd that for diﬀusion constants exceeding 9.3 × 1029 cm2 s−1, the
random walk approximation for particle diﬀusion predicts that the average proton will not
86

undergo a change in direction before leaving the 10 pc diﬀusion region. In the studies of
Chernyakova et al. (2011) and Linden et al. (2012) this corresponds to a proton energy of
only 2.2 TeV. It is these protons which dominate the 1 TeV signal, since the E−2 proton
injection signal implies that the most important contributor to γ-rays of a given energy are
protons of a very similar energy. This could mean that some fraction of protons which are
undergoing p-p scattering in our simulations are not isotropically distributed.
However, the random-walk approximation for proton diﬀusion is notably poor in
this region, and all protons will undergo some scattering oﬀof the magnetic ﬁeld inhomogen-
ities in the diﬀusion region. The exact degree of proton anisotropy will depend sensitively
on the speciﬁcs of this diﬀusion scenario, and speciﬁcally on any inhomogenities in the mag-
netic ﬁeld structure, which are both invariably present, and diﬃcult to directly determine.
Lastly, we note that even if the vast majority of the signal is anisotropic (thus appearing
very similar to the point source calculation), even a small isotropic component could be
distinguished from the point source calculation, given the incredible χ2 detection of the
Hadronic model by the CTA.
We note that this same process could also place constraints on the dark matter
annihilation cross-section - using the observed angular and radial proﬁles to determine
the maximum contribution of photons following a morphology consistent with dark matter
annihilation. However, due to the small angular region considered, as well as the extremely
bright point-source emission observed by H.E.S.S., these constraints are not competitive
with those determined, for example, by H.E.S.S. observations of the regions directly above
and below the Galactic plane Abramowski et al. (2011). While the GC remains an extremely
87

interesting region for setting dark matter constraints with CTA, the best limits will likely
continue to be set by analysis of regions directly oﬀof the Galactic plane. This scenario may
become interesting, however, in cases where the dark matter density in the GC region is
found to be highly adiabatically contracted (e.g. α >∼1.7), leading to extremely enhanced
ﬂuxes within the inner pc of the Galaxy.
Pinpointing the nature of the GC source will allow us to more eﬀectively search
for a dark matter signal in this region, as the diﬀerentiation between the point source and
hadronic models would allow for an extrapolation of their expected emission proﬁles into
the regions where strong dark matter limits can be set. Additionally, the extrapolation of
the observed CTA emission will greatly reﬁne Fermi-LAT models of the morphology of the
central point source, as shown in Linden et al. (2012). Thus TeV γ-ray observations will
be critical to validate or constrain particle dark matter models that could explain other
observations tentatively indicating signals from dark matter annihilation at lower energies
(e.g Hooper (2012)). In this scenario, CTA will be highly complementary to an extended
Fermi-LAT campaign, and will place strong limits on the spectrum of the central point
source.
88

Figure 4.1 Observed ﬂux at the solar position as a function of the angle from the galactic
center from the actual emission morphology (i.e. for a machine with a perfect angular res-
olution, top row), the emission as observed by an instrument with the angular resolution
of the HESS telescope (middle row) and for an instrument with the angular resolution of
the CTA telescope (bottom row) in the case of hadronic emission in the regime rectilinear
proton propagation (left column), hadronic emission in the regime of diﬀusive proton prop-
agation (middle column), and point source emission. The ﬂuxes are shown logarithmically
and binned to regions of 10−4◦. The pointsource emission for an instrument with perfect
angular resolution is not shown, as it would would provide a delta function at the center
of the image. The ﬂux shown stands as the ﬂux between 1-10 TeV in energy averaged over
10000 realizations of 93 hour HESS observations and 1000 realizations of 500 hour CTA
observations.
89

Figure 4.2 Expected photon counts as a function of the distance from the GC (◦from Sgr
A*), for models where the 1-10 TeV signal is generated by photons from a point source at
the position of Sgr A* (black) or via hadronic emission from the central point source which
propagates rectilinearly (ρ(r) ∝r−2) and subsequently interacts with gas (red). The mean
shown in each model is the average of 1000 realizations, and error bars indicate the
√
counts
for a the average simulation. The value of χ2/d.o.f is computed via a two-sample K-S test
which does not depend on the binning used in the ﬁgure.
90

Figure 4.3 Same as Figure 4.2 but for protons which are propagating diﬀusively (ρ(r) ∝r−1)
(red)
91

Figure 4.4 Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) of photons observed within 0.05◦of
the GC for models of the total number of photons produced within ∼0.07◦of the GC.
We show the case of a point source at the position of the GC (solid black), the hadronic
model as described in Section 4.1 (green short dash), dark matter following an NFW proﬁle
α = 1.0 (blue long dash) and dark matter following a steeper proﬁle with α = 1.4 (orange
dot-dashed).
92

Galactic
Plane
Figure 4.5 Expected photon counts as a function of the azimuthal angle φ = arctan(b/l)
(shown in the inset), for both the point-source (black squares) and the hadronic emis-
sion scenario for protons which propagate rectilinearly (red triangles) for photons observed
within 0.05◦of the GC. In the case of a point source, photons are symmetrically distributed
around the position of the GC, while the majority of emission due to hadronic injection
follows the distribution of gas, which is aligned more closely with the Galactic plane.
93

Galactic
Plane
Figure 4.6 Same as Figure 4.5 but for protons which are propagating diﬀusively (ρ(r) ∝r−1)
(red)
94

Chapter 5
Dark Matter and Synchrotron
Emission from Galactic Center
Radio Filaments
Weakly Interacting Massive Particles (WIMPs) provide an attractive class of can-
didates for the dark matter of our universe Bertone et al. (2005); Bergstr¨om (2009). The
WIMP paradigm is motivated in part by the realization that particles with weak-scale in-
teractions and masses will naturally freeze-out in the early universe with a relic abundance
similar to the observed density of dark matter Steigman (1979b), an observation referred
to as the “WIMP Miracle”. Barring any complicating factors such as conannihilations, res-
onances, or S-wave suppression, dark matter candidates motivated by the WIMP miracle
annihilate with a cross section of approximately σv ≈3 × 10−26 cm3 s−1 (where v is the
relative velocity of the annihilating WIMPs). These annihilations produce stable particles,
95

including photons at γ-ray energies, as well as protons, electrons, neutrinos, and their an-
tiparticles. Because the dark matter annihilation rate scales with the square of the dark
matter density, regions such as the Galactic center, dwarf spheroidal galaxies, and galaxy
clusters represent promising locations for searches for indirect signatures of dark matter.
The launch of the Fermi Large Area Telescope (Fermi-LAT) in 2008 has greatly
expanded our view of the γ-ray sky Atwood et al. (2009). In addition to its signiﬁcantly
enhanced eﬀective area, the unparalleled spatial and energy resolution of the Fermi-LAT
has allowed for the separation of point sources in the Galactic center, revealing much more
detailed information about the diﬀuse γ-ray emission from this region Abdo et al. (2009a);
Vitale et al. (2009c). Recently, Hooper & Goodenough (2011c) identiﬁed an excess of γ-rays
within approximately 175 pc of the Galactic center in the energy range of ∼500 MeV to
7 GeV, and showed that this could be explained by 7-10 GeV dark matter particles an-
nihilating into τ +τ −pairs, possibly among other leptonic ﬁnal states. This range of dark
matter masses also provides a suitable match to the direct detection signals observed by
the DAMA/LIBRA Bernabei et al. (2010b); Hooper et al. (2010) and CoGeNT collabora-
tions Aalseth et al. (2011c,b); Hooper & Kelso (2011). While upcoming limits from CMB
constraints Slatyer et al. (2009); H¨utsi et al. (2011) as well as LEP constraints Fox et al.
(2011), error bars in these measurements, along with uncertainties in the dark matter den-
sity both locally and near the galactic center, are more than suﬃcient to remedy any tension
between these models.
If annihilating dark matter particles are in fact responsible for the ﬂux of γ-rays
observed from the Galactic center, this signal is guaranteed to be accompanied by the
96

production of a hard population of electrons and positrons carrying a signiﬁcant percentage
of the total annihilation energy. In the case of democratic annihilation (equal number of
annihilations to each family of charged leptons: e+e−, µ+µ−, and τ +τ −), the combined
electrons and positrons carry away nearly an order of magnitude more energy than the γ-
rays observable by the Fermi-LAT (8.4 GeV per annihilation, as compared to 1.1 GeV into
γ-rays for a 8 GeV WIMP). For this reason, the synchrotron radiation from the electrons
and positrons produced in dark matter annihilations provides a particularly promising test
of the dark matter interpretation of the γ-ray ﬂux from the Galactic center. Along these
lines, it has been shown that the characteristics of the galactic synchrotron excess known
as the WMAP Haze are consistent with scenarios in which annihilating dark matter is the
source of the observed Galactic center γ-rays Hooper & Linden (2011b).
In addition to the high dark matter density expected in the Galactic center Navarro
et al. (1996b), galactic studies of dark matter synchrotron are enticing due to the many
survey observations undertaken over several decades. Observations at 74 MHz Brogan et al.
(2003), 330 MHz Pedlar et al. (1989); Anantharamaiah et al. (1991); LaRosa et al. (2000b);
Nord et al. (2004), 1.4 GHz Yusef-Zadeh et al. (2004), 5 GHz LaRosa et al. (2004) and
higher frequencies Sofue et al. (1986); Reich et al. (2000) allow for the additional modeling
of spectral features, in addition to the spatial characteristics, of radio sources. A particularly
interesting probe for synchrotron signals of dark matter annihilation concerns the population
of long (∼40 pc) and thin (∼1 pc) ﬁlamentary structures located between 10 and 200 pc
from the Galactic center, which have been identiﬁed at radio wavelengths Yusef-Zadeh et al.
(1984). These structures, known as non-thermal radio ﬁlaments (NRFs), are characterized
97

primarily by their extremely hard radio spectra, with a spectral index α between -0.5
and +0.3 (where Sν ∼να), as well as their preferential alignment perpendicular to the
Galactic Plane. In several notable cases such as the Radio Arc, high resolution surveys
have found a tangled network of separate NRFs which contribute to the overall emission in
the structure Yusef-Zadeh et al. (1984). The radio emission from these ﬁlaments is highly
polarized, implying that the radio sources are powered by synchrotron emission in a highly
ordered poloidal magnetic ﬁeld of strength ∼100 µG Tsuboi et al. (1986).
While several dynamical mechanisms have been proposed to explain the compar-
atively strong magnetic ﬁelds found in NRFs relative to the large scale Galactic magnetic
ﬁeld Rosner & Bodo (1996); Boldyrev & Yusef-Zadeh (2006), the hard synchrotron spectrum
observed from NRFs presents a more diﬃcult puzzle. The observed synchrotron spectral
index, α, stemming from a power-law electron injection spectrum with index p can be mod-
eled as p = 2α −1, where p is the power law index of the electron injection spectrum and
α is the power law index of the output synchrotron spectrum. Thus, the p ∼-2.4 spectrum
observed to result from astrophysical shock acceleration Blandford & Eichler (1987); Jones
& Ellison (1991); Malkov & O’C Drury (2001) would be expected to yield a spectrum of
synchrotron emission softer than α ∼-0.7, which is signiﬁcantly softer than observations of
NRFs such as G0.2-0.0, commonly known as the Radio Arc. Lesch et al. (1988) modeled
the observed synchrotron spectrum of the Radio Arc, ﬁnding the synchrotron spectrum
to be best ﬁt by an essentially monoenergetic electron spectrum at approximately 7 GeV.
Further observations have found a ∼10 GHz turnover in the synchrotron spectrum of many
NRFs, implying a strongly peaked electron energy spectrum at several GeV propagating in
98

a magnetic ﬁeld on the order of 100 µG Boldyrev & Yusef-Zadeh (2006).
Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain the origin of such a highly
peaked electron spectrum in NRFs. Most notably, Lesch & Reich (1992), and later Lieb
et al. (2004), advocated a pile-up scenario in which magnetic reconnection zones formed in
collisions between NRFs and molecular clouds create electrical potentials which can accel-
erate electrons to a single energy speciﬁed by the relative strength of the electromagnetic
potential and the synchrotron energy loss rate. This explanation, however, is problematic
for three reasons: (1) not all bright NRFs have observed molecular cloud associations Lang
et al. (1999a); Law & Yusef-Zadeh (2004), (2) recent simulations of collisional reconnection
regimes imply a maximum electron energy of less than 10 MeV, several orders of magnitude
below that needed to explain the observed synchrotron signal Lyubarsky (2005); Zanotti &
Dumbser (2011), although collisionless reconnection, already proposed in the case of γ-ray
bursts, may be signiﬁcantly more eﬀective in accelerating leptons to high energies McKin-
ney & Uzdensky (2012); Lazarian et al. (2011), and (3) the maximum energy of particles
moving through magnetic reconnection is expected to depend sensitively on the geometry
of the reconnection region Lazarian et al. (2011), which would be expected to produce very
diﬀerent synchrotron emission spectra in diﬀerent NRFs. An alternate scenario involves
electron acceleration in star formation regions Yusef-Zadeh (2003), although the necessary
mechanism to create a peaked electron spectrum in star formation regions is not known.
In this chapter, we propose that dark matter annihilation may provide a physical
basis for the nearly monoenergetic electron spectrum necessary to explain NRF emission.
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁnd that the highly peaked electron injection spectrum naturally produced
99

by annihilations of light dark matter particles correctly produces the hard and bright syn-
chrotron emission spectrum observed in multiple NRFs. In § 5.1, we review the astrophysics
of ﬁlimentary arcs and demonstrate that the ordered magnetic ﬁeld structure within these
objects requires that their synchrotron emission results from electrons and positrons in-
jected from within the ﬁlaments themselves, rather than from external sources. In § 5.2,
we show that relatively light dark matter particles annihilating to leptons, such as those
proposed by Hooper & Goodenough (2011c) to explain the Galactic center γ-ray excess, are
also predicted to inject electrons with a spectrum and intensity naturally capable of explain-
ing the synchrotron intensity and spectrum observed from NRFs. In § 5.3, we show that
synchrotron emission produced as a product of dark matter annihilation can explain the
characteristics of the NRF population, including their spectral conformity and the spherical
symmetry of their intensity with respect to the Galactic center. Finally, in § 5.4, we present
several testable predictions for this dark matter annihilation scenario with the goal of dis-
criminating this possibility from astrophysical source mechanisms. Further study of the
Milky Way’s radio ﬁlaments may play a critical role in untangling various interpretations
of the γ-ray excess observed in the Galactic center.
5.1
The Astrophysics of the Non-Thermal Radio Filaments
The strength of the magnetic ﬁelds in NRFs have been estimated through a variety
of means. Early estimates centered on the brightest NRF, G0.2-0.0 (the Radio Arc), and
were based on a comparison between the magnetic ﬁeld pressure and the estimated ram
pressure from nearby molecular cloud interactions, which indicated magnetic ﬁeld strengths
100

as high as 1 mG Yusef-Zadeh & Morris (1987); Morris & Yusef-Zadeh (1989). More re-
cent observations, however, have pointed to somewhat weaker magnetic ﬁelds (∼100 µG)
among the population of NRFs for three reasons: (1) the observations of kinks in several
NRFs such as G359.1-0.2 (the Snake) and G358.85+0.47 (the Pelican) imply that the mag-
netic ﬁeld pressure may be signiﬁcantly smaller than the ram pressure Gray et al. (1995);
Lang et al. (1999a), (2) the compact radial extent of the ﬁlaments is diﬃcult to explain
if a 1 mG magnetic ﬁeld is surrounded by a region with a signiﬁcantly weaker galactic
magnetic ﬁeld LaRosa et al. (2004), and (3) synchrotron models of the radio spectrum im-
ply equipartition magnetic ﬁelds between approximately 50 and 200 µG Anantharamaiah
et al. (1991). Furthermore, in the overall population of NRFs, a turnover of the hard syn-
chrotron spectrum at ∼10 GHz is observed, implying a magnetic ﬁeld strength on the order
of 100 µG Boldyrev & Yusef-Zadeh (2006).
Although it has been suggested that these relatively strong magnetic ﬁelds may
simply trace an extremely strong poloidal magnetic ﬁeld formed in the Galactic center
during the proto-halo phase of galaxy formation Sofue & Fujimoto (1987); Chandran et al.
(2000); Crocker et al. (2010), more recent studies have instead interpreted NRFs to contain
local enhancements of the relatively weak diﬀuse magnetic ﬁeld (Boldyrev & Yusef-Zadeh,
2006; Ferri`ere, 2009, and references therein.). LaRosa et al. (2005) studied the synchrotron
spectral index and ﬂux densities at 74 and 330 MHz, and calculated the strength of the
large-scale diﬀuse magnetic ﬁeld to be approximately ∼10 µG in the inner Milky Way.
Furthermore, a ubiquitous poloidal ﬁeld is unable to explain recent observations of several
NRFs which are not aligned perpendicular to the Galactic Disk Lang et al. (1999a); Nord
101

et al. (2004). Finally, depolarization due to Faraday rotation also implies the strength of
the diﬀuse magnetic ﬁeld along the line-of-sight to be ∼7 µG Gray et al. (1995).
The strong magnetic ﬁelds in NRFs relative to those in the surrounding galactic
medium can greatly aﬀect the propagation of cosmic rays into and out of the ﬁlaments. The
high degree of polarization of the synchrotron emission from NRFs implies that their mag-
netic ﬁelds are highly ordered Yusef-Zadeh & Morris (1987). Assuming that depolarization
is dominated by turbulence in the magnetic ﬁeld, the observed fractional polarization can
be approximated as:
p ≈p0(γ)
B2
0
B2
0 + B2r
= p0(γ) B2
0
B2
T
(5.1)
where p0(γ) is the intrinsic polarization (determined by the index γ of the electron injection
spectrum), B0 is the intensity of the ordered ﬁeld, Br is the intensity of a random ﬁeld with
variance 2
3Br, and BT =
q
B2
0 + B2r is the total ﬁeld. This solution stands as an equality in
the case of a synchrotron spectrum α = -1, and varies only slightly in all relevant cases Burn
(1966). Observations of ∼60% polarization in multiple NRFs Yusef-Zadeh et al. (2004) thus
indicate magnetic ﬁelds with ordered fractions (B2
0/B2
T ) greater than ∼80%. In reality,
depolarizing eﬀects such as Faraday rotation may dominate synchrotron depolarization Lang
et al. (1999a), implying a magnetic ﬁeld which is signiﬁcantly more ordered than required
by this lower limit.
In the presence of highly ordered magnetic ﬁelds, the gyroradius of electrons im-
pinging perpendicular to the ﬁeld lines of the NRFs is extremely small, leading the ﬁlaments
to act as a magnetic mirror which quickly rejects incident electrons. In Fig. 5.1, we show
102

the average time that an electron impacting a cylindrical magnetic ﬁeld with total strength
100 µG remains within a ﬁlament before being evicted, as a function of the ordered fraction
of the magnetic ﬁeld. We employ a ﬁlament radius of 0.412 pc (10”), and imagine the ﬁla-
ment as an inﬁnitely long tube in order to safely ignore any edge eﬀects. Using Monte Carlo
methods, we have averaged the result over all initial impact angles between the particle and
ﬁlament. We ﬁnd that, for the highly ordered magnetic ﬁelds required in NRFs, incident
electrons are almost immediately expelled from the ﬁlament (within seconds) and thus do
not signiﬁcantly contribute to the synchrotron emission from these objects. While electrons
may be able to enter through the edges of a ﬁlament aligned with the magnetic ﬁeld, the
geometry of NRFs suggests that this would occur for only a very small (< 1%) fraction
of electron impacts, greatly diminishing the electron population within the ﬁlament. The
jaggedness of this dataset is statistical in nature, and is not relevant for the constraints
established here.
5.2
Synchrotron Emission From Dark Matter Annihilation
inside of Non-Thermal Radio Filaments
Since magnetic mirroring prevents external electrons from propagating into the
NRFs, we are motivated to study the expected synchrotron contribution of electrons and
positrons which originate from within the ﬁlaments themselves. The injection of energetic
electrons/positrons through dark matter annihilations is particularly interesting for four
reasons: (1) the dark matter annihilation rate will remain entirely unaﬀected by the pecu-
liar magnetic properties of the NRFs, allowing for a rigorous comparison in ﬂux between
103

the ﬁlaments and the surrounding interstellar medium, (2) the electron injection spectrum
from dark matter will be identical at all locations, providing an explanation for the simi-
lar synchrotron spectra observed from multiple NRFs, (3) the dark matter density in the
Galactic center is dominated by a smooth component Diemand et al. (2008b), and naturally
explains the intensity observed from all NRFs, and (4) a dark matter annihilation scenario
at very similar energies has already been proposed to explain Galactic center emission at
γ-ray energies Hooper & Goodenough (2011c).
The local dark matter annihilation rate per volume at a location ⃗x is given by:
ΦDM(⃗x) = 1
2⟨σv⟩
 
ρ(⃗x)
MDM
!2
(5.2)
where ρ(⃗x) is the dark matter energy density, MDM is the dark matter particle’s mass, and
⟨σv⟩is dark matter’s annihilation cross section multiplied by the relative velocity of the
WIMPs. We adopt a dark matter distribution based on the results of numerical simula-
tions Navarro et al. (1996b); Diemand et al. (2008b), and given by ρ(r) = ρ0 (r/8.5 kpc)−1.25,
where r is the distance from the Galactic center and ρ0 = 0.385 GeV cm−3 Catena & Ullio
(2010b); Lisanti & Spergel (2012). We also adopt a dark matter annihilation cross section
of ⟨σv⟩= 3 × 10−26 cm3 s−1, which is the value predicted for a simple thermal relic.
Assuming approximate cylindrical symmetry for the ﬁlament geometry, the anni-
hilation rate within a ﬁlament of length l and diameter w is given by:
ΦDM = 1.4 × 1033 s−1
 
8 GeV
MDM
!2  
⟨σv⟩
3 × 10−26cm3/s
!
×
 
r
100 pc
!−2.5  
l
40 pc
!  
w
1 pc
!2
(5.3)
104

where r is the distance of the ﬁlament from the Galactic center. We note that in many
NRFs, the distance from the Galactic center changes considerably across the length of the
ﬁlaments - we will discuss the eﬀect of this when modeling speciﬁc ﬁlaments.
The types and spectra of particles produced in dark matter annihilations depend
on the details of the particle physics model. In order to generate a bright ﬂux of synchrotron
emission with a spectrum peaking at ∼10 GHz, we will focus on dark matter which anni-
hilates dominantly to charged leptons. In particular, we will consider a democratic model
which annihilates equally to e±, µ±, and τ ± ﬁnal states. The nearly instantaneous decays
of the taus and muons produce lower energy electrons/positrons, as well as a prompt ﬂux
of γ-rays (as opposed to γ-rays from the inverse-Compton scattering of energetic electrons).
It is this prompt ﬂux of γ-rays which Hooper & Goodenough (2011c) ﬁnd to be consistent
with the excess observed in the Galactic center by Fermi-LAT.
The spectrum of electrons and positrons produced through dark matter annihila-
tions within a given NRF is calculated using the Pythia package Sj¨ostrand et al. (2001b);
Gondolo et al. (2004). In the left frame of Fig. 5.2, we show the injected electron spectrum
per dark matter annihilation for our canonical case of a dark matter particle with a mass of
8 GeV, annihilating equally into e+e−, µ+µ−and τ +τ −. We note that the electron/positron
spectrum is very hard, following a spectrum between E−0.5 and E0 between 100 MeV and
8 GeV, although we caution that this spectrum is not a continuous power law. The ma-
jority (∼2/3) of the electron energy is deposited in a delta function at 8 GeV following
the dark matter annihilations directly into electrons. These 8 GeV electrons will dominate
the synchrotron spectrum from NRFs, in part due to their shorter synchrotron energy loss
105

time. We note that the positron spectrum is identical and lends another factor of two to
the overall synchrotron ﬂux.
In order to determine the synchrotron spectrum expected from dark matter an-
nihilations, we must also model the diﬀusion of electrons throughout the NRFs. Models
of the ﬁlaments typically require an electron diﬀusion timescale similar to the energy loss
time of the electron population in the NRF’s magnetic ﬁeld Gray et al. (1995); Lang et al.
(1999b). This has the eﬀect of smearing out the electron energy distribution and soften-
ing the overall synchrotron spectrum. Through considerations of the electron gyroradius
similar to those discussed in § 5.1, electrons created within the NRFs are constrained from
eﬀective diﬀusion perpendicular to the ordered magnetic ﬁeld. In the case of an entirely
ordered magnetic ﬁeld, charged leptons would spiral freely along the magnetic ﬁeld lines
until exiting the ﬁlament. However, in the observed regime containing signiﬁcant ordered
and unordered ﬁelds, diﬀusion is expected to be signiﬁcantly more complicated.
In the case of very low turbulence levels, much work has been done within the
perturbative framework of quasi-linear theory which seeks to calculate the parallel and per-
pendicular diﬀusion components as a function of the power in turbulent modes of the mag-
netic ﬁeld with a wavenumber resonant with the inverse of the particles momentum Jokipii
(1966, 1971). The amplitude of these modes, however, is poorly constrained in galactic
simulations. More recently, numerical simulations have been used to analyze the parallel
and perpendicular diﬀusion constants in regimes in which the ordered and unordered ﬁeld
are co-dominant. Notably, Casse et al. (2002) found that in the case of a magnetic ﬁeld
which is approximately 80% ordered, the parallel diﬀusion constant exceeds the perpendic-
106

ular diﬀusion constant by a factor of ∼125. Very similar results were later obtained for
the case of more energetic cosmic rays DeMarco et al. (2007). Since the length travelled
by diﬀusive particles can be written as ℓ=
√
2Dt, where D is the assumed diﬀusion con-
stant. This implies that perpendicular and parallel diﬀusion will remove particles from the
ﬁlaments on equivalent timescales if the parallel and perpendicular extent of the NRFs is
approximately 125 to 1. This length-scale is similar to the observed length to width ratio
in multiple ﬁlamentary structures Yusef-Zadeh et al. (2004), implying that diﬀusion along
the length of the ﬁlamentary arcs acts on a similar time frame to diﬀusion across the much
smaller NRF width. Since the calculation of magnetic ﬁeld order stands as a lower limit in
this calculation, it is feasible that perpendicular diﬀusion is in fact entirely irrelevant in the
population of NRF structures.
The overall normalization of the diﬀusion constant depends sensitively on the
length scale of the turbulent disturbances in the magnetic medium Jokipii (1966) and
is highly uncertain. While simulations are able to constrain the mean galactic diﬀusion
constant through observations of cosmic ray primary-to-secondary ratios at the solar po-
sition (e.g Strong & Moskalenko, 1998), these simulations do not constrain local diﬀusion
constants, especially in magnetically unique regions such as NRFs.
The synchrotron energy loss time of an electron is given by:
E
˙E = 6.6 × 1012 s
 
8 GeV
E
!  
100 µG
B
!2
(5.4)
Due to the diﬃculties of calculating the diﬀusion constant within a partially or-
dered magnetic ﬁeld, we choose a parallel diﬀusion constant such that electrons remain
107

within the NRF for a length of time given by:
Tconﬁnement = E
˙E ×
 
8 GeV
E
!0.33
= 6.6 × 1012 s
 
τ
1
!  
8 GeV
E
!1.33 
100 µG
B
!2
(5.5)
where τ is the ratio of the diﬀusion timescale for 8 GeV electrons compared to their syn-
chrotron energy loss time. For example, in the case τ = 1.0, 8 GeV electrons diﬀuse out of
the NRF on a timescale equal to their synchrotron energy loss time. Thus the τ parame-
ter can also be seen as an indicator of the average synchrotron exhaustion, or the average
time that an electron generated by dark matter annihilation has propagated through the
NRF before producing the synchrotron emission presently observed. The additional factor
of E−0.33 accounts for the energy dependence of the diﬀusion constant calculated by Kol-
mogorov (1941). We note that the synchrotron softening of an electron spectrum for a
given value of τ is independent of the magnetic ﬁeld strength. In Fig. 5.2 (right), we show
the spectrum of electrons from dark matter annihilations after accounting for synchrotron
energy losses for τ = 1.0.
We are now prepared to calculate the synchrotron spectrum resulting from dark
matter annihilations taking place within a NRF. In Fig. 5.3, we plot the synchrotron spec-
trum from dark matter annihilations for magnetic ﬁeld strengths of 50 µG, 100 µG, and
200µG and for values τ =0.1, 1.0 and 2.0. In each case, we predict a peak in synchrotron
energy at ∼1-10 GHz followed by a suppression of the synchrotron emissivity at higher
frequencies. In the following section, we will compare this prediction to the synchrotron
spectrum observed from speciﬁc NRFs.
108

5.3
Comparison to Speciﬁc Filaments
In astrophysical interpretations of NRF observations, variations in the electron
injection spectrum can be invoked to eﬀectively explain the diﬀerent spectral features in
each NRF, since the peak of the synchrotron emission spectrum depends on the square
of the electron energy.
However, in the case of dark matter annihilations, the injected
electron spectrum must be uniform in each ﬁlament. Variations in the observed synchrotron
spectra may still originate from diﬀerences in either the magnetic ﬁeld strength or diﬀusion
timescales of each NRF. These eﬀects are relatively weak, however, and would be unable to
explain extreme variations in the spectral turnover of diﬀerent NRFs. Thus a population
survey of the synchrotron spectra in NRFs remains a powerful diagnostic for testing the
dark matter interpretation.
In Table 5.1, we have compiled the observed synchrotron spectra of the most
thoroughly studied NRFs. We ﬁnd the population to be relatively homogeneous, with a hard
spectrum below ∼5 GHz that quickly turns over at higher frequencies. The variation in the
spectral turnover from the hardest NRF (G0.2-0.0, Radio Arc) to the softest (G0.08+0.15,
Northern Thread) is approximately an order of magnitude.
In order to test whether magnetic ﬁeld and diﬀusion timescale variations can ex-
plain these spectral and intensity variations within the highly constrained framework of a
uniform electron injection spectrum, we consider four NRFs with particularly well mea-
sured spectra and intensities: G0.2-0.0 (the Radio Arc, Reich, 2003), G0.16-0.14 (the Arc
Filament, Sofue et al., 1992), G0.08+0.15 (the Northern Thread, Lang et al., 1999b) and
G359.1-0.2 (the Snake, Gray et al., 1995). Data were extracted using the Dexter pack-
109

Name
Alternative
α1.4
0.33
α4.8
1.4
α>
4.8
References
G0.08+0.15
N. Thread
-0.5
-0.5
-2.0
Lang et al. (1999b)
G358.85+0.47
The Pelican
-0.6
-0.8±0.2
-1.5±0.3
Kassim et al. (1999)
G359.1-0.2
The Snake
-1.1
∼0.0
*
Nicholls & Gray (1993)
G0.2-0.0
Radio Arc
——-
+0.3
+0.3
Sofue et al. (1992)
G0.16-0.14
Arc Fil.
——-
0.0
-0.8
Sofue et al. (1992)
G359.32-0.16
——-
-0.1
-1.0
———–
LaRosa et al. (2004)
G359.79+0.17
RF-N8
-0.6±0.1
-0.9;-1.3
———-
Law et al. (2008a)
G359.85+0.39
RF-N10
0.2;-1.1∗∗
-0.6;-1.5∗∗
——-
LaRosa et al. (2001)
G359.96+0.09
S. Thread
-0.5
——–
——–
LaRosa et al. (2000b)
G359.45-0.040
Sgr C
-0.5
——–
-0.5±0.3
Liszt & Spiker (1995)
G359.54+0.18
Ripple
——–
-0.5;-0.8
——-
Law et al. (2008a)
G359.36+0.10
RF-C12
——–
-0.5;-1.8
——-
Law et al. (2008a)
G0.15+0.23
RF-N1
——–
+0.2;-0.5
——-
Law et al. (2008a)
G0.09-0.09
———
———
——-
0.15
Reich (2003)
Table 5.1 Spectral Characteristics of Observed Non-Thermal Radio Filaments
∗Spectrum is highly position dependent, but shows a clear trend towards steeper spectral slopes at
high frequencies for any given position
∗∗Two very diﬀerent values exist in the literature for the high frequency spectrum of G359.1-0.2.
Gray et al. (1995) cites a value of -0.2 ± 0.2, while a more recent analysis by Law et al. (2008b)
yields α8.33
4.8GHz = -1.86 ± 0.64
110

age Demleitner et al. (2001), and is shown with the statistical errors and astrophysical
background subtraction determined by each study. In each case, we calculate the ﬂux at
the point of maximum 1.4 GHz emission, with the exception of the Snake. For that ﬁlament,
the peak emission corresponds to a “kink” in the NRF morphology which shows a spectral
index representative of astrophysical injection. Thus for the Snake, the ﬂux is determined
at a point where the spectral index α4.8 GHz
1.4 GHz is entirely ﬂat, which lies at approximately 19’
in the Gray et al. (1995) nomenclature.
In Fig. 5.4, we provide dark matter ﬁts to the intensity and spectrum of these four
NRFs. For the Radio Arc (top left), we adopt a representative distance from the Galactic
center of 20 pc, a diameter of 20 pc, a magnetic ﬁeld of 290 µG and a diﬀusion timescale of
7.9 x 1011 s (τ = 1.0). For the Arc Filament (bottom left), we adopt the same distance of
20 pc, using a ﬁlamentary diameter of 0.62 pc, a magnetic ﬁeld of 100 µG and a diﬀusion
timescale of 1.7 x 1013 s (τ = 2.5). For the Northern Thread, we employ a Galactic center
distance of 30 pc, a diameter of 1 pc, a magnetic ﬁeld of 50 µG, and a diﬀusion timescale of
2.5×1014 s. Finally, for the Snake we adopt a Galctic Center distance of 120 pc, a diameter
of 7 pc, a magnetic ﬁeld of 100 µG and a diﬀusion timescale of 1.9 x 1013 s (τ = 2.0).
One potential mismatch in our best ﬁt parameters concerns the larger widths
necessary for the dark matter component to match the intensity of the observed radio
ﬁlaments. While we have produced best ﬁt widths of 7’ for the Radio Arc, 0.4’ for the
Northern Thread, 0.25’ for the Arc Filament, and 2.8’ for the Snake, observational data
supports smaller widths of 4’ for the Radio Arc Reich (2003), 0.07’-0.2’ for the Northern
Thread Lang et al. (1999b), 0.3’ for the Arc Filament Sofue et al. (1992) and 0.2’-1.0’ for
111

the Snake Gray et al. (1995); Anantharamaiah et al. (1991). However this mismatch may
be expected for three reasons. First, we have in general attempted to match the peak lumi-
nosities observed within the NRFs, while our simulations calculate the average luminosity
expected throughout the enhanced magnetic ﬁeld region of the NRF. Changes in the mag-
netic ﬁeld intensity and structure may conﬁne electrons more eﬀectively in speciﬁc regions
of a NRF, which would then show luminosities signiﬁcantly brighter than those predicted
by dark matter. Secondly, observations calculating the width of the NRFs would be ex-
pected to miss the outer regions of enhanced magnetic ﬁeld, where the decreased width of
the ﬁlament would produce only negligible emission. Third, the distance to the Galactic
center may change considerably over the length of the NRF, producing enhanced annihi-
lation rates at regions near the Galactic center. For instance, if the Northern Thread is
more correctly modeled to extend linearly from 20 pc to 45 pc from the Galactic center,
the total annihilation rate is enhanced by over 50%. However, even these features may be
insuﬃcient to explain the extremely large diameters necessary to explain synchrotron emis-
sion in G359.1-0.2 (the Snake). We note that our analysis does not preclude astrophysical
mechanisms formed within the ﬁlament from also contributing to the synchrotron emission
spectrum, which may be the case in this particularly bright ﬁlament.
A second issue in this analysis concerns the implication that the diﬀusion constant
is signiﬁcantly lower in ﬁlaments with particularly soft spectra. These disparities are not
unique to a dark matter scenario, and have traditionally existed in astrophysical interpre-
tations of these NRFs (cf. Tsuboi et al., 1995; Lang et al., 1999b). In both dark matter and
astrophysical scenarios, this may be understood in a model where the ﬁlaments exist as an
112

entirely ordered magnetic enhancement superimposed on a random diﬀuse magnetic ﬁeld
of approximately 10 µG which permeates the Galactic center region. The diﬀering ratios of
the ordered to random magnetic ﬁelds (e.g 80% in the Northern Thread vs. nearly 100% in
the Radio Arc) would then drive signiﬁcantly enhanced parallel diﬀusion in the Radio Arc.
Alternatively, assumptions that the Alfv`en velocity places an upper limit on the speed of
electron diﬀusion implies a diﬀusion timescale which scales as B−1 and would approximately
match the ratio of diﬀusion timescales observed in these two systems Alfv´en (1942). We
note, however, that this eﬀect is not well understood and remains a signiﬁcant assumption
in our model. Lastly, it is possible that the magnetic ﬁeld structures at the edges of the
NRFs are conﬁgured to allow signiﬁcant reﬂection of trapped electrons Heyvaerts et al.
(1988).
Another necessary feature in any dark matter model of NRFs concerns the radial
dependence of the electron injection spectrum.
As shown in Eqn. 5.3, the dark matter
annihilation rate within a given ﬁlament falls oﬀas ∼r−2.5, where r is the distance of the
ﬁlament to the dynamical center of the galaxy. A quantitative observation of the electron
injection spectrum in individual ﬁlaments is diﬃcult, due to the varying lengths, widths,
magnetic ﬁelds, and diﬀusion constants in the observed ﬁlaments. However, the distance
from the Galactic center to various NRFs is thought to span nearly an order of magnitude,
which implies an injection spectrum that varies by more than a factor of 300 throughout
the NRF population. This makes the statistical observation of such a feature possible, even
with extremely crude estimations for the astrophysical parameters of individual NRFs. In
order to examine this necessary trend, we have studied the observations of 7 NRFs with
113

integrated ﬂuxes and lengths observed at 330 MHz in the LaRosa et al. (2000b) catalog,
as well as the 13 NRFs observed at 1.4 GHz in the Yusef-Zadeh et al. (2004) catalog. In
both cases, integrated ﬂuxes as well as lengths, are provided. We assume a constant radial
width for all NRF, noting that quoted widths for most NRFs fall approximately within a
factor of two. For this reason, we have removed the Radio Arc from our datasets as this
assumption is particularly poor for that ﬁlament.
The total luminosity of a NRF is expected to depend sensitively on its length. In
addition to the linear dependence of the dark matter annihilation rate on the length of a
ﬁlament, longer ﬁlaments are expected to retain electrons for longer periods of time and
as a result will deposit a greater fraction of their initial energy into synchrotron radiation
within the ﬁlament. In this work, we consider three scenarios to account for the inﬂuence
of a NRF’s length. First, we we consider the case in which electrons are eﬀectively conﬁned
and lose their energy to synchrotron radiation on timescales much smaller than the diﬀusion
timescale (τ ≫1). In this case the total ﬂux in an NRF should depend only linearly on the
length of the ﬁlament. Second, in the case that electrons free stream through the ﬁlaments
on timescales much smaller than the synchrotron energy loss time (τ ≪1), the amount
of energy deposited by a single electron into the ﬁlament is expected to scale with the
length of the ﬁlament, providing a total ﬂux which scales with the length of the ﬁlament
squared. Finally, in the case that electrons diﬀusively propagate through the ﬁlament on
a timescale smaller than the synchrotron energy loss time (τ ≪1 with D0/c ≪ﬁlament
length) the total energy deposited by an electron inside the ﬁlament will vary as the square
of the ﬁlaments length, providing a total ﬂux which varies as the cube of the length of
114

the ﬁlament. The cases in which the total ﬂux scales with l and l3 eﬀectively bracket the
possible degrees of correlation between the length of a NRF and it’s total ﬂux, while the l2
case can be considered something of a median expectation.
We ﬁrst examine the observed dataset at 330 MHz. In the left frames of Fig. 5.5,
we plot the ﬂux per unit length (top), per unit length squared (middle) and per unit
length cubed (bottom) as a function of the projected distance of each NRF to the Galactic
center. In each case, we note no signiﬁcant trend between the distance of a given ﬁlament
from the Galactic center. In other words, the distance of a given ﬁlament from Galactic
center does not appear to have signiﬁcant bearing on its emission at 330 MHz, suggesting
that astrophysical mechanisms (i.e. not dark matter annihilations) are responsible for the
emission at this frequency.
The same conclusion is not found at 1.4 GHz, however. At this frequency (right),
we see a very signiﬁcant correlation between the projected distance of a ﬁlament to the
Galactic center and its observed intensity. In particular, ﬁlaments closer to the Galactic
center tend to be considerably brighter at 1.4 GHz than those farther away. We note that
for the dark matter halo proﬁle used in this chapter, we predict a ﬂux which scales with
r−2.5, while a more generic range of proﬁles predicts behavior between roughly r−2 and r−3.
There are several interesting features of the results shown in Fig. 5.5. First, al-
though the correlation observed among the ﬁlaments in the 1.4 GHz dataset could have
plausibly been the result of a selection eﬀect resulting from the presence of greater astro-
physical backgrounds closer to the Galactic center, the 330 Mhz observations dispute this
reasoning, as does the lack of any bright NRFs at 1.4 GHz far from the Galactic center. The
115

diﬀerent trends observed in these datasets instead support the surprising conclusion that
the electron injection spectra which produces the emission at 1.4 GHz is physically distinct
from the emission mechanism which dominates at 330 MHz. Both trends are naturally
explained in the case of a light dark matter particle in a magnetic ﬁeld of ∼100 µG, as
the synchrotron spectrum will peak at approximately 1 GHz, with astrophysical processes
dominating the emission at lower frequencies.
We caution that this relationship is still somewhat tenuous, due to the varying NRF
widths, magnetic ﬁelds, three dimensional distances, and diﬀusion constants which are not
modeled in this analysis, and additional studies will be necessary to better identify and
reﬁne this apparent trend. If dark matter annihilations are in fact responsible for a sizable
fraction of the emission observed at 1.4 GHz, improved measurements of these parameters
should enhance the correlation shown in Fig. 5.5. Furthermore, if astrophysical mechanisms
dominate the low energy synchrotron emission, then we would expect the spectral slope
in this region to be relatively soft. We note that the observed trend is steepest among
the 1.4 GHz NRFs which were not included in the 330 MHz analysis, making additional
measurements in this region necessary to better understand the apparent mismatch between
low and high frequency observations.
Finally, we note that no correlation such as that
described here would be expected in reconnection or shock acceleration models of NRF.
However, models based on a monoenergetic electron ﬂux from Sgr A* could plausibly lead
to a similar relation, although as argued in § 5.1, such electrons are not expected to penetrate
into the NRFs.
116

5.4
Discussion and Conclusions
The observed synchrotron emission from non-thermal radio ﬁlaments (NRFs) in
the Inner Milky Way have long been diﬃcult to explain with known astrophysical mech-
anisms.
In this chapter, we have proposed that dark matter annihilations taking place
within these ﬁlaments could produce the nearly monoenergetic electron spectrum necessary
to generate the hard synchrotron emission that is observed. In this regard, dark matter
annihilations have several advantages over proposed astrophysical mechanisms. First, elec-
trons produced through dark matter annihilations yield a synchrotron spectrum in good
agreement with the hard spectral index and turnover observed from NRFs, without man-
dating ﬁnely tuned magneto-hydrodynamic interactions to move electrons independently
into equivalent monoenergetic electron distributions.
Second, WIMPs annihilating into
leptonic ﬁnal states, such as those employed at low masses in order to explain the Fermi-
Galactic center excess Hooper & Goodenough (2011c), are predicted to inject electrons into
the Galactic center region with an energy density very similar to the synchrotron signal
observed from NRFs.
Lastly, as shown in Fig. 5.5, dark matter annihilations naturally
explain the observed correlation between the radial distance of NRFs to the Galactic center
and the inferred electron injection spectrum in the ﬁlaments.
A dark matter origin of the observed radio emission from NRFs yields several
concrete and testable predictions.
In particular, the dark matter annihilation rate and
corresponding ﬂux of injected electrons must show approximate spherical symmetry with
respect to the Galactic center (Diemand et al., 2008b), and the injected spectrum of electrons
must be identical for all ﬁlaments throughout the Galactic center. This is not the case for
117

other proposed astrophysical mechanisms, for which the electron injection spectrum can
vary from ﬁlament to ﬁlament. Furthermore, we have demonstrated that the intensity of
1.4 GHz emission is signiﬁcantly enhanced for NRFs near the Galactic center compared to
those farther away, as would be expected from dark matter distributed in a cusped halo
proﬁle. Observations which are able to independently determine or constrain the magnetic
ﬁeld strengths and other characteristics among a population of NRFs could be used to
further examine any scenario requiring a single electron injection spectrum. If dark matter
annihilations are found not to power NRFs, these objects may be used to place stringent
constraints on the dark matter annihilation rate in the region surrounding the Galactic
center. New observations of NRFs will thus be integral to resolving both the astrophysics
and particle physics of these unusual regions.
118

Figure 5.1 The average time that 10 GeV electrons spend within a ﬁlament of total magnetic
ﬁeld of 100 µG after impacting its side, as a function of the ordered fraction of the magnetic
ﬁeld energy density within the ﬁlament. This time is insigniﬁcant compared to the ∼1012
second energy loss time for these particles, indicating that externally produced electrons
contribute only a negligible fraction of the synchrotron radiation from NRFs.
119

Figure 5.2 (Left) The spectrum of electrons injected through the annihilation of an 8 GeV
dark matter particle to e+e−, µ+µ−and τ +τ −(democratically). Note that the contribution
from e+e−takes the form of a delta function at 8 GeV and is concealed by the line denoting
the “Total Flux”. (Right) The spectrum of electrons from dark matter annihilations before
(solid) and after (dashed) synchrotron energy losses for an energy loss time of τ = 1.0 (as
deﬁned in Eqn. 5.5). The direct ﬂux to electrons represents a delta function at the 8 GeV
mass of the dark matter particle which carries approximately 2/3 of the total electron
energy. The positron ﬂux has an identical energy dependence and lends a factor of two to
the total lepton ﬂux from dark matter annihilation.
120

Figure 5.3 The spectrum of synchrotron radiation (in Janskys, deﬁned as 10−26 watts per
square meter per Hz) from electrons produced by the annihilation of an 8 GeV dark matter
particle democratically into leptonic ﬁnal states in magnetic ﬁelds of 50 µG (red, top left),
100 µG (black, top right), and 200 µG (blue, bottom), with the electron distribution softened
during propagation times of τ = 1.0 (solid), 0.1 (dotted) and 2.0 (dashed).
121

Figure 5.4 The synchrotron energy spectrum predicted from dark matter annihilations
(MDM = 8 GeV, annihilating to e+e−, µ+µ−and τ +τ −with ⟨σv⟩= 3 × 10−26 cm3 s−1)
compared to the observed intensity and spectrum of G0.2-0.0 (the Radio Arc, top left),
G0.08+0.15 (Northern Thread, top right), G0.16-0.14 (Arc Filament, bottom left) and
G359.1-0.2 (the Snake, bottom right). The magnetic ﬁelds, ﬁlamentary width, and syn-
chrotron energy loss times are shown for the synchrotron match to each ﬁlament.
122

Figure 5.5 Flux per unit length (top), per length squared (center), and per length cubed
(bottom) for NRFs at 330 MHz (left)LaRosa et al. (2000b) and 1.4 GHz (right) Yusef-Zadeh
et al. (2004), as a function of the projected distance of each ﬁlament from the Galactic center.
Error bars based on the integrated ﬂux, as well as a best-ﬁt linear regression are shown for
each frame. Boxed points indicate NRFs which are listed in both the 1.4 GHz and 330
MHz datasets. At 330 MHz, there is no clear correlation between the ﬂux and the distance
of a ﬁlament from the Galactic center. At 1.4 GHz, however, those ﬁlaments closer to the
Galactic center are clearly brighter than those farther away.
123

Chapter 6
Conclusion
6.1
The Status of Light Dark Matter Models
Since the original observations of the extended γ-ray excess at the galactic center
(Hooper & Goodenough, 2011b; Hooper & Linden, 2011c), several follow up studies have
improved on the modeling an interpretation of the studies, with similar qualitative results.
Models by Abazajian & Kaplinghat (2012) employed a sophisticated template-approach in
order to model the GC excess, under the assumption that relaxing the point-source models
from those used in Hooper & Linden (2011c) would reduce the signiﬁcance of the excess.
Instead, they found a >20σ preference for an extended, spherically symmetric excess, with a
spectrum almost identical to that of Hooper & Linden (2011c). Since this more sophisticated
model allows all ﬂuxes to be recomputed in order to present a best ﬁt model of the data, it
demonstrates that the spherically symmetric excess is a signiﬁcant component of the γ-ray
sky in the GC region.
Additionally, work by Hooper & Slatyer (2013) examined the spectral variation
124

in the Fermi bubbles as a function of the galactic latitude, hoping to pinpoint a source of
spectral softening which might indicate the origin of the bubble γ-rays. Interestingly, they
instead discovered at low galactic latitudes (10-30◦above the Galactic plane) a spectral
feature nearly identical to that observed in the GC Hooper & Slatyer (2013). The power of
this signal as a function of galactic latitude is equivalent to expectations from a dark matter
particle following a density proﬁle ρ(r) ∝r−1.2, which is equivalent to the best ﬁt measure-
ments from the GC. We have recently worked to determine whether this excess may be due
to a population of MSPs in the galactic bulge, and found that the spectrum and luminosity
distributions of MSPs necessary to explain this excess are highly disfavored (Hooper et al.,
2013).
Finally, additional evidence has accumulated indicating the existence of a light
dark matter particle. Work by Hooper et al. (2012a) observed the hard excess in synchrotron
radiation reported by the ARCADE-II collaboration (Fixsen et al., 2009) and found that
it is well modeled by light, leptophilic, dark matter candidates. Additionally, results by
the CDMS collaboration have found a statistically signiﬁcant excess in low energy events,
compared to background expectations. If interpreted as a dark matter signal, their excess is
best interpreted as a dark matter particle of 8.6 GeV (CDMS Collaboration et al., 2013a).
These observations are in reasonable agreement with observations by the CoGeNT (Aalseth
et al., 2011c,a), DAMA/LIBRA (Bernabei et al., 2010a) and CRESST (Angloher et al.,
2012) experiments. However, these models are also currently ruled out by the Xenon 100
collaboration (Aprile et al., 2011; Angle et al., 2011). As these experiments are currently
at odds with each-other, more work will be necessary in order to understand the current
125

evidence pointing towards the direct detection of a light dark matter particle.
However, several astrophysical observations also exist which disfavor a the inter-
pretation of the GC and bubble excesses as light dark matter. For instance, observations
by the Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) satellite found an excess in hard
synchrotron emission in regions between 7-20◦oﬀof the GC, which was initially interpreted
as a possible signal of dark matter annihilation (Hooper et al., 2007; Finkbeiner, 2004).
Speciﬁcally, it was shown in Hooper & Linden (2011a) that this residual could be ﬁt by the
synchrotron radiation produced by light, leptophilic dark matter - with similar properties
to models needed to explain the GC excess. However, an analysis by Dobler (2012) found
the excess to be highly correlated to the Fermi-bubbles observed by Dobler et al. (2010)
and Su et al. (2010). This excess does not appear to be compatible with a dark matter
interpretation, due to the sharp edges observed in the excess emission morphology. Addi-
tionally, this signal is deﬁnitely incompatible with models of light dark matter annihilation,
as the Fermi bubble spectrum extends to energies far higher than the light dark matter
mass. However, it is worth noting that the failure of dark matter to explain the WMAP
excess does not greatly constrain light dark matter models, as the updated magnetic ﬁeld
measurements in the bubble region obtained by Hooper & Slatyer (2013) imply that the
dark matter contribution to the observed synchrotron radiation would fall nearly an order
of magnitude below current bounds.
Additionally, a survey of synchrotron radiation from nearby galaxies by Carlson
et al. (2013a) indicates that a reasonable population of nearby galaxies with similar physical
characteristics to the Milky Way have synchrotron intensities which are suppressed com-
126

pared to our galaxy by several orders of magnitude. In astrophysical models of the WMAP
haze, the galaxy-to-galaxy variability of the synchrotron emission strength can be explained
by transient events, such as recent supernovae or AGN activity, which vary highly between
galaxies. However, in dark matter annihilation models, the electron injection intensity must
remain constant in time. This implies that the diﬀusion parameters of some “Milky Way
twin” galaxies must highly disfavor synchrotron emission compared to the Milky Way. For
example, the magnetic ﬁelds strengths of these galaxies might have to be an order of mag-
nitude weaker than Milky Way observations indicate. While the diﬀusion parameters of
nearby galaxies are highly uncertain (making any quantitative constraint on dark matter
diﬃcult to ascertain) it is concerning that many nearby galaxies have synchrotron signals
which are underluminous by several orders of magnitude compared to dark matter expec-
tations.
Additional work will certainly be necessary in order to verify, or rule out, the
multiple tentative pieces of evidence pointing towards a light WIMP particle. It is unfor-
tunately somewhat diﬃcult to test the dark matter interpretation of the γ-ray excess at
the galactic center with Fermi-LAT observations of other sources, such as dwarf spheroidal
galaxies or galaxy clusters, and the current limits from each regime are not projected to
reach the cross-section compatible with GC observations by the end of the Fermi-LAT lifes-
pan Geringer-Sameth & Koushiappas (2011); Ackermann et al. (2010). Perhaps the most
promising future constraint comes from CMB observations, which currently fall only a fac-
tor of ∼2 above light dark matter cross-section (Galli et al., 2011). Notably, CMB limits
are able to place the strongest constraints on leptophilic interactions, since they produce
127

the most signiﬁcant reheating of the universe. Updated constraints from the PLANCK col-
laboration are likely to push this experimental bound well into the best ﬁt region of the GC
γ-ray signal. Additionally, collider constraints from the LHC are likely to greatly constrain
speciﬁc dark matter particle models (Goodman et al., 2010, 2011; Rajaraman et al., 2011).
6.2
Observations Indicating Other Dark Matter Models
Additionally, recent observations have produced evidence supporting dark matter
particles with other parameters that are not compatible with the excess at the GC. One
such signal is the anomalous rise in the positron fraction as a function of energy observed by
the PAMELA satellite (Adriani et al., 2009b), as well as the Fermi-LAT (Ackermann et al.,
2012) and AMS-02 (Aguilar et al., 2013). This stands in direct contrast to expectations
from the secondary production of positrons via pion-decay produced by a steeply falling
primary proton injection spectrum. This idea is well-motivated, as Majorana dark matter
annihilation would be expected to produce electrons and positrons in equal abundance,
explaining the substantial rise in the positron fraction. A dark matter candidate explaining
the PAMELA excess must have three generic properties: (1) the dark matter particle must
be relatively massive E > 350 GeV, in order to explain the highest energy positrons observed
by AMS-02, (2) the dark matter particle must annihilate primarily to leptonic ﬁnal states,
in order to avoid the overproduction of antiprotons compared to observations, and (3) the
dark matter particle must annihilate at rates signiﬁcantly above the thermal cross-section,
in order to explain the large excess of observed positrons. Myriad dark matter models have
been formulated which satisfy these three constraints, e.g. Arkani-Hamed et al. (2009),
128

Cholis et al. (2009), Cirelli et al. (2009) and others too numerous to be listed here.
However, the rising positron fraction observed by PAMELA, Fermi-LAT and AMS-
02 can also be explained by an astrophysical source. Energetic pulsars are thought to pro-
duce electron/positron pairs as electromagnetic waves propagate through the super-strong
magnetic ﬁelds produced by pulsar rotation. The PAMELA excess can be ﬁt adequately by
both models of galactic pulsars (Hooper et al., 2009; Barger et al., 2009), and also by consid-
ering the contribution from only a few nearby pulsars, which may dominate the total pulsar
contribution to the positron excess (Profumo, 2012). Interestingly, if nearby pulsars domi-
nate the signal, then they may also induce an anisotropy in the total electron-plus-positron
ﬂux, a result which may be tested by the Fermi-LAT (Profumo, 2012). A recent analysis
by Linden & Profumo (2013) found that the slight ﬂattening of the increasing positron
spectrum favors a nearby pulsar explanation, and also posits that the large eﬀective area of
ACTs may allow them to provide stronger limits on the total electron anisotropy compared
to the space-based telescopes.
Perhaps the most exciting recent evidence for particle dark matter is the observa-
tion by Weniger (2012) of a line in the Fermi-LAT data with an energy of approximately
130 GeV and observed near the GC. This ﬁnding, which was quickly conﬁrmed by an anal-
ysis by Su & Finkbeiner (2012), lead to an outburst of activity from the physics community,
as a line signature is extremely diﬃcult to generate with astrophysical sources. A peculiar
feature of the γ-ray line is that the intensity of line photons is consistent with an interaction
cross-section which is approximately an order of magnitude higher than that expected by
loop-suppressed diagrams of dark matter annihilation into two γ-ray photons. However,
129

nearly 100 papers (see Carlson et al. (2013b) for a nearly complete list) have thus far been
written in order to discuss various models which may resolve this inconsistency.
More troubling, perhaps, is the possibility that inconsistencies in the event re-
construction by the Fermi-LAT telescope at high energies may be artiﬁcially inducing a
line into the Fermi-LAT data. This is particularly worrisome, as the number of events at
these very high energies is relatively small, making it diﬃcult to adequately check instru-
mental systematics. An early analysis by Finkbeiner et al. (2013) found evidence that the
130 GeV line also existed in Albedo photons observed in Earth’s atmosphere, a region which
should be dominated by π0 decay γ-rays produced via high energy protons colliding with
the Earth’s upper atmosphere. This signal should deﬁnitely not contain any γ-ray line,
since the π0 decay spectrum is well studied by colliders. However, the same analysis found
no method by which the line observed in the Earth’s albedo could be translated only to
the GC, without also producing extremely bright γ-ray line emission in the galactic plane,
where it is not observed.
A further analysis of systematics by Bloom et al. (2013) indicated several possible
systematics in the Fermi-LAT data, including some evidence pointing towards a decreased
instrumental eﬀective area above and below the γ-ray line energy compared to Monte Carlo
simulations. This error could potentially produce a γ-ray line, as it would decrease the
number of photons compared to expectations both above and below the tentative line.
However, no systematic observed in the Fermi-LAT data had the appropriate strength in
order to explain the entire γ-ray line signal observed at the GC. Finally, a recent analysis by
Whiteson (2013) found that the 130 GeV line may also exist in photons taken from within
130

5◦of the sun. Again, this appears to be a problem for dark matter interpretations of the
γ-ray line, as the sun should not produce monoenergetic photons.
The ultimate fate of the γ-ray line analysis is still extremely uncertain. While
astrophysical backgrounds are unlikely, instrumental artifacts still appear very probable.
Several eﬀorts are currently underway in order to elucidate the reliability of line observa-
tions. By altering the survey strategy of the Fermi-LAT telescope in order to increase the
total exposure at the GC, the Fermi-LAT could increase the low number statistics currently
hampering our understanding of the γ-ray line phenomenon (Su & Finkbeiner, 2012). Ad-
ditionally, upcoming observatories such as the Gamma-400 telescope and the H.E.S.S.-II
instrument may provide independent tests of the line phenomenon (Bergstr¨om et al., 2012).
6.3
Constraints on WIMP Models
In addition to these enticing signals, several important constraints have also been
placed on the dark matter cross-section. Perhaps most notably, a systematic stacking of
dwarf spheroidal galaxies has ruled out WIMPs below 30 GeV interacting with a cross-
section above 3 × 10−26 cm−3s−1 (Ackermann et al., 2011).
Additionally, data from
Xenon100 has placed extremely strong limits on the scattering cross-section with bary-
onic matter which is several orders of magnitude below previous constraints (Aprile et al.,
2011; Angle et al., 2011).
At low energies, an analysis by Regis & Ullio (2008) set constraints on the dark
matter cross-section using multiwavelength constraints at radio and X-Ray energies of the
point source near the GC. Because the magnetic ﬁeld strength is expected to be very high in
131

this region, the synchrotron radiation from energetic electrons should be produced promptly.
These limits were thus able to set extremely strong limits on the dark matter annihilation
cross-section. Notably, constraints from synchrotron radiation were able to rule out dark
matter annihilating at the thermal cross-section by four orders of magnitude under speciﬁc
sets of assumptions. However, these models also rely on extreme extrapolations of the dark
matter density proﬁle and magnetic ﬁeld energy density into the center of the galaxy (on
scales of ∼10−5 pc). These extrapolations have not been tested, and are unlikely to hold
over such extreme regions.
6.4
Future Progress
In order to set strong constraints on the dark matter parameter space, new instru-
ments, observations, and models will need to be produced. A convincing signal from dark
matter annihilation would optimally have three important qualities: (1) it should be clearly
separable from instrumental systematics and backgrounds, (2) it should produce consistent
signals among multiwavelength scans and in both direct, indirect, and collider searches, (3)
it should not violate constraints from any experiment.
In the theater of indirect detection, this requires multiwavelength observations of
a single source, using models which are capable of taking into account the technical advan-
tages of both γ-ray and radio observatories. For GC observations, upcoming models will
need to be more sophisticated, in order to recreate the complexity of the observed radio
morphology while predicting the γ-ray ﬂux from the same models. Any correct model con-
taining both dark matter and astrophysical emission sources should be able to recreate the
132

entire multiwavelength spectrum, while not exceeding the observed emission in any energy
band or region. The upcoming years will be an exciting time for searches of dark matter
annihilation, and as we close in on the expected cross-section for dark matter annihilation,
more curiosities are likely to present themselves.
133

Bibliography
Aalseth, C. E., Barbeau, P. S., Bowden, N. S., Cabrera-Palmer, B., Colaresi, J., Collar,
J. I., Dazeley, S., de Lurgio, P., & et al. 2011a, Physical Review Letters, 106, 131301
—. 2011b, Physical Review Letters, 106, 131301
Aalseth, C. E., Barbeau, P. S., Colaresi, J., Collar, J. I., Diaz Leon, J., Fast, J. E., Fields,
N., Hossbach, T. W., & et al. 2011c, Physical Review Letters, 107, 141301
—. 2011d, Physical Review Letters, 107, 141301
Abazajian, K. N. 2011a, JCAP, 3, 10
—. 2011b, JCAP, 3, 10
Abazajian, K. N., Agrawal, P., Chacko, Z., & Kilic, C. 2010, JCAP, 11, 41
Abazajian, K. N., & Harding, J. P. 2012, JCAP, 1, 41
Abazajian, K. N., & Kaplinghat, M. 2012, PRD, 86, 083511
Abdo, A. A., Ackermann, M., Ajello, M., Allafort, A., Antolini, E., Atwood, W. B., Axels-
son, M., Baldini, L., Ballet, J., Barbiellini, G., & et al. 2010a, ApJ Supp, 188, 405
134

Abdo, A. A., Ackermann, M., Ajello, M., Atwood, W. B., Axelsson, M., Baldini, L., Ballet,
J., Band, D. L., Barbiellini, G., Bastieri, D., & et al. 2009a, ApJ Supp, 183, 46
Abdo, A. A., Ackermann, M., Ajello, M., Atwood, W. B., Axelsson, M., Baldini, L., Ballet,
J., Barbiellini, G., Baring, M. G., Bastieri, D., & et al. 2010b, ApJ Supplement, 187, 460
Abdo, A. A., Ackermann, M., Ajello, M., Atwood, W. B., Axelsson, M., Baldini, L., Ballet,
J., Barbiellini, G., & et al. 2009b, Science, 325, 848
Abdo, A. A., Ackermann, M., Ajello, M., Baldini, L., Ballet, J., Barbiellini, G., Bastieri,
D., Bechtol, K., & et al. 2010c, JCAP, 4, 14
Abdo, A. A., Ackermann, M., Ajello, M., Baldini, L., Ballet, J., Barbiellini, G., Bastieri,
D., Bellazzini, R., & et al. ????
Abramowski, A., Acero, F., Aharonian, F., Akhperjanian, A. G., Anton, G., Barnacka, A.,
Barres de Almeida, U., Bazer-Bachi, A. R., & et al. 2011, Physical Review Letters, 106,
161301
Acero, F., Aharonian, F., Akhperjanian, A. G., Anton, G., Barres de Almeida, U., Bazer-
Bachi, A. R., Becherini, Y., Behera, B., & et al. 2010a, MNRAS, 402, 1877
Acero, F., Aharonian, F., Akhperjanian, A. G., Anton, G., Barres de Almeida, U., Bazer-
Bachi, A. R., Becherini, Y., Behera, B., & HESS Collaboration. 2010b, MNRAS, 402,
1877
Ackermann, M., Ajello, M., Albert, A., Atwood, W. B., Baldini, L., Ballet, J., Barbiellini,
G., Bastieri, D., & et al. 2011, Physical Review Letters, 107, 241302
135

Ackermann, M., Ajello, M., Allafort, A., Atwood, W. B., Baldini, L., Barbiellini, G.,
Bastieri, D., Bechtol, K., & et al. 2012, Physical Review Letters, 108, 011103
Ackermann, M., Ajello, M., Allafort, A., Baldini, L., Ballet, J., Barbiellini, G., Bastieri, D.,
Bechtol, K., & et al. 2010, JCAP, 5, 25
Adriani, O., Barbarino, G. C., Bazilevskaya, G. A., Bellotti, R., Boezio, M., Bogomolov,
E. A., Bonechi, L., Bongi, M., & et al. 2009a, Nature, 458, 607
—. 2009b, Nature, 458, 607
Aguilar, M., Alberti, G., Alpat, B., Alvino, A., Ambrosi, G., Andeen, K. Anderhub, H.,
Arruda, L., & et al. 2013, PRL, 110
Aharonian, F. 2005, in KITP Conference: The Paradoxes of Massive Black Holes: A Case
Study in the Milky Way
Aharonian, F., Akhperjanian, A. G., Anton, G., Barres de Almeida, U., Bazer-Bachi, A. R.,
Becherini, Y., Behera, B., Bernl¨ohr, K., & et al. 2009a, A&A, 503, 817
—. 2009b, A&A, 503, 817
Aharonian, F., Akhperjanian, A. G., Aye, K.-M., Bazer-Bachi, A. R., Beilicke, M., Benbow,
W., Berge, D., Berghaus, P., & et al. 2004a, Astroparticle Physics, 22, 109
—. 2004b, A&A, 425, L13
Aharonian, F., Akhperjanian, A. G., Barres de Almeida, U., Bazer-Bachi, A. R., Becherini,
Y., Behera, B., Benbow, W., Bernl¨ohr, K., & et al. 2008a, A&A, 492, L25
136

—. 2008b, A&A, 492, L25
Aharonian, F., Akhperjanian, A. G., Bazer-Bachi, A. R., Beilicke, M., Benbow, W., Berge,
D., Bernl¨ohr, K., Boisson, C., & et al. 2006a, Nature, 439, 695
—. 2006b, Physical Review Letters, 97, 221102
—. 2006c, Physical Review Letters, 97, 221102
—. 2006d, A&A, 457, 899
—. 2006e, ApJ, 636, 777
Aharonian, F., Akhperjanian, A. G., Bazer-Bachi, A. R., Beilicke, M., Benbow, W., Berge,
D., Bernl¨ohr, K., C., B., & et al. 2006f, ApJ, 636, 777
Aharonian, F., Khangulyan, D., & Malyshev, D. 2012, AAP, 547, A114
Aharonian, F., & Neronov, A. 2005a, ApJ, 619, 306
—. 2005b, Astrophysics and Space Science, 300, 255
—. 2005c, Astrophysics and Space Science, 300, 255
Ahmed, Z., Akerib, D. S., Arrenberg, S., Bailey, C. N., Balakishiyeva, D., Baudis, L., Bauer,
D. A., Brink, P. L., & et al. 2011, Physical Review Letters, 106, 131302
Akerib, D. S., Attisha, M. J., Baudis, L., Bauer, D. A., Bolozdynya, A. I., Brink, P. L.,
Bunker, R., Cabrera, B., & et al. 2010, PRD, 82, 122004
Albert, J., Aliu, E., Anderhub, H., Antoranz, P., Armada, A., Asensio, M., Baixeras, C.,
Barrio, J. A., & et al. 2006, ApJL, 638, L101
137

Alfv´en, H. 1942, Nature, 150, 405
Aloisio, R., Berezinsky, V., & Gazizov, A. 2009, ApJ, 693, 1275
Anantharamaiah, K. R., Pedlar, A., Ekers, R. D., & Goss, W. M. 1991, MNRAS, 249, 262
Angle, J., Aprile, E., Arneodo, F., Baudis, L., Bernstein, A., Bolozdynya, A. I., Coelho,
L. C. C., Dahl, C. E., & et al. 2011, Physical Review Letters, 107, 051301
Angloher, G., Bauer, M., Bavykina, I., Bento, A., Bucci, C., Ciemniak, C., Deuter, G., von
Feilitzsch, F., & et al. 2012, European Physical Journal C, 72, 1971
Aprile, E., Arisaka, K., Arneodo, F., Askin, A., Baudis, L., Behrens, A., Bokeloh, K.,
Brown, E., & et al.. 2011, Physical Review Letters, 107, 131302
Arkani-Hamed, N., Finkbeiner, D. P., Slatyer, T. R., & Weiner, N. 2009, PRD, 79, 015014
Atoyan, A., & Dermer, C. D. 2004, ApJL, 617, L123
Atwood, W. B., Abdo, A. A., Ackermann, M., Althouse, W., Anderson, B., Axelsson, M.,
Baldini, L., Ballet, J., Band, D. L., Barbiellini, G., & et al. 2009, ApJ, 697, 1071
Babcock, H. W. 1939, Lick Observatory Bulletin, 19, 41
Baganoﬀ, F. K., Bautz, M. W., Brandt, W. N., Chartas, G., Feigelson, E. D., Garmire,
G. P., Maeda, Y., Morris, M., Ricker, G. R., Townsley, L. K., & Walter, F. 2001, Nature,
413, 45
Ballantyne, D. R., Melia, F., Liu, S., & Crocker, R. M. 2007a, ApJL, 657, L13
—. 2007b, ApJL, 657, L13
138

Barger, V., Gao, Y., Keung, W.-Y., Marfatia, D., & Shaughnessy, G. 2009, Physics Letters
B, 678, 283
Becklin, E. E., Gatley, I., & Werner, M. W. 1982a, ApJ, 258, 135
—. 1982b, ApJ, 258, 135
B´elanger, G., Goldwurm, A., Goldoni, P., Paul, J., Terrier, R., Falanga, M., Ubertini, P.,
Bazzano, A., Del Santo, M., Winkler, C., Parmar, A. N., Kuulkers, E., Ebisawa, K.,
Roques, J. P., Lund, N., & Melia, F. 2004, ApJL, 601, L163
Berezinsky, V., Bottino, A., & Mignola, G. 1994, Physics Letters B, 325, 136
Berezinsky, V. S., Gurevich, A. V., & Zybin, K. P. 1992, Physics Letters B, 294, 221
Bergstr¨om, L. 2009, New Journal of Physics, 11, 105006
Bergstr¨om, L., Bertone, G., Conrad, J., Farnier, C., & Weniger, C. 2012, JCAP, 11, 25
Bergstr¨om, L., Ullio, P., & Buckley, J. H. 1998, Astroparticle Physics, 9, 137
Bernabei, R., Belli, P., Cappella, F., Cerulli, R., Dai, C. J., D’Angelo, A., He, H. L.,
Incicchitti, A., Kuang, H. H., Ma, X. H., Montecchia, F., Nozzoli, F., Prosperi, D.,
Sheng, X. D., Wang, R. G., & Ye, Z. P. 2010a, European Physical Journal C, 67, 39
—. 2010b, European Physical Journal C, 67, 39
Bertone, G., Hooper, D., & Silk, J. 2005, Physics Reports, 405, 279
Blandford, R., & Eichler, D. 1987, Physics Reports, 154, 1
Blitz, L., Bloemen, J. B. G. M., Hermsen, W., & Bania, T. M. 1985, A&A, 143, 267
139

Bloom, E., Charles, E., Izaguirre, E., Snyder, A., Albert, A., Winer, B., Yang, Z., & Essig,
R. 2013, ArXiv e-prints
Blumenthal, G. R., Faber, S. M., Flores, R., & Primack, J. R. 1986a, ApJ, 301, 27
—. 1986b, ApJ, 301, 27
Blumenthal, G. R., Faber, S. M., Primack, J. R., & Rees, M. J. 1984, Nature, 311, 517
Blumenthal, G. R., Pagels, H., & Primack, J. R. 1982, Nature, 299, 37
Boldyrev, S., & Yusef-Zadeh, F. 2006, ApJL, 637, L101
Bond, J. R., & Szalay, A. S. 1983, ApJ, 274, 443
Boyarsky, A., Malyshev, D., & Ruchayskiy, O. 2011, Physics Letters B, 705, 165
Bradaˇc, M., Clowe, D., Gonzalez, A. H., Marshall, P., Forman, W., Jones, C., Markevitch,
M., Randall, S., Schrabback, T., & Zaritsky, D. 2006, ApJ, 652, 937
Bradford, C. M., Stacey, G. J., Nikola, T., Bolatto, A. D., Jackson, J. M., Savage, M. L.,
& Davidson, J. A. 2005, ApJ, 623, 866
Braun, I., Bolz, O., van Eldik, C., Hermann, G., Hinton, J., & Hofmann, W. 2008, Journal
of Physics Conference Series, 110, 062003
Brogan, C. L., Nord, M., Kassim, N., Lazio, J., & Anantharamaiah, K. 2003, Astronomische
Nachrichten Supplement, 324, 17
Buckley, M. R., & Hooper, D. 2010, PRD, 82, 063501
Burn, B. J. 1966, MNRAS, 133, 67
140

Carlson, E., Linden, T., Profumo, S., & Weniger, C. 2013a, ArXiv e-prints
—. 2013b, ArXiv e-prints
Casse, F., Lemoine, M., & Pelletier, G. 2002, PRD, 65, 023002
Catena, R., & Ullio, P. 2010a, JCAP, 8, 4
—. 2010b, JCAP, 8, 4
CDMS Collaboration, Agnese, R., Ahmed, Z., Anderson, A. J., Arrenberg, S., Balak-
ishiyeva, D., Basu Thakur, R., Bauer, D. A., Billard, J., & et al. 2013a, ArXiv e-prints
—. 2013b, ArXiv e-prints
Chandran, B. D. G., Cowley, S. C., & Morris, M. 2000, ApJ, 528, 723
Chernyakova, M., Malyshev, D., Aharonian, F. A., Crocker, R. M., & Jones, D. I. 2011,
ApJ, 726, 60
Cholis, I., Dobler, G., Finkbeiner, D. P., Goodenough, L., & Weiner, N. 2009, PRD, 80,
123518
Christopher, M. H., Scoville, N. Z., Stolovy, S. R., & Yun, M. S. 2005, ApJ, 622, 346
Cirelli, M., Kadastik, M., Raidal, M., & Strumia, A. 2009, Nuclear Physics B, 813, 1
Clowe, D., Bradaˇc, M., Gonzalez, A. H., Markevitch, M., Randall, S. W., Jones, C., &
Zaritsky, D. 2006, ApJL, 648, L109
Collar, J. I. 2010, ArXiv e-prints
141

—. 2011a, ArXiv e-prints
—. 2011b, ArXiv e-prints
Cowsik, R., & McClelland, J. 1973, ApJ, 180, 7
Crocker, R. M., & Aharonian, F. 2011, Physical Review Letters, 106, 101102
Crocker, R. M., Jones, D. I., Melia, F., Ott, J., & Protheroe, R. J. 2010, Nature, 463, 65
CTA Collaboration. 2011, ArXiv e-prints
CTA Consortium, T. 2011, ArXiv e-prints
DeMarco, D., Blasi, P., & Stanev, T. 2007, JCAP, 6, 27
Demleitner, M., Accomazzi, A., Eichhorn, G., Grant, C. S., Kurtz, M. J., & Murray, S. S.
2001, in Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc Conference Series, Vol. 238, Astronomical
Data Analysis Software and Systems X, ed. F. R. Harnden, Jr., F. A. Primini, & H. E.
Payne, 321
Diemand, J., Kuhlen, M., Madau, P., Zemp, M., Moore, B., Potter, D., & Stadel, J. 2008a,
Nature, 454, 735
—. 2008b, Nature, 454, 735
Diemand, J., Zemp, M., Moore, B., Stadel, J., & Carollo, C. M. 2005, MNRAS, 364, 665
Dine, M., & Fischler, W. 1983, Physics Letters B, 120, 137
Dobler, G. 2012, ApJ, 750, 17
142

Dobler, G., Finkbeiner, D. P., Cholis, I., Slatyer, T., & Weiner, N. 2010, ApJ, 717, 825
Dodelson, S., Hooper, D., & Serpico, P. D. 2008, PRD, 77, 063512
Doroshkevich, A. G., Khlopov, M. I., Sunyaev, R. A., Szalay, A. S., & Zeldovich, I. B. 1981,
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 375, 32
Dugger, L., Jeltema, T. E., & Profumo, S. 2010, JCAP, 12, 15
Ferri`ere, K. 2009, A&A, 505, 1183
—. 2012, A&A, 540, A50
Ferriere, K. 2012, ArXiv e-prints
Ferri`ere, K., Gillard, W., & Jean, P. 2007, A&A, 467, 611
Finkbeiner, D. P. 2004, ArXiv Astrophysics e-prints
Finkbeiner, D. P., Su, M., & Weniger, C. 2013, JCAP, 1, 29
Fixsen, D. J., Kogut, A., Levin, S., Limon, M., Lubin, P., Mirel, P., Seiﬀert, M., Singal, J.,
Wollack, E., Villela, T., & Wuensche, C. A. 2009, ArXiv e-prints
—. 2011, ApJ, 734, 5
Fornengo, N., Lineros, R., Regis, M., & Taoso, M. 2011, Physical Review Letters, 107,
A261302
Fox, P. J., Harnik, R., Kopp, J., & Tsai, Y. 2011, PRD, 84, 014028
Frenk, C. S., White, S. D. M., & Davis, M. 1983, ApJ, 271, 417
143

Fryer, C. L., Liu, S., Rockefeller, G., Hungerford, A., & Belanger, G. 2007, ApJ, 659, 389
Galli, S., Iocco, F., Bertone, G., & Melchiorri, A. 2011, PRD, 84, 027302
Geringer-Sameth, A., & Koushiappas, S. M. 2011, Physical Review Letters, 107, 241303
Ghez, A. M., Wright, S. A., Matthews, K., Thompson, D., Le Mignant, D., Tanner, A.,
Hornstein, S. D., Morris, M., Becklin, E. E., & Soifer, B. T. 2004, ApJL, 601, L159
Gnedin, O. Y., Ceverino, D., Gnedin, N. Y., Klypin, A. A., Kravtsov, A. V., Levine, R.,
Nagai, D., & Yepes, G. 2011a, ArXiv e-prints
—. 2011b, ArXiv e-prints
Gnedin, O. Y., Kravtsov, A. V., Klypin, A. A., & Nagai, D. 2004a, ApJ, 616, 16
—. 2004b, ApJ, 616, 16
Goldberg, H. 1983, Physical Review Letters, 50, 1419
Gondolo, P., Edsj¨o, J., Ullio, P., Bergstr¨om, L., Schelke, M., & Baltz, E. A. 2004, JCAP, 7,
8
Goodenough, L., & Hooper, D. 2009, ArXiv e-prints
Goodman, J., Ibe, M., Rajaraman, A., Shepherd, W., Tait, T. M. P., & Yu, H.-B. 2010,
PRD, 82, 116010
—. 2011, Physics Letters B, 695, 185
Governato, F., Brook, C., Mayer, L., Brooks, A., Rhee, G., Wadsley, J., Jonsson, P.,
Willman, B., Stinson, G., Quinn, T., & Madau, P. 2010, Nature, 463, 203
144

Graﬀ, D. S., & Freese, K. 1996, ApJL, 456, L49
Gray, A. D., Nicholls, J., Ekers, R. D., & Cram, L. E. 1995, ApJ, 448, 164
Heyvaerts, J., Norman, C., & Pudritz, R. E. 1988, ApJ, 330, 718
Hinton, J. A. 2004, NAR, 48, 331
Hinton, J. A., & Aharonian, F. A. 2007, ApJ, 657, 302
Hooper, D., , D. P., & Dobler, G. 2007, PRD, 76, 083012
Hooper, D. 2012, ArXiv e-prints
Hooper, D., Belikov, A. V., Jeltema, T. E., Linden, T., Profumo, S., & Slatyer, T. R. 2012a,
PRD, 86, 103003
Hooper, D., Blasi, P., & Dario Serpico, P. 2009, JCAP, 1, 25
Hooper, D., Cholis, I., Linden, T., Siegal-Gaskins, J., & Slatyer, T. 2013, ArXiv e-prints
Hooper, D., Collar, J. I., Hall, J., McKinsey, D., & Kelso, C. M. 2010, PRD, 82, 123509
Hooper, D., de la Calle Perez, I., Silk, J., Ferrer, F., & Sarkar, S. 2004a, JCAP, 9, 2
—. 2004b, JCAP, 9, 2
Hooper, D., & Dingus, B. L. 2004, PRD, 70, 113007
Hooper, D., & Goodenough, L. 2011a, Physics Letters B, 697, 412
—. 2011b, Physics Letters B, 697, 412
—. 2011c, Physics Letters B, 697, 412
145

Hooper, D., & Kelso, C. 2011, PRD, 84, 083001
Hooper, D., Kelso, C., & Queiroz, F. S. 2012b, ArXiv e-prints
Hooper, D., & Linden, T. 2011a, PRD, 83, 083517
—. 2011b, PRD, 83, 083517
—. 2011c, PRD, 84, 123005
Hooper, D., & Slatyer, T. R. 2013, ArXiv e-prints
H¨utsi, G., Chluba, J., Hektor, A., & Raidal, M. 2011, A&A, 535, A26
Iocco, F., Pato, M., Bertone, G., & Jetzer, P. 2011, JCAP, 11, 29
Jokipii, J. R. 1966, ApJ, 146, 480
—. 1971, Reviews of Geophysics and Space Physics, 9, 27
Jones, F. C., & Ellison, D. C. 1991, Space Science Reviews, 58, 259
Kahn, F. D., & Woltjer, L. 1959, ApJ, 130, 705
Kalberla, P. M. W., & Kerp, J. 2009, Annual Review of Astron and Astrophys, 47, 27
Kamae, T., Karlsson, N., Mizuno, T., Abe, T., & Koi, T. 2006, ApJ, 647, 692
Kassim, N. E., Larosa, T. N., Lazio, T. J. W., & Hyman, S. D. 1999, in Astronomical
Society of the Paciﬁc Conference Series, Vol. 186, The Central Parsecs of the Galaxy, ed.
H. Falcke, A. Cotera, W. J. Duschl, F. Melia, & M. J. Rieke, 403
Kolmogorov, A. 1941, Akademiia Nauk SSSR Doklady, 30, 301
146

Kosack, K., Badran, H. M., Bond, I. H., Boyle, P. J., Bradbury, S. M., Buckley, J. H.,
Carter-Lewis, D. A., Celik, O., & et al. 2004, ApJL, 608, L97
Kuchowicz, B. 1969, Fortschritte der Physik, 17, 517
Kusunose, M., & Takahara, F. 2012, ArXiv e-prints
Lang, C. C., Anantharamaiah, K. R., Kassim, N. E., & Lazio, T. J. W. 1999a, ApJL, 521,
L41
Lang, C. C., Morris, M., & Echevarria, L. 1999b, ApJ, 526, 727
LaRosa, T. N., Brogan, C. L., Shore, S. N., Lazio, T. J., Kassim, N. E., & Nord, M. E.
2005, ApJL, 626, L23
LaRosa, T. N., Kassim, N. E., Lazio, T. J. W., & Hyman, S. D. 2000a, Astronomical
Journal, 119, 207
—. 2000b, Astronomical Journal, 119, 207
LaRosa, T. N., Lazio, T. J. W., & Kassim, N. E. 2001, ApJ, 563, 163
LaRosa, T. N., Nord, M. E., Lazio, T. J. W., & Kassim, N. E. 2004, ApJ, 607, 302
Law, C., & Yusef-Zadeh, F. 2004, ApJ, 611, 858
Law, C. J., Yusef-Zadeh, F., & Cotton, W. D. 2008a, ApJ Supp, 177, 515
Law, C. J., Yusef-Zadeh, F., Cotton, W. D., & Maddalena, R. J. 2008b, ApJ Supp, 177,
255
147

Lazarian, A., Kowal, G., Vishniac, E., & de Gouveia Dal Pino, E. 2011, Planetary Space
Science, 59, 537
Lee, B. W., & Weinberg, S. 1977, Physical Review Letters, 39, 165
Lesch, H., & Reich, W. 1992, A&A, 264, 493
Lesch, H., Schlickeiser, R., & Crusius, A. 1988, A&A, 200, L9
Levine, R., Gnedin, N. Y., Hamilton, A. J. S., & Kravtsov, A. V. 2008, ApJ, 678, 154
Lieb, S., Lesch, H., & Birk, G. T. 2004, A&A, 419, 161
Linden, T., Hooper, D., & Yusef-Zadeh, F. 2011, ApJ, 741, 95
Linden, T., Lovegrove, E., & Profumo, S. 2012, ApJ, 753, 41
Linden, T., & Profumo, S. 2013, ArXiv e-prints
Lisanti, M., & Spergel, D. N. 2012, Physics of the Dark Universe, 1, 155
Liszt, H. S., & Spiker, R. W. 1995, ApJ Supp, 98, 259
Liu, S., Melia, F., Petrosian, V., & Fatuzzo, M. 2006a, ApJ, 647, 1099
—. 2006b, ApJ, 647, 1099
Liu, S., Petrosian, V., Melia, F., & Fryer, C. L. 2006c, ApJ, 648, 1020
—. 2006d, ApJ, 648, 1020
Longair, M. S. 2010, High Energy Astrophysics, ed. Longair, M. S.
Lyubarsky, Y. E. 2005, MNRAS, 358, 113
148

Malkov, M. A., & O’C Drury, L. 2001, Reports on Progress in Physics, 64, 429
Malyshev, D., Cholis, I., & Gelfand, J. D. 2010, ApJ, 722, 1939
Mayer-Hasselwander, H. A., Bertsch, D. L., Dingus, B. L., Eckart, A., Esposito, J. A.,
Genzel, R., Hartman, R. C., Hunter, S. D., & et. al. 1998, A&A, 335, 161
McKinney, J. C., & Uzdensky, D. A. 2012, MNRAS, 419, 573
Milgrom, M. 1983, ApJ, 270, 365
Montero-Casta˜no, M., Herrnstein, R. M., & Ho, P. T. P. 2009, ApJ, 695, 1477
Morris, M., & Yusef-Zadeh, F. 1989, ApJ, 343, 703
Nakanishi, H., & Sofue, Y. 2003, Publications of the ASJ, 55, 191
Navarro, J. F., Frenk, C. S., & White, S. D. 1997, Astrophys.J., 490, 493
Navarro, J. F., Frenk, C. S., & White, S. D. M. 1996a, ApJ, 462, 563
—. 1996b, ApJ, 462, 563
—. 1997, ApJ, 490, 493
Navarro, J. F., Hayashi, E., Power, C., Jenkins, A. R., Frenk, C. S., White, S. D. M.,
Springel, V., Stadel, J., & Quinn, T. R. 2004, MNRAS, 349, 1039
Navarro, J. F., Ludlow, A., Springel, V., Wang, J., Vogelsberger, M., White, S. D. M.,
Jenkins, A., Frenk, C. S., & Helmi, A. 2010, MNRAS, 402, 21
Nicholls, J., & Gray, A. D. 1993, Proceedings of the Astronomical Society of Australia, 10,
233
149

Nolan, P. L., Abdo, A. A., Ackermann, M., Ajello, M., Allafort, A., Antolini, E., Atwood,
W. B., Axelsson, M., Baldini, L., Ballet, J., & et al. 2012, ApJ Supplement, 199, 31
Nord, M. E., Lazio, T. J. W., Kassim, N. E., Hyman, S. D., LaRosa, T. N., Brogan, C. L.,
& Duric, N. 2004, Astronomical Journal, 128, 1646
Oh, S.-H., Brook, C., Governato, F., Brinks, E., Mayer, L., de Blok, W. J. G., Brooks, A.,
& Walter, F. 2011, Astronomical Journal, 142, 24
Oort, J. H. 1932, BAIN, 6, 249
—. 1940, ApJ, 91, 273
Ostriker, J. P., & Peebles, P. J. E. 1973, ApJ, 186, 467
Paczynski, B. 1986, ApJ, 304, 1
Pagels, H., & Primack, J. R. 1982, Physical Review Letters, 48, 223
Pe˜narrubia, J., Pontzen, A., Walker, M. G., & Koposov, S. E. 2012, ApJL, 759, L42
Pedlar, A., Anantharamaiah, K. R., Ekers, R. D., Goss, W. M., van Gorkom, J. H., Schwarz,
U. J., & Zhao, J.-H. 1989, ApJ, 342, 769
Planck Collaboration, Ade, P. A. R., Aghanim, N., Armitage-Caplan, C., Arnaud, M.,
Ashdown, M., Atrio-Barandela, F., Aumont, J., Baccigalupi, C., Banday, A. J., & et al.
2013, ArXiv e-prints
Preskill, J., Wise, M. B., & Wilczek, F. 1983, Physics Letters B, 120, 127
Profumo, S. 2005, PRD, 72, 103521
150

—. 2012, Central European Journal of Physics, 10, 1
Rajaraman, A., Shepherd, W., Tait, T. M. P., & Wijangco, A. M. 2011, PRD, 84, 095013
Regis, M. 2011, personal communication
Regis, M., & Ullio, P. 2008, PRD, 78, 043505
Reich, W. 2003, A&A, 401, 1023
Reich, W., Sofue, Y., & Matsuo, H. 2000, Pub. of the ASJ, 52, 355
Requena-Torres, M. A., Guesten, R., Weiss, A., Harris, A. I., Marin-Pintado, J., Stutzki,
J., Klein, B., Heyminck, S., & Risacher, C. 2012, ArXiv e-prints
Roberts, M. S., & Whitehurst, R. N. 1975, ApJ, 201, 327
Rockefeller, G., Fryer, C. L., Melia, F., & Warren, M. S. 2004, ApJ, 604, 662
Rosner, R., & Bodo, G. 1996, ApJL, 470, L49
Rubin, V. C., & Ford, Jr., W. K. 1970, ApJ, 159, 379
Ryden, B. S., & Gunn, J. E. 1987a, ApJ, 318, 15
—. 1987b, ApJ, 318, 15
Sch¨odel, R., Merritt, D., & Eckart, A. 2009, A&A, 502, 91
Seiﬀert, M., Fixsen, D. J., Kogut, A., Levin, S. M., Limon, M., Lubin, P. M., Mirel, P.,
Singal, J., Villela, T., Wollack, E., & Wuensche, C. A. 2011, ApJ, 734, 6
151

Sj¨ostrand, T., Ed´en, P., Friberg, C., L¨onnblad, L., Miu, G., Mrenna, S., & Norrbin, E.
2001a, Computer Physics Communications, 135, 238
—. 2001b, Computer Physics Communications, 135, 238
Slatyer, T. R., Padmanabhan, N., & Finkbeiner, D. P. 2009, PRD, 80, 043526
Sofue, Y., & Fujimoto, M. 1987, Pub. of the ASJ, 39, 843
Sofue, Y., Inoue, M., Handa, T., Tsuboi, M., Hirabayashi, H., Morimoto, M., & Akabane,
K. 1986, Pub. of the ASJ, 38, 475
Sofue, Y., Murata, Y., & Reich, W. 1992, Pub. of the ASJ, 44, 367
Springel, V., Wang, J., Vogelsberger, M., Ludlow, A., Jenkins, A., Helmi, A., Navarro,
J. F., Frenk, C. S., & White, S. D. M. 2008, MNRAS, 391, 1685
Steigman, G. 1979a, Annual Review of Nuclear and Particle Science, 29, 313
—. 1979b, Annual Review of Nuclear and Particle Science, 29, 313
Strong, A. W., & Moskalenko, I. V. 1998, ApJ, 509, 212
Su, M., & Finkbeiner, D. P. 2012, ArXiv e-prints
Su, M., Slatyer, T. R., & Finkbeiner, D. P. 2010, ApJ, 724, 1044
Thompson, D. J., Bertsch, D. L., Fichtel, C. E., Hartman, R. C., Hofstadter, R., Hughes,
E. B., Hunter, S. D., Hughlock, B. W., & et al. 1993, ApJS, 86, 629
Tisserand, P., Le Guillou, L., Afonso, C., Albert, J. N., Andersen, J., Ansari, R., Aubourg,
´E., Bareyre, P., & et al. 2007, AAP, 469, 387
152

Tsuboi, M., Inoue, M., Handa, T., Tabara, H., Kato, T., Sofue, Y., & Kaifu, N. 1986,
Astronomical Journal, 92, 818
Tsuboi, M., Kawabata, T., Kasuga, T., Handa, T., & Kato, T. 1995, Pub. of the ASJ, 47,
829
van den Bergh, S. 1999, PASP, 111, 657
Vitale, V., Morselli, A., & for the Fermi/LAT Collaboration. 2009a, ArXiv e-prints
—. 2009b, ArXiv e-prints
—. 2009c, ArXiv e-prints
Walker, M. G., & Pe˜narrubia, J. 2011, ApJ, 742, 20
Wang, Q. D., Gotthelf, E. V., & Lang, C. C. 2002, Nature, 415, 148
Weniger, C. 2012, JCAP, 8, 7
Wharton, R. S., Chatterjee, S., Cordes, J. M., Deneva, J. S., & Lazio, T. J. W. 2012, ApJ,
753, 108
White, S. D. M., Frenk, C. S., & Davis, M. 1983, ApJL, 274, L1
Whiteson, D. 2013, ArXiv e-prints
Yusef-Zadeh, F. 2003, ApJ, 598, 325
Yusef-Zadeh, F., Goss, W. M., Roberts, D. A., Robinson, B., & Frail, D. A. 1999, ApJ, 527,
172
153

Yusef-Zadeh, F., Hewitt, J. W., & Cotton, W. 2004, ApJ Supp, 155, 421
Yusef-Zadeh, F., Melia, F., & Wardle, M. 2000, Science, 287, 85
Yusef-Zadeh, F., & Morris, M. 1987, Astronomical Journal, 94, 1178
Yusef-Zadeh, F., Morris, M., & Chance, D. 1984, Nature, 310, 557
Zaharijas, G., & Hooper, D. 2006, PRD, 73, 103501
Zanotti, O., & Dumbser, M. 2011, MNRAS, 418, 1004
Zhang, L., & Cheng, K. S. 2001, A&A, 368, 1063
Zwicky, F. 1933, Helvetica Physica Acta, 6, 110
154

