
CONTENTS
Cover
Series page
Title page
Copyright page
Dedication page
Acknowledgments
Introduction
1 Darwinism
Natural Selection: Charles Darwin
The Mechanics of Inheritance: Gregor Mendel
The Discovery of the Gene: Thomas Hunt Morgan
The Role of DNA in Genetics
What’s in a Name? “Darwinism” or “Evolutionary Theory”?
2 The Selfish Gene
Introducing Dawkins
Dawkins’ Approach: The Selfish Gene
The Place of Humanity in a Darwinian Universe
Are Genes Really Selfish?
What Remains of the “Selfish Gene” Approach?
3 Blind Faith?
Faith as Blind Trust?
Is Atheism Itself a Faith?
Is Christian Faith Irrational?
The Problem of Radical Theory Change in Science
The Limits of Science
Mystery, Insanity, and Nonsense
4 The Blind Watchmaker
The Contours of a Darwinian Worldview

Is Darwinism a Complete Explanation?
God as an Explanatory Hypothesis?
The Elimination of Purpose: Dawkins on Teleology in Nature
The Divine Watchmaker: Paley’s Grand (but Correctable) Mistake
Dynamic Conceptions of Creation: Augustine of Hippo
Natural Selection and Religious Beliefs: Darwin’s Views
The Christian Reaction to Darwin
5 Cultural Darwinism?
Universal Darwinism: The Evolution of Culture
Introducing the Meme
Introducing the “God-Meme”
Is Cultural Development Darwinian?
Do Memes Actually Exist?
The Flawed Analogy between Gene and Meme
The Redundancy of the Meme
God as a Virus of the Mind?
Moving On …
6 The God Delusion
The Cultural Location of The God Delusion
The “Warfare” of Science and Religion
Natural Science Leads to Neither Atheism Nor Christianity
Science, Faith, and Evidence
A Darwinian Explanation of Belief in God?
Awe, Wonder, and Religion
Conclusion
Select Bibliography
1. Works by Richard Dawkins
Other works
Index
End User License Agreement

Also by Alister E. McGrath from Wiley-Blackwell
Christianity: An Introduction, Third Edition (2015) Emil Brunner: A
Reappraisal (2014)
The World of C. S. Lewis (2013)
Christian History: An Introduction (2013)
Historical Theology: An Introduction to the History of Christian Thought,
Second Edition (2012) Reformation Thought: An Introduction, Fourth Edition
(2012) Theology: The Basic Readings, Second Edition (edited, 2012) Theology:
The Basics, Third Edition (2012) Luther's Theology of the Cross: Martin
Luther's Theological Breakthrough, Second Edition (2011) Darwinism and the
Divine: Evolutionary Thought and Natural Theology (2011) The Christian
Theology Reader, Fourth Edition (edited, 2011) Christian Theology: An
Introduction, Fifth Edition (2011) Science and Religion: A New Introduction,
Second Edition (2009) The Open Secret: A New Vision for Natural Theology
(2008) The Order of Things: Explorations in Scientific Theology (2006)
Christianity: An Introduction, Second Edition (2006) The Intellectual Origins of
the European Reformation, Second Edition (2003) Christian Literature: An
Anthology (edited, 2003)a
A Brief History of Heaven (2003)
The Blackwell Companion to Protestantism (edited with Darren C. Marks, 2003)
The Future of Christianity (2002)
Reformation Thought: An Introduction, Third Edition (2000) Christian
Spirituality: An Introduction (1999) Historical Theology: An Introduction (1998)
The Foundations of Dialogue in Science and Religion (1998) The Blackwell
Encyclopedia of Modern Christian Thought (edited, 1995) A Life of John Calvin
(1990)
Note
a out of print

Dawkins’ God
From The Selfish Gene to The God Delusion
Second Edition
Alister E. McGrath

This edition first published 2015
© 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
Registered Office
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial Offices
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148-5020, USA
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services, and for information about how to apply for
permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/wiley-
blackwell.
The right of Alister E. McGrath to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance
with the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise,
except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of
the publisher.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not
be available in electronic books.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand
names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered
trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor
mentioned in this book.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in
preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not
engaged in rendering professional services and neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for
damages arising herefrom. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a
competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
McGrath, Alister E., 1953–
   Dawkins’ God : From The Selfish Gene to The God Delusion / Alister E. McGrath.– Second edition.
   pages cm
   Includes bibliographical references and index.
   ISBN 978-1-118-96478-1 (pbk.)
1. Apologetics. 2. Dawkins, Richard, 1941– I. Title.
   BT1103.M34 2015
   261.5′5–dc23
       2014029784
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Cover image: Top, l–r : Biological cell © dreaming2004 / iStock; Molecular structure © BlackJack3D
iStock; Animated waves © Toria Shutterstock; Chemistry science formula and tablets. Medicine symbol ©
isak55 Shutterstock; Vertical photo of an old tree in a green forest © andreiuc88 Shutterstock

“More attention to the History of Science is needed, as much by scientists as
by historians, and especially by biologists, and this should mean a deliberate
attempt to understand the thoughts of the great masters of the past, to see in
what circumstances or intellectual milieu their ideas were formed, where they
took the wrong turning or stopped short on the right track.”
R. A. Fisher, speaking at a symposium held in Canberra marking the
centenary of the publication of Charles Darwin’s Origin of Species. “Natural
Selection from the Genetical Standpoint.” Australian Journal of Science 22
(1959): 16–17.

Acknowledgments
I owe a particular debt to senior academic colleagues who have read this work in
draft form, and were generous in their comments: Denis Alexander, R. J. Berry,
Francis Collins, Simon Conway Morris, David C. Livingstone, Michael Ruse,
Jeffrey Schloss, and especially Joanna Collicutt. I myself am responsible for any
remaining errors of fact or interpretation. Oxford University kindly provided
clarification on some important points of detail.

Introduction
I first came across Richard Dawkins in 1977 when I read his Selfish Gene
(1976). I was completing my doctoral research in Oxford University’s
department of biochemistry, under the genial supervision of Professor Sir
George Radda, who went on to become Chief Executive of the Medical
Research Council. I was trying to figure out how biological membranes work so
successfully by developing new physical methods to study their behavior.
Although it would be some years before The Selfish Gene achieved the cult
status it subsequently enjoyed, it was obviously a marvelous book. I admired
Dawkins’ wonderful way with words, and his ability to explain crucial – yet
often difficult – scientific ideas so clearly. It was popular scientific writing at its
best. No surprise, then, that the New York Times commented that it was “the sort
of popular science writing that makes the reader feel like a genius.”
By any standards, The Selfish Gene was a great read – stimulating, controversial,
and informative. Dawkins had that rare ability to make complex things
understandable, without talking down to his audience. Yet Dawkins did more
than just make evolutionary theory intelligible. He was willing to set out its
implications for every aspect of life, in effect presenting Darwinism as a
universal philosophy of life, rather than a mere scientific theory. It was heady
stuff – far better, in my view, than Jacques Monod’s earlier work Chance and
Necessity (1971), which explored similar themes, but in a rather dull way. And,
like all provocative writers, Dawkins opened up debates which were both
important and intrinsically interesting – such as the existence of God, and the
meaning of life.
Although Dawkins’ atheism was evident in The Selfish Gene, it was presented in
an interesting and engaging way – the kind of approach that provokes a good
conversation. I was especially interested in Dawkins’ own history, as we had
traversed quite different routes – in my case, from atheism to Christianity; in his,
from Christianity to atheism. In fact, at that time I was in the process of moving
from the study of the natural sciences to Christian theology, combining working
in Oxford’s research laboratories with taking tutorials in theology. My long-term
goal was to explore the relation of Christian thought and the natural sciences,
and my mentors had made it clear that I would need research degrees in both
disciplines to be taken seriously.

By June 1978, I had gained my doctorate in molecular biophysics and first-class
honors in theology, and was preparing to leave Oxford to begin theological
research at Cambridge University. To my surprise, I then received an invitation
to lunch with a senior editor at Oxford University Press. Oxford is a very small
place, and gossip spreads very quickly. The Press had heard about my
“interesting career to date,” he explained, and had an interesting possibility to
discuss with me. Dawkins’ Selfish Gene had generated a huge amount of
interest. Would I like to write a response from a Christian perspective?
It would be a wonderful book to write. Only a fool, I remember thinking at the
time, could resist such an invitation. After much thought, I wrote a polite note
thanking my colleague for lunch, and explaining that I did not yet feel ready to
write such a book. There were many others better qualified, in my view – such
as the biochemist and theologian Arthur Peacocke (1924–2008). It would just be
a matter of time before someone else wrote a book-length response to Dawkins’
ideas. So I headed off to Cambridge to do research into Christian theology,
before returning to Oxford to lecture in theology in 1983. Oxford University’s
excellent library resources meant I was able to keep up and develop my reading
in the history and philosophy of science, as well as follow the most recent
experimental and theoretical developments in the field.
But I had not forgotten Dawkins. His Selfish Gene introduced a new concept and
word into the investigation of the history of ideas – the “meme.” As the area of
research I hoped to pursue was the history of ideas (specifically, Christian
theology, but set against the backdrop of intellectual development in general), I
had done a substantial amount of background research on existing models of
how ideas were developed and received within and across cultures. None of
them seemed satisfactory.1 But Dawkins’ theory of the “meme” – a cultural
replicator – seemed to offer a brilliant new theoretical framework for exploring
the general question of the origins, development, and reception of ideas, based
on rigorous empirical scientific investigation. I recall with great affection a
moment of sheer intellectual excitement, sometime late in 1977, when I realized
that there might be a credible alternative to the stale and unpersuasive models of
doctrinal development I had explored and rejected at that stage. Might this be the
future?2
As I knew from Darwin’s work on the Galapagos finches, it helps to approach
evidence with at least a provisional theoretical framework.3 And so I began to
explore using the “meme” as a model for the development of Christian doctrine.
I shall report more fully on my twenty-five-year evaluation of both the “meme”

concept and its utility in a later chapter. Suffice it to say at this stage that I was
perhaps somewhat optimistic concerning both its rigorous empirical grounding
and its value as a tool for the critical study of intellectual development.
In the meanwhile, Dawkins went on to produce a series of brilliant and
provocative books, each of which I devoured with interest and admiration.
Dawkins followed The Selfish Gene with The Extended Phenotype (1981), The
Blind Watchmaker (1986), River out of Eden (1995), Climbing Mount
Improbable (1996), Unweaving the Rainbow (1998), A Devil’s Chaplain (2003),
and finally the culmination of his career as an atheist apologist in The God
Delusion (2006). Following The God Delusion, Dawkins went on to publish
some elegant works of popular science, and an informative memoir of his life,
which have informed the analysis in these pages. Yet the tone and focus of
Dawkins’ writing changed over the years. As philosopher Michael Ruse pointed
out in a review of The Devil’s Chaplain, Dawkins’ focus shifted “from writing
about science for a popular audience to waging an all-out attack on
Christianity.”4 The brilliant scientific popularizer became a tub-thumping anti-
religious polemicist, preaching rather than arguing his case (or so it seemed to
his critics).
So what is the source of Dawkins’ hostility to religion? My reading of his works
suggests that this animosity is deep-rooted, and not grounded in one specific
concern. Four interconnected yet distinct grounds of criticism may be found
throughout his writings. All are found in his God Delusion (2006); yet their
formulation dates from different stages of his career.
1. A Darwinian worldview makes belief in God unnecessary or impossible.
Although hinted at in The Selfish Gene, this idea is developed in more detail
in The Blind Watchmaker.
2. Religion makes assertions which are grounded in faith, a “kind of mental
illness” which shies away from a rigorous, evidence-based concern for truth.
For Dawkins, truth is grounded in explicit proof; any form of obscurantism
or mysticism grounded in faith is to be opposed vigorously. Dawkins’ robust
insistence on evidence-based thinking is obvious in The Selfish Gene, and
recurs regularly in his later writings.
3. Religion offers an impoverished and attenuated vision of the world. “The
universe presented by organized religion is a poky little medieval universe,
and extremely limited.”5 In contrast, science offers a bold and brilliant vision
of the universe as grand, beautiful, and awe-inspiring. This aesthetic critique

of religion is developed especially in his 1998 work Unweaving the
Rainbow.
4. Religion leads to evil. It is like a malignant virus, infecting human minds.
This is not strictly a scientific judgment, in that, as Dawkins often points out,
the sciences cannot establish what is good or evil. “Science has no methods
for deciding what is ethical.”6 It is, however, a profoundly moral objection to
religion, deeply rooted within western culture and history, which must be
taken with the greatest seriousness.
In 2004, I published the first edition of Dawkins’ God, which aimed to explore
and evaluate Dawkins’ views on science and religion through a close reading of
his publications – in effect, a belated version of the book I was asked to write
back in 1978. There were three main reasons for writing that book. First,
Dawkins is a fascinating writer, both in terms of the quality of the ideas he
develops, and the verbal dexterity with which he defends them. Anyone who is
remotely interested in debates about the meaning of life will find Dawkins an
important sparring partner. Augustine of Hippo once wrote of the “eros of the
mind,” referring to a deep longing within the human mind to make sense of
things – a passion for understanding and knowledge. Anyone sharing that
passion will want to enter into the debate that Dawkins has begun.
And that was my second reason for writing. Yes, Dawkins may occasionally
seem to be immensely provocative and aggressive, dismissing alternative
positions with indecent haste, or treating criticism of his personal views as an
attack on the entire scientific enterprise. Yet this is what makes popular debates
interesting, and raises them above the tedious drone of normal scholarly
discussion, which seems invariably to be accompanied by endless footnotes,
citing of weighty but dull authorities, and a cautious understatement heavily
laced with qualifications. Dawkins clearly wanted to provoke such a debate and
discussion, and it would be churlish not to join in.
I had a third reason, however. I write as a Christian theologian who believes it is
essential to listen seriously and carefully to criticism of my discipline, and
respond appropriately to it. One of my reasons for taking Dawkins so seriously is
that I want to ask what may be learned from him. As any serious historian of
Christian thought knows, Christianity is committed to a constant review of its
ideas in the light of their moorings in Scripture and tradition, always asking
whether any contemporary interpretation of a doctrine is adequate or acceptable.
As we shall see, Dawkins offers a powerful, and in my view credible, challenge
to one way of thinking about the doctrine of creation, which gained influence in
E
l
d d
i
h
l
d
i d
d
ill li
i

England during the early modern period, and still lingers on in some quarters
today. He is a critic who needs to be heard, and taken seriously.
The first edition of this work was well received. Yet even within a few years of
its publication, it was clear that it needed major revision. For a start, Dawkins
published The God Delusion in 2006. It would be unthinkable to discuss his
views on science and religion without engaging with this influential work.
Secondly, a substantial secondary literature emerged, dealing with a range of
issues of direct relevance to the topic of this book. It was clearly essential to
distil the importance of this new body of knowledge into the text of a new
edition of this work.
In the spring of 2014, I judged that the moment was right for a new edition of
this work. I had just been appointed as the Andreas Idreos Professor of Science
and Religion at Oxford, and it seemed entirely appropriate to begin this final
phase of my career by interacting with Oxford’s former Professor of the Public
Understanding of Science.
Finally, I must make it clear that, although I disagree with Dawkins over many
issues, I regard him as one of the most important scientists of his age, not least
because of his superb ability to communicate scientific ideas to a wider
audience. He has helped to create a new cultural interest in the field of science
and religion, from which I and many others have benefited. That discussion is
certain to continue, and will develop in new directions in the future. Perhaps this
book might help that debate move onward and upward.
Alister E. McGrath
Oxford, June 2014
Notes
1 The one I initially had greatest hopes for was Pierre Rousselot, “Petit théorie
du développement du dogme.” Recherches de science religieuse 53 (1965):
355–90. For the issues, see Alister E. McGrath, “The Evolution of Doctrine?
A Critical Examination of the Theological Validity of Biological Models of
Doctrinal Development.” In The Order of Things: Explorations in Scientific
Theology, 117–67. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2006.
2 I was not the only one to be so excited in this way by Dawkins’ new idea: see
Stephen Shennan. Genes, Memes and Human History: Darwinian

Archaeology and Cultural Evolution. London: Thames & Hudson, 2002, 7.
3 I later wondered if I had made too much of this incident in Darwin’s
intellectual development: see Frank J. Sulloway, “Darwin and His Finches:
The Evolution of a Legend.” Journal of the History of Biology 15 (1982): 1–
53.
4 Michael Ruse, “Through a Glass, Darkly.” American Scientist 91 (2003): 554–
6.
5 Richard Dawkins, “A Survival Machine.” In The Third Culture, edited by John
Brockman, 75–95. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1996, 85.
6 A Devil’s Chaplain, 34. For all Dawkins texts, please see the Select
Bibliography for a full reference.

1
Darwinism
The Rise of a Scientific Theory
Why are things the way they are? How did they come to be this way? And what
– if anything – might this tell us about the meaning of life? These questions have
played a decisive role in shaping western thinking about the world. From the
beginning of human civilization, people have wondered what explanation might
be offered for the structures of the world – such as the haunting and solemn
silence of the stars in the night sky, the beauty of a rainbow, and the mysterious
behavior of living beings. Not only do these evoke a sense of awe; they call out
for an explanation.
The earliest Greek philosophers – the pre-Socratics – argued endlessly about the
nature of the world, and how it came to be as it is. They insisted that the universe
was rationally constructed, and that it could therefore be understood through the
right use of human reason and argument. Human beings had the ability to make
sense of the universe. Socrates took this line of thought further, identifying a link
between the way the universe was constructed and the best way for human
beings to live. To reflect on the nature of the universe was to gain insights into
the nature of the “good life” – the best and most authentic way of living.
Reflecting on the clues provided in the structuring of the world thus led to an
understanding of our identity and destiny.
For many, the answer lay in the divine origins of the world – the idea that, in
some way, the world has been ordered or constructed. Many have found this idea
to be spiritually attractive and intellectually satisfying. For Dawkins, however,
the advent of Charles Darwin has shown this up as “cosmic sentimentality,”
“saccharine false purpose,” which natural science has a moral mission to purge
and debunk. Such naïve beliefs, he argues, might have been understandable
before Darwin came along. But not now. Darwin has changed everything.
Newton would be an atheist if he had been born after Darwin. Before Darwin,
atheism was just one among many religious possibilities; now, it is the only
serious option for a thinking, honest, and scientifically informed person.
Dawkins’ robustly positive take on Darwinism and the message that it brings to
the world can be seen in a short talk he gave on BBC Radio in 2003, in which he
set out his personal creed:

[We should] rejoice in the amazing privilege we enjoy. We have been born,
and we are going to die. But before we die we have time to understand why
we were ever born in the first place. Time to understand the universe into
which we have been born. And with that understanding, we finally grow up
and realise that there is no help for us outside our own efforts.1
Dawkins argues that Darwin marks that decisive point of transition, providing us
with the only reliable explanation of our origins. Intellectual history is thus
divided into two epochs – before Darwin, and after Darwin. As James Watson,
the Nobel Prize winner and co-discoverer of the structure of DNA put it,
“Charles Darwin will eventually be seen as a far more influential figure in the
history of human thought than either Jesus Christ or Mohammed.”
But why Darwin? Why not Karl Marx? Or Sigmund Freud? Each of these is
regularly proposed as having brought about an intellectual earthquake, shattering
prevailing assumptions and ushering in radical new ways of thinking which lead
to the bifurcation of human thought. The theories of biological evolution,
historical materialism, and psychoanalysis have all been proposed as defining
the contours of humanity come of age. All, interestingly, have been linked with
atheism, the movement that some Europeans in the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries hoped might prove to be an intellectual and political liberator. So why
Darwin? To ask this question is to open up the issues which so deeply concern
Dawkins, and which have such wider implications.
To appreciate the contributions of Richard Dawkins to debates about
evolutionary theory and the relation of science and religion, we must first
contextualize his ideas. This opening chapter is a scene-setter, providing the
background against which Dawkins’ ideas about the “selfish gene” and “blind
watchmaker” are to be seen. Before we can make sense of Dawkins’ distinctive
approach, we need to set him in his proper context, and tell the story of the
emergence of the form of evolutionary thought that is often referred to as
“Darwinism.”
Natural Selection: Charles Darwin
The publication of Charles Darwin’s Origin of Species (1859) is rightly regarded
as a landmark in nineteenth-century science. On December 27, 1831, HMS
Beagle set out from the southern English port of Plymouth on a voyage that
lasted almost five years. Its mission was to complete a survey of the southern
coasts of South America, and afterward to circumnavigate the globe. The small

ship’s naturalist was Charles Darwin (1809–82). During the voyage, Darwin
noted some aspects of the plant and animal life of South America, particularly
the Galapagos Islands and Tierra del Fuego, which seemed to him to require
explanation, yet which were not satisfactorily accounted for by existing theories.
The opening words of the Origin of Species set out the riddle that he was
determined to solve:
When on board HMS Beagle as naturalist, I was much struck with certain
facts in the distribution of the organic beings inhabiting South America, and
in the geological relations of the present to the past inhabitants of that
continent. These facts, as will be seen in the latter chapters of this volume,
seemed to throw some light on the origin of species – that mystery of
mysteries, as it has been called by one of our greatest philosophers.2
One popular account of the origin of species, widely supported by the religious
and academic establishment of the early nineteenth century, held that God had
somehow created everything more or less as we now see it. The success of the
view owed much to the influence of William Paley (1743–1805), archdeacon of
Carlisle, who compared God to one of the mechanical geniuses of the Industrial
Revolution. God had directly created the world in all its intricacy. We shall
explore the origins and influence of Paley’s thinking in the fourth chapter of this
work; at this stage, we need merely note that Paley was of the view that God had
constructed – Paley prefers the word “contrived” – the world in its finished form,
as we now know it. The idea of any kind of development seemed impossible to
him. Did a watchmaker leave his work unfinished? Certainly not!3
Darwin knew of Paley’s views, and initially found them persuasive. However,
his observations on the Beagle raised some questions. On his return, Darwin set
out to develop a more satisfying explanation of his own observations and those
of others. Although Darwin appears to have hit on the basic idea of evolution
through natural selection by 1842, he was not ready to publish. Such a radical
theory would require massive observational evidence to be marshalled in its
support.
Some earlier works advocating the evolution of species – most notably, Robert
Chambers’ Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation (1844) – were so
incompetent scientifically that they threatened to discredit the ideas that they
tried to advance.4 Thomas H. Huxley, who would later champion Darwin’s
theory, damned the book as a “once attractive and still notorious work of
fiction,” and its author as one of “those who . . . indulge in science at second-

hand and dispense totally with logic.”5 Chambers was a publisher, not a scientist,
and was a little naïve at points; for example, in taking seriously a highly
improbable report that living creatures had resulted from passing electric
currents through potassium ferrocyanate solution.
As a result of Chambers’ muddying of the waters, there was now no way that a
radical new theory of biological origins could be launched without
overwhelming documentation, guaranteed to disarm its critics through its sheer
weight of observational data and close evidence-based argument. Darwin’s
Origin of Species provided such a work, offering both evidence of the
phenomenon of biological evolution and an explanation of its mechanism.
Philosophers of science draw an important distinction between a “logic of
discovery” and a “logic of confirmation.” To simplify what is rather a complex
discussion, we might suggest that a logic of discovery is about how someone
arrives at a scientific hypothesis, and a logic of confirmation about how that
hypothesis is shown to be reliable and realistic.6 Sometimes hypotheses arise
from a long period of reflection on observation; sometimes they come about in a
flash of inspiration. Yet if the logic of discovery can often be more inspirational
than rational, the same is clearly not true of the logic of justification. Here, any
hypothesis – however it is derived – is rigorously and thoroughly checked
against what may be observed, to determine the degree of empirical fit between
theory and observation. There is no reason to suggest that Darwin’s notion of
natural selection came about in a moment of inspiration, on the Galapagos or
anywhere else. His theory began taking shape in 1837 and 1838. In Darwin’s
case, the logics of discovery and justification both seem to have been based
primarily on extensive reflection on often puzzling observations.7
Darwin’s own account of how he developed his theory of natural selection
makes it clear that it was later reflection on observations that brought about his
insight. When he boarded the Beagle in 1831, he tells us, he was inclined to the
view that the flora and fauna of a given region would be determined by their
physical environment. His observations caused him to question this belief, and to
search for alternative explanations – one of which gradually came to dominate
his thinking. Let us listen to Darwin’s own account of things:
During the voyage of the Beagle I had been deeply impressed by discovering
in the Pampean formation great fossil animals covered with armor like that on
the existing Armadillos; secondly, by the manner in which closely allied
animals replace one another in proceeding southwards over the Continent;

and thirdly, by the South American character of most of the productions of
the Galápagos archipelago, and more especially by the manner in which they
differ slightly on each island of the group; none of these islands appearing to
be very ancient in the geological sense. It was evident that facts such as these,
as well as many others, could be explained on the supposition that species
gradually become modified; and the subject haunted me.8
On his return to England, Darwin set about building up his repository of
evidence for evolution. As Darwin reflected on his own observations, and
supplemented them with those of others, a number of points emerged as being of
particular significance. For Darwin, four features of the natural world in
particular seemed to require particularly close attention, in the light of problems
and shortcomings with existing explanations, especially the idea of “special
creation” offered by religious apologists such as William Paley:9 rudimentary
organs, extinction, geographical biodiversity, and adaptation. While Paley’s
theory – which we shall consider in more detail in Chapter 4 – offered
explanations of these observations, they seemed increasingly cumbersome and
forced. A better explanation, Darwin believed, had to lie to hand. None of these
could be regarded as “proofs” of natural selection; nevertheless, they possessed a
cumulative force in suggesting it was the best explanation of what was actually
observed.
The point here is that a number of explanations could be offered for what was
observed in nature. The debate concerned which of these explanations was the
best. Now, the word “best” is difficult to define. Do we mean the simplest
theory? The most elegant? The most natural? The great English natural
philosopher William Whewell (1794–1866) – much admired by Darwin – used a
rich visual image to communicate the capacity of a good theory to make sense
of, and weave together, observations. “The facts are known but they are
insulated and unconnected . . . The pearls are there but they will not hang
together until some one provides the string.”10 The “pearls” are the observations
and the “string” is a grand vision of reality, a worldview, that connects and
unifies the data. A grand theory, Whewell asserted, allows the “colligation of
facts,” establishing a new system of relations with each other, unifying what
might have otherwise been considered to be disconnected and isolated
observations. The “pearls” were the observations that Darwin had accumulated;
but what was the best string on which to thread them?
The pearls – to continue with this visual analogy – include four categories of
observations which clearly require to be strung together.

1. Many creatures possess “rudimentary structures,” which have no apparent or
predictable function – such as the nipples of male mammals, the rudiments
of a pelvis and hind limbs in snakes, and wings on many flightless birds.
How might these be explained on the basis of Paley’s theory, which stressed
the importance of the individual design of species? Why should God design
redundancies? Darwin’s theory accounted for these with ease and elegance.
2. Some species were known to have died out altogether. The phenomenon of
extinction had been recognized before Darwin, and was often explained on
the basis of catastrophe theories, such as a universal flood, as suggested by
the biblical account of Noah. Darwin’s theory offered a neater account of the
phenomenon.
3. Darwin’s research voyage on the Beagle had persuaded him of the uneven
geographical distribution of life forms throughout the world. In particular,
Darwin was impressed by the peculiarities of island populations, such as the
finches of the Galapagos Islands. Once more, the doctrine of special creation
could account for this, yet in a manner that seemed forced and unpersuasive.
Darwin’s theory offered a much more plausible account of the emergence of
these specific populations.
4. Various forms of certain living creatures seemed to be adapted to their
specific needs. Darwin held that these could best be explained by their
emergence and selection in response to evolutionary pressures. Paley’s
theory of special creation proposed that these creatures were individually
designed by God with those specific needs in mind.
So what could be inferred from these? What was the best explanation of these
observations? The best string to connect them? The challenge facing Darwin was
to find a theoretical framework which could accommodate these observations as
simply, elegantly, and persuasively as possible. Darwin’s method is a textbook
case of the method of “inference to the best explanation” which is now widely
regarded as lying at the core of the scientific method.11 Darwin was quite clear
that his theory of natural selection was not the only explanation of the biological
data which could be adduced. He did, however, believe that it possessed greater
explanatory power than its rivals, such as the doctrine of independent acts of
special creation, as set out in the writings of William Paley: “Light has been
shown on several facts, which on the belief of independent acts of creation are
utterly obscure.”12
Many popular accounts of the scientific method emphasize the importance of

prediction. If a theory does not predict, it is not scientific. Darwin was quite
clear that his theory did not predict, and could not predict. That was just the
nature of things.13 The nature of the scientific phenomena was such that
prediction was not possible for Darwin. This point unhappily led some
philosophers of science, most notably Karl Popper, to suggest that Darwinism
was not really scientific.14
This point is no longer taken seriously. More recent studies, especially in the
philosophy of biology, have raised interesting questions about whether
prediction really is essential to the scientific method. This issue emerged as
important in the nineteenth-century debate between William Whewell and John
Stuart Mill over the role of induction as a scientific method.15 Whewell
emphasized the importance of predictive novelty as a core element of the
scientific method; Mill argued that the difference between prediction of novel
observations and theoretical accommodation of existing observations was purely
psychological, and had no ultimate epistemological significance. The debate, of
course, continues. In a recent discussion of the issue, leading philosophers of
biology Christopher Hitchcock and Elliott Sober argue that while prediction can
occasionally be superior to accommodation, this is not always the case.16
Situations can easily be envisaged where accommodation is superior to
prediction. Prediction is neither intrinsically nor invariably to be preferred to
accommodation. The relevance of this point to the scientific character of
Darwin’s approach will be obvious.
The Origin of Species sets out with great care why the idea of natural selection is
the best mechanism to explain how the evolution of species took place, and how
it is to be understood. Darwin proposed that a process of “natural selection” had
to be proposed as nature’s analogue to the process of “artificial selection” in
stockbreeding. Darwin was familiar with these issues, especially as they related
to the breeding of pigeons.17 The first chapter of the Origin of Species therefore
considers “variation under domestication” – that is, the way in which domestic
plants and animals are bred by agriculturists. Darwin notes how selective
breeding allows farmers to create animals or plants with particularly desirable
traits. Variations develop in successive generations through this process of
breeding, and these can be exploited to bring about inherited characteristics
which are regarded as being of particular value by the breeder. In the second
chapter, Darwin introduces the key notions of the “struggle for survival” and
“natural selection” to account for what may be observed in both the fossil
records and the present natural world.

Darwin argues that this process of “domestic selection” or “artificial selection”
offers a model for a mechanism for what happens in nature. “Variation under
domestication” is presented as an analogue of “variation under nature.” A
process of “natural selection” is argued to occur within the natural order which is
analogous to a well-known process, familiar to English stockbreeders and
horticulturalists: “As man can produce and certainly has produced a great result
by his methodical and unconscious means of selection, what may not nature
effect?”18
Darwin’s theory had considerable explanatory force – a point recognized by
many at the time, even those who were anxious about the implications of his
ideas for the place of humanity within nature. Yet there was a serious problem
with the theory. How did nature “remember” and “transmit” these new
developments? How could a rising generation “inherit” the traits of its
predecessor? What mechanism could be proposed by which these new
developments could be passed on to future generations? Darwin’s
contemporaries generally believed that characteristics of the parents were
“blended” when they were passed to the offspring. But if this was the case, how
could a single mutation be spread throughout a species? It would be diluted to
the point of insignificance, like a drop of ink in a bucket of water. It seemed that
Darwin’s evolutionary hypothesis was in genetic difficulties. Variation would
simply become diluted. A new trait would be like a teaspoon of white paint
falling into a vat of black treacle: it would vanish from sight.
Darwin’s Origin of Species went through six editions, and Darwin worked
constantly to improve his text, adding new material, amending existing material,
and, above all, responding to criticisms in what can only be described as a
remarkably open manner. Of the 4,000 sentences in the first edition, Darwin had
rewritten three in four by the time of the final sixth edition of 1872.
Interestingly, some 60% of these modifications took place in the last two
editions, which introduced some “improvements” that now seem unwise – for
example, his incorporation of Herbert Spencer’s potentially misleading phrase
“the survival of the fittest.”19
The contents of these successive editions of the Origin of Species make it clear
that Darwin’s new theory faced considerable opposition on many fronts. Some
traditional Christian thinkers saw it as a threat to the way in which they had
interpreted their faith; others saw Darwin’s theory as offering new ways of
understanding and exploring traditional Christian ideas.
Yet Darwin’s theory also provoked controversy within the scientific community,

with many scientists of his day raising concerns about the scientific foundations
of natural selection. If the successive editions of Origin are anything to go by,
Darwin’s theory was criticized by many scientists of the day on evidentiary
grounds. Yet this is the norm, not the exception, in scientific advance. Criticism
of a theory is the means by which – to use a Darwinian way of speaking – we
discover whether it has survival potential. The reception of a scientific theory is
a communal affair, in which a “tipping point” is gradually reached through a
process of debate and reflection, often linked with additional research programs.
Darwin’s theory appears to have met more sustained opposition from the
scientific community than from its religious counterpart, especially on account
of its failure to offer a convincing account of how innovations were transmitted
to future generations.
A good example of such scientific criticism can be seen in Henry Charles
Fleeming Jenkin’s concerns about “blending inheritance.”20 Jenkin (1833–85)
was a Scottish engineer, heavily involved in the business of developing
underwater telephone cables, who identified what Darwin clearly believed to be
a potentially fatal enquiry flaw in his theory. Jenkin pointed out that, on the basis
of existing understandings of hereditary transmission, any novelties would be
diluted in subsequent generations. Yet Darwin’s theory depended on the
transmission, not dilution, of such characteristics. In other words, Darwin’s
theory lacked a viable understanding of genetics. Darwin responded to Jenkin in
the fifth edition of the Origin. The reply is generally thought to be very weak
and unsatisfactory. But how could it be otherwise?
The answer, of course, lay in the writings of the Austrian monk Gregor Mendel
(1822–84), which we shall consider in the next section. While the confluence of
Mendel’s theory of genetics and Darwin’s theory of natural selection still lay
some years in the future, it can be said that perhaps the greatest of Darwin’s
difficulties would not remain problematic for much longer.
Darwin himself was fully aware of the need for a comprehensive account of the
mechanics of inheritance. The theory he developed (known as “pangenesis”) was
based on hypothetical “gemmules” – minute particles which somehow determine
all characteristics of the organism.21 These “gemmules” had never been
observed; nevertheless, Darwin argued that it was necessary to propose their
existence to make sense of the observational data at his disposal. Each and every
cell of an organism, and even parts of cells, was understood to produce
gemmules of a specific type corresponding to the cell or cell part. These are able
to circulate throughout the body and enter the reproductive system. Every sperm

and egg contains these hypothetical gemmules, and are thus transmitted to the
next generation. It was an ingenious solution; yet it was not right.22 Darwin’s
theory of pangenesis actually only involved partial blending, “since the patent
elements fuse but the latent elements do not.”23 Darwin’s theory faltered, lacking
a plausible theory of genetics.
Yet even though Darwin did not believe that he had adequately dealt with all the
problems which required resolution – most notably, the question of the
transmission of genetic information – he was still confident that his explanation
was the best available. A comment added to the sixth edition of the Origin of
Species makes this point clear.24
It can hardly be supposed that a false theory would explain, in so satisfactory
a manner as does the theory of natural selection, the several large classes of
facts above specified. It has recently been objected that this is an unsafe
method of arguing; but it is a method used in judging the common events of
life, and has often been used by the greatest natural philosophers.
While recognizing that it lacked rigorous proof, Darwin clearly believed that his
theory could be defended on the basis of criteria of acceptance and justification
that were already widely used in the natural sciences, and that its explanatory
capacity was itself a reliable guide to its truth.
The Mechanics of Inheritance: Gregor Mendel
Unknown to Darwin, the issues that he was finding so troublesome were being
investigated at that time in a quiet monastery garden in central Europe. Gregor
Mendel was a monk who entered the Augustinian monastery of St. Thomas in
the Austrian town of Brünn (now the Czech town of Brno) during his twenties.
His monastic superiors were impressed with his enthusiasm but not his existing
levels of education. They sent him to the University of Vienna for further study
(1851–3), during which time he specialized in physics, chemistry, zoology, and
botany. After returning to the monastery, he taught in a local school, and
conducted some experiments in the monastery garden. He had been encouraged
by both his teachers at the University of Vienna and the abbot of his monastery
to explore his interest in hybridization in plant populations. In effect, Mendel
studied the heredity of specific characteristics as they were passed on from
parent plants to their offspring. These experiments came to an end when he was
elected abbot of the monastery in 1868, and faced new administrative
responsibilities.

Mendel’s experiments involving growing something like 28,000 pea plants over
the period 1856–63 and observing how characteristics were transmitted from one
generation to the next. He chose to focus on seven easily determined
characteristics of his peas. Two of the best known of these are the color of their
flowers (purple or white?) and the color of their seeds (yellow or green?). As he
observed the patterns of inheritance of these characteristics, Mendel noticed
some significant recurring features. Because he used so many plants and
recorded his findings so meticulously, his results could be subjected to detailed
statistical analysis which disclosed certain regular, recurring mathematical
patterns of immense importance. In cross-pollinating plants that either produce
yellow or green peas exclusively, Mendel found that the first offspring
generation always has yellow peas. However, the following generation
consistently has a 3:1 ratio of yellow to green. Certain characteristics, such as
yellow seeds, were found to be “dominant” over other “recessive”
characteristics, such as green seeds.
From his research, Mendel was able to formulate three fundamental principles
which seemed to govern inheritance:
1. That the inheritance of each trait – such as the color of the flower or seed –
seems to be determined by certain units or factors that are passed on to
descendants.
2. That an individual plant inherits one such unit from each parent for each of
these traits.
3. That traits which do not show up in an individual may nevertheless be passed
on to a later generation.
Mendel thus proposed a theory of “particulate inheritance,” in which
characteristics were determined by discrete units of inheritance that were passed
intact from one generation to the next. Adaptive mutations could spread slowly
through a species and never be “blended out,” as some contemporary theories of
genetics held. The evolutionary implications of this were considerable. Darwin’s
theory of natural selection, building on small mutations over long periods of
time, suddenly became much more plausible.
Mendel set out his ideas at the Natural History Society of Brno early in 1865.
They were received politely, but not enthusiastically, and were published the
following year.25 It seems that hardly anyone read the Verhandlungen des
naturforschenden Vereins in Brünn, and the article languished unnoticed, despite

having been sent to the libraries of some 120 institutions including the Royal
Society and the Linnean Society in London. In 1868, Mendel was elected abbot
of his monastery, and found himself overwhelmed with administrative
responsibilities. He was unable to undertake further research, or advance his
ideas more widely. It was only in 1900 that the significance of Mendel’s Laws
were fully appreciated, following their “rediscovery” by Carl Correns in
Germany (1864–1933), Hugo de Vries in the Netherlands (1848–1935), and
Erich von Tschermak-Seysenegg in Austria (1871–1962), and their importance
more fully realized.26
Questions have been raised about the integrity of Mendel’s work. In 1930, the
British mathematical biologist Ronald A. Fisher (1890–1962) published a
landmark work in Darwinian theory, which argued that Mendel’s empirical
results could have been predicted by an armchair scientist, armed only with “a
few very simple assumptions,” concerning the Mendelian notion of “factorial
inheritance.”27 Fisher also suggested, on mathematical grounds, that Mendel’s
reported observations were just too good to be true. Mendel’s segregation ratios
were far higher than the principles of variation statistics would permit. Since
such segregation ratios could occur only very seldom, the integrity of Mendel’s
ideas would have to be reconsidered. This view is still encountered. As recently
as 1991, it was argued that Mendel’s “account of his experiments is neither
truthful nor scientifically likely,” and that “most of the experiments described in
Versuche are to be considered fictitious.”28 However, the basis of such criticisms
is now generally regarded as discredited, and there seems to be no real case to
answer.29 Mendel kept detailed notebooks of his observations, and recorded
everything – even when the results did not fit neatly with his emerging
theories.30
Mendel possessed a copy of Darwin’s Origin of Species, and clearly realized that
his own research explained one of the major difficulties facing Darwin’s
theory.31 He marked the following passage with double lines in the margin. In
Darwin’s original English, this reads:32 “The slight degree of variability in
hybrids from the first cross or in the first generation, in contrast with their
extreme variability in the succeeding generations, is a curious fact and deserves
attention.” As Mendel’s most distinguished biographer pointed out, this curiosity
would not remain mysterious for much longer: “Mendel must have felt some
gratification in the thought that his theory was soon to explain this curious
fact.”33 Mendel seems to have appreciated the importance of his own ideas to
Darwin. Yet Darwin, as far as can be seen, never knew of Mendel’s ideas, nor

their far-reaching implications for his own theory.
Dawkins himself points out that things would have been very different if Darwin
had had access to these results.34 He suggests that “Mendel perhaps did not
realize the significance of his findings, otherwise he might have written to
Darwin.”35 I am inclined to suspect that he did realize the significance of his
findings, as the unusually heavy marking of that passage from the Origin of
Species indicates. Perhaps he felt that he had already done enough to publicize
his results. After all, he was a monk, and hence perhaps disinclined to any
further self-advertisement. In any case, his treatise was listed in several major
British English-language sources by 1881.
Mendel had shown that inheritance seemed to be determined by certain “units”
or “factors.” But what where these units? This brings us to the discovery of the
gene, an important event in its own right, and of fundamental importance to
Dawkins’ exposition of a Darwinian worldview.
The Discovery of the Gene: Thomas Hunt
Morgan
The significance of Mendel’s ideas had been appreciated in the English-speaking
world by the Cambridge geneticist William Bateson (1861–1926), who
expended considerable effort in attempting to clarify the principles governing
inherited characteristics or traits, including inventing the term “genetics” to
designate the field of studies. Yet Bateson was strongly opposed to the
suggestion that evolution could proceed by the accumulation of the small
changes that Mendel’s theory seemed to offer, and Darwin’s theory seemed to
require. Indeed, it is possible to argue that Bateson and his followers
significantly impeded the synthesis of Darwinian evolution by natural selection
and Mendelian genetics on account of their misgivings concerning its
explanatory potency.36
By 1905, Bateson had established that certain traits were linked in some manner,
although the pattern of coupling (later to be interpreted as “complete” and
“incomplete” coupling) was far from clear. Bateson used a series of vague
physical analogies – such as “coupling” and “repulsion” – in an ultimately
unsuccessful attempt to explain his puzzling observations.37 Bateson’s writings
suggest that he thought in terms of certain forces (analogous to magnetic or
electrical forces) which were capable of attracting or repelling factors of genetic

significance. In the end, the solution was set out in a seminal paper published by
the American geneticist Thomas Hunt Morgan (1866–1945) in 1926.38 The
solution? The gene.
Excited by Mendel’s ideas, Morgan had exploited the short reproductive cycle of
the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster to explore the transmission of heritable
characteristics. Like Mendel, he chose to focus on some well-defined
characteristic traits that occurred in pairs. The most famous of these was the
color of the eyes. Noting the patterns of distribution of red and white eyes,
Morgan modified Mendel’s theory in an important respect: he argued that not all
genetic traits are passed on independently, as Mendel had supposed. Instead,
some genetic traits seemed to be linked, and are thus inherited together, rather
than individually.
Morgan’s most important conclusion concerned the “units” or “factors” which
transmitted these traits, now known as “genes.” It had been known for some time
that the division of cells was accompanied by the appearance of tiny rod-shaped,
threadlike structures, known as “chromosomes.” Some had speculated that these
chromosomes might be responsible for transmitting hereditary information.
Morgan was able to provide overwhelming evidence that this was indeed the
case. The “genes” responsible for transmitting this information were physically
located on the chromosomes. As microscopes with increasing resolution were
developed, it eventually became possible to confirm this visually.
Morgan’s fruit flies had four unusually large chromosomes, which made them
particularly easy to study microscopically. He discovered that there were four
distinct groups of traits that appeared to be inherited together, corresponding
exactly with the number of pairs of chromosomes observed in Drosophila. He
also found that one of the four linkage groups had fewer characteristics than the
other three. This seemed to tie in with the fact that one of the Drosophila
chromosomes was smaller than the other three. While further work on the role in
hereditary transmission of the chromosomes in the cell nucleus was still needed,
a coherent picture was now beginning to emerge.
Morgan outlined his findings and assessed their significance in two papers
published in the journal Science in 1910 and 1911. Morgan’s chromosomal
theory of heredity assumed that each chromosome contains a collection of small
units called genes (a term he borrowed from the Danish physiologist Wilhelm
Johannsen who had been a colleague at Columbia University in 1909), with
different genes having specific locations along specific chromosomes. The
Mendelian notion of discrete hereditary factors could now be stated in terms of

“genes.” What has come to be known as the “neo-Darwinist” synthesis was now
possible – Mendelian genetics as the basic explanation of evolutionary change,
linked with the process of Darwinian natural selection as determining its
outcome.39
One of the greatest achievements of the early scientific revolution of the
seventeenth century was the “mathematization of nature.” The growing
realization that the deeper structures of nature could be represented
mathematically was both a stimulus to scientific reflection,40 and the cause of
deeper reflection on why mathematics was so “unreasonably effective” in
representing reality.41 Unsurprisingly, many began to wonder if Darwin’s basic
ideas were capable of expressing mathematically. If Darwin was indeed the
“Newton of the grassblade,”42 might not mathematics prove as effective at
uncovering the law governing the biological world as effectively as Newton had
uncovered the laws of motion?
The first significant attempts to develop a mathematical theory of natural
selection took place in the 1920s, predominantly through the formulation of
theoretical population genetics by Ronald A. Fisher – whose criticisms of
Mendel we noted earlier – although with important contributions from J. B. S.
Haldane (1892–1964) and Sewall Wright (1889–1988).43 It is possible to see
Fisher’s landmark work Genetical Theory of Natural Selection as “a kind of
mathematical–Mendelian appendix to The Origin of Species.”44 Fisher, Haldane,
and Wright developed sophisticated mathematical models of evolution which
accounted for the manner in which mutations arise and spread through a
population through natural selection. By about 1932, the first phase of the
“evolutionary synthesis” was complete; the second phase was catalyzed by
Theodosius Dobzhansky (1900–75) on the publication in 1937 of his landmark
book, Genetics and the Origin of Species, which offered an explanation of how
species came into existence.
Yet further clarification was needed concerning the molecular basis of genetics.
A decisive step forward was made in the United States during the Second World
War – to which we now turn.
The Role of DNA in Genetics
Morgan’s discovery of the critical role of the chromosomes in genetics sparked
new interest in their chemical composition. What were these threadlike fibers

actually made of? The Swiss biochemist Friedrich Miescher (1844–95)
established the chemical composition of cell nuclei in 1868. He determined that
they contained two basic components – a nucleic acid (now known as
deoxyribose nucleic acid, and universally known by its acronym DNA), and a
class of proteins (now known as histones).45 These nucleic acids were not
regarded as particularly important biologically. Chemical studies suggested they
were not very diverse and they had only a small number of components.
In 1938, the American biochemist Phoebus Levene (1869–1940), then working
at the Rockefeller Institute in New York, discovered that DNA was basically a
remarkably long polymer.46 However, he took the view that this long polymer
simply consisted of repeated units of four basic nucleotides: adenine (A),
guanine (G), thymine (T), and cytosine (C). For this reason, many (including
Levene himself) regarded DNA as highly unlikely to have any major role in the
transmission of inherited characteristics. It was too simple chemically to encode
genetic information. Many believed that the ultimate key to the molecular basis
of genetics would lie in proteins found within the chromosomes.
As is so often the case, the key to solving this riddle came from an unexpected
source. In 1928, the English bacteriologist Fred Griffith (1879–1941) was
involved in investigating a pneumonia epidemic in London. While investigating
the pneumococcus responsible for this outbreak, Griffith made the surprising
discovery that live pneumococci could acquire genetic traits from other, dead
pneumococci in a process he termed “transformation.” But how could this be?
All that the dead pneumococci could transmit were chemicals: specifically, two
types of nucleic acid – ribonucleic acid (RNA) and deoxyribonucleic acid
(DNA) – and protein. How could these bring about genetic change in living
cells?
The importance of Griffith’s work was not appreciated until a research team
headed up by Oswald Avery (1877–1955) replicated his findings at the
Rockefeller Institute in New York. Avery and his team began detailed studies of
how genetic information was transmitted to living pneumococci. They conducted
a series of experiments which demonstrated that genetic information was not
mediated by proteins, or by RNA, but specifically by DNA.47 This was a
momentous discovery, even if it would be some time before its full implications
were appreciated. If DNA – and no other substance – was the carrier of
hereditary information, it must have a much more complex structure than had
previously been appreciated. Yet nobody knew what this structure was, nor how
DNA was able to play such a critical genetic role.

This gave new impetus to a remarkable series of studies. Rosalind Franklin
(1920–58) undertook pioneering X-ray crystallography work on DNA, which did
much to facilitate the ground-breaking work of the English physicist Francis
Crick (1916–2004) and the American geneticist James Watson (b. 1928)
demonstrating a double-helix structure for DNA.48 This achievement was a
remarkable physical discovery in itself. Yet it also opened the way to
understanding how DNA could pass on genetic information. Watson and Crick
immediately realized that the pairing of the bases in this double-stranded DNA
had to be the key to its function as a replicator and as the transmitter of genetic
information. They wrote: “It has not escaped our notice that the specific pairing
we have postulated immediately suggests a possible copying mechanism for the
genetic material.”49 In other words, a knowledge of the physical structure DNA
suggested a mechanism by which it could replicate itself.50
On the basis of this research, Crick proposed what he called the “Central
Dogma” – namely, that DNA replicates, acting as a template for RNA, which in
turn acts as a template for proteins. The long and complex DNA molecule
contains the genetic information necessary for transmission “encoded” using the
four basic nucleotides: adenine (A), guanine (G), thymine (T), and cytosine (C)
arranged in sequences of “base pairs” (in that adenine is always linked to
thymine, and guanine to cystosine in the double-helix structure of DNA),
attached to a sugar and phosphate spine. It is the sequence of these base pairs
which determines the genetic information transmitted.51
So why is this so important for an understanding of evolutionary biology? The
most important point to emphasize is that Darwin’s theory of natural selection
required variation to take place and to be transmitted, rather than diluted, to
following generations. Natural selection would then take place, determining
whether or not the genetic code for this variation would survive. The neo-
Darwinian synthesis is grounded in the assumption that small random genetic
changes (mutations) over long periods of time occasionally have positive
survival value. Organisms possessing these favorable mutations should have
relative advantage in survival and reproduction, and they will tend to pass their
characteristics on to their descendants. Assuming that there are differential rates
of survival, it is not difficult to see how a favorable characteristic can become
established and transmitted.
The key point is that genetic variation takes place in nature, that the process of
natural selection determines whether this variation survives, and that the process
of genetic replication ensures that this variation is transmitted. Evolution thus
d b fi
ti
f th
b
fi i l
i ti
d th
li i
ti
f

proceeds by fixation of these rare beneficial variations, and the elimination of
maladapted variations through the process of natural selection. This, however,
still leaves open many of the problems of evolutionary biology. To give an
example: at what level does natural selection take place? Is it at the level of
genes themselves? Or of individual organisms which contain those genes? Or at
the level of kin (closely related individuals) or groups? We shall consider these
issues later in this work, as we engage with Dawkins’ views on these themes.
What’s in a Name? “Darwinism” or
“Evolutionary Theory”?
Many scientific theories are initially known by the names of their originators or
chief advocates. A good example is “Copernicanism,” a term that is used in a
specifically historical sense to refer to the way of thinking about the solar
system developed in the sixteenth century by Nicolaus Copernicus (1473–1543)
and his immediate followers.52 Yet the term “Copernicanism” refers to a theory
which incorporates both the correct central heliocentric assumption, and the
incorrect subsidiary assumption that all the planets orbit the sun in perfect
circles at constant speeds.53 The former assumption was subsequently affirmed,
just as the second was corrected, by Johannes Kepler (1571–1630).54 The term
“Copernicanism” thus designates a particular model of the solar system, which
includes some elements now considered to be correct, and others which are
recognized as being wrong. Nobody uses the term “Copernicanism” any more to
refer to the solar system. The debate has moved on.
So is the same also true of “Darwinism”? Nobody would deny the historical
importance of Charles Darwin, whose works set out the theory of descent with
modification through natural selection.55 But should we continue to use the term
“Darwinism” to refer to contemporary theories of biological evolution, when
they have moved on so much?
Some writers would defend the continued use of the term in this sense. Jean
Gayon argues that the term “Darwinism” acknowledges the manner in which
Darwin has “constrained the conceptual and empirical development of
evolutionary biology ever after.”56 Others, however, find the use of the term
“Darwinism” deeply problematic.57 Why should contemporary thinking about
evolution be described in this manner? Evolutionary thought has moved on since
Darwin. Surely “Darwinism” should be used in an essentially historical sense, to
refer to the ideas that Darwin himself developed. As is well known, modern

evolutionary biology has developed a range of ideas which are decidedly non-
Darwinian – that is to say, ideas of which Darwin knew nothing. To speak of
Darwinism is thus “grossly misleading,” suggesting that Darwin was “the
beginning and the end, the alpha and omega, of evolutionary biology,” and that
the subject changed little since the publication of the Origin of Species.58
Evolutionary thought has moved far beyond the intellectual landscape originally
envisaged by Darwin,59 as a series of non-Darwinian processes – such as
autopoiesis, self-organization, epigenetic mechanisms, and symbiosis – are now
realized to play a significant role in the evolutionary process, considered as a
whole.60
The modern approach to evolutionary theory, though grounded in Darwin’s
theory of natural selection, was initially supplemented with Mendelian genetics
in the 1930s and 1940s, and subsequently by the development of mathematical
systems allowing the modeling of evolution in populations in the 1940s and
1950s, and the emergence of an understanding of the molecular basis of
evolution through the structures and function of RNA and DNA.61 Continuing to
talk about “Darwinism” merely fosters the inaccurate and unfortunate perception
that the field stagnated for 150 years after Darwin’s own day.
Historians have also raised concerns about the use of the term “Darwinism.” For
a start, historical research has made it clear that evolutionary thought had
developed well before Darwin’s time, with other writers having made signal
contributions to the science. Using the term “Darwinism” perpetuates the
historical myth of Darwin as a solitary genius, and fails to do justice to his
intellectual context and dependencies. Without in any way denying Darwin’s
genius, it is essential to contextualize Darwin against the backdrop of
evolutionary thought at the time.62 Critics point out that the predominance and
narrow focus of English-language scholarship has led to Darwin being given a
position of privilege which marginalizes, often to the point of ignoring, the
significant pre-Darwinian discussions in France, Germany, and Italy which
helped bring about the revolutionary change in thinking from a static
understanding of biological organisms to the dynamic, evolutionary viewpoint
that is now taken for granted.63 Darwin was unquestionably a major influence in
bringing about this revolution; he cannot, however, be seen as its sole originator.
And what about Mendel? As we have seen, the work of Fisher and others
demonstrated the critical importance of Mendel’s ideas as an integral part of
evolutionary thought. To use the exclusivist term “Darwinism” is to deny
Mendel his fundamental place in the development of the science of evolution.

One possible solution to the dilemma is to use the label “neo-Darwinism,” thus
indicating both the origins of some core themes of modern evolutionary biology,
while at the same time acknowledging their significant modification and
amplification through subsequent research. Yet this is only one such way of
designating this modification of Darwin’s ideas; others which have achieved
wider currency – such as the “evolutionary synthesis,” “modern synthesis,” the
“modern evolutionary synthesis,” or the “new synthesis” – avoid mentioning
Darwin by name.64 As pressure grows for modification of at least some of the
elements of this evolutionary synthesis,65 the value of the term “neo-Darwinism”
seems increasingly fragile.
Modern evolutionary biologists now tend to use the term “Darwinism” rarely,
except in a historical sense to designate Darwin’s formative ideas.66 The term
“Darwinian” is now often used to refer to the historically significant issue of
Darwin’s personal views, irrespective of the subsequent direction of the
discussion about evolution.67 A survey of the literature suggests that most
modern biologists, when speaking about present-day understanding of
evolutionary biology, tend to speak about “the theory of evolution” or
“evolutionary biology,” rather than “Darwinism.” It is certainly true that
Darwin’s three core principles of variation, inheritance, and selection remain
significant to modern evolutionary theories; nevertheless, these are now
supplemented with additional notions.68
Some have therefore drawn the conclusion that the continuing use of the term
“Darwinism” to epitomize modern evolutionary biology is as anachronistic as
using “Copernicanism” to designate contemporary cosmology. The terms
designate important turning points in the history of the disciplines, in the course
of which at least some elements of today’s thinking were developed. These have,
of course, been supplemented (and modified) by many others since then. So why
not abandon it, in favor of one of the many superior alternatives? There seems
no obvious scientific reason for retaining it. As times passes, it is inevitable that
increasing historical distance from Darwin will weaken the links between his
specific formulation of the evolutionary process, and contemporary
understandings of the field.69 The use of “Darwinism” to refer to evolutionary
biology as this is presently understood would seem at least unnecessary, and
probably unwise.
So why retain the use of the term in this book? In part, the answer lies in
Dawkins’ development of the idea of “Universal Darwinism.” One of Dawkins’
more important contributions to the public discussion of the significance of

evolutionary thought is his argument that what he terms “Universal Darwinism”
represents a justified extension of Darwin’s approach from the biological to the
cultural domain. In developing Darwin in this way, Dawkins and others have
initiated an important cultural and historical debate over the cultural authority
and character of Darwinism.70 Is Darwinism to be seen as a provisional scientific
theory, which has limited relevance to a broader cultural agenda? Or is it to be
seen as a worldview, like Marxism, which, if correct, has major implications for
a much broader cultural and social agenda?71 Is it, as Dawkins asserts, a
“universal truth?” Although this debate can be tracked back to the publication of
Darwin’s Origin of Species itself,72 it remains important today. For some,
including Dawkins, the term “Darwinism” designates a worldview, a
metanarrative. For this reason, we shall continue to use the term “Darwinism” in
this work, despite the concerns noted in this section.
At this point, we have laid the groundwork for a proper engagement with
Richard Dawkins’ important contributions to evolutionary thought, and the
relation of science and faith. In the next chapter, we shall explore the
significance of Dawkins’ landmark work The Selfish Gene.
Notes
1 Richard Dawkins, “Alternative Thought for the Day.” BBC Radio 4, August
14, 2003.
2 Charles Darwin, On the Origin of the Species by Means of Natural Selection.
London: John Murray, 1859, 1. Note that all six editions of this work are now
easily accessed online: http://darwin-online.org.uk. Accessed August 5, 2014.
3 See further John T. Baldwin, “God and the World: William Paley’s Argument
from Perfection Tradition – A Continuing Influence.” Harvard Theological
Review 85 (1992): 109–20.
4 For further details, see James A. Secord, Victorian Sensation: The
Extraordinary Publication, Reception, and Secret Authorship of Vestiges of
the Natural History of Creation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000.
5 T. H. Huxley, review of “The Vestiges of Creation.” The British and Foreign
Medico-Chirurgical Review 26 (1854): 425–39.
6 For a good account, see Christiane Chauviré, “Peirce, Popper, Abduction, and

the Idea of Logic of Discovery.” Semiotica 153 (2005): 209–21.
7 See the reflections of Scott A. Kleiner, “The Logic of Discovery and Darwin’s
Pre-Malthusian Researches.” Biology and Philosophy 3 (1988): 293–315.
8 Charles Darwin and Nora Barlow, The Autobiography of Charles Darwin,
1809–1882: With Original Omissions Restored. New York: Norton, 1993,
118.
9 Scott A. Kleiner, “Problem Solving and Discovery in the Growth of Darwin’s
Theories of Evolution.” Synthese 62 (1981): 119–62, especially 127–9. Note
that substantially the same issues can be discerned in Johann Kepler’s
explanation of the solar system: Scott A. Kleiner, “A New Look at Kepler
and Abductive Argument.” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science 14
(1983): 279–313.
10 William Whewell, Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences. 2 vols. London: John
W. Parker, 1847, vol. 2, 36. As has often been pointed out, Whewell’s theory
of induction is open to criticism: see, for example, Laura J. Snyder, “The
Mill–Whewell Debate: Much Ado about Induction.” Perspectives on Science
5 (1997): 159–98.
11 For the best general statement of this method, see Peter Lipton, Inference to
the Best Explanation. 2nd edn. London: Routledge, 2004.
12 Charles Darwin, On the Origin of the Species by Means of Natural Selection.
6th edn. London: John Murray, 1872, 164.
13 See especially the detailed study of Elisabeth Anne Lloyd, “The Nature of
Darwin’s Support for the Theory of Natural Selection.” In Science, Politics,
and Evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008, 1–19.
14 Karl R. Popper, “Natural Selection and the Emergence of Mind.” Dialectica
32 (1978): 339–55.
15 Snyder, “The Mill–Whewell Debate.” Snyder elsewhere argues that
Whewell’s views on induction have been misunderstood, and merit closer
attention as a distinctive approach: Laura J. Snyder, “Discoverers’
Induction.” Philosophy of Science 64 (1997): 580–604.
16 Christopher Hitchcock and Elliott Sober, “Prediction vs. Accommodation and
the Risk of Overfitting.” British Journal for Philosophy of Science 55 (2004):

1–34. The “weak predictivism” defended by Hitchcock and Sober has
parallels elsewhere: see, for example, the careful assessment of approaches in
Marc Lange, “The Apparent Superiority of Prediction to Accommodation as a
Side Effect.” British Journal for Philosophy of Science 52 (2001): 575–88;
David Harker, “Accommodation and Prediction: The Case of the Persistent
Head.” British Journal for Philosophy of Science 57 (2006): 309–21.
17 On which see James A. Secord, “Nature’s Fancy: Charles Darwin and the
Breeding of Pigeons.” Isis 72 (1981): 163–86.
18 Darwin, Origin of the Species. 1st edn. 1859, 83.
19 Spencer (1820–1903) used the phrase in his Principles of Biology (1864);
Darwin incorporated it into the fifth edition of the Origin: “This preservation
of favourable variations, and the destruction of injurious variations, I call
Natural Selection, or the Survival of the Fittest”; Charles Darwin, Origin of
Species. 5th edn. London: John Murray, 1869, 91–2.
20 On which see Michael G. Bulmer, “Did Jenkin’s Swamping Argument
Invalidate Darwin’s Theory of Natural Selection?” British Journal for the
History of Science 37 (2004): 281–97.
21 The theory is set out in his The Variation of Animals and Plants under
Domestication. 2 vols. London: John Murray, 1868.
22 Conway Zirkle, The Early History of the Idea of the Inheritance of Acquired
Characters and of Pangenesis. Philadelphia, PA: American Philosophical
Society, 1946.
23 A point stressed by Michael G. Bulmer, Francis Galton: Pioneer of Heredity
and Biometry. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2003.
24 Darwin, Origin of Species. 6th edn. London: John Murray, 1872, 444. This
comment is not present in earlier editions of the work.
25 Gregor Johann Mendel, “Versuche über Pflanzen-Hybriden.” Verhandlungen
des naturforschenden Vereins in Brünn 4 (1866): 3–47.
26 See for example Carl Correns, “G. Mendels Regel über das Verhalten der
Nachkommenschaft der Rassenbastarde.” Berichte der deutschen botanischen
Gesellschaft 18 (1900): 158–68.

27 Ronald A. Fisher, The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1930.
28 Frederico di Trocchio, “Mendel’s Experiments: A Reinterpretation.” Journal
of the History of Biology 24 (1991): 485–519. For a response see Franz
Weiling, “J. G. Mendel hat in der Darstellung seiner Erbsenversuche nicht
gelogen.” Biologie in unserer Zeit 4 (1995): 49–53.
29 The best review in English is Daniel J. Fairbanks and Bryce Rytting.
“Mendelian Controversies: A Botanical and Historical Review.” American
Journal of Botany 88 (2001): 737–52.
30 Allan Franklin, Ending the Mendel–Fisher Controversy. Pittsburgh, PA:
University of Pittsburgh Press, 2008, 6–7.
31 More specifically, a copy of the second German edition of 1863, based on the
third English edition of 1861. Only two passages are double-marked in this
way.
32 Charles Darwin, On the Origin of Species by Natural Selection. 3rd edn.
London: John Murray, 1861, 296.
33 Vítezslav Orel, Gregor Mendel: The First Geneticist. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1996, 193.
34 A Devil’s Chaplain, 67–9.
35 The Selfish Gene, 34.
36 See the detailed analysis in Peter J. Bowler, The Eclipse of Darwinism: Anti-
Darwinian Evolution Theories in the Decades around 1900. Baltimore, MD:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1983; Jean Gayon, Darwinism’s Struggle for
Survival: Heredity and the Hypothesis of Natural Selection. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1998.
37 Recent scholarship has suggested Bateson’s ideas were more plausible than
realized at the time: see Patrick Bateson, “William Bateson: A Biologist
ahead of His Time.” Journal of Genetics 81, no. 2 (2002): 49–58.
38 The best study is still Garland E. Allen, Thomas Hunt Morgan: The Man and
His Science. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1978.
39 For Morgan’s mature statement of this theory, see Thomas H. Morgan, The

Theory of the Gene. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1938.
40 Joella G. Yoder, Unrolling Time: Christiaan Huygens and the
Mathematization of Nature. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988.
41 See the classic study of Eugene Wigner, “The Unreasonable Effectiveness of
Mathematics.” Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics 13
(1960): 1–14.
42 John F. Cornell, “Newton of the Grassblade? Darwin and the Problem of
Organic Teleology.” Isis 77 (1986): 405–21.
43 The best studies are Alan Grafen, “Fisher the Evolutionary Biologist.” The
Statistician 52 (2003): 319–29; A. W. F. Edwards, “Mathematizing Darwin.”
Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 65, no. 3 (2011): 421–30. Grafen refers
to Fisher as “Darwin’s mathematician.”
44 A. W. F. Edwards, “The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection.” Genetics
154 (2000): 1419–26.
45 See Ralf Dahm, “Friedrich Miescher and the Discovery of DNA.”
Developmental Biology 278, no. 2 (2005): 274–88.
46 For a brief assessment of Levene’s significance, see Robert D. Simoni,
Robert L. Hill, and Martha Vaughan, “The Structure of Nucleic Acids and
Many Other Natural Products: Phoebus Aaron Levene.” Journal of Biological
Chemistry 277, no. 22 (2002): 23–4.
47 Oswald Avery, Colin MacLeod, and Maclyn McCarty, “Studies on the
Chemical Nature of the Substance Inducing Transformation of Pneumococcal
Types: Induction of Transformation by a Desoxyribonucleic Acid Fraction
Isolated from Pneumococcus Type III.” Journal of Experimental Medicine 79
(1944): 137–58.
48 Francis H. C. Crick and James D. Watson, “Molecular Structure of Nucleic
Acids: A Structure for Deoxyribose Nucleic Acid.” Nature 171 (1953): 737–
8.
49 Crick and Watson, “Molecular Structure of Nucleic Acids,” 738.
50 For a good introduction, see C. R. Calladine, Understanding DNA the
Molecule and How It Works. 3rd edn. San Diego, CA: Elsevier Academic,

2004.
51 For further details see such works as Anthony J. F. Griffiths, An Introduction
to Genetic Analysis. 7th edn. New York: Freeman, 2000; idem, Modern
Genetic Analysis: Integrating Genes and Genomes. 2nd edn. New York:
Freeman, 2002.
52 See Liba Taub, Ptolemy’s Universe: The Natural Philosophical and Ethical
Foundations of Ptolemy's Astronomy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1993.
53 See Karoly Simonyi, A Cultural History of Physics. London: Peters, 181–5.
54 See Carl D. Murray and Stanley F. Dermott, Solar System Dynamics.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001, 3–4. See further Bruce
Stephenson, The Music of the Heavens: Kepler’s Harmonic Astronomy.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994.
55 See Peter J. Bowler, Evolution: The History of an Idea. 3rd edn. Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press, 2003.
56 Jean Gayon, “From Darwin to Today in Evolutionary Biology.” In The
Cambridge Companion to Darwin, edited by Jonathan Hodge and Gregory
Radick, 240–64. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003, 241.
57 Note the important concerns expressed in Eugenie Scott and Glenn Branch,
“Don’t Call It Darwinism.” Evolution: Education and Outreach 2 (2009): 90–
4.
58 Olivia Judson, “Let’s Get Rid of Darwinism.” New York Times, July 15,
2008.
59 For the continuous evolution of Darwinism, see David Depew and Bruce
Weber, Darwinism Evolving: Systems Dynamics and the Genealogy of
Natural Selection. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995; Evelyn Fox Keller,
Making Sense of Life: Explaining Biological Development with Models,
Metaphors, and Machines. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002;
Timothy Shanahan, The Evolution of Darwinism: Selection, Adaptation, and
Progress in Evolutionary Biology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2004, 11–36.
60 Note the points made in Gregory L. Challis and David A. Hopwood,

“Synergy and Contingency as Driving Forces for the Evolution of Multiple
Secondary Metabolite Production by Streptomyces Species.” Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 100 (2003): 14555–61.
61 For an introduction to the core developments see Ted Everson, The Gene: A
Historical Perspective. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 2007. See further Steven
A. Frank, “The Price Equation, Fisher’s Fundamental Theorem, Kin
Selection, and Causal Analysis.” Evolution 51 (1997): 1712–29. The
importance of information theory should also be noted: Jeffrey S. Wicken,
Evolution, Thermodynamics, and Information: Extending the Darwinian
Paradigm. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987; Hubert P. Yockey,
Information Theory, Evolution, and the Origin of Life. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2005; Steven A. Frank, “Natural Selection
Maximizes Fisher Information.” Journal of Evolutionary Biology 22 (2009):
231–44.
62 See for example Pietro Corsi, Evolution before Darwin. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2010.
63 See the important discussion in Pietro Corsi, “Before Darwin: Transformist
Concepts in European Natural History.” Journal of the History of Biology 38
(2005): 67–83.
64 A work which had an important influence on shaping the vocabulary of the
field was Julian S. Huxley, Evolution: The Modern Synthesis. London: Allen
and Unwin, 1942.
65 See for example Ulrich Kutschera and Karl J. Niklas, “The Modern Theory of
Biological Evolution: An Expanded Synthesis.” Naturwissenschaften 91
(2004): 255–76; Massimo Pigliucci, “Do We Need an Extended Evolutionary
Synthesis?” Evolution 61 (2007): 2743–9; Sean B. Carroll, “EvoDevo and an
Expanding Evolutionary Synthesis: A Genetic Theory of Morphological
Evolution.” Cell 134 (2008): 25–36.
66 For comment see David L. Hull, “Darwinism as a Historical Entity: A
Historiographic Proposal.” In The Darwinian Heritage, edited by David
Kohn, 773–812. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1985.
67 Momme von Sydow, From Darwinian Metaphysics towards Understanding
the Evolution of Evolutionary Mechanisms. Göttingen: Universitätsverlag
Göttingen, 2012, 102–3.

68 For the question of the whether a unifying narrative may be offered of the
development of evolutionary theories, see Vassiliki B. Smocovitis, Unifying
Biology: The Evolutionary Synthesis and Evolutionary Biology. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1996, 97–188.
69 See for example Jerry A. Fodor and Massimo Piattelli-Palmarini, What
Darwin Got Wrong. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2010, 95–137.
70 There are important anticipations of this development in the writings of John
Dewey: see for example John Dewey, The Influence of Darwin on Philosophy
and Other Essays. New York: Holt, 1910, 1–26.
71 This has been a major theme in the writings of John C. Greene: see especially
his Darwin and the Modern World View. Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State
University Press, 1961.
72 See for example Ernst Cassirer, “Darwinism as a Dogma and as a Principle of
Knowledge.” In The Problem of Knowledge: Philosophy, Science, and
History since Hegel, 160–75. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1950.

2
The Selfish Gene
A Darwinian View of the World
The Selfish Gene, published by Oxford University Press in 1976, established
Dawkins’ reputation both as an original thinker and as a scientific popularizer
and communicator. Alongside a series of beautiful analogies and lucid
explanations of Darwinian orthodoxy, Dawkins introduced fresh insights, many
of which have stood the test of time well. A good example is Dawkins’ emphasis
on so-called “outlaw” genes, such as segregation-distorters and transposons,
which spread despite their negative effects on the host organism’s fitness.1 These
“outlaws” or “selfish genetic elements” (SGEs) are now recognized as being
more common and significant than was originally realized,2 and have become
one of the strongest arguments for the utility of the “gene’s-eye view” advocated
by Dawkins in this seminal work.
Is this enough to account for the success of The Selfish Gene? Perhaps. Yet some
have suggested that the work needs to be viewed against a cultural backdrop,
which created an interest in its ideas transcending their scientific significance.
Dawkins seemed to some to advocate a view of human beings as collections of
“selfish genes,” lending moral credibility to individualist political ideologies
such as those of Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher who argued that greed
was good for society.3 Frans de Waal famously saw The Selfish Gene as lending
weight to the neoliberal ideology that pervaded western thought in the final
quarter of the twentieth century. “The Selfish Gene taught us that since evolution
helps those who help themselves, selfishness should be looked at as a driving
force for change rather than a flaw that drags us down.”4 Perhaps Dawkins’
ideas did chime in with wider cultural concerns and debates; yet for most, the
appeal of The Selfish Gene lay primarily in its scientific ideas, irrespective of
their deeper resonances with the cultural emphases of the late 1970s.
Yet before we begin to explore the ideas of this work in greater detail, we must
first introduce its author.
Introducing Dawkins

Clinton Richard Dawkins was born in Kenya on March 26, 1941, the son of
Clinton John and Jean Mary Vyvyan Dawkins.5 On his return to the United
Kingdom from Nyasaland (now Malawi) in 1949, Dawkins attended Chafyn
Grove School in the English cathedral city of Salisbury, before moving north to
study at Oundle School, near Peterborough, from 1954 to 1959. Dawkins’
religious background at this time was traditional Anglicanism, although he hints
that he was intrigued in his youth by the ideas of the French Jesuit
palaeontologist Pierre Teilhard de Chardin concerning the relation of evolution
and spirituality.6 Dawkins recalls that he “retained a strong belief in some sort of
unspecified creator,” mainly because he “was impressed by the beauty and
apparent design of the living world.”7
Dawkins attributes his loss of faith to two intellectual developments. The first
was his growing realization that “Darwin provided the magnificently powerful
alternative to biological design which we now know to be true.”8 This is a
recurrent theme in Dawkins’ later writings: Darwinism offers a superior
explanation of what is observed in the biological world than a “non-
denominational creator god.” The second is his belief that there is an
“elementary fallacy” within any argument from design, in that “any god capable
of designing the universe would have needed a fair bit of designing himself.” We
shall consider this point later in this book.
After Oundle, Dawkins went up to Balliol College, Oxford University, to study
zoology in 1959. He initially applied to read biochemistry, but was offered a
place to read zoology instead. After graduating in 1962, Dawkins went on to
undertake research with the Animal Behaviour Research Group at 13 Bevington
Road, an annex of Oxford University’s Department of Zoology, under the
supervision of Professor Niko Tinbergen (1907–88), who subsequently won the
Nobel Prize in Medicine and Physiology in 1973.9 Tinbergen and his Austrian
colleague Konrad Lorenz (1903–89) pioneered the discipline of ethology – the
study of whole patterns of animal behavior in natural environment, stressing the
analysis of adaptation and the evolution of patterns. Although Lorenz may be
argued to have laid the conceptual foundations for the discipline in the 1930s,
Tinbergen’s patient and detailed observational work is widely credited with its
later conceptual and practical development, especially through his landmark
work The Study of Instinct (1951).10 Dawkins’ doctoral thesis, entitled
“Selective Pecking in the Domestic Chick,” stands firmly within this tradition.
Its subject was tight and well-defined: what mechanism may be proposed to
account for the way in which a chick pecks at the stimuli around it?

Dawkins relates how his research was inspired by a lecture he had heard from
Professor N. S. Sutherland (1927–98), who left Oxford in 1964 to establish the
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology at the recently founded University of
Sussex. His work focused on developing a “Threshold Model” which might
account for a detailed series of experimental observations concerning the timing
and orientation of chick pecks at small hemispherical spots, presented in pairs.
His data was processed using an Eliot 803 machine – an early computer, which
relied on punched tape for its data. The thesis was submitted in June 1966, and
accepted later that year.
Dawkins then spent a further year at Oxford doing postdoctoral research, along
with some lecturing in the Department of Zoology. Tinbergen was on sabbatical
leave during the academic year 1966–7, and asked Dawkins to cover some of his
lectures, while at the same time writing up his thesis for publication.11 Mike
Cullen, one of Dawkins’ colleagues in the Animal Behaviour Research Group at
Bevington Road, had read W. D. Hamilton’s two papers of 1964 setting out his
theory of kin selection, including the question of how certain apparently
cooperative forms of behavior arise.12 Hamilton’s ideas found a receptive
audience within the research group.
Encouraged by Cullen, Dawkins decided to use these lectures to explore some
aspects of Hamilton’s theory of “kin selection.” An individual behaves in such a
way that the reproductive capacity of another individual is enhanced, even to
own detriment of its own selective capacity. The phenomenon may be observed
in aspects of the social, parental, and mating behavior of animals. So how could
this have evolved?
Dawkins came to the conclusion that the “most imaginative way of looking at
evolution, and the most inspiring way of teaching it” was to see the entire
process from the perspective of the gene. In his typewritten lecture notes from
1966, Dawkins set out some core themes of his approach:
Genes are in a sense immortal. They pass through the generations, reshuffling
themselves each time they pass from parent to offspring. The body of an
animal is but a temporary resting place for the genes; the further survival of
the genes depends on the survival of that body at least until it reproduces and
the genes pass into another body. . . To use the terms “selfish” and
“altruistic,” then, our basic expectation on the basis of the orthodox neo-
Darwinian theory of evolution, is that Genes will be selfish.13
The genes, for their own good, are “manipulating” and directing the bodies that

contain them, and carry them about. Throughout his writings, Dawkins has
developed the rhetoric of a gene’s-eye view of things – not simply of the
individual, but of the entire living world. Organisms can be reduced to genes,
and genes to digital (not analogue) information.
Life is just bytes and bytes of bytes of digital information. Genes are pure
information – information that can be encoded, recoded and decoded, without
any degradation or change of meaning . . . We – and that means all living
things – are survival machines programmed to propagate the digital database
that did the programming. Darwinism is now seen to be the survival of the
survivors at the level of pure, digital, code.14
In effect, Dawkins was arguing that we should extrapolate from Hamilton’s
theory of kin selection, and apply it to every aspect of social behavior. Animals
were to be seen as “machines carrying their instructions around” with them,
using their every aspect as “levers of power to propel the genes into the next
generation.” Evolution is about the survival of the information in the genes of
the individual. Individuals are of relevance to the genes; they are useful
containers of the genetic code, but are in the final analysis expendable. Because
kin groups share the same genes, the sacrifice of an individual may still increase
the likelihood of those genes surviving within the gene group as a whole.
Dawkins can be regarded as the first, and perhaps still the most systematic,
ethologist of the gene. It is this central theme which has been so decisive to his
way of seeing the world, and we shall explore it in much greater detail presently.
From Oxford, Dawkins went on to become Assistant Professor of Zoology at the
University of California at Berkeley in 1967, returning to Oxford as Lecturer in
Zoology and Fellow of New College in 1970. The return to Oxford was the
result of a personal approach by Tinbergen, who wanted Dawkins to apply for a
university lectureship in animal behavior, linked to a fellowship at New College.
At the last minute, Tinbergen switched his support to another candidate, Colin
Beer, who gained the position. However, Tinbergen had research funds at his
disposal, and was able to fund Dawkins’ return to Oxford. Yet Beer was not
happy in Oxford. His wife had held a professorship in the United States, and it
became clear that Oxford did not provide her with a satisfactory academic base.
A year later, Beer returned to the United States, and the lectureship was re-
advertised. Dawkins duly applied, this time with Tinbergen’s support, and was
appointed to the position. It was during this time that his most influential and
creative works were published, including The Selfish Gene and The Blind
Watchmaker.

In 1995, Dawkins was promoted to a new academic position at Oxford
University, made possible by the generosity of Charles Simonyi, then one of the
Microsoft Corporation’s foremost software architects, who went on to co-found
the Intentional Software Corporation in August 2002. Simonyi had no doubts
about who he wanted to occupy this new position in the public understanding of
science. Dawkins was duly appointed as the first “Charles Simonyi Reader in the
Public Understanding of Science.” Oxford University announced this
development as follows:
Dr Charles Simonyi has offered the University a munificent benefaction for
the endowment of a Professorship of the Public Understanding of Science.
The following statute, and the decree to be made by Council if the statute is
approved, formally accept the benefaction on the conditions agreed with Dr
Simonyi, establish the Charles Simonyi Professorship of the Public
Understanding of Science, and provide in the first instance for the immediate
appointment of Dr C. R. Dawkins to a Charles Simonyi Readership in the
Public Understanding of Science.15
A further advance in his professional standing took place a year later in July
1996 following the 1995–6 Oxford University “Recognition of Distinction”
exercise, as a result of which the University conferred on Dawkins the additional
ad hominem title of “Professor of the Public Understanding of Science.”16 The
primary criterion for the award of the title of professor under the “Recognition of
Distinction” procedure at that time was that “research must be of outstanding
quality, have led to a significant international reputation, and be comparable in
distinction with that expected of a professor in other major research
universities.” In its official publications subsequent to 1996, Oxford referred to
Dawkins as the “Simonyi Reader, and Professor of the Public Understanding of
Science.”17 He was made a Fellow of the Royal Society – the supreme accolade
for a British scientist – in May 2001, and retired from the Simonyi Readership in
September 2008, having reached the statutory retirement age of sixty-seven.
Yet alongside his professional career as Oxford’s Professor of the Public
Understanding of Science, Dawkins pursued a second vocation as an atheist
apologist, culminating in his 2006 bestseller, The God Delusion. Dawkins’
understanding of the natural sciences played a critically important role in his
strident advocacy of atheism.18 For this reason, we shall be looking at his
approach in some detail in the final chapter of this work. For many scholars,
including the present writer, Dawkins is the most influential and important
advocate of a “scientific atheism,” one of the most interesting developments in

modern western culture.19
But this is to rush ahead of our narrative. We need to begin with the book that
propelled Dawkins to international fame – The Selfish Gene (1976). In what
follows, we shall tell the story of how this landmark book came about, and
explore some of its themes.
Dawkins’ Approach: The Selfish Gene
In 1973, Dawkins was settled in Oxford University’s Department of Zoology,
doing research on the songs of Pacific field crickets.20 Industrial discontent was
widespread in the United Kingdom at this time. On January 1, 1974, the British
government implemented the “Three-Day Work Order,” introducing a three-day
working week, intended to reduce the commercial use of electricity to three
consecutive days a week, and thus conserve dwindling coal stocks. This
significant reduction in electricity supplies inevitably impacted on scientific
research at Oxford. Unable to carry out research throughout the week, Dawkins
decided to make good use of this enforced spare time. He would write his first
book. The portable typewriters of that day required no electricity, so there was
no problem in getting on with this when electricity was not available. Dawkins
had already mapped out the leading themes of the work; it was just a question of
getting them down on paper.
So what were the key ideas developed in this work? Perhaps Alan Grafen comes
closest to capturing the essence of the work: it was a fresh expression of the
“fundamental logic of Darwinism” which showed how the gene’s-eye approach
“brought all the existing theory into coherence with it.”21 For Dawkins, the most
satisfying rationale of the evolutionary process is framed in terms of gene
lineages. The changes required for evolution to develop take place very slowly.
The life of an individual organism, or a group of organisms, is small in
comparison with the time required for these changes to come about. This
demands a stable and very long-term unit of genetic transmission – and only
gene lineages can satisfy this condition. As Richard Alexander pointed out,
“genes are the most persistent of all living units, hence on all counts the most
likely units of selection.”22 For Dawkins, evolution is therefore the struggle of
gene lineages to replicate.
[The gene] does not grow senile; it is no more likely to die when it is a
million years old than when it is only a hundred. It leaps from body to body

down the generations, manipulating body after body in its own way and for
its own ends, abandoning a succession of mortal bodies before they sink in
senility and death. The genes are the immortals, or rather, they are defined as
genetic entities that come close to deserving the title.23
While individual DNA molecules might survive for little more than months,
their ability to replicate themselves means that any given DNA molecule “could
theoretically live on in the form of copies of itself for a hundred million years.”24
In contrast, the individual organisms or groups of organisms are short-lived, and
do not extend over the time-scales necessary to perpetuate the changes that
slowly accumulate over extended lengths of time. “Genetically speaking,
individuals and groups are like clouds in the sky or dust-storms in the desert.
They are temporary aggregations or federations. They are not stable through
evolutionary time.”25 Only genes have sufficient permanence to function as units
of selection, Dawkins argued; organisms and their phenotypes are merely
temporary manifestations or embodiments of something more fundamental.
Everything, therefore, depends on the gene.
In the second edition of The Selfish Gene, Dawkins acknowledges that a similar
idea is “implicit” in the writings of R. A. Fisher.26 My own reading of Fisher’s
classic Genetical Theory of Natural Selection (1930) leads me to suggest that it
is fairly explicit, as the following citation indicates: “To put the matter in another
way, each gene is constantly tending to create genetic situations favourable to its
own survival, so that an increase in numbers due to any cause will in its turn
react favourably upon the selective advantage which it enjoys.”27 So how do
genetic changes come about? Is there not, on the face of it, an obvious and fatal
contradiction between Dawkins’ emphasis upon the “high copying-fidelity” of
replicators, and the appearance of change? If replicators transmit digital
information so accurately, how can change come about? Surely the fidelity of
transmission points to a static, not dynamic, situation?
It is an important question, which might seem to raise formidable difficulties.
Certain species do indeed seem to have undergone relatively little development
over huge periods of time – for example, oysters and the Ginkgo tree seem to
have changed relatively little over the last 150 million years.28 Yet changes do
occur. Indeed, such “mutations” are the “ultimate raw materials for evolution.”29
In his Chance and Necessity (1971), the French Nobel laureate Jacques Monod
(1910–76) set out the basic consensus within molecular biology. Monod pointed
out that genetic mutations can be observed in the laboratory. Rare, spontaneous

mutations are observed in populations of Drosophila or other model organisms;
others can be induced at random through using mutagens, such as certain
chemicals or radiation. Such mutations could also be expected to arise over time
in nature itself – accidentally, unpredictably, and for a variety of reasons. But
once these (generally small) changes are “incorporated in the DNA structure, the
accident – essentially unpredictable because always singular – will be
mechanically and faithfully replicated and translated.”30 The outcomes of these
genetic mutations are then passed on within the evolutionary process, which acts
as a “filter,” determining whether they and their genetic codes survive. Most do
not. “The replicative system, far from being able to eliminate the microscopic
perturbations by which it is inevitably beset, knows only how to register and
offer them – almost always in vain – to the teleonomic filter by which their
performance is finally judged through natural selection.”31
Dawkins does not endorse Monod’s emphasis on the decisive role of “blind
chance.” While recognizing that many had indeed drawn the conclusion that
Darwinism was a “theory of chance,” Dawkins insisted that this was a
misrepresentation of the situation. “Chance is a minor ingredient in the
Darwinian recipe, but the most important ingredient is cumulative selection
which is quintessentially non-random.”32 Evolution can thus be seen as the
outcome of the nonrandom survival of randomly varying replicators, with the
emphasis placed upon the regularity of selection rather than the happenstance of
variation. Random changes in DNA give rise to new organisms, which
reproduce and are subject to the pressure of natural selection. “Core Darwinism”
could thus be defined as the “minimal theory that evolution is guided in
adaptively nonrandom directions by the nonrandom survival of small random
hereditary changes.”33
So what about individual organisms, or groups? Although a hasty reading of
Dawkins might suggest that evolution is conceived in purely molecular terms,
involving only a silent and invisible competition between genes, it soon becomes
clear that he avoids any such absurdity. In that organisms are the “vehicle” by
which genes are passed on, the capacity of the organism to survive and
reproduce becomes of immense importance. The process of selection is not
competition between genes per se (how could that happen?), but takes places at
the level of intermediaries: namely, the “vehicles” which bear or embody those
genes. “A monkey is a machine that preserves genes up trees, a fish is a machine
that preserves genes in the water; there is even a small worm that preserves
genes in German beer mats.”34 These “gene survival machines” reproduce their

genes, and die; it is the genes that survive, not the vehicles. Bodies provide
“what it takes to propagate genes” and may thus properly be regarded as
“engines of gene propagation.” This distinction could be formalized in terms of
the replicators and vehicles – that is, between small genetic units (“genes”)
themselves, and the higher-level entities (typically organisms, but sometimes a
family of genetically related organisms) which transmit those genes onward in
the evolutionary process.35
In The Selfish Gene, Dawkins offered what might be called an “ethology of the
gene” – although genes cannot really be said to “behave” or “act” – which
shifted the emphasis away from individual animals, or groups of animals, as the
unit of evolution to the nature of the genes themselves. This “gene’s-eye view of
the world” regards an individual organism as a “survival machine,” a “passive
receptacle for genes,” or a “colony of genes.” Dawkins stresses that this is not to
suggest that such organisms have no individuality of their own; his point is that
these individual characteristics are genetically determined, and hence contribute
to whether that lineage of genes will be successful or not. We must “deeply
imbibe the fundamental truth that an organism is a tool of DNA rather than the
other way round.”36 Evolution thus occurs when genetically caused traits are
passed on to the next generation.
So what is a gene? Here, we encounter a number of widely acknowledged
difficulties. The term is capable of being defined or visualized in quite different
ways.37 As Dawkins rightly points out, the molecular biologist’s “gene” is not
the same as the “gene” of the gene’s-eye theorist.38 The former refers to a length
of DNA that codes for a protein, the latter for a strand of DNA that survives
meiosis intact. In a classic paper, Seymour Benzer offered an essentially
molecular definition of the concept,39 which attempted to bridge the gap
between the classic view of the gene as an indivisible unit of genetic
information, and the newly discovered physical structure of DNA, which showed
that the molecular basis of genetics consisted of a sequence of nucleotides.
Dawkins is fully aware of this meaning of the term, but points out that it is
perfectly acceptable to conceptualize the “gene” in terms of the unit involved in
creating a Darwinian adaptation. His definition, borrowed from George C.
Williams, is as follows: “any portion of chromosomal material that potentially
lasts for enough generations to serve as a unit of natural selection.”40 It is a
functional definition, but is perfectly acceptable, despite the grumblings of
population geneticists. However, it does lead to a troubling degree of circularity,
in that it makes it almost true by definition that the gene is the unit of selection.

Williams himself wasn’t entirely happy about this definition.41 Dawkins, he
argued, defined a replicator in such a way that it had to be conceived “as a
physical entity duplicating itself in a reproductive process.” While not
necessarily disagreeing with this, Williams suggested that Dawkins “was misled
by the fact that genes are always identified with DNA.” For Williams, it was
essential to be clear that the DNA molecule was the medium, not the message:
the gene is “a package of information, not an object.” Williams himself insisted
that not all genes are evolutionary, if one defines an evolutionary gene as “any
inherited information for which there is a favorable or unfavorable selection bias
equal to several or many times its rate of endogenous change.”42
How does this work in practice? Perhaps the easiest way is to take a case study.
Let’s imagine a lion. The faster it can run, the more likely it is to survive – partly
because it can outrun its prey, and hence ensure its food supply. Let’s imagine
that a genetic mutation takes place leading to a lion appearing with superior
running skills. The local lion population now has two different kinds of lion: the
ones with the new mutation, and the old ones without it. To begin with, they
exist side by side. But the lions possessing this mutation have a greater capacity
to survive, and hence pass their characteristics on to later generations through
the gene – that is, whatever it is that caused this mutation in the first place.43
So how are these genetic mutations expressed in living organisms? At this point,
we need to draw a distinction between the gene (or “genotype”) as the
“internally coded, inheritable information” carried by all living organisms, used
as a “blueprint” or set of instructions for building and maintaining a living
creature; and the phenotype, as the outward, physical manifestation of the
organism – the visible characteristics or behavior which result from the
interaction of an organism’s genetic blueprint and the environment. Dawkins
argues that the gene is the unit of selection, in that it exerts phenotypic effects on
the organism – for example, the sharpness of its claws, the nature of its
metabolism, or the strength of its leg muscles. Successful genes are those that
cause phenotypic effects which promote their survival.
Dawkins took this a stage further through his ideas of an “extended
phenotype.”44 He pointed out that the effects of the gene were not limited to
physical characteristics of the individual organism, but extended to their
environment. Bower birds construct grass structures within which to mate. Those
species of bower birds with especially bright plumage tend to construct less
elaborate bowers; those with less attractive plumage compensate for this by
fabricating more intricate structures.45 As Samir Okasha pointed out, this

approach raises some questions, especially where the environment plays a major
role.
Thinking in terms of a gene’s “interests,” as Dawkins and others do, makes
good sense where a gene has a relatively context-independent effect on its
host organism. The gene’s phenotypic effect can then be thought of as a
“strategy” it has devised to promote its transmission. But as critics have
noted, if a gene’s phenotypic effect is highly dependent on context, including
genetic context, it is misleading to think this way, since the gene’s chances of
transmission are not in its own hands—they depend on extraneous factors.46
Dawkins is alert to these issues, as the chapter titled “The Selfish Cooperator” in
his Unweaving the Rainbow (1998) makes clear. A gene must not be seen in
isolation, but as embedded in a context, consisting of the other genes in the gene
pool of a species. A gene transported into a different “climate” or “context” of
other genes can have a completely different expression, and would be subject to
completely different selection pressures.
This, then, is a brief sketch of Dawkins’ approach, set against its historical
background. It has, as might be expected, generated considerable debate and
discussion. In what follows, we shall consider some of the more important issues
to have emerged in reflection on the work’s basic themes.
The Place of Humanity in a Darwinian Universe
If there was one aspect of his own theory of evolution which left Charles Darwin
feeling unsettled, it was its implications for the status and identity of the human
race. In every edition of the Origin of Species, Darwin consistently stated that
his proposed mechanism of natural selection did not entail any fixed or universal
law of progressive development. Furthermore, he explicitly rejected the belief of
Jean-Baptiste Lamarck (1744–1829) that evolution demonstrated any intrinsic or
necessary tendency toward perfection.47 The inevitable conclusion must
therefore be that human beings (now understood to be participants within, rather
than merely observers of, the evolutionary process) cannot in any sense be said
to be either the “goal” or the “apex” of evolution. It was not an easy conclusion
for Darwin, or for his age. The conclusion to the Descent of Man speaks of
humanity in exalted terms, while insisting upon its “lowly” biological origins:
Man may be excused for feeling some pride at having risen, though not
through his own exertions, to the very summit of the organic scale; and the

fact of his having thus risen, instead of having been aboriginally placed there,
may give him hope for a still higher destiny in the distant future. But we are
not here concerned with hopes or fears, only with the truth as far as our
reason permits us to discover it; and I have given the evidence to the best of
my ability. We must, however, acknowledge, as it seems to me, that man with
all his noble qualities . . . still bears in his bodily frame the indelible stamp of
his lowly origin.48
Using his own version of the image of the “Great Chain of Being,” Darwin
occasionally seems to suggest that evolution implies progress toward superior
creatures, projecting moral (and occasionally even ontological) qualities onto
more neutral scientific description.49
Dawkins has no hesitations here. We must recognize that we are animals, part of
the evolutionary process. He is strongly critical of the absolutist assumptions he
discerns behind “speciesism” – a term invented by Richard Ryder, and given
wider currency by Peter Singer, currently of Princeton University.50 Yet
Dawkins draws an important – indeed, a remarkable – distinction between
humanity and every other living product of genetic mutation and natural
selection. We alone are able to resist our genes. While some writers – such as
Julian Huxley – tried to develop an ethical system based on what they regarded
as Darwinian evolution’s more progressive aspects, Dawkins regards this as
misguided.51 Natural selection may be the dominant force in biological
evolution; this does not for one moment mean that we need to endorse its
apparent ethical implications.
It is an important point, as some have argued that Darwinian theory endorses a
“survival of the fittest” ethic. A recently discovered letter of Darwin himself
seems to lend credibility to this “social Darwinist” approach,52 although Darwin
is elsewhere generally cautious about drawing any such conclusions. Dawkins is
adamant: human beings are not the prisoner of their genes, but are capable of
rebelling against such a genetic tyranny:
As an academic scientist I am a passionate Darwinian, believing that natural
selection is, if not the only driving force in evolution, certainly the only
known force capable of producing the illusion of purpose which so strikes all
who contemplate nature. But at the same time as I support Darwinism as a
scientist, I am a passionate anti-Darwinian when it comes to politics and how
we should conduct our human affairs.53

Dawkins suggests that the situation can be compared to an oncologist, whose
professional specialty is studying cancer, and whose professional vocation is
fighting it.
This same theme emerges in The Selfish Gene. Dawkins concluded this work
with a passionate defense of human dignity and freedom in the face of genetic
determinism. We – that is, his (human) readers – can rebel against our selfish
genes:
We have the power to defy the selfish genes of our birth and, if necessary, the
selfish memes of our indoctrination. We can even discuss ways of
deliberately cultivating and nurturing pure, disinterested altruism – something
that has no place in nature, something that has never existed before in the
whole history of the world. We are built as gene machines and cultured as
meme machines, but we have the power to turn against our creators. We,
alone on earth, can rebel against the tyranny of the selfish replicators.54
Human beings alone have evolved to the point at which we are able to rebel
against precisely the process that brought us here in the first place. The evolution
of the human brain is, as Dawkins points out, central to this unique status. What
pressures led to the enlargement of the human brain?55 And why should this
process yield any significant evolutionary advantage? This new development
requires that roughly one-quarter of human metabolism is devoted to ensuring
brain function. This represents a substantial investment of energy, and a
correspondingly high risk for the survival of the species. Nevertheless, whatever
its explanation, it happened.56
By wise use of this additional resource, humans alone can subvert their “selfish
genes” – for example, through using artificial contraception.57 It’s a moot point
whether this example can be regarded as a brave act of rebellion by enlightened
humans against their genes. It could equally be argued to be an act of collusion.
One of the driving arguments for artificial contraception is that it limits the
disastrous consequences of population explosion, which would pose a challenge
to the continued existence of the human species – and hence the transmission of
human genes. But Dawkins’ point stands against this criticism: humanity is able
to realize the covert influences on actions and reflections, and resist our innate
selfish tendencies.
Only we have evolved brains which are capable of, in the first place,
understanding how we came to being here, and in the second, subverting the
process that might at some very distant point lead to our being displaced,

perhaps by some superior primate. Dawkins has, perhaps unsurprisingly, been
criticized by primatologists at this point. Frans de Waal, for example, points out
that the call to “rise above nature” has nothing to do with Darwin, who rather
emphasized that “our humaneness is grounded in the social instincts that we
share with other animals.”58
Are Genes Really Selfish?
In using the title The Selfish Gene, Dawkins saw himself as simply telling the
truth about the implications of evolutionary theory for an understanding of
human nature:
The argument of this book is that we, and all other animals, are machines
created by our genes . . . I shall argue that a predominant quality to be
expected in a successful gene is ruthless selfishness. This gene selfishness
will usually give rise to selfishness in individual behaviour. However, as we
shall see, there are special circumstances in which a gene can achieve its own
selfish goals best by fostering a limited form of altruism at the level of
individual animals. “Special” and “limited” are important words in the last
sentence. Much as we might wish to believe otherwise, universal love and the
welfare of the species as a whole are concepts that simply do not make
evolutionary sense.59
Where some social Darwinists of the 1920s and 1930s in effect argued that
evolutionary theory provided a scientific basis for legitimizing certain forms of
human behavior,60 Dawkins argued that one of the most important reasons for
understanding such theories was to alert us to the way in which our genetic
history predisposes us to act in certain selfish manners so that we can resist this.
“Let us try to teach generosity and altruism, because we are born selfish. Let us
understand what our own selfish genes are up to, because we may then at least
have the chance to upset their designs.”61 Our genes may “instruct us to be
selfish,” but we are under no obligation to obey them. There is a sense in which
human beings must actively resist their genes if they are “to build a society in
which individuals cooperate generously and unselfishly towards a common
good.”
But can one speak of genes being “selfish”? Many commentators have raised
concerns about Dawkins’ concept of “the selfish gene.” Dawkins’ phrase “the
selfish gene” was criticized by the philosopher Mary Midgley, partly because of

what she regarded as definitional vagueness, but more fundamentally on account
of philosophical laziness. “Genes cannot be selfish or unselfish, any more than
atoms can be jealous, elephants abstract or biscuits teleological.”62 Midgley
argued that the attribution of “selfishness” to genes represented a form of
anthropomorphic thinking, by which genes were understood to possess human
qualities and vices. Genes themselves, she argued, cannot be selfish; the term
can really only be applied meaningfully to an organism capable of behavior.63 It
was a reasonable point concerning the validity of metaphorical or analogical
language. After all, can genes really be said to “behave” in any way, whether
“selfish” or not? Genes replicate; they cannot be said to “behave” or “act,” even
in a pseudo-teleological way. Yet this reasonable point was unfortunately lost in
the noise of a scientifically confused piece of polemic which managed to
misrepresent Dawkins’ views on the gene.64
Dawkins was perfectly aware of the issues Midgley noted, and, in my view,
deals with them thoroughly in The Selfish Gene. It needs to be appreciated that
Dawkins was no stranger to the use of analogies in the sciences. In his doctoral
thesis, he devoted several pages to exploring the proper use of models or
“pictorial aids” in scientific explanation and description, especially in relation to
issues of behavior.65 Dawkins insisted that a clear distinction could be drawn
between the subjective and behavioristic senses of the term, and that his
definition was unequivocally behavioristic in nature. Genes behave as if they are
selfish, whatever implications this may be understood to have. As he pointed out
in The Selfish Gene, “we must not think of genes as conscious, purposeful
agents. Blind natural selection, however, makes them behave rather as if they
were purposeful, and it has been convenient, as a form of shorthand, to refer to
genes in the language of purpose.”66 (Darwin himself, we may note, had earlier
remarked that “natural selection” was “shorthand” for a much more complex and
nuanced process.)
Dawkins was quite clear that genes are not consciously selfish; yet their
dynamics resemble those of consciously selfish agents. Dawkins offers a
perfectly defensible account of the term “selfish” in the opening sections of The
Selfish Gene. The term is being used in a “behavioural, not subjective” sense.
Dawkins is not “concerned here with the psychology of motives”; the issue is
“whether the effect of an act” is to “lower or raise the survival prospects” of a
given organism67. Genes are not to be thought of as having subjective motives;
yet it is heuristically or pedagogically helpful to think of them as acting in this
way.68

If we allow ourselves the license of talking about genes as if they had conscious
aims, always reassuring ourselves that we could translate our sloppy language
back into respectable terms if we wanted to, we can ask the question, what is a
single selfish gene trying to do?
Nor does Dawkins see the notion of a “selfish gene” as being inconsistent with
the idea of cooperation between genes. Dawkins emphasized this point in a
preface to the thirtieth anniversary edition of The Selfish Gene (2006), revealing
that he considered alternative titles for the work, including The Eternal Gene and
– significantly – The Cooperative Gene. At several points during the work,
Dawkins highlights the importance of what could be described as a form of
cooperation among self-interested genes. The process of natural selection favors
groups of mutually compatible (if not actually cooperating) interacting genes.
This point is difficult for non-biologists to grasp. As might be expected,
Dawkins has a good analogy to hand to convey the point at issue. Imagine, he
suggests, the Oxford and Cambridge boat race – a collaborative venture, in
which the nine crew members work with each other to secure an intended goal.
Since a good oarsman in bad company will lose the race, the coach’s job is to
find the best selection of crew members from the pool available.69
A further point at which Dawkins has been criticized needs more careful
examination – the tendency to portray genes as active agents. This point has
been highlighted by the Oxford systems biologist Denis Noble, who identifies
the following passage in The Selfish Gene as problematic for two reasons: first,
in that it portrays genes as active agents, and second, because it strays beyond
the empirically verifiable into what amounts to metaphysical speculation:
[Genes] swarm in huge colonies, safe inside gigantic lumbering robots, sealed
off from the outside world, communicating with it by tortuous indirect routes,
manipulating it by remote control. They are in you and me; they created us,
body and mind; and their preservation is the ultimate rationale for our
existence.70
Noting that genes are here depicted as active agents, in control of their own
destiny, Noble asks what in this passage can be proved from observation, and
what is to be regarded as metaphysical speculation. For Noble, the empirically
verified facts are restricted to the statement that genes “are in you and me.” The
rest is speculative. Noble then playfully rewrites Dawkins’s prose, smuggling in
a totally different set of metaphysical assumptions, while retaining the single
empirically verifiable statement in Dawkins’ original piece.

[Genes] are trapped in huge colonies, locked inside highly intelligent beings,
moulded by the outside world, communicating with it by complex processes,
through which, blindly, as if by magic, function emerges. They are in you and
me; we are the system that allows their code to be read; and their preservation
is totally dependent on the joy that we experience in reproducing ourselves.
We are the ultimate rationale for their existence.71
Here, humans are represented as being in control. We are active; genes are
passive.
So what in Noble’s passage is observable, and what is speculative? As before,
the only thing that can be evidentially confirmed is that genes are “in you and
me.” The remainder is speculative, and lies beyond empirical investigation.
Dawkins and Noble see things in completely different ways. They both cannot
be right. Both smuggle in a series of quite different values and beliefs. Yet their
statements are “empirically equivalent.” In other words, they both have equally
good grounding in observation and experimental evidence. So which is right?
Which is the more scientific? How could we decide which is to be preferred on
scientific grounds? As Noble observes, “no-one seems to be able to think of an
experiment that would detect an empirical difference between them.”72
Noble’s critique of Dawkins raises the question of how the “selfish gene”
approach is currently regarded within the scientific community – a question we
shall consider in the following section.
What Remains of the “Selfish Gene” Approach?
With the benefit of hindsight, it is perhaps rather difficult to understand the sense
of standing on the dawn of a new age which seems to have infected the minds of
some evolutionists of the late 1960s, including Williams and Dawkins. The new
view of evolution as based entirely on self-interest owed little to Darwin, and
was supported as much by an inflated rhetoric as by an appeal to evidence.
Dawkins’ own dismissal of what he termed a “sloppily unconscious group-
selectionism” included both the problematic assertion that the gene’s-eye view
represented a recovery of Darwin’s position and that its opponents were to be
considered as “a Jesuitically sophisticated and dedicated neo-group-selectionist
rearguard.”73 Yet Darwin himself articulated the concept of group selection at
numerous points in the full corpus of his writings, mainly to explain how natural
selection could give rise to altruistic behavior and moral instincts. These could
be accommodated by his theory of natural selection, he argued, if they could be

shown to be “for the good of the community.”74
The resurgence of group selection since the 1970s has raised very serious
difficulties for Dawkins’ gene’s-eye approach. The Selfish Gene appeared at a
point at which most evolutionary biologists rejected the “for the good of the
group” explanations of evolution, and insisted that all adaptations were to be
explained in terms of individual self-interest.75 Dawkins’ insistence that genes
were “the fundamental unit of selection” was taken as an argument against group
selection, when it was perhaps better seen as a reaction against what was
prematurely seen as a deficient understanding of the process of natural selection.
Dawkins’ distaste for “group selection” – which he recently unfairly dismissed
as “the poorly defined and incoherent view that evolution is driven by the
differential survival of whole groups of organisms”76 – is seen by his critics as
being inattentive to recent developments in the field.77 Dawkins’ advocation of
the gene’s-eye approach must be set against the “naïve group selectionism” that
was highly influential in the first half of the twentieth century. This approach
tended to emphasize “between-group selection,” which was assumed to
outweigh “within-group selection.” Yet during the late 1970s and 1980s, it
became increasingly clear that that the prevailing tendency to reject “between-
group selection” as a significant evolutionary force was unjustified, and required
reconsideration.78 Dawkins’ continuing rejection of group selection is
significantly out of line with the contemporary consensus that selection can be
understood as operating at a variety of levels. The debate has moved on since the
1970s.
It is important to appreciate that science is progressive, achieving its insights
through constant review and revision of existing theories and paradigms in the
light of accumulating evidence and observations. A way of looking at things –
which is what the Greek term theoria really means – that is capable of offering a
satisfying synthesis of the evidence at one point in time may find itself
overwhelmed by the subsequent accumulation of evidence. What once seemed
natural and intuitive seems increasingly cumbersome, forced, and implausible.
Has this happened to the gene’s-eye view of evolution?
It would be no criticism of Dawkins’ approach if this were the case. Science is
on a journey, and leaves its past behind it as it moves on. This is perhaps one of
the most distinctive differences between the natural sciences and the humanities.
Few scientific publications are read more than fifteen years after their
appearance, whereas many works in the humanities retain a classic status that

ensures they become part of a cultural canon.79 Dawkins’ Selfish Gene is still
read today, forty years after its publication – a remarkable testimony to its
popular appeal, and the quality of its writing and intellectual articulation.
But is this really Darwinism? In one sense, the “selfish gene” is not a Darwinian
idea, in that Darwin knew nothing about genes. Darwin had a more pluralist
approach to the unit of selection (particularly the individual organism), and
thought in terms of the transmission of variation, rather than the survival of the
gene.80
Yet it is important to realize that questions are being raised about Dawkins’
approach within the scientific literature, which go far beyond the question of
whether it is really “Darwinian,” or the popular misunderstandings of the work
that cannot really be regarded as serious “criticisms.” In what follows, I shall
note representative criticisms, and offer a brief assessment of their significance.
One initial concern relates to the Darwinian “tree of life” model, implicit in The
Selfish Gene, and set out explicitly in The Blind Watchmaker.81 This sets out a
Darwinian “descent with modification” formula using the idea of “perfect
nesting.”82 Evolutionary descent demands a branching structure, similar to a
genealogical tree. Yet recent work on genome sequencing of simple organisms,
such as bacteria or archaea, seems to point to the repeated transfer of genes, or
perhaps even clusters of genes, from organism to organism.83 Most early studies
assumed species evolved primarily by vertical inheritance from parent or
parents. However, the comparison of microbial gene sequences suggests that
horizontal inheritance may be relatively common. The growing evidence for
extensive lateral gene transfer among organisms at the lower reaches of the tree
of life84 suggests that the image of a branching “tree of life” may need revision,
to take account of this apparent intersection of rings close to its base.
It seems increasingly necessary to speak of a “Darwinian horizon” – a point way
back in evolutionary time at which horizontal gene transfer was so common that
the traditional Darwinian account becomes problematic. Darwinism, which
posits vertical gene transfer as the dominant theme of evolution, can cope with
lateral gene transfer as a subtext or sideshow; when it is the main story, however,
things are rather more difficult. We shall have to wait and see how things
develop here. I do not regard this as forcing a revision of Dawkins’ overall
approach in The Selfish Gene; nevertheless, it alters the detail at points – not
least by suggesting that the standard Darwinian account does not embrace the
totality of evolutionary history.
f

This general point being noted, let us consider some more specific criticisms.
Some have expressed concern about the lack of rigorous mathematical analysis
in The Selfish Gene. One of the great strengths of the work of earlier
evolutionary theorists – such as Fisher and Haldane – was their mathematical
demonstration of how mutations arise and spread through a population through
natural selection. Why did not Dawkins offer such a defense of his model? In
part, the answer lies in the fact that The Selfish Gene is a popular work, whose
intended audience might struggle with such detail.85 It is, however, possible to
mathematize Dawkins’ approach by using optimization theory to explore the
analogy of the gene as a “fitness-maximizing agent.”86
Another point concerns the epistemic status of the gene’s-eye approach. We
have already noted misgivings expressed about whether genes can really be said
to be selfish,87 whether it is appropriate to use the language of intentionality in
relation to genes,88 and the difficulty of defining genes in the first place.89 Yet
there is still some confusion about whether Dawkins is advocating “an empirical
thesis about how evolution happened” or “a heuristic perspective for thinking
about evolution.”90 Does the gene’s-eye approach designate a process or a
perspective? A helpful distinction can be made between the process of “genic
selection” and the perspective of the gene’s-eye view.91 The problems begin to
arise when they are confused or conflated. It is easy for a biologist to work with
a plurality of perspectives; a plurality of processes is something rather different.
A gene’s-eye view can offer helpful perspectives on events which are not
necessarily caused by genic selection.92 For example, Kenneth Waters has
argued that a genic perspective can be used to make sense of phenomena that are
capable of being interpreted on the basis of a significantly different model:
“What appears as a multiple level selection process (e.g., selection of the t-
allele) to those who draw the conceptual divide [between environments] at the
traditional level, appears to genic selectionists of Williams’s style as several
selection processes being carried out at the same level within different genetic
environments.”93 The gene’s-eye view may be capable of accommodating data
which others might argue was better explained by a “group selection”
approach.94 Defenders of this approach thus argue that in many cases there are
multiple equally adequate accounts of evolutionary events, but that the set of
equally adequate representations will always include one operating at the genic
level.95 My own concern about this pluralist perspective is that it seems to me to
render the approach incapable of direct empirical falsification.96

The idea of the “selfish gene” may live on in the niches of popular culture,
where it seems to have achieved the status of a dogma for some. Most
researchers now argue for the need for an integrative, multilevel approach to
evolutionary theory in which genes and many other components of organisms
that are inherited are viewed as cooperating in networks. Perhaps paradoxically,
relentless competition thus leads to cooperation. Overall, Dawkins’ gene’s-eye
perspective is seen to remain helpful heuristically, as a way of viewing the
complexities of the evolutionary process. Yet it is increasingly been seen as one
angle of approach among others, not the defining model or theory of evolution.
Thus far, we have sketched the outlines of the “Darwinian” approach advocated
by Dawkins. But what are its implications? What difference might it make to our
broader view of reality, including that realm of human life and thought which is
often, though somewhat misleadingly, called “religion”? In Chapter 4, we shall
explore some of the features of the Darwinian view of reality developed and so
ably communicated by Dawkins, and consider what he believes to be its
religious implications. To explore this important question, we will consider one
of Dawkins’ most important works, in which he explicitly engages such
questions – The Blind Watchmaker. Yet we must first look at a more general
question, which underlies Dawkins’ analysis in that book. How does science
establish its beliefs? And what are the implications of this for religion? We shall
consider some aspects of this broader question in the next chapter.
Notes
1 Dawkins develops this idea primarily in chapter 8 of The Extended Phenotype,
which can be seen as an extension of the approach set out in The Selfish
Gene. See Kim Sterelny and Paul Griffiths, Sex and Death: An Introduction
to Philosophy of Biology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999, 55–
75.
2 See Gregory D. D. Hurst and John H. Werren, “The Role of Selfish Genetic
Elements in Eukaryotic Evolution.” Nature Reviews Genetics 2 (2001): 597–
606; Austin Burt and Robert Trivers, Genes in Conflict: The Biology of
Selfish Genetic Elements. Cambridge, MA: Belknap, 2006.
3 See Marek Kohm, “To Rise Above.” In Richard Dawkins: How a Scientist
Changed the Way We Think, edited by Alan Grafen and Mark Ridley, 248–
54. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006; Mary Midgley, The Solitary Self:

Darwin and the Selfish Gene. Durham: Acumen, 2010.
4 Frans de Waal, Our Inner Ape: The Best and Worst of Human Nature. London:
Granta, 2006, 21.
5 Dawkins provides details of his early family life in British colonial Africa in
An Appetite for Wonder, 1–69.
6 A Devil’s Chaplain, 196.
7 An Appetite for Wonder, 140–1.
8 An Appetite for Wonder, 141.
9 For Dawkins’ memories of this period, see An Appetite for Wonder, 171–201.
10 For a critical yet appreciative account of Tinbergen, see Hans Kruuk, Niko’s
Nature: The Life of Niko Tinbergen, and His Science of Animal Behaviour.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003. For Dawkins’ brief personal
reflections on Tinbergen’s significance, originally given as the opening
remarks to a day conference at Oxford on Tinbergen’s legacy on March 20,
1990, see Richard Dawkins, “Introduction.” In The Tinbergen Legacy, edited
by M. S. Dawkins, T. R. Halliday, and R. Dawkins, ix–xii. London: Chapman
& Hall, 1991.
11 Richard Dawkins, “The Ontogeny of a Pecking Preference in Domestic
Chicks.” Zeitschrift für Tierpsychologie 25 (1968): 170–86; idem, “A
Threshold Model of Choice Behaviour.” Animal Behaviour 17 (1969): 120–
33.
12 The key paper was published in two parts in 1964: William Hamilton, “The
Genetic Evolution of Social Behaviour.” Journal of Theoretical Biology 7
(1964): 1–16; 17–52. For a helpful account of “Hamilton’s Rule,” see Alan
Grafen, “A Geometric View of Relatedness.” In Oxford Surveys in
Evolutionary Biology, edited by R. Dawkins and M. Ridley, 28–89. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1985.
13 Typewritten text of 1966 reproduced in An Appetite for Wonder, 200.
Emphasis in original.
14 River out of Eden, 19.
15 Oxford University Gazette, October 12, 1995. Dawkins’ appointment to the

Simonyi readership was confirmed in the University Gazette on January 18,
1996, with effect to the mandatory retiring age of sixty-seven.
16 Oxford University Gazette, Supplement (2) to Gazette 4408, July 22 1996.
17 E.g., see Oxford University Calendar 2003–4. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2003, 77. These details were confirmed by Oxford University on
October 26, 2012 in response to a request made under the Freedom of
Information Act.
18 See Alister E. McGrath, “Evidence, Theory, and Interpretation: The ‘New
Atheism’ and the Philosophy of Science.” Midwest Studies in Philosophy 37
(2013): 179–89.
19 For its history, see Thomas Dixon, “Scientific Atheism as a Faith Tradition.”
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science C 33 (2002): 337–59.
20 For Dawkins’ account of this period, see An Appetite for Wonder, 257–84.
21 Alan Grafen, “The Intellectual Contribution of The Selfish Gene to
Evolutionary Theory.” In Richard Dawkins: How a Scientist Changed the
Way We Think, edited by Alan Grafen and Mark Ridley, 66–74. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2006, 73.
22 Richard D. Alexander, Darwinism and Human Affairs. London: Pitman,
1980, 38.
23 The Selfish Gene, 34.
24 The Selfish Gene, 35.
25 The Selfish Gene, 34.
26 The Selfish Gene, ix.
27 R. A. Fisher, The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. 2nd edn. New York:
Dover, 1958, 102–3. For a rigorous analysis of the material, see A. W. F.
Edwards, “R. A. Fisher’s Gene-Centred View of Evolution and the
Fundamental Theorem of Natural Selection.” Biological Reviews 89 (2014):
135–47.
28 See Zhiyan Zhou and Shaolin Zheng. “The Missing Link in Ginkgo
Evolution.” Nature 423 (2003): 821–2.

29 George Gaylord Simpson, Life: An Introduction to Biology. London:
Thompson, 1965, 430.
30 Jacques Monod, Chance and Necessity: An Essay on the Natural Philosophy
of Modern Biology. New York: Knopf, 1971, 114.
31 Monod, Chance and Necessity, 118.
32 The Blind Watchmaker, 49.
33 A Devil’s Chaplain, 81. This does not, by the way, imply that all evolutionary
change is adaptive.
34 The Selfish Gene, 21.
35 Richard Dawkins, “Replicators and Vehicles.” In Current Problems in
Sociobiology, edited by King’s College Sociobiology Group, 45–64.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982. Other evolutionary biologists
use different terminology: for example, David Hull prefers to speak of
“interactors” and “replicators.” See David L. Hull, Science as a Process: An
Evolutionary Account of the Social and Conceptual Development of Science.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990.
36 The Extended Phenotype, 239.
37 See André Pichot, Histoire de la notion de gène. Paris: Flammarion, 1999;
Peter J. Beurton, Raphael Falk, and Hans-Jörg Rheinberger, eds., The
Concept of the Gene in Development and Evolution: Historical and
Epistemological Perspectives. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2000; Helen Pearson, “Genetics: What Is a Gene?” Nature 441, no. 7092
(2006): 398–401.
38 For Dawkins’ response to further discussion of this and other points, see
Richard Dawkins, “Extended Phenotype—but Not Too Extended. A Reply to
Laland, Turner and Jablonka.” Biology and Philosophy 19 (2004): 377–96.
39 Seymour Benzer, “The Elementary Units of Heredity.” In The Chemical
Basis of Heredity, edited by W. D. McElroy and B. Glass, 70–93. Baltimore,
MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1957.
40 The Selfish Gene, 28.
41 George C. Williams, “A Package of Information.” In The Third Culture,

edited by John Brockman, 38–50. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995.
42 George C. Williams, Adaptation and Natural Selection: A Critique of Some
Current Evolutionary Thought. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
1966, 25.
43 It must be noted at this point that Dawkins’ proposal is much more adept at
accounting for the modification of the characteristics of existing species than
for the generation of new species. See Steven Rose, “The Rise of
Neurogenetic Determinism.” In Consciousness and Human Identity, edited by
John Cornwell, 86–100. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998.
44 Richard Dawkins, “Replicator Selection and the Extended Phenotype.”
Zeitschrift für Tierpsychologie 47 (1978): 61–76.
45 The Extended Phenotype, 199–200.
46 Samir Okasha, Evolution and the Levels of Selection. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2006, 167.
47 Gregory Radick, “Two Explanations of Evolutionary Progress.” Biology and
Philosophy 15, no. 4 (2000): 475–91.
48 Charles Darwin, The Descent of Man. 2nd edn. London: John Murray, 1882,
619.
49 For comment, see Maurice Mandelbaum, History, Man, and Reason: A Study
in Nineteenth-Century Thought. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1971, 77–88; Dov Ospovat, The Development of Darwin’s Theory:
Natural History, Natural Theology, and Natural Selection, 1838–1859.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995, 229–35.
50 A Devil’s Chaplain, 20–5.
51 See here Paul L. Farber, The Temptations of Evolutionary Ethics. Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press, 1994, 136. Farber comments that
Huxley’s “ethics was a projection of his values onto the history of man,” so
that his “naturalism assumed the vision he pretended to discover.”
52 Richard Weikart, “A Recently Discovered Darwin Letter on Social
Darwinism.” Isis 86 (1995): 609–11.
53 A Devil’s Chaplain, 10–11.

54 The Selfish Gene, 200–1. The first edition (1976) ended at this point; the
second edition (1989) added two additional chapters. Note that Dawkins
introduces the term “meme” here, as a “cultural replicator” analogous to the
gene, as a genetic replicator. We shall have more to say about this new type
of replicator later.
55 For Dawkins’ comments, see Unweaving the Rainbow, 286–90; A Devil’s
Chaplain, 74–7.
56 For some reflections, not dissimilar to Dawkins, see Geoffrey Miller, The
Mating Mind: How Sexual Choice Shaped the Evolution of Human Nature.
London: Vintage, 2001.
57 The Selfish Gene, 109–22.
58 De Waal, Our Inner Ape, 22.
59 The Selfish Gene, 9–10. Emphasis original.
60 Gregory Claeys, “The ‘Survival of the Fittest’ and the Origins of Social
Darwinism.” Journal of the History of Ideas 61 (2000): 223–40. A case in
point is the form of Social Darwinism underlying certain Nazi ideas: Richard
Weikart, Hitler’s Ethic: The Nazi Pursuit of Evolutionary Progress. New
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009.
61 The Selfish Gene, 10.
62 Mary Midgley, “Gene-Juggling.” Philosophy 54 (1979): 439–58.
63 A point made regularly by Dawkins’ critics within the evolutionary biology
community: see, for example, Steven Rose, “The Rise of Neurogenetic
Determinism.” In Consciousness and Human Identity, edited by John
Cornwell, 86–100. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998.
64 For Dawkins’ response, see Richard Dawkins, “In Defence of Selfish Genes.”
Philosophy 56 (1981): 556–73.
65 Richard Dawkins, “Selective Pecking in the Domestic Chick.” D. Phil.
Thesis, Oxford University, 1966, 183–5.
66 The Selfish Gene, 196.
67 The Selfish Gene, 11.

68 The Selfish Gene, 88.
69 The Selfish Gene, 40.
70 The Selfish Gene, 21.
71 See Denis Noble, The Music of Life: Biology Beyond the Genome. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2006, 11–15; quote at p. 13.
72 Noble would now argue that the cumulative weight of observation would
count against Dawkins: Denis Noble, “Neo-Darwinism, the Modern
Synthesis and Selfish Genes: Are They of Use in Physiology?” Journal of
Physiology 589, no. 5 (2011): 1007–15.
73 The Extended Phenotype, 6.
74 Elliott Sober and David Sloan Wilson, Unto Others: The Evolution and
Psychology of Unselfish Behavior. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1998, 4–6. Dawkins is not correct in his belief that Darwin did not
teach group selection “with the exception of one anomalous passage in The
Descent of Man.”
75 David Sloan Wilson and Edward O. Wilson, “Rethinking the Theoretical
Foundation of Sociobiology.” Quarterly Review of Biology 82 (2007): 327–
48.
76 This quote is taken from Dawkins’ condescending and misleading review of
E. O. Wilson’s Social Conquest of Earth; “The Descent of Edward Wilson”;
Prospect, May 24, 2012, www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/science-and-
technology/edward-wilson-social-conquest-earth-evolutionary-errors-origin-
species, accessed August 7, 2014.
77 See the robust and highly critical rebuttal of Dawkins by David Sloan Wilson,
“Richard Dawkins, Edward O. Wilson, and the Consensus of the Many”;
Huffington Post, June 11, 2012, www.huffingtonpost.com/david-sloan-
wilson/richard-dawkins-edward-o-_b_1588510.html, accessed August 7,
2014.
78 Mark E. Borrello, “The Rise, Fall and Resurrection of Group Selection.”
Endeavour 29 (2005): 43–7. As an example of the changed perspective, see
Charles J. Goodnight and Lori Stevens, “Experimental Studies of Group
Selection: What Do They Tell Us about Group Selection in Nature?”

American Naturalist 150 (1997): S59–S79.
79 See the analysis in Italo Calvino, Why Read the Classics? New York:
Pantheon, 1999.
80 See the points made by Fern Elsdon-Baker, The Selfish Genius: How Richard
Dawkins Rewrote Darwin's Legacy. London: Icon, 2009, 103–23.
81 See the extended discussion in The Blind Watchmaker, 255–84.
82 The Blind Watchmaker, 259.
83 For a survey of the evidence and issues, see Luis Boto, “Horizontal Gene
Transfer in Evolution: Facts and Challenges.” Proceedings of the Royal
Society B 277 (2010): 819–27.
84 See for example K. Henze, C. Schnarrenberger, and W. Martin,
“Endosymbiotic Gene Transfer: A Special Case of Horizontal Gene Transfer
Germane to Endosymbiosis, the Origins of Organelles and the Origins of
Eukaryotes.” In Horizontal Gene Transfer, edited by M. Syvanen and C.
Kado, 343–52. London: Academic, 2001.
85 A point made by Grafen, “Intellectual Contribution.”
86 See the discussion in A. Gardner and J. J. Welch, “A Formal Theory of the
Selfish Gene.” Journal of Evolutionary Biology 24 (2011): 1801–13.
87 Burt and Trivers, Genes in Conflict, 1–18.
88 See further Brian Charlesworth, “Conflicts of Interest.” Current Biology 16
(2006): R1009–R1011.
89 Elisabeth Anne Lloyd, “Why the Gene Will Not Return.” Philosophy of
Science 72 (2005): 287–310. See also Beurton, Falk, and Rheinberger, eds.,
Concept of the Gene; Pearson, “Genetics: What Is a Gene?”
90 See Okasha, Evolution and the Levels of Selection, 146–9.
91 For a defense of “genic selection,” see P. Kitcher, K. Sterelny, and C. K.
Waters, “The Illusory Riches of Sober’s Monism.” The Journal of Philosophy
87, no. 3 (1990): 158–61.
92 Okasha, Evolution and the Levels of Selection, 148.

93 C. Kenneth Waters, “Tempered Realism about the Force of Selection.”
Philosophy of Science 58, no. 4 (1991): 553–73. See also his later paper
“Why Genic and Multilevel Selection Theories Are Here to Stay.”
Philosophy of Science 72 (2005): 311–33.
94 For the debate about the levels of selection, see Edward O. Wilson, “One
Giant Leap: How Insects Achieved Altruism and Colonial Life.” BioScience
58 (2008): 17–25. More generally, see the discussion of Wilson and Wilson,
“Rethinking the Theoretical Foundation of Sociobiology.”
95 For a criticism of this approach, see the important paper of R. N. Brandon and
H. F. Nijhout, “The Empirical Nonequivalence of Genic and Genotypic
Models of Selection: A (Decisive) Refutation of Genic Selectionism and
Pluralistic Genic Selectionism.” Philosophy of Science 73, no. 3 (2006): 277–
97.
96 A point stressed by Noble, “Neo-Darwinism.”

3
Blind Faith?
Evidence, Proof, and Rationality in Science and
Religion
One of the central themes of the human quest for knowledge is the need to be
able to distinguish mere “opinion” from “knowledge.” How can we distinguish a
belief that is warranted and rigorously reasoned from mere unsubstantiated
opinion? The debate goes back to Plato, and continues today. The key question –
whether in the natural sciences, philosophy or theology – is this: What
conditions must be fulfilled before we can conclude that a given belief is
justified? For Dawkins, the only reliable knowledge we may hope to have of the
world is scientific. Philosophers, lawyers, theologians, and others may make
spurious claims to secure knowledge. In the end, however, it is only the natural
sciences that can provide a true understanding of the world.
Although Dawkins and I diverge at points in our views about the cultural
authority and intellectual implications of the natural sciences, we both take
delight in the sense of wonder that so often accompanies the scientific
investigation of nature. Science is the great success story of human intellectual
exploration. It is widely regarded as the most secure and reliable form of human
knowledge, and has gained this enviable reputation by the modesty of its
ambition. Scientists know that they don’t have to comment on everything – just
what can be shown to be true by rigorous and testable investigation.
In one sense, the cultural authority of science rests on its principled refusal to
comment on matters that lie beyond its domain of competency. Questions of
value and meaning, for example, are non-empirical, and are widely regarded as
lying beyond its scope. The cultural and intellectual authority of science depends
upon its absolute neutrality in ethical, political, and religious debates. This point
was made by Darwin’s great supporter Thomas H. Huxley (1825–95), who
declared that science “commits suicide when it adopts a creed.”1 Huxley made
this dramatic statement toward the end of a remarkable speech of April 1880 at
the Royal Institution, London, celebrating the “coming of age” of The Origin of
Species. He was right. If science is hijacked by fundamentalists, whether
religious or anti-religious, its intellectual integrity is subverted and its cultural

authority compromised.
Science is a never-ending quest for the best understanding of things. The way
things seem today will not be the way they are seen a century from now. (A
hundred years ago, scientists thought that the universe had existed forever; that
belief has now been replaced with the radically different notion that the universe
came into being in a primordial fireball known as the Big Bang.2) The chemist
and noted philosopher of science Michael Polanyi (1891–1976) once shrewdly
observed that scientists believed many things to be true, but knew that some of
those would eventually be shown to be wrong. The problem was that they didn’t
know which they were.
Today, most scientists believe that Darwin’s theory of natural selection is the
best explanation of what we see in the world around us. But as Dawkins himself
rightly points out, Darwinism itself may eventually turn out to need revision,
perhaps even rejection: “We must acknowledge the possibility that new facts
may come to light which will force our successors of the twenty-first century to
abandon Darwinism or modify it beyond recognition.”3 This statement has
caused concern to some, but Dawkins was absolutely right in making it. Science
is driven by the accumulation of evidence and theoretical reflection on that
evidence, which will from time to time lead to the abandoning of what was
previously thought to be right.
Such a recognition of the provisionality of scientific theories is not the same as
embracing a free-floating relativism, with each individual or generation
arbitrarily choosing what it wants to believe. Theoretical judgments are driven
by evidence, which builds up over time, gradually leading to what the historian
Thomas Kuhn called “paradigm shifts” – radical changes in the way in which we
see things, forced upon us by the accumulation of evidence.4
The importance of evidence-based thinking for the scientific enterprise cannot be
overstated. Science has learned to conform its thinking to the distinct and
idiosyncratic nature of the universe, rather than trying to lay down in advance
what form this ought to take. The fact that the strangeness of the physical
universe is not something we could possibly have predicted makes it clear that
rationality is a matter of discovery, rather than foresight. The question a scientist
will ask is not: “Is this reasonable?” but “What are the reasons for thinking this
is true?” Science is about evidence-based thinking.
Dawkins’ emphasis on evidence-based reasoning leads him to adopt a strongly
critical attitude toward any beliefs that are inadequately grounded in the

observable. “As a lover of truth, I am suspicious of strongly held beliefs that are
unsupported by evidence.”5 One of his core beliefs, frequently repeated in his
writings, is that religious faith is “blind trust, in the absence of evidence, even in
the teeth of evidence.”6
The debate over how we generate and justify our beliefs is immensely important,
and Dawkins’ contribution to this debate must be welcomed, and – along with its
rivals – taken seriously. Considerable attention has been paid to the way in
which people sustain their belief systems. Cognitive psychological research has
demonstrated repeatedly that people “tend to seek out, recall and interpret
evidence in a manner that sustains beliefs.”7 The interpretation of data is often
deeply shaped by implicit beliefs that they affect the way in which people
process information and arrive at judgments. Both religious and anti-religious
belief systems are often resistant to anything that threatens to undermine,
challenge, qualify, or disconfirm them. Deeply held assumptions often render
these implicit theories “almost impervious to data.”8 Observations are
foregrounded and emphasized in ways that render them consistent with existing
belief systems.
One of the more puzzling aspects of Dawkins’ critique of religion is his
insistence that it represents a form of “blind faith,” which refuses to reflect on
observation and experience in a reasoned manner. Doubtless some religious
people adopt such an approach; it is, however, clearly not in any way typical or
representative. The observational inaccuracy of this belief has generated
widespread criticism of Dawkins, within both religious and atheist circles.
Thus the Oxford theologian Keith Ward has criticized Dawkins’ “systematic
mockery and demonizing of competing views, which are always presented in the
most naïve light.”9 Dawkins’ habit of misrepresenting the views of his
opponents is probably the least attractive aspect of his writings, and simply
reinforces the perception that he inhabits a hermetically sealed conceptual world,
impervious to a genuine engagement with its alternatives, including religion.
We may open our discussion of the place of evidence in Dawkins’ worldview by
exploring his approach to the idea of “faith.”
Faith as Blind Trust?
Faith “means blind trust, in the absence of evidence, even in the teeth of
evidence.”10 This view, set out for the first time in 1976, is an expression of one

of the “core beliefs” that determine Dawkins’ attitude to religion. In 1989, he
hardened his views: faith now qualified “as a kind of mental illness.”11 This non-
negotiable core conviction surfaces again in 1992, when Dawkins delivered a
lecture at the Edinburgh International Science Festival, in which he set out his
views on the relation of faith and evidence. Dawkins was scathing over the
intellectual irresponsibility of faith: “Faith is the great cop-out, the great excuse
to evade the need to think and evaluate evidence. Faith is belief in spite of, even
perhaps because of, the lack of evidence . . . Faith is not allowed to justify itself
by argument.”12 Four years later, Dawkins was named “Humanist of the Year.”
In his acceptance speech, published the following year in the journal The
Humanist, Dawkins set out his agenda for the eradication of what he regarded as
the greatest evil of our age.
It is fashionable to wax apocalyptic about the threat to humanity posed by the
AIDS virus, “mad cow” disease, and many others, but I think a case can be
made that faith is one of the world’s great evils, comparable to the smallpox
virus but harder to eradicate. Faith, being belief that isn’t based on evidence,
is the principal vice of any religion.
This is to be contrasted with the natural sciences, which offer an evidence-based
approach to the world. “As a lover of truth, I am suspicious of strongly held
beliefs that are unsupported by evidence.”13
Dawkins here opens up the whole question of the place of proof, evidence, and
faith in both science and religion. It is a fascinating topic, and we must be
grateful to him for so doing. In this chapter, we shall explore some of the issues
raised by the history and philosophy of science for this debate, and ask if it really
is quite as simple as Dawkins suggests. I certainly thought so during my atheist
phase, and would have regarded Dawkins’ arguments – if I then had access to
them – as entirely plausible and evidentially compelling. But not now.
Dawkins is absolutely right to insist upon evidential foundations for belief, no
matter what that belief may be. In many ways, his approach is similar to that of
the English mathematician William K. Clifford (1845–79). In his influential
essay The Ethics of Belief (1877), Clifford argued that “it is wrong always,
everywhere, and for anyone, to believe anything upon insufficient evidence.”14
This was, he argued, not simply an intellectual responsibility; it was a
fundamentally moral duty. Nobody should be allowed to believe something
which was argumentatively or evidentially underdetermined. I would, of course,
agree with Clifford, although I think it is fair to point out that Clifford’s use of

the phrase “insufficient evidence” is more than a little vague, not least when he
comes to deal with that cornerstone of the scientific explanation – the question
of justified inference.
Happily, Clifford – who was a mathematician – knew enough about the more
empirical sciences to be aware that the scientific method relies upon inference.
Yet, even so, his account of the scientific method is clearly deeply problematic.
It seems quite incapable, for example, for dealing with the troublesome issue of
the “underdetermination of theory by evidence,”15 one of the persistent
difficulties that cloud the horizons of those who prefer to keep their science
simple and untroubled by philosophical and historical inconveniences. If
Clifford’s unrealistic account of the scientific method were to be applied to
Darwin’s Origin of Species, we should have to reject either Darwin’s work as
unscientific and even unethical, or Clifford’s account of the place of belief in
science. Fortunately, this matter is easily resolved, and it is Clifford who is to be
judged as unsatisfactory.
Darwin himself was quite clear that his doctrine of natural selection could not be
proved, and praised the perspicuity of the naturalist F. W. Hutton (1836–1905)
for pointing this out: “He is one of the very few who see that the change of
species cannot be directly proved, and that the doctrine must sink or swim
according as it groups and explains phenomena. It is really curious how few
judge it in this way, which is clearly the right way.”16 Darwin believed that the
case for his doctrine of natural selection lay in its ability to “group and explain”
the observations he had accumulated. Yet even though Darwin did not believe
that he had sorted out all the problems with his theory, he was confident that his
explanation was the best available.17
The inadequacies of Clifford’s approach are the subject of the famous 1897
essay “The Will to Believe” (1897), in which the psychologist William James
(1842–1910) argued that human beings find themselves in a position where they
have to choose between intellectual options which are, in James’s words,
“forced, living, and momentous.”18 We all, James argues, need what he terms
“working hypotheses” to make sense of our experience of the world. These
“working hypotheses” often lie beyond total proof, yet are accepted and acted
upon because they are found to offer reliable and satisfying standpoints from
which to engage the real world. For James, faith is a particular form of belief,
which is pervasive in everyday life. James defined faith as follows: “Faith means
belief in something concerning which doubt is still theoretically possible.” This
leads James to declare that: “Faith is synonymous with working hypothesis.”

Although James is sometimes accused of lending intellectual weight to what is
merely wishful thinking – a charge, for example, made by the American scientist
and pragmatist philosopher Charles S. Peirce (1839–1914) – James himself did
not see things this way. As Gerald E. Myers observed in his study of James: “He
always advocated a faith sensitive to reason, experimental in nature, and
therefore susceptible to revision.”19
So what of Dawkins? Let’s begin by looking at that definition of faith, and ask
where it comes from. Faith “means blind trust, in the absence of evidence, even
in the teeth of evidence.” But why should anyone accept this puzzling and totally
unrepresentative definition? In his “Prayer for my Daughter,” Dawkins makes an
important point, which is clearly relevant here: “Next time somebody tells you
that something is true, why not say to them: ‘What kind of evidence is there for
that?’ And if they can’t give you a good answer, I hope you’ll think very
carefully before you believe a word they say.”20 So what is the evidence that
religious people define or understand “faith” in this absurd way? I don’t. And
what’s more, I don’t know anyone else who does either.
Sadly, Dawkins offers no defense of this definition. He offers no evidence that it
is representative of religious opinion. He cites no authority in its support. I don’t
accept this idea of faith, and I have yet to meet a theologian who takes it
seriously. It cannot be defended from any official declaration of faith from any
Christian denomination. It is Dawkins’ own definition, constructed with his own
agenda in mind, being represented as if it were characteristic of those he wishes
to criticize.
What is really worrying is that Dawkins genuinely seems to believe that faith
actually is “blind trust,” despite the fact that no major Christian writer adopts
such a definition. This is a core belief for Dawkins, which determines more or
less every aspect of his attitude to religion and religious people. Yet core beliefs
often need to be challenged. This may be what Dawkins thinks; it is not what
Christians think. Let me provide a definition of faith offered by W. H. Griffith-
Thomas (1861–1924), a noted Anglican theologian whose definition of faith is
typical of most Christian writers: “[Faith] affects the whole of man’s nature. It
commences with the conviction of the mind based on adequate evidence; it
continues in the confidence of the heart or emotions based on conviction, and it
is crowned in the consent of the will, by means of which the conviction and
confidence are expressed in conduct.”21 It is a good and reliable definition,
synthesizing the core elements of the characteristic Christian understanding of
faith. And this faith “commences with the conviction of the mind based on

adequate evidence.” I see no point in wearying readers with other quotations
from Christian writers down the ages in support of this point. In any case, it is
Dawkins’ responsibility to demonstrate that his skewed and nonsensical
definition of “faith” is characteristic of Christianity through evidence-based
argument.
Having set up his straw man, Dawkins knocks it down. It is not an unduly
difficult or demanding intellectual feat. Faith is infantile, we are told – just fine
for cramming into the minds of impressionable young children, but outrageously
immoral and intellectually risible in the case of adults. We’ve grown up now,
and need to move on. Why should we believe things that can’t be scientifically
proved? Faith in God, Dawkins argues, is just like believing in Santa Claus and
the Tooth Fairy. When you grow up, you grow out of it.
This would seem to be a schoolboy argument that has accidentally found its way
into a grown-up discussion. It is as amateurish as it is unconvincing. There is no
serious empirical evidence that people regard God, Santa Claus, and the Tooth
Fairy as being in the same category. I stopped believing in Santa Claus and the
Tooth Fairy when I was about six years old. After being an atheist for some
years, I discovered God when I was eighteen, and have never regarded this as
some kind of infantile regression.
If Dawkins’ rather simplistic argument has any plausibility, it requires a real
analogy between God and Santa Claus to exist – which it clearly does not.
Everyone knows that people do not regard belief in God as belonging to the
same category as these childish beliefs. Dawkins, of course, argues that they
both represent belief in non-existent entities. But this represents a very
elementary confusion over which is the conclusion and which the presupposition
of an argument.
In any case, Santa Claus and the Tooth Fairy are not ideas invented by children;
these myths are forced upon them by adults, even if the children themselves
often collude with them. Dawkins takes the view that belief in God is something
forced upon children by tyrannical adults, and is to be rejected for that reason.
Yet it is impossible to study the development of atheism in the twentieth century
without noting how precisely this pattern of the imposition of ideas was also
found in the Soviet Union and other atheist states.22 Having failed to persuade
people that atheism was right, the Soviet authorities ended up imposing it.
In July 1954, the Communist Party of the Soviet Union ordered an increased
explicit commitment to atheism in its schools. Belief in God had not yet been

eliminated by argument or force. The only option seemed to be an aggressive
program of indoctrination of its children. Soviet schoolbooks repeatedly asserted
the malevolence of religion through slogans such as “Religion is a fanatical and
perverse reflection of the world” or “Religion has become the medium for the
spiritual enslavement of the masses.” Alarmed at the persistence of religion, the
Party decreed that “the teaching of school subjects (history, literature, natural
sciences, physics, chemistry, etc.) should be saturated with atheism.” In the end,
all that the program did was to lay the foundations for the massive rebirth of
belief in God after the collapse of the Soviet Union in the 1990s.
So, if Dawkins’ argument carries weight, are we to conclude that atheism is evil,
immoral, and incredible – the sort of nonsense that one has to force on children,
because otherwise they would never believe it? No. The institutional abuse of an
idea does not discredit it, whether we are talking about atheism, theism, or
democracy.
At times, Dawkins seems to get carried away with his anti-religious rhetoric by
sliding from “this cannot be proved” to “this is false” with alarming ease,
apparently unaware of the lapses in reasoning along the way. Consider, for
example, his response in a 1999 debate on “Whether Science is Killing the Soul”
to a question from the audience: can science offer consolation in the way that
religion does – for example, after the death of a close friend or relative: “The
fact that religion may console you doesn’t of course make it true. It’s a moot
point whether one wishes to be consoled by a falsehood.”23 Dawkins slides
effortlessly from “consolation does not make religion true” to “religion is false.”
Now perhaps this is an entirely natural inference for Dawkins himself, given his
deeply ingrained and entrenched anti-religious feelings. But it is not a logically
valid conclusion. It not follow that, since A has not been proven, A is false. As
we shall see when reflecting on Dawkins’ idea of the “meme,” these
hypothetical entities have never been proved to exist, and give every indication
of being purely hypothetical notions. Yet Dawkins clearly believes in the meme.
As the core belief that faith is “blind trust” permeates Dawkins’ many criticisms
of religion, it clearly needs careful examination. Let’s examine one of his
statements on the nature of faith in a little more detail. In the second edition of
The Selfish Gene, Dawkins proposes an absolute dichotomy between “blind
faith” and “overwhelming, publicly available evidence”: “But what, after all, is
faith? It is a state of mind that leads people to believe something – it doesn’t
matter what – in the total absence of supporting evidence. If there were good
supporting evidence, then faith would be superfluous, for the evidence would

compel us to believe it anyway.”24 This is an unsustainable view of the relation
of evidence and belief in the natural sciences, chiefly because it fails to make the
critical distinction between the “total absence of supporting evidence” and the
“absence of totally supporting evidence.”
For example, consider the current debate within cosmology over whether the Big
Bang gave rise to a single universe, or a series of universes (the so-called
“multiverse”).25 I have many distinguished scientific colleagues who support the
former approach, and equally distinguished scientific colleagues who support the
latter. Both are real options for thinking and informed scientists, who make their
decisions on the basis of their judgments of how best to interpret the evidence
and believe – but cannot prove – that their interpretation is correct. This process,
rather inconveniently, doesn’t fit at all with Dawkins’ bold declaration that “if
there were good supporting evidence, then faith would be superfluous, for the
evidence would compel us to believe it anyway.” Science just isn’t like that.26
In its rigorous sense, “proof” applies only to logic and mathematics. We can
prove that 2 + 2 = 4, just as we can prove that “the whole is greater than the
part.”
John Polkinghorne – a theoretical physicist turned theologian – insists that the
real issue in both science and religion is whether a belief can be regarded as
warranted or justified.27
Neither science nor religion can entertain the hope of establishing logically
coercive proof of the kind that only a fool could deny. No one can avoid
some degree of intellectual precariousness, and there is a consequent need for
a degree of cautious daring in the quest for truth. Experience and
interpretation intertwine in an inescapable circularity. Even science cannot
wholly escape this dilemma (theory interprets experiments; experiments
confirm or disconfirm theories).
Good reasons can be given for believing that a scientific theory (or religious
belief) are justified, even if these fall short of the rigorous proof that we expect
in logic or mathematics. Yet on further reflection, we realize that this form of
rigorous proof is actually limited to the somewhat narrow worlds of logic and
mathematics.
It is important to avoid confusing “provability” with “truth.” In science, as we
make a series of observations, we are forced to address the question: what must
be true if we are to explain what is observed? What “big picture” of reality offers

the best fit? Charles Peirce used the term “abduction” to refer to the way in
which scientists generate theories that might offer the best explanation of things.
The method is now more often referred to as “inference to the best explanation.”
A classic example of this can be found in Darwin’s Origin of Species, a work
that both Dawkins and I admire enormously. Both of us regard it as a model of
the scientific method. As we noted earlier in this chapter, Darwin believed that
his theory of “natural selection,” set out in this work, provided the most elegant
and persuasive explanation of biological life forms. But he knew he could not
prove it.28 The problems were obvious.
To begin with, there was no “smoking gun” – no knock-down, unambiguous
evidence which would conclusively and incontrovertibly compel people to
accept his theory. Everything that was then known about the natural world could
be accommodated by rival evolutionary theories, such as transformism.29
Furthermore, there were serious scientific objections and difficulties to his
theory, which led many scientists of his day to believe it was vulnerable.30
Yet despite some formidable difficulties, Darwin believed that his theory was
right, and would one day be shown to be right. How, he asked, could a theory be
wrong when it made so much sense of what he observed? Yes, there were loose
ends everywhere, and a large number of problems. But his core idea seemed to
him to be correct – despite the fact it could not be proved: “A crowd of
difficulties will have occurred to the reader. Some of them are so grave that to
this day I can never reflect on them without being staggered; but, to the best of
my judgment, the greater number are only apparent, and those that are real are
not, I think, fatal to my theory.”31
So does science prove its theories? There are certainly some things that science
(as opposed to logic and mathematics) can prove, and has proved – for example,
that the chemical formula for water is H2O,32 or that the average distance of the
moon from the earth is about 384,500 km. But these are basically facts about our
world. The big scientific questions concern notions about the origins of the
universe, the nature of force and matter, and perhaps the biggest question of
them all: Is there a “Grand Unified Theory” that can explain everything? We can
give good answers to these questions, which we believe can be justified from the
best evidence we have at our disposal. But we can’t give a final answer, because
we know that what scientists believe today may not be what scientists believe in
the future. No wonder that so many standard scientific textbooks rightly
emphasize that “science rests on faith.”33

Most people do not have a problem with this. Faith is just part of human life, and
plays an important role in science as it does everywhere else. However, Dawkins
seems to have an aversion to using the word “faith,” believing it denotes some
kind of intellectual perversity reserved for deluded religious fools. Faith is
invariably blind faith. Well, it’s not. Faith – whether religious or secular – is just
a normal human way of making sense of a complex world. As the philosopher
Julia Kristeva observed, “whether I belong to a religion, whether I be agnostic or
atheist, when I say ‘I believe’, I mean ‘I hold as true’.”34 Or as the cultural
commentator Terry Eagleton put it: “We hold many beliefs that have no
unimpeachably rational justification, but are nonetheless reasonable to
entertain.”35 Dawkins seems to think that faith is confined to religion, when in
fact it saturates the realities of human life.
Is Atheism Itself a Faith?
Is science a religion? Dawkins is often asked this question, and has a standard
answer: No. The sciences, he argues, have all the good points of religious belief,
and none of their bad points. They evoke a sense of wonder at reality, and offer
humanity uplift and inspiration. And they are immune from the problems of
faith. Atheism is the only option for today’s thinking person, whose ideas are
grounded in the only valid mode of encounter with reality – that of the natural
sciences. It’s a splendidly simple account of things.
It all starts to unravel very quickly, however. We have already noted Dawkins’
belief that religious faith is “blind trust, in the absence of evidence, even in the
teeth of evidence.”36 This arbitrary and idiosyncratic definition simply does not
stand up to serious investigation. In fact, it is itself an excellent example of a
false belief tenaciously held and defended “in the absence of evidence, even in
the teeth of evidence.” Dawkins doggedly holds on to his own dogmatic idea of
what “faith” is, despite being repeatedly challenged and contradicted on this
point. But what of atheism itself?
Dawkins presents agnosticism as an intellectual soft option, offering a rhetorical
dismissal of the notion. In his Edinburgh Lecture of 1992 he argued that
agnosticism is a “cop-out” – an argument that can be applied to anything. “There
is an infinite number of hypothetical beliefs we could hold which we can’t
positively disprove.” Now there is unquestionably some truth in this. But the real
difficulty is that Dawkins’ biological arguments – to the extent that they are
genuine arguments, rather than blunt dogmatic assertions – lead only to religious

agnosticism. He is obliged to supplement them with additional arguments of a
non-scientific nature to get to his intended conceptual destination of atheism.
And these are often rhetorical, rather than analytical, in nature. In the end,
Dawkins’ atheism does not really rest on his science at all, but on an unstated
and largely unexamined cluster of hidden non-scientific values and beliefs. As
this point is so important, we shall explore it further.
The debate between atheism and religious belief has gone on for centuries, and
just about every aspect of it has been explored to the point where even
philosophers seem bored with it. The outcome is a stalemate. Nobody can prove
God’s existence, and nobody can disprove it. This does not suit Dawkins at all.
One of the most striking things about Dawkins’ atheism is the confidence with
which he asserts both its inevitability, and its scientific foundations. It is a
curious confidence, which seems curiously out of place – perhaps even out of
order – to those familiar with the philosophy of science. As Richard Feynman
(1918–88), who won the Nobel Prize for physics in 1965 for his work of
quantum electrodynamics, often pointed out, scientific knowledge is a body of
statements of varying degree of certainty – some most unsure, some nearly sure,
but none absolutely certain.37 Yet Dawkins seems to deduce atheism from the
“book of nature” as if it were a pure matter of logic. Atheism is asserted as if it
was the only conclusion possible from a series of axioms.
Many of a more philosophical inclination will want to ask a question at this
point: given that the natural sciences proceed by inference from observational
data, how can Dawkins be so sure about atheism? At times, he speaks with the
conviction of a believer about the certainties of a godless world. It is as if
atheism was the secure and inevitable result of a seamless logical argument. But
how can he achieve such certainty, when the natural sciences are not deductive
in their methods?
This difficulty has puzzled me throughout my reading of Dawkins’ works.
Inference is, by definition, an uncertain matter, in which one must take
enormous trouble not to reach premature conclusions. So how come Dawkins is
so sure about his science-based atheism? Others have examined the same
evidence, and come to quite different conclusions. As will be clear from what
has been said thus far, Dawkins’ insistence that atheism is the only legitimate
worldview for a natural scientist is an unsafe and unreliable judgment. Yet my
anxiety is not limited to the flawed intellectual case that Dawkins’ makes for his
convictions; I am troubled by the ferocity with which he asserts his atheism. One
obvious potential answer is that the grounds of Dawkins’ atheism lie elsewhere
h
hi
i
h
h
i
h
l
i
hi b li f

than his science, so that there is perhaps a strongly emotive aspect to his beliefs
at this point. Yet I have not come across anything that forces me to this
conclusion. The answer has to lie elsewhere.
I began to find an answer to my question while reading Timothy Shanahan’s
careful analysis of Dawkins’ distinctive style of reasoning.38 This study
compared Dawkins’ approach to biological data with that of Stephen Jay Gould.
Shanahan pointed out that Dawkins’ conclusions are actually determined by a set
of logical premises, which are ultimately – yet indirectly – grounded in the
empirical data. “The very nature of a valid deductive argument is such that,
given certain premises, a given conclusion follows of logical necessity quite
irrespective of whether the premises used are true.”39 In effect, Dawkins uses an
essentially inductive approach to defend a Darwinian worldview – yet then
extracts from this worldview a set of premises from which secure conclusions
may be deduced.
Although Shanahan limits his analysis to exploring how Gould and Dawkins
arrive at such antithetically opposed conclusions on the issue of evolutionary
progress, his analysis is clearly capable of extension to his religious views.
Having inferred that Darwinism is the best explanation of observation, Dawkins
proceeds to transmute a provisional scientific theory into a totalizing ideological
worldview. Atheism is thus presented as the logical conclusion of a series of
axiomatic premises, having the certainty of a deduced belief, even though its
ultimate basis is actually inferential.
I have no doubt that Dawkins himself is persuaded of the case for atheism. Yet
the case made is not publicly persuasive. Dawkins is obliged to make a “leap of
faith” from agnosticism to atheism, corresponding to those who make a similar
leap in the opposite direction. The idea that atheism is a form of faith is
unproblematic. It amounts to little more than asserting what everyone knows to
be true: that the things that really matter in life often lie beyond demonstrative
proof. Nobody is going to be able to settle the question of the existence of God
with complete certainty. It’s simply not in the same category as whether the
earth is flat, or whether DNA takes the form of a double helix. It’s more like the
question of whether democracy is better than totalitarianism. This cannot be
settled by scientific means – but this does not present people from reaching their
own conclusions on this matter. Nor does it entail that their decisions on such
matters are irrational – a matter which we may explore a little further in the next
section.
Is Christian Faith Irrational?

Is Christian Faith Irrational?
As we have seen Dawkins’ analysis of faith is highly simplistic, and takes no
account of the way in which words are used in religious contexts. The Austrian
philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889–1951) made the uncontestable point
that words are used with different meanings in different contexts. For
Wittgenstein, the Lebensform (“form of living”) within which a word was used
was of decisive importance in establishing its meaning. As Wittgenstein pointed
out, precisely the same word can be used in a large number of contexts, with
different meanings in each. One way of getting round this problem might be to
invent a totally new vocabulary, in which the meaning of each word was tightly
and unequivocally defined. But this is not a real option. Languages are living
entities, and cannot be forced to behave in such an artificial way.
A perfectly acceptable approach, according to Wittgenstein, is to take trouble to
define the particular sense in which a word should be understood, in order to
avoid confusion with its many other senses. This involves a careful study of its
associations and its use in the “form of living” to which it relates.40 Instead of
blindly and naïvely assuming that a word which means one thing in one situation
means precisely the same in another, it is universally agreed that we need to take
great care in establishing how words are used in each context, and the meanings
that they bear.
This point ought to be familiar to any working scientist, who is perfectly used to
using words in one sense in everyday life, and a more precise, restricted sense
within a laboratory culture. I worked for several years during the late 1970s in
Professor Sir George Radda’s research group in Oxford University’s Department
of Biochemistry. Every weekday morning at 11.00, we gathered for communal
coffee around an ancient gas ring. When someone asked a neighbor to “Pass the
sugar!,” what they were actually asking for was the chemical known as
“sucrose” or, more precisely, α-D-glucopyranosyl-β-D-fructofuranoside. Now in
the natural sciences, the term “sugar” represents a very broad class of chemicals,
which includes the specific sugars found in sugar cane (sucrose), milk (lactose),
and various fruits (fructose). These vary greatly in sweetness. Lactose, for
example, has only 16% of the sweetness of sucrose.
The “sugar” of the everyday world is thus actually one very specific form of the
more general scientific category of sugar – specifically, a 1, 2-glycoside. This
simple difference of vocabulary can cause immense confusion, especially in
relation to health problems arising from excessive sucrose consumption.41 It
might also have led to someone putting lactose in their coffee. We would have

needed to pile six times the amount of lactose into our coffee to achieve the
same degree of sweetness as sucrose. But this confusion just didn’t arise.
Everyone who gathered for coffee knew that words were being used with
different meanings in different contexts, and could tell the difference between
them.
Now there isn’t a problem here. You just get used to living in different worlds,
and becoming sensitive to their subtle linguistic differences. You realize that
words mean different things within different communities. Outsiders find these
subtle differences troubling, and often fail to understand why the distinctive
languages of different communities come into being. There is no question of
dishonesty involved, as if anyone was trying to deceive people by using these
specific forms of language. They evolve naturally, in response to the
professional needs and distinctive tasks of the communities involved. It just
involves becoming bilingual, and sensitive to the different meanings of words in
different contexts. It means being prepared to ask people “What do you mean
when you use that word?,” and being prepared to accept that their use of that
word may not be identical with your use of the word – and that this doesn’t mean
that they are wrong, and you are right. Otherwise, communication across
disciplinary boundaries becomes impossible. Scientists use language in a way
that differs from ordinary usage; so do theologians. The first stage in any attempt
to engage with a discipline is to understand its use of language.
Dawkins knows this perfectly well. He famously ridiculed philosopher Mary
Midgley for criticizing his “selfish gene” hypothesis for her apparent lack of
awareness of how scientists used language. His words deserve to be cited –
against him:
[Midgley] seems not to understand biology or the way biologists use
language. No doubt my ignorance would be just as obvious if I rushed
headlong into her field of expertise, but I would then adopt a more diffident
tone. As it is we are both in my corner, and it is hard for me not to regard the
gloves as off.42
So this is the same Richard Dawkins who, knowing nothing about Christian
theology, rushes headlong into the field, and tells theologians what they really
mean when they use their own language? Or that they really mean “blind trust”
when they speak of “faith”? There is a total failure on Dawkins’ part even to
begin to understand what Christian theology means by its language. It really
does make it very difficult to take his judgments concerning its alleged failures
with any degree of seriousness.

Let’s try and get things straight here. As a professional theologian, I have no
hesitation in asserting that the classic Christian tradition has always valued
rationality, and does not hold that faith involves the complete abandonment of
reason or believing in the teeth of the evidence. Indeed, the Christian tradition is
so consistent on this matter that it is difficult to understand where Dawkins has
got the idea of faith as “blind trust” from. Even a superficial reading of the
works of leading Christian philosophers such as Richard Swinburne (Oxford
University), Nicolas Wolterstorff (Yale University), and Alvin Plantinga
(University of Notre Dame), or even popular writers such as C. S. Lewis,43
would reveal their passionate commitment to the question of how one can make
“warranted,” “evidenced,” or “coherent” statements concerning God.44 There is
no question of “blind trust.” The issue is how one can make an informed,
rational, and defensible judgment on the God-question, when the evidence is
open to multiple readings.
Now perhaps Dawkins is too busy writing books against religion to allow him
time to read works of religion. On the rare occasions when he cites classic
theologians, he tends to do so at second hand, often with alarming results. For
example, Dawkins singles out the early Christian writer Tertullian (c. 160–c.
225) for particularly acerbic comment, on account of two quotations from his
writings: “It is certain because it is impossible”; and “it is by all means to be
believed because it is absurd.”45 Dawkins has little time for such nonsense.
“That way madness lies.”
In his view, Tertullian’s approach – as evidenced by these two isolated citations
– is just like that of the White Queen in Lewis Carroll’s Through the Looking-
Glass, who insisted on believing six impossible things before breakfast. As this
dismissive account of Tertullian is one of the very few occasions on which
Dawkins engages with serious representatives of the Christian theological
tradition, I propose to take his comments with seriousness, and see where they
take us. They might tell us something about Tertullian. Or even about
Christianity. Or, then again, about Dawkins himself.
Tertullian, a Roman theologian based in the North African city of Carthage,
never wrote the words “it is by all means to be believed because it is absurd.”
This garbled misquotation is often attributed to him in secondary writings. But it
is a misreading, and has been known to be such for some time.46 So at least we
can reasonably assume that Dawkins has not read Tertullian himself, but has
taken this citation from an unreliable secondary source.

Tertullian really did, however, write the words “it is certain because it is
impossible.” The context, however, makes it clear that he is not for one moment
arguing for a “blind faith.”47 Tertullian is not discussing the relation of faith and
reason, or the evidential basis of Christianity. Reading the passage in context
immediately eliminates any such idea. It has been known since 1916 that
Tertullian is parodying some ideas from Aristotle in this passage. “The phrase is
often misquoted, and more often it is supposed to crystallize an irrational
prejudice in his mind, as if he scorned and spurned the intelligence in religion –
a supposition which will not survive any first-hand acquaintance with [his]
writings.”48
What is the point that Tertullian is making? He is simply pointing out that the
Christian gospel is profoundly counter-cultural and counterintuitive on the
importance of Christ’s death. So why would anyone want to make it up, when it
is so obviously implausible by those standards of wisdom? Tertullian then
parodies a passage from Aristotle’s Rhetoric, which argues that an extraordinary
claim may well be true, precisely because it is so out of the ordinary. It was
probably meant to be a rhetorical joke, for those who knew their Aristotle.
It is grossly inaccurate and unfair to determine Tertullian’s rich understanding of
the rationality of faith on the basis of a single, isolated phrase. If any phrase
sums up Tertullian’s attitude to reason, it is the following: “For reason is a
property of God’s, since there is nothing which God, the creator of all things, has
not foreseen, arranged and determined by reason. Furthermore, there is nothing
God does not wish to be investigated and understood by reason.”49 The bottom
line is that there are no limits to what may be “investigated and understood by
reason.” The same God who created humanity with the capacity to reason
expects that reason to be used in the exploration and representation of the world.
And that’s where the vast majority of Christian theologians stand today, and
have stood in the past. Sure, there are exceptions. But Dawkins seems to prefer
to treat exceptions as if they were the rule, offering no evidence in support of
this highly questionable conclusion.
Christian theologians regard their faith as intellectually warranted for many
reasons – perhaps most notably because of the coherent account of reality it
offers. A good example of this is found in the writings of C. S. Lewis (1898–
1963), who abandoned his earlier “glib and shallow rationalism” on account of
the more satisfying vision of reality he encountered in Christianity. Lewis
declared that he was an “empirical theist,” who arrived at belief in God by
“induction.”50 His views on the rational foundations of his faith are summarized

in this pithy sentence, now inscribed on his memorial stone in Poet’s Corner,
Westminster Abbey: “I believe in Christianity as I believe that the Sun has risen,
not only because I see it, but because by it I see everything else.”51
Lewis may well have found this way of thinking already expressed in the
writings G. K. Chesterton. After his initial agnosticism, Chesterton’s spiritual
journey took a decisive new turn in 1903. He published a newspaper article
explaining why he and many others now regarded Christianity with intense
intellectual seriousness. “We have returned to it because it is an intelligible
picture of the world.” Chesterton realized that testing a theory meant checking it
out against observation: “The best way to see if a coat fits a man is not to
measure both of them, but to try it on.” Let Chesterton himself explain what he
has in mind:
Numbers of us have returned to this belief; and we have returned to it, not
because of this argument or that argument, but because the theory, when it is
adopted, works out everywhere; because the coat, when it is tried on, fits in
every crease … We put on the theory, like a magic hat, and history becomes
translucent like a house of glass.52
Chesterton’s argument is that it is the Christian vision of reality as a whole –
rather than any of its individual components – that proves so compelling.
Individual observations of nature do not “prove” Christianity to be true; rather,
Christianity validates itself by its ability to make sense of those observations.
Chesterton puts this in a sentence rich with inductive insight: “The phenomenon
does not prove religion, but religion explains the phenomenon.” For Chesterton,
a good theory – whether scientific or religious – is to be judged by the amount of
illumination it offers, and its capacity to accommodate what we see in the world
around us and experience within us.
We find a similar view in the writings of Dorothy L. Sayers, who became
convinced that Christianity seemed to offer “the only explanation of the universe
that is intellectually satisfactory.”53 For Christians, faith goes beyond what is
logically demonstrable, yet is nevertheless capable of rational motivation and
foundation. It is a form of motivated or warranted belief – not a blind leap into
the dark, but a joyful discovery of a bigger picture of things, of which we are
part.
But my concern here is not to show that Christianity is right; it is simply to point
out two things. First, that its adherents believe it to be rational, and believe that
they are justified in believing it to be rational. And second, that Dawkins does
t
ll k
h t h i t lki g b
t h

not really know what he is talking about here.
The Problem of Radical Theory Change in
Science
When I was learning physics at high school, I gradually became aware of an
awkward contradiction within what I was being taught. On the one hand, I was
being assured that the theories of modern physics were completely reliable, the
most secure form of knowledge that humanity could ever hope to possess. Yet
every now and then, we would venture into a strange, twilight region, in which it
would be explained to us, in hushed, conspiratorial tones, that “physicists once
used to believe this, but they don’t believe this now.” Most of these had to do
with the nature of light – something that was reasonably simple for a sixteen-
year-old to understand. Once, it was thought that light required a medium to
travel – but now, in the enlightened 1960s, nobody believed that any more.
Once, people thought that light was made up purely of waves – but now we
knew that it consists of photons. At first, I thought that these old-fashioned
views dated back to the sixteenth century. But the awful truth soon became clear.
The acceptance of these new ideas dated from about forty years earlier. “Once”
turned out to mean “quite recently.”
The problem of “radical theory change” in science cannot be overlooked in any
responsible account of the scope of the scientific method. It is impossible to
assume that today’s scientific knowledge determines how things will be seen in
future, or that today’s scientific theories will continue to retain the confidence of
future generations. There is no doubt that such confident attitudes were held in
the late nineteenth century.54 Theoretical stability had been assumed to be a sign
of theoretical truth. Yet this simply turned out to be complacency.
Many noted nineteenth-century scientists held that everything worth knowing
was now known. In 1871, James Clerk Maxwell (1831–79) expressed his
irritation with the then prevailing idea that physics had uncovered all that could
be known, so that all that remained was to establish measurements to the next
place of decimals.55 Max Planck (1858–1947) relates how he found himself
uncertain what subject to study at the University of Munich in 1875. His
inclination to study the natural sciences was rubbished by the Professor of
Physics at the university, who declared that nothing worthwhile remained to be
discovered.56 Robert A. Millikan (1868–1953) – whose investigations of the
electron broke new ground – recalls how physics was widely regarded as a “dead

subject” in American academic circles during the early 1890s.57 Such views
were widespread, and can be found in many scientific writings of the period. The
leading American astronomer Simon Newcomb (1835–1909) felt able to assert
in 1888 that more or less everything of importance had been seen and measured;
what remained was to consolidate this body of knowledge.58 Sure, a few more
comets would be discovered. But the “big picture” was settled. It just remained
for some more detail to be filled in.
Yet by 1920, a revolution was under way within physics. The great age of
“classical physics” was over, and a new age dominated by quantum mechanics,
the theory of relativity, and a Big Bang cosmology was dawning. There was no
hint in the final decades of the nineteenth century of the tidal wave of change
that was about to sweep over the natural sciences in the twentieth. Nobody in the
nineteenth century seemed to have any idea of the massive upheavals that would
take place, overturning many of the scientific certainties of the age. The theories
seemed settled, assured, and constant. A century later, however, new theoretical
paradigms had taken over.
Historians and philosophers of science have produced long lists of scientific
theories, each of which was believed by one generation to be the best possible
representation of reality, yet which were abandoned by later generations, in the
light of new discoveries and increasingly precise measurements of what was
already known. Some theories have proved remarkably stable; many have been
radically modified, and others abandoned altogether.59
As Michael Polanyi pointed out, natural scientists find themselves having to
believe some things that they know will later be shown to be wrong – but not
being sure which of their present beliefs would turn out to be erroneous. How
can Dawkins be so sure that his current beliefs are true, when history shows a
persistent pattern of abandoning of scientific theories as better approaches
emerge? What historian of science can fail to note that what was once regarded
as secure knowledge was eroded through the passage of time?
Scientific theorizing is thus provisional. In other words, it offers what is believed
to be the best account of the experimental observations currently available.
Radical theory change takes place either when it is believed that there is a better
explanation of what is currently known, or when new information comes to light
which forces us to see what is presently known in a new light. Unless we know
the future, it is impossible to take an absolute position on the question of
whether any given theory is “right.” What can be said – and, indeed, must be
said – is that this is believed to be the best explanation currently available.

History simply makes fools of those who argue that every aspect of the current
theoretical situation is true for all time. The problem is that we don’t know
which of today’s theories will be discarded as interesting failures by future
generations, and which will be retained.
If theories are thus subject to erosion, what of worldviews that are based upon
them? What happens to a worldview, if its theoretical foundations collapse?
Once more, history provides us with ample warnings of what happens when a
scientific theory underpinning a worldview collapses. Like a house of cards, the
worldview follows suit.
It is absolutely correct to say that “evolutionary biologists currently believe that
Darwinism is the best theoretical explanation of earth’s life-forms.” But this
does not mean that future evolutionary biologists will share this judgment. We
may believe that Darwinism is right, but we do not know that this is so. To do
this, we need to stand in a hypothetical position, which allows us to see the
evidence of the future. On the basis of what we currently know, we may hold
this theoretical position; however, the history of science makes it clear that new
evidence has a habit of arising, causing radical revision – perhaps even
abandonment – of many long-held theories. Will Darwinism be one of them? As
we noted earlier, Dawkins rightly recognizes that future generations may
abandon Darwinism, or revise it radically. And what then will happen to any
worldviews, whether atheist or theist, which are founded on this same
Darwinism? The only honest answer is that we don’t know. Darwinism, like any
other scientific theory, is best seen as a temporary resting place, not a final
destination.
The Limits of Science
The natural sciences are empirical in their approach – in other words, they rely
on the application of observation and experiment in investigating the world. Yet
empiricism refuses as a matter of principle to speculate about any realities
beyond the observable world. Bas van Fraasen, a leading philosopher of science,
makes this point clearly:
To be an empiricist is to withhold belief in anything that goes beyond the
actual, observable phenomena, and to recognize no objective modality in
nature. To develop an empiricist account of science is to depict it as involving
a search for truth only about the empirical world, about what is actual and
observable … it must invoke throughout a resolute rejection of the demand

for an explanation of the regularities in the observable course of nature by
means of truths concerning a reality beyond what is actual and observable.60
This emphasis on what is “actual and observable” gives the sciences their
distinct identity. But it also defines their limits.
The clumsy word “scientism” – often glossed as “scientific imperialism”61 – is
now used to refer to the view that science can solve all our problems, explain
human nature, or tell us what is morally good.62 It claims that all that is known,
or can be known, is capable of verification or falsification using the scientific
method. Anything that cannot be verified or falsified in this manner is to be
regarded as at best mere private opinion or belief, and at worst delusion or
fantasy. Yet very few natural scientists embrace scientific imperialism, which
appears to appeal to a handful of philosophers on the one hand, and a much
larger cohort of adherents of popular “scientific atheism” on the other.
Two areas of thought that clearly lie beyond the legitimate scope of the natural
sciences are the non-empirical notions of value and meaning. These cannot be
read off the world, or measured as if they were constants of nature. As the
philosopher Hilary Putnam rightly notes, while there is such a thing as
“correctness in ethics,” it is important not to model our ethical thinking “on the
ways in which we get things right in physics.”63 It has been known since the
eighteenth century that there are formidable intellectual obstacles in the way of
anyone wanting to argue that science can generate moral values, most notably
the impossibility of arguing from observed facts to moral values.
Religion engages with questions that lie beyond the scope of the scientific
method – such as the existence of God, the meaning of life, and the nature of
values. These are all open to rational debate; it is very doubtful that they are
open to scientific analysis in that they are not empirical notions. Sir Peter
Medawar (1915–97), who won the Nobel Prize in medicine for his work on
immunology, drew what seems to me to be an important and entirely defensible
distinction between “transcendent” questions, which he thought were best left to
religion and metaphysics, and questions about the organization and structure of
the material universe, which were the bread and butter of the natural sciences.
Medawar insisted that it is “very likely” that there are limits to science, given
“the existence of questions that science cannot answer, and that no conceivable
advance of science would empower it to answer.”64
So what sort of questions did Medawar have in mind? These turn out to be
questions such as “What are we all here for? What is the point of living?” These

are real questions, and we are right to seek answers to them. But science – if
applied legitimately – isn’t going to help us here. We need to look elsewhere for
answers. Karl Popper noted the importance of such “ultimate questions,” both in
terms of their intrinsic importance, and their transcendence of the scientific
method.
It is important to realize that science does not make assertions about ultimate
questions — about the riddles of existence, or about man’s task in this world.
This has often been well understood. But some great scientists, and many
lesser ones, have misunderstood the situation. The fact that science cannot
make any pronouncement about ethical principles has been misinterpreted as
indicating that there are no such principles.65
Mystery, Insanity, and Nonsense
Dawkins is a splendid representative of the no-nonsense “one rationality fits all”
approach of the Enlightenment. Perhaps this is most obvious in his discussion of
“mystery” – a category which he cheerfully, if a little prematurely, reduces to
“plain insanity or surrealist nonsense.”66 We can make sense of things – or, if we
can’t make sense of things right now, the relentless advance of science will make
this possible sooner or later. Given enough time, anything can happen. Religious
people who talk about “mystery” are just irrational mystics who are too lazy or
frightened to use their minds properly.
It is a recognizable caricature of the idea of “mystery.” But it’s still a caricature.
Here is what a theologian means when using the word “mystery”: something
which is true and possesses its own rationality – yet which the human mind finds
it impossible to grasp fully. Some years ago, I started learning Japanese. I didn’t
get very far. The language uses three syllabaries, has a vocabulary which bears
little relation to any of the languages that I knew, and a syntax that seemed
completely illogical to my western way of thinking. In short: I couldn’t make
sense of it. But my failure to grasp the Japanese language represented a failure
on my part. Those who know the language assure me that it is rational and
intelligible; it is just that I wasn’t able to get my mind around it.
There is no way that the concept of “mystery” means “an irrationality,” except in
the sense that it may be counterintuitive. It may lie beyond the present capacity
of human reason to grasp; that does not mean it is contrary to reason, as Thomas
Aquinas emphasized. The human mind is just too limited to grasp the totality of
such a reality, and we must therefore do what we can, while recognizing our
li i
W
G d
d h
fi d
h
J h D
ll d “ h i

limits. We are not God, and hence find what John Donne called “the immense
weight of divine glory” difficult to cope with.
And it is not just an issue in the area of theology. Any attempt to engage with the
immensity of nature – such as the seemingly vast time-scale of Darwinian
evolution – faces the same problems, and makes the use of both the word and the
idea of “mystery” entirely appropriate in the natural science. Dawkins himself
knows this, as is clear from his derisive comment on postmodern critics of the
sciences:
Modern physics teaches us that there is more to truth than meets the eye; or
than meets the all too limited human mind, evolved as it was to cope with
medium-sized objects moving at medium speeds through medium distances
in Africa. In the face of these profound and sublime mysteries, the low-grade
intellectual poodling of pseudo-philosophical poseurs seems unworthy of
adult attention.67
My point precisely.
Quantum mechanics is an excellent example of an area of science where the
category of “mystery” seems entirely appropriate. It is something that we believe
to be true, and to possess a deep rationality of its own – but which it often seems
impossible to get our minds around. I certainly found my mathematics pressed to
its limits when specializing in this discipline at Oxford in the academic year
1972–3. Dawkins concurs, noting in particular how its conclusions “can be
disturbingly counterintuitive.”68
The point here is that both the scientific and religious communities can be
thought of as attempting to wrestle with the ambiguities of experience, and
offering the “best possible explanations” for what is observed, while accepting
the intellectual difficulties that may arise if we think in this way. The analysis of
experience can lead to the generation of conceptualities which are often very
complex, and occasionally quite counterintuitive. Many more unreflective
natural scientists hostile to religion deride the complexity of its conceptualities.
Science, they argue, deals with simple ideas, and avoids such extravagant
ventures into such realms. Others, however, who have given more careful
thought to the matter are not so sure.
The Princeton philosopher of science Bas van Fraassen is intensely skeptical of
those who suggest that science is justifiably simple whereas religion is
unjustifiably complex; once more, quantum theory is cited as an example: “Do
the concepts of the Trinity, the soul, haecceity, universals, prime matter, and

potentiality baffle you? They pale beside the unimaginable otherness of closed
space-times, event-horizons, EPR correlations and bootstrap models.”69 Fraassen
clearly considers that the conceptual and imaginative demands of some areas of
modern physics exceed those traditionally associated with even the most
labyrinthine theological and philosophical systems of the Middle Ages. His point
is that an empirical engagement with the world of experience and phenomena
throws up theoretical concepts which are far from simple, yet which appear to be
inevitable if the phenomena are to be preserved.
For an orthodox Christian theologian, the doctrine of the Trinity is the inevitable
outcome of intellectual engagement with the Christian experience of God; for
the physicist, equally abstract and bewildering concepts emerge from wrestling
with the world of quantum phenomena. But both are committed to sustained
intellectual engagement with those phenomena, in order to derive and develop
theories or doctrines which can be said to do justice to them, preserving rather
than reducing them.
Dawkins’ most reflective account of “mystery” is found in Unweaving the
Rainbow, which explores the place of wonder in an understanding of the
sciences. While maintaining Dawkins’ core hostility to religion, the work
acknowledges the importance of a sense of awe and wonder in driving people to
want to understand reality. Dawkins singles out the poet William Blake as an
obscurant mystic, who illustrates why religious approaches to mystery are
pointless and sterile. Dawkins locates Blake’s many failings in an
understandable – but misdirected – longing to delight in a mystery:
The impulses to awe, reverence and wonder which led Blake to mysticism …
are precisely those that lead others of us to science. Our interpretation is
different but what excites us is the same. The mystic is content to bask in the
wonder and revel in a mystery that we were not “meant” to understand. The
scientist feels the same wonder, but is restless, not content; recognizes the
mystery as profound, then adds, “But we’re working on it.”70
So there isn’t actually a problem with the word or the category of “mystery.”
The question is whether we choose to wrestle with it, or take the lazy and
complacent view that this is conveniently off-limits.
In this chapter, we have considered some aspects of Dawkins’ understanding of
the role of the sciences in leading us to form reliable judgments and opinions.
The importance of the issue is obvious. Yet our reflections have focused on the
sciences in general. So what of evolutionary biology in particular? What is its

relevance to religion, and the deeper questions of life? In the next chapter, we
shall consider The Blind Watchmaker (1983), in which Dawkins explicitly
engages the religious implications of a Darwinian worldview.
Notes
1 Thomas H. Huxley, Darwiniana. London: Macmillan, 1893, 252.
2 Helge S. Kragh, Conceptions of Cosmos: From Myths to the Accelerating
Universe. A History of Cosmology. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.
3 A Devil's Chaplain, 81.
4 Paul Hoyningen-Huene, Reconstructing Scientific Revolutions: Thomas S.
Kuhn’s Philosophy of Science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993,
197–265.
5 A Devil’s Chaplain, 117.
6 The Selfish Gene, 198.
7 Richard E. Nisbett and Lee D. Ross, Human Inference: Strategies and
Shortcomings of Social Judgment. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1980,
192.
8 Nisbett and Ross, Human Inference, 169.
9 Keith Ward, God, Chance and Necessity. Oxford: One World, 1996, 99–100.
10 The Selfish Gene, 198.
11 The Selfish Gene, 330 (this passage added in the second edition).
12 The lecture had no agreed title, and was published under the title “Lions 10,
Christians Nil” in vol. 1, no. 8 (December 1994) of an electronic journal
entitled “The Nullafidian,” which describes itself as “The E-Zine of Atheistic
Secular Humanism and Freethought,” formerly known as “Lucifer’s Echo.”
There is no pagination. The journal appears to have ceased publication in
March 1996.
13 A Devil’s Chaplain, 117.
14 William Kingdon Clifford, The Ethics of Belief and Other Essays. Amherst,

NY: Prometheus, 1999, 70–96.
15 See for example Laurie Calhoun, “The Underdetermination of Theory by
Data, ‘Inference to the Best Explanation’, and the Impotence of
Argumentation.” Philosophical Forum 27 (1996): 146–60.
16 The Life and Letters of Charles Darwin, edited by F. Darwin. 3 vols. London:
John Murray, 1887, vol. 2, 155. Hutton deserves much greater attention as a
perceptive interpreter of Darwin: see for example John Stenhouse, “Darwin’s
Captain: F. W. Hutton and the Nineteenth-Century Darwinian Debates.”
Journal of the History of Biology 23 (1990): 411–42.
17 Charles Darwin, Origin of Species. 6th edn. London: John Murray, 1872, 444.
This comment is not present in earlier editions of the work.
18 William James, “The Will to Believe.” In The Will to Believe and Other
Essays in Popular Philosophy. New York: Longmans, 1897, 1–31, 3.
19 Gerald E. Myers, William James, His Life and Thought. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press, 1986, 460.
20 A Devil’s Chaplain, 248.
21 W. H. Griffith-Thomas, The Principles of Theology. London: Longmans,
1930, xviii. Faith thus includes “the certainty of evidence” and the “certainty
of adherence”; it is “not blind, but intelligent” (xviii–xix).
22 See for example Dimitry V. Pospielovsky, A History of Marxist-Leninist
Atheism and Soviet Anti-Religious Policies. New York: St. Martin’s Press,
1987.
23 Debate between Richard Dawkins and Steve Pinker at Westminster Central
Hall, London, on February 19, 1999, chaired by Tim Radford, science
correspondent of The Guardian.
24 The Selfish Gene, 330.
25 For a collection of essays from leading thinkers exploring the options, see
Bernard Carr, ed., Universe or Multiverse? Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2007.
26 See the important discussion of the relation between “evidence” and
“warrant” in Susan Haack, Evidence and Inquiry. Oxford: Blackwell, 1993,

158–81.
27 For the context of this remark, see John Polkinghorne, Theology in the
Context of Science. London: SPCK, 2008, 84–6.
28 See his famous comments on F. W. Hutton’s concerns about his theory: The
Life and Letters of Charles Darwin, edited by F. Darwin. 3 vols. London:
John Murray, 1887, vol. 2, 155.
29 Pietro Corsi, “Before Darwin: Transformist Concepts in European Natural
History.” Journal of the History of Biology 38 (2005): 67–83.
30 For a discussion of these difficulties, see Abigail J. Lustig, “Darwin’s
Difficulties.” In The Cambridge Companion to the “Origin of Species,”
edited by Michael Ruse and Robert J. Richards, 109–28. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2009.
31 Charles Darwin, Origin of Species. 1st edn. London: John Murray, 1859, 171.
32 Though there is a lot more that needs to be said about this: see Barbara
Abbott, “Water = H2O.” Mind 108 (1999): 145–8.
33 Hugh G. Gauch, Scientific Method in Practice. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 2003, 152.
34 Julia Kristeva, The Incredible Need to Believe. New York: Columbia
University Press, 2009, 3. Her general point is widely accepted within
contemporary philosophy: see for example Slavoj Žižek, How to Read Lacan.
London: Granta, 2007, 93–4; John Cottingham, Why Believe? London:
Continuum, 2009.
35 Terry Eagleton, “Lunging, Flailing, Mispunching.” Review of The God
Delusion. October 19, 2006. London Review of Books,
www.lrb.co.uk/v28/n20/terry-eagleton/lunging-flailing-mispunching,
accessed August 7, 2014.
36 The Selfish Gene, 198.
37 See especially Richard P. Feynman, What Do You Care What Other People
Think? London: Unwin Hyman, 1989; Richard P. Feynman, The Meaning of
It All. London: Penguin, 1999.
38 Timothy Shanahan, “Methodological and Contextual Factors in the

Dawkins/Gould Dispute over Evolutionary Progress.” Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of
Biological and Biomedical Sciences 32 (2001): 127–51.
39 Shanahan, “Methodological and Contextual Factors,” 140.
40 .Ludwig Wittgenstein, Lectures and Conversations on Aesthetics, Psychology
and Religious Belief. Oxford: Blackwell, 1966, “If I had to say what is the
main mistake made by philosophers . . . I would say that it is that when
language is looked at, what is looked at is a form of words and not the use
made of the form of words.”
41 Madeleine Sigman-Grant and Jaime Morita, “Defining and Interpreting
Intakes of Sugars.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 78 (2003): 815S–
626S.
42 Richard Dawkins, “In Defence of Selfish Genes.” Philosophy 56 (1981):
556–73. For Midgley’s original article, see Mary Midgley, “Gene-Juggling.”
Philosophy 54 (1979): 439–58. For her response to Dawkins’ criticisms, see
Mary Midgley, “Selfish Genes and Social Darwinism.” Philosophy 58
(1983): 365–77. Emphases original.
43 Alister E. McGrath, “An Enhanced Vision of Rationality: C. S. Lewis on the
Reasonableness of Christian Faith.” Theology 116, no. 6 (2013): 410–17.
44 I have in mind such works as Richard Swinburne, The Coherence of Theism.
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1977; Nicholas Wolterstorff, Reason within the
Bounds of Religion. Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1984; Alvin Plantinga,
Warranted Christian Belief. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.
45 A Devil’s Chaplain, 139.
46 For details, see Robert D. Sider, “Credo Quia Absurdum?” Classical World
73 (1978): 417–19.
47 Tertullian, De paenitentia, v.4.
48 James Moffat, “Tertullian and Aristotle.” Journal of Theological Studies 17
(1916): 170–1. For a more recent study, see Robert D. Sider, Ancient
Rhetoric and the Art of Tertullian. London: Oxford University Press, 1971,
56–9.

49 Tertullian, de poenitentia i, 2. “Quippe res dei ratio quia deus omnium
conditor nihil non ratione providit disposuit ordinavit, nihil enim non ratione
tractari intellegique voluit.”
50 These phrases are found in a manuscript known as “Early Prose Joy,” held at
the Wade Center, Wheaton College, Illinois. I explore the contours of
Lewis’s conversion (or “re-conversion”) in Alister E. McGrath, C. S. Lewis –
A Life. Eccentric Genius, Reluctant Prophet. London: Hodder & Stoughton,
2013, 135–51.
51 C. S. Lewis, “Is Theology Poetry?” In C. S. Lewis: Essay Collection. London:
Collins, 2000, 21.
52 G. K. Chesterton, “The Return of the Angels.” Daily News, March 14, 1903.
53 Letter to L. T. Duff, May 10, 1943; The Letters of Dorothy L. Sayers vol. 2:
1937 to 1943, edited by Barbara Reynolds. New York: St. Martin’s Press,
1996, 401.
54 See the excellent study of Lawrence Badash, “The Completeness of
Nineteenth-Century Science.” Isis 63 (1973): 48–58.
55 W. D. Niven, ed., The Scientific Papers of James Clerk Maxwell. 2 vols.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980, vol. 2, 244.
56 Max Planck, A Scientific Autobiography. New York: Philosophical Library,
1949, 8.
57 Robert A. Millikan, The Autobiography of Robert A. Millikan. New York:
Houghton, Mifflin, 1950, 23–4. On Millikan, see Robert Hugh Pargon, The
Rise of Robert Millikan: Portrait of a Life in American Science. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press, 1982.
58 Simon Newcomb, “The Place of Astronomy among the Sciences.” The
Sidereal Messenger 7 (1888): 69–70.
59 For the biological sciences, see the points raised by Sylvia Culp and Philip
Kitcher, “Theory Structure and Theory Change in Contemporary Molecular
Biology.” British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 40 (1989): 459–83.
60 Bas C. van Fraassen, The Scientific Image. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1980, 202–3.

61 John Dupré, “Against Scientific Imperialism.” PSA: Proceedings of the
Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Association 2 (1994): 374–81.
62 For critiques, see Frederick A. Olafson, Naturalism and the Human
Condition: Against Scientism. London: Routledge, 2001; Mikael Stenmark,
Scientism: Science, Ethics and Religion. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2001. For
helpful nuancing of the issues, see Susan Haack, Defending Science – Within
Reason: Between Scientism and Cynicism. Amherst, NY: Prometheus, 2003.
63 Hilary Putnam, “Was Wittgenstein Really an Anti-Realist about
Mathematics?” In Wittgenstein in America, edited by Timothy McCarthy and
Sean C. Stidd. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001, 140–94, 185–6.
64 Peter B. Medawar, The Limits of Science. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1985, 66.
65 Karl R. Popper, “Natural Selection and the Emergence of Mind.” Dialectica
32 (1978): 339–55, 342.
66 A Devil’s Chaplain, 139.
67 A Devil’s Chaplain, 19.
68 A Devil’s Chaplain, 18–19. He cites in support Lewis Wolpert’s excellent
study The Unnatural Nature of Science. London: Faber & Faber, 1992.
69 Bas van Fraassen, “Empiricism in the Philosophy of Science.” In Images of
Science: Essays on Realism and Empiricism, edited by P. Churchland and C.
Hooker, 245–308. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985, 258.
70 Unweaving the Rainbow, 17.

4
The Blind Watchmaker
Evolution and the Elimination of God?
Although Dawkins had sketched his views on the implications of a Darwinian
worldview for religion in earlier writings, his first systematic treatment of this
issue is found in his important work The Blind Watchmaker (1986). The subtitle
emphasizes one of the work’s core themes: “Why the evidence of evolution
reveals a universe without design.” The Blind Watchmaker is regarded as one of
Dawkins’ most important publications, and reveals both his skills as a
communicator and his commitment to a Darwinian worldview. His aim in
writing the book, he declared, was not only to persuade his readers “that the
Darwinian worldview happens to be true” but that this is “the only known theory
that could, in principle, solve the mystery of our existence.”1 Darwinism,
Dawkins suggested, is true, not merely on this planet, but throughout the
universe wherever life may be found.
The Contours of a Darwinian Worldview
The title The Blind Watchmaker represents a critique of the image of God as a
“watchmaker,” which began to be used in the late seventeenth century, and
played a prominent role in William Paley’s landmark work Natural Theology
(1802).2 Paley argued that the complexities of the biological world were to be
compared to the machinery of a clockwork watch, forcing any intelligent
observer to draw the conclusion that the biological realm had been designed and
constructed by God.
Dawkins’ decision to engage Paley is entirely appropriate, given that Charles
Darwin himself was initially persuaded by Paley’s arguments, before beginning
to realize that they were inadequate at points. Indeed, Darwin’s growing
realization that his own theory of evolution made more sense of his detailed
observations than Paley’s was of no small importance in persuading him of the
need to publish his findings, and explain the appeal of his new approach.3 In
effect, Dawkins sets out to offer an updated version of Darwin’s own
engagement with Paley, extending Darwin’s critique of Paley to include his
modern interpreters and followers.

Two themes dominate The Blind Watchmaker. First, that the complexities of the
biological world which seem to point toward a divine designer are to be seen as
mere “appearances of design”; they are, in fact, the outcome of the blind process
of evolution. Living organisms evolve by means of the process of natural
selection, which “does not see ahead, does not plan consequences, [and] has no
purpose in view.”4 And second, the Darwinian worldview effectively eliminates
God as a redundancy, offering a superior and simpler explanation of what we
observe in the world around us.
This second point brings us to an important aspect of Dawkins’ understanding of
science, especially as it relates to religion. In his landmark essay “Darwin
Triumphant: Darwinism as Universal Truth,” Richard Dawkins sets out his
conviction that Darwin’s theory of evolution is more than just a scientific theory,
on the same epistemological level as other such provisional theories. Darwinism
is to be seen as a worldview, a total account of reality, a “universal and timeless”
principle, capable of being applied throughout the universe. In comparison, rival
worldviews such as Marxism are to be seen as “parochial and ephemeral,”5
lacking the grounding in a scientific understanding of reality that is so
characteristic of Darwin’s theory of natural selection, and the understandings of
the world and human nature that emerge from it. Darwinism is not being
presented as a representative element of the scientific enterprise, with a
legitimate place at the round table of ethical and social debate. It is clearly
understood as the defining account of reality.
Where most evolutionary biologists would agree that Darwinism offers a
description of reality, Dawkins and some others go further, holding that it is to
be seen as an explanation of things. Darwinism is a worldview, a grand récit, a
metanarrative6 – that is to say, a totalizing framework, by which the great
questions of life are to be evaluated and answered. Dawkins’ advocacy of
Darwinism as a “worldview” has provoked criticism from postmodern writers,
for whom any metanarrative – whether Marxist, Freudian, or Darwinian – is to
be resisted as a matter of principle.7 Although this criticism of Dawkins is often
portrayed as postmodern critique of science, it is clearly a critique of a
worldview alleged to be based upon science.
One of Dawkins’ main concerns in The Blind Watchmaker is to challenge the
“appearance of design” within the natural world, especially at the biological
level. Surely the intricate structure of aspect of the biological world – such as the
human eye – points to something that cannot be explained by random natural
forces, and which obliges us to invoke a divine creator by way of explanation?

How otherwise may we explain the vast and complex structures that we observe
in nature?8
Dawkins’ answer is set out primarily in The Blind Watchmaker, with important
amplification of some points in the later work Climbing Mount Improbable. The
fundamental argument common to both works is that complex things evolve
from simple beginnings, over long periods of time:
Living things are too improbable and too beautifully “designed” to have come
into existence by chance. How, then, did they come into existence? The
answer, Darwin’s answer, is by gradual, step-by-step transformations from
simple beginnings, from primordial entities sufficiently simple to have come
into existence by chance. Each successful change in the gradual evolutionary
process was simple enough, relative to its predecessor, to have arisen by
chance. But the whole sequence of cumulative steps constitutes anything but
a chance process.9
What might seem to be a highly improbable development needs to be set against
the backdrop of the huge periods of time envisaged by the evolutionary process.
Dawkins explores this point using the image of a metaphorical “Mount
Improbable.” Seen from one angle, its “towering, vertical cliffs” seem
impossible to climb. Yet seen from another angle, the mountain turns out to have
“gently inclined grassy meadows, graded steadily and easily towards the distant
uplands.”10
The “illusion of design,” Dawkins argues, arises because we intuitively regard
structures as being too complex to have arisen by chance. An excellent example
is provided by the human eye, cited by some advocates of the divine design and
direct special creation of the world as a confirmation of God’s existence. In one
of the most detailed and argumentative chapters of Climbing Mount Improbable,
Dawkins conducts a mental experiment to show how, given enough time, even
such a complex organ could have evolved from something much simpler.11
It’s all standard Darwinism. What’s new is the lucidity of the presentation, and
the detailed illustration and defense of these ideas through judiciously selected
case studies and carefully crafted analogies. In that Dawkins sees Darwinism as
a worldview, rather than a biological theory, he has no hesitation in taking his
arguments far beyond the bounds of the purely biological. The evolutionary
process leaves no conceptual space for God. What an earlier generation
explained by an appeal to a divine creator can be accommodated within a
Darwinian framework. There is no need to believe in God after Darwin.

Some might draw the conclusion that Darwinism merely encourages
agnosticism. Far from it: for Dawkins, Darwin impels us to atheism. It is not
merely that evolution erodes the explanatory potency of God; it eliminates God
altogether. In an important essay of 1996, Dawkins argues that there are at
present only three possible ways of seeing the world: Darwinism, Lamarckism,
or God.12 The last two fail to explain the world; the only option is therefore
Darwinism: “I’m a Darwinist because I believe the only alternatives are
Lamarckism or God, neither of which does the job as an explanatory principle.
Life in the universe is either Darwinian or something else not yet thought of.”13
Now the rhetoric of his argument demands that Darwinism, Lamarckism, and
belief in God are three mutually exclusive views, so that commitment to one
necessarily entails rejection of the others. Yet it is well known that many
Darwinians believe that there is a convergence between Darwinism and theism.
The extent of that overlap is most certainly open to discussion, and it is far from
being a settled issue. Yet Dawkins’ conclusion depends upon proposing an
absolute dichotomy – either Darwinism or God – when the theories themselves
do not require such absolutist ways of thinking (though they certainly permit
it).14 This absolutism does not (and could not) follow from the legitimate
application of the methods of the natural sciences, but rather arises from an
ideological precommitment which informs and controls his way of thinking at
this point.
Dawkins also presupposes the total irreconcilability of Darwinism and
Lamarckism as overall accounts of evolution. Perhaps this was how things were
seen back in the 1980s; it is certainly not how they are seen now. Our deepening
understanding of human evolution, for example, does not fit easily within a
purely Darwinian paradigm, and has led some to suggest that there are
Lamarckian elements in human evolution, or that at least some aspects of human
evolution are best explained by a Lamarckian paradigm.15 Some would now
argue that humans are able to subvert the biological evolutionary process due to
their unique capacity for cognition and cultural adaptation. The growing
importance of anthropology and neurology as evolution-related disciplines has
led to qualifications of purely biological accounts of evolution.16
Yet our concern here is with Dawkins’ understanding of the implications of
evolution for belief in God. We may agree that Dawkins has certainly
demonstrated that a purely natural description may be offered of what is
currently known of the history and present state of living organisms. But why
does this lead to the more radical conclusion that there is no God? Dawkins’

arguments lead to the conclusion that God need not be invoked as a direct
explanatory agent within the evolutionary process. This is consistent with
various atheist, agnostic, and Christian understandings of the world, but it
necessitates none of them.
Is Darwinism a Complete Explanation?
One of the leading themes of The Blind Watchmaker is that Darwinism offers the
ultimate explanation of human origins – the only one that makes any sense, and
stands up to critical evidential judgment. But a critic might reasonably respond
by pointing out that Darwinism does not – and, indeed, cannot – offer a complete
explanation of the origins of life, of the origins of species in general, or of
humanity in particular. At best, it offers a partial explanation – an explanation
that depends on other supplementary explanations, each of which has at least
some claim to be considered the “master” explanation.
Let’s set out the issues. First, we need to note the importance of a “Darwinian
horizon” – a point at which the development of life had reached a point of
sufficient complexity for Darwinian processes to come into play. As Dawkins
himself rightly points out, DNA is an integral component of the Darwinian
paradigm, providing the means by which genetic information may be transmitted
with astonishing fidelity. Yet it is now widely agreed that both DNA itself, and
the associated DNA replication mechanisms, appeared at a relatively late stage
in early life history.17 Darwinian mechanisms kicked in only at a relatively late
stage in the history of the planet earth. Other processes led up to the point at
which this evolutionary mechanism could begin.
Nor does Darwinism explain the origins of life.18 Darwin himself was careful
not to discuss the question of how life began in the Origin of Species, although
the assumption that purely natural processes might account for the origins of life
seems implicit in many of his writings.19 Although some believed that his failure
to account for the origins of life represented a significant failure on his part,
Darwin was quite clear that his theories explained the transformations of species,
not the origins of life. Darwin’s theory offered an explanation of how life
developed; it was not an explanation of how life came into being, which he saw
as lying outside the scope of his theory.
Yet we must return to the critical role played by DNA in biological evolution to
make a final point. The ability of DNA to encode genetic information is
critically dependent on the chemistry of carbon – above all, its ability to form

long chains. Is there a global chemical basis for evolution throughout the
universe?20 If so, it is not difficult to see why life might be carbon-based. Yet
most biologists would argue that the evolutionary process is dependent on what
is available, making it questionable whether, if biological evolution is universal
throughout the universe (as Dawkins clearly believes it is), it necessarily uses the
same chemical mechanisms and agents in every situation. Evolution on earth
makes extensive use of phosphates;21 evolution elsewhere might not.
Finally, it is simply impossible to discuss evolution without considering the
processes which led to the synthesis of three chemical elements that are essential
for the mechanisms of evolutionary process on earth – carbon, nitrogen, and
oxygen. The recognition of the chemical dependence of biological evolution is
nothing new. The Harvard chemist Josiah Parsons Cooke (1827–94) argued that
the chemistry of the universe was of vital importance in shaping its
development. The fundamental properties of the chemical elements determined
both biological constraints and possibilities:
Before the first organic cell could exist, and before Mr. Darwin’s principle of
natural selection could begin that work of unnumbered ages which was to end
in developing a perfect man, nay, even before the solid globe itself could be
condensed from Laplace’s nebula, the chemical elements must have been
created, and endowed with those properties by which alone the existence of
that cell is rendered possible.22
Yet biochemically critical elements such as carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen did not
form, and could not have formed, in the early history of the universe. Their
existence is the consequence of the “clumping” or “accretion” of material into
stars, with the subsequent initiation of nuclear fusion reactions.23 The ratio of the
gravitational binding force to rest-mass energy (widely regarded as a classic
example of “fine tuning”) is such that it permitted the gradual “clumping” of
material into larger bodies – the stars. Stars form as a result of turbulence in
giant clouds of matter within the tenuous interstellar medium.24 Without the
formation of stars, the universe would have been limited to hydrogen and
helium, with only a tiny percentage of other elements, such as lithium and
beryllium.
So where do these reflections leave us? The issues we have raised provide the
deep context for biological evolution, making it clear that this process is only
part of the answer to the question of human origins. It also raises some issues
about whether Darwinism can be seen as a universal process in terms of its
mechanisms given the importance of local factors in determining the chemical

mechanisms, given the importance of local factors in determining the chemical
resources available for evolutionary mechanisms and agents. Evolution is part of
the answer to the question of how we came to be here. Yet that process is
ultimately dependent on other processes, lying beyond its reach.
Let’s move on, and look at another aspect of the debate over the theological
implications of Darwinism.
God as an Explanatory Hypothesis?
Do we need God to explain anything? William Paley argued that God was an
explanation for the “contrivances” observed in nature – that is to say, natural
structures that showed evidence of design and execution. For Dawkins, Darwin
marks the parting of the ways. Before Darwin, Dawkins argues, it was possible
to see the world as something designed by God; after Darwin, we can speak only
of the “illusion of design.” A Darwinian world has no purpose, and we delude
ourselves if we think otherwise. “The universe we observe had precisely the
properties we should expect if there is, at bottom, no design, no purpose, no evil
and no good, nothing but blind pitiless indifference.”25
Dawkins thus argues that God is redundant as an explanatory hypothesis. God
has no discernible “utility function” in scientific explanation. In support of this
idea, he offers a number of arguments, of which the most interesting is his
“biomorph programme.”26 This analogy is intended to help us appreciate that the
appearance of design can arise from random developments. Imagine, he
suggests, a monkey (or equivalent) with a typewriter equipped with twenty-six
capital letters and a space bar. Dawkins selects a twenty-eight character phrase
from Shakespeare’s Hamlet, as follows:
METHINKS IT IS LIKE A WEASEL
This is the “target phrase.” Now a computer generates, at random, a phrase of
twenty-eight characters – the equivalent of the proverbial monkey trying to type
out the works of Shakespeare. Needless to say, it bears no relation to the target
phrase.
But now something happens. The computer has been instructed to examine the
phrase, and select the one “which, however slightly, most resembles the target
phrase.”27 The process now continues. After a mere thirty iterations, something
recognizably like the target phrase has developed:
METHINGS IT IS LIKE I WEASEL

Just a dozen or so iterations later, the target phrase had been reached. Dawkins
concludes that the process of evolution is capable of bringing about the
appearance of order rather more quickly and effectively than might be expected.
The analogy, however, is flawed, glossing over some fundamental issues as if
they were unproblematic. Indeed, it represents an excellent example of what
Friedrich Waismann termed the “conjuring away of philosophical problems”
through carefully controlled and selected analogies.28 The most obvious problem
is that the analogy presupposes a teleology which Dawkins believes to be absent
in nature. There is no “target phrase” toward which evolution may proceed.
Dawkins concedes this point in the same work, but does not regard it as being
critical to his analogy.29 This is clearly incorrect.
Yet there is another problem, which Dawkins does not properly address. The
idea of design or purposeful selection has been eliminated only at the verbal
level. While the analogy allows us to avoid the vocabulary of “design,” the
notion of design is implicit in the computer program, which was constructed to
control the development in a certain specific way. An unacknowledged
anthropomorphism underlies the analogy, and lends it plausibility for the
intended readership. Remove the (designed) computer program and the analogy
loses its much of its plausibility. It is best seen simply and solely as an indication
of how small random mutations can accumulate to yield substantial changes
provided that they are selected nonrandomly.30
Setting to one side the plausibility of the analogy, let us focus on the point that
Dawkins wants to make. A “theory of random mutation plus nonrandom
cumulative selection” can explain the appearance of design in the world. There
is no need to posit a God as an explanatory mechanism. Suppose we concede
this point; what are its implications? Dawkins infers that, since God may be
ignored as an improbable irrelevance, the only meaningful position is atheism.
Yet he does not actually make the logical moves required to reach such a
conclusion, apparently assuming that they are so self-evident that they do not
require demonstration. But it is not so. To illustrate this point, we may explore
the view of the world set out by the leading Christian theologian Thomas
Aquinas (1225–74) in the thirteenth century.
Aquinas constructed a framework for understanding God’s relation to the world
which weaves together the fundamental themes of the Christian creeds.31 The
basic ideas that Aquinas developed can be set out very simply, as follows. God is
the cause of all things. Yet God’s causality operates in a number of ways. While

God must be considered capable of doing certain things directly, God delegates
causal efficacy to the created order. For Aquinas, this notion of secondary
causality must be considered as an extension of, not an alternative to, the
primary causality of God himself. Events within the created order can exist in
complex causal relationships, without in any way denying their ultimate
dependency upon God as final cause.
The critical point to appreciate is that the created order thus demonstrates causal
relationships which can be investigated by the natural sciences.32 Those causal
relationships can be investigated and correlated – for example, in the form of the
“laws of nature” – without in any way implying, still less necessitating, an
atheist worldview. To put this as simply as possible: God creates a world with its
own ordering and processes.
This classic approach had its strengths and weaknesses. The most obvious of its
strengths is that it laid the conceptual foundations for the development of the
natural sciences in the later Middle Ages, by encouraging the investigation of
natural processes and events. It is, by the way, important to note that this
Christian view of the world was set out long before Darwin. As a result, there is
no way that Aquinas’ approach can be described as a post hoc attempt to defend
Christianity in response to a perceived threat from the new science of
evolutionary biology.
The Elimination of Purpose: Dawkins on
Teleology in Nature
Let’s recall one of Dawkins’ more quotable statements, noted earlier: “The
universe we observe had precisely the properties we should expect if there is, at
bottom, no design, no purpose, no evil and no good, nothing but blind pitiless
indifference.”33 For Dawkins, Darwinism eliminates any notion of purpose
within the natural world. There may be appearances of design, or semblances of
purpose; but that is all they are. The idea of teleology is destroyed by Darwin’s
insights. Dawkins here seems to find support from Thomas H. Huxley, who
remarked that what struck him most forcibly on his first reading of Darwin’s
Origin of Species was “that teleology, as commonly understood, had received its
deathblow at Mr Darwin’s hands.”34
Yet there are two points that need to be made here. First, Huxley was clear that
only one version – the “commonly understood” form – of teleology was
discredited by Darwin; others were not. Second, the idea of teleology has re-

y
;
,
gy
emerged as helpful and appropriate in certain respects within evolutionary
biology since about 2000. Let’s look at both of these points briefly.
First, Huxley was critical of those who suggested that Darwin’s theory of natural
selection tended to “abolish Teleology, and eviscerate the argument from
design.”35 While Huxley rightly held that Darwin’s approach destroyed the
popular understanding of teleology set out by William Paley, he was clear that
Darwin’s theory of evolution bore witness to a “wider teleology,” rooted in the
deeper structure of the universe. It is also important to note Asa Gray’s remark
in an article in Nature: “let us recognize Darwin’s great service to Natural
Science in bringing back to it Teleology; so that instead of Morphology versus
Teleology, we shall have Morphology wedded to Teleology.”36
Second, the biologist Francisco J. Ayala and others have insisted upon the
legitimacy and importance of the use of teleological language in biological
explanation.37 The adaptations of organisms can be considered to be explained
teleologically when their existence can be accounted for in terms of their
contribution to the reproductive fitness of the population. Such adaptations –
such as organs, homeostatic mechanisms, or patterns of behavior – are observed
to have had a beneficial impact on the survival or reproductive capacities of
organisms, which can be considered as the phenomenological “goal” toward
which they tend.
It is important to note that the concept of “teleology” is open to multiple
interpretations – some theistic, others not.38 The philosopher of biology Ernst
Mayr rightly noted that many biologists resist teleological statements or
explanations, partly out of suspicion that these smuggle unverifiable theological
or metaphysical doctrines into supposedly objective scientific accounts of
reality.39 Yet what, Mayr asked, if some kind of teleology is discerned within,
not imposed upon, the biological process? “The use of so-called ‘teleological’
language by biologists is legitimate; it neither implies a rejection of
physicochemical explanation nor does it imply non-causal explanation.”40 In
support of his suggestion, Mayr noted that examples of goal-directed behavior
are widespread in the natural world. Indeed, “the occurrence of goal-directed
processes is perhaps the most characteristic feature of the world of living
systems.”41
We need now to turn to consider the writer and the image which play a central
role in Dawkins’ Blind Watchmaker. In the major section which follows, we
shall consider the image of God as the divine watchmaker, and its application to

the living world by the early nineteenth-century theologian William Paley.
The Divine Watchmaker: Paley’s Grand (but
Correctable) Mistake
The concept of God as “watchmaker,” which Dawkins spends so much time
demolishing, was developed by Robert Boyle (1627–91) during the late
seventeenth century. Boyle compared the regularities and complexities of the
world to the Great Clock of Strasbourg. It was a somewhat hasty response to the
intellectual challenge of what is usually known as “the mechanical
philosophy.”42 Initially applied to the physical world, the “watchmaker” analogy
was transposed to the biological sphere in the late eighteenth century, with
results that some found reassuring, and others deeply unsatisfying.
The Blind Watchmaker represents a significant and highly successful attack on
this eighteenth-century concept of God as a watchmaker. But what are the
implications of this? What Dawkins actually demonstrates is that a very specific
understanding of the doctrine of creation, which came into being in response to
the historical circumstances of eighteenth-century England, is completely
undermined by a Darwinian account of evolution. This theory, associated with
William Paley, had already been rejected as inadequate by many leading
theologians of the day – such as John Henry Newman (1801–90) – before
Darwin undermined it still further. In view of the importance of this point, we
shall examine Paley’s theory in some detail.
The background to William Paley’s emphasis on the apparent “contrivance” of
the biological world is a peculiarly English affair, arising through complex
interaction of politics and religion in England in the early eighteenth century.
This development is fascinating historically, as well as being of no small
importance to Dawkins’ thesis of the “blind watchmaker.”43
In the late seventeenth century, a series of events within both the British state
and society at large forced the Church of England onto the defensive.44 One of
these is of particular relevance for our purposes: the emergence of Deism, a view
of God which recognizes the divine creatorship, yet which rejects any continuing
divine involvement with the world. The rise of Deism caused some problems for
the established church, especially in relation to how the Bible and doctrinal
tradition of the church were to be interpreted. Impressed by Isaac Newton’s
demonstration of the mechanical regularity of the world, many within the church

began to explore the idea that an appeal to the natural world might be the basis
for a new defense of Christian ideas.45
Now an interest in the natural world has always been part of the Christian
intellectual tradition. However, in the past, this generally took the form of
interpreting the world from a Christian perspective, appealing to the wonder and
beauty of the natural world as a way of appreciating the beauty of God.46 It is
well known that one of the most fundamental impulses leading to the
development of the natural sciences in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries
was the belief that to study nature at close quarters was to gain a deeper
appreciation of the wisdom of God.47 As the great naturalist John Ray (1628–
1705) – author of the celebrated work The Wisdom of God Manifested in the
Works of Creation (1691) – put it in 1660: “There is for a free man no
occupation more worthy and delightful than to contemplate the beauteous works
of nature and honour the infinite wisdom and goodness of God.”48
Yet all this changed in the early eighteenth century. A new approach to doing
theology developed, which would be variously known as “natural theology” or
“physical theology” (from the Greek word physis, “nature”). The existence and
attributes of God, it was argued, could be inferred from nature itself. As
rationalism gained a growing hold on English intellectual life, the established
church responded by shifting emphasis from traditional sources of authority
(such as the Bible) to the natural world. The existence and wisdom of God could
be proved to an increasingly skeptical world by an appeal to the ordering of
nature.
Initially, this “natural theology” made its appeal to the ordering of the physical
world – and above all, to the regularity of the “celestial mechanics”
demonstrated by Isaac Newton (1642–1727). Suddenly, Newton was seen as
having mapped out a new approach to defending Christianity and doing
theology. “Physical theology” became all the rage in the early 1700s. Yet it was
not long before what had seemed to be a promising alliance between science and
religion led to a growing and potentially irreversible estrangement.49 An
approach once advocated by the leading scientists of the day passed into the
decidedly less competent hands of bishops and archdeacons, who often repeated
at second hand ideas they had not properly understood, and whose implications
they were prone to exaggerate. The Newtonian system seemed to suggest that
the world was a self-sustaining mechanism which had no need for divine
governance or sustenance for its day-to-day operation.50 Far from encouraging
belief in God, it declared this to be quite unnecessary.

By the end of the eighteenth century, many in Britain’s cultural elite had
concluded that Newton’s system was more likely to lead to atheism or
agnosticism than to faith. Newton’s synthesis of the physical sciences and
religion had failed. When Percy Bysshe Shelley (1792–1822) remarked that “the
consistent Newtonian is necessarily an atheist,”51 he was expressing the
emerging consensus of the age that there was little to be gained by defending
Christianity by an appeal to physics.
So if physics was a dead end, what about biology? Might it be possible to
construct arguments for God’s existence based on an appeal to the living world
of nature, rather than the regular orbits of the planets? Paley could see a way of
injecting new life into the approach. It would live to fight another day. As it
happened, Paley’s approach achieved a popular success beyond anything he
could have imagined. Yet it created the utterly false impression that the
intellectual credibility of Christianity somehow depended upon the approach he
adopted. The approach? God as the watchmaker.
Paley’s Natural Theology; or Evidences of the Existence and Attributes of the
Deity, Collected from the Appearances of Nature (1802) had a profound
influence on popular English religious thought in the first half of the nineteenth
century, and is known to have been read appreciatively by the young Charles
Darwin. Paley was deeply impressed by Newton’s discovery of the regularity of
nature, especially in relation to the area usually known as “celestial mechanics.”
It was clear that the entire universe could be thought of as a complex
mechanism, operating according to regular and understandable principles.
For Paley, the analogy of God as a watchmaker needed to be transferred from
the physical to the biological domain. Nature was to be seen as a “contrivance.”
This important word implies the ideas of design and construction – both of
which Paley held to be evident in the biological world. Paley argues that only
someone who is mad would suggest that complex mechanical technology came
into being by purposeless chance. Mechanism presupposes contrivance – that is
to say, both a sense of purpose and an ability to design and fabricate. Both the
human body in particular, and the world in general, could be seen as
mechanisms which had been designed and constructed, perfectly adapted to their
needs and specific situations.
The opening paragraphs of Paley’s Natural Theology set out the analogy for
which Paley became famous, and which is the subject of many gracious, yet
ultimately critical, references within Dawkins’ Blind Watchmaker:

In crossing a heath, suppose I pitched my foot against a stone, and were asked
how the stone came to be there. I might possibly answer, that for any thing I
knew to the contrary it had lain there for ever; nor would it, perhaps, be very
easy to show the absurdity of this answer. But suppose I had found a watch
upon the ground, and it should be inquired how the watch happened to be in
that place. I should hardly think of the answer which I had before given, that
for any thing I knew the watch might have always been there. Yet why should
this answer not serve for the watch as well as for the stone; why is it not
admissible in the second case as in the first?52
Paley then offers a detailed description of the watch, noting in particular its
container, coiled cylindrical spring, many interlocking wheels, and glass face.
Having carried his readers along with this careful analysis, Paley turns to draw
his critically important conclusion:
This mechanism being observed – it requires indeed an examination of the
instrument, and perhaps some previous knowledge of the subject, to perceive
and understand it; but being once, as we have said, observed and understood,
the inference we think is inevitable, that the watch must have had a maker –
that there must have existed, at some time and at some place or other, an
artificer or artificers who formed it for the purpose which we find it actually
to answer, who comprehended its construction and designed its use.53
The analogy, like most of Paley’s work, was borrowed, and the scholarship
decidedly second-rate. Paley had ruthlessly plagiarized John Ray’s writings in
his quest for a new natural theology. Though a derivative and old-fashioned
thinker, Paley was nevertheless an excellent communicator. What he
communicated so effectively was nevertheless an outmoded way of thinking.
Ways of thinking, dating from the late seventeenth and early eighteenth century,
already regarded as outdated and unhelpful by most Christian academics, were
given a new lease of life through Paley’s populist writing.54
Nature, Paley argued, shows signs of “contrivance” – that is, purposeful design
and fabrication. Nature bears witness to a series of biological structures which
are “contrived” – that is, constructed with a clear purpose in mind. “Every
indication of contrivance, every manifestation of design, which existed in the
watch, exists in the works of nature.” Indeed, Paley argues, nature shows an
even greater degree of contrivance than the watch. He is at his best when dealing
with the immensely complex structures of the human eye and heart, each of
which can be described in mechanical terms. Anyone using a telescope, he
points out can see that this complex instrument was designed and manufactured

points out, can see that this complex instrument was designed and manufactured
by someone. Who, he wonders, can look at the human eye, and fail to see that it
also has a designer?
Paley’s argument is that creation is static. Once God has made things, they don’t
develop. They were cast in their final form, and needed to undergo no
development. For Paley, the notion of development implied imperfection of an
original form. And how could a perfect God create an imperfect creature? Since
there is no sense of development within Paley’s account of creation, the mere
demonstration of evolution within nature is sufficient to undermine his entire
thesis.
Darwin’s theory accounted much more naturally and elegantly for two features
of the biological world, which Paley’s doctrine of “special creation” could
accommodate only in a somewhat forced and clumsy manner. First, during his
voyages on the Beagle, Darwin had been impressed by the highly individual
animal populations of islands, such as the Galapagos. These could easily be
accounted for in terms of evolution within a local environment. Paley’s theory
struggled to make sense of this. Second, Darwin realized that his theory could
explain vestigial organs, which had no apparent purpose. Paley had problems
explaining why God would equip human beings with appendixes, when they
served no useful purpose. Yet for Darwin, these were remnants of an
evolutionary past. Darwin believed that his theory of natural selection possessed
greater explanatory power than Paley’s doctrine of independent acts of special
creation. “Light has been shown on several facts, which on the belief of
independent acts of creation are utterly obscure.”55
Like Darwin before him, Dawkins is eloquent and generous in his account of
Paley’s achievement, noting with appreciation his “beautiful and reverent
descriptions of the dissected machinery of life.”56 Without in any way belittling
the wonder of the mechanical “watches” that so fascinated and impressed Paley,
Dawkins argued that his case for God – though made with “passionate sincerity”
and “informed by the best biological scholarship of his day” – is “gloriously and
utterly wrong.” The “only watchmaker in nature is the blind forces of physics.”
Dawkins is right to criticize Paley. Most Christian academics – whether
scientists or theologians – of the early Victorian age did the same thing, seeing
Paley as representing an outdated way of looking at things that failed to do
justice to either the scientific developments of the age, or the basic themes of an
informed Christian theology. The great Victorian theologian John Henry
Newman declared that Paley’s approach was as likely to lead to atheism as to

belief in God. Newman rejected Paley’s argument from design, in effect
proposing an inductive approach to the interpretation of the natural world: “I
believe in design because I believe in God; not in God because I see design.”57
In 1852, Newman was invited to give a series of lectures in Dublin on “the idea
of a university.” This allowed him to explore the relation between Christianity
and the sciences, and especially the “physical theology” of Paley. Newman was
scathing about Paley’s approach, lambasting it as “a false gospel.” Far from
being an advance on the more modest approaches adopted by the early church, it
represented a degeneration from those views.
The nub of Newman’s criticism of Paley’s approach can be summarized in a
sentence: “it has been taken out of its place, has been put too prominently
forward, and thereby has almost been used as an instrument against
Christianity.”58 Paley’s “physical theology” was a liability, and Newman
believed that it ought to be abandoned before it discredited Christianity:
Physical Theology cannot, from the nature of the case, tell us one word about
Christianity proper; it cannot be Christian, in any true sense, at all … Nay,
more than this; I do not hesitate to say that, taking men as they are, this so-
called science tends, if it occupies the mind, to dispose it against
Christianity.59
Seven years before Darwin had subverted Paley’s approach on scientific
grounds, Newman – widely regarded as the most important English theologian
of the nineteenth century – had repudiated Paley as an outdated theological
liability.
What is interesting is that there is no awareness on Newman’s part of a new
crisis of faith about to be precipitated by Darwin’s work. His argument, which
predates Darwin’s Origin of Species, rests solely on his belief that Paley’s
approach fails in what it sought to deliver, and traps Christian theology in an
apologetic which can only go disastrously wrong. It was not the first time
Christian apologetics had taken a disastrous wrong turn; an immediate correction
was, in Newman’s view, long overdue.
Some later Victorian writers took the view that Darwin’s theory of evolution
allowed Paley to be developed in more helpful directions. As James Moore has
shown in his massive and definitive account of Christian responses to Darwin,
there were many who believed that the obvious deficiencies in Paley’s account
of biological life – most notably, the notion of “perfect adaptation” – were

corrected by Darwin’s notion of natural selection.60
More importantly, a series of writers discarded Paley’s interest in specific
adaptations (to use a Darwinian term unknown to him), and preferred to focus on
the fact that evolution appeared to be governed by certain quite definite laws – a
clear application to biology of the general approach developed in the Middle
Ages by Aquinas, reflected in Baden Powell’s influential Essays on the Spirit of
the Inductive Philosophy (1855).61
The essential point here is that Paley represents the late and final flowering of a
movement that came into being in the aftermath of the great Newtonian
revolution of the late seventeenth century, and which had completely lost its way
by the middle of the eighteenth century. Paley reworked older ideas, unaware
that their already tenuous credibility was about to expire. Darwin’s Origin of
Species and later writings are to be seen as a late nineteenth-century refutation of
an early eighteenth-century idea regarded with suspicion by leading Christian
writers of the early nineteenth century.
So why did Paley work with the idea of a static natural order, established once
and for all by God in a primordial act of creation? By locking himself into this
static view of things, Paley painted himself into a corner. Neither he nor his later
followers could cope with the geological evidence of the world being older than
had hitherto been imagined,62 or with the growing awareness of changes in the
biological population over time. Yet these were the assumptions of the late
seventeenth century, which was locked into the static way of thinking
characteristic of the science of that earlier age. Paley’s theology was shaped by
the scientific worldview of the early modern period, which led him to think of
creation in static terms.63
Christianity is not a static entity; rather, it is like a growing plant.64 Although
grounded in the Bible, the Christian theological tradition has always been
mindful of the need to interpret its foundational text in the most authentic way
possible. This has led to debates within the church over how best to interpret
certain passages. In the first 500 years of Christianity, a number of basic
principles emerged. One of these was to interpret the Bible in such a way that
allowed a creative interaction with the best natural science of the day.
The most influential theologian of this era was Augustine of Hippo (354–430),
who is of especial importance in relation to the exploration of the relationship
between biblical interpretation and the sciences. Augustine stressed the
importance of respecting the conclusions of the sciences in relation to biblical

exegesis. As Augustine observed in his commentary on Genesis, certain of its
passages were genuinely open to diverse interpretations. It was therefore
important to allow further scientific research to assist in the determination of
which was the most appropriate mode of interpretation for a given passage:
In matters that are so obscure and far beyond our vision, we find in Holy
Scripture passages which can be interpreted in very different ways without
prejudice to the faith we have received. In such cases, we should not rush in
headlong and so firmly take our stand on one side that, if further progress in
the search for truth justly undermines our position, we too fall with it. We
should not battle for our own interpretation but for the teaching of the Holy
Scripture. We should not wish to conform the meaning of Holy Scripture to
our interpretation, but our interpretation to the meaning of Holy Scripture.65
Augustine therefore urged that biblical interpretation should take due account of
what could reasonably be regarded as established facts. This approach to biblical
interpretation aimed to ensure that Christian theology never became trapped in a
pre-scientific worldview. This has always been the dominant theme in western
biblical interpretation. Yet it does not preclude debates over what is the best
approach. And these debates often involved trial and error, determining the best
way of interpreting a biblical passage by an extended period of discussion and
exploration.
And one of those explorations was due to William Paley. It does not matter that
history regards it as one of the less successful pieces of theological adventurism.
We cannot adopt a “Whig view of history,” which lauds those explorations
which succeeded, and excoriates those which failed. To use Arnold Toynbee’s
famous phrase, the whole enterprise of Christian theology, like human
civilization itself, is “a movement and not a condition, a voyage and not a
harbour.”66 Precisely the same is true of the scientific method. Exploration is
essential.
As we have already emphasized, evaluation of Paley’s approach to Christian
apologetics was underway from 1800, and was essentially complete by 1850,
before the publication of Darwin’s theory. The verdict? It was an experiment
that had failed. It was time to rediscover older approaches to apologetics, and
develop new ones, untainted by the failures of Paley. Yet such was Paley’s
impact that his ideas lingered within Victorian culture – and with them, an
essentially static understanding of the biological world, which was improperly
assumed to be the Christian view of things. No wonder that so many theologians

wanted to get back to an earlier, more authentic way of doing theology, and set
Paley’s adventurism to one side.
Dawkins’ assessment of the theological implications of Darwinism is
excessively dependent on the assumption that Paley (or Paleyesque) approaches
to the biosphere are typical or normative for Christianity. He also seems to
assume that the intellectual case for Christianity rests largely, if not totally, upon
an “argument for design” akin to that proposed by Paley. Yet Christian theology
does not hold that Christian belief is irrational or lacking positive epistemic
status without an appeal to the kind of arguments that Paley develops. Dawkins
makes a superb case for abandoning Paley. However, he seems to think this also
entails abandoning God.
So what if we were to forget about Paley, and return to the biblical interpretation
and theological methods of the early church? Sadly, this is an historical
experiment which simply cannot be undertaken. History, like the evolutionary
process described by Darwin and Dawkins, is irreversible, and prone to
contingencies which lie beyond experimental control. Happenstance is as
important in cultural as it is in biological evolution. But what can be said, and
needs to be said is this: if the Darwinian debate had taken place in the Greek-
speaking church of the fourth century, things would have worked out very
differently.67 Dawkins’ strongly negative assessment of the religious
implications of Darwinism depends on depicting a local historical contingency
as a universal theological necessity. Even allowing for the cultural importance
of Britain in the nineteenth century, the local and specific conditions of
Victorian England cannot be treated as if they were determinant of the Christian
faith down the ages.
We need to realize that earlier Christian writers had developed dynamic
conceptions of creation – as opposed to Paley’s flat and static notion – which
were highly amendable to an evolutionary view. In what follows, we shall
consider one of the best-known examples.
Dynamic Conceptions of Creation: Augustine of
Hippo
In the early fifth century, Augustine of Hippo – widely regarded as one of
Christianity’s most perceptive and influential theologians – published his
reflections on the first three chapters of Genesis. De Genesi ad litteram (“On the

Literal Meaning of Genesis”) was written between 401 and 415.68 One of the
most important ideas developed in this commentary is that God’s act of creation
was not limited to an act of origination, but extended to include subsequent
unfolding and development of the original creation. The world was created with
the capacity for further development, under God’s providential direction. Where
some thought of creation in terms of God’s insertion of new kinds of plants and
animals ready-made, as it were, into an already existing world, Augustine rejects
this as inconsistent with the overall witness of the Bible. Rather, God must be
thought of as creating in that very first moment the potencies (Augustine uses
the image of a “seed”) for all the kinds of living things that would come later,
including humanity.
Augustine thus argued that God created the world with the capacity to develop
from the “seedlike principles” that were present from the beginning, each of
which contained the potential for the later development of a specific living
kind.69 Augustine suggests that the earth has received from God the power or
capacity to produce things by itself.70 The notion of the “seed” is best
understood as heuristic, providing an inexact, though helpful, means of
visualization for the theologically difficult yet important notion of God
continuing to act within nature to actualize the potentialities embedded within
the created order at the moment of its creation.71 The image of the seed implies
that the original creation contained within it the potentialities for all the living
kinds that would subsequently emerge.
Augustine thus taught that there were two “moments” in creation, corresponding
to a primary act of origination, and a continuing process of providential
guidance.72 While conceding that there is a natural tendency to think of creation
as a past event, Augustine insists that God must be recognized to be working
even now, in the present, sustaining and directing the unfolding of the
“generations that he laid up in creation when it was first established.”73
Augustine insists that this does not mean that God created the world incomplete
or imperfect, in that “what God originally established in causes, he subsequently
fulfilled in effects.”74 The world was created with an inbuilt potentiality to
become what God intended it to be over time, which was bestowed in the
primordial act of origination.75 This process of development, Augustine
declares, is governed by fundamental laws, which reflect the will of their creator:
“God has established fixed laws governing the production of kinds and qualities
of beings, and bringing them out of concealment into full view, so that God’s

will might be over all.”76
We see here an explicit affirmation of the role of divine providence in guiding
the emergence of the natural world by “fixed laws” [certas leges]. This notion
would play an important role in guiding later thinking on the “laws of nature” or
“scientific laws.”77 Augustine uses the idea of a providentially directed process
of emergence to articulate a two-fold notion of creation, both as a primordial
event with embedded possibilities, and the subsequent actualization of those
possibilities over time.
Even this very brief account of Augustine’s theology of creation will make it
clear that it offers a helpful framework within which to set a Christian account of
biological evolution. Implicit within Augustine’s account of creation is the
notion that creation entails the origination of a potentially multilevel reality,
whose properties emerge under certain conditions which either did not exist, or
were not considered appropriate for development, at the origins of the universe.
Augustine argues that the universe was brought into being with the intrinsic
capacities to develop into its full form, subject to God’s guidance. This contrasts
sharply with the views of Paley, who believed that that any idea that nature
possessed vital powers or inherent forces sufficient to create its own order was
tantamount to atheism.78
We need to set Augustine’s approach alongside the celebrated remark by Charles
Kingsley (1819–75), arising from his reflections on Darwin’s Origin of Species:
“We knew of old that God was so wise that he could make all things; but,
behold, he is so much wiser than even that, that he can make all things make
themselves.”79 Why, it may reasonably be asked, did Kingsley not develop this
idea from his reading of Augustine, rather than of Darwin? Why was he not able
to bring this theological framework to his reading of Darwin, and realize its
potential resonance with what he found in the Origin of Species? After all, the
English Catholic biologist St. George Mivart (1827–1900) knew about
Augustine’s approach, and appreciated the importance of the framework it
offered for accommodation evolutionary perspectives. “St. Augustine insists in a
very remarkable manner on the merely derivative sense in which God’s creation
of organic forms is to be understood; that is, that God created them by conferring
on the material world the power to evolve them under suitable conditions.”80
And Frederick Temple (1821–1902), later to become archbishop of Canterbury,
saw such an approach as the obvious way ahead for Christian theology. In some
influential lectures of 1884, Temple suggested that God had endowed the
creation with “such inherent powers that in the ordinary course of time living

creatures such as the present were developed … He did not make the things, we
may say; no, but He made them make themselves.”81
Paley’s approach, and others like it, are a contingency of history, the outcome of
the prevailing scientific consensus of the early eighteenth century (which some
unwisely assumed to be permanently valid), and an ecclesiastical establishment
which wanted to emphasize the importance of stability, order, and regularity, and
was perfectly happy to go along with Paley’s approach and its predecessors as a
means to that end – not because they knew (or even believed) it was wrong, but
simply because they appear to have lacked an awareness of viable and authentic
alternatives from the first great period of Christian theological reflection.
If Paley and his colleagues can be said to have taken a wrong turn, we must
thank Dawkins for pointing this out – although noting that many in the Victorian
age had already drawn the same conclusion. It is not Christianity as such that
Dawkins has discredited, but a decidedly English theological fashion of the
eighteenth century, which had long been abandoned by Christian academics. The
Catholic philosopher of religion Christopher F. J. Martin gets it right when he
remarks: “The Being whose existence is revealed to us by the argument from
design is not God but the Great Architect of the Deists and Freemasons, an
impostor disguised as God, a stern, kindly, and immensely clever old English
gentleman, equipped with apron, trowel, square and compasses.”82 Yet Paley’s
vivid analogy lingers on in popular accounts of faith, particularly within North
American Protestantism. Perhaps this was the real target of Dawkins’ criticism.
Natural Selection and Religious Beliefs:
Darwin’s Views
So what of Darwin’s own religious faith? Did his theory of evolution turn him
into an atheist crusader against religious belief, as some seem to suggest?
Unfortunately, Darwin’s authority and example are continually invoked to
justify metaphysical and theological claims that go far beyond anything that he
himself expressed in, or associated with, his evolutionary biology. Happily, the
fundamentally historical question of Darwin’s religious views is relatively easy
to answer, thanks to the intensive scholarly study of Darwin and his Victorian
context in the last few decades.83 The excellent online Darwin Project has a
section which brings together the most important historical evidence in a way
that is both historically objective and trustworthy.84

There are two related questions that need to be considered. First, what were
Darwin’s own religious views? It seems that Darwin abandoned what we might
call “conventional Christian beliefs” at some point in the 1840s, although the
dating of this must probably remain elusive. Yet there is a substantial theoretical
gap between “abandoning an orthodox Christian faith” and “becoming an
atheist.” Christianity involves a highly specific conception of God; it is perfectly
possible to believe in a god other than that of Christianity, or to believe in God
and reject certain other aspects of the Christian faith. Indeed, the “Victorian
crisis of faith” – within which Darwin is widely seen as having been both
spectator and participant – can be understood as a shift away from the specifics
of Christianity toward a more generic concept of God, largely determined by the
ethical values of the day.85 Darwin, like many others, appears to have moved
toward what might reasonably be described as a Deist conception of God, rather
than the more specific divinity of the Christian faith.86 It is not difficult to
discern a more or less continuous trajectory from the Christian orthodoxy of his
Cambridge years to a non-biblical Deism at the time of the publication of the
Origin of Species, and subsequently to a more agnostic position in later life
(although Darwin was not entirely consistent in his leanings at this time).87
While Darwin’s religious beliefs unquestionably veered away from what we
might loosely call “Christian orthodoxy,” they are not replaced with anything
even remotely resembling the aggressive and ridiculing form of atheism we
unfortunately find in some of those who have presented themselves as his
champions in more recent times. There is little in Darwin’s writings to point to
any such conclusion. In 1879, while working on his autobiography, Darwin
commented on his personal religious confusion: “My judgement often fluctuates
… In my most extreme fluctuations I have never been an Atheist in the sense of
denying God. I think that generally (and more and more as I grow older), but not
always, that an Agnostic would be the more correct description of my state of
mind.”88
Two factors are known to have been a particular concern for Darwin, with
negative implications for his attitude toward traditional Christianity. First,
Darwin found the existence of pain and suffering in the world to be an
unbearable intellectual and moral burden. It is widely agreed that what C. S.
Lewis termed “the problem of pain” is one of the most significant obstacles to
Christian belief, and it is entirely understandable that one as sensitive as Darwin
should feel the weight of this matter, particularly in the light of his own
protracted (and still unexplained) illness.89 The death of his daughter Annie at

the tender age of ten unquestionably deepened his feeling of moral outrage over
this issue.90
In 1961, Donald Fleming put forward the important thesis that Darwin’s
experience of suffering was an integral element of his own loss of faith. Fleming
held that Darwin came to believe that “modern man would rather have senseless
suffering than suffering warranted to be intelligible because willed from on
high.”91 Pain and suffering were to be accepted as the meaningless outcome of
the evolutionary process; this, however disagreeable, seemed preferable to the
alternative – namely, that God either inflicted suffering himself, or permitted it
to be inflicted by others.
The idea that evolution took place according to certain general principles or
laws, with the precise details left to chance, never entirely satisfied Darwin,
seeming to leave many intellectual loose ends and open up difficult moral issues
– not least, the immense wastage of life attending the process of natural
selection. But it seemed to Darwin to be less troubling than the alternative – that
“a beneficent and omnipotent God would have designedly created the
Ichneumonidae with the express intention of their feeding within the living
bodies of caterpillars.”92 At least this could be put down to an accident of nature,
rather than purposeful divine design.
Second, Darwin shared the moral outrage of the mid-Victorian period over some
aspects of Christian doctrine especially associated with the increasingly
influential evangelical movement. Like George Eliot (1819–80) and many others
at the time,93 Darwin reacted with repugnance to ideas such as the damnation to
everlasting Hell of those who did not explicitly believe the Christian gospel.94
Darwin felt this outrage with particular force, on account of his father’s
somewhat unorthodox religious beliefs. As he wrote in his Autobiography: “I
can indeed hardly see how anyone ought to wish Christianity to be true; for if so
the plain language of the text seems to show that the men who do not believe,
and this would include my Father, Brother and almost all of my friends, will be
everlastingly punished. And this is a damnable doctrine.”95 In October 1882, six
months after Darwin’s death, his widow asked that this particular passage should
not be published. She wrote the following in the margins of her husband’s
manuscript at this point: “I should dislike the passage in brackets to be
published. It seems to me raw. Nothing can be said too severe upon the doctrine
of everlasting punishment for disbelief – but very few now wd. call that
‘Christianity.’”96 We can see here something of the spirit of this remarkable

period in English cultural history, in which some aspects of evangelical
Christianity were subjected to an unprecedented level of criticism, reflecting a
growing belief that these accounts of the nature and purposes of God were
deficient and unacceptable within an increasingly sophisticated culture.97
Darwin here speaks with the voice of his age, and does not add anything of a
specifically evolutionary character.
But it is the second question that is the more important for our purposes in this
section. What did Darwin believe to be the relationship between his theory of
natural selection and Christianity, irrespective of whether Darwin himself is to
be regarded as an orthodox or conventional Christian believer? In other words,
setting Darwin’s personal religious views to one side, did he think that a
Christian could accept his approach to evolution, as set out in the successive
editions of the Origin of Species? Once more, Darwin discusses this matter
explicitly in his works, making it clear that he considered his approach to
evolution as causing no mental discomfort for orthodox Christian belief. This is
perhaps the most striking difference between Darwin and Dawkins, and has not
received the attention that it deserves.
Many have praised the prescience and cool neutrality of Darwin’s Origin of
Species, noting its Olympian social and political detachment and scrupulous
religious neutrality. It is in Darwin’s letters that we must turn for illumination of
both the fluctuations of his religious beliefs over time, as well as his reluctance
to comment on religious matters, including his own personal beliefs. Yet when
the context demanded it, Darwin seems to have been willing, not merely to go on
record concerning, but to emphasize, the consilience of religious faith and the
theory of natural selection.
A representative example lies to hand in his reference to “laws impressed on
matter by the Creator,” which is given a higher profile in the second edition of
the Origin than in the first.98 Darwin’s emphasis upon the role of natural laws in
governing evolutionary processes prompted some to suggest that Darwin had
achieved for biology what Newton had achieved for physics. Ernst Haeckel, for
example, wrote of Darwin as the “new Newton,” who had uncovered the natural
laws governing the biological domain.99 Darwin’s theory of natural selection
was comparable to Newton’s law of gravity. Taken together, they offered a
unitary vision of the natural world.100 As Newtonian physics had led to the
emergence of a new style of natural theology, might not Darwinian biology have
a similar outcome? Newton had uncovered the laws of physics; Darwin those of
biology.

Such lines of reflection might well end up leading to a Deistic conception of
God, rather than a Trinitarian God. But there is not even the whiff of a personal
atheism here. While some might argue that Darwin may have made it possible to
be an intellectually fulfilled atheist, Darwin did not himself draw that
conclusion. It is difficult to believe that his references to a Creator in the Origin
of Species were simply contrived to mollify his audience, representing crude
deceptions aimed at masking a private atheism which Darwin feared might
discredit his theory in the eyes of the religious public. As Darwin himself
commented to Asa Gray (1810–88) in May 1860, concerning his Origin of
Species, he had no intention of writing “atheistically,” and did not believe that
his views on natural selection entailed atheism: “I can see no reason, why a man,
or other animal, may not have been aboriginally produced by other laws; and
that all these laws may have been expressly designed by an omniscient Creator,
who foresaw every future event and consequence.”101 While Darwin saw his
doctrine of natural selection as consistent with belief in a creator God, he did not
see this as entailing a creator God, and often expressed his own personal
uncertainty about this matter. But the point is this: whatever Darwin’s own
religious views may have been, he was clear both that others who did believe in
a creator God ought not to have intellectual difficulty with his theory, and that
his theory itself was not a challenge to their beliefs. Dawkins is not good at
doing history, and his failure to engage adequately with Darwin’s views at this
crucial point is difficult to understand – especially when Darwin so clearly
contradicts Dawkins at this juncture.
Darwin’s enemy was not God, nor even the Church of England, but a specific
view of God which limited the act of creation to a series of specific past divine
actions, leading to a fixed, static biological realm. Yet it is not necessary to
determine Darwin’s personal religious views to evaluate is impact upon natural
theology in the Victorian age. Thomas H. Huxley, who was rather inclined to
emphasize the anti-religious aspects of Darwin’s thought, was quite clear that
“the doctrine of Evolution is neither Anti-theistic nor Theistic.”102 Darwin’s
theory denied direct divine creation of biological organisms. The question that
remained open was whether it also denied indirect involvement, such as action
through secondary causes.
In this section, I expressed concern that Dawkins has not adequately engaged
with Darwin’s own views on the compatibility of natural selection and belief in
God. We must now turn to another historical question, which raises further
doubts concerning whether Dawkins has adequately justified his atheist reading
of Darwinism. In what follows, we shall reflect on the views of leading Christian

biologists and theologians around the time of Darwin himself to the new theory
of natural section.
The Christian Reaction to Darwin
Within thirty years of the publication of Darwin’s Origin of Species, many
within the establishment of the Church of England had swung behind the new
ideas, and pronounced them to be perfectly consistent with Christian theology.
This positive new attitude within the established church was noticed by most,
including Huxley. In November 1887, he penned an essay in the journal
Nineteenth Century, summarizing and evaluating three recent sermons by senior
bishops of the Church of England. These were preached in Manchester Cathedral
on Sunday, September 4, 1887, during the meeting of the British Association for
the Advancement of Science, by the bishops of Carlisle, Bedford, and
Manchester.103 “These excellent discourses,” Huxley wrote with evident
enthusiasm, “signalize a new departure in the course adopted by theology
towards science, and to indicate the possibility of bringing about an honourable
modus vivendi between the two.” Huxley welcomed this genuine attempt to
achieve a rapprochement – no, more than that: a genuine convergence – of the
natural sciences and theology. Perhaps his greatest enthusiasm was reserved for
the firm rejection of any notion of demanding isolated intellectual compartments
of the human mind for dealing with both. Huxley singled out one comment by
the bishop of Bedford for especial praise, in which the bishop repudiated any
idea that science and religion
occupy wholly different spheres, and need in no way intermeddle with each
other. They revolve, as it were, in different planes, and so never meet. Thus
we may pursue scientific studies with the utmost freedom and, at the same
time, may pay the most reverent regard to theology, having no fears of
collision, because allowing no points of contact.104
Why bother with such historical details? Because they make it clear that it is
deeply problematic to suggest that Darwinism necessitates atheism. As a matter
of historical fact, Darwinism was not perceived to entail atheism by the best-
informed judges of the time. Huxley’s personal view was that it led to a
principled agnosticism. However, his comments on these sermons indicates that
he did not regard this as a completed closed question. While there was
opposition, particularly from some popular preachers, to Darwin’s ideas, the vast
scholarly endeavor to understand both popular and academic reaction to them

has demonstrated a far greater level of religious support for Darwin than was
previously supposed.105
This support for Darwin was not restricted to the Church of England. A growing
interest in Darwin is evident in North America around this time, even in those
more conservative religious groups from which opposition might be expected.
An excellent example of this positive assessment of Darwin can be found in
Benjamin B. Warfield (1851–1921), widely regarded as the most important
American theologian of the late nineteenth century. Although characterized by a
conservative Protestant religious outlook, Warfield made clear his support for
the concept of biological evolution.106 Where Darwin regarded the evolutionary
process as resting upon chance variations, whose subsequent fate was
determined by general principles, Warfield argued that it was entirely proper to
see the evolutionary process as guided by divine providence.
In fact, the theory was surprisingly widely accepted within early North American
fundamentalism. This movement derives its name from a series of short
publications entitled The Fundamentals, which appeared over the period from
1912 to 1917.107 One of those fundamentalist essays was by James Orr, who
argued that evolution “is coming to be recognized as but a new name for
‘creation’, only that the creative power now works from within, instead of, as in
the old conception, in an external, plastic fashion.”108 Although hostile to
Darwin’s notion of random variations, Orr was clear that the process of natural
selection could easily be viewed in terms consistent with Christian theism.
We might also pause here to note the views of Sir Ronald A. Fisher, one of the
most important evolutionary biologists of the twentieth century.109 Fisher, whose
many theoretical achievements are noted by Dawkins, is often cited as the father
of the neo-Darwinian synthesis. Although a rather private man, Fisher was
perfectly prepared to get involved in controversy whenever he believed scientific
truth was being compromised. That he did not regard neo-Darwinism as
entailing atheism (or even agnosticism) is perfectly clear from a sermon he
preached in the chapel of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1947:
To the traditionally religious man, the essential novelty introduced by the
theory of the evolution of organic life, is that creation was not all finished a
long while ago, but is still in progress, in the midst of its incredible duration.
In the language of Genesis we are living in the sixth day, probably rather
early in the morning, and the Divine artist has not yet stood back from his
work, and declared it to be “very good.” Perhaps that can only be when God’s

very imperfect image has become more competent to manage the affairs of
the planet of which he is in control.110
Fisher retired to Australia in 1959, and is buried in Adelaide Cathedral, South
Australia.
Stephen Jay Gould rightly pointed out that many leading Darwinians self-
defined religiously, and saw no problem about doing so.111 As Gould observes,
any suggestion that Darwinian theory of evolution is necessarily atheistic goes
way beyond the competency of the natural sciences, and strays into territory
where the scientific method cannot be applied. If it is applied, it is misapplied.
Thus Gould argues that Charles Darwin was agnostic (having lost his religious
beliefs upon the tragic death of his favorite daughter), whereas the great
American botanist Asa Gray, who advocated natural selection and wrote a book
entitled Darwiniana, was a devout Christian.
More recently, Gould continues, Charles D. Walcott (1850–1927), the discoverer
of the Burgess Shale fossils, was a convinced Darwinian and an equally firm
Christian, who believed that God had ordained natural selection to construct a
history of life according to His plans and purposes. More recently still, the “two
greatest evolutionists of our generation” show radically different attitudes to the
existence of God: George Gaylord Simpson (1902–84) was a humanist agnostic,
Theodosius Dobzhansky a believing Russian Orthodox. As Gould concludes:
“Either half my colleagues are enormously stupid, or else the science of
Darwinism is fully compatible with conventional religious beliefs – and equally
compatible with atheism.”112 And that, in a nutshell, seems to be where the
debate has ended. Darwinism can be held to be consistent with conventional
religious beliefs, agnosticism, and atheism. It all depends on how these terms are
defined. The debate itself is fascinating, and opens up many important questions
about the limits of the scientific method, the interpretation of the Bible, the
evidential basis of faith, the transition from scientific theories to worldviews,
and the history of biology. It is impossible to study, or become involved in, such
debates without being challenged and stimulated to think through some of life’s
great issues.
But the debate, though immensely worthwhile and intellectually fascinating, is
religiously inconclusive. Dawkins presents Darwinism as an intellectual
superhighway to atheism. In reality, the intellectual trajectory mapped out by
Dawkins seems to get stuck in a rut at agnosticism. And having stalled, it stays
there. There is a substantial logical gap between Darwinism and atheism, which
Dawkins seems to prefer to bridge by rhetoric, rather than evidence. If firm

p
g
y
,
conclusions are to be reached, they must be reached on other grounds. And those
who earnestly tell us otherwise have rather a lot of explaining to do.
Notes
1 The Blind Watchmaker, ix–x.
2 The Blind Watchmaker, 4–6.
3 See William Sweet, “Paley, Whately, and ‘Enlightenment Evidentialism’.”
International Journal for Philosophy of Religion 45 (1999): 143–66; Matthew
D. Eddy, “The Rhetoric and Science of William Paley’s Natural Theology.”
Theology and Literature 18 (2004): 1–22.
4 The Blind Watchmaker, 21.
5 “Darwin Triumphant: Darwinism as Universal Truth.” In A Devil’s Chaplain,
78–90.
6 For the legitimacy of this term in this context, see Dena Pedynowski,
“Science(s): Which, When and Whose? Probing the Metanarrative of
Scientific Knowledge in the Social Construction of Nature.” Progress in
Human Geography 27 (2003): 735–52.
7 For an illuminating example, see Luke Davidson, “Fragilities of Scientism:
Richard Dawkins and the Paranoid Idealization of Science.” Science as
Culture 9 (2000): 167–99. For a more general postmodern response to
scientific criticism of cultural accounts of science, see Brian Martin, “Social
Construction of an ‘Attack on Science’.” Social Studies of Science 26 (1996):
161–73.
8 An excellent study of this issue may be found in Michael Ruse, Darwin and
Design: Does Evolution Have a Purpose? Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 2003.
9 The Blind Watchmaker, 43.
10 Climbing Mount Improbable, 64.
11 Climbing Mount Improbable, 126–79.
12 Richard Dawkins, “A Survival Machine.” In The Third Culture, edited by

John Brockman, 75–95. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1996.
13 Dawkins, “A Survival Machine,” 85–6.
14 Michael Ruse, “Darwinism and Atheism: A Marriage Made in Heaven?”
Think 2, no. 6 (2004): 51–62.
15 See for example Eugene V. Koonin and Yuri I. Wolf, “Is Evolution
Darwinian or/and Lamarckian?” Biology Direct (November 11, 2009): 4:42.
doi: 10.1186/1745-6150-4-42; Guy Barry, “Lamarckian Evolution Explains
Human Brain Evolution and Psychiatric Disorders.” Frontiers in
Neuroscience (November 26, 2013): doi: 10.3389/fnins.2013.00224.
16 The development of odor sensitivity is a good example of a phenomenon that
can be interpreted plausibly within a Lamarckian paradigm: Moshe Szyf,
“Lamarck Revisited: Epigenetic Inheritance of Ancestral Odor Fear
Conditioning.” Nature Neuroscience 17 (2014): 2–4.
17 See, for example, Patrick Forterre, Jonathan Filée, and Hannu Myllykallio,
“Origin and Evolution of DNA and DNA Replication Machineries.” In The
Genetic Code and the Origin of Life, edited by Lluis Ribas de Pouplana, 145–
68. New York: Kluwer Academic, 2004.
18 Liane M. Gabora, “Self–Other Organization: Why Early Life Did Not Evolve
through Natural Selection.” Journal of Theoretical Biology 241 (2006): 443–
50.
19 Juli Peretó, Jeffrey L. Bada, and Antonio Lazcano, “Charles Darwin and the
Origin of Life.” Origins of Life and Evolution of the Biosphere 39, no. 5
(2009): 395–406.
20 Steven A. Benner, Alonso Ricardo, and Matthew A. Carrigan, “Is There a
Common Chemical Model for Life in the Universe?” Current Opinion in
Chemical Biology 8 (2004): 672–89.
21 See the classic study of Frank H. Westheimer, “Why Nature Chose
Phosphates.” Science 235 (1987): 1173–8.
22 Josiah Parsons Cooke, Religion and Chemistry. New York: Scribner’s Sons,
1880, 265.
23 Donald D. Clayton, Principles of Stellar Evolution and Nucleosynthesis. New

York: McGraw-Hill, 1968, 70–2. For a detailed consideration of the question
of “fine tuning,” see Alister E. McGrath, A Fine-Tuned Universe: The Quest
for God in Science and Theology. Louisville, KY: Westminster John Knox
Press, 2009.
24 For an excellent summary of present theories of stellar formation, see
Michael D. Smith, The Origin of Stars. London: Imperial College Press,
2004, especially 31–136.
25 River out of Eden, 133.
26 The Blind Watchmaker, 46–51.
27 The Blind Watchmaker, 47.
28 Friedrich Waismann, The Principles of Linguistic Philosophy. London:
Macmillan, 1965, 60.
29 The Blind Watchmaker, 50.
30 Climbing Mount Improbable, 75.
31 For what follows, see Etienne Gilson, The Christian Philosophy of St.
Thomas Aquinas. Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1994.
32 See the important studies of William E. Carroll, “Aquinas on Creation and
the Metaphysical Foundations of Science.” Sapientia 54 (1999): 69–91; idem,
“Creation, Evolution, and Thomas Aquinas.” Revue des questions
scientifiques 171 (2000): 319–47.
33 River out of Eden, 133.
34 Thomas H. Huxley, Lay Sermons, Addresses, and Reviews. London:
Macmillan, 1870, 301.
35 See Francis Darwin, ed., The Life and Letters of Charles Darwin. 3 vols.
London: John Murray, 1887, vol. 2, 201.
36 Asa Gray, “Scientific Worthies: Charles Robert Darwin.” Nature 10, no. 240
(1874): 79–81, 81.
37 Francisco J. Ayala, “Teleological Explanations in Evolutionary Biology.”
Philosophy of Science 37 (1970): 1–15; idem, “Teleological Explanations vs.
Teleology.” History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences 20 (1998): 41–50.

38 See Martin Mahner and Mario Bunge, Foundations of Biophilosophy. Berlin:
Springer, 1997, 367–76; Ernst Mayr, “The Multiple Meanings of
‘Teleological’.” History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences 20 (1998): 35–
40.
39 Ernst Mayr, Toward a New Philosophy of Biology: Observations of an
Evolutionist. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1988, 38–66,
especially 39–41; idem, What Makes Biology Unique? Considerations on the
Autonomy of a Scientific Discipline. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2004, 39–66, especially 46–7.
40 Mayr, Toward a New Philosophy of Biology, 59.
41 Mayr, Toward a New Philosophy of Biology, 44–5.
42 For background, see Margaret J. Osler, Divine Will and the Mechanical
Philosophy: Gassendi and Descartes on Contingency and Necessity in the
Created World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994.
43 The Blind Watchmaker, 4–6.
44 Lisa M. Zeitz, “Natural Theology, Rhetoric, and Revolution: John Ray’s
Wisdom of God, 1691–1704.” Eighteenth Century Life 18 (1994): 120–33;
Scott Mandelbrote, “The Uses of Natural Theology in Seventeenth-Century
England.” Science in Context 20 (2007): 451–80.
45 James R. Jacob and Margaret C. Jacob, “The Anglican Origins of Modern
Science: The Metaphysical Foundations of the Whig Constitution.” Isis 71
(1980): 251–67.
46 See for example Umberto Eco, The Aesthetics of Thomas Aquinas. London:
Radius, 1988; Patrick Sherry, Spirit and Beauty: An Introduction to
Theological Aesthetics. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1992.
47 For some reflections, see John Hedley Brooke, Science and Religion: Some
Historical Perspectives. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991.
48 See Charles Raven, John Ray, Naturalist. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1950, 83.
49 See the careful study of H. H. Odom, “The Estrangement of Celestial
Mechanics and Religion.” Journal of the History of Ideas 27 (1966): 533–58.

50 James E. Force, “The Breakdown of the Newtonian Synthesis of Science and
Religion: Hume, Newton and the Royal Society.” In Essays on the Context,
Nature and Influence of Isaac Newton’s Theology, edited by R. H. Popkin
and J. E. Force, 143–63. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1990.
51 John Gascoigne, “From Bentley to the Victorians: The Rise and Fall of
British Newtonian Natural Theology.” Science in Context 2 (1988): 219–56.
52 William Paley, Works. London: Wm. Orr & Co., 1849, 25.
53 Paley, Works, 25.
54 For a detailed account, see Alister E. McGrath, Darwinism and the Divine:
Evolutionary Thought and Natural Theology. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell,
2011, 85–142.
55 Charles Darwin, Origin of the Species. 6th edn. London: John Murray, 1872,
164.
56 The Blind Watchmaker, 5.
57 Newman, letter to William Robert Brownlow, April 13, 1870; in The Letters
and Diaries of John Henry Newman, vol. 25, 97. For further comment on
Newman and arguments from design, see Noel K. Roberts, “Newman on the
Argument from Design.” New Blackfriars 88 (2007): 56–66; Kevin
Mongrain, “The Eyes of Faith: Newman’s Critique of Arguments from
Design.” Newman Studies Journal 6 (2009): 68–86.
58 John Henry Newman, The Idea of a University. London: Longmans, Green &
Co, 1907, 450–1. For the background, see Fergal McGrath, The Consecration
of Learning; Lectures on Newman’s Idea of a University. Dublin: Gill, 1962.
59 Newman, Idea of a University, 454.
60 James R. Moore, The Post-Darwinian Controversies: A Study of the
Protestant Struggle to Come to Terms with Darwin in Great Britain and
America, 1870–1900. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979.
61 R. S. S. Baden Powell, Essays on the Spirit of the Inductive Philosophy.
London: Longman, Brown, Green and Longmans, 1855. For an excellent
analysis of this thinker, see Pietro Corsi, Science and Religion: Baden-Powell
and the Anglican Debate. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988.

62 See Stephen Baxter, Ages in Chaos: James Hutton and the Discovery of Deep
Time. New York: Forge, 2004.
63 See McGrath, Darwinism and the Divine, 219–22.
64 See here Aidan Nichols, From Newman to Congar: The Idea of Doctrinal
Development from the Victorians to the Second Vatican Council. Edinburgh:
Clark, 1990.
65 On this, see Tarsicius van Bavel, “The Creator and the Integrity of Creation
in the Fathers of the Church.” Augustinian Studies 21 (1990): 1–33.
66 Arnold J. Toynbee, Civilization on Trial. London: Oxford University Press,
1948, 55.
67 See Frances M. Young, “Adam and Anthropos: A Study of the Interaction of
Science and the Bible in Two Anthropological Treatises of the Fourth
Century.” Vigiliae Christianae 37 (1983): 110–40.
68 It is important to distinguish the complete mature work De Genesi ad litteram
libri duodecim (401–15) from the incomplete earlier work De Genesi ad
litteram imperfectus liber (393–4). All references in this chapter are to the
complete mature work.
69 See further Michael J. McKeough, The Meaning of the Rationes Seminales in
St Augustine. Washington: Catholic University of America Press, 1926.
70 Augustine, De Genesi ad litteram, V.iv.11.
71 Augustine, De Genesi ad litteram, VI.vi.10–11; IV.xvi.27.
72 Augustine, De Genesi ad litteram, V.iv.11.
73 Augustine, De Genesi ad litteram, V.xx.41–2.
74 Augustine, De Genesi ad litteram, VI.xi.19.
75 Augustine, De Genesi ad litteram, VI.xi.18.
76 Augustine, De Genesi ad litteram, VI.xiii.23.
77 For the subsequent use of significant phrases such as “quasdam certas leges,”
see Jane E. Ruby, “The Origins of Scientific ‘Law’.” Journal of the History
of Ideas 47 (1986): 341–59.

78 William Paley, Natural Theology: or, Evidences of the Existence and
Attributes of the Deity. 12th edn. London: Faulder, 1809, 427–34.
79 Charles Kingsley, “The Natural Theology of the Future.” In Westminster
Sermons. London: Macmillan, 1874, v–xxxiii, xxv. Like Augustine, Kingsley
saw this process as being directed by divine providence (xxiv–xxv).
80 St. George Mivart, On the Genesis of Species. New York: Appleton & Co.,
1871, 281. For discussion see Don O’Leary, Roman Catholicism and Modern
Science: A History. New York: Continuum, 2006, 78–93.
81 Frederick Temple, The Relations between Religion and Science. London:
Macmillan, 1885, 115.
82 Christopher F. J. Martin, Thomas Aquinas: God and Explanations.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1997, 181.
83 See for example John Hedley Brooke, “The Relations between Darwin’s
Science and His Religion.” In Darwinism and Divinity, edited by John
Durant. Oxford: Blackwell, 1985, 40–75; Frank Burch Brown, The Evolution
of Darwin’s Religious Views. Macon, GA: Mercer University Press, 1986;
John Hedley Brooke, “Darwin and Victorian Christianity.” In The Cambridge
Companion to Darwin, edited by Jonathan Hodge and Gregory Radick, 192–
213. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
84 See www.darwinproject.ac.uk, accessed August 8, 2014.
85 Perhaps too much has been made of this “crisis of faith”: see Timothy Larsen,
Crisis of Doubt: Honest Faith in Nineteenth-Century England. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2006.
86 See Frank Burch Brown, “The Evolution of Darwin’s Theism.” Journal of the
History of Biology 19 (1986): 1–45. It is interesting to compare Darwin’s
views with the idea of “generic divinity” found in the writings of Benjamin
Franklin: David T. Morgan, “Benjamin Franklin: Champion of Generic
Religion.” Historian 62 (2000): 723–9. While having difficulties with the
Christian idea of God, Franklin was no atheist.
87 It is interesting to note how many scientists have held religious views that
were heterodox, at least to some degree. See the important studies gathered
together in John Hedley Brooke and Ian McLean, eds., Heterodoxy in Early
Modern Science and Religion. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.

88 Life and Letters of Darwin, vol. 1, 304.
89 For a study of the causes of Darwin’s illness, characterized by intermittent
“excitement, violent shivering and vomiting attacks,” see Ralph E. Colp, To
Be an Invalid: The Illness of Charles Darwin. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1977.
90 This has been beautifully documented by Randal Keynes, Annie’s Box:
Charles Darwin, His Daughter and Human Evolution. London: Fourth
Estate, 2001.
91 Donald Fleming, “Charles Darwin, the Anaesthetic Man.” Victorian Studies 4
(1961): 219–36.
92 Letter to Asa Gray, May 22, 1860, Life and Letters of Darwin, vol. 2, 310–12.
93 U. C. Knoepflmacher, Religious Humanism and the Victorian Novel: George
Eliot, Walter Pater, and Samuel Butler. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1970.
94 For an excellent overview of this moral revulsion, see Geoffrey Rowell, Hell
and the Victorians: A Study of the Nineteenth-Century Theological
Controversies Concerning Eternal Punishment and the Future Life. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1974.
95 The Autobiography of Charles Darwin 1809–1882, edited by Nora Barlow.
London: Collins, 1958, 87.
96 Autobiography of Charles Darwin, 87, n. 1.
97 See here works such as Howard R. Murphy, “The Ethical Revolt against
Christian Orthodoxy in Early Victorian England.” American Historical
Review 60 (1955): 800–17.
98 See the analysis in John Hedley Brooke, “‘Laws Impressed on Matter by the
Creator’? The Origins and the Question of Religion.” In The Cambridge
Companion to the “Origin of Species,” edited by Michael Ruse and Robert J.
Richards, 256–74. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
99 See John F. Cornell, “Newton of the Grassblade? Darwin and the Problem of
Organic Teleology.” Isis 77 (1986): 405–21.
100 See Bernard Kleeberg, “God-Nature Progressing: Natural Theology in

German Monism.” Science in Context 20 (2007): 537–69.
101 Life and Letters of Darwin, vol. 2, 312.
102 Thomas H. Huxley, “On the Reception of the Origin of Species.” In Life and
Letters of Darwin, vol. 2, 202.
103 Text in Thomas H. Huxley, “An Episcopal Trilogy.” In Science and
Christian Tradition: Essays, 126–59. London: Macmillan, 1894.
104 Huxley, “An Episcopal Trilogy,” 129.
105 See for example David N. Livingstone, Darwin’s Forgotten Defenders: The
Encounter between Evangelical Theology and Evolutionary Thought. Grand
Rapids, MI: Eerdmans, 1987.
106 See David N. Livingstone, “B. B. Warfield, the Theory of Evolution and
Early Fundamentalism.” Evangelical Quarterly 58 (1986): 69–83; David N.
Livingstone and Mark A. Noll, “B. B. Warfield (1851–1921): A Biblical
Inerrantist as Evolutionist.” Isis 91 (2000): 283–304; Alister E. McGrath,
“Evangelicalism and Science.” In The Oxford Handbook of Evangelical
Theology, edited by Gerald McDermott, 434–48. New York: Oxford
University Press, 2010.
107 For details, see George Marsden, Fundamentalism and American Culture:
The Shaping of Twentieth Century Evangelicalism 1870–1925. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1980.
108 James Orr, “Science and Christian Faith.” In The Fundamentals. 4 vols. Los
Angeles: Bible Institute of Los Angeles, 1917, vol. 1, 334–47. Emphases
original.
109 See the excellent biography by his daughter, Joan Fisher Box, R. A. Fisher:
The Life of a Scientist. New York: Wiley, 1978.
110 R. A. Fisher, “The Renaissance of Darwinism.” The Listener 37 (1947):
1001.
111 Stephen Jay Gould, “Impeaching a Self-Appointed Judge.” Scientific
American 267, no. 1 (1992): 118–21.
112 Gould, “Impeaching a Self-Appointed Judge,” 119–20.

5
Cultural Darwinism?
The Invention of the Meme
Darwinism, Dawkins believes, is too big a theory to be limited to the field of
biology. Why restrict Darwinism to the world of the gene, when it is laden with
significance for every aspect of human life and thought? In The Selfish Gene,
Dawkins explains that he had long been interested in the analogy between
cultural and genetic information. Might not Darwinian theory also be applied to
human culture, rather than being limited to the world of biology? This
intellectual move lays the ground for converting Darwinism from a scientific
theory to a worldview – a metanarrative, an overarching view of reality.
Universal Darwinism: The Evolution of Culture
Dawkins stands in a long tradition of those who have attempted to apply
Darwin’s theory of evolution to human culture.1 It is, however, a challenging
and deeply problematic suggestion, not least because the shaping of human
culture involves active agency on the part of human beings. Not all cultural
developments are the result of forethought and deliberate planning; but many are
– and are often planned on the basis of understandings (such as those of Antonio
Gramsci) of how the process of cultural evolution can be manipulated and
directed.2 “Human agents act intentionally to produce anticipated cultural
outcomes. They are not ‘blind watchmakers’.”3 Although the application of any
biological model of evolution to cultural development is fraught with
difficulties, the intentionality of at least some aspects of cultural development
would seem to point to a Lamarckian, rather than a Darwinian, model as having
superior explanatory potential.4
The move, however, requires a cultural equivalent to the gene – a “cultural
replicator,” which ensures the transmission of information across time and space.
If this concept of a cultural replicator could be established on a firm scientific
basis, Darwinism would be transformed into a universal method, reaching
beyond the specific domain of biological evolution to include the world of
culture.5

The evolutionary psychologist Donald T. Campbell (1916–96) developed the
idea of a “cultural replicator” as early as 1960 as part of his “blind variation and
selective retention” model of cultural evolution,6 and introduced the term
“mnemone” to describe this.7 The related idea of the “culturgen” has found
particular acceptance within North American sociobiology.8 Yet such clumsy
terms failed to capture the popular imagination. In marked contrast, Dawkins
developed an approach that got noticed.
Introducing the Meme
In The Selfish Gene, Dawkins introduced the term which has come to dominate
popular discussion of the issue of cultural evolution: the “meme.” Dawkins
recalls how he wanted a word for a “cultural replicator” that sounded like “gene”
– thus stressing the analogy between cultural and genetic transmission – and
came up with “meme,”9 an abbreviation of the term “mimeme,” which he
derived from the Greek mimesis (“imitation”). The meme was proposed as a
hypothetical replicator – “a unit of cultural transmission, or a unit of imitation”10
– to explain the process of the development of culture within a Darwinian
framework.
Although the notion of a cultural replicator had been developed earlier, Dawkins
popularized the concept, and made it accessible to a wider audience through his
simple terminology and illustrations. In part, the greater success of this term can
be put down to the neater and more memorable terminology Dawkins developed.
Yet another factor was the greater popular reach of his writings, which allowed a
much wider reading public to become aware of the potential of essentially
biological analogues for cultural development. As a result, Dawkins’ work has
generated considerable popular discussion.11 In this chapter, we shall explore
Dawkins’ central contribution to a Darwinian account of the evolution of human
culture.
So what is a meme? Dawkins answers this question clearly in The Selfish Gene,
even though he is a little vague about the mechanism by which memes transfer
information:
Examples of memes are tunes, ideas, catch-phrases, clothes fashions, ways of
making pots or of building arches. Just as genes propagate themselves in the
gene pool by leaping from body to body via sperm or eggs, so memes
propagate themselves in the meme pool by leaping from brain to brain by a

process which, in the broad sense of the term, can be called imitation.12
For Dawkins, one of the best examples of a meme is believing in God – an idea
that has come to feature prominently in recent popular atheist polemical
writings. But how reliable is this idea?
The “memetic” approach is unquestionably helpful in formulating research
questions in the field of intellectual history and cultural development. The three
core elements of evolutionary theory – selection, variation, and replication – can
all be seen at work in cultural contexts. In her analysis of the concept of the
meme, Kate Distin has shown how all three elements can be seen in the
phenomenon of cultural evolution.13 For example, a meme may mutate, and be
transmitted in a different form – which is then subject to the selection process.14
This is unquestionably part of the picture of cultural evolution. But it is only part
of the picture. Yes, memes may mutate – but they may equally be deliberately
changed by humans with agendas, and access to the mechanisms which
influence the cultural reception of ideas and values. The sociological issues of
human agency, control, and power simply cannot be avoided here. We may
concede that certain aspects or elements of cultural evolution may be analogous
to biological evolution. Yet the overall picture is much more complex.15
A further point needs clarification. In The Selfish Gene, Dawkins identifies
tunes, ideas, catch-phrases, fashions, aspects of architecture, songs, and
believing in God, as examples of memes. Yet there is a problem with this
definition of the meme. In Dawkins’ account of the neo-Darwinian synthesis, it
is the gene that is the unit of selection, even though it is the phenotype which is
actually subject to the process of selection. The gene is the replicator, or the set
of instructions; the phenotype is the physical manifestation of the organism, the
visible characteristics or behavior resulting from that set of instructions. Yet all
the examples of memes that Dawkins offers in The Selfish Gene are the result of
such instructions, not the instructions themselves. While Dawkins proposed an
analogy between meme and gene, he actually illustrated this by appealing to the
cultural equivalent of phenotypes, not genes. Dawkins’ suggestion of a parallel
between the propagation of genes in the gene pool and memes in a (hypothetical)
meme pool was thus not entirely warranted.
We can grasp the importance of this point by considering an earlier attempt to
account for cultural evolution in terms of an essentially Darwinian mechanism.
In an important article of 1968, expanded in 1975, the anthropologist F. T. Cloak
proposed that culture evolved along Darwinian lines, and set out how ethological

methods might be applied to culture-specific behavior.16 Cloak drew a
distinction between “i-culture” (the set of cultural instructions that are contained
in the nervous system) and “m-culture” (relationships in material structures
which are maintained by such instructions, or changes in material structures
which come about as a result of these instructions). All the examples of memes
that Dawkins provides in The Selfish Gene are actually cases of what Cloak
terms “m-culture,” where the reader might reasonably have expected to be
provided with examples of “i-culture” (again, using Cloak’s terms).
Dawkins recognized this problem, and modified his ideas in his next major work
– The Extended Phenotype (1982). His original account of the meme, he
conceded, was defective; it required correction:
I was insufficiently clear about the distinction between the meme itself, as
replicator, and its “phenotypic effects” or “meme products” on the other. A
meme should be regarded as a unit of information residing in a brain (Cloak’s
“i-culture”). It has a definite structure, realised in whatever medium the brain
uses for storing information . . . This is to distinguish it from phenotypic
effects, which are its consequences in the outside world (Cloak’s m-
culture).17
This clarification removed one fundamental difficulty with the concept of the
meme. On any standard neo-Darwinian account, genes give rise to phenotypes.
There is no question of phenotypical causation of genetic traits. To put it in a
nutshell: genes are selected, not instructed.18 Dawkins, who vigorously defends
this “central dogma” of Darwinian orthodoxy, had put himself in a potentially
indefensible position, in that he appeared to imply that it was phenotypes that
were inherited.
This new definition of the meme identifies it as the fundamental unit of
information or instruction which gives rise to cultural artifacts and ideas. It is the
set of instructions, the blueprint, not the product. What Dawkins originally
defined as memes – things like “catchy tunes” – are now to be regarded as
“meme products.” At a popular level, however, Dawkins’ meme concept
continues to be discussed in terms of his 1976 definition, set out in The Selfish
Gene, rather than its 1982 revision, as presented in the somewhat less widely
read Extended Phenotype.
Introducing the “God-Meme”

So what is the relevance of this hypothetical meme for belief in God? From the
outset, Dawkins associated his idea of the meme with issues of religious belief,
declaring that religions were “the prime examples of memes.”19 A series of
writers – including Karl Marx (1818–83) and Sigmund Freud (1856–1939) –
argued that, since there is no God to believe in, human religious belief is
essentially an invention designed to provide “metaphysical comfort” to an
existentially beleaguered humanity.20 Dawkins develops this approach in a new
direction, arguing that religions are basically “mind parasites.” Belief in God is
to be seen as “self-replicating information” that “leaps infectiously from mind to
mind.”
Dawkins is an atheist, and believes (though in my view incorrectly on both
points) first, that there is no God, and second, that religious faith is “blind trust,”
which refuses to take account of evidence. So it is natural for him to raise this
question: Why do people believe in God, when there is no God to believe in?
Dawkins’ answer lies in the ability of a God-meme to replicate itself in the
human mind. The God-meme performs particularly well because it has “high
survival value, or infective power, in the environment provided by human
culture.”21 People do not believe in God because they have given long and
careful thought to the matter; they do so because they have been infected by a
powerful meme. In both cases, the intent and outcome is a subversion of the
intellectual legitimacy of belief in God. Belief in God is not something that is
intellectually compelling; it is just that the God-meme is good at infecting
people.
The same, of course, would also be true of an “atheism”-meme, although
Dawkins somehow manages to overlook this point. Dawkins does not deal with
how atheism spreads on the basis of his memetic approach, presumably on
account of his core belief that atheism is scientifically correct. Others would
argue that it is a belief, which requires explanation. Dawkins’ model actually
requires that both atheism and belief in God should be seen as memetic effects.
They are therefore equally valid – or equally invalid, for that matter.
The problem with this approach is immediately obvious. If all ideas are memes,
or the effects of memes,22 Dawkins is left in the decidedly uncomfortable
position of having to accept that his own ideas must also be recognized as the
effects of memes. Scientific ideas would then become yet another example of
memes replicating within the human mind. This would not suit Dawkins’
purposes at all, and he excludes the notion in an intriguing manner: “Scientific
ideas, like all memes, are subject to a kind of natural selection, and this might

look superficially virus-like. But the selective forces that scrutinize scientific
ideas are not arbitrary or capricious. They are exacting, well-honed rules, and
they do not favour pointless self-serving behaviour.”23 This represents a case of
special pleading, in which Dawkins makes an unsuccessful attempt to evade the
trap of self-referentiality. Anyone familiar with intellectual history will spot the
pattern immediately. Everyone’s dogma is wrong except mine. My ideas are
exempt from the general patterns I identify for other ideas, which allows me to
explain them away, leaving my own to dominate the field.
But why should conformity to scientific criteria be allowed to determine whether
a meme is “good” or “useful”? On any conventional reading of things, a good or
useful meme would be one that promoted harmony, gave someone a sense of
belonging, or increased life expectancy. These would seem far more natural and
obvious criteria for “good” memes. But on further reflection, the truth dawns on
us. There are no “natural” criteria involved at all. We decide whether we like
them or not, and then label the memes accordingly. If you like religion, it’s a
“good” meme; if not, it’s “bad.” In the end, all that Dawkins does here is to
construct an entirely circular argument, reflecting his own subjective system of
values.24 Ideas of which Dawkins disapproves – such as belief in God – are
labeled as “viral,” whereas those of which he approves are treated as non-viral.
The apparent lack of objectivity of judgment is a real concern – all the more so
because Dawkins appears blissfully unaware of his own covert intellectual
commitments, and their covert impact on his assessment of things.
We shall return to explore the idea of “God as a virus” later in the present
chapter. But first, we need to consider some concerns which have led most to
abandon the meme as a serious tool of scientific research. In what follows, I
shall explore the origins of Dawkins’ concept of the meme in more detail, and
address some critical difficulties that confront this specific idea, before moving
on to consider Dawkins’ later idea that God as a parasitic “virus of the mind.”
These difficulties – which are not restricted to any putative God-meme – may be
summarized as follows:
1. There is no reason to suppose that cultural evolution is Darwinian, or indeed
that evolutionary biology has any particular value in accounting for the
development of ideas.
2. There is no direct evidence for the existence of memes themselves. The idea
is best understood in an instrumentalist sense, as a heuristic device offering a
helpful way of viewing things, without any commitment to the meme being a
“real” entity.

3. The case for the existence of the meme rests on the questionable assumption
of a direct analogy with the gene, which proves incapable of bearing the
theoretical weight that is placed upon it.
4. There is no necessary reason to propose the existence of a meme as an
explanatory construct. The observational data can be accounted for perfectly
well by other models and mechanisms.
Is Cultural Development Darwinian?
My own interest in intellectual history developed at more or less the same time
at which Dawkins first set out the meme theory. When I first encountered the
idea of the meme in 1977, I found it immensely exciting. Here was something
which was potentially open to rigorous evidence-based investigation, offering
new possibilities for the study of intellectual and cultural development.25 Why
was I so optimistic about the idea? I was in the process of beginning what would
be one of my lifetime concerns – the history of ideas. My particular interest lay
in how religious ideas develop over time, and the factors that lead to their
development, modification, acceptance, or rejection, and – at least in some cases
– their slow decline into oblivion.
The meme, I thought at the time, would allow me to create and validate robust
and reliable models for intellectual and cultural development, firmly grounded in
observational evidence. Yet as I began my research, I found myself coming up
against serious obstacles in practically every area of intellectual activity I
investigated.
Most important of these was my growing realization that Darwinism itself
seemed very poorly adapted to account for the development of culture, or the
overall shape of intellectual history. When I researched the rise of atheism
during its “Golden Age” (1789–1989), I was struck by the purposefulness of the
contemporary retrieval of the older atheisms of writers such as Xenophanes (c.
570–c. 475 bc) or Lucretius (c. 99–c. 55 bc). These ideas were deliberately
reappropriated. Their revival did not just happen; it was made to happen in order
to achieve a specific goal. The process was strongly teleological, driven by
precisely the purpose and intentionality that Darwinian orthodoxy excludes from
the evolutionary process.
The same point can be seen in the emergence of the Renaissance, widely
regarded as one of the most remarkable developments in the history of western
culture. Its origins lie in Italy during the thirteenth century, although its full

blossoming would take place in the following two centuries.26 The movement
expanded from Italy into northern Europe, causing significant changes wherever
it took hold. The cultural impact of the movement was immense – for example,
the Gothic style of architecture gave way to the classical style, impacting
significantly on western European urban landscapes.27
So why did this happen? What explanation may be given for this radical and
highly creative redirection of European culture at this time? Since the origins
and development of the movement are so well understood, it represents an ideal
– indeed, even a critical – case for the application of mimetic theory.
Since the pioneering work of P. O. Kristeller (1905–99), the fundamental basis
of the Renaissance is widely accepted to be the critical reappropriation of the
culture of ancient Rome (and, to a lesser extent, Athens).28 Perhaps stimulated
by the presence of the remains of classical civilization in Italy, Renaissance
theorists advocated the recovery of the rich cultural heritage of the past – the
elegant Latin of Cicero; the eloquence of classical rhetoric; the splendor of
classical architecture; the philosophies of Plato and Aristotle; the republican
political ideals which inspired the Roman constitution.29 Renaissance writers set
about deliberately and systematically adopting these principles, and applying
them to their own situation.
It is a fascinating and complex picture, which continues to delight a new
generation of scholars. But it does raise some serious difficulties for Dawkins’
theory. The origins, development, and transmission of Renaissance humanism –
while subject to the inevitable happenstance of history – was deliberate,
intentional, and planned. If Darwinism is about copying the instructions
(genotype), Lamarckism is about copying the product (phenotype). It would thus
seem that Lamarck, rather than Darwin, offers the better account of cultural
evolution in the case of the Renaissance.
The patterns of development I found in the history of the Renaissance – and, I
must add, in most of the other intellectual and cultural phenomena I have studied
– is that of the blending of memes, and a clear pattern of intellectual causality
which forces us to use a Lamarckian, rather than neo-Darwinian, understanding
of the evolutionary process; assuming, of course, that evolutionary biology has
any relevance to the development of culture, or to the history of ideas. The use
of such terms as “Darwinian” and “Lamarckian” to describe cultural
development may just be downright misleading, implying a fundamental analogy
where none – other than the passage of time and the observation of change –

really exists.
Dawkins seems to be aware of these problems. Consider these cautionary
comments of 1982:
Memes may partially blend with each other in a way that genes do not. New
“mutations” may be “directed” rather than random with respect to
evolutionary trends. The equivalent of Weismannism is less rigid for memes
than for genes; there may be Lamarckian causal arrows leading from
phenotype to replicator, as well as the other way round. These differences
may prove sufficient to render the analogy with genetic selection worthless,
or positively misleading.30
I think this is a fair judgment. If the observational evidence compelled us to
conclude that cultural evolution or the development of ideas took place in a
Darwinian manner, then that would be the end of the debate. Yet the model is
inappropriate. Biological and cultural evolution may have their points of
similarity; they seem, however, to proceed by quite different mechanisms.
The question of whether cultural evolution can be described or illuminated by
biological analogies remains disputed. In recent years, four viewpoints have
emerged. It remains to be seen how the debate will continue in the future:
1. Cultural evolution is best considered as a Lamarckian process.31
2. Any viable theory of cultural evolution must contain Lamarckian elements.32
3. If a Darwinian paradigm is held to offer the best explanation of the evolution
of cultural entities, it requires considerable expansion or modification to
accommodate the observational evidence.33
4. Cultural evolution is best described using models drawn from other sources,
such as disease epidemiology,34 learning theory,35 or cognitive
psychology.36
Do Memes Actually Exist?
The second difficulty with the meme idea is that it is inadequately grounded in
the evidence. In his preface to Susan Blackmore’s Meme Machine (1999),
Dawkins points out the problems that the meme faces if it is to be taken
seriously within the scientific community:

Another objection is that we don’t know what memes are made of, or where
they reside. Memes have not yet found their Watson and Crick; they even
lack their Mendel. Whereas genes are to be found in precise locations on
chromosomes, memes presumably exist in brains, and we have even less
chance of seeing one than of seeing a gene (though the neurobiologist Juan
Delius has pictured his conjecture of what a meme might look like).37
These are intriguing comments, indicating an awareness of the evidential
vulnerability of the memetic hypothesis. To his critics, Dawkins talking about
memes is like believers talking about God – an invisible, unverifiable postulate,
which helps explain some things about experience, but ultimately lies beyond
empirical investigation. It is far from clear how Dawkins’ views on evidence and
beliefs allows him to continue believing in memes, when he is so critical of
others for believing in God.
And just what are we to make of the point that “the neurobiologist Juan Delius
has pictured his conjecture of what a meme might look like”? I’ve seen countless
pictures of God in many visits to art galleries. And that verifies the concept? Or
makes it scientifically plausible? Delius’ proposal that a meme will have a single
locatable and observable structure as “a constellation of activated neuronal
synapses” is purely conjectural, and has yet to be subjected to rigorous empirical
investigation.38 It is one thing to speculate about what something might look
like; the real question is whether it is there at all.
In 1993, Dawkins laid down the essence of what constituted a “scientific”
approach: “testability, evidential support, precision, quantifiability, consistency,
intersubjectivity, repeatability, universality, progressiveness, independence of
cultural milieu, and so on.”39 So where is the evidential support for memes? The
quantitative analysis? The formulation of criteria by which the meme may be
confirmed or eliminated as a useful construct? We await clarification here.
The glaring contrast with the gene will be obvious. Genes can be “seen,” and
their transmission patterns studied under rigorous empirical conditions. What
started off as hypothetical constructs inferred from systematic experiment and
observation ended up being observed themselves. The gene was initially seen as
a theoretical necessity, in that no other mechanism could explain the relevant
observations, before being accepted as a real entity on account of the sheer
weight of evidence. But what about memes? The simple fact is that they are, in
the first place, hypothetical constructs, inferred from observation rather than
observed in themselves; in the second place, unobservable; and in the third

place, more or less useless at the explanatory level. This makes their rigorous
investigation intensely problematic, and their fruitful application somewhat
improbable.
A gene is an observable entity that is well defined at the biological, chemical,
and physical levels. Biologically, the gene is a distinct portion of a chromosome;
chemically, it consists of DNA; physically, it consists of a double-helix, with a
sequence of nucleotides which represent a “genetic code” that can be read and
interpreted. Even if genes were never observed, they would continue to be
considered a superb theoretical explanation of what can be observed.
The situation with memes is quite different. What are memes? Where are they
located? How are they to be described biologically, chemically, and physically?
There is no operational definition of a meme, allowing its alleged characteristics
and function to be investigated. Our understanding of cultural development and
the history of ideas would not be in the least disadvantaged if the idea of the
meme is forgotten. The meme is simply an optional extra, an unnecessary
addition to the range of theoretical mechanisms proposed to explain the
development of culture. It can be abandoned without difficulty by cultural
theorists.40
And what about the mechanism by which memes are allegedly transmitted? One
of the most important implications of the discovery of the structure of DNA was
that it opened the way to an understanding of the mechanism of replication. So
what physical mechanism is proposed in the case of the meme? How does a
meme cause a memetic effect? Or, to put the question in a more pointed way:
How could we even begin to set up experiments to identify and establish the
structure of memes, let alone to explore their relation to alleged memetic effects?
Unsurprisingly, the plausibility of the meme as a serious scientific hypothesis
now seems to be on the wane.
And since the meme is not warranted scientifically, are we to conclude that there
is a meme for belief in memes themselves?41 The meme concept then dies the
slow death of self-referentiality, in that, if taken seriously, the idea explains itself
as much as anything else. And as the qualifications mount up, the concept loses
its plausibility. It’s like adding more and more epicycles to the Ptolemaic model
of the solar system. What was once a bright, neat idea becomes immensely
cumbersome, its initial brilliance fading with every additional qualification
added in its defense.
The Flawed Analogy between Gene and Meme

The Flawed Analogy between Gene and Meme
Dawkins’ argument for both the existence and function of the meme is based on
a proposed analogy between biological and cultural evolution. His implicit
assumption seems to be that, since the transmission of culture and the
transmission of genes are analogical processes, the well-developed concepts and
methods of neo-Darwinism can account for them both. The argument can be set
out as follows:
Biological evolution requires a replicator, now known to actually exist,
namely the gene.
So, by analogy:
Cultural evolution also requires a replicator, which is hypothesized to be the
meme.
It is a brave and bold move. But is it right? Does this analogy actually work?
And what is the hard, observational evidence for memes, that demands that we
accept this hypothetical concept as a necessary and fruitful means of explaining
cultural development?
As has often been demonstrated, analogical argumentation is an essential
element of scientific reasoning.42 The perception of an analogy between A and B
is often the starting point for new lines of enquiry, opening up new and
exhilarating frontiers. Yet that same perception has often led to scientific dead
ends, including the long-abandoned ideas of “calorific” and “phlogiston.” As
Mario Bunge points out, analogies have a marked propensity to mislead in the
sciences.43 So is this posited analogy between gene and meme in the first place
real, and in the second helpful?
Let’s begin by exploring whether the analogy has any basis in fact. The
exploration and testing of the limits of scientific analogies is an important and
legitimate aspect of the scientific method. In The Blind Watchmaker, Dawkins
provides an eloquent discussion of how science has often advanced by exploring
whether a possible analogy may point to something deeper: “Some of the
greatest advances in science have come about because some clever person
spotted an analogy between a subject that was already understood, and another
still mysterious subject. The trick is to strike a balance between too much
indiscriminate analogizing on the one hand, and a sterile blindness to fruitful
analogies on the other.”44 Analogies don’t always mislead. The problem is
working out which ones are fruitful, and which are dead ends. In proposing the

meme, Dawkins was exploring a potentially significant analogy between
biological and cultural evolution, proposing an analogical process or mechanism
to account for this. He was not the first to do so, but he communicated it with
particular skill.
Exactly the same process of exploring analogies can be seen at work in Darwin’s
Origin of Species. Darwin spotted what seemed to be an analogy between the
way animals were bred to improve certain desirable characteristics, and the way
nature seemed to bring about changes. He proposed the idea of “natural
selection” as a mechanism within the natural order, analogous to the “artificial
selection” of the animal-breeding industry.45 This analogy has turned out to be
highly fruitful, but as the history of science demonstrates, there are significant
limits to analogical argumentation of this kind.
Remember the ether? Sound and light seemed analogous to many physicists in
the nineteenth century. They seemed to behave so similarly. Both were known to
be forms of waves, whose speed and wavelength could be determined with a
high degree of accuracy. And since the propagation of sound required a medium
– such as air or water – then the same had to be true of light as well. The term
“ether” was used to designate this mysterious medium, through which light and
other electromagnetic radiation travelled.
The Michelson–Morley experiment of 1887 set out to explore the properties of
the “luminiferous ether” – that is, the medium through which light was believed
to travel. As a result of their experiment, Albert A. Michelson (1852–1931) and
Edward W. Morley (1838–1923) came to the remarkable conclusion that “the
ether is at rest with regard to the earth’s surface.”46 This puzzling result had a
number of possible implications. One of these was that there was no
“luminiferous ether” in the first place. The analogy with sound had just been
pressed too far.
By the 1920s, the scientific world had finally come round to the conclusion that
light was not the same as sound. There were unquestionably similarities,
parallels, and convergences – but these had been overinterpreted, and allowed to
create the impression that two different entities were analogous. Even though
light and sound did indeed behave in very similar ways in very many contexts,
they were completely different things. Light needed no medium; it would travel
in a vacuum.
It is a well-known story, and its moral is perfectly clear: analogies can be
dangerously misleading. The argument from analogy was seen to have misled

here – as it had misled in so many other cases. Quantum theory is an excellent
example of a scientific discipline bedeviled by problems arising from the bad use
of analogies.47 And when we move outside the relatively well defined world of
physics into the chaos of human culture, analogies often develop a life of their
own, unchecked by the rigid demands of evidence-based argument.
The early case for some physical factor for the transmission of hereditary
information – now known as the “gene” – was based on the Mendelian
demonstration of the precision of such transmission, and the self-evident fact
that there was no other means by which such information could be stored,
transmitted, and retrieved. The case of cultural evolution is completely different.
All human cultures possess means by which information may be transmitted
within existing populations and to subsequent generations – such as books,
rituals, institutions, and oral traditions.48 The notion of a “meme” is functionally
redundant, forcing its defenders to make a case by analogy with the gene – yet to
downplay the empirically determined biological, chemical, and physical
parameters of the gene, which are now an essential aspect of molecular genetics.
The plausibility of the meme is thus grounded in a questionable analogical
argument, not in overwhelming evidence and observation.49
We clearly need the memetic equivalent of the Michelson–Morley experiment –
something which will determine, by empirical investigation rather than
questionable analogical argumentation, whether memes exist. The present state
of research overwhelmingly suggests that memes are the new ether – a redundant
hypothesis just waiting to be finally eliminated.50 The “meme for memes” may
have a high capacity for survival and transmission – but it names nothing in the
real world. In fact, in both respects, it seems to be inconveniently similar to
Dawkins’ God-meme.
The Redundancy of the Meme
Perhaps the most significant criticism of the meme concept is that the study of
cultural and intellectual development proceeds perfectly well without it.
Economic and physical models – especially information transfer – have proved
their worth in this context. The contrast between meme and gene is, once more,
painfully obvious: the gene had to be postulated, as there was simply no other
way of explaining the observational evidence concerning the patterns of
transmission of inherited traits. The meme is explanatorily redundant.
Economic models, which treat ideas as “information cascades” or consumer

durables are rather more persuasive and helpful than the unverified meme
concept.51 These models incorporate the “competition” and “extinction” motifs
of Darwinian theory, without necessarily endorsing its theories on the origins of
innovations. For example, an economic “theory of fads” is considerably more
convincing as an explanation of patterns of thought adoption and dispersal than
Dawkins’ meme.52 Cultural evolution and intellectual development can often be
better understood in terms of a physical, rather than a biological analogue – such
the transmission of information on random networks.53 Yet Dawkins does not
consider these significant theoretical alternatives in evaluating his meme
hypothesis.
To its supporters, the meme has not yet been definitively pronounced dead.
Dawkins’ idea of the meme has been upheld by two of his colleagues – Daniel
Dennett, especially in his Darwin’s Dangerous Idea (1995), and Susan
Blackmore, especially in her The Meme Machine (1999). Significantly, Dennett
and Blackmore understand the meme in strikingly different ways54 – which is
perhaps inevitable, given the meme’s questionable empirical credentials. Yet the
concept of the meme remains so vague and so empirically indeterminate that
there seems to be no means by which it can be verified or falsified.
In any case, what it proposes to “explain” can easily be accounted for by other
models. Exactly what otherwise puzzling phenomena are accounted for by
memes? Dawkins is coy about specifics here, exposing all the more clearly the
glaring contrast between this and his brilliant evidence-based defense of his
concept of the “selfish gene.”
Although now a quarter of a century old, the “science” of memetics has failed to
generate a productive research program in mainstream cognitive science,
sociology, or intellectual history. On the basis of the evidence available, I can
only agree with Martin Gardner’s withering criticism of the notion:
A meme is so broadly defined by its proponents as to be a useless concept,
creating more confusion than light, and I predict that the concept will soon be
forgotten as a curious linguistic quirk of little value. To critics, who at the
moment far outnumber true believers, memetics is no more than a
cumbersome terminology for saying what everybody knows and that can be
more usefully said in the dull terminology of information transfer.55
Gardner’s concerns are echoed in an article reflecting on the closure of the
online Journal of Memetics, which was launched in 1997, arguably at the zenith

of the cultural plausibility of the meme.56 The journal folded in 2005. Why? The
answer can be found in a devastating critique of the notion of the meme,
published in the final issue of this ill-fated journal.57 Dr. Bruce Edmonds made
two fundamental criticisms of the notion of memetics, which he believes have
undermined its claims to plausibility in the scientific community:
1. The underlying reason why memetics has failed is that it “has not provided
any extra explanatory or predictive power beyond that available without the
gene-meme analogy.” In other words, it has not provided any “added value”
in terms of providing new understanding of phenomena.
2. The study of memetics has been characterized by “theoretical discussion of
extreme abstraction and over ambition.” Edmonds singles out for special
criticism unrealistic and over-ambitious attempts, often developed in
advance of evidence, “to ‘explain’ some immensely complex phenomena
such as religion.” Yet for many of its more uncritical and enthusiastic
advocates, this is precisely the reason why the meme was invented – to
explain away belief in God.58
Edmonds ends his dismissal of the meme with what in effect amounts to its
obituary: Memetics “has been a short-lived fad whose effect has been to obscure
more than it has been to enlighten. I am afraid that memetics, as an identifiable
discipline, will not be widely missed.”
Not surprisingly, Dawkins himself has moved on, distancing himself from any
suggestion that he offered the meme concept as an explanation of human culture
in general.59 As Daniel Dennett puts it, Dawkins has recently “drawn in his
horns slightly.”60 He has retreated from his early optimism, and hinted that the
meme hypothesis was simply a useful analogy. Others have taken a similar view,
suggesting that the meme is best seen as a useful theoretical construct, which
plays a valuable heuristic role in explaining observational evidence. “For us, the
pertinent question is not whether memes exist . . . but whether they are a useful
theoretical expedient.”61 Dennett suggests that Dawkins was forced to back off
here because he was seen as having become a sociobiologist.62 I think it rests
more on a growing realization of the chronic evidential underdetermination of
the notion. While discussion about whether the meme has any explanatory or
predictive value continues,63 there has been a perceptible loss of interest in the
idea since about 2010.
God as a Virus of the Mind?

God as a
us o t e
d
Yet there are other ways of visualizing or conceptualizing the transmission of
ideas in culture which draw on biological analogies. During the 1990s, Dawkins
developed his meme concept in another direction, using the image of a “virus of
the mind.” “Memes,” Dawkins tells us, can be transmitted “like viruses in an
epidemic.”64 Although the connection between a “meme” and a “virus of the
mind” is not clarified with the precision we might expect, it is clear that, for
Dawkins, the key theme in each case is replication. For a virus to be effective, it
must possess two qualities: the ability to replicate information accurately, and to
obey the instructions which are encoded in the information replicated in this
way.65
Yet there is a problem here. Mary Midgley argues that, while human beings can
be considered to act as passive carriers of biological viruses, they cannot be
regarded as mere passive “vehicles” or “carriers” of ideas and beliefs.66 As
psychologists have pointed out from the time of William James (1842–1910)
onward, individuals actively interpret the information they receive in the light of
their existing knowledge and values, and on the basis of that may decide to
reject, accept, or modify the information that is communicated to them.67
Yet there is also a most regrettable verbal sleight of hand at work here, a
rhetorical device apparently being presented as if it were good science. As
everyone knows, viruses are bad things; they are contagious, parasitic entities,
which exploit their hosts.68 A computer “virus” causes degradation of the
system’s capacity to function. The rhetorically freighted “argument” that God is
a virus amounts to little more than thinly veiled insinuation, rather than rigorous
evidence-based reasoning. Belief in God is proposed as a malignant infection
contaminating otherwise pure minds. Yet the whole idea founders on the rocks
of the absence of experimental evidence, the subjectivity of Dawkins’ personal
value judgments implicated in assessing what is “good” and “bad,” and the
circularity of self-referentiality.
The importance of this point can be seen from Susan Blackmore’s recent change
of heart on whether God can be seen as a “virus of the mind.”69 “The idea of
religions as ‘viruses of the mind’ may have had its day,” she remarked, given the
clear evidence that religion can sometimes – though not always – be “something
helpful and adaptive to its host.” Perhaps the phrase “bacteria of the mind” might
be more helpful? After all, “bacteria can be helpful as well as harmful; they can
be symbiotic as well as parasitic.”
So just what is the experimental evidence that God is bad for you? Dawkins

So just what is the experimental evidence that God is bad for you? Dawkins
presumes that it is publicly accepted within the scientific community that
religion debilitates people, reducing their potential for survival and health. Yet a
substantial body of recent empirical research points to a generally positive
interaction of religion and health. That there are pathological types of religious
belief and behavior is well known; yet this in no way invalidates the generally
positive estimation of religion’s impact on mental health to emerge from
evidence-based studies.
Dawkins appears to assume that his readers will rather uncritically share his own
subjective views on the malignancy of religion, and thus accept his conclusions
without demur. But they are not grounded in the rigorously evidence-based
analysis, based on objective observation of the impact of religion on individuals,
which is typical of the scientific enterprise that both Dawkins and I admire.
The implications of this emerging consensus for the “God as virus” hypothesis is
unambiguous. An already tenuous analogy becomes completely unsustainable. If
religion is reported as having a positive impact on human wellbeing by 79% of
recent studies in the field,70 and neutral or mixed in a further 20%, how can it
conceivably be regarded as analogous to a virus? Viruses are meant to be bad for
you. So just how many viruses have such a positive impact on their hosts? Far
from being something which reduces the survival value of its host, belief in God
is an additional resource that enhances psychic survival.71 I have no doubt that,
within the faith-based worldview which shapes Dawkins’ account of reality –
atheism – God ought to have such a negative, detrimental impact on human
wellbeing. But he does not. The evidence just doesn’t fit the theory.
Furthermore, what is the actual experimental evidence for such hypothetical
“viruses of the mind”? In the real world, viruses are not known solely by their
symptoms; they can be detected, subjected to rigorous empirical investigation,
and their genetic structure characterized minutely. In contrast, the “virus of the
mind” is hypothetical; posited by a questionable analogical argument, not direct
observation; and is totally unwarranted conceptually on the basis of the behavior
that Dawkins proposes for it. Can we observe these viruses? What is their
structure? Their “genetic code”? Their location within the human body? And,
most importantly of all, given Dawkins’ interest in their spread, what is their
mode of transmission?
There is no experimental evidence that ideas are viruses. Ideas may seem to
“behave” in certain respects as if they are viruses. But there is a massive gap
between analogy and identity – and, as the history of science illustrates only too

painfully, most false trails in science are about analogies which were mistakenly
assumed to be identities. The “God as virus” slogan, to the extent that it has any
scientific validity, might be shorthand for something like “the patterns of
diffusion of religious ideas seem to be analogous to those of the spread of certain
diseases.”
Unfortunately, Dawkins does not give any evidence-based arguments for this,
and prefers to conjecture as to the impact of such a hypothetical virus on the
human mind. The science just isn’t there. In any case, each and every argument
that Dawkins adduces for his idea of “God as virus of the mind” can be
countered by proposing its counterpart for “atheism as a virus of the mind.” Both
ideas are equally unsubstantiated and meaningless.
The “thought contagion” metaphor has been developed most thoroughly by
Aaron Lynch,72 who makes the crucially important point that the way in which
ideas spread has no necessary relation to their validity or “goodness.” As Lynch
puts it:
The term “thought contagion” is neutral with respect to truth or falsity, as
well as good or bad. False beliefs can spread as thought contagions, but so
too can true beliefs. Similarly, harmful ideas can spread as thought
contagions, but so too can beneficial ideas … Thought contagion analysis
concerns itself primarily with the mechanism by which ideas spread through a
population. Whether an idea is true, false, helpful or harmful are considered
mainly for the effects they have on transmission rates.73
Moving On …
The invention of the Internet gave a new meaning to the “meme,” far removed
from Dawkins’ original intentions back in 1976. The idea of the meme has been
“co-opted by the marketing and advertising industry as a way of getting their
messages into your head.”74 A “meme” now designates words, images, or
actions which are designed to be liked and thus to spread, generally with the
intention of influencing people – often to buy something. It is nothing like what
Dawkins proposed. But at least the word “meme” has survived, even if it now
means something quite different.
But what about the original concept of the meme? It now finds few supporters.
Neither the developed forms of Dawkins’ concepts of the meme or the “virus of
the mind” – whatever their relationship – really help us validate or negate ideas,

or understand or explain patterns of cultural development. As most working in
the area of cultural development have concluded, it is perfectly possible to
postulate and study cultural evolution while remaining agnostic to its
mechanism. “All we need to do is recognize that cultural inheritance exists, and
that its routes are different from the genetic ones.”75
And what does this have to do with the idea of God? Well, not very much,
really. A “memetic” approach to the diffusion of ideas may allow some insights
about how beliefs – such as belief in God or belief in memes – spread within a
culture. But it can’t tell us anything about whether this belief itself is right or
wrong, good or bad. This won’t stop people drawing such conclusions – but they
are not valid conclusions. And they are most certainly not scientific conclusions.
Notes
1 For a defense of this approach, see Alex Mesoudi, Cultural Evolution: How
Darwinian Theory Can Explain Human Culture and Synthesize the Social
Sciences. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2011. An often-overlooked
example is Peter Medawar’s analysis of tradition in terms of selection
pressures: see Peter Medawar, “Tradition: The Evidence of Biology.” In The
Uniqueness of the Individual. New York: Basic Books, 1958, 134–42.
2 E.g., see Anne Showstack Sassoon, Gramsci and Contemporary Politics:
Beyond Pessimism of the Intellect. London: Routledge, 2000, 15–42.
3 Ted Benton, “Social Causes and Natural Relations.” In Alas, Poor Darwin:
Arguments against Evolutionary Psychology, edited by Hilary Rose and
Steven Rose, 206–24. London: Harmony, 2000, 216. For similar concerns,
see Joseph M. Bryant, “An Evolutionary Social Science? A Skeptic’s Brief,
Theoretical and Substantive.” Philosophy of the Social Sciences 34 (2004):
451–92.
4 The situation is much more complex than it might at first seem, as pointed out
by Maria E. Kronfeldner, “Is Cultural Evolution Lamarckian?” Biology and
Philosophy 22 (2007): 493–512.
5 See Joseph Poulshock, “Universal Darwinism and the Potential of Memetics.”
Quarterly Review of Biology 77 (2002): 174–5.
6 Donald T. Campbell, “Blind Variation and Selective Retention in Creative

Thought as in Other Knowledge Processes.” Psychological Review 67 (1960):
380–400; idem, “Variation, Selection and Retention in Sociocultural
Evolution.” In Social Change in Developing Areas: A Reinterpretation of
Evolutionary Theory, edited by H. R. Barringer, G. I. Blanksten, and R. W.
Mack, 19–49. Cambridge, MA: Schenkman, 1965. For an evaluation of the
approach, see Dean Keith Simonton, “Creative Thought as Blind-Variation
and Selective-Retention: Combinatorial Models of Exceptional Creativity.”
Physics of Life Reviews 7 (2010): 156–79.
7 Donald T. Campbell, “A General ‘Selection Theory’ as Implemented in
Biological Evolution and in Social Belief-Transmission-with-Modification in
Science.” Biology and Philosophy 3 (1988): 413–63. The term was first
introduced by Campbell in 1974; this article sets out a later exposition of the
notion.
8 A “culturgen” is to be understood as “a relatively homogenous set of artifacts,
behaviours, or mentifacts”; Charles J. Lumsden and Edward O. Wilson,
Genes, Mind, and Culture: The Coevolutionary Process. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1981, 27. For an assessment of this concept, see
Brian Baxter, A Darwinian Worldview: Sociobiology, Environmental Ethics
and the Work of Edward O. Wilson. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2007, 59–76.
9 The Selfish Gene, 192. Similarly, the word “memetic” was coined, paralleling
“genetic”; once more, the intention was to stress that both biological and
cultural evolution could be accounted for by “units of replication” or “units of
transmission.”
10 The Selfish Gene, 192. Emphasis original. On the “imitation” theme, see Lee
Alan Dugatkin, The Imitation Factor: Evolution beyond the Gene. New York:
Free Press, 2000, 115–35.
11 See for example Susan J. Blackmore, The Meme Machine. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1999. This is best seen as a somewhat ambitious extension
of Dawkins’ approach, which goes beyond his own formulation of the notion.
12 The Selfish Gene, 173.
13 Kate Distin, The Selfish Meme: A Critical Reassessment. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2005.
14 Distin develops these themes more fully in Kate Distin, Cultural Evolution.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011, 49–62.
15 For example, see the points made by Peter Godfrey-Smith, “Darwinism and
Cultural Change.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 367
(2012): 2160–70.
16 F. T. Cloak, “Is a Cultural Ethology Possible?” Human Ecology 3 (1975):
161–81. An earlier version of this article appeared in Research Previews 15
(1968): 37–47. For another perspective, see L. L. Cavalli-Sforza, “Cultural
Evolution.” American Zoologist 26 (1986): 845–55.
17 The Extended Phenotype, 109. As this citation suggests, The Extended
Phenotype was not conceived as a popular book (unlike The Selfish Gene).
18 For an excellent presentation of this point, see Gary Cziko, Without Miracles:
Universal Selection Theory and the Second Darwinian Revolution.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995.
19 A Devil’s Chaplain, 117.
20 Friedrich Nietzsche, The Birth of Tragedy. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2007, 12. See William Lloyd Newell, The Secular Magi: Marx, Freud,
and Nietzsche on Religion. New York: Pilgrim, 1986.
21 The Selfish Gene, 193. Dawkins clearly assumes a link between religion,
biology, and culture, but fails to deal with this in any depth. For a (non-
memetic) attempt to engage this question, see Walter Burkert, Creation of the
Sacred: Tracks of Biology in Early Religions. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1996.
22 On which see John A. Ball, “Memes as Replicators.” Ethology and Sociology
5 (1984): 145–61.
23 A Devil’s Chaplain, 145.
24 See the analysis in Distin, The Selfish Meme, 72–7.
25 For my reflections, see my extended essay: Alister E. McGrath, “The
Evolution of Doctrine? A Critical Examination of the Theological Validity of
Biological Models of Doctrinal Development.” In The Order of Things:
Explorations in Scientific Theology. Oxford: Blackwell, 2006, 117–67.
26 There is a huge literature. For a useful introduction see Charles G. Nauert,

Humanism and the Culture of Renaissance Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1995.
27 See for example Norbert Huse, Wolfgang Wolters, and Edmund Jephcott. The
Art of Renaissance Venice: Architecture, Sculpture, and Painting, 1460–
1590. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990; James S. Ackerman,
Distance Points: Essays in Theory and Renaissance Art and Architecture.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991.
28 See for example Paul Oskar Kristeller, Renaissance Thought: The Classic,
Scholastic, and Humanistic Strains. New York: Harper & Row, 1961.
29 For the general issue, see Ronald G. Witt, In the Footsteps of the Ancients:
The Origins of Humanism from Lovato to Bruni. Leiden: Brill, 2000.
30 The Extended Phenotype, 112.
31 See Arthur J. Robson, “The Evolution of Strategic Behaviour.” Canadian
Journal of Economics 28 (1995): 17–41; Stephen Jay Gould, Life’s
Grandeur: The Spread of Excellence from Plato to Darwin. London:
Jonathan Cape, 1996, 217–30; Richard Nelson, “Evolutionary Social Science
and Universal Darwinism.” Journal of Evolutionary Economics 16 (2006):
491–510.
32 See Thorbjørn Knudsen, “Nesting Lamarckism within Darwinian
Explanations: Necessity in Economics and Possibility in Biology?” In
Darwinism and Evolutionary Economics, edited by John Nightingale and
John Laurent, 121–59. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 2001.
33 See Thorbjørn Knudsen and Geoffrey M. Hodgson, “Why We Need a
Generalized Darwinism: And Why Generalized Darwinism Is Not Enough.”
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 61 (2006): 1–19;
Kronfeldner, “Is Cultural Evolution Lamarckian?”; Yoshihisa Kashima,
“Globalization, Diversity and Universal Darwinism.” Culture and Psychology
13 (2007): 129–39.
34 See L. L. Cavalli-Sforza and M. W. Feldman, Cultural Transmission and
Evolution: A Quantitative Approach. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1981, 46–53.
35 See Robert D. Boyd and Peter J. Richerson, Culture and the Evolutionary
Process. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985, 81–131. Boyd and

Richerson later emphasized that the evolution of human culture was a
landmark in human development, marking a transition away from purely
biological accounts of human evolution: Peter J. Richerson and Robert Boyd,
Not by Genes Alone: How Culture Transformed Human Evolution. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2005.
36 See Lumsden and Wilson, Genes, Mind, and Culture.
37 A Devil’s Chaplain, 124.
38 Juan D. Delius, “The Nature of Culture.” In The Tinbergen Legacy, edited by
M. S. Dawkins, T. R. Halliday, and R. Dawkins, 75–99. London: Chapman &
Hall, 1991. See also the earlier essay Juan D. Delius, “On Mind Memes and
Brain Bugs: A Natural History of Culture.” In The Nature of Culture, edited
by Walter A. Koch, 26–79. Bochum: Brockmeyer, 1989. More than twenty
years later, this idea remains as tenuous and unevidenced as before.
39 A Devil’s Chaplain, 145.
40 Note the comments of Maurice Bloch, “A Well-Disposed Social
Anthropologist’s Problem with Memes.” In Darwinizing Culture: The Status
of Memetics as a Science, edited by Robert Aunger, 189–203. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2000.
41 Alan Costall, “The ‘Meme’ Meme.” Cultural Dynamics 4 (1991): 321–35.
42 Daniel Rothbart, “The Semantics of Metaphor and the Structure of Science.”
Philosophy of Science 51 (1984): 595–615.
43 Mario Bunge, Method, Model, and Matter. Dordrecht: Reidel, 1973, 125–6.
44 The Blind Watchmaker, 195.
45 See Robert M. Young, “Darwin’s Metaphor and the Philosophy of Science.”
Science as Culture 16 (1993): 375–403.
46 A. A. Michelson and E. W. Morley, “On the Relative Motion of the Earth and
Luminiferous Ether.” American Journal of Science 34 (1887): 333–45.
47 Mario Bunge, “Analogy in Quantum Theory: From Insight to Nonsense.”
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 18 (1967): 265–86.
48 There is a huge literature, including works such as Niklas Luhmann, Love as

Passion: The Codification of Intimacy. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press, 1998; Vera Schwarcz, Bridge across Broken Time: Chinese and Jewish
Cultural Memory. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1998; John
Lowney, The American Avant-Garde Tradition: William Carlos Williams,
Postmodern Poetry, and the Politics of Cultural Memory. Lewisburg, PA:
Bucknell University Press, 1997.
49 See further the discussion in Mark Jeffreys, “The Meme Metaphor.”
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 43 (2000): 227–42.
50 There are some very interesting alternative proposals for the interaction of
genes and culture set out in William H. Durham, Coevolution: Genes,
Culture, and Human Diversity. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press,
1991, 1–41.
51 See for example S. Bikhchandani, D. Hirshleifer, and I. Welch, “Learning
from the Behavior of Others: Conformity, Fads, and Informational
Cascades.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 12 (1998): 151–70.
52 Sushil Bikhchandani, David Hirshleifer, and Ivo Welch, “A Theory of Fads,
Fashion, Custom, and Cultural Change as Informational Cascades.” Journal
of Political Economy 100 (1992): 992–1026. Dawkins fails to explore this
issue in his account of “crazes,” which he analyses very superficially using an
epidemiological model: A Devil’s Chaplain, 136–7.
53 See for example D. J. Watts, “A Simple Model of Information Cascades on
Random Networks.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 99
(2002): 5766–71. The implications of this as an analogue for the transmission
of ideas in a cultural system will be obvious.
54 As noted by Distin, The Selfish Meme.
55 Martin Gardner, “Kilroy Was Here.” Los Angeles Times, March 5, 2000.
56 Website at http://jom-emit.cfpm.org, accessed August 8, 2014.
57 Bruce Edmonds, “The Revealed Poverty of the Gene–Meme Analogy – Why
Memetics per se Has Failed to Produce Substantive Results.” January 2005.
http://cfpm.org/jom-emit/2005/vol9/edmonds_b.html, accessed August 8,
2014.
58 Edmonds, “Revealed Poverty.”

59 A Devil’s Chaplain, 127.
60 Daniel C. Dennett, Darwin's Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meaning of
Life. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995, 361. Dennett himself developed a
highly speculative notion of the meme, with little empirical evidence to
support it. It is important not to judge Dawkins’ more modest notion against
this inflated version. It is worth noting that the meme hypothesis is still
advocated by Dawkins in Unweaving the Rainbow, 304–10, and The God
Delusion, 191–201.
61 Kevin Laland and John Odling-Smee, “The Evolution of the Meme.” In
Darwinizing Culture: The Status of Memetics as a Science, edited by Robert
Aunger, 121–42. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000, 121.
62 Dennett, Darwin’s Dangerous Idea, 361–2.
63 See Susan Blackmore, “Memetics Does Provide a Useful Way of
Understanding Cultural Evolution.” In Contemporary Debates in Philosophy
of Biology, edited by Francisco J. Ayala and Robert Arp, 255–72. Oxford:
Blackwell, 2010; William C. Wimsatt, “Memetics Does Not Provide a Useful
Way of Understanding Cultural Evolution.” In Contemporary Debates in
Philosophy of Biology, edited by Francisco J. Ayala and Robert Arp, 273–91.
Oxford: Blackwell, 2010.
64 A Devil’s Chaplain, 121.
65 A Devil’s Chaplain, 135.
66 Mary Midgley, “Why Memes?” In Alas, Poor Darwin: Arguments against
Evolutionary Psychology, edited by Hilary Rose and Steven Rose, 67–84.
London: Jonathan Cape, 2001. From a religious perspective, see the concerns
noted in John W. Bowker, Is God a Virus?: Genes, Culture and Religion.
London: SPCK, 1995.
67 See especially Sperber’s complaint about the marginalization of human
psychology in this discussion: Dan Sperber, “Why a Deep Understanding of
Cultural Evolution Is Incompatible with Shallow Psychology.” In Roots of
Human Sociality: Culture, Cognition and Interaction, edited by Nick Enfield
and Stephen Levinson, 431–49. Oxford: Berg, 2006.
68 Some might argue that bacteriophages are examples of good viruses, in that
they infect and destroy bacteria that are potentially damaging for humans.

From the bacterium’s perspective, of course, things look rather different.
69 Susan Blackmore, “Why I No Longer Believe Religion Is a Virus of the
Mind.” The Guardian, September 16, 2010.
www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2010/sep/16/why-no-longer-
believe-religion-virus-mind, accessed August 8, 2014.
70 Harold G. Koenig and Harvey J. Cohen, The Link between Religion and
Health: Psychoneuroimmunology and the Faith Factor. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2002, 101.
71 Kenneth I. Pargament, The Psychology of Religion and Coping: Theory,
Research, Practice. New York: Guilford, 1997.
72 Aaron Lynch, Thought Contagion: How Belief Spreads through Society. New
York: Basic Books, 1996.
73 Aaron Lynch, “An Introduction to the Evolutionary Epidemiology of Ideas.”
Biological Physicist 3, no. 2 (2003): 7–14.
74 Dominic Basulto, “Have Internet Memes Lost Their Meaning?” Washington
Post, July 5, 2013.
75 Stephen Shennan, Genes, Memes and Human History: Darwinian
Archaeology and Cultural Evolution. London: Thames & Hudson, 2002, 63.
For a more positive (but problematic) assessment of the meme see Kim
Sterelny, “Memes Revisited.” British Journal for Philosophy of Science 57
(2006): 145–65.

6
The God Delusion
Dawkins on Atheism, Science, and Religion
In 2006, Dawkins published a popular work of atheist polemics, with a teasing
title that helped ensure it became a bestseller: The God Delusion. The work
confirmed his profile as one of the world’s best-known atheists, and as a leading
figure in the “New Atheist” movement which attracted much attention in the five
years between 2006 and 2010, before fading away. The work is chiefly notable
for its dogmatic and trenchant assertion that God is a delusion – a “psychotic
delinquent” invented by mad, deluded people.1 For Dawkins, science sorts out
this nonsense, in that it shows why there cannot be a God in the first place, and
explains why credulous people arrive at such a ridiculous conclusion in the
second.
The God Delusion was a “feel-good” book aimed at atheists, anxious at the
persistence, and even resurgence, of religious belief they saw around them. It
reassured them that they were not on their own, and flattered them by
proclaiming the intellectual superiority of atheists over deluded religious
believers. The latter was an unwise move. Terms such as “arrogant” and
“dogmatic” began to be used to refer to the “New Atheism” – even from those
sympathetic to its aims and ideas.
The God Delusion develops some themes that Dawkins set out in two television
programs, entitled “Root of All Evil?,” first broadcast in the United Kingdom in
January 2006 by Channel 4. Unlike The Selfish Gene, which is a popular work
rigorously informed by the best scientific scholarship, presented by a writer who
clearly understands and appreciates the issues, The God Delusion seemed to its
critics to be little more than an anti-religious rant lacking any serious scholarly
foundation.
To give one trivial but unfortunately representative example, Dawkins provides
a few decontextualized quotes, lifted from an Internet site, from the sixteenth-
century German Protestant writer Martin Luther, which Dawkins treats as
representative of Luther’s irrationalism – here taken to mirror that of religion in
general.2 No attempt is made to check the accuracy of the translation of the
quotes, to clarify what Luther means by “reason,” and how it differs from what

Dawkins takes to be the self-evident meaning of the word. Having written a
book on Luther’s complex attitude to reason, I was somewhat disappointed at
Dawkins’ cavalier approach to truth.3 I admire the simplicities of popular writing
– but not when they become simplifications and misrepresentations. Yet the
populist tone of The God Delusion, seen by scholars as a weakness, did much to
ensure the work’s success. It remains one of the most widely read popular
manifestos for atheism.
Up to this point, we have explored the development of Dawkins’ ideas up to
about 2003. So how are these refined and nuanced in this major work of popular
atheist apologetics? The God Delusion is a rather disorganized collage of
arguments and pastiche of assertions which cannot be said to advance those
ideas or enhance their critical edge, but rather harnesses them in the service of
the advocacy of atheism. It makes use of some themes we have already
considered – such as the idea of a “God-meme,” or God as a “virus of the mind”
– but does not develop them further. Since one of the central themes of The God
Delusion is the inevitability of the triumph of science over religion, it is clearly
essential to consider this late work in our study. We begin by locating The God
Delusion within its cultural context.
The Cultural Location of The God Delusion
On September 11, 2001, four commercial jet passenger airliners were hijacked
by Islamic terrorists in a series of coordinated suicide attacks against targets in
the United States of America. This event, now invariably referred to simply as
“9/11,” changed the public perception of religion within secular western
liberalism. Where once it was seen as merely a puzzling relic from the past, it
was now seen as dangerous, encouraging fanaticism, violence, and intolerance.4
Dawkins would play a central role in this change in cultural mood in western
liberal circles. 9/11 confirmed everything he had always believed: religion was
dangerous precisely because it was irrational, and when it failed to win
arguments, it resorted to terror instead. Four days after the attack, Dawkins
declared that “to fill a world with religion, or religions of the Abrahamic kind, is
like littering the streets with loaded guns. Do not be surprised if they are used.”5
Five years later, Dawkins’ definitive response to 9/11 appeared, in the form of
The God Delusion.
The cultural backdrop to this work, and the New Atheism in general, is complex.
Dawkins’ book is in part an exasperated defense of some core assumptions of

modernity in the midst of a world that he believes to have embraced a
postmodern irrationalism.6 The unexpected rebound of religion was one such
factor. The humanist Michael Shermer, director of the Skeptics Society and
publisher of Skeptic magazine, made this point in the closing year of the
twentieth century, when he observed that never in history had so many people,
and such a high percentage of the American population, believed in God.7
The resurgence of religion throughout most parts of the world – western Europe
being a conspicuous exception – demanded a response, grounded in the two core
legitimating resources of the Enlightenment: reason and science. Of all the
works to emerge from the New Atheism, Dawkins’ God Delusion is by far the
most interesting and intellectually robust of these responses, notable for its
harnessing of the core methods and assumptions of science – especially biology
– as a key ally in the war against religion.8
The cultural lineage of Dawkins’ approach in this work can be discerned in a
number of its themes, including its implicit collusion with the impoverished
mechanistic metaphysics of the Newtonian worldview, and a somewhat
condescending assumption that all cultures that do not fall in line with the
Enlightenment’s limited account of reality are backward and irrational.
Dawkins’ rather naïve account of theory and evidence, already obvious in earlier
works, now seems uncomfortably close to some kind of “Enlightenment
rationalist fundamentalism,”9 which failed to recognize either the limits of
reason, or its potential abuse in the service of oppression.
There is also a clear alignment with the individualist voluntarism characteristic
of late capitalist consumerism. It is not difficult to see the philosopher Immanuel
Kant’s notion of the sovereign individual who freely chooses her own destiny
hovering over The God Delusion, although never quite brought to conscious
articulation. Dawkins tends to present religion as something imposed (and hence
oppressive and evil), and atheism as something freely chosen (and hence
liberating and good) – a culturally and socially located account of the relation of
faith and atheism, which is worryingly inattentive to the social realities of state-
imposed atheism, such as that associated with the Soviet Union for most of its
history.10 Perhaps more importantly, Dawkins’ dislike of “group selection”
generally leads him to avoid discussing the social functions of religion, and to
focus instead on the impact of faith on individuals. Needless to say, that impact
is presented in purely negative terms, without any attempt to engage the
substantial literature on the matter. The cultural critic Terry Eagleton,
exasperated at Dawkins’ laughable caricatures of religion in The God Delusion,

summarized its pseudo-scientific dogmatism at this point admirably: “Such is
Dawkins’s unruffled scientific impartiality that in a book of almost four hundred
pages, he can scarcely bring himself to concede that a single human benefit has
flowed from religious faith, a view which is as a priori improbable as it is
empirically false.”11
For our purposes in this book, the most important theme in The God Delusion is
the epistemological privileging of the natural sciences, even if Dawkins is highly
selective in what he chooses to note.12 Dawkins had earlier explored and set out
his ideas on this theme in Unweaving the Rainbow. This is a triumphalist
manifesto for the cultural independence of the sciences, offering a robust defense
of the core values of the Enlightenment. Two issues stand out as being of major
significance:
1. Dawkins argues that the sciences lead to a model of the universe which is
“not a superstitious, small-minded, parochial model filled with spirits and
hobgoblins, astrology and magic, glittering with fake crocks of gold at where
the rainbow ends.”13 In contrast, the religious view of nature is presented as
being so ugly that it could not lead anyone to aesthetically pleasing
conclusions. Religion is said to be aesthetically deficient, leading to the
impoverishment of nature, and a diminution of the natural human sense of
wonder and mystery evoked by the universe, and its scientific investigation.
2. Dawkins rejects any transcendent dimension to nature as aesthetically
redundant and intellectually untenable. Science is said to get rid of such
meaningless notions as “purpose,” “God,” and so forth. Nothing is lost by
their elimination, Dawkins declares, except the deviousness that keeps the
psychics, astrologers, and other peddlers of dishonest nonsense in business.
Unweaving the Rainbow offers a somewhat simplistic account of the scope of
the natural sciences, which seems untroubled by the less appealing aspects of the
scientific enterprise – such as the links between scientific research and military
applications – in the face of what Dawkins sees as outbursts of irrationality in
western culture. Nor does Dawkins note the darker side of the Enlightenment,
which has so troubled many thinkers of the late twentieth century – such as its
demand for the enforcement of uniformity, and its intolerance for deviation from
what is declared to be “rational.”14 Dawkins’ robust defense of modernism in the
face of what he regarded as postmodern irrationalism is curiously inattentive to
the historical roots and fundamental motivations of the postmodern enterprise –
namely, the realization that modernity in effect amounted to a totalization of

reality within a single unitary framework, resistance to which was to be seen as a
sign of irrationality or madness.
To understand the ferocity of Dawkins’ attack on religion in The God Delusion,
we must try to step into a worldview that is unfamiliar to most of us – namely,
that science and religion are fighting to the death for the soul of humanity, and
no quarter must be given to ensure the triumph of reason over superstition, or of
science over religion. So where does this idea, now widely debunked by
historians, come from?
The “Warfare” of Science and Religion
The narrative of the New Atheism is that of the cultural triumph and intellectual
totalization of science. Science eliminates God, having gobbled up the
explanatory space he once occupied. Science is the only reliable tool that we
possess to understand the world. It has no limits. Science may not know
something now – but it will in the future. It is just a matter of time before science
displaces religion completely. Real scientists must therefore be atheists. It is
simply unthinkable that a genuine scientist would be a religious believer.
Science and religion, for Dawkins, represent logically and ideologically
exclusive domains. If you’re a real scientist, you can’t believe in God. If you
believe in God, you can’t be a real scientist.
This doctrinaire attitude has done much to undermine the intellectual credibility
of Dawkins’ arguments in The God Delusion. One of the more unpleasant parts
of the book is his personal attack on the eminent physicist Freeman Dyson.
Dyson was awarded the Templeton Prize for Religion in 2000, and gave an
acceptance speech in which he lauded the achievements of religion, while
highlighting and criticizing its downside. He was also clear about the downside
of atheism, noting that “the two individuals who epitomized the evils of our
century, Adolf Hitler and Joseph Stalin, were both avowed atheists.” Dawkins
was outraged by this “endorsement of religion by one of the world’s most
distinguished physicists.”15 When Dyson commented that he was a Christian
who wasn’t particularly interested in the doctrine of the Trinity, Dawkins
interpreted this to mean that Dyson wasn’t really a Christian at all, but was
actually an atheist simulating a Christian identity. “Isn’t that just what any
atheistic scientist would say, if he wanted to sound Christian?”16
Dawkins’ outrage here reflects a challenge to his absolutist commitment to the
malignancy of religion, regularly cited as one of the greatest weaknesses of The

God Delusion. Sure, religion can be held accountable for some bad things; but
it’s also responsible for a lot of good things. As the leading skeptic Michael
Shermer pointed out, “religion, like all social institutions of such historical depth
and cultural impact, cannot be reduced to an unambiguous good or evil.”17
Yet the problem is not so much that a controlling anti-religious outlook distorts
and determines Dawkins’ views on religion. It is that this worldview is shaped
by the notion of a permanent warfare between science and religion, so that any
scientist who is supportive of religion is a traitor or an appeaser – someone who
represents the “Neville Chamberlain” school.18 For those who do not recognize
this slightly dated and parochial allusion, Dawkins is referring to the
(unsuccessful) policy of appeasement adopted by the British Prime Minister,
Neville Chamberlain, toward Adolf Hitler in 1938, in the hope of avoiding a
damaging and destructive total war in Europe. This unpleasant analogy seems to
imply that scientists who affirm the importance of religion are “appeasers,” and
that religious people are to be compared to either Hitler or the Nazis. It is a
natural assumption, given Dawkins’ dogmatic controlling worldview, which
shapes how he sees things. But it’s not one shared by many others.
Dawkins then proceeds to single out Michael Ruse – a distinguished atheist
philosopher who describes himself as a “hard-line Darwinian,” who has done
much to clarify the philosophical roots and consequences of Darwinism, and
challenge religious fundamentalism – as an example of such an appeaser.19
Why? Might it possibly have been Ruse’s criticism of Dawkins for his
intellectually sloppy and personally dogmatic response to Pope John Paul II’s
1996 statement to the Pontifical Academy of Sciences supporting the notion of
biological evolution, while criticizing certain materialist interpretations of the
idea? Here’s what Ruse had to say: “When John Paul II wrote a letter endorsing
Darwinism, Richard Dawkins’ response was simply that the pope was a
hypocrite, that he could not be genuine about science and that Dawkins himself
simply preferred an honest fundamentalist.”20 For Ruse, Dawkins was so locked
into a controlling “religious people must be anti-evolution” mindset that he
simply could not comprehend this development – and therefore concluded that
the pope could not conceivably be telling the truth.
Dawkins’ espousal of the “warfare” model between science and religion is
simply unwise; his use of it as a normative worldview is simply ridiculous. For
Dawkins, any talk about an “alleged convergence” between religion and science
can only be “a shallow, empty, hollow, spin-doctored sham.”21 Yet Dawkins
offers his readers no engagement with history or recent historical scholarship – a

failing which many consider to be the Achilles’ heel of Dawkins’ simplistic
positivist approach to the natural sciences. It is why the many critics of the New
Atheism accuse it of developing “vacuous arguments afloat on oceans of
historical ignorance.”22 And it is not difficult to figure out why Dawkins steers
clear of both history, and recent historical scholarship.
In the last two decades, the scholarly understanding of the historical relationship
of science and religion has undergone an intellectual revolution no less than that
occasioned by Darwin’s Origin of Species. Intensive historical scholarly research
has demonstrated that the popular notion of a protracted war between church and
science which continues to this day is a piece of Victorian propaganda,
completely at odds with the facts.23 There were certainly individual conflicts,
often reflecting institutional politics and personal agendas – such as the Galileo
affair – or simply misunderstandings on either or both sides of the debate. But
these conflicts are neither typical nor defining.
Dawkins takes a strongly positivist view of science, and links this with the idea
that science and religion are necessarily at war with each other. To do this, he
has to adopt an “essentialist” view of both science and religion, which holds that
both are be defined by core beliefs or methods, and disregards both their
changing ideas and approaches over time, and the extent of social construction in
shaping these.24 The “warfare” model rests on “essentialist” accounts of the
interaction of science and religion, which assumes that each of these terms
designates something fixed, permanent, and essential, so that their mutual
relationship is determined by something fundamental to each of the disciplines,
unaffected by the specifics of time, place, or culture. But it is simply not so. The
relation of science and religion is historically conditioned, bound to the social
and intellectual conditions of the age.25
Most historians who stand outside the groupthink of the New Atheist movement
regard religion as having had a generally benign and constructive relationship
with the natural sciences in the west.26 Tensions and conflicts, such as the
Galileo controversy, often turned out on closer examination to have more to do
with papal politics, ecclesiastical power struggles, and personality issues than
with any fundamental tensions between faith and science.27 Leading historians
of science regularly point out that the interaction of science and religion is
determined primarily by the specifics of their historical circumstances, and only
secondarily by their respective subject matters. There is no universal paradigm
for the relation of science and religion, either theoretically or historically. The
case of Christian attitudes to evolutionary theory in the late nineteenth century

makes this point particularly evident. As the Irish geographer and intellectual
historian David Livingstone makes clear in a ground-breaking study of the
reception of Darwinism in two very different contexts – Belfast and Princeton –
local issues and personalities were often of decisive importance in determining
the outcome.28
In the eighteenth century, a remarkable synergy developed between religion and
the sciences in England. Newton’s “celestial mechanics” was widely regarded as
at worst consistent with, and at best a glorious confirmation of, the Christian
view of God as creator of a harmonious universe. Many members of the Royal
Society of London – founded to advance scientific understanding and research –
were strongly religious in their outlooks, and saw this as enhancing their
commitment to scientific advancement.
All this changed in the second half of the nineteenth century. The general tone of
the later nineteenth-century encounter between religion (especially Christianity)
and the natural sciences was set by two works – John William Draper’s History
of the Conflict between Religion and Science (1874) and Andrew Dickson
White’s The Warfare of Science with Theology in Christendom (1896). The
crystallization of the “warfare” metaphor in the popular mind was
unquestionably catalyzed by such vigorously polemical writings.29
Yet the notion of an endemic conflict between science and religion, so
aggressively advocated by White and Draper, is itself socially determined,
created in the lengthening shadows of hostility toward individual clergy and
church institutions. The interaction of science and religion has been influenced
more by their social circumstances than by their specific ideas.30 The Victorian
period itself gave rise to the social pressures and tensions which engendered the
myth of permanent warfare between science and religion. The “conflict” model
has its origins in the specific conditions of the Victorian era, in which an
emerging professional intellectual group sought to displace a group which had
hitherto occupied the place of honor.
The “conflict” model of science and religion thus came to prominence at a time
when professional scientists wished to distance themselves from their amateur
colleagues, and when changing patterns in academic culture necessitated
demonstrating its independence from the church and other bastions of the
establishment. Academic freedom demanded a break with the church; it was a
small step toward depicting the church as the opponent of learning and scientific
advance in the late nineteenth century, and the natural sciences as its strongest
advocates.

Today, the idea that the natural sciences and religion have been permanently at
war with each other is no longer taken seriously by any historian of science. It is
understandable that it should still linger in some works of popular science and
journalism – after all, serious academic historical scholarship takes a long time
to filter down to this lower level. If it is read at all, that is.
And it is not just historians who regard the “warfare” model as outdated and
discredited. Most scientists don’t see things this way either. After surveying the
views of contemporary scientists, Rice University sociologist Elaine Howard
Ecklund concluded that “the ‘insurmountable hostility’ between science and
faith is a caricature, a thought-cliché, perhaps useful as a satire on groupthink,
but hardly representative of reality.”31
The twentieth century has witnessed a vast revision of the simplistic views of the
nineteenth century on the nature and limits of the scientific method, and the
relation of faith and science. The huge scholarly process of subjecting these
traditional views to minute examination has forged a new awareness of
possibilities for positive and constructive dialogue and engagement, at a time in
the history of western culture which is showing a new interest in spirituality at
every level.
I do wish Dawkins would join in this dialogue, instead of firing off inaccurate,
wildly rhetorical salvoes, and lampooning those who disagree with him.32 Why?
One of the defining characteristics of western culture is the perception of a
growing – possibly accelerating – alienation between the humanities and natural
sciences, and an increasing cultural unease about where science is taking us.
Back in 1959, C. P. Snow observed that the gulf between the arts and sciences
had become so pronounced that it was necessary to speak of two distinct and
non-interactive cultures in western society: “The intellectual life of the whole of
western society is increasingly being split into two polar groups … Literary
intellectuals at one pole … at the other scientists, and as the most representative,
the physical scientists. Between the two a gulf of mutual incomprehension.”33 If
anything, things seem to have got worse since then. The once relatively civilized
disagreements between the natural sciences and the humanities seem to have
given way to something approaching a shooting war.
Recent works dealing with the cultural impact of science show a growing
polarization between the natural sciences and the humanities. The possibility of
reconciliation – or even a constructive dialogue – seems to diminish year by
year. And Dawkins is one of those who some accuse of making things worse.34

It doesn’t need to be like this. We might turn to Sir Peter Medawar’s 1968
Romanes Lecture at Oxford University, entitled “Science and Literature,” in
which this distinguished biologist and scientific popularizer sought to hold
together what seemed to be drifting apart. To remedy this, Medawar suggested,
required that people on both sides should “work their way towards an
understanding – not just of each other’s accomplishments … nor just of each
other’s purposes … but of each other’s methods and energizing concepts, and
the quality and pattern of movement of each other’s thought.”35 Medawar gets
my vote anytime.
Natural Science Leads to Neither Atheism Nor
Christianity
Dawkins’ emphasis on science as the ultimate adjudicator of life’s great
questions faces a significant difficulty, in that the scientific method is incapable
of delivering a decisive adjudication of the God question. Those who believe
that it proves or disproves the existence of God press that method beyond its
legitimate limits, and run the risk of abusing or discrediting it. Some
distinguished biologists (such as Francis S. Collins, director of the Human
Genome Project) argue that the natural sciences create a positive presumption of
faith;36 others (such as the evolutionary biologist Stephen Jay Gould) that they
have negative implications for theistic belief. But they prove nothing, either way.
If the God question is to be settled, it must be settled on other grounds.
This is not a new idea. Indeed, the recognition of the religious limits of the
scientific method was well understood around the time of Darwin himself. As
none other than “Darwin’s Bulldog,” T. H. Huxley, wrote in 1880: “Some
twenty years ago, or thereabouts, I invented the word ‘Agnostic’ to denote
people who, like myself, confess themselves to be hopelessly ignorant
concerning a variety of matters, about which metaphysicians and theologians,
both orthodox and heterodox, dogmatise with utmost confidence.”37 Fed up with
both theists and atheists making hopelessly dogmatic statements on the basis of
inadequate empirical evidence, Huxley declared that the God question could not
be settled on the basis of the scientific method: “Agnosticism is of the essence of
science, whether ancient or modern. It simply means that a man shall not say he
knows or believes that which he has no scientific grounds for professing to know
or believe… Consequently Agnosticism puts aside not only the greater part of
popular theology, but also the greater part of anti-theology.”38 Huxley’s

arguments are as valid today as they were in the late nineteenth century, despite
the protestations of those on both sides of the great debate about God.
In a 1992 critique of an anti-evolutionary work which posited that Darwinism
was necessarily atheistic,39 Stephen Jay Gould invoked the memory of Mrs.
McInerney, his third-grade teacher, who was in the habit of rapping young
knuckles when their owners said or did particularly stupid things:
To say it for all my colleagues and for the umpteenth million time (from
college bull sessions to learned treatises): science simply cannot (by its
legitimate methods) adjudicate the issue of God’s possible superintendence of
nature. We neither affirm nor deny it; we simply can’t comment on it as
scientists. If some of our crowd have made untoward statements claiming that
Darwinism disproves God, then I will find Mrs. McInerney and have their
knuckles rapped for it (as long as she can equally treat those members of our
crowd who have argued that Darwinism must be God’s method of action).
Gould rightly insists that science can work only with naturalistic explanations; it
can neither affirm nor deny the existence of God. The bottom line for Gould is
that Darwinism actually has no bearing on the existence or nature of God. If
Darwinians choose to dogmatize on matters of religion, they stray beyond the
straight and narrow way of the scientific method, and end up in the philosophical
badlands. Either a conclusion cannot be reached at all on such matters, or it is to
be reached on other grounds.
Now Dawkins knows perfectly well that “science has no way to disprove the
existence of a supreme being.”40 This, he argues, cannot be allowed to lead to
the conclusion that “belief (or disbelief) in a supreme being is a matter of pure
individual inclination.” But who said anything about “pure individual
inclination”? Where does this idea come from? Dawkins seems to imply that,
where the scientific method cannot be properly applied, there is only
epistemological anarchy, in which we are reduced to the pure subjectivity of
individual opinion.
But it’s nothing like that. This misleading gloss on a perfectly serious and
legitimate debate about the limits of the scientific method allows Dawkins to
evade the point at issue. If the scientific method cannot settle an issue, it does
not mean that all answers have to be regarded as equally valid, or that we
abandon rationality in order to deal with them. It simply means that the
discussion shifts to another level, using different criteria of evidence and
argumentation. Everyone knows that, if the scientific method can neither prove

nor disprove the existence or nature of God, then either we abandon the question
as unanswerable, or we answer it on other grounds. And that is precisely what
Dawkins himself does – develop arguments for atheism which are ultimately
non-scientific in character. We shall return to consider how successful these are
in due course. The key point for the moment is simply this: the scientific method
alone cannot ultimately determine the God question, even though it has some
important contributions to make to the debate.
Science, Faith, and Evidence
One of the central assertions of Dawkins’ God Delusion is that beliefs should be
proved with reference to evidence. As we noted earlier, Dawkins regards
religious belief as an evidence-free zone, meriting the accolade of “blind faith”
or a “kind of mental illness.” I have no doubt that some religious people have
some very strange views about the relation of faith and reason. But the fact
remains that the mainstream of religious thought – especially within Christianity
– has celebrated, affirmed, and explored the rationality of faith, and eschewed
any notion of “blind faith” or a “God of the gaps.”
So what is meant by “evidence”? Dawkins does not appear to appreciate that an
observation only becomes evidence when placed within, and assessed against, a
theoretical framework. An observation can thus function as evidence for several
possible theories, being interpreted in different manners within these theoretical
frameworks.41 A core assumption of Dawkins’s polemic against theism is that
observations can be treated as “brute,” in that they ultimately have only one
proper, unequivocal meaning.
This assumption, deeply embedded within the Enlightenment,42 is problematic.
Unsurprisingly, the work of Thomas Kuhn does not feature prominently in
Dawkins’ writings. On the relatively few occasions when Dawkins does refer to
Kuhn, it is as a “truth-heckler,” someone who resists Dawkins’ scientific
positivism in the name of covert sociological agendas.43 Kuhn rightly observed,
however, that any supposedly “univocal” observations in science were perceived
as such because they were interpreted solely within the dominant hermeneutical
paradigm of that time.44 A “paradigm shift” resulted in that same observation
now being located and interpreted within another hermeneutical framework –
that is to say, an observation once regarded as evidence for one theory came to
be treated as evidence for something else. It is not difficult to understand this
failure to engage seriously with the issues raised by Kuhn. The epistemological

simplicity of Dawkins’ “evidential univocality” is seriously undermined by
Kuhn’s historical and philosophical analysis.
Perhaps related to this weakness, Dawkins fails to make the significant and
necessary distinction between a “logic of discovery” and a “logic of
verification.” The manner in which a scientific theory or hypothesis is derived
often turns out to have little bearing on its truth. As the American philosopher
and scientist Charles S. Pierce pointed out, a theory might emerge through
intuition or inspiration, as much as through rational reflection. Yet once
formulated, a theory must be tested against observation.45
A classic example of this is August Kekulé’s hypothesis that the chemical
benzene possessed a cyclical structure. Kekulé (1829–96) first set out this idea in
a French article of 1865, and then a German article of 1866. Kekulé did not
explain the “logic of discovery” which led to the formulation of this innovative
idea at that time, although his subsequent work provided an extensive “logic of
justification” for the ring structure of benzene. But in 1890, at a celebration
marking the twenty-fifth anniversary of this suggestion – by then widely
accepted – Kekulé spoke of how this idea came to him. Perhaps because his
reputation was by then beyond reproach, Kekulé was able to tell his astonished
audience of the unorthodox manner by which he developed the idea in the first
place.46 He had a dream of a snake chasing its own tail. But while the origins of
this idea might indeed be somewhat speculative, even mystical, the fact remains
that, when it was checked out against the evidence, it seemed to work. The
manner of its derivation might be opaque; the manner of its verification,
however, was perfectly clear – and ultimately persuasive.
So how do these reflections relate to Dawkins’ arguments in The God Delusion?
Dawkins tends to treat God as an additional object within the universe – like a
teapot orbiting between the earth and Mars47 – which leads him to draw two
conclusions. First, the existence of this additional object ought to be
demonstrable. Second, that religious belief is less parsimonious than atheism, in
that it involves believing in one additional entity.
These are both interesting points. Dawkins has been heavily criticized by
philosophers and theologians on the first of them, in that Christianity does not
regard God as an object within the world, capable of the same kind of empirical
verification as a new planet within the solar system. As the Catholic theologian
Herbert McCabe once remarked, “God is not an inhabitant of the universe; he is
the reason why there is a universe at all.”48
Dawkins’ demand that God should be provable or observable is deeply

Dawkins  demand that God should be provable or observable is deeply
problematic. Proof, in the proper sense of the term, is limited to the rather small
worlds of mathematics and logic. The natural sciences invite us to think more in
terms of the identification of reasons for believing that something may be true,
mindful of the provisionality of our conclusions.
Yet the rather outdated form of scientific positivism to which Dawkins is
wedded demands that the existence of proposed entities ought to be proved – for
example, by observing them. In this, he echoes some themes of “logical
positivism,” which gained intellectual traction in Oxford through the influence
of A. J. Ayer (1910–89) and others. Dawkins’ approach to the existence of God
is perhaps more akin to the common-sense approach of earlier empiricists – such
as David Hume (1711–76) – than to Ayer’s metaphysically deflationary agenda.
It is difficult not to see the intellectual affinity between Dawkins and Hume: “If
we take in our hand any volume, of divinity or school metaphysics for instance,
let us ask, Does it contain any abstract reasoning concerning quantity or
number? No. Does it contain any experimental reasoning concerning matter of
fact and existence? No. Commit it then to the flames, for it can contain nothing
but sophistry and illusion.”49 But things are not quite this simple. A realist
philosophy of science – which I assume underlies Dawkins’ approach –
distinguishes between observable and unobservable entities, while recognizing
that this distinction rests on human sensory capabilities, rather than the reality
that is being observed. Subatomic particles cannot strictly be “observed,” yet
cannot be regarded as “non-existent” for that reason. The distinction between
what can be observed and what cannot be observed reflects limitations on the
unaided human capacity to observe, which can be enhanced through technology,
and extended through theoretical interpretation.50 The best scientific theories
offer explanations of both observable and unobservable aspects of the world.51
The theoretical importance of “dark matter” (which cannot be observed) in
contemporary cosmology is a luminous and representative reminder of the
importance of this point. It is hypothesized to account for effects that are
believed to be the result of mass, where no such mass can actually be seen.52
Science is absolutely right in demanding that we provide justification of our
beliefs, on the basis of the best knowledge and methods at our disposal.
However, as Stanley Fish pointed out, those methods of enquiry and bodies of
knowledge change over time:
[A defence of objective truth] will not proceed by citing unmediated and
unchallengeable evidence, but by citing evidence that appears to me to be

conclusive given the features of the world as I see it and the force of
arguments I unproblematically affirm, at least for now. In short, I rely on the
world that has been delivered to me by the traditions of inquiry and
demonstration I currently have faith in. That is what objectivity means, going
with the best arguments and bodies of evidence one has at the moment.53
Fish’s point merits close consideration: methods of investigation and normative
assumptions are embedded within social and professional contexts, and thus
change over time. The same “evidence” (that is, observation) is thus open to
being interpreted in different ways in different socio-cultural locations.
But Dawkins has a third point to make. In a rather patchy and derisory account
of the “anthropic principle,” lacking even the semblance of objectivity of
judgment, Dawkins argues that the idea of a creator God is nonsensical, in that
such a God would have to be “complex,” and hence “improbable.”54 While
conceding that this does not amount to a disproof of God’s existence, Dawkins
clearly believes that it renders the idea implausible. This, it must be said, is a
puzzling argument, which has left his critics struggling to grasp the point at
issue.55 Dawkins appears to confuse statistical improbability with the rather
different notion of epistemic improbability. Let me give an argument which
descends to Dawkins’ level of naïveté at this point. The possibility of a specific
individual called “Richard Dawkins” existing is vanishingly small. Therefore he
is so improbable that he doesn’t exist. It’s nonsense.
Dawkins also develops a fourth critique of the doctrine of creation. God
designed the world, then who designed God? “Any God capable of designing
anything would have to be complex enough to demand the same kind of
explanation in his own right. God presents an infinite regress from which he
cannot help us to escape.”56 If that process of regression is terminated, he
argues, this constitutes an improper and premature foreclosure, based on “the
dubious luxury of arbitrarily conjuring up a terminator to an infinite regress.”57
Anything that explains something itself has to be explained – and that
explanation in turn needs to be explained. There is no justifiable way of ending
this infinite regression of explanations. What explains the explanation? Who
designed the designer?
Yet many note that the holy grail of the natural sciences is the quest for the
“Grand Unified Theory” – the “theory of everything.” Why is such a theory
regarded as being so important? Because it can explain everything, without itself
requiring or demanding an explanation.58 The explanatory buck stops right there.

There is no infinite regress in the quest for explanation. If Dawkins’ brash and
simplistic arguments carried weight, this great scientific quest could be
dismissed with a seemingly profound, yet in fact trivial, question: What explains
the explainer?
Now maybe there is no such ultimate theory. Maybe the “theory of everything”
will turn out to be a “theory of nothing.” However, there is no reason to suppose
that this quest is a failure from the outset, simply because it represents the
termination of an explanatory process. Yet an analogous quest for an irreducible
explanation lies at the heart of the scientific quest. There is no logical
inconsistency, no conceptual flaw, no self-contradiction involved. A “theory of
everything” may well be more complex than the lesser theories that it explains –
but what has that to do with its improbability?
A Darwinian Explanation of Belief in God?
Perhaps the most interesting section of The God Delusion deals with the question
of whether belief in God is conditioned by our evolutionary past. Potentially, this
could have been one of the most important and interesting aspects of the work,
exploring whether belief in God can be explained persuasively in purely
naturalist terms as an evolutionary outcome. But the discussion is skewed and
unpersuasive. Dawkins writes as an atheist polemicist, not as a disinterested
scientist.
A serious reflection on the issue would have considered at least four possible
views on whether religion is adaptive, and in what manner (and to what extent)
this might help account for its origins:
1. Religious beliefs have no adaptive functions, so that their presence and
success in human populations is to be explained by other means. The notion
of the “meme,” which we considered earlier, is an example of such a
reductive evolutionary explanation of belief in God.
2. Religious beliefs can be considered as by-products of more fundamental and
essentially adaptive features of human cognition.
3. Religious beliefs are to be considered as adaptations which play a positive
role in enabling humanity to deal with environmental complexity.
4. Religious beliefs are essentially cultural adaptations that co-evolve and
interact with natural adaptations.

The difficulty here is that it is still far from clear whether religious belief is
adaptive or not. Some argue that there is no obvious adaptive function to
religious belief,59 where others hold that religion can clearly be interpreted
in adaptationist terms.60 There is simply no consensus on this matter at
present.61
Dawkins is thus obliged to offer a highly selective review of the literature on the
topic, peppered with his own somewhat trenchant views on the nature and value
of religion, which seem to function as the dogmatic presupposition of his
argument, rather than as its evidenced conclusion. Whatever the situation may
have been in our evolutionary past, Dawkins declares, religion is now non-
adaptive, damaging people. If religious beliefs can be described as adaptive in
any sense, it is only in that these beliefs themselves prove successful as cultural
parasites within their human hosts. His analysis is conspicuously lacking in
empirical engagement of any kind, and is best seen as armchair theorizing,
without any scholarly or empirical merit. As the leading evolutionary biologist
David Sloan Wilson argued, The God Delusion suggests that Dawkins “is just
another angry atheist, trading on his reputation as an evolutionist and
spokesperson for science to vent his personal opinions about religion.”62
There is little point in reading The God Delusion as a serious contribution to our
understanding of the origins of religion. It is deeply regrettable that Dawkins’
evolutionary account depends on the “general principles” of religion63 he finds
in The Golden Bough by Sir James Frazer (1854–1941) – a highly
impressionistic early work of anthropology, first published in 1890.64 It is a
highly puzzling strategy. Why does Dawkins depend so heavily here on the core
assumptions of a work which is well over a century old, and now largely
discredited? Many would argue that the rise of modern anthropology was a
direct reaction to the obvious inadequacies of Frazer’s Golden Bough, which
lacked any serious basis in systematic empirical study.
So why might Dawkins want to follow Frazer in reducing religion to some single
universal trait, neglecting (if, indeed, he is aware of it) the mass of research that
suggests it is much more complex and diverse, incapable of being forced into a
simple set of universal beliefs or attitudes? The only persuasive answer is that,
by making this move, Dawkins can accommodate the origins of religion within
his “universal Darwinism.” “Universal features of a species demand a Darwinian
explanation.”65 Yet religion does not exhibit the “universal features” that
Dawkins’ approach demands. It is one of the many points at which The God

Delusion depends on discarded nineteenth-century assumptions to make a
twenty-first-century case against religion.
Dawkins asserts that religion is an unintended by-product of the evolutionary
process.66 One of the best-written passages in The God Delusion describes how
moths use light sources in the night sky – such as the moon – to orient their
flight path. This, Dawkins points out, is to be seen as an adaptation in
evolutionary terms. But with the invention of artificial light, this adaptation goes
wrong. Through a “misfiring by-product of a normally useful compass,” moths
are attracted to artificial lighting – including the flame of candles.67 The moth
that flies into a candle flame and burns up, Dawkins rightly notes, had no
intention of committing suicide. It had simply fallen victim to what was once a
useful adaptation.
Dawkins suggests (without offering much in the way of evidence) that religion is
also to be understood in terms of the misfiring of some once useful instinct.
“Religious behaviour may be a misfiring, an unfortunate by-product of an
underlying psychological propensity which in other circumstances is, or once
was, useful.”68 It is “a by-product of something else,” a “primitively
advantageous trait” that now “sometimes misfires to generate religion.” It is a
puzzling statement. How can one speak of the “by-product” of the evolutionary
process? After all, as Dawkins points out, natural selection “does not see ahead,
does not plan consequences, [and] has no purpose in view.”69 How can one
meaningfully speak of the intended goal of the process (and hence distinguish
this from an unintended “by-product”) without adopting a teleological account of
evolution? How can Dawkins speak of religion as distinctively “accidental,”
when his understanding of the evolutionary process precludes any theoretical
framework that allows him to suggest that some outcomes are “intentional” and
others “accidental”?
Dawkins follows this decidedly unpersuasive evolutionary explanation of
religion with an amateurish reflection on whether human beings are predisposed
to believe in God. There are major problems in offering a psychological account
of the origins of religion, which Dawkins overlooks. It is certainly possible to
argue that some aspects of human cognitive processes may help explain how
religious ideas are generated or sustained. But as the psychologist Fraser Watts
points out, it is necessary to recognize a multiplicity of causes in such areas.
Some scientists have fallen into the habit of asking: “What caused A? Was it X
or Y?” But in the human sciences, multiple causes are the norm. For example,
consider the question “Is depression caused by physical or social factors?” The

answer is that it is caused by both. As Watts points out, the history of such
research “ought to make us wary of asking whether an apparent revelation of
God really is such, or whether it has some other natural explanation, in terms of
people’s thought processes or brain processes.”70 To put it crudely, God, human
brain processes, and psychological processes could all be causal factors in
human religious experience.
Awe, Wonder, and Religion
In the opening sections of The God Delusion, Dawkins speaks of a sense of
“transcendent wonder” at the beauty and complexity of nature, which “religion
monopolized in past centuries.”71 Dawkins argues – rightly, in my view – that it
is perfectly possible to have a sense of “awe” or reverence for nature without
being religious. Indeed, at points he suggests that a religious commitment
actually diminishes this sense of awe, by positing an aesthetically deficient view
of the universe: “The universe is genuinely mysterious, grand, beautiful, awe-
inspiring. The kinds of views of the universe which religious people have
traditionally embraced have been puny, pathetic, and measly in comparison to
the way the universe actually is. The universe presented by organized religions is
a poky little medieval universe, and extremely limited.”72 The logic of this bold
assertion is rather hard to follow, and its factual basis astonishingly slight. The
“medieval” view of the universe may indeed have been more limited and
restricted than modern conceptions. This has nothing to do with religion,
however, either as cause or effect. It reflected the science of the day, largely
based upon Aristotle’s treatise De caelo (“On Heaven”). If the universe of
religious people in the Middle Ages was indeed “poky,” it was because they
trusted the best cosmologists of the day to tell them what it was like. This, they
were assured, was scientific truth, and they accepted it. They took it on trust.
They were naïve enough to assume that what their science textbooks told them
was right. Precisely that trust in science and scientists which Dawkins
commends so uncritically led them to weave their theology around someone
else’s view of the universe. They didn’t know about such things as “radical
theory change in science,” which causes twenty-first century people to be
cautious about investing too heavily in the latest scientific theories, and much
more critical of those who base worldviews upon them.
Medieval conceptions of the universe were largely based on a Ptolemaic model
of the planetary system, which located the earth at the center of a vast, ordered

cosmic mechanism.73 This is vividly depicted in Nuremberg Chronicle (1493)
by Hartmann Schedel (1440–1514), one of the most popular and technologically
advanced printed books of the late Middle Ages. On this grand view of the
universe, the earth stood at the center of a series of concentric spheres, each of
which rotates round the earth according to its own predetermined rhythms.
Beyond them lies the “empyrean” – a vast, eternal, infinite, and formless void.
Christian theologians assumed that this was where paradise was located, often on
the basis of questionable traditional arguments.74 Popular depictions of this
vision of the universe, such as the Nuremberg Chronicle, depict God and the
saints as dwelling in this region. It is not today’s model of the solar system, and
is wrong at just about every point. It’s certainly “medieval,” but it’s hardly a
“poky little universe.” Most medieval writers that I have read on the topic found
the thought of cosmic vastness to be really rather awesome – even on the basis
of a Ptolemaic model of the heavens.
The implication of Dawkins’ unsubstantiated criticism is that a religious view of
reality is deficient and impoverished in comparison with his own. There is no
doubt that this consideration is an important factor in generating and maintaining
his atheism. Yet his analysis of this issue is disappointingly thin and
unpersuasive. The very slight historical evidence that Dawkins brings forward in
support of his extravagant and unsubstantiated excoriation of religious visions of
reality, whether in Unweaving the Rainbow or elsewhere, amounts to little more
than an observation that our understanding of the vastness and complexity of the
universe has increased in recent years.
A Christian approach to nature identifies three ways in which a sense of awe
comes about in response to what we observe:
1. An immediate sense of wonder at the beauty of nature. This is evoked
immediately. This “leap of the heart” that William Wordsworth described on
seeing a rainbow in the sky occurs before any conscious theoretical
reflection on what it might imply. To use psychological categories, this is
about perception, rather than cognition. I can see no good reason for
suggesting that believing in God in any way diminishes this sense of wonder.
Dawkins’ argument at this point is so underdetermined by evidence and so
utterly implausible that I fear I must have misunderstood it.
2. A derived sense of wonder at the mathematical or theoretical representation
of reality which arises from this. Dawkins also knows and approves of this
second source of “awed wonder,” but seems to imply that religious people
“revel in mystery and feel cheated when it is explained.”75 They don’t; a new

sense of wonder emerges, which I will explain in a moment.
3. A further derived sense of wonder at what the natural world points to. One of
the central themes of Christian theology is that the creation bears witness to
its creator, “The heavens declare the glory of the Lord!” (Psalm 19:1). For
Christians, to experience the beauty of creation is a sign or pointer to the
glory of God, and is to be particularly cherished for this reason. Dawkins
excludes any such transcendent reference from within the natural world.
In a ground-breaking study, the psychologists Dacher Keltner and Jonathan
Haidt developed a prototype approach to the experience of awe, which has at its
heart two distinctive features – vastness and accommodation.76 Vastness, they
argue, refers to “anything that is experienced as being much larger than the self,
or the self’s ordinary level of experience or frame of reference.” It may refer
simply to physical size, or to more subtle markers of vastness, such as social
signs or symbolic markers. Accommodation refers to what was identified by
Jean Piaget (1896–1980), Professor of Genetic and Experimental Psychology at
the University of Geneva from 1940 to 1971, as the process by which human
mental structures undergo an adjustment in the face of the challenge posed by
new experiences. Thus it would be possible to experience a sense of awe through
realization of the “breadth and scope of a grand theory,” such as evolutionary
theory – or the Christian vision of reality:
We propose that prototypical awe involves a challenge to or negation of
mental structures when they fail to make sense of an experience of something
vast. Such experiences can be disorientating and even frightening … They
also often involve feelings of enlightenment and even rebirth, when mental
structures expand to accommodate truths never before known. We stress that
awe involves a need for accommodation, which may or not be satisfied. The
success of one’s attempt at accommodation may partially explain why awe
can be both terrifying (when one fails to understand) and enlightening (when
one succeeds).77
On the basis of this approach, the human sense of awe at the vastness of the
universe, or the dramatic beauty of a natural landscape or feature (such as a
rainbow) could be enhanced by grasping the theoretical foundations or
implications of what was being observed. This resonates with Dawkins’ belief –
which is also mine – that the theoretical representations of reality are in
themselves beautiful, and capable of evoking awe on account of their complexity
or their capacity to invoke a “big picture” view of things. This is unquestionably

the case with theories which propose a larger vision of things – a list of theories
which includes, but is not limited to, Darwinism, Marxism, and Christian
theology.
Dawkins suggests that a religious approach to the world misses out on
something.78 Having read Unweaving the Rainbow and The God Delusion, I still
haven’t worked out what this is. A Christian reading of the world denies nothing
of what the natural sciences tell us, except the trenchant naturalist dogma that
reality is limited to what may be known through the natural sciences. If
anything, a Christian engagement with the natural world adds a richness which I
find quite absent from Dawkins’ account of things, offering a new motivation for
the study of nature. Perhaps the greatest difference between science and religion
thus lies not in how they begin, nor even in how they proceed, but in how they
end.
As a populist manifesto, The God Delusion works magnificently. Its
swashbuckling rhetoric leaves its readers in no doubt of what is right and wrong.
The future of the planet depends on the elimination of superstition, and the
reinstatement of reason! Science is the only reliable source of knowledge, and
must triumph over primitive ways of thought – most notably, religion. But the
price paid for this argumentative simplicity is unacceptably high. The work
relies excessively on gross oversimplifications, misunderstandings, and
misrepresentations. It is best seen as a work of atheist polemic, not of scientific
popularization. If Dawkins has made any contributions to the serious debate
about science and religion, these are to be found in his earlier writings, not this
unfortunate diatribe.
Notes
1 The God Delusion, 38.
2 The God Delusion, 190.
3 Alister E. McGrath, Luther’s Theology of the Cross: Martin Luther’s
Theological Breakthrough. Oxford: Blackwell, 1985.
4 For some excellent studies and critiques, see Amarnath Amarasingam, ed.,
Religion and the New Atheism: A Critical Appraisal. Leiden: Brill, 2010;
Tina Beattie, The New Atheists: The Twilight of Reason and the War on
Religion. London: Darton, Longman and Todd, 2007; Terry Eagleton,

Reason, Faith, and Revolution: Reflections on the God Debate. New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press, 2009; David Bentley Hart, Atheist Delusions: The
Christian Revolution and Its Fashionable Enemies. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press, 2009.
5 Richard Dawkins, “Religion’s Misguided Missiles.” The Guardian, September
15, 2001.
6 Note the analysis in Terry Eagleton, Culture and the Death of God. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2014.
7 Michael Shermer, How We Believe: Science, Skepticism, and the Search for
God. New York: Freeman, 2000, 16–31.
8 For the recent use of Darwinism in atheist apologetics, see Abigail J. Lustig,
“Natural Atheology.” In Darwinian Heresies, edited by Abigail J. Lustig,
Robert J. Richards, and Michael Ruse, 69–83. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2004; Alister E. McGrath, “The Ideological Uses of
Evolutionary Biology in Recent Atheist Apologetics.” In Biology and
Ideology: From Descartes to Dawkins, edited by Denis R. Alexander and
Ronald Numbers, 329–51. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2010.
9 I take this interesting phrase from the perceptive account of Ernest Gellner,
Postmodernism, Reason and Religion. London: Routledge, 1992, 80. For the
argument that the New Atheism is itself a new form of fundamentalism, see
Chris Hedges, When Atheism Becomes Religion: America’s New
Fundamentalists. New York: Free Press, 2008.
10 For an account of how his experience of Soviet atheism led him to religious
faith, see Peter Hitchens, The Rage against God: How Atheism Led Me to
Faith. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 2010.
11 Eagleton, “Lunging, Flailing, Mispunching.” For Eagleton’s own perceptive
and critical comments on this important issue, see Terry Eagleton, Holy
Terror. New York: Oxford University Press, 2005.
12 This view is often designated “scientism,” although I have misgivings about
both the term and its connotations. See Mikael Stenmark, Scientism: Science,
Ethics and Religion. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2001.
13 Unweaving the Rainbow, 312.

14 See for example John Gray, Straw Dogs: Thoughts on Humans and Other
Animals. London: Granta, 2002. For a balanced account of the
Enlightenment, see Anthony Pagden, The Enlightenment and Why It Still
Matters. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013.
15 The God Delusion, 152.
16 The God Delusion, 152.
17 Shermer, How We Believe, 71.
18 The God Delusion, 66–9. For a criticism of Dawkins’ rhetoric at this point,
see Fern Elsdon-Baker, The Selfish Genius: How Richard Dawkins Rewrote
Darwin’s Legacy. London: Icon, 2009, 225–55, especially 229.
19 His best work, in my view, is Monad to Man: The Concept of Progress in
Evolutionary Biology. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996.
20 Cited in God Delusion, 67. For Ruse’s own assessment of this papal
statement, see Michael Ruse, “John Paul II and Evolution.” Quarterly Review
of Biology 72 (1997): 391–5.
21 A Devil’s Chaplain, 151.
22 Hart, Atheist Delusions, 4.
23 Two earlier publications were especially important in forcing this radical
review of the popular viewpoint: David C. Lindberg, and Ronald L. Numbers,
God and Nature: Historical Essays on the Encounter between Christianity
and Science. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1986; Edward Grant,
The Foundations of Modern Science in the Middle Ages: Their Religious,
Institutional and Intellectual Contexts. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1996.
24 For the point at issue, see Stephan Fuchs, Against Essentialism: A Theory of
Culture and Society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2001,
especially 12–70.
25 For a sustained critique of this position, richly illustrated with historical case
studies, see John Brooke, and Geoffrey Cantor, Reconstructing Nature: The
Engagement of Science and Religion. Edinburgh: Clarke, 1998.
26 See, for example, Ronald L. Numbers, ed. Galileo Goes to Jail: And Other

Myths about Science and Religion. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 2009.
27 Mario Biagioli, Galileo, Courtier: The Practice of Science in the Culture of
Absolutism. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993.
28 David N. Livingstone, “Darwinism and Calvinism: The Belfast–Princeton
Connection.” Isis 83 (1992): 408–28.
29 For their impact, see James R. Moore, The Post-Darwinian Controversies: A
Study of the Protestant Struggle to Come to Terms with Darwin in Great
Britain and America, 1870–1900. New York: Cambridge University Press,
1979, 29–49.
30 See for example Frank M. Turner, “The Victorian Conflict between Science
and Religion: A Professional Dimension.” Isis 69 (1978): 356–76; Colin A.
Russell, “The Conflict Metaphor and Its Social Origins.” Science and
Christian Faith 1 (1989): 3–26.
31 Elaine Howard Ecklund, Science vs. Religion: What Scientists Really Think.
New York: Oxford University Press, 2010, 5.
32 For reflections on this disagreeable aspect of Dawkins’ writing, see Gary
Keogh, Reading Richard Dawkins: A Theological Dialogue with New
Atheism. Minneapolis, MN: Fortress Press, 2014.
33 C. P. Snow, The Two Cultures and the Scientific Revolution. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1959, 3.
34 See for example Hugh Aldersley-Williams, “The Misappliance of Science.”
New Statesman, September 13, 1999.
35 Peter Medawar, “Science and Literature.” Encounter. January 1969, 15–23,
16. On Medawar’s achievement, see Neil Calver, “Sir Peter Medawar:
Science, Creativity and the Popularization of Karl Popper.” Notes and
Records of the Royal Society 67 (2013): 301–14. Interestingly, Dawkins
included extracts from this lecture in his edited collection The Oxford Book of
Modern Science Writing. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009, 178–9.
36 Francis S. Collins, “Faith and the Human Genome.” Perspectives on Science
and Christian Faith 55 (2003): 142–53.

37 See his 1883 letter to Charles A. Watts, publisher of the Agnostic Annual.;
Life and Letters of Thomas Henry Huxley. London: Macmillan, 1913, vol. 3,
97. For further comment, see Alan Willard Brown, The Metaphysical Society:
Victorian Minds in Crisis, 1869–1880. London: Oxford University Press,
1947.
38 Huxley, Life and Letters, vol. 3, 97.
39 Gould, “Impeaching a Self-Appointed Judge.”
40 A Devil’s Chaplain, 149.
41 As noted by John Earman, “Underdetermination, Realism, and Reason.”
Midwest Studies in Philosophy 18 (1994): 19–38. For a criticism of this
position, see Igor Deuven and Leon Horsten, “Earman on
Underdetermination and Empirical Indistinguishability.” Erkenntnis 49
(1998): 303–20.
42 For the development of this paradigm in the eighteenth century, see Mark E.
Blum, “The European Metahistorical Narrative and Its Changing
‘Metaparadigms’ in the Modern Age.” In Political Economy, Linguistics and
Culture: Crossing Bridges, edited by Jürgen G. Backhaus, 101–62.
Heidelberg: Springer, 2008.
43 A Devil’s Chaplain, 16.
44 Thomas S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. 2nd edn. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1970. See further José Díez, “Falsificationism
and the Structure of Theories: The Popper–Kuhn Controversy about the
Rationality of Normal Science.” Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
38 (2007): 543–54.
45 Christiane Chauviré, “Peirce, Popper, Abduction, and the Idea of Logic of
Discovery.” Semiotica 153 (2005), 209–21.
46 August Kekulé, “Benzolfest Rede.” Berichte der deutschen chemischen
Gesellschaft zu Berlin 23 (1890): 1302–11.
47 The God Delusion, 51–2. Dawkins takes this analogy from the writings of
Bertrand Russell.
48 Herbert McCabe, God Still Matters. London: Continuum, 2002, 37.

49 David Hume, Enquiries concerning Human Understanding and concerning
the Principles of Morals. 3rd edn. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975, 165. For
the problems with this approach, see Colin Howson, Hume’s Problem:
Induction and the Justification of Belief. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2000, 168–220.
50 For the issues, see Dudley Shapere, “The Concept of Observation in Science
and Philosophy.” Philosophy of Science 49 (1982): 485–525; Paul Dicken
and Peter Lipton, “What Can Bas Believe? Musgrave and van Fraassen on
Observability.” Analysis 66 (2006): 226–33; Anjan Chakravartty, A
Metaphysics for Scientific Realism: Knowing the Unobservable. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2007.
51 See Stathos Psillos, Knowing the Structure of Nature: Essays on Realism and
Explanation, London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009.
52 For an excellent review, see Gianfranco Bertone, Dan Hooper, and Joseph
Silk, “Particle Dark Matter: Evidence, Candidates and Constraints.” Physics
Reports 405, nos. 5–6 (2005): 279–390.
53 Stanley Fish, “Evidence in Science and Religion, Part Two.” New York
Times, April 9, 2012.
54 The God Delusion, 111–24.
55 See for example Alvin Plantinga, Where the Conflict Really Lies: Science,
Religion, and Naturalism. New York: Oxford University Press, 2011, 25–30.
56 The God Delusion, 109.
57 The God Delusion, 77.
58 Among the best introductions are David Deutsch, The Fabric of Reality.
London: Allen Lane, 1997; Brian Greene, The Elegant Universe:
Superstrings, Hidden Dimensions, and the Quest for the Ultimate Theory.
London: Vintage, 2000.
59 For example, see Pascal Boyer, Religion Explained: The Evolutionary
Origins of Religious Thought. New York: Basic Books, 2001, 4–33; Scott
Atran, In Gods We Trust: The Evolutionary Landscape of Religion. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2002, 12–13.

60 As argued by Candace S. Alcorta and Richard Sosis, “Ritual, Emotion, and
Sacred Symbols: The Evolution of Religion as an Adaptive Complex.”
Human Nature 16 (2005): 323–59.
61 Peter J. Richerson and Lesley Newson, “Is Religion Adaptive? Yes, No,
Neutral. But Mostly We Don’t Know.” In The Believing Primate: Scientific,
Philosophical and Theological Reflections on the Origin of Religion, edited
by Jeffrey Schloss and Michael Murray, 100–17. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2009.
62 David Sloan Wilson, “Beyond Demonic Memes: Why Richard Dawkins is
Wrong about Religion.” eSkeptic. July 4, 2007,
www.skeptic.com/eskeptic/07–07–04, accessed August 8, 2014.
63 The God Delusion, 188.
64 See Eric Csapo, Theories of Mythology. Oxford: Blackwell, 2005, 36–43.
65 The God Delusion, 166.
66 The God Delusion, 172–9.
67 The God Delusion, 172–3.
68 The God Delusion, 174.
69 The Blind Watchmaker, 21.
70 Fraser Watts, “Cognitive Neuroscience and Religious Consciousness.” In
Neuroscience and the Person, edited by R. J. Russell, N. C. Murphy, and C.
J. Isham, 327–46. Vatican City: Vatican Observatory, 1999.
71 The God Delusion, 12.
72 Richard Dawkins, “A Survival Machine.” In The Third Culture, edited by
John Brockman, 75–95. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1996, 85.
73 By far the best study is Edward Grant, Planets, Stars and Orbs: The Medieval
Cosmos, 1200–1687. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
74 Grant, Planets, Stars and Orbs, 169–85; 371–89.
75 Unweaving the Rainbow, xiii. See also his extended discussion, ranging from
traditional religions to New Age movements, at 114–79.

76 Dacher Keltner and Jonathan Haidt, “Approaching Awe, a Moral, Spiritual
and Aesthetic Emotion.” Cognition and Emotion 17 (2003): 297–314.
77 Keltner and Haidt, “Approaching Awe,” 304.
78 Unweaving the Rainbow, xii.

Conclusion
This book has barely scratched the surface of a series of fascinating questions
raised by the writings of Richard Dawkins. Some of these are directly, others
indirectly, religious in nature. I am conscious that I have failed to deal with any
of them in the detail that they rightly demand. I have opened up some questions
for further discussion, and have not settled anything – except that the issues
raised in this book are important and interesting, and that further discussion is
clearly needed. Dawkins raises all the right questions, and gives some interesting
answers. They’re not particularly reliable answers, admittedly, unless you
happen to believe that religious people are science-hating fools who are into
“blind faith” and other unmentionable things in a big way.
So why this failure to understand religion? Nobody is asking Dawkins to agree
with religion; if he wishes to engage with it, however, we have every right to
expect an attempt to understand it. Perhaps the philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein
helps us understand the issue. “A picture held us captive. And we could not get
outside it, for it lay in our language and language seemed to repeat it to us
inexorably.”1 Wittgenstein here puts into words what I believe undergirds
Dawkins’ attitude toward science and religion – a self-imposed captivity to a
controlling “picture of reality” or “worldview,” which seems to render him
incapable of stepping outside this rigid way of thinking. This worldview is
cultural, rather than scientific. It reflects a cultural interpretation of the scientific
project, rather than being itself scientific in its character. Science articulates no
worldview, and degenerates into an ideology if it chooses to adopt one. That is
precisely why Thomas H. Huxley’s wise aphorism is to be celebrated and
cherished: science “commits suicide when it adopts a creed.” Dawkins’
misplaced certainties about religion are ultimately not scientific, but ideological.
This book aims to move the discussion about the relation of science and religion
on, and draw a line under the often unreliable account that Dawkins offers. An
evidence-based approach to this question is much more complex and much more
interesting than Dawkins’ so-called “path of simplicity and straight thinking,”
which all too often proves to involve the forcing of a complex reality into the
intellectual straitjacket of a dogmatic atheism.
A good example of this reductionist “straight thinking” is found in Dawkins’
answers to the great “why” questions of life. Consider the following

conversation with a six-year-old girl, which Dawkins recounted in the first of his
1991 Royal Institution Christmas Lectures: “I asked her what she thought
flowers were for? She gave a very thoughtful answer. ‘Two things,’ she said; ‘to
make the world pretty and to help the bees make honey for us.’ Well, I thought
that was a very nice answer and I was very sorry I had to tell her that it wasn’t
true.”2 Dawkins’ own answer to this question is chilling in its utter failure to
appreciate the complexity of life, and the need to engage questions at multiple
levels. “Simplicity and straight thinking” lead to a simplistic biological
reductionism, which is totally inattentive to the deeper questions of meaning:
“We are machines built by DNA whose purpose is to make more copies of the
same DNA Flowers are for the same thing as everything else in the living
kingdoms, for spreading ‘copy-me’ programmes about, written in DNA
language.” As Dawkins saw things, the question of the “meaning of life” was
simple. “We are machines for propagating DNA, and the propagation of DNA is
a self-sustaining process. It is every living object’s sole reason for living.”3
This is simply nonsense. It may well be an element of a biological account of the
significance of life. But as any “critical realist” philosophy of science makes
clear, reality is complex, and requires engagement and analysis at multiple
levels.4 Only someone with chronic biological tunnel vision would suggest that
the “sole reason for living” is “the propagation of DNA.” Other answers may be
added, complementing and extending this existentially impoverished account of
the meaning of life. To be human is ultimately to transcend any physical or
biological account of human identity. It is to move on and away from the belief
that, because we are biological (or chemical or physical) entities, our
significance is therefore to be reduced to that level.5 Yes, we have a biological
function, and that is part of the answer to the question of what we are, and why
we are here. But it is only part of the answer, not the “sole” answer.
As Dawkins rightly points out, there are areas of tension between science and
religion, which must be acknowledged and confronted; yet alongside them, sadly
unacknowledged by Dawkins, there is an immense potential for intellectual
synergy and the discovery of fresh perspectives on reality. The question of
whether there is a God, and what that God might be like, has not – despite the
predictions of overconfident Darwinians – gone away since Darwin, and remains
of major intellectual and personal importance. On this matter, we have perhaps
more to learn from Darwin himself than from his more dogmatic recent
interpreters. New Atheist writers in general, and Dawkins in particular, have
raised some fascinating questions about the relation of science and religion, yet
have conspicuously failed to provide intellectually satisfactory answers.

have conspicuously failed to provide intellectually satisfactory answers.
The conversation continues. Some minds on both sides of the argument may be
closed; the evidence and the debate, however, most certainly are not. Scientists
and theologians have so much to learn from each other. Listening to each other,
we might – to use an elegant phrase from Dawkins himself – “hear the galaxies
sing.”6 Or even the heavens declaring the glory of the Lord (Psalm 19:1).
Notes
1 Ludwig Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations. 3rd edn. Oxford:
Blackwell, 1968, 48.
2 Lecture transcript, in Michael Poole, “A Critique of Aspects of the Philosophy
and Theology of Richard Dawkins.” Science and Christian Belief 6, no. 1
(1994): 41–59, 51.
3 Richard Dawkins, Growing Up in the Universe. London: BBC Education
1991, 21. This short work is a study guide to Dawkins’ 1991 Royal Institution
Christmas Lectures.
4 For exploration and documentation of this theme, see Alister E. McGrath, A
Scientific Theology, vol. 2: Reality. London: Continuum, 2002, 195–244.
5 The issue of emergent properties represents one obvious difficulty for such a
reductionist perspective: see for example Michael Silberstein, “Reduction,
Emergence, and Explanation.” In Blackwell Guide to the Philosophy of
Science, edited by Peter Machamer and Michael Silberstein, 80–107. Oxford:
Blackwell, 2002; Margaret Morrison, “Emergence, Reduction, and
Theoretical Principles: Rethinking Fundamentalism.” Philosophy of Science
73 (2006): 876–87.
6 Unweaving the Rainbow, 313.

Select Bibliography
1. Works by Richard Dawkins
An Appetite for Wonder: The Making of a Scientist. A Memoir. London: Bantam,
2013.
The Blind Watchmaker: Why the Evidence of Evolution Reveals a Universe
without Design. New York: W. W. Norton, 1986.
Climbing Mount Improbable. London: Viking, 1996.
A Devil’s Chaplain. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 2003.
The Extended Phenotype: The Long Reach of the Gene. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1982.
“In Defence of Selfish Genes.” Philosophy 56 (1981): 556–73.
The God Delusion. London: Bantam, 2006.
The Greatest Show on Earth: The Evidence for Evolution. London: Bantam,
2009.
The Magic of Reality: How We Know What’s Really True. London: Bantam,
2011.
“The Ontogeny of a Pecking Preference in Domestic Chicks.” Zeitschrift für
Tierpsychologie 25 (1968): 170–86.
“Replicator Selection and the Extended Phenotype.” Zeitschrift für
Tierpsychologie 47 (1978): 61–76.
“Replicators and Vehicles.” In Current Problems in Sociobiology, edited by
King’s College Sociobiology Group, 45–64. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1982.
River out of Eden: A Darwinian View of Life. London: Phoenix, 1995.
“A Scientist’s Case against God.” The Independent. April 20, 1992.
“Selective Pecking in the Domestic Chick.” D. Phil. Thesis, Oxford University,

1966.
The Selfish Gene. 2nd edn. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989.
“A Survival Machine.” In The Third Culture, edited by John Brockman, 75–95.
New York: Simon & Schuster, 1996.
Unweaving the Rainbow: Science, Delusion and the Appetite for Wonder.
London: Penguin, 1998.
Other works
Aunger, Robert, ed. Darwinizing Culture: The Status of Memetics as a Science.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Ayala, Francisco J. “Teleological Explanations in Evolutionary Biology.”
Philosophy of Science 37 (1970): 1–15.
Ayala, Francisco J. “Teleological Explanations vs. Teleology.” History and
Philosophy of the Life Sciences 20 (1998): 41–50.
Ball, John A. “Memes as Replicators.” Ethology and Sociology 5 (1984): 145–
61.
Bateson, Patrick. “William Bateson: A Biologist ahead of his Time.” Journal of
Genetics 81, no. 2 (2002): 49–58.
Beurton, Peter J., Raphael Falk, and Hans-Jörg Rheinberger, eds. The Concept of
the Gene in Development and Evolution: Historical and Epistemological
Perspectives. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Blackmore, Susan J. The Meme Machine. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1999.
Boto, Luis. “Horizontal Gene Transfer in Evolution: Facts and Challenges.”
Proceedings of the Royal Society B 277 (2010): 819–27.
Brandon, R. N., and H. F. Nijhout, “The Empirical Nonequivalence of Genic and
Genotypic Models of Selection: A (Decisive) Refutation of Genic Selectionism
and Pluralistic Genic Selectionism.” Philosophy of Science 73, no. 3 (2006):
277–97.

Brooke, John Hedley. “Darwin and Victorian Christianity.” In The Cambridge
Companion to Darwin edited by Jonathan Hodge and Gregory Radick, 192–213.
Brooke, John Hedley. “‘Laws Impressed on Matter by the Creator’? The Origins
and the Question of Religion.” In The Cambridge Companion to the “Origin of
Species”, edited by Michael Ruse and Robert J. Richards, 256–74. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Brooke, John Hedley. “The Relations between Darwin’s Science and his
Religion.” In Darwinism and Divinity, edited by John Durant, 40–75. Oxford:
Blackwell, 1985.
Brooke, John Hedley. “Science and the Fortunes of Natural Theology: Some
Historical Perspectives.” Zygon 24 (1989): 3–22.
Brooke, John Hedley, and Ian McLean, eds. Heterodoxy in Early Modern
Science and Religion. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.
Brown, Frank Burch. The Evolution of Darwin’s Religious Views. Macon, GA:
Mercer University Press, 1986.
Brown, Frank Burch. “The Evolution of Darwin’s Theism.” Journal of the
History of Biology 19 (1986): 1–45.
Bulmer, Michael G. Francis Galton: Pioneer of Heredity and Biometry.
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2003.
Bulmer, Michael G. “Did Jenkin’s Swamping Argument Invalidate Darwin’s
Theory of Natural Selection?” British Journal for the History of Science 37
(2004): 281–97.
Burkert, Walter. Creation of the Sacred: Tracks of Biology in Early Religions.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996.
Burt, Austin, and Robert Trivers. Genes in Conflict: The Biology of Selfish
Genetic Elements. Cambridge, MA: Belknap, 2006.
Calver, Neil. “Sir Peter Medawar: Science, Creativity and the Popularization of
Karl Popper.” Notes and Records of the Royal Society 67 (2013): 301–14.
Campbell, Donald T. “Blind Variation and Selective Retention in Creative
Thought as in Other Knowledge Processes.” Psychological Review 67 (1960):
380–400.

Campbell, Donald T. “A General ‘Selection Theory’ as Implemented in
Biological Evolution and in Social Belief-Transmission-with-Modification in
Science.” Biology and Philosophy 3 (1988): 413–63.
Carroll, Sean B. “EvoDevo and an Expanding Evolutionary Synthesis: A
Genetic Theory of Morphological Evolution.” Cell 134 (2008): 25–36.
Claeys, Gregory. “The ‘Survival of the Fittest’ and the Origins of Social
Darwinism.” Journal of the History of Ideas 61 (2000): 223–40.
Cloak, F. T. “Is a Cultural Ethology Possible?” Human Ecology 3 (1975): 161–
81.
Collins, Francis S. “Faith and the Human Genome.” Perspectives on Science and
Christian Faith 55 (2003): 142–53.
Conway-Morris, Simon. Life’s Solution: Inevitable Humans in a Lonely
Universe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Cornell, John F. “Newton of the Grassblade? Darwin and the Problem of
Organic Teleology.” Isis 77 (1986): 405–21.
Corsi, Pietro. “Before Darwin: Transformist Concepts in European Natural
History.” Journal of the History of Biology 38 (2005): 67–83.
Corsi, Pietro. Evolution before Darwin. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010.
Culp, Sylvia, and Philip Kitcher. “Theory Structure and Theory Change in
Contemporary Molecular Biology.” British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science 40 (1989): 459–83.
Cziko, Gary. Without Miracles: Universal Selection Theory and the Second
Darwinian Revolution. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995.
Dahm, Ralf. “Friedrich Miescher and the Discovery of DNA.” Developmental
Biology 278, no.2 (2005): 274–88.
Darden, Lindley. Theory Change in Science: Strategies from Mendelian
Genetics. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991.
Darden, Lindley. “William Bateson and the Promise of Mendelism.” Journal of
the History of Biology 10 (1977): 87–106.
Dennett, Daniel C. Darwin’s Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meaning of

Life. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995.
Depew, David, and Bruce Weber, Darwinism Evolving: Systems Dynamics and
the Genealogy of Natural Selection. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995.
Desmond, Adrian, and James Moore. Darwin. London: Michael Joseph, 1991.
de Waal, Frans. Our Inner Ape: The Best and Worst of Human Nature. London:
Granta Books, 2006.
Di Trocchio, F. “Mendel’s Experiments: A Reinterpretation.” Journal of the
History of Biology 24 (1991): 485–519.
Distin, Kate. The Selfish Meme: A Critical Reassessment. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Dixon, Thomas. “Scientific Atheism as a Faith Tradition.” Studies in History
and Philosophy of Science C 33 (2002): 337–59.
Durham, William H. Coevolution: Genes, Culture, and Human Diversity.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1991.
Eddy, Matthew D. “The Rhetoric and Science of William Paley’s Natural
Theology.” Theology and Literature 18 (2004): 1–22.
Edwards, A. W. F. “The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection.” Genetics 154
(2000): 1419–26.
Edwards, A. W. F. “Mathematizing Darwin.” Behavioral Ecology and
Sociobiology 65, no. 3 (2011): 421–30.
Edwards, A. W. F. “R. A. Fisher’s Gene-Centred View of Evolution and the
Fundamental Theorem of Natural Selection.” Biological Reviews 89 (2014):
135–47.
Eldredge, Niles. Reinventing Darwin: The Great Debate at the High Table of
Evolutionary Theory. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1995.
Elsdon-Baker, Fern. The Selfish Genius: How Richard Dawkins Rewrote
Darwin's Legacy. London: Icon, 2009.
England, Richard. “Natural Selection, Teleology, and the Logos: From Darwin
to the Oxford Neo-Darwinists, 1859–1909.” Osiris 16 (2001): 270–87.

Evans, L. T. “Darwin’s Use of the Analogy between Artificial and Natural
Selection.” Journal of the History of Biology 17 (1984): 113–40.
Everson, Ted. The Gene: A Historical Perspective. Westport, CT: Greenwood,
2007.
Fairbanks, Daniel J., and Bryce Rytting. “Mendelian Controversies: A Botanical
and Historical Review.” American Journal of Botany 88 (2001): 737–52.
Fisher, Ronald A. The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1930.
Fisher, Ronald A. “Has Mendel’s Work Been Rediscovered?” Annals of Science
1 (1936): 115–37.
Fisher, Ronald A. “The Renaissance of Darwinism.” The Listener 37 (1947):
1001.
Fodor, Jerry A., and Massimo Piattelli-Palmarini. What Darwin Got Wrong.
New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2010.
Forterre, Patrick, Jonathan Filée, and Hannu Myllykallio. “Origin and Evolution
of DNA and DNA Replication Machineries.” In The Genetic Code and the
Origin of Life, edited by Lluis Ribas de Pouplana, 145–68. New York: Kluwer
Academic, 2004.
Frank, Steven A. “Natural Selection Maximizes Fisher Information.” Journal of
Evolutionary Biology 22 (2009): 231–44.
Frank, Steven A. “The Price Equation, Fisher’s Fundamental Theorem, Kin
Selection, and Causal Analysis.” Evolution 51 (1997): 1712–29.
Franklin, Allan. Ending the Mendel-Fisher Controversy. Pittsburgh, PA:
University of Pittsburgh Press, 2008.
Fyfe, Aileen. “The Reception of William Paley’s Natural Theology in the
University of Cambridge.” British Journal for the History of Science 30 (1997):
321–35.
Gabora, Liane M. “Self–Other Organization: Why Early Life Did Not Evolve
through Natural Selection.” Journal of Theoretical Biology 241 (2006): 443–50.
Gale, Barry G. Evolution without Evidence: Charles Darwin and the Origin of

Species. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1982.
Gardner, A., and J. J. Welch. “A Formal Theory of the Selfish Gene.” Journal of
Evolutionary Biology 24 (2011): 1801–13.
Gayon, Jean. Darwinism’s Struggle for Survival: Heredity and the Hypothesis of
Natural Selection. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Gayon, Jean. “From Darwin to Today in Evolutionary Biology.” In The
Cambridge Companion to Darwin, edited by Jonathan Hodge and Gregory
Radick, 240–64. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003
Ghiselin, Michael T. Metaphysics and the Origin of Species. Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, 1997.
Ghiselin, Michael T. The Triumph of the Darwinian Method. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1984.
Gould, Stephen Jay. “Impeaching a Self-Appointed Judge.” Scientific American
267, no. 1 (1992): 118–21.
Gould, Stephen Jay. Rocks of Ages: Science and Religion in the Fullness of Life.
London: Jonathan Cape, 2001.
Gould, Stephen Jay. The Structure of Evolutionary Theory. Cambridge, MA:
Belknap, 2002.
Grafen, Alan. “Fisher the Evolutionary Biologist.” The Statistician 52 (2003):
319–29.
Grafen, Alan. “A Geometric View of Relatedness.” In Oxford Surveys in
Evolutionary Biology, edited by R. Dawkins and M. Ridley, 28–89. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1985.
Grafen, Alan. “The Intellectual Contribution of The Selfish Gene to Evolutionary
Theory.” In Richard Dawkins: How a Scientist Changed the Way We Think,
edited by Alan Grafen and Mark Ridley, 66–74. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2006.
Grant, Edward. The Foundations of Modern Science in the Middle Ages: Their
Religious, Institutional and Intellectual Contexts. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1996.

Grant, Edward. Planets, Stars and Orbs: The Medieval Cosmos, 1200–1687.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Griffiths, Anthony J. F. An Introduction to Genetic Analysis. 7th edn. New York:
Freeman, 2000.
Griffiths, Anthony J. F. Modern Genetic Analysis: Integrating Genes and
Genomes. 2nd edn. New York: W. H. Freeman and Co., 2002.
Gross, Alan G. The Rhetoric of Science. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1996.
Hamilton, William. “The Genetic Evolution of Social Behaviour.” Journal of
Theoretical Biology 7 (1964): 1–16; 17–52.
Harker, David. “Accommodation and Prediction: The Case of the Persistent
Head.” British Journal for Philosophy of Science 57 (2006): 309–21.
Harms, William. “Cultural Evolution and the Variable Phenotype.” Biology and
Philosophy 11 (1996): 357–75.
Haught, John F. God after Darwin: A Theology of Evolution. Boulder, CO:
Westview, 2000.
Henze, K., C. Schnarrenberger, and W. Martin. “Endosymbiotic Gene Transfer:
A Special Case of Horizontal Gene Transfer Germane to Endosymbiosis, the
Origins of Organelles and the Origins of Eukaryotes.” In Horizontal Gene
Transfer, edited by M. Syvanen and C. Kado, 343–52. London: Academic, 2001.
Hitchcock, Christopher, and Elliott Sober, “Prediction vs. Accommodation and
the Risk of Overfitting.” British Journal for Philosophy of Science 55 (2004): 1–
34.
Hull, David L. Science as a Process: An Evolutionary Account of the Social and
Conceptual Development of Science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1990.
Hurst, Gregory D. D., and John H. Werren. “The Role of Selfish Genetic
Elements in Eukaryotic Evolution.” Nature Reviews Genetics 2 (2001): 597–
606.
Judson, Olivia. “Let’s Get Rid of Darwinism.” New York Times. July 15, 2008.

Keller, Evelyn Fox. Making Sense of Life: Explaining Biological Development
with Models, Metaphors, and Machines. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 2002.
Keogh, Gary. Reading Richard Dawkins: A Theological Dialogue with New
Atheism. Minneapolis, MN: Fortress, 2014.
Keltner, Dacher, and Jonathan Haidt. “Approaching Awe, A Moral, Spiritual and
Aesthetic Emotion.” Cognition and Emotion 17 (2003): 297–314.
Keynes, Randal. Annie’s Box: Charles Darwin, His Daughter and Human
Evolution. London: Fourth Estate, 2001.
Kitcher, Paul. “Explanatory Unification and the Causal Structure of the World.”
In Scientific Explanation, edited by P. Kitcher and W. Salmon, 410–505.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1989.
Kitcher, P., K. Sterelny, and C. K. Waters. “The Illusory Riches of Sober’s
Monism”, Journal of Philosophy 87, no. 3 (1990): 158–61.
Kleiner, Scott A. “The Logic of Discovery and Darwin’s Pre-Malthusian
Researches.” Biology and Philosophy 3 (1988): 293–315.
Kleiner, Scott A. “Problem Solving and Discovery in the Growth of Darwin’s
Theories of Evolution.” Synthese 62 (1981): 119–62.
Koenig, Harold G., and Harvey J. Cohen. The Link between Religion and
Health: Psychoneuroimmunology and the Faith Factor. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2002.
Kohm, Marek. “To Rise Above.” In Richard Dawkins: How a Scientist Changed
the Way We Think, edited by Alan Grafen and Mark Ridley, 248–54. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2006.
Kruuk, Hans. Niko’s Nature: The Life of Niko Tinbergen, and His Science of
Animal Behaviour. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Kutschera, Ulrich, and Karl J. Niklas. “The Modern Theory of Biological
Evolution: An Expanded Synthesis.” Naturwissenschaften 91 (2004): 255–76.
Laland, Kevin N., and Gillian R. Brown. Sense and Nonsense: Evolutionary
Perspectives on Human Behaviour. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002.

Lange, Marc. “The Apparent Superiority of Prediction to Accommodation as a
Side Effect.” British Journal for Philosophy of Science 52 (2001): 575–88.
Lindberg, David C., and Ronald L. Numbers. God and Nature: Historical Essays
on the Encounter between Christianity and Science. Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1986.
Lloyd, Elisabeth Anne. “The Nature of Darwin’s Support for the Theory of
Natural Selection.” In Science, Politics, and Evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2008, 1–19.
Lloyd, Elisabeth Anne. “Why the Gene Will Not Return.” Philosophy of Science
72 (2005): 287–310.
Lumsden, Charles J., and Edward O. Wilson. Genes, Mind, and Culture: The
Coevolutionary Process. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1981.
Lustig, Abigail J. “Darwin’s Difficulties.” In The Cambridge Companion to the
“Origin of Species”, edited by Michael Ruse and Robert J. Richards, 109–28.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009.
Lynch, Aaron. “An Introduction to the Evolutionary Epidemiology of Ideas.”
Biological Physicist 3, no. 2 (2003): 7–14.
Lynch, Aaron. Thought Contagion: How Belief Spreads through Society. New
York: Basic Books, 1996.
Maynard Smith, John. The Theory of Evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1995.
Mayr, Ernst. “The Multiple Meanings of ‘Teleological’.” History and
Philosophy of the Life Sciences 20 (1998): 35–40.
Mayr, Ernst. Toward a New Philosophy of Biology: Observations of an
Evolutionist. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1988.
Mayr, Ernst. What Makes Biology Unique? Considerations on the Autonomy of a
Scientific Discipline. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
McGrath, Alister E. Darwinism and the Divine: Evolutionary Thought and
Natural Theology. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2011.
McGrath, Alister E. “Evidence, Theory, and Interpretation: The ‘New Atheism’

and the Philosophy of Science.” Midwest Studies in Philosophy 37 (2013): 179–
89.
McGrath, Alister E. “The Ideological Uses of Evolutionary Biology in Recent
Atheist Apologetics.” In Biology and Ideology: From Descartes to Dawkins,
edited by Denis R. Alexander and Ronald Numbers, 329–51. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2010.
McMullin, Ernan. The Inference That Makes Science. Milwaukee, WI:
Marquette University Press, 1992.
Medawar, Peter B. The Limits of Science. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1985.
Midgley, Mary. “Gene-Juggling.” Philosophy 54 (1979): 439–58.
Midgley, Mary. “Selfish Genes and Social Darwinism.” Philosophy 58 (1983):
365–77.
Midgley, Mary. The Solitary Self: Darwin and the Selfish Gene. Durham:
Acumen, 2010.
Miller, Geoffrey. The Mating Mind: How Sexual Choice Shaped the Evolution of
Human Nature. London: Vintage, 2001.
Miller, W. R., and C. E. Thoreson. “Spirituality, Religion and Health: An
Emerging Research Field.” American Psychologist 58 (2003): 24–35.
Mongrain, Kevin. “The Eyes of Faith: Newman’s Critique of Arguments from
Design.” Newman Studies Journal 6 (2009): 68–86.
Monod, Jacques. Chance and Necessity: An Essay on the Natural Philosophy of
Modern Biology. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1971.
Moore, James R. The Darwin Legend. London: Hodder and Stoughton, 1995.
Moore, James R. “Deconstructing Darwinism: The Politics of Evolution in the
1860s.” Journal of the History of Biology 24 (1991): 353–408.
Moore, James R. The Post-Darwinian Controversies: A Study of the Protestant
Struggle to Come to Terms with Darwin in Great Britain and America, 1870–
1900. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979.
Morris, Richard. The Evolutionists: The Struggle for Darwin’s Soul. New York:

W. H. Freeman, 2001.
Noble, Denis. The Music of Life: Biology beyond the Genome. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2006.
Noble, Denis. “Neo-Darwinism, the Modern Synthesis and Selfish Genes: Are
They of Use in Physiology?” Journal of Physiology 589, no. 5 (2011): 1007–15.
Okasha, Samir. Evolution and the Levels of Selection. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2006.
Orel, Vítezslav. Gregor Mendel: The First Geneticist. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1996.
Ospovat, Dov. The Development of Darwin’s Theory: Natural History, Natural
Theology, and Natural Selection, 1838–1859. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1995.
Pearson, Helen. “Genetics: What Is a Gene?” Nature 441, no. 7092 (2006): 398–
401.
Pennisi, Elizabeth. “Is It Time to Uproot the Tree of Life?” Science as Culture
284 (1999): 1305–7.
Peretó, Juli, Jeffrey L. Bada, and Antonio Lazcano. “Charles Darwin and the
Origin of Life.” Origins of Life and Evolution of the Biosphere 39, no. 5 (2009):
395–406.
Pichot, André. Histoire de la notion de gène. Paris: Flammarion, 1999.
Pigliucci, Massimo. “Do We Need an Extended Evolutionary Synthesis?”
Evolution 61 (2007): 2743–9.
Plantinga, Alvin. Warranted Christian Belief. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2000.
Plantinga, Alvin. Where the Conflict Really Lies: Science, Religion, and
Naturalism. New York: Oxford University Press, 2011.
Poole, Michael. “A Critique of Aspects of the Philosophy and Theology of
Richard Dawkins.” Science and Christian Belief 6, no. 1 (1994): 41–59.
Popper, Karl R. “Natural Selection and the Emergence of Mind.” Dialectica 32
(1978): 339–55.

Poulshock, Joseph. “Universal Darwinism and the Potential of Memetics.”
Quarterly Review of Biology 77 (2002): 174–5.
Radick, Gregory. “Two Explanations of Evolutionary Progress.” Biology and
Philosophy 15, no. 4 (2000): 475–91.
Richards, R. J. Darwin and the Emergence of Evolutionary Theories of Mind
and Behaviour. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987.
Roberts, Noel K. “Newman on the Argument from Design.” New Blackfriars 88
(2007): 56–66.
Rose, Steven. “The Rise of Neurogenetic Determinism.” In Consciousness and
Human Identity, edited by John Cornwell, 86–100. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1998.
Ruse, Michael. Can a Darwinian Be a Christian? The Relationship between
Science and Religion. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001.
Ruse, Michael. Darwin and Design: Does Evolution Have a Purpose?
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2003.
Ruse, Michael. “Darwin’s Debt to Philosophy: An Examination of the Influence
of the Philosophical Ideas of John F. Herschel and William Whewell on the
Development of Charles Darwin’s Theory of Evolution.” Studies in the History
and Philosophy of Science 66 (1975): 159–81.
Ruse, Michael. Mystery of Mysteries: Is Evolution a Social Construction?
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1999.
Ruse, Michael. Taking Darwin Seriously: A Naturalistic Approach to
Philosophy. New York: Prometheus, 1998.
Sarkar, Sahotra. The Founders of Evolutionary Genetics: A Centenary
Reappraisal. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic, 1992.
Scott, Eugenie, and Glenn Branch. “Don’t Call It Darwinism.” Evolution:
Education and Outreach 2 (2009): 90–4.
Scott, Eugenie, and Glenn Branch. Genetics and Reductionism. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Secord, James A. “Nature’s Fancy: Charles Darwin and the Breeding of

Pigeons.” Isis 72 (1981): 163–86.
Secord, James A. Victorian Sensation: The Extraordinary Publication,
Reception, and Secret Authorship of Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000.
Shanahan, Timothy. The Evolution of Darwinism: Selection, Adaptation, and
Progress in Evolutionary Biology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2004.
Shanahan, Timothy. “Methodological and Contextual Factors in the
Dawkins/Gould Dispute over Evolutionary Progress.” Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological
and Biomedical Sciences 32 (2001): 127–51.
Shennan, Stephen. Genes, Memes and Human History: Darwinian Archaeology
and Cultural Evolution. London: Thames & Hudson, 2002.
Simoni, Robert D., Robert L. Hill, and Martha Vaughan. “The Structure of
Nucleic Acids and Many Other Natural Products: Phoebus Aaron Levene.”
Journal of Biological Chemistry 277, no. 22 (2002): 23–4.
Sloan, Phillip R. “Darwin on Nature and Divinity.” Osiris 16 (2001): 251–69.
Smocovitis, Vassiliki B. Unifying Biology: The Evolutionary Synthesis and
Evolutionary Biology. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1996.
Sober, Elliott R. “Modus Darwin.” Biology and Philosophy 14 (1999): 253–78.
Sober, Elliott R., and David Sloan Wilson. Unto Others: The Evolution and
Psychology of Unselfish Behavior. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1998.
Stamos, David N. “Popper, Falsifiability, and Evolutionary Biology.” Biology
and Philosophy 11 (1996): 161–91.
Stenhouse, John. “Darwin’s Captain: F. W. Hutton and the Nineteenth-Century
Darwinian Debates.” Journal of the History of Biology 23 (1990): 411–42.
Sterelny, Kim. Dawkins vs. Gould: Survival of the Fittest. Cambridge: Icon,
2001.
Sterelny, Kim, and Paul Griffiths, Sex and Death: An Introduction to Philosophy

of Biology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.
Van Fraassen, Bas. “Empiricism in the Philosophy of Science.” In Images of
Science: Essays on Realism and Empiricism, edited by P. Churchland and C.
Hooker, 245–308. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985.
Ward, Keith. God, Chance and Necessity. Oxford: One World, 1996.
Waters, C. Kenneth “Tempered Realism about the Force of Selection.”
Philosophy of Science, 58 no. 4 (1991): 553–73.
Watts, D. J. “A Simple Model of Information Cascades on Random Networks.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 99 (2002): 5766–71.
Weaver, A. J., L. T. Flannelly, J. Garbarino, C. R. Figley, and K. J. Flannelly.
“A Systematic Review of Research on Religion and Spirituality in the Journal of
Traumatic Stress, 1990–99.” Mental Health, Religion and Culture 6 (2003):
215–28.
Weikart, Richard. “A Recently Discovered Darwin Letter on Social Darwinism.”
Isis 86 (1995): 609–11.
Weiling, Franz. “J. G. Mendel hat in der Darstellung seiner Erbsenversuche
nicht gelogen.” Biologie in unserer Zeit 4 (1995): 49–53.
Weikart, Richard. Hitler’s Ethic: The Nazi Pursuit of Evolutionary Progress.
New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009.
Williams, George C. Adaptation and Natural Selection: A Critique of Some
Current Evolutionary Thought. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1966.
Williams, George C. “A Package of Information.” In The Third Culture, edited
by John Brockman, 38–50. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1996.
Wilson, David Sloan, and Edward O. Wilson, “Rethinking the Theoretical
Foundation of Sociobiology.” Quarterly Review of Biology 82 (2007): 327–48.
Wilson, Edward O. “One Giant Leap: How Insects Achieved Altruism and
Colonial Life.” BioScience 58 (2008): 17–25.
Yockey, Hubert P. Information Theory, Evolution, and the Origin of Life.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Young, Robert M. “Darwin’s Metaphor and the Philosophy of Science.” Science

as Culture 16 (1993): 375–403.
Young, Robert M. “Darwin’s Metaphor: Does Nature Select?” Monist 55 (1971):
442–503.
Young, Robert M. Darwin’s Metaphor: Nature’s Place in Victorian Culture.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985.
Zhou, Zhiyan, and Shaolin Zheng. “The Missing Link in Ginkgo Evolution.”
Nature 423 (2003): 821–2.

Index
abduction
agnosticism
Darwin on
Dawkins on
Huxley on
Alexander, Richard
altruism
analogies, use of
Aquinas, Thomas
Aristotle
artificial selection 
atheism
Darwin
Darwinism
Dawkins on
as faith
“Golden Age”
memetic approach
New Atheism
scientific
Soviet Union
Augustine of Hippo
Avery, Oswald
awe, concept of

accommodation
religion and
vastness
Ayala, Francisco J.
Ayer, A. J.
Baden-Powell, R. S. S.
Bateson, William
Beer, Colin
belief systems
see also faith
benzene
Benzer, Seymour
Bible
Big Bang cosmology
biomorph programme
Blackmore, Susan
Blake, William
The Blind Watchmaker (Dawkins)
Bower birds
Boyle, Robert
brain, evolution of
British Association for the Advancement of Science
Bunge, Mario
Campbell, Donald T.
carbon
Carroll, Lewis
catastrophe theory

p
y
causality, primary and secondary
celestial mechanics
Chamberlain, Neville
Chambers, Robert
Chance and Necessity (Monod)
Chesterton, G. K.
Christianity
apologetics
Bible
Church of England
Darwin and
Deism and
evangelical movement
evolution and
meme and
in North America
Paley and
rationality
response to nature
theology
Trinity doctrine
see also creation, doctrine of; faith; God; natural theology
chromosomes
Church of England
classical civilization
Clifford, William K.
Climbing Mount Improbable (Dawkins)

Cloak, F. T.
Collins, Francis S.
contraception
“contrivances”
Cooke, Josiah Parsons
Copernicanism
Copernicus, Nicolaus
Correns, Carl
Creation, doctrine of
Augustine of Hippo on
beauty of creation
Darwin on
North American fundamentalism
special creation 
watchmaker analogy and
Crick, Francis
Cullen, Michael
culture
cultural replicators
evolution of
The God Delusion and
The Selfish Gene and
see also memes
culturgen
dark matter
Darwin, Charles
on artificial selection

Autobiography
Christian reaction to
criticism of
daughter Annie’s death
Descent of Man
Galapagos
gemmules
HMS Beagle voyages
Mendel and
on natural selection see natural selection
Origin of Species
Paley and
pangenesis
religious views
Darwiniana (Gray)
Darwinism
atheism
Belfast and Princeton reception
cultural
Dawkins on
defined
or “evolutionary theory”
God and
horizon
humanity
origins of life
Pope John Paul II on
radical theory change

radical theory change
social Darwinism
survival of fittest
as theory of chance
tree of life model
universal
use of term
worldview 
Darwin Project
Darwin’s Dangerous Idea (Dennett)
“Darwin Triumphant: Darwinism as Universal Truth” (Dawkins)&n
Dawkins, Clinton John
Dawkins, Jean Mary Vyvyan
Dawkins, Richard
on agnosticism
on atheism
basis of hostility to religion
biography
biomorph programme
Charles Simonyi Reader in the Public Understanding of Science
criticism from scientific community
on Darwin
on Darwinism
doctoral thesis
evidence-based argument
on faith
Fellow of the Royal Society
“Humanist of the Year”

u a st o t e
ea
on humanity
meme theory
misrepresents views of opponents
popular science
Professor of the Public Understanding of Science
religious background
selfish gene hypothesis
on teleology in nature
“virus of the mind” theory
works:
The Blind Watchmaker
Climbing Mount Improbable
A Devil’s Chaplainnn
The Extended Phenotype
The God Delusion
River out of Eden
The Selfish Gene
Unweaving the Rainbow
Dawkins’ God (1st edn.) (McGrath)
De caelo (“On Heaven”) (Aristotle)
Deism
Delius, Juan
Dennett, Daniel
Descent of Man (Darwin)
design, appearance of
A Devil’s Chaplain (Dawkins)nn
de Waal, Frans

Distin, Kate
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid)
Darwinism and
double-helix structure 25
four basic nucleotides
mutations
role in genetics
Dobzhansky, Theodosius
domestic selection
Donne, John
Draper, John William
Drosophila melanogaster (fruit fly)
Dyson, Freeman
Eagleton, Terry
Ecklund, Elaine Howard
economic models
Edmonds, Bruce
Eliot, George
empyrean
Enlightenment
eros of the mind (Augustine of Hippo)
Essays on the Spirit of the Inductive Philosophy (Baden-Powell)
ether
The Ethics of Belief (Clifford)
ethology
evangelicalism
evidence

evidence-based thinking
paradigm shifts
in science and religion 
underdetermination of theory by
evil
atheism
Darwinism
religion
evolution
brain
Chambers’ theory
chemical dependence
Christianity and
cultural
group selection
human
Lamarckism
non-Darwinian processes
Paley’s theory
perfect adaptation notion
process acts as filter
tree of life model
see also Darwinism; genetics; natural selection
The Extended Phenotype (Dawkins)
extinction
eye, human
fads, theory of

faith
atheism as
as blind trust
Christian faith and rationality
evidence and
science and
working hypothesis
Feynman, Richard
Fisher, Ronald A. 
Fish, Stanley
Fleming, Donald
Fraassen, Bas van
Franklin, Rosalind
Frazer, Sir James
Freud, Sigmund
fundamentalism, North American
Galileo controversy
Gardner, Martin
gemmules
Genesis
Genetical Theory of Natural Selection (Fisher)
genetics
Bateson’s theory
chromosomes
cooperation between genes
Darwin and
definitions of gene

digital information
environmental role
ethology of gene
evolutionary gene
extended phenotype
gene as fitness-maximizing agent
gene lineages
genes as active agents
gene’s-eye approach
genetic determinism
genic selection
genome sequencing
genotype and phenotype
horizontal gene transfer
meme/gene analogy
Mendelian
Morgan’s theory
mutations
“outlaw” genes
particulate inheritance theory
role of DNA
selfish gene hypothesis 
Genetics and the Origin of Species (Dobzhansky)
God
causality and
childish beliefs and
creation and
Darwinism and

Darwinism and
Deism and
as designer
as explanatory hypothesis
God-meme
problem of pain and suffering
universe and
“virus of the mind” hypothesis
watchmaker analogy
see also faith
The God Delusion (Dawkins)
The Golden Bough (Frazer)
Gould, Stephen Jay
Grafen, Alan
Gramsci, Antonio
Gray, Asa
Great Clock of Strasbourg
Greek philosophy
Griffith, Fred
Griffith-Thomas, W. H.
group selection
Haeckel, Ernst
Haidt, Jonathan
Haldane, J. B. S.
Hamilton, W. D.
histones
History of the Conflict Between Religion and Science (Draper)
Hit h
k Ch i t
h

Hitchcock, Christopher
The Humanist
humanity
as collections of “selfish genes”
Darwinism and
evolution of
see also culture
Hume, David
Hutton, F. W.
Huxley, Julian
Huxley, Thomas H.
i-culture
information transfer
inheritance, mechanics of see genetics
intellectual history
island populations
James, William
Jenkin, Henry Charles Fleeming
Johannsen, Wilhelm
Journal of Memetics
Kant, Immanuel
Kekulé, August
Keltner, Dacher
Kepler, Johannes
Kingsley, Charles
kin selection theory
Kristeller, P. O.

,
Kristeva, Julia
Kuhn, Thomas
Lamarck, Jean-Baptiste
Lamarckism 
Lebensform (“form of living”) (Wittgenstein)
Levene, Phoebus
Lewis, C. S.
life
meaning of
origins of
linguistic context
Livingstone, David
logical positivism
Lorenz, Konrad
Lucretius
Luther, Martin
Lynch, Aaron
McCabe, Herbert
Martin, Christopher F. J.
Marxism
Marx, Karl
mathematization of nature
Maxwell, James Clerk
Mayr, Ernst
m-culture
mechanical philosophy
Medawar Sir Peter

Medawar, Sir Peter
medieval cosmology
The Meme Machine (Blackmore)
memes
“atheism”-meme
existence
God-meme
“good”
Internet and
meme/gene analogy
meme products
mimesis (“imitation”)
redundancy
scientific ideas
self-referentiality
Mendel, Gregor
Mendelian genetics 
dominant/recessive characteristics
factorial inheritance
particulate inheritance
pea plants
segregation ratios
metanarrative
Michelson, Albert A.
Michelson–Morley experiment
Midgley, Mary
Miescher, Friedrich
Millikan, Robert A.

a ,
obe t
.
Mill, John Stuart
Mivart, St. George
mnemone
Monod, Jacques
Moore, James
Morgan, Thomas Hunt
Morley, Edward W.
mutations
genetic
memes
Myers, Gerald E.
mystery
mystics
natural sciences
evidence-based approach
The God Delusion on
history of
and humanities
limits of
natural selection
artificial selection and 
blind process
Christian reaction to Darwin
Darwin on
ethics and
mathematical theory of
mutations and

mutations and
of scientific ideas
natural theology (physical theology)
Natural Theology (Paley)
nature
Christian response to
laws of
mathematization of
teleology in
see also natural theology
neo-Darwinian synthesis
neoliberal ideology
Newcomb, Simon
Newman, John Henry
Newton, Isaac
Noble, Denis
North American
fundamentalism
Protestantism
Nuremberg Chronicle (Schedel)
Okasha, Samir
optimization theory
organisms
adaptations
design and
mutations and
potassium ferrocyanate solution
simple

simple
vehicle for genes
organs, vestigial
The Origin of Species (Darwin)
Orr, James
Oxford University
Dawkins at
Paley, William
“contrivances”
Darwin and
divine watchmaker analogy
Natural Theology
special creation 
pangenesis
Peacocke, Arthur
Peirce, Charles S.
phenotype
extended
genes and
Lamarckism and
phosphates
physical theology see natural theology
physics
Piaget, Jean
Planck, Max
Plantinga, Alvin
Plato

pneumococci
Polanyi, Michael
Polkinghorne, John
Pope John Paul II
Popper, Karl
postmodernism
“Prayer for My Daughter” (Dawkins)&n
pre-Socratics
proof
Putnam, Hilary
quantum theory
questions
transcendent
ultimate
Radda, Professor Sir George
radical theory change 
rationality
Ray, John
reductionism, biological
religion
9/11 changed perception of
adaptive function
awe and
consolation from
Darwin’s beliefs
Dawkins on
evil and

mental health and
psychological account of origins
wonder and
see also Christianity; creation doctrine; faith; God; natural theology;
science/religion relations
Renaissance
Rhetoric (Aristotle)
River out of Eden (Dawkins)
RNA (ribonucleic acid)
Rousselot, Pierre
Royal Society of London
rudimentary structures
Ruse, Michael
Ryder, Richard
Sayers, Dorothy L.
Schedel, Hartmann
science
analogies in
cultural authority
Darwinian worldview and
Dawkins on
limits of
medieval
radical theory change 
rests on faith
see also natural sciences; physics
science/religion relations

biblical exegesis and
Christian reaction to Darwinism
faith and 
The God Delusion on
mystery and
natural theology and
observable/unobservable entities
warfare model
scientific atheism
scientific imperialism
scientific method
accommodation
inference to best explanation
justified inference
memes and
prediction
religion and
scientific theory
criticism of
Grand Unified Theory
logic of discovery and justification 
scientism
The Selfish Gene (Dawkins)
Shanahan, Timothy
Shelley, Percy Bysshe
Shermer, Michael
Simonyi, Charles
Simpson George Gaylord

Simpson, George Gaylord
Singer, Peter
Snow, C. P.
Sober, Elliott
social Darwinism
Socrates
Soviet Union
speciesism
Spencer, Herbert
stars
The Study of Instinct (Tinbergen)
sugar
Sutherland, N. S.
Swinburne, Richard
Teilhard de Chardin, Pierre
teleology
in nature
Temple, Frederick
Tertullian
thought contagion metaphor
Through the Looking Glass (Carroll)
Tinbergen, Niko
Toynbee, Arnold
transformism
tree of life model
Trinity, doctrine of
Tschermak-Seysenegg, Erich von

universe
Darwinism
early history
God and
medieval view
Unweaving the Rainbow (Dawkins)
Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation (Chambers)
Victorian England
crisis of faith
science/religion relations
“virus of the mind” theory
Vries, Hugo de
Waismann, Friedrich
Walcott, Charles D.
Ward, Keith
The Warfare of Science with Theology in Christendom (White)
Warfield, Benjamin B.
Waters, Kenneth
Watson, James
Watts, Fraser
Whewell, William
White, Andrew Dickson
Williams, George C.
The Will to Believe (James)
Wilson, David Sloan
The Wisdom of God Manifested in the Works of Creation (Ray)
Wittgenstein, Ludwig

g
g
Wolterstorff, Nicolas
wonder, sense of
words and “form of living”
Wordsworth, William
world, divine origins of
Wright, Sewell
Xenophanes

WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.

