See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/360218255
Transhumanism According to Stefan Lorenz Sorgner: Why the Posthuman
Project Requires Responsibility and Empathy
Article · April 2022
CITATIONS
0
READS
167
1 author:
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
Bioethics and New Technology View project
Maurizio Balistreri
Università degli Studi di Torino
36 PUBLICATIONS   62 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Maurizio Balistreri on 27 April 2022.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

   
1(1) 2021, 57–66 
 
 
                           https://deliberatio.uvt.ro/ 
 
                 ISSN 2810 – 5826 ISSN – L 2810 – 5532 Print 
              ISSN 2810 – 5532 ISSN – L 2810 – 5532 Online 
 
*  Department of Philosophy and Educational Sciences, University of Turin Via Sant’Ottavio 20, 10124 Turin 
(Italy). E-mail: maurizio.balistreri@unito.it; https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5704-7377 
Transhumanism According to Stefan Lorenz Sorgner: Why the 
Posthuman Project Requires Responsibility and Empathy 
Maurizio Balistreri * 
Abstract 
Unlike the traditional conception of humanism, transhumanism, posthumanism, and metahumanism defend a new 
understanding of humanism. They construe human beings as entities that can no longer be ontologically distinct 
from other living beings. But even if these conceptions put forward a more modest conception of human beings than 
the one we find within the more traditional humanistic paradigm, they support the desirability for and, in part, the 
necessity of modifying human nature. By comparing with the emerging technologies permitting humans to be 
enhanced, Stefan Lorenz Sorgner’s book On Transhumanism introduces the moral debate within transhumanistic 
thinking, showing this new cultural trend’s complexity and philosophical richness. After demonstrating the 
weakness of the main objections to human enhancement, the article confronts Sorgner’s philosophical proposals and 
his suggestion to conciliate, in metahumanism, the transhumanist theoretical conception with the posthumanist one. 
Even though we share the choice to concede central value to (negative) freedom, we will maintain that reflection on 
enhancement should also consider the theme of responsibility and, in particular, debate the duties towards those we 
put into the world. In conclusion, we will state that a conception recognizing the importance of feelings and empathy 
is more capable of questioning the traditional humanistic model.  
Keywords: transhumanism, bioethics, enhancement, genome editing, responsibility, human embryos 
 
1. The Posthuman as a Survival Project 
The pandemic we are experiencing has made one thing clear: that we are highly vulnerable 
entities that can be threatened and swept away by a virus that may at first glance seem harmless 
but actually holds lethal force. In recent years, discussion of bioethics has concentrated on the 
possibility of using the new technologies (not only pharmaceuticals but also genome editing and 
avant-garde artificial limbs) to enhance human abilities and dispositions: in the period of Covid-
19, it is urgent to launch a reflection on the essential contribution science and the biotechnologies 
may give not so much to our enhancement (which would still be auspicious) as to our survival 
(Germani, Wäscher, Biller-Andorno, 2021; Rabiah, 2020). It is not the first time that moral 
philosophy and bioethics have discussed the possibility of using genetic modification techniques 
to make human beings able to survive in a less and less hospitable environment. In an article 
from some years ago, Liao, Sandberg and Roache (2012) suggest turning to genome editing to 
replan human beings and make them, if not more sensitive to the environmental crisis and 
climate change, then at least more adapted to living (surviving) in a polluted and warmer climate 
with decreasing resources. According to Persson and Savulescu (2012), solving these 

58                                                                         Maurizio Balistreri / Transhumanism According to Sorgner 
emergencies requires moral bio-enhancement. Only by enhancing our ability to empathize will 
we worry over the future and (therefore) have reason to change our lifestyles, modify that 
behavior at the basis of the environmental crisis. Indeed, it is one thing to sympathize with an 
individual person before us (and with whom we can interact); it is another to get in tune with the 
feelings of billions and billions of people who have yet to be born. Only through an intervention 
to replan human nature will we succeed in extending our imagination and feeling solidarity and 
compassion towards people who are so far away and unknown. But suppose moral bio-
enhancement failed to work or we were able to modify our behavior. In that case, we could turn 
to genome editing to make human beings smaller (for example, a few centimeters shorter) or 
significantly reduce their daily water and caloric requirements and make them intolerant to 
animal meat—in that this would appreciably decrease animal breeding (Liao, Sandberg & 
Roache 2012). Other solutions that have been suggested to harder to realize but could still be 
explored: for example, we need light to see at night, so if we were—like cats—able to see at 
night too, we could significantly reduce electric energy consumption (Liao, 2017). 
On the other hand, it seems harder to think that photosynthesis could be a feasible solution, in 
that, to reduce solar energy and the quantity of heat necessary for our maintenance/requirement, 
human beings would have to be completely different, with a far broader body area than the 
current one. Before these scenarios, which smack of science fiction, suggesting turning to 
genome editing to make human beings more resistant to coronavirus seems not only more 
acceptable (we are, ultimately, used to vaccination, and many of us have already been 
vaccinated—not once but twice—against coronavirus), but also easier. But even this case would 
mean intervening to replan human nature, not for therapeutic ends, but simply to enhance or 
improve our resistance.  
There is no point assuming a position against any intervention to replan human nature on 
principle. Even though it is not difficult to find positions against human (bio)enhancement in the 
current debate, most criticism is only rhetorically strong because they lack cogency (Buchanan, 
2011; Balistreri, 2020). Sorgner is right: anyone thinking it is wrong to modify genetically or 
replan human nature does not understand that human beings are already (bio)enhanced, or rather, 
human beings have always been posthuman. This seems to be the central point distinguishing the 
positions of those who defend the posthuman, whether or not they then define their 
transhumanist, posthumanist, or metahumanist perspective. Anyone taking evolutionism 
seriously agrees that human nature is not steady or immutable; that is, it is not only the advent of 
biotechnology that changes our (‘natural’) abilities and dispositions, in that cultural and social 
changes may be just as deep as bio-medical ones for us. We are—Allen Buchanan reminds us—
the product of processes of literacy, numeracy and the institutions we invent to regulate (and co-
ordinate) our social life, in that they change our conception of ourselves, our world and our 
interpersonal relationships: “Taken together—writes Buchanan—literacy and numeracy are 
profound and far-reaching cognitive enhancement. Computers, building on the platform of 
literacy and numeracy, extend human cognitive capacities even farther” (Buchanan, 2011, p. 38). 
For this reason, it is wrong to think that biotechnologies place us before a completely new 
scenario, in that we have always remodeled human nature. “Thus, it is quite misleading to say 
that it is only now, in the age of molecular biology, that human beings are able to change 
themselves irreversibly” (Buchanan, 2011, p. 40). So, one may discuss—as Sorgner explains—
which is the ability that is currently preferable to subject to modification; is it better to improve 
cognitive or physical abilities, correct our moral dispositions or extend life expectancy? There 
may also be different positions among supporters of the posthuman. However, we are not obliged 
to preserve this particular (and current) conception of human nature, and the opposite could only 
be held by one entrenched in a pre-Darwinian conception of human beings. For example, 
Michael Sandel has stated that any project to replan human nature is unacceptable. It can only be 
the expression of a lack of humility and respect towards nature. A virtuous person—Sandel 

   
2021, Volume 1, Issue 1 
 59 
states—has no desire to control what happens naturally but can enhance what nature produces 
and thus open up to the unexpected: “This takes us back—states Sandel—to the notion of 
giftedness. Even if it does not harm the child or impair its autonomy, eugenic parenting is 
objectionable because it expresses and entrenches a certain stance toward the world—a stance of 
mastery and dominion that fails to appreciate the gifted character of human powers and 
achievements and misses the part of freedom that consists in a persisting negotiation with the 
given” (Sandel, 2007, p. 83). The point is that there seems to be nothing virtuous in trusting 
blindly in the forces of nature and, even if it were possible, give up interventions that could 
improve the lives of the people we put into the world. And it is not true that behind a parent’s 
choice to modify (enhance) their child’s genetic heritage—interventions of this type are not yet 
clinically possible, but we are trying to imagine the future—there may be, as Sandel suggests, 
only such motivations as the search for perfection or immortality. At the time of genome editing, 
a patient could feel the responsibility to turn to these interventions simply because they are 
worried about the wellbeing of the child to be born and intends to ensure them with a ‘decent’ 
existence. Ultimately it is what any person choosing to have a child has—since the dawn of 
time—been trying to do: over time, the means change, but the basic objective remains the same. 
After all, the irresponsible thing is not to choose to turn to genetic modification techniques (we 
are, of course, assuming that these techniques are safe and there are no unjustified risks for the 
child to be born) in comparison to trusting the destiny of the child to be born to the blind forces 
of nature. Hopping there will be no unfortunate events. Sandel urges the cultivation of a feeling 
of respect (and of humility) towards nature and (for) giving up any plan to control natural 
processes (that is, being able to open up to the unexpected). However, in this context, we may 
consider the pandemic we are experiencing as an example or paradigm. Letting nature choose 
could have dramatic, irreversible consequences for others. That is, it is not by opening up to the 
unexpected that we show we hold the wellbeing of those we put into the world at heart, but by 
conserving the ability to choose and use the means (and the bio-medical technologies) 
responsibly. Then there is no risk that, by turning to genetic modification interventions, we 
cancel human essence. Francis Fukuyama has stated that the most serious problem with the 
biotechnological revolution is that it could irreversibly do away with the very features and 
essential properties of our humanity:  
And what is that human essence that we might be in danger of losing?—Francis Fukuyama wonders—For a 
religious person, it might have to do with the divine gift or spark that all human beings are born with. From a 
secular perspective, it would have to do with human nature: the species-typical characteristics shared by all 
human beings qua human beings. That is ultimately what is at stake in the biotech revolution. (Fukuyama, 2003, 
p. 101)  
But the problem is that it is far from clear what these essential features of our humanity might 
be. In other terms, we could hold completely different positions on what distinguishes us as 
human beings and fail to lay down objectively, or at least convincingly, what the best proposal or 
position might be. Further, our ideas about what is essential may just refer to prejudice or habit. 
For example, before assisted reproduction, sex may have seemed an essential feature of 
reproduction, but today—after over forty years’ assisted reproduction—our perception is 
completely different. In the long run, interventions to replan or modify the genetic heritage could 
radically change future generations’ beliefs about what is truly essential in a human being. 
Further, Jonathan Glover (2006) is right when he says that we should keep the question regarding 
what is essential (in human nature) separate from what is worth preserving/safeguarding, in that 
a thing may be essential but not worthy of (or deserve) being safeguarded. There may be aspects 
of human nature (like, for example, aggressiveness, a limited ability to empathize with strangers, 
etc.) which we may wish to eliminate or at least correct. In this way, we also respond to those 

60                                                                         Maurizio Balistreri / Transhumanism According to Sorgner 
thinking that replanning human nature in any form necessarily implies a form of 
instrumentalization of the person born with an enhanced genetic code. It would be right to talk of 
instrumentalization (of the person born) if we turned to genetic modification interventions only 
to fulfil a desire we have, or rather to model a yet-to-be-born child born to our pleasure. In this 
case, the parents would be treating the child born more like an object (and a product) than a 
person. But there is no instrumentalization if the parents turn to genetic modification 
interventions only to ensure greater giftedness, hence higher chances of having a decent life, to 
the child coming into the world. On the contrary, this seems a morally appreciable choice 
because it favors the person’s wellbeing. We can, then, minimize the risk that the person born 
with a genetic code modified (by third parties) may feel like a puppet in the hands of others and 
have the impression they cannot lead an authentic life. The parents may also choose the genetic 
heritage. Still, they cannot determine or program life in that each of us can choose whether (or 
not) to cultivate certain dispositions and abilities. That is, one born with a modified genetic 
heritage cannot be a slave to their parents’ planning (therefore, their condition cannot even 
remotely be compared to a slave’s), in that genetic heritage is only a part of our history and does 
not determine our behavior. Further, if the child born with an enhanced genetic heritage were 
deprived of their freedom, then so would each one of us, in that no one has the chance to choose 
their genetic heritage. The thesis that biotechnologies would impose a new form of slavery has 
not only been supported by Habermas (2013): Leon Kass (2004) also states that enhancement 
interventions radically change our relationship with actions, turning us from main players (and 
the authors of our actions) to mere observers of what we do. In both cases, we face an 
idealization of technologies that we do not even find among transhumanists. So, one imagines 
that it is sufficient to correct or insert some genetic sequence to obtain the desired result (for 
example, significant physical or cognitive performance or the development of a certain type of 
character). The problem is that a certain type of genetic heritage can ensure a particular 
giftedness (or predisposition). Still, then—as we said—only the subject may try to take 
advantage of it in the direction they prefer. If there is a lack of willingness or adequate 
environmental conditions, any programming will be in vain. The transhumanist plan Sorgner 
presents has been able to work out a convincing reply to the positions from the more 
conservative sources of the current bioethics debate, demonstrating the ineluctability of the 
posthuman, and most of the previous considerations are a part of any transhumanist’s critical 
thinking. There are differences, Sorgner explains, in how transhumanists conceive of the 
posthuman, in that the posthuman can design both an exceptional species compared to human 
beings and the conclusion of a journey that—passing through humanity’s current condition—
then allows the building of a new man (or rather, has him born). In these terms, the transhuman 
would be a member of the human species in its journey towards posthuman realization. 
Whichever conception of posthuman is preferred, what counts—as Sorgner reminds us—is that, 
from the transhumanist perspective, the posthuman is something desirable and worth creating: 
“From my point of view—Sorgner states—the meaning of the posthuman can be understood 
only if one acknowledges that it is a meaningful concept, which gives meaning to life for 
scientifically oriented people” (Sorgner, 2016/2020, p. 71). A project of this type indeed has 
nothing therapeutic about it, so it no longer concerns the field of medicine. Morally, however, 
there is no point in making a distinction between therapeutic and improvement interventions. 
Indeed, if we consider the therapeutic use of biotechnologies approvable because it promotes 
people’s wellbeing, we should all the more accept (or consider compulsory) the use of these very 
technologies for improvement purposes, in that sometimes only enhancement (or improvement) 
allows the quality of life to be improved. 

   
2021, Volume 1, Issue 1 
 61 
2. Freedom or Responsibility? 
Sorgner states the wish to defend a perspective able to go beyond the opposition between 
transhumanism and posthumanism: “It champions weak versions of posthumanism and 
transhumanism, strives to establish a relation and dialogue between both discourses, and at the 
same time represents an alternative to them” (Sorgner, 2016/2020, p. 41). Sorgner explains 
essential differences between transhumanism and posthumanism (for example, transhumanists 
have a linear way of thinking, use technical terms and adopt or refer to scientific methodology, 
while posthumanists have a non-linear way of thinking and defending hermeneutic 
methodology). Further, transhumanists stress the importance of reason and truth, whereas 
posthumanists believe reason only plays a practical function and (that) we should therefore resize 
the importance of reason. The fact that a tool is more efficient does not mean it can offer the best 
world understanding: “it follows from this insight that the limits of the possibility of reason must 
be taken seriously: reason helps us pragmatically, but it is not able to communicate the truth to us 
in correspondence with reality” (Sorgner, 2016/2020, p. 51). For example, regarding the question 
relating to the possibility of accessing truth, posthumanism does not recognize any progress in 
current natural science conclusions regarding Medieval Christians’ judgements (on the world). In 
other terms: with regard to ultimate truths—Sorgner states—“it is unclear from a posthumanist 
perspective whether the natural sciences, whose insights are accepted by many contemporary 
people, or Christianity, which was the prevailing worldview in Europe one thousand years ago, 
provide us with their insights” (Sorgner,  2016/2020, p. 55).  
The metahumanism defending Sorgner intends to go further and beyond a dualistic conception 
of humanism: “(meta can mean ‘beyond’), but it also occupies a position between posthumanism 
and transhumanism (meta can also mean ‘in the middle of ‘) (Sorgner, 2016/2020, p. 41). That is, 
“metahumanism strives to mediate among the most diverse philosophical discourses in the 
interest of letting the appropriate meaning of relationality, perspective, and radical plurality 
emerge (Sorgner, 2016/2020, p. 41). Mediation is possible—states Sorgner—embracing certain 
aspects of transhumanist and posthumanist thinking within a theoretical perspective able to 
distance from ‘classical’ humanism. According to Sorgner, it is right to recognize that reason can 
carry out a basic practical function—“namely because the use of reason helps us in coping with 
our worldly challenges” (Sorgner,  2016/2020, p. 51)—but one must embrace the posthumanists’ 
warning and give up forever the belief one can grasp truth. Further, together with hermeneutic 
methodology, we must accept the dissolution of the subject-object distinction, which is—in line 
with Nietzsche’s thinking—the other aspect distinguishing postmodern thinking. And, morally, 
Sorgner suggests integrating a weak version of transhumanism with a weak version (of) 
posthumanism (Sorgner, 2016/2020, p. 54): this means giving up, on the one hand, moral and 
legal duties and, on the other, questioning—via legal reforms—the centrality of human beings. 
Indeed, for Sorgner, transhumanism can, in a weaker version, recognize the value and 
importance of enhancement technologies without thereby needing to state that people have the 
moral (or legal) duty to turn to these means to ‘improve’ their life or their children’s: “A weaker 
understanding of transhumanism posits that enhancement techniques only promote the likelihood 
of many people leading a good life without necessarily requiring that transhumanist insights 
entail legal and moral obligations” (Sorgner,  2016/2020, p. 54).  
On the other hand, weak posthumanism does not need to draw legal conclusions (or 
implications) from a theoretical perspective stating that there are only differences of degree, not 
ontological ones, between the different entities: “A weaker version of posthumanism—states 
Sorgner—would argue that humans may indeed be distinguishable from other natural beings 
only by degrees, but it would not require that this insight results in legal reform” (Sorgner, 
2016/2020, p. 54). Sorgner’s attempt to integrate the transhumanist perspective with the 
posthumanist one is original. One can share the skepticism towards reason as an ability allowing 

62                                                                         Maurizio Balistreri / Transhumanism According to Sorgner 
us to reach truth and the rejection of human beings’ exceptional character compared to 
nonhuman animals. For example, Sorgner states that “Nonhuman personhood and the 
overcoming of speciesism, however, affect not only the human-animal relationship but also the 
human-machine relationship”, (Sorgner, 2016/2020, p. 90). The important point here is the value 
attributed to freedom as the absence of (negative) interference and the stance in favor of 
technologies allowing the modification and enhancement of humanity (not only genome editing 
but also artificial intelligence and any other technology available). But I am not sure that, before 
unprecedented technological development that for the first time allows replanning human nature, 
reflection on the responsible use of biotechnologies may be given up. Sorgner is right when he 
says that it is correct to recognize the existence of a radical plurality of the ‘good’, given that 
human beings display very different perspectives, lifestyles, preferences and desires. However, 
this does not mean that it is impossible to put forward considerations of a moral character 
regarding the use of enhancement technologies that may have an, if not objective, at least 
universalizable character. Indeed, once we have access to technologies allowing the modification 
of human nature, we will be able to significantly and irreversibly condition the life of the people 
we put in the world. It would be ingenuous to think that the parents’ love—and experience—
suffice to face these scenarios and that it is not necessary to take further the question of 
responsibility towards the people we put in the world. Given these options, writes Sorgner: 
It seems most plausible to claim that genetic enhancement and parental guidance usually bring about better 
results for the offspring than the alternatives since the qualities brought about through enhancement are based 
upon parental choices that are normally made based on experience. Parents usually love their children and want 
them to have the best possible starting points in life. Of course, parental decisions do not always produce good 
results. But as a rule of thumb, parental influence most often leads to better outcomes than those from chance or 
without any guidance. Parents uphold qualities on the basis of their experience, and having experience in the 
context of ethical decisions is necessary for making good ethical decisions. (Sorgner, 2015, p. 34)  
It is not simple to establish what type of responsibility we have towards those we put into the 
world, but this is precisely why we should not circumvent the problem but analyze it in all its 
complexity. Obviously, the parents’ choice must be free and aware: but this is not enough, in that 
a responsible parent should pay attention to the consequences of their choices and, for example, 
not have a child born who could risk having a life that is not unlivable but still full of torment 
and suffering. Even though we are not obliged to select (or bring into the world) the best child 
(Savulescu & Kahane, 2009), we should not perhaps make do with our children simply having a 
‘life worth living’, in that life can continue to be worth living even in a condition of extreme 
suffering (Balistreri, 2021). Ensuring the child born with a good chance of having a good life 
seems a more responsible solution—at least in those circumstances where parenthood is a 
question of choice and not destiny or an imposition (Steinbock & McClamrock, 1994). Indeed, 
any discussion on moral responsibility (at the time of genome editing) may seem superfluous if 
we start from the idea that no genetic condition prejudices the chance to have a good life. This is, 
for example, the position defended by those stating that disability is nothing but a mere 
difference: there is dangerous rhetoric—say Barnes (2014; 2016) and Garland-Thomson (2011; 
2012; 2017)—accompanying the debate on genome editing techniques, hindering – correct – 
reflection on the right to turn to it. Indeed, it is not true that these procedures are always desirable 
because they would spare the one coming into the world suffering or adversity that would 
otherwise limit their opportunities and condition their life forever. The thesis is that the 
disabilities would never be (for the subject involved) defects or disadvantages (that is, penalizing 
conditions), but mere differences: that is, features—writes Barnes (2014)—like sexuality, sex 
and race. If they make existence much more difficult, this only depends on the fact that social 
prejudice encourages stigma towards the disabled or at least makes it more difficult for them to 

   
2021, Volume 1, Issue 1 
 63 
achieve full integration. But Sorgner is a metahumanist who vigorously defends the value of 
genetic modification interventions, so he should consider a parent’s choice not to turn to this 
technology morally debatable. Yet Sorgner seems more interested in stressing (negative) 
freedom rather than responsibility. The problem of disability is that the disadvantages associated 
with it do not always have a social explanation. Some conditions still involve suffering or hinder 
the subject from having an autonomous life, irrespective of society’s ability to be sensitive and 
open to different conditions of humanity. For example, some conditions oblige regular self-
subjection to invasive, debilitating operations: also, some (particular) physical and/or cognitive 
conditions are incompatible with a certain type of experience. Furthermore, it would be 
challenging to build a society welcoming of any condition (or body). What may be an obstacle 
for one person may be an advantage for another. Even, if possible, it might still have high costs 
and remove economic resources from other areas.  
The value of freedom seems central, especially in choices for enhancement regarding only the 
agent (in that it seems fair for choices regarding one’s own life to be left to the subject’s 
discretion). But even in this scenario, there appears to be room for reflection on the theme of 
moral responsibility. The question is not only that (genetically) enhanced people could raise the 
social yield. The enhancement and genetic modification (or replanning) of human beings also 
seem—as we have seen—to offer a beneficial (as well as cheap) solution to climate change and 
the pandemic crisis. The hypothesis is simple: the more people choose to turn to genetic 
enhancement or modification (for example, accepting genetic intervention modifications making 
them far more resistant to coronavirus), the more chance there will be to solve the problem or at 
least approach a definitive solution (Lehmann, 2017). So, the idea is confirmed that adequate 
reflection on human enhancement may not be limited to stressing only the value of negative 
freedom; it should also face the theme of responsibility. Buchanan has stated that, in 
consideration of the advantages that may come to social cooperation, the state may be justified in 
encouraging people to turn to (bio)enhancement interventions “by providing subsidies, tax 
credits, or other incentives to encourage people to have the enhancement (Buchanan, 2011, p. 
50). In fact, according to Buchanan, the very reasons justifying obligation for education can also 
justify obligation for genetic modification interventions, designed to improve personal abilities 
and dispositions: “The justification—states Buchanan—offered would be indistinguishable from 
that which is used to justify education, immunization, and basic health care” and obligation (or at 
least some forms of encouragement) may see “that every citizen has the capacity to be an 
effective participant in social cooperation” (Buchanan, 2011, p. 51). This is not the place to 
embrace Buchanan’s invitation and ask whether a liberal democratic society may be morally 
justified in imposing—by law—a program of human (bio)enhancement. It is sufficient to 
observe that, even if it is true that democratic and pluralistic societies may have difficulty 
converging on the same program for human (bio)enhancement, in some instances (for example, 
think again of the vaccination against coronavirus), the objective could be reached far more 
quickly. After all, here, we are mainly interested in showing that the question of (moral) 
responsibility is far from marginal but central in any discussion on improvement 
biotechnologies. This means that reflection on the posthuman should not be limited to defending 
the value of negative freedom. 
3. Reason or Sentiment? 
     Regarding moral (bio)enhancement interventions, Sorgner does not believe that scientific and 
technological development will in the short term permit the realization of interventions able to 
make future 
generations 
more moral. 
“Transhumanist proposals 
in 
which moral 
(bio)enhancement plays a central role thus strike me as implausible” (Sorgner, 2016/2020, p. 87). 
He does, though, think that there is a relationship between cognitive and moral improvement 

64                                                                         Maurizio Balistreri / Transhumanism According to Sorgner 
(Sorgner, 2016/2020, pp. 86-87). Consequently, enhancement in cognitive abilities may 
indirectly lead to moral improvement: “If there is indeed a causal connection between moral and 
cognitive developments, and the data just mentioned suggest this insight, then the promotion of 
cognitive enhancement could also indirectly enhance morality” (Sorgner, 2016/2020, pp. 86-87). 
According to Sorgner, reason would perform a central function for morality, in that it is reason 
that would allow the development over time of those rules or principles favoring cooperation. 
The emphasis Sorgner gives to thimportance of reason for morality does not stand in 
contradiction to his considerations regarding the limits (and the partiality) of our rational 
abilities, in that—as we saw previously—he recognizes that reason may perform an important 
function practically. Further, a rationalistic conception of morality seems coherent with the 
naturalistic reconstruction he puts forward and with a conception of human nature that is 
compatible with an evolutionistic scientific explanation (Sorgner, 2016/2020, p. 34):  
Transhumanists embrace a scientific, naturalistic, and worldly understanding of the human, and therefore they 
must reject the modern understanding of the human as paradigmatically represented by Descartes and Kant since 
an ultimately naturalistic anthropology does not provide for the possibility of the existence of nonmaterial 
reason. (Sorgner, 2016/2020, p. 51)  
However, it is legitimate to ask whether, in assigning a central role to reason in explaining 
morality, Sorgner does not remain linked to a conception of humanism that he considers no 
longer acceptable. If—as Sorgner writes—it is true that the philosophies going beyond 
humanism put forward a more modest conception of human beings, in that they no longer 
consider human beings ontologically different from, nor better to other living beings (Sorgner, 
2016/2020, p. 32), then the role of reason should also be questioned. There is an essential 
philosophical tradition connecting morality not to reason but sentiment and sympathy. Darwin 
was convinced that the key to the evolution of morality lay not in reason but sympathy. Any 
philosophical conception that questions humanism should consider it carefully, in that it can 
reduce—even morally—our (alleged) distance from other living beings. Explaining morality 
with sentiment and sympathy does not mean giving up the objectivity of ethics, nor does it mean 
giving up the possibility of continuing to have a reflective or critical look at one’s own behavior: 
it simply means adopting a different model (or anthropological paradigm) of human beings. 
Sorgner is mainly concerned about questioning the idea that reason may arrive at a truth that 
corresponds to reality, but this does not force him to leave some practical function to reason: 
“Instead, it follows from this insight—says Sorgner—that the limits of the possibility of reason 
must be taken seriously: reason helps us pragmatically, but it is not able to communicate the 
truth to us in correspondence with reality (Sorgner, 2016/2020, p. 51). It is not with reason but 
through sentiment and the imagination, wrote David Hume, that we build and give stability to 
our relations of cause and effect, for it is only because we have in the past experienced a repeated 
connection that our mind can pass from one idea to another happily. In reality, Hume stated, 
there is no objective necessity that on the appearance of the first phenomenon that usually 
accompanies it should follow. It is we who on perceiving an object pass at once to the second 
and believe that the second must manifest itself: “When therefore any object is presented, which 
elevates and enlivens the thought, every action, to which the mind applies itself, will be more 
strong and vivid, as long as that disposition continues” (Hume, 2005, p. 69). The key is the lively 
passage from the first idea (or thing) we observe to the one we have always seen connected:  
Hence it happens, that when the mind is once enliven’d by a present impression, it proceeds to form a more 
lively idea of the related objects, by a natural transition of the disposition from the one to the other. The change 
of the objects is so easy, that the mind is scarce sensible of it, but applies itself to the conception of the related 
idea with all the force and vivacity it acquir’d from the present impression. (Hume, 2005, p. 69)  

   
2021, Volume 1, Issue 1 
 65 
In other terms, if the objective is to promote surpassing an ‘idealized’ conception of the 
human, then we should not stop at Nietzsche. This is because Hume could give an even more 
significant contribution, in that, in contrast to Christian anthropology, he explained that reason is 
and must be a slave to passions.  
4. Conclusions 
Before unprecedented scientific and technological development promising to transform the 
world radically, Sorgner’s book allows a critical discussion of the rapidly opening scenarios, 
starting from a reflection on the cultural and philosophical movements defending the value of 
(and, in part, need for) the posthuman. Thus, the book not only offers a clear introduction to 
transhumanism but also provides an opportunity to consider the moral questions lying more and 
more at the center of public debate (and bioethics). The question is not so much whether human 
(bio)enhancement is desirable but morally acceptable. Sorgner hypothesizes that turning to 
increasingly innovative technology will occur anyway, as what type of enhancement we should 
hope for and what kind of moral responsibility this enhancement presupposes are other 
questions. Sorgner’s book does not claim to offer a definitive reply to these questions, but clearly 
and convincingly explains why we should not be afraid to replan our world with biotechnology. 
References 
Balistreri, M. (2020). Superumani. Etica e potenziamento. Edizioni Espress. 
Balistreri, M. (2021). Il bambino migliore? Che cosa significa essere genitori responsabili al tempo del genome 
editing. Fandango (forthcoming). 
Barnes, E. (2016). The minority body: A theory of disability. Oxford University Press. 
Barnes, E. (2014). Valuing Disability, Causing Disability. Ethics, 125(1), 88–113. 
Buchanan, A. (2011). Beyond humanity? Oxford University Press. 
Fukuyama, F. (2003). Our posthuman future. Consequences of the biotechnology revolution. Farrar, Straus and 
Giroux. 
Garland-Thomson, R. (2017). Disability bioethics: From theory to practice. The Kennedy Institute of Ethics Journal, 
27(2), 323–339.  
Garland-Thomson, R. (2012). The case for conserving disability. Journal of Bioethical Inquiry, 9(3), 339–355. 
Garland-Thomson, R. (2011). Misfits: A feminist materialist disability concept. Hypatia, 26(3), 591–609. 
Germani F., Wäscher S., & Biller-Andorno N. (2021). A CRISPR response to pandemics? Exploring the ethics of 
genetically 
engineering 
the 
human 
immune 
system. 
EMBO 
Reports, 
22(3), 
e52319, 
1–4, 
DOI: 10.15252/embr.202052319. 
Glover, J. (2006). Choosing children. Genes, disability, and design. Oxford University Press. 
Habermas, J. (2013). The future of human nature. Polity Press. 
Hume, D. (2005). A treatise of human nature (1739-1741). D. F. Norton & M. J. Norton (Eds.). Clarendon Press. 
Kass, L. (2004). Life, liberty & the defense of dignity. The challenge for bioethics. Encounter Books. 
Lehmann, L. S. (2017). Is editing the genome for climate change adaptation ethically justifiable? AMA Journal of 
Ethics, 19(12), 1186–1192. 
Liao, M., Sandberg A., & Roache, R. (2012). Human engineering and climate change. Ethics, Policy and 
Environment, 15(2), 206–221. 
Liao, M. (2017). Tackling climate change through human engineering. In A. De Grey, J. Rossiter, J. A. Paradiso, K. 
Warwick, H. Shah (Eds.) The next step: Exponential life (pp. 274–293). BBVA. 
Persson, I., & Savulescu, J. (2012). Unfit for the future. The need of moral enhancement. Oxford University Press. 
Rabiah, Y. P. (2020, December 8). Opinion: Editing the DNA of human embryos could protect us from future 
pandemics. The Conversation. 
Sandel, M. (2007). The case against perfection. Ethics in the age of genetic engineering. Harvard University Press. 
Savulescu, J., & Kahane, G. (2009). The moral obligation to create children with the best chance of the best life. 
Bioethics, 23(5), 274–290. 
Sorgner, S. L. (2015). The future of education: Genetic enhancement and metahumanities. Journal of Evolution and 
Technology, 25(1), 31–48. 

66                                                                         Maurizio Balistreri / Transhumanism According to Sorgner 
Sorgner, S. L. (2020). On Transhumanism: The most dangerous idea in the world?! (S. Hawkins, Trans). 
Pennsylvania State University Press. (Original work published 2016). 
Steinbock, B., & McClamrock, R. (1994). When is birth unfair to the child. Hastings Center Report, 24 (6), 15-21. 
 
View publication stats

