TAMIM ANSARY 

Praise for 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
"If you want to put today's headlines about jihadist suicide 
bombings into the much larger context of history, you'd be well 
advised to settle in with Destiny Disrupted. It's the story of a 
civilization that suddenly found itself upended by strangers and 
now wants to put itself right. And if author Ansary stops short of 
calling the result a clash of civilizations, he feels free to call it two 
one-sided views of world history. His book is a valuable tool for 
opening up a view of the other side." 
-St. Louis Post-Dispatch 
"This is a marvelous book. Ansary has written an indispensable 
historical account of the last 1,500 years from a perspective that 
is all too often ignored in the West. Destiny Disrupted will be 
read for generations to come." 
-REZA AsLAN, author of No god but God 
and How to Win a Cosmic ~r 
"A must-read for anyone who wants to learn more about the history 
of the Islamic world. But the book is more than just a litany of past 
events. It is also an indispensable guide to understanding the politi-
cal debates and conflicts of today, from 9/11 to the wars in Iraq and 
Afghanistan, from the Somali pirates to the Palestinian/Israeli 
conflict. As Ansary writes in his conclusion, 'The conflict wracking 
the modern world is not, I think, best understood as a clash of 
civilizations ... It's better understood as the friction generated by 
two mismatched world histories intersecting."' 
-San Francisco Chronicle 

"Ansary has written an informative and thoroughly engaging look 
at the past, present, and future of Islam. With his seamless and 
charming prose, he challenges conventional wisdom and appeals 
for a fuller understanding of how Islam and the world at large 
have shaped each other. And that makes this book, in this uneasy, 
contentious post 9/11 world, a must-read." 
-KHALED HossEINI, author of The Kite Runner 
and A Thousand Splendid Suns 
"A lively, thorough, and accessible survey of the history of Islam 
(both the religion and its political dimension) that explores many 
of the disconnects between Islam and the West." 
-Shelf Awareness 
"There's not a page where you won't learn something startling in 
Destiny Disrupted. Beautifully clear and endlessly engaging, it's 
a romp through science, poetry, politics, and religion, in the 
company of a wise and charming mind, the perfect antidote to 
the Islamophobia that clouds Europe and North America." 
-RAJ PATEL, author of Stuff and Starved and visiting scholar, 
Center for African Studies, University of California at Berkeley 
"Never apologist in tone, meticulously researched and balanced, 
often amusing but never glib, Destiny Disrupted is ultimately a 
gripping drama that pulls the reader into great, seminal events of 
world history, a book which offers a wealth of knowledge and in-
sight to any reader who wants to understand the movements and 
events behind the modern-day hostilities wracking Western and 
Islamic societies." 
-Portland Oregonian 

DESTINY DISRUPTED 

THE ISLAMIC WORLD TODAY 

DESTINY 
DISRUPTED 
~ 
A History of the World 
Through Islamic Eyes 
TAMIM ANSARY 
PublicAffairs 
NEW YORK 

Copyright © 2009 by Tamim Ansary 
Hardcover edition first published in 2009 in the United States by PublicAffairs'™, 
a member of the Perseus Books Group. 
Paperback edition first published in 2010 in the United States by PublicAffairs. 
All rights reserved. 
Printed in the United States of America. 
No part of this book may be reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written 
permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and 
reviews. For information, address PublicAffairs, 250 West 57th Street, Suite 1321, 
New York, NY 10107. 
PublicAffairs books are available at special discounts for bulk purchases in the U.S. 
by corporations, institutions, and other organizations. For more information, please 
contact the Special Markets Department at the Perseus Books Group, 2300 Chestnut 
Street, Suite 200, Philadelphia, PA 19103, call (BOO) 810-4145, ext. 5000, or e-mail 
special.markets@perseusbooks.com. 
Designed by Brent Wilcox 
Text set in Adobe Garamond 
A CIP catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress. 
Hardcover ISBN: 978-1-58648-606-8 
Paperback ISBN: 978-1-58648-813-0 
10 9 8 7 6 54 3 2 1 

For Amanuddin and Terttu 


CONTENTS 
List of Maps 
IX 
Names and Dates 
XI 
Introduction 
Xlll 
The Middle World 
2 The Hijra 
17 
3 Birth of the Khalifate 
33 
4 Schism 
53 
5 Empire of the Umayyads 
67 
6 The Abassid Age 
79 
7 Scholars, Philosophers, and Sufis 
91 
8 Enter the Turks 
117 
9 Havoc 
133 
10 Rebirth 
159 
11 
Meanwhile in Europe 
199 
12 West Comes East 
217 
13 The Reform Movements 
247 
14 Industry, Constitutions, and Nationalism 
269 
15 Rise of the Secular Modernists 
301 
vii 

viii 
CONTENTS 
16 The Crisis of Modernity 
17 The Tide Turns 
Afterword 
Appendix: The Structure of Islamic Doctrine 
Notes 
Bibliography 
Acknowledgments 
Index 
317 
329 
349 
359 
361 
367 
371 
373 

LIST OF MAPS 
The Islamic World Today 
11 
Growth of Islam 
xv1 
The Mediterranean World (Defined by Sea Routes) 
2 
The Middle World (Defined by Land Routes) 
2 
On the Eve oflslam: The Byzantine and Sassanid Empires 
15 
Imam Hussein's Route to Karbala 
69 
The Umayyad Empire 
76 
Abu Muslim and the Abbasid Revolution 
85 
The Three Khalifates 
121 
Seljuk Empire: The Turks Invade the Islamic World 
128 
The Theater of the Crusades 
141 
The Mongol Invasions of the Islamic World 
154 
Constantinople: The World's Most Impregnable City 
176 
The Three Islamic Empires of the Seventeenth Century 
196 
The European Quest for a Sea Route to the Indies 
201 
Western Imperialism: The Global Reach of Sea Power 
218 
"The Great Game" 
23 7 
World War I and the Arab Revolt 
296 
The Sykes-Picot Agreement 
297 
Division of the Arab World: The Mandates Plan 
312 
Israel and Palestine 
323 
ix 


NAMES AND DATES 
Some writers are scrupulous about the system they use for transliterating 
Islamic names and words into English, insisting that one or another system 
is correct. I have to confess I am not among them. I have seen my own 
name spelled too many different ways in English to be picky. (People often 
ask me, which is correct, Ansari or Ansary-is it y or z? Well, neither, re-
ally: it's the letter yaw.) Given the arbitrary nature of transliteration, my 
guiding principle in this book has been to go for the simplest spellings and 
the most recognizable reductions. 
Also many Arabic names include a series of patronymics preceded by 
Ibn, meaning "son of." Usually, I use the shortest form of the name by 
which a person is most commonly known. The profusion of unfamiliar 
names (and words) in this book will challenge many English-speaking 
readers; I wish to minimize such difficulties, so if a familiar form of a word 
or name exists in English, that's what I go with. Also, following a prece-
dent set by Albert Hourani in A History of the Arab Peoples, I use the pre-
fixal-the first time an Arabic name is used but drop it after that: al-Ghazali 
becomes Ghazali. 
As for dates, two calendars apply to these events, the Islamic one and 
the so-called "common era'' dating system, which actually derives from the 
Christian calendar. In the early decades after the birth of the Muslim com-
munity, I generally give the Islamic date (the number of years followed by 
AH which stands ''After the Hijra''). I do so because I think that in this 
early period it's useful to convey a feel for how many years have passed 
since the crucial events oflslam. Later in time, I slide over to the "common 
xi 

xii 
NAMES AND DATES 
era" system, because that's the framework with which most readers are 
familiar-and what's the point of giving a date if it doesn't place an event 
in context and situate it relative to other events? 

INTRODUCTION 
Growing up as I did in Muslim Afghanistan, I was exposed early on to a 
narrative of world history quite different from the one that schoolchildren 
in Europe and the Americas routinely hear. At the time, however, it didn't 
shape my thinking, because I read history for fun, and in Farsi there 
wasn't much to read except boring textbooks. At my reading level, all the 
good stuff was in English. 
My earliest favorite was the highly entertaining Child's History of the 
World by a man named V. V. Hillyer. It wasn't till I reread that book as an 
adult, many years later, that I realized how shockingly Eurocentric it was, 
how riddled with casual racism. I failed to notice these features as a child 
because Hillyer told a good story. 
When I was nine or ten, the historian Arnold Toynbee passed through 
our tiny town of Lashkargah on a journey, and someone told him of a 
history-loving little bookworm of an Afghan kid living there. Toynbee was 
interested and invited me to tea, so I sat with the florid, old British gen-
tleman, giving shy, monosyllabic answers to his kindly questions. The only 
thing I noticed about the great historian was his curious habit of keeping 
his handkerchief in his sleeve. 
When we parted, however, Toynbee gave me a gift: Hendrick Willem 
Van Loon's The Story of Mankind. The title alone thrilled me-the idea 
that all of"mankind" had a single story. Why, I was part of"mankind" my-
self, so this might be my story, in a sense, or at least might situate me in 
the one big story shared by all! I gulped that book down and loved it, and 
the Western narrative of world history became my framework ever after. 
xiii 

xiv 
INTRODUCTION 
All the history and historical fiction I read from then on just added flesh 
to those bones. I still studied the pedantic Farsi history texts assigned to us 
in school but read them only to pass tests and forgot them soon after. 
Faint echoes of the other narrative must have lingered in me, however, 
because forty years later, in the fall of 2000, when I was working as a text-
book editor in the United States, it welled back up. A school publisher in 
Texas had hired me to develop a new high school world-history textbook 
from scratch, and my first task was to draw up a table of contents, which 
entailed formulating an opinion about the overall shape of human history. 
The only given was the structure of the book. To fit the rhythm of the 
school year, the publisher ordained that it be divided into ten units, each 
consisting of three chapters. 
But into what ten (or thirty) parts does all of time naturally divide? 
World history, after all, is not a chronological list of every damn thing that 
ever happened; it's a chain of only the most consequential events, selected 
and arranged to reveal the arc of the story-it's the arc that counts. 
I tied into this intellectual puzzle with gusto, but my decisions had to 
pass through a phalanx of advisors: curriculum specialists, history teachers, 
sales executives, state education officials, professional scholars, and other 
such worthies. This is quite normal in elementary and high school text-
book publishing, and quite proper I think, because the function of these 
books is to convey, not challenge, society's most up-to-date consensus of 
what's true. A chorus of advisors empanelled to second-guess a develop-
ment editor's decisions helps to ensure that the finished product reflects 
the current curriculum, absent which the book will not even be saleable. 
As we went through the process, however, I noticed an interesting tug 
and pull between my advisors and me. We agreed on almost everything 
except-! kept wanting to give more coverage to Islam in world history, 
and they kept wanting to pull it back, scale it down, parse it out as side-
bars in units devoted mainly to other topics. None of us was speaking 
out of parochial loyalty to "our own civilization." No one was saying 
Islam was better or worse than "the West." All of us were simply express-
ing our best sense of which events had been most consequential in the 
story of humankind. 
Mine was so much the minority opinion that it was indistinguishable 
from error, so we ended up with a table of contents in which Islam consti-

INTRODUCTION 
XV 
tuted the central topic of just one out of thirty chapters. The other two 
chapters in that unit were "Pre-Columbian Civilizations of the Americas" 
and ''Ancient Empires of Africa." 
Even this, incidentally, represented expanded coverage. The best-selling 
world history program of the previous textbook cycle, the 1997 edition of 
Perspectives on the Past, addressed Islam in just one chapter out of thirty-
seven, and half of that chapter (part of a unit called "The Middle Ages") 
was given over to the Byzantine Empire. 
In short, less than a year before September 11, 2001, the consensus of 
expert opinion was telling me that Islam was a relatively minor phenome-
non whose impact had ended long before the Renaissance. If you went 
strictly by our table of contents, you would never guess Islam still existed. 
At the time, I accepted that my judgment might be skewed. After all, 
I had a personal preoccupation with Islam that was part of sorting out 
my own identity. Not only had I grown up in a Muslim country, but I 
was born into a family whose one-time high social status in Afghanistan 
was based entirely on our reputed piety and religious learning. Our last 
name indicates our supposed descent from the Ansars, "the Helpers," 
those first Muslim converts of Medina who helped the Prophet Mo-
hammed escape assassination in Mecca and thereby ensured the survival 
of his mission. 
More recently, my grandfather's great-grandfather was a locally revered 
Muslim mystic whose tomb remains a shrine for hundreds of his devotees 
to this day, and his legacy percolated down to my father's time, instilling 
in our clan a generalized sense of obligation to know this stuff better than 
the average guy. Growing up, I heard the buzz of Muslim anecdotes, com-
mentary, and speculation in my environment and some of it sank in, even 
though my own temperament somehow turned resolutely secular. 
And it remained secular after I moved to the United States; yet I found 
myself more interested in Islam here than I ever had been while living in 
the Muslim world. My interest deepened after 1979, when my brother 
embraced "fundamentalist" Islam. I began delving into the philosophy of 
Islam through writers such as Fazlur Rahman and Syed Hussein Nasr as 
well as its history through academics such as Ernst Grunebaum and Albert 
Hourani, just trying to fathom what my brother and I were coming from, 
or in his case, moving toward. 

xvi 
INTRODUCTION 
GROWTH OF ISLAM 
Given my personal stake, I could concede that I might be overestimat-
ing the importance of Islam. And yet ... a niggling doubt remained. Was 
my assessment wholly without objective basis? Take a look at these six 
maps, snapshots of the Islamic world at six different dates: 
When I say "Islamic world," I mean societies with Muslim majorities 
and/or Muslim rulers. There are, of course, Muslims in England, France, 

INTRODUCTION 
xvii 
the United States, and nearly every other part of the globe, but it would be 
misleading, on that basis, to call London or Paris or New York a part of the 
Islamic world. Even by my limited definition, however, has the "Islamic 
world" not been a considerable geographical fact throughout its many cen-
turies? Does it not remain one to this day, straddling the Asian-African 
landmass and forming an enormous buffer between Europe and East Asia? 
Physically, it spans more space than Europe and the United States com-
bined. In the past, it has been a single political entity, and notions of its 
singleness and political unity resonate among some Muslims even now. 
Looking at these six maps, I still have to wonder how, on the eve of 9111, 
anyone could have failed to consider Islam a major player at the table of 
world history! 
After 9/11, perceptions changed. Non-Muslims in the West began to 
ask what Islam was all about, who these people were, and what was going 
on over there. The same questions began to bombinate with new urgency 
for me too. That year, visiting Pakistan and Afghanistan for the first time 
in thirty-eight years, I took along a book that I had found in a used book-
store in London, Islam in Modern History by the late Wilfred Cantwell 
Smith, a professor of religion at McGill and Harvard. Smith published his 
book in 1957, so the "modern history" of which he spoke had ended more 
than forty years earlier, and yet his analyses struck me as remarkably-in 
fact disturbingly-pertinent to the history unfolding in 2002. 
Smith shone new light on the information I possessed from childhood 
and from later reading. For example, during my school days in Kabul, I 
was quite aware of a man named Sayyid Jamaluddin-i-Afghan. Like "every-
one," I knew he was a towering figure in modern Islamic history; but 
frankly I never fathomed how he had earned his acclaim, beyond the fact 
that he espoused "pan-Islamism," which seemed like mere pallid Muslim 
chauvinism to me. Now, reading Smith, I realized that the basic tenets of 
"Islamism," the political ideology making such a clatter around us in 
2001, had been hammered out a hundred-plus years earlier by this intel-
lectual Karl Marx of"Islamism." How could his very name be unknown to 
most non-Muslims? 
I plowed back into Islamic history, no longer in a quest for personal 
identity, but in an effort to make sense of the alarming developments among 
Muslims of my time-the horror stories in Afghanistan; the tumult in 

xviii 
INTRODUCTION 
Iran, the insurgencies in Algeria, the Philippines, and elsewhere; the hi-
jackings and suicide bombings in the Middle East, the hardening extrem-
ism of political Islam; and now the emergence of the Taliban. Surely, a 
close look at history would reveal how on Earth it had come to this. 
And gradually, I came to realize how it had come to this. I came to per-
ceive that, unlike the history of France or Malta or South America, the his-
tory of the Islamic lands "over there" was not a subset of some single world 
history shared by all. It was more like a whole alternative world history 
unto itself, competing with and mirroring the one I had tried to create for 
that Texas publisher, or the one published by McDougall-Littell, for which 
I had written "the Islam chapters." 
The two histories had begun in the same place, between the Tigris and 
Euphrates Rivers of ancient Iraq, and they had come to the same place, 
this global struggle in which the West and the Islamic world seemed to be 
the major players. In between, however, they had passed through differ-
ent-and yet strangely parallel!-landscapes. 
Yes, strangely parallel: looking back, for example, from within the 
Western world-historical framework, one sees a single big empire towering 
above all others back there in ancient times: it is Rome, where the dream 
of a universal political state was born. 
Looking back from anywhere in the Islamic world, one also sees a sin-
gle definitive empire looming back there, embodying the vision of a uni-
versal state, but it isn't Rome. It is the khalifate of early Islam. 
In both histories, the great early empire fragments because it simply 
grows too big. The decaying empire is then attacked by nomadic barbar-
ians from the north-but in the Islamic world, "the north" refers to the 
steppes of Central Asia and in that world the nomadic barbarians are not 
the Germans but the Turks. In both, the invaders dismember the big 
state into a patchwork of smaller kingdoms permeated throughout by a 
single, unifying religious orthodoxy: Catholicism in the West, Sunni 
Islam in the East. 
World history is always the story of how "we" got to the here and now, 
so the shape of the narrative inherently depends on who we mean by "we" 
and what we mean by "here and now." Western world history traditionally 
presumes that here and now is democratic industrial (and postindustrial) 
civilization. In the United States the further presumption holds that world 

INTRODUCTION 
xix 
history leads to the birth of its founding ideals of liberty and equality and 
to its resultant rise as a superpower leading the planet into the future. This 
premise establishes a direction for history and places the endpoint some-
where down the road we're traveling now. It renders us vulnerable to the 
supposition that all people are moving in this same direction, though some 
are not quite so far along-either because they started late, or because 
they're moving more slowly-for which reason we call their nations "de-
veloping countries." 
When the ideal future envisioned by postindustrialized, Western demo-
cratic society is taken as the endpoint of history, the shape of the narrative 
leading to here-and-now features something like the following stages: 
1. Birth of civilization {Egypt and Mesopotamia) 
2. Classical age {Greece and Rome) 
3. The Dark Ages {rise of Christianity) 
4. The Rebirth: Renaissance and Reformation 
5. The Enlightenment {exploration and science) 
6. The Revolutions {democratic, industrial, technological) 
7. Rise of Nation-States: The Struggle for Empire 
8. World Wars I and II. 
9. The Cold War 
10. The Triumph of Democratic Capitalism 
But what if we look at world history through Islamic eyes? Are we apt 
to regard ourselves as stunted versions of the West, developing toward the 
same endpoint, but less effectually? I think not. For one thing, we would 
see a different threshold dividing all of time into "before" and "after": the 
year zero for us would be the year of Prophet Mohammed's migration 
from Mecca to Medina, his Hijra, which gave birth to the Muslim com-
munity. For us, this community would embody the meaning of"civilized," 
and perfecting this ideal would look like the impulse that had given his-
tory its shape and direction. 
But in recent centuries, we would feel that something had gone awry 
with the flow. We would know the community had stopped expanding, 
had grown confused, had found itself permeated by a disruptive crosscur-
rent, a competing historical direction. As heirs to Muslim tradition, we 

XX 
INTRODUCTION 
would be forced to look for the meaning of history in defeat instead of tri-
umph. We would feel conflicted between two impulses: changing our no-
tion of "civilized" to align with the flow of history or fighting the flow of 
history to realign it with our notion of "civilized." 
If the stunted present experienced by Islamic society is taken as the 
here-and-now to be explained by the narrative of world history, then the 
story might break down to something like the following stages: 
1. Ancient Times: Mesopotamia and Persia 
2. Birth of Islam 
3. The Khalifate: Quest for Universal Unity 
4. Fragmentation: Age of the Sultanates 
5. Catastrophe: Crusaders and Mongols 
6. Rebirth: The Three-Empires Era 
7. Permeation of East by West 
8. The Reform Movements 
9. Triumph of the Secular Modernists 
10. The Islamist Reaction 
Literary critic Edward Said has argued that over the centuries, the West 
has constructed an "Orientalist" fantasy of the Islamic world, in which a 
sinister sense of "otherness" is mingled with envious images of decadent 
opulence. Well, yes, to the extent that Islam has entered the Western imag-
ination, that has more or less been the depiction. 
But more intriguing to me is the relative absence of any depictions at 
all. In Shakespeare's day, for example, preeminent world power was cen-
tered in three Islamic empires. Where are all the Muslims in his canon? 
Missing. If you didn't know Moors were Muslims, you wouldn't learn it 
from Othello. 
Here are two enormous worlds side by side; what's remarkable is how 
little notice they have taken of each other. If the Western and Islamic 
worlds were two individual human beings, we might see symptoms of re-
pression here. We might ask, "What happened between these two? Were 
they lovers once? Is there some history of abuse?" 
But there is, I think, another less sensational explanation. Throughout 
much of history, the West and the core of what is now the Islamic world 

INTRODUCTION 
xxi 
have been like two separate universes, each preoccupied with its own in-
ternal affairs, each assuming itself to be the center of human history, each 
living out a different narrative-until the late seventeenth century when 
the two narratives began to intersect. At that point, one or the other had 
to give way because the two narratives were crosscurrents to each other. 
The West being more powerful, its current prevailed and churned the 
other one under. 
But the superseded history never really ended. It kept on flowing be-
neath the surface, like a riptide, and it is flowing down there still. When 
you chart the hot spots of the world-Kashmir, Iraq, Chechnya, the 
Balkans, Israel and Palestine, Iraq-you're staking out the borders of some 
entity that has vanished from the maps but still thrashes and flails in its ef-
fort not to die. 
This is the story I tell in the pages that follow, and I emphasize "story." 
Destiny Disrupted is neither a textbook nor a scholarly thesis. It's more like 
what I'd tell you if we met in a coffeehouse and you said, "What's all this 
about a parallel world history?" The argument I make can be found in 
numerous books now on the shelves of university libraries. Read it there 
if you don't mind academic language and footnotes. Read it here if you 
want the story arc. 1 Although I am not a scholar, I have drawn on the 
work of scholars who sift the raw material of history to draw conclusions 
and of academics who sifted the work of scholarly researchers to draw 
meta-conclusions. 
In a history spanning several thousand years, I devote what may seem 
like inordinate space to a brief half century long ago, but I linger here be-
cause this period spans the career of Prophet Mohammed and his first four 
successors, the founding narrative of Islam. I recount this story as an inti-
mate human drama, because this is the way that Muslims know it. Acade-
mics approach this story more skeptically, crediting non-Muslim sources 
above supposedly less-objective Muslim accounts, because they are mainly 
concerned to dig up what "really happened." My aim is mainly to convey 
what Muslims think happened, because that's what has motivated Muslims 
over the ages and what makes their role in world history intelligible. 
I will, however, assert one caveat here about the origins oflslam. Un-
like older religions-such as Judaism, Buddhism, Hinduism, even 
Christianity-Muslims began to collect, memorize, recite, and preserve 

xxii 
INTRODUCTION 
their history as soon as it happened, and they didn't just preserve it but 
embedded each anecdote in a nest of sources, naming witnesses to each 
event and listing all persons who transmitted the account down through 
time to the one who first wrote it down, references that function like the 
chain of custody validating a piece of evidence in a court case. 
This implies only that the core Muslim stories cannot best be ap-
proached as parables. With a parable, we don't ask for proof that the events 
occurred; that's not the point. We don't care if the story is true; we want the 
lesson to be true. The Muslim stories don't encapsulate lessons of that sort: 
they're not stories about ideal people in an ideal realm. They come to us, 
rather, as accounts of real people wrestling with practical issues in the mud 
and murk of actual history, and we take from them what lessons we will. 
Which is not to deny that the Muslim stories are allegorical, nor that 
some were invented, nor that many or even all were modified by tellers 
along the way to suit agendas of the person or moment. It is only to say 
that the Muslims have transmitted their foundational narrative in the same 
spirit as historical accounts, and we know about these people and events in 
much the same way that we know what happened between Sulla and Mar-
ius in ancient Rome. These tales lie somewhere between history and myth, 
and telling them stripped of human drama falsifies the meaning they have 
had for Muslims, rendering less intelligible the things Muslims have done 
over the centuries. This then is how I plan to tell the story, and if you're on 
board with me, buckle in and let's begin. 

I 
~ 
The Middle World 
TONG BEFORE ISLAM was born, two worlds took shape between the 
LAtlantic Ocean and the Bay of Bengal. Each coalesced around a dif-
ferent network of trade and travel routes; one of them, mainly sea routes; 
the other, land routes. 
If you look at ancient sea traffic, the Mediterranean emerges as the ob-
vious center of world history, for it was here that the Mycenaeans, Cretans, 
Phoenicians, Lydians, Greeks, Romans, and so many other vigorous early 
cultures met and mingled. People who lived within striking distance of the 
Mediterranean could easily hear about and interact with anyone else who 
lived within striking distance of the Mediterranean, and so this great sea it-
self became an organizing force drawing diverse people into one another's 
narratives and weaving their destinies together to form the germ of a world 
history, and out of this came "Western civilization." 
If you look at ancient overland traffic, however, the Grand Central Sta-
tion of the world was the nexus of roads and routes connecting the Indian 
subcontinent, Central Asia, the Iranian highlands, Mesopotamia, and 
Egypt, roads that ran within a territory ringed by rivers and seas-the Per-
sian Gulf, the Indus and Oxus rivers; the Aral, Caspian, and Black seas; the 
Mediterranean, the Nile, and the Red Sea. This eventually became the Is-
lamic world. 
Unfortunately, common usage assigns no single label to this second 
area. A portion of it is typically called the Middle East, but giving one part 

2 
THE MEDITERRANEAN WORLD (Defined by Sea Routes) 
THE MIDDLE WORLD (Defined by Land Routes) 

THE MIDDLE WORLD 
3 
of it a name obscures the connectedness of the whole, and besides, the 
phrase Middle East assumes that one is standing in western Europe-if 
you're standing in the Persian highlands, for example, the so-called Middle 
East is actually the Middle West. Therefore, I prefer to call this whole area 
from the Indus to Istanbul the Middle World, because it lies between the 
Mediterranean world and the Chinese world. 
The Chinese world was, of course, its own universe and had little to do 
with the other two; and that's to be expected on the basis of geography 
alone. China was cut off from the Mediterranean world by sheer distance 
and from the Middle World by the Himalayas, the Gobi Desert, and the 
jungles of southeast Asia, a nearly impenetrable barrier, which is why 
China and its satellites and rivals barely enter the "world history'' centered 
in the Middle World, and why they come in for rare mention in this book. 
The same is true of sub-Saharan Africa, cut off from the rest of Eurasia by 
the world's biggest desert. For that matter, the Americas formed yet an-
other distinct universe with a world history of its own, which is for geo-
graphic reasons even more to be expected. 
Geography, however, did not separate the Mediterranean and Middle 
worlds as radically as it isolated China or the Americas. These two regions 
coalesced as different worlds because they were what historian Philip D. 
Curtin has called "intercommunicating zones": each had more interaction 
internally than it had with the other. From anywhere near the Mediter-
ranean coast, it was easier to get to some other place near the Mediter-
ranean coast than to Persepolis or the Indus River. Similarly, caravans on 
the overland routes crisscrossing the Middle World in ancient times could 
strike off in any direction at any intersection-there were many such in-
tersections. As they traveled west, however, into Asia Minor {what we now 
call Turkey), the very shape of the land gradually funneled them down into 
the world's narrowest bottleneck, the bridge (if there happened to be one 
at the given time) across the Bosporus Strait. This tended to choke over-
land traffic down to a trickle and turn the caravans back toward the center 
or south along the Mediterranean coast. 
Gossip, stories, jokes, rumors, historical impressions, religious mytholo-
gies, products, and other detritus of culture flow along with traders, travel-
ers, and conquerors. Trade and travel routes thus function like capillaries, 
carrying civilizational blood. Societies permeated by a network of such 

4 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
capillaries are apt to become characters in one another's narratives, even if 
they disagree about who the good guys and the bad guys are. 
Thus it was that the Mediterranean and Middle worlds developed 
somewhat distinct narratives of world history. People living around the 
Mediterranean had good reason to think of themselves at the center of 
human history, but people living in the Middle World had equally good 
reason to think they were situated at the heart of it all. 
These two world histories overlapped, however, in the strip of territory 
where you now find Israel, where you now find Lebanon, where you now 
find Syria and Jordan-where you now, in short, find so much trouble. 
This was the eastern edge of the world defined by sea-lanes and the west-
ern edge of the world defined by land routes. From the Mediterranean per-
spective, this area has always been part of the world history that has the 
Mediterranean as its seed and core. From the other perspective, it has al-
ways been part of the Middle World that has Mesopotamia and Persia at 
its core. Is there not now and has there not often been some intractable ar-
gument about this patch of land: whose world is this a part of? 
THE MIDDLE WORLD BEFORE ISLAM 
The first civilizations emerged along the banks of various big slow-moving 
rivers subject to annual floods. The Huang Ho valley in China, the Indus 
River valley in India, the Nile Valley in Africa-these are places where, 
some six thousand years ago or more, nomadic hunters and herders settled 
down, built villages, and became farmers. 
Perhaps the most dynamic petri dish of early human culture was that 
fertile wedge of land between the Tigris and Euphrates known as 
Mesopotamia-which means, in fact, "between the rivers." Incidentally, the 
narrow strip of land flanked by these two rivers almost exactly bisects 
the modern-day nation oflraq. When we speak of"the fertile crescent" as "the 
cradle of civilization," we're talking about Iraq-this is where it all began. 
One key geographical feature sets Mesopotamia apart from some of the 
other early hotbeds of culture. Its two defining rivers flow through flat, 
habitable plains and can be approached from any direction. Geography 
provides no natural defenses to the people living here-unlike the Nile, for 
example, which is flanked by marshes on its eastern side, by the uninhab-

THE MIDDLE WORLD 
5 
itable Sahara on the west, and by rugged cliffs at its upper end. Geography 
gave Egypt continuity but also reduced its interactions with other cultures, 
giving it a certain stasis. 
Not so, Mesopotamia. Here, early on, a pattern took hold that was re-
peated many times over the course of a thousand-plus years, a complex 
struggle between nomads and city dwellers, which kept spawning bigger 
empires. The pattern went like this: 
Settled farmers would build irrigation systems supporting prosperous 
villages and towns. Eventually some tough guy, some well-organized priest, 
or some alliance of the two would bring a number of these urban centers 
under the rule of a single power, thereby forging a larger political unit-a 
confederation, a kingdom, an empire. Then a tribe of hardy nomads 
would come along, conquer the monarch of the moment, seize all his 
holdings, and in the process expand their empire. Eventually the hardy no-
mads would become soft, luxury-loving city dwellers, exactly the sort of 
people they had conquered, at which point another tribe of hardy nomads 
would come along, conquer them, and take over their empire. 
Conquest, consolidation, expansion, degeneration, conquest-this was 
the pattern. It was codified in the fourteenth century by the great Muslim 
historian Ibn Khaldun, based on his observations of the world he lived in. 
Ibn Khaldun felt that in this pattern he had discovered the underlying 
pulse of history. 
At any given time, this process was happening in more than one place, 
one empire developing here, another sprouting there, both empires ex-
panding until they bumped up against each other, at which point one 
would conquer the other, forging a single new and bigger empire. 
About fifty-five hundred years ago, a dozen or so cities along the Eu-
phrates coalesced into a single network called Sumer. Here, writing was 
invented, the wheel, the cart, the potter's wheel, and an early number sys-
tem. Then the Akkadians, rougher fellows from upriver, conquered 
Sumer. Their leader, Sargon, was the first notable conqueror known to 
history by name, a ferocious fellow by all accounts and the ultimate self-
made man, for he started out poor and unknown but left records of his 
deeds in the form of clay documents stamped with cuneiform, which ba-
sically said, "This one rose up and I smote him; that one rose up and I 
smote him." 

6 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Sargon led his armies so far south they were able to wash their weapons 
in the sea. There he said, "Now, any king who wants to call himself my 
equal, wherever I went, let him go!" meaning, "Let's just see anyone else 
conquer as much as I have." 1 His empire was smaller than New Jersey. 
In time, a fresh wave of nomadic ruffians from the highlands came 
down and conquered Akkad, and they were conquered by others, and they 
by others-Guttians, Kassites, Hurrians, Amorites-the pattern kept re-
peating. Look closely and you'll see new rulers presiding over basically the 
same territory, but always more of it. 
The Amorites clocked a crucial moment in this cycle when they built 
the famous city of Babylon and from this capital ruled the (first) Babylon-
ian Empire. The Babylonians gave way to the Assyrians, who ruled from 
the even bigger and grander city of Nineveh. Their empire stretched from 
Iraq to Egypt, and you can imagine how enormous such a realm must have 
seemed at a time when the fastest way to get from one place to another was 
by horse. The Assyrians acquired a nasty reputation in history as merciless 
tyrants. It's hard to say if they were really worse than others of their time, 
but they did practice a strategy Stalin made infamous in the twentieth cen-
tury: they uprooted whole populations and moved them to other places, 
on the theory that people who had lost their homes and lived among 
strangers, cut off from familiar resources, would be too confused and un-
happy to organize rebellion. 
It worked for a while, but not forever. The Assyrians fell at last to one 
of their subject peoples, the Chaldeans, who rebuilt Babylon and won a 
lustrous place in history for their intellectual achievements in astronomy, 
medicine, and mathematics. They used a base-12 system (as opposed to 
our base-10 system) and were pioneers in the measurement and division of 
time, which is why the year has twelve months, the hour has sixty minutes 
(five times twelve), and the minute has sixty seconds. They were terrific 
urban planners and architects-it was a Chaldean king who built those 
Hanging Gardens of Babylon, which the ancients ranked among the seven 
wonders of the world. 
But the Chaldeans followed the Assyrian strategy of uprooting whole 
populations in order to divide and rule. Their king Nebuchadnezzar was 
the one who first smashed Jerusalem and dragged the Hebrews into cap-
tivity. It was also a Chaldean king of Babylonia, Balshazzar, who, while 

THE MIDDLE WORLD 
7 
feasting in his palace one night, saw a disembodied hand write on his wall 
in letters of fire, "Mene mene tekel upharsin. " 
His sycophants couldn't make heads or tails of these words, probably 
because they were blind drunk, but also because the words were written in 
some strange tongue {Aramaic, as it happens.) They sent for the Hebrew 
captive Daniel, who said the words meant "Your days are numbered; 
you've been weighed and found wanting; your kingdom will be divided." 
At least so goes the Old Testament story in the book of Daniel. 
Balshazzar barely had time to ponder the prophecy before it came true. 
A sudden blistering bloodbath was unleashed upon Babylon by the newest 
gang of ruffians from the highlands, an alliance of Persians and Medes. 
These two Indo-European tribes put an end to second Babylonia and re-
placed it with the Persian Empire. 
At this point, the recurrent pattern of ever-bigger empires in the heart 
of the Middle World came to an end or at least to a long pause. For one 
thing, by the time the Persians were done, there wasn't much left to con-
quer. Both "cradles of civilization," Egypt and Mesopotamia, ended up 
as part of their realm. Their suzerainty stretched west into Asia Minor, 
south to the Nile, and east through the Iranian highlands and Afghanistan 
to the Indus River. The perfumed and polished Persians probably saw no 
point in further conquest: south of the Indus lay steaming jungles, and 
north of Afghanistan stretched harsh steppes raked by bitter winds and 
roamed by Turkish nomads eking out a bare existence with their herds 
and flocks-who even wanted to rule that? The Persians therefore con-
tented themselves with building a string of forts to keep the barbarians 
out, so that decent folks might pursue the arts of civilized living on the 
settled side of the fence. 
By the time the Persians took charge, around 550 BCE, a lot of con-
solidation had already been done: in each region, earlier conquerors had 
drawn various local tribes and towns into single systems ruled by one 
monarch from a central capital, whether Elam, Ur, Nineveh, or Babylon. 
The Persians profited from the work (and bloodshed) of their predecessors. 
Yet the Persian Empire stands out for several reasons. First, the Persians 
were the counter-Assyrians. They developed a completely opposite idea of 
how to rule a vast realm. Instead of uprooting whole nations, they resettled 
them. They set the Hebrews free from captivity and helped them get back to 

8 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Canaan. The Persian emperors pursued a multicultural, many-people-
under-one-big-tent strategy. They controlled their enormous realm by let-
ting all the different constituent people live their own lives according to 
their own folkways and mores, under the rule of their own leaders, provided 
they paid their taxes and submitted to a few of the emperor's mandates and 
demands. The Muslims later picked up on this idea, and it persisted 
through Ottoman times. 
Second, the Persians saw communication as a key to unifying, and 
thus controlling, their realm. They promulgated a coherent set of tax 
laws and issued a single currency for their realm, currency being the 
medium of communication in business. They built a tremendous net-
work of roads and studded it with hostels to make travel easy. They de-
veloped an efficient postal system, too, an early version of the Pony 
Express. That quote you sometimes see associated with the U.S. Postal 
Service, "Neither snow nor rain nor heat nor gloom of night stays these 
couriers from the swift completion of their appointed rounds," comes 
from ancient Persia. 
The Persians also employed a lot of translators. You couldn't get away 
with saying, "But, officer, I didn't know it was against the law; I don't 
speak Persian." Translators enabled the emperors to broadcast written de-
scriptions of their splendor and greatness in various languages so that all 
their subjects could admire them. Darius ("the Great"), who brought the 
Persian Empire to one of its several peaks, had his life story carved into a 
rock at a place called Behistun. He had it inscribed in three languages: Old 
Persian, Elamite, and Babylonian, fifteen thousand characters devoted to 
Darius's deeds and conquests, detailing the rebels who had tried and failed 
to topple him and the punishments he had meted out to them, essentially 
communicating that you did not want to mess with this emperor: he'd cut 
off your nose, and worse. Nonetheless, citizens of the empire found Per-
sian rule basically benign. The well-oiled imperial machinery kept the 
peace, which let ordinary folks get on with the business of raising families, 
growing crops, and making useful goods. 
The part of Darius's Behistun inscription written in Old Persian was 
decipherable from modern Persian, so after it was rediscovered in the nine-
teenth century, scholars were able to use it to unlock the other two lan-
guages and thus gain access to the cuneiform libraries of ancient 

THE MIDDLE WORLD 
9 
Mesopotamia, libraries so extensive that we know more about daily life in 
this area three thousand years ago than we know about daily life in west-
ern Europe twelve hundred years ago. 
Religion permeated the Persian world. It wasn't the million-gods idea of 
Hinduism, nor was it anything like the Egyptian pantheon of magical 
creatures with half-human and half-animal shapes, nor was it like Greek 
paganism, which saw every little thing in nature as having its own god, a 
god who looked human and had human frailties. No, in the Persian uni-
verse, Zoroastrianism held pride of place. Zoroaster lived about a thousand 
years before Christ, perhaps earlier or perhaps later; no one really knows. 
He hailed from northern Iran, or maybe northern Afghanistan, or maybe 
somewhere east of that; no one really knows that, either. Zoroaster never 
claimed to be a prophet or channeler of divine energy, much less a divin-
ity or deity. He considered himself a philosopher and seeker. But his fol-
lowers considered him a holy man. 
Zoroaster preached that the universe was divided between darkness and 
light, between good and evil, between truth and falsehood, between life 
and death. The universe split into these opposing camps at the moment of 
creation, they had been locked in struggle ever since, and the contest 
would endure to the end of time. 
People, said Zoroaster, contain both principles within themselves. They 
choose freely whether to go this way or that. By choosing good, people 
promote the forces of light and life. By choosing evil, they give strength to 
the forces of darkness and death. There is no predestination in the Zoroas-
trian universe. The outcome of the great contest is always in doubt, and 
not only is every human being free to make moral choices, but every moral 
choice affects that cosmic outcome. 
Zoroaster saw the drama of the universe vested in two divinities-not 
one, not thousands, but two. Ahura Mazda embodied the principle of 
good, Ahriman the principle of evil. Fire served as an iconic representation 
of Ahura Mazda, which has led some to characterize Zoroastrians as fire 
worshippers, but what they worship is not fire per se, it's Ahura Mazda. 
Zoroaster spoke of an afterlife but suggested that the good go there not as 
a reward for being good but as a consequence of having chosen that direc-
tion. You might say they lift themselves to heaven by the bootstraps of 
their choices. The Persian Zoroastrians rejected religious statues, imagery, 

10 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
and icons, laying the basis for the hostility toward representation in reli-
gious art that reemerged forcefully in Islam. 
Sometimes Zoroaster, or at least his followers, called Ahura Mazda "the 
Wise Lord" and spoke as if he was actually the creator of the entire uni-
verse and as if it was he who had divided all of creation into two opposing 
aspects a short time after the moment of creation. Thus, Zoroaster's dual-
ism inched toward monotheism, but it never quite arrived there. In the 
end, for the ancient Persian Zoroastrians, two deities with equal power in-
habited the universe, and human beings were the rope in a tug of war be-
tween them. 
A Zoroastrian priest was called a magus, the plural of which is magi: the 
three "wise men of the East" who, according to the Christian story, 
brought myrrh and frankincense to the infant Jesus in his stable were 
Zoroastrian priests. The word magician also derives from magi. These 
priests were thought by others {and sometimes themselves claimed) to pos-
sess miraculous powers. 
In the late days of the empire, the Persians broke into the Mediter-
ranean world and made a brief, big splash in Western world history. Per-
sian emperor Darius sallied west to punish the Greeks. I say "punish," not 
"invade" or "conquer," because from the Persian point of view the so-called 
Persian Wars were not some seminal clash between two civilizations. The 
Persians saw the Greeks as the primitive inhabitants of some small cities on 
the far western edges of the civilized world, cities that implicitly belonged 
to the Persians, even though they were too far away to rule directly. Em-
peror Darius wanted the Greeks merely to confirm that they were his sub-
jects by sending him a jar of water and a box of soil in symbolic tribute. 
The Greeks refused. Darius collected an army to go teach the Greeks a les-
son they would never forget, but the very size of his army was as much a 
liability as an asset: How do you direct so many men at such a distance? 
How do you keep them supplied? Darius had ignored the first principle of 
military strategy: never fight a land war in Europe. In the end, it was the 
Greeks who taught the Persians an unforgettable lesson-a lesson that they 
quickly forgot, however, for less than one generation later, Darius's 
dimwitted son Xerxes decided to avenge his father by repeating and com-
pounding his mistakes. Xerxes, too, came limping home, and that was the 
end of Persia's European adventure. 

THE MIDDLE WORLD 
11 
It didn't end there, however. About 150 years later, Alexander the Great 
took the battle the other way. We often hear of Alexander the Great con-
quering the world, but what he really conquered was Persia, which had al-
ready conquered "the world." 
With Alexander, the Mediterranean narrative broke forcefully in upon 
the Middle World one. Alexander dreamed of blending the two into one: 
of uniting Europe and Asia. He was planning to locate his capital at Baby-
lon. Alexander cut deep and made a mark. He appears in many Persian 
myths and stories, which give him an outsize heroic quality, though not an 
altogether positive one {but not entirely villainous, either). A number of 
cities in the Muslim world are named after him. Alexandria is the obvious 
example, but a less obvious one is Kandahar-famous now because the 
Taliban consider it their capital. Kandahar was originally called "Iskandar," 
which is how "Alexander" was pronounced in the east, but the "Is" 
dropped away, and "Kandar" softened into "Kandahar." 
But the cut Alexander inflicted dosed up, the skin grew over, and the 
impact of his eleven years in Asia faded. One night in Babylon he suddenly 
died, whether from the flu, malaria, too much drink, or poison, no one 
knows. He had stationed generals in various parts of the territory he had 
conquered, and the moment he died, the toughest ones claimed whatever 
terrain they happened to hold, fashioning Hellenic kingdoms that endured 
for a few hundred years. For example, in the kingdom of Bactria (now 
northern Afghanistan) artists made Greek-looking sculptures; later, when 
Buddhist influences seeped north from India, the two art styles mixed, re-
sulting in what is now known as Greco-Buddhist art. 
Eventually, however, those kingdoms weakened, Greek influence faded 
away, the Greek language fell out of use here, and the Persian substratum 
welled back to the surface. Another empire came to occupy much the same 
territory as that of the ancient Persians (though not as much of it). The 
new rulers called themselves Parthians, and they were formidable warriors. 
The Parthians battled Rome to a standstill, preventing their expansion 
east. Their armies were the first to include cataphracts-knights in full 
metal armor riding huge armored horses, much like the ones we associate 
with Europe's feudal ages. These Parthian knights were like mobile castles. 
But mobile castles are cumbersome, so the Parthians had another cavalry 
corps as well, lightly dad men riding naked horses. As a battle tactic, the 

12 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
light cavalry sometimes pretended to have been routed; in the hot middle 
of the fighting, they would suddenly turn tail and race away. The army 
they were fighting would break ranks and chase after them, losing all order 
as they clamored, "Get 'em, boys; they're on the run; let's finish 'em!" 
whereupon the Parthians would suddenly wheel around and fire into the 
disorganized rabble their opponents had become, annihilating them in 
minutes. This was later known as a Parthian shot, and when you hear the 
phrase "parting shot," you may actually be hearing a corruption of the phrase 
"Parthian shot."2 
The Parthians were originally nomadic herders and hunters from the 
mountains northeast of Persia, but once they appropriated the frame of 
the old Persian Empire, they became, for all practical purposes, Persians. 
(Their name, Parthian, is probably a corruption or variation of "Persian.") 
This empire endured for centuries without leaving much of a trace, be-
cause they took little interest in art and culture, and mobile castles get re-
cycled for scrap metal once the warriors inside them die. 
While they lasted, however, the Parthians protected and promoted 
trade, and caravans moved freely within their borders. The Parthian cap-
ital was known to the Greeks as Hecatompylos, "the hundred gated," be-
cause so many roads converged there. In the bazaars of Parthian cities, 
you could probably hear gossip from all quarters of the empire and the 
societies it bordered: the Greco-Buddhist kingdoms in the east, the Hin-
dus to the south of them, the Chinese of the further east, the waning 
Greek (Seleucid) kingdoms in the west, and the Armenians to their 
north .... The Parthians had little social intercourse with the Romans, 
unless fighting counts. The civilizational blood that made the Parthians 
Persian didn't get across that border, and so again the Mediterranean and 
Middle worlds diverged. 
Around the time the Parthians began their rise, China was unified for 
the first time. In fact, the glory years of China's seminal Han dynasty co-
incide almost exactly with the period of Parthian dominance. In the West, 
the Romans began their great expansion near the beginning of the 
Parthian era. Just as Rome was beating Carthage for the first time, the 
Parthians were taking Babylonia. Just as Julius Caesar was tearing up Gaul, 
Parthian power was peaking in the Middle World. In 53 BCE the Parthians 
crushed the Romans in a battle, capturing thirty-four thousand legion-

THE MIDDLE WORLD 
13 
naires and killing Crassus who, along with Caesar and Pompey, had been 
coruler of Rome. Thirty years later, the Parthians dealt Mark Antony a 
stinging defeat and established the Euphrates River as the border between 
the two empires. The Parthians were still expanding east when Christ was 
born. The spread of Christianity went little noticed by the Parthians, who 
favored Zoroastrianism in a lukewarm sort of way. When Christian mis-
sionaries began trickling east, the Parthians let them in; they didn't care 
very much about religion, one way or another. 
The Parthians always operated on a feudal system, with power distrib-
uted down through many layers of lords. Over time, imperial power 
leaked away into this ever more fragmented feudalism. In the third 
(Christian) century, a provincial rebel overthrew the last of the Parthians 
and founded the Sassanid dynasty, and this quickly expanded to occupy 
all the same territory as the Parthians and a little more besides. The Sas-
sanids didn't alter the direction of cultural change; they only organized 
the empire more effectively, erased the last traces of Hellenic influence, 
and completed the restoration of the Persian fabric. They built monu-
mental sculptures, enormous buildings, and imposing cities. Zoroastrian-
ism enjoyed a huge resurgence-fire and ashes, sunlight and darkness, 
Ahura Mazda and Ahriman: it was the state religion. Missionary monks 
had been roaming west from Afghanistan, teaching Buddhism, but the 
seeds they dropped would not grow in the soil of Zoroastrian Persia, so 
they turned east, which is why Buddhism spread to China but not Eu-
rope. Countless Persian tales and legends of later times go back to this 
Sassanid period. The greatest of the Sassanid kings, Khusrow Anushervan, 
came to be remembered (by Persian speakers) as the archetype of the "just 
king," conflated perhaps with Kay Khosrow, the third king oflran's myth-
ical first dynasty, something like an Arthurian figure presiding over a Per-
sian Camelot and served by noble warriors.3 
The Roman Empire, meanwhile, was falling apart. In 293, the emperor 
Diodetian divided the empire in four parts for administrative purposes: it 
had grown just too huge and cumbersome to run from a single center. But 
Diodetian's reform ended up splitting the empire in two. The wealth was 
all in the east, it turned out, so the western part of the Roman Empire 
crumbled. As nomadic German tribes moved into the empire, government 
services shrank, law and order broke down, and trade decayed. Schools 

14 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
foundered, western Europeans stopped reading or writing much, and Eu-
rope sank into its so-called Dark Ages. Roman cities in places like Ger-
many and France and Britain fell into ruin, and society simplified down to 
serfs, warriors, and priests. The only institution binding disparate locales 
together was Christianity, anchored by the bishop of Rome, soon known 
as the pope. 
The eastern portion of the Roman Empire, headquartered in Constan-
tinople, continued to hang on. The locals still called this entity Rome but 
to later historians it looked like something new, so retrospectively they 
gave it a new name: the Byzantine Empire. 
Orthodox Christianity was centered here. Unlike Western Christianity, 
this church had no pope-like figure. Each city with a sizable Christian 
population had its own top bishop, a "metropolitan," and all the metro-
politans were supposedly equal, although the top bishop of Constantino-
ple was more equal than most. Above them all, however, stood the 
emperor. Western learning, technology, and intellectual activity contracted 
to Byzantium. Here, writers and artists continued to produce books, 
paintings, and other works, yet once eastern Rome became the Byzantine 
Empire it more or less passed out ofWestern history. 
Many will dispute this statement-the Byzantine Empire was Christ-
ian, after all. Its subjects spoke Greek, and its philosophers ... well, let us 
not speak too much about its philosophers. Almost any well-educated 
Westerner knows of Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, not to mention Sopho-
cles, Virgil, Tacitus, Pericles, Alexander of Macedon, Julius Caesar, Augus-
tus, and many others; but apart from academics who specialize in 
Byzantine history, few can name three Byzantine philosophers, or two 
Byzantine poets, or one Byzantine emperor after Justinian. The Byzantine 
Empire lasted almost a thousand years, by few can name five events that 
took place in the empire during all that time. 
Compared to ancient Rome, the Byzantine Empire didn't wield much 
clout, but in its own region it was a superpower, largely because it had no 
competition and because its walled capital of Constantinople was probably 
the most impregnable city the world had ever known. By the mid-sixth 
century, the Byzantines ruled most of Asia Minor and some of what we 
now call eastern Europe. They butted right up against Sassanid Persia, the 
region's other superpower. The Sassanids ruled a swath of land stretching 

THE MIDDLE WORLD 
15 
ON THE EVE OF ISLAM: THE BYZANTINE AND SASSANID EMPIRES 
east to the foothills of the Himalayas. Between the two empires lay a strip 
of disputed territory, the lands along the Mediterranean shore, where the 
two world histories overlap and where disputes have been endemic. To the 
south, in the shadow of both big empires, lay the Arabian Peninsula, in-
habited by numerous autonomous tribes. Such was the political configura-
tion of the Middle World just before Islam was born. 


The Hijra 
Year Zero 
622 CE 
I
N THE LATE sixth century of the Christian age, a number of cities flour-
ished along the Arabian coast as hotbeds of commerce. The Arabians re-
ceived goods at Red Sea ports and took camel caravans across the desert to 
Syria and Palestine, transporting spice and cloth and other trade goods. 
They went north, south, east, and west; so they knew all about the Chris-
tian world and its ideas, but also about Zoroaster and his ideas. A number 
of Jewish tribes lived among the Arabs; they had come here after the Ro-
mans had driven them out of Palestine. Both the Arabs and the Jews were 
Semitic and traced their descent to Abraham (and through him to Adam). 
The Arabs saw themselves as the line descended from Abraham's son Ish-
mael and his second wife, Hagar. The stories commonly associated with 
the Old Testament-Adam and Eve, Cain and Abel, Noah and his ark, 
Joseph and Egypt, Moses and the pharaoh, and the rest of them-were 
part of Arab tradition too. Although most of the Arabs were pagan poly-
theists at this point and the Jews had remained resolutely monotheistic, 
the two groups were otherwise more or less indistinguishable in terms of 
culture and lifestyle: the Jews of this area spoke Arabic, and their tribal 
structure resembled that of the Arabs. Some Arabs were nomadic Bedouins 
17 

18 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
who lived in the desert, but others were town dwellers. Mohammed, the 
prophet of Islam, was born and raised in the highly cosmopolitan town of 
Mecca, near the Red Sea coast. 
Meccans were wide-ranging merchants and traders, but their biggest, 
most prestigious business was religion. Mecca had temples to at least a 
hundred pagan deities with names like Hubal, Manat, Allat, al-Uzza, and 
Fals. Pilgrims streamed in to visit the sites, perform the rites, and do a lit-
tle business on the side, so Mecca had a busy tourist industry with inns, 
taverns, shops, and services catering to pilgrims. 
Mohammed was born around the year 570. The exact date is unknown 
because no one was paying much attention to him at the time. His father was 
a poor man who died when Mohammed was still in the womb, leaving Mo-
hammed's mother virtually penniless. Then, when Mohammed was only six, 
his mother died too. Although Mohammed was a member of the Quraysh, 
the most powerful tribe in Mecca, he got no status out of it because he be-
longed to one of the tribe's poorer dans, the Banu ("dan" or "house of") 
Hashim. One gets the feeling that this boy grew up feeling quite keenly his 
uncertain status as an orphan. He was not abandoned, however; his dose rel-
atives took him in. He lived with his grandfather until the old man died and 
then with his uncle Abu Talib, who raised him like a son-yet the fact re-
mained that he was a nobody in his culture, and outside his uncle's home he 
probably tasted the disdain and disrespect that was an orphan's lot. His child-
hood planted in him a lifelong concern for the plight of widows and orphans. 
When Mohammed was twenty-five, a wealthy widowed business-
woman named Khadija hired him to manage her caravans and conduct 
business for her. Arab society was not kind to women as a rule, but 
Khadija had inherited her husband's wealth, and the fact that she held on 
to it suggests what a powerful and charismatic personality she must have 
had. Mutual respect and affection between Mohammed and Khadija led 
the two to marriage, a warm partnership that lasted until Khadija's death 
twenty-five years later. And even though Arabia was a polygynous society 
in which having only one wife must have been uncommon, Mohammed 
married no one else as long as Khadija lived. 
As an adult, then, the orphan built quite a successful personal and busi-
ness life. He acquired a reputation for his diplomatic skills, and quarreling 
parties often called upon him to act as an arbiter. Still, as Mohammed ap-

THE HIJRA 
19 
proached the age of forty, he began to suffer what we might now call a 
midlife crisis. He grew troubled about the meaning of life. Looking 
around, he saw a society bursting with wealth, and yet amid all the 
bustling prosperity, he saw widows eking out a bare living on charity and 
orphans scrambling for enough to eat. How could this be? 
He developed a habit of retreating periodically to a cave in the moun-
tains to meditate. There, one day, he had a momentous experience, the 
exact nature of which remains mysterious, since various accounts survive, 
possibly reflecting various descriptions by Mohammed himself. Tradition 
has settled on calling the experience a visitation from the angel Gabriel. In 
one account, Mohammed spoke of "a silken cloth on which was some 
writing" brought to him while he was asleep. 1 In the main, however, it was 
apparently an oral and personal interaction, which started when Mo-
hammed, meditating in the utter darkness of the cave, sensed an over-
whelming and terrifying presence: someone else was in the cave with him. 
Suddenly he felt himself gripped from behind so hard he could not 
breathe. Then came a voice, not so much heard as felt throughout his 
being, commanding him to "recite!" 
Mohammed managed to gasp out that he could not recite. 
The command came again: "Recite!" 
Again Mohammed protested that he could not recite, did not know 
what to recite, but the angel-the voice-the impulse-blazed once more: 
"Recite!" Thereupon Mohammed felt words of terrible grandeur forming 
in his heart and the recitation began: 
Recite in the name of your Lord Who created, 
Created humans from a drop of blood. 
Recite! 
And your Lord is most Bountiful 
He who taught humans by the pen, 
taught humans that which they knew not. 
Mohammed came down from the mountain sick with fear, thinking he 
might have been possessed by a jinn, an evil spirit. Outside, he felt a pres-
ence filling the world to every horizon. According to some accounts, he 
saw a light with something like a human shape within it, which was only 

20 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
more thunderous and terrifying. At home, he told Khadija what had hap-
pened, and she assured him that he was perfectly sane, that his visitor had 
really been an angel, and that he was being called into service by God. "I 
believe in you," she said, thus becoming Mohammed's first follower, the 
first Muslim. 
At first, Mohammed preached only to his intimate friends and close 
relatives. For a time, he experienced no further revelations, and it de-
pressed him: he felt like a failure. But then the revelations began to come 
again. Gradually, he went public with the message, until he was telling 
people all around Mecca, "There is only one God. Submit to His will, or 
you will be condemned to hell"-and he specified what submitting to the 
will of God entailed: giving up debauchery, drunkenness, cruelty, and 
tyranny; attending to the plight of the weak and the meek; helping the 
poor; sacrificing for justice; and serving the greater good. 
Among the many temples in Mecca was a cube-shaped structure with a 
much-revered cornerstone, a polished black stone that had fallen out of the 
sky a long time ago-a meteor, perhaps. This temple was called the Ka'ba, 
and tribal tales said that Abraham himself had built it, with the help of his 
son Ishmael. Mohammed considered himself a descendant of Abraham 
and knew all about Abraham's uncompromising monotheism. Indeed, 
Mohammed didn't think he was preaching something new; he believed he 
was renewing what Abraham (and countless other prophets) had said, so 
he zeroed in on the Ka'ba. This, he said, should be Mecca's only shrine: the 
temple of Allah. 
AI means "the" in Arabic, and lah, an elision of ilaah, means "god." 
Allah, then, simply means "God." This is a core point in Islam: Mo-
hammed wasn't talking about "this god" versus "that god." He wasn't say-
ing, "Believe in a god called Lah because He is the biggest, strongest god," 
nor even that Lah was the "only true god" and all the other ones were fake. 
One could entertain a notion like that and still think of God as some par-
ticular being with supernatural powers, maybe a creature who looked like 
Zeus, enjoyed immortality, could lift a hundred camels with one hand, 
and was the only one of its kind. That would still constitute a belief in one 
god. Mohammed was proposing something different and bigger. He was 
preaching that there is one God too all-encompassing and universal to be 
associated with any particular image, any particular attributes, any finite 

THE HIJRA 
21 
notion, any limit. There is only God and all the rest is God's creation: this 
was the message he was delivering to anyone who would listen. 
Mecca's business leaders came to feel threatened by Mohammed be-
cause they were making good money from religious tourism; if this only-
one-god idea took hold, they feared, the devotees of all the other gods 
would stop coming to Mecca and they'd be ruined. (Today, ironically, over 
a million people come to Mecca each year to perform the rites of pilgrim-
age at the Ka'ba, making this the biggest annual gathering on earth!) 
Besides, Mecca profited from drinking dens, gambling, prostitution, 
and other such attractions, and the tribal power brokers could not tolerate 
a man railing against the very entertainments that brought in their wealth, 
even if he had merely a smattering of followers, many of them powerless 
poor people and slaves. Well, for one thing, not all his followers were poor 
people and slaves: they included the wealthy and respected merchants Abu 
Bakr and Othman, and soon they even included the physically imposing 
giant Omar, who started out as one of Mohammed's most bitter enemies. 
The trend looked disturbing. 
For nearly twelve years, Mohammed's uncle Abu Talib defended him 
against all criticism. According to most Muslims, Abu Talib never converted 
to Islam himself, but he stood up for his nephew out of personal loyalty and 
love, and his word had weight. Khadija also backed her husband unstint-
ingly, which gave him precious comfort. Then, in the course of a single dev-
astating year, both these major figures in Mohammed's life died, leaving 
God's Messenger exposed to his enemies. That year, seven elders of the 
Quraysh tribe decided to have Mohammed killed while he slept, thereby get-
ting rid of the troublemaker before he could do real damage to the economy. 
One of Mohammed's several uncles spearheaded the plot. In fact, all seven 
plotters were related to Mohammed, but this didn't soften their resolve. 
Fortunately, Mohammed caught wind of the plot and worked out how 
to foil it with help from two dose companions. One was his cousin Ali, 
now a strapping young man, who would soon marry Mohammed's daugh-
ter Fatima and become the Messenger's son-in-law. Another was his best 
friend, Abu Bakr, Mohammed's first follower outside his immediate family 
circle and his closest adviser, soon to become Mohammed's father-in-law. 
The Prophet had already been in contact with delegates from Yathrib, 
another town near the Red Sea coast, some 250 miles north of Mecca. It 

22 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
was an agricultural rather than a commercial town and it was torn by con-
flict because its inhabitants belonged to several quarreling tribes. The peo-
ple of Yathrib wanted a fair-minded outsider to come in and oversee 
negotiations among the tribes; they hoped that if they ceded judicial au-
thority to such a person, he would be able to bring about a peace. Mo-
hammed had a reputation as a fair-minded and skillful arbitrator, a role he 
had played in several crucial disputes, and so the Yathribis thought he 
might be the man for the job. Several of them visited Mecca to meet Mo-
hammed and found his charisma overwhelming. They converted to Islam 
and invited Mohammed to move to Yathrib as an arbiter and help put an 
end to all the quarrelling; the Prophet accepted. 
Mohammed's murder was planned for a September night in the year 
622 CE. That night, the Prophet and Abu Bakr slipped away into the 
desert. Ali crawled into Mohammed's bed to make it look like he was 
still there. When the would-be assassins burst in, they were furious to 
find Ali, but they spared the kid and sent a search party out to hunt 
down the Prophet. Mohammed and Abu Bakr had made it only to a cave 
near Mecca, but legend has it that a spider built its web across the mouth 
of the cave after they entered. When the posse came by and saw the web, 
they assumed no one could be inside, and so passed on. Mohammed and 
Abu Bakr made it safely to Yathrib, by which time some of Mohammed's 
other followers had moved there too, and the rest soon followed. Most of 
these Meccan emigrants had to leave their homes and property behind; 
most were making a break with family members and fellow tribesmen 
who had not converted. But at least they were coming to a place where 
they would be safe, and where their leader Mohammed had been invited 
to preside as the city's highest authority, the arbiter among the rival tribal 
chieftains. 
True to his promise, Mohammed sat down with the city's fractious 
tribes to hammer out a covenant {later called the Pact of Medina.) This 
covenant made the city a confederacy, guaranteeing each tribe the right to 
follow its own religion and customs, imposing on all citizens rules de-
signed to keep the overall peace, establishing a legal process by which the 
tribes settled purely internal matters themselves and ceded to Mohammed 
the authority to settle intertribal disputes. Most important, all the signato-
ries, Muslim and non-Muslim, pledged to join all the others to defend 

THE HIJRA 
23 
Medina against outside attack. Although this document has been called 
the first written constitution, it was really more of a multiparty treaty. 
Mohammed also appointed one Yathribi Muslim to mentor and help 
each family of Meccan Muslims. The native was to host the newcomer and 
his family, get them settled, and help them start a new life. From this time 
on, the Yathribi Muslims were called the Ansar, "the helpers." 
The name of the city changed too. Yathrib became Medina, which sim-
ply means "the city'' {short for a phrase that meant "city of the prophet"). 
The emigration of the Muslims from Mecca to Medina, is known as the 
Hijra {often spelled Hegira in English.) A dozen years later, when Muslims 
created their own calendar, they dated it from this event because the Hijra, 
they felt, marked the pivot of history, the turning point in their fortunes, 
the moment that divided all of time into before the Hijra {BH) and after 
the Hijra {AH). 
Some religions mark their founder's birthday as their point of origin; 
some, the day he died; and still others, the moment of their prophet's en-
lightenment or his key interaction with God. In Buddhism, for example, 
the religion begins with Siddhartha Gautama's achievement of enlighten-
ment under the bodhi tree. Christianity attributes key religious signifi-
cance to Christ's death and resurrection {as well as his birth.) Islam, 
however, pays little attention to Mohammed's birthday. Growing up as a 
Muslim, I didn't know when he was born, because nothing special hap-
pened that day in Afghanistan. Some countries, such as Egypt, commem-
orate the day more elaborately, but still, there's no analog to Christmas in 
Islam, no "Mohammedmas." 
The revelation in the cave is commemorated as the most sacred night 
in Muslim devotions: it is the Night of Power, Lailut al-Qadr, which falls 
on or near the twenty-seventh day of Ramadan, the month of fasting. But 
in the Muslim calendar of history, that event occurred ten years before the 
really crucial turning point: the Hijra. 
What makes moving from one town to another so momentous? The 
Hijra takes pride of place among events in Muslim history because it 
marks the birth of the Muslim community, the Umma, as it is known in 
Islam. Before the Hijra, Mohammed was a preacher with individual fol-
lowers. After the Hijra, he was the leader of a community that looked to 
him for legislation, political direction, and social guidance. The word hijra 

24 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
means "severing of ties." People who joined the community in Medina re-
nounced tribal bonds and accepted this new group as their transcendent 
affiliation, and since this community was all about building an alternative 
to the Mecca of Mohammed's childhood, it was an epic, devotional social 
project. 
This social project, which became fully evident in Medina after the 
Hijra, is a core element oflslam. Quite definitely, Islam is a religion, but 
right from the start (if "the start" is taken as the Hijra) it was also a po-
litical entity. Yes, Islam prescribes a way to be good, and yes, every de-
voted Muslim hopes to get into heaven by following that way, but 
instead of focusing on isolated individual salvation, Islam presents a plan 
for building a righteous community. Individuals earn their place in 
heaven by participating as members of that community and engaging in 
the Islamic social project, which is to build a world in which orphans 
won't feel abandoned and in which widows won't ever be homeless, hun-
gry, or afraid. 
Once Mohammed became the leader of Medina, people came to him 
for guidance and judgments about every sort of life question, big or little: 
how to discipline children ... how to wash one's hands ... what to con-
sider fair in a contract ... what should be done with a thief ... the list 
goes on. Questions that in many other communities would be decided by 
a phalanx of separate specialists, such as judges, legislators, political lead-
ers, doctors, teachers, generals, and others, were all in the Prophet's baili-
wick here. 
Portions of the Qur'an recited in Mecca consist entirely of language 
like this: 
When earth is shaken with a mighty shaking 
and earth brings forth her burdens, 
and Man says, "what ails her?" 
upon that day she shall tell her tidings 
for that her Lord has inspired her. 
Upon that day men shall issue in scatterings to see their works 
and whoso has done an atom's weight of good shall see it 
and whoso has done an atom's weight of evil shall see it. 

THE HIJRA 
25 
When you look at the verses revealed in Medina, you still find much 
passionate, lyrical, and imprecatory language, but you also find passages 
like this one: 
God charges you, concerning your children: 
to the male the like of the portion 
of two females, and if they be women 
above two, then for them two-thirds 
of what he leaves, but if she be one 
then to her a half; and to his parents 
to each one of the two the sixth 
of what he leaves, if he has children 
but if he has no children, and his 
heirs are his parents, a third to his 
mother, or, if he has brothers, to his 
mother a sixth, after any bequest 
he may bequeath, or any debt. 
Your fathers and your sons-you know not 
which out of these is nearer in profit 
to you. So God apportions; surely God is 
All-knowing, All-wise. 
This is legislation, and this is what the Muslim enterprise expanded to, 
once it took root in Medina. 
After the Hijra, the native Arabs of Medina gradually converted to 
Islam, but the city's three Jewish tribes largely resisted conversion, and over 
time a friction developed between them and the Muslims. Among the 
Arabs, too, some of the men displaced by Mohammed's growing stature 
harbored a closely guarded resentment. 
Meanwhile, the Quraysh tribe had not given up on assassinating Mo-
hammed, even though he now lived 250 miles away. Not only did 
Quraysh leaders put a huge bounty of a hundred camels on Mohammed's 
head, they remained fixated on stamping out his whole community. To fi-
nance an assault on Medina, the wealthiest merchants of Mecca stepped 
up their trading expeditions. Mohammed countered by leading Muslims 
in raids on these Meccan caravans (which helped solve another problem 

26 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
the Meccan emigrants faced: how to support themselves now that they had 
lost their goods and businesses.) 
After a year of these raids, the Meccans decided to raise the stakes. A 
thousand of them strapped on weapons and marched out to finish off the 
upstarts. The Muslims met them with a force of three hundred men at a 
place called Badr and defeated them soundly. The Qur'an mentions the 
battle of Badr as proof of Allah's ability to decide the outcome of any bat-
tle, no matter what the odds. 
Before Badr, some of the bedouin tribesmen had worked for merchants 
in Mecca as contract bodyguards. After Badr, these tribes began to switch 
sides. The growing solidarity of the Muslim community in Medina began 
to alarm the Jewish tribes. One of the three renounced the Pact of Medina 
and tried to instigate an uprising against Mohammed and a return to the 
pre-Islamic status quo, but the uprising failed, and this tribe was expelled 
from Medina. 
Now the Quraysh really did have cause to worry. Instead of eliminating 
Mohammed, it looked like they might have dug themselves the beginnings 
of a hole. In the year 3 AH, they decided to overwhelm the Muslims while 
they still had the numbers. They tripled the size of their army, heading for 
Medina with three thousand men. The Muslims could scratch up only 950 
warriors. Again, they would be outnumbered three to one-but after Badr, 
how could this matter? They had the only asset that mattered: Allah was 
on their side. 
The second of Islam's three iconic battles occurred at a place called 
Uhud. At first the Muslims seemed to be winning again, but when the 
Meccans fell back, some of the Muslims disobeyed one of Mohammed's 
explicit orders: they broke ranks and spilled across the field in a chaotic 
rush to scoop up their share of booty-at which point the Meccans 
struck from behind, led by Khaled bin al-Walid, a military genius who 
later converted to Islam and became one of the Umma's leading generals. 
The Prophet himself was wounded at Uhud, seventy Muslims were 
killed, and many of the rest fled. The Umma survived, but this battle 
marked a bad defeat. 
These seminal battles of Islamic history were so small-scale, measured 
against most real wars, that they barely qualify as battles. Each one, how-
ever, was incorporated into Muslim theology and vested with meaning. 

THE HIJRA 
27 
Thus, the battle of Badr showed that Allah's will, not material factors, de-
termined victory in battle. But the battle of Uhud raised a thorny theo-
logical question. IfBadr showed the power of Allah, what did Uhud show? 
That Allah could also lose battles? That He was not quite as all-powerful 
as Mohammed proclaimed? 
Mohammed, however, found a different lesson in defeat. Allah, he ex-
plained, let the Muslims lose this time to teach them a lesson. The Mus-
lims were supposed to be fighting for a righteous cause-a just 
community on earth. Instead, at Uhud they forgot this mission and went 
scrambling for loot in direct disobedience to the Prophet's orders, and so 
they forfeited Allah's favor. Divine support was not an entitlement; Mus-
lims had to earn the favor of Allah by behaving as commanded and sub-
mitting to His will. This explanation for defeat provided a stencil that 
Muslims invoked repeatedly in later years, after the Mongol holocaust of 
the thirteenth century, for example, when nomadic invaders from Central 
Asia overwhelmed most of the Islamic world, and again in response to 
Western domination, which began in the eighteenth century and contin-
ues to this day. 
The Quraysh spent two years planning their next assault. Recruiting allies 
from other tribes, they built an army of ten thousand men-inconceivably 
gigantic for that time and place. When Mohammed heard about this force 
marching on Medina, he had his Muslims dig a moat around their town. 
The Quraysh arrived on camels, which would not or could not cross the 
moat. The stymied Quraysh decided to starve Medina with a siege. 
The siege strategy, however, scuttled a secret plan the Quraysh were 
counting on. After the disastrous battle of Uhud, another of Medina's Jew-
ish tribes had been exposed as collaborating with the Meccans. Like the 
first Jewish tribe, they had been tried and sent into exile. The third tribe, 
the Banu Qurayza, then proclaimed its loyalty to the Pact of Medina. 
Now, however, in the run-up to the Battle of the Moat, its leaders had se-
cretly conspired with the Quraysh to fall upon the Muslim forces from be-
hind as soon as the Meccan forces attacked from the front. 
When no frontal attack came, the conspirators within Medina lost their 
nerve. Meanwhile, the besieging force began to fragment, for it was a con-
federation of tribes, most of whom had come along only as a favor to their 
Qurayshi allies. With no battle to fight, they got restless. When a windstorm 

28 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
blew up-no small matter in this landscape-they drifted off, and soon the 
Quraysh gave up and went home too. 
All this left the Banu Qurayza in a bad spot. Their plot had been dis-
covered and now their allies were gone. Mohammed put the whole tribe 
on trial and appointed one of their former associates among the Medina 
tribes as judge. When the tribe was found guilty, the judge declared that 
the crime was treason, the punishment for which was death. Some on-
lookers protested against this sentence, but Mohammed confirmed the 
sentence, whereupon some eight hundred Jewish men were executed in the 
public square, and the women and children of the tribe were sent to live 
with the two tribes exiled earlier. 
This whole drama sent a shock wave through Arabia. The trial and ex-
ecution of the Banu Qurayza announced the grim resolution of the Mus-
lims of Medina. In strictly military terms the Battle of the Moat was a 
stalemate, but the Quraysh had mustered a force of ten thousand with 
such fanfare that failing to win was as bad as losing, and this loss helped to 
stoke a growing myth of Muslim invincibility, communicating a broad im-
pression that this community was not just another powerful tribe feeling 
its oats but something strange and new. The Muslims lived a distinctly dif-
ferent way of life, they practiced their own devotional rituals, and they had 
a leader who, when problems came up, went into a trance and channeled 
advice, he said, from a supernatural helper so powerful that Muslims had 
no fear of going into battle outnumbered three to one. 
Who was this helper? 
At first, many of the unconverted might have thought, It's a really pow-
erful god. But gradually the Muslim message sank in: not a god but the 
God, the only one. And what if Mohammed was exactly what he claimed 
to be-the one human being on earth directly connected to the creator of 
the entire universe? 
Recruiting people to kill the man grew ever more difficult. Recruit-
ing warriors to go up against his forces grew difficult too. After the Bat-
tle of the Moat, the trickle of conversions to Islam became a flood. It's 
easy to suppose people were converting out of canny self-interest, a de-
sire to join the winning side. Muslims, however, believe there was more 
to it. In Mohammed's presence, they believe, people were having a reli-
gious experience. 

THE HIJRA 
29 
Mohammed never claimed supernatural powers. He never claimed the 
ability to raise the dead, walk on water, or make the blind to see. He only 
claimed to speak for God, and he didn't claim that every word out of his 
mouth was God talking. Sometimes it was just Mohammed talking. How 
could people tell when it was God and when it was Mohammed? 
At the time, apparently, it was obvious. Today's Muslims have a special 
way of vocalizing the Qur'an called qira'ut. It's a sound quite unlike any 
other made by the human voice. It's musical, but it isn't singing. It's in-
cantatory, but it isn't chanting. It invokes emotion even in someone who 
doesn't understand the words. Every person who performs qira'ut does so 
differently, but every recitation feels like an imitation or intimation or in-
terpretation of some powerful original. When Mohammed delivered the 
Qur'an, he must have done so in this penetrating and emotional voice. 
When people heard the Qur'an from Mohammed, they were not just lis-
tening to words but experiencing an emotional force. Perhaps this is why 
Muslims insist that no translation of the Qur'an is the Qur'an. The true 
Qur' an is the whole package, indivisible: the words and their meanings, 
yes, but also the very sounds, even the look of the lettering when the 
Qur'an is in written form. To Muslims, it wasn't Mohammed the person 
but the Qur'an coming through Mohammed that was converting people. 
One other factor attracted people to the community and inspired 
them to believe Mohammed's claims. In this part of the world, small-scale 
warfare was endemic, as it seems to be in any area populated by many 
small nomadic tribes among whom trading blends into raiding (such as 
North America's eastern woodlands before Columbus arrived, or the 
Great Plains shortly after). Add the Arabian tradition of blood feuds last-
ing for generations, add also the tapestry of fragile tribal alliances that 
marked the peninsula at this time, and you have a world seething with 
constant, ubiquitous violence. 
Wherever Mohammed took over, he instructed people to live in peace 
with one another, and the converts did. By no means did he tell Muslims 
to eschew violence, for this community never hesitated to defend itself. 
Muslims still engaged in warfare, just not against one another; they ex-
pended their aggressive energy fighting the relentless outside threat to their 
survival. Those who joined the Umma immediately entered Dar al-Islam, 
which means "the realm of submission (to God)" but also, by implication, 

30 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
"the realm of peace." Everyone else was living out there in Dar al-Harb, 
the realm of war. Those who joined the Umma didn't have to watch their 
backs anymore, not with their fellow Muslims. 
Converting also meant joining an inspiring social project: the con-
struction of a just community of social equals. To keep that community 
alive, you had to fight, because the Umma and its project had implacable 
enemies. jihad never meant "holy war" or "violence." Other words in Ara-
bic mean "fighting" more unambiguously {and are used as such in the 
Qur'an). A better translation for jihad might be "struggle," with all the 
same connotations the word carries in the rhetoric of social justice move-
ments familiar to the West: struggle is deemed noble when it's struggle for 
a just cause and if the cause demands "armed struggle," that's okay too; it's 
sanctified by the cause. 
Over the next two years, tribes all across the Arabian peninsula began 
accepting Mohammed's leadership, converting to Islam, and joining the 
community. One night Mohammed dreamed that he had returned to 
Mecca and found everyone there worshipping Allah. In the morning, he 
told his followers to pack for a pilgrimage. He led fourteen hundred Mus-
lims on the two-hundred-mile trek to Mecca. They came unarmed, despite 
the recent history of hostilities, but no battle broke out. The city closed its 
gates to the Muslims, but Quraysh elders came out and negotiated a treaty 
with Mohammed: the Muslims could not enter Mecca this year but could 
come back and perform their rites of pilgrimage next year. Clearly, the 
Quraysh knew the game was over. 
In year 6 AH, the Muslims came back to Mecca and visited the Ka'ba 
without violence. Two years later, the elders of Mecca surrendered the city 
to Mohammed without a fight. As his first act, the Prophet destroyed all 
the idols in the Ka'ba and declared this cube with the black cornerstone 
the holiest spot in the world. A few of Mohammed's former enemies 
grumbled and muttered threats, but the tide had turned. Virtually all the 
tribes had united under Mohammed's banner, and all of Arabia was living 
in harmony for the first time in reported memory. 
In year 10 AH {632 CE), Mohammed made one more pilgrimage to 
Mecca and there gave a final sermon. He told the assembled men to regard 
the life and property of every Muslim as sacred, to respect the rights of all 
people including slaves, to acknowledge that women had rights over men 

THE HIJRA 
31 
just as men had rights over women, and to recognize that among Muslims 
no one stood higher or lower than anyone else except in virtue. He also 
said he was the last of God's Messengers and that after him no further rev-
elations would be coming to humanity.2 
Shortly after returning to Medina, he fell ill. Burning with fever, he 
went from house to house, visiting his wives and friends, spending a mo-
ment or two with each one, and saying good-bye. He ended up with his 
wife Ayesha, the daughter of his old friend Abu Bakr, and there, with his 
head in her lap, he died. 
Someone went out and gave the anxious crowd the news. At once, loyal 
Omar, one of Mohammed's fiercest and toughest but also one of his most 
hotheaded companions, jumped to his feet and warned that any man who 
spread such slander would lose limbs when his lie was exposed. Mo-
hammed dead? Impossible! 
Then the older and more prudent Abu Bakr went to investigate. A mo-
ment later he came back and said, "0 Muslims! Those of you who wor-
shipped Mohammed, know that Mohammed is dead. Those of you who 
worship Allah, know that Allah is alive and immortal." 
The words swept away Omar's rage and denial. He felt, he told friends 
later, as if the ground had been cut out from under him. He broke down 
crying, then, this strong bull of a man, because he realized that the news 
was true: God's Messenger was dead. 


Birth of the Khalifate 
11-24 AH 
632-644 CE 
D
EVOTED MUSLIMS SEE the whole of Mohammed's life as a religious 
metaphor illuminating the meaning of existence, but the religious 
event does not end with the Prophet's death. It continues through the 
terms of his first four successors, remembered as the Rashidun, "the rightly 
guided ones": Abu Bakr, Omar, Othman, and Ali. The entire drama, from 
the revelation in the cave through the Hijra to the death of the Prophet's 
fourth successor almost forty years later, forms the core religious allegory 
oflslam, analogous to the last supper, the crucifixion, and the resurrection 
ofJesus Christ in Christianity. 
Islam emerged well within literate times. People were writing journals, 
diaries, letters, bureaucratic documents, and other works. For this period a 
rich documentary record exists. It seems, then, as if the origins of Islam 
should lie squarely within the realm of journalism rather than legend. And 
yet, what we know about the life and times of these first four successors de-
rives largely from a history written decades later by the writer Ibn Ishaq, 
who died in 151 AH (768 CE). 
Ibn Ishaq came from a long line of traditionists, the archivists of oral 
culture: men and women whose job it was to gather, remember, and retell 
33 

34 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
significant events. He was the first of his line to write the whole story 
down, but most of his book has been lost. Before it disappeared, however, 
other writers quoted from it, referred to it, included excerpts from it in 
their own works, wrote synopses of it, or paraphrased its stories. (Recently, 
in fact, some academics have been trying to reconstruct Ibn Ishaq's work 
from the fragments of it found in other works.) 
One historian who used Ibn Ishaq as his major source was Ibn Jarir al-
Tabari, who died about three hundred years after the Hijra. He wrote the 
thirty-nine-volume History of the Prophets and Kings that begins with 
Adam and ends in the year 292 AH (915 CE). His work has survived into 
the present day, and most of the anecdotes and details we read about Mo-
hammed and his successors come to us through him. It is he who tells us 
what color hair these men had, what their favorite food was, and how 
many camels they owned. He includes their key speeches and conversa-
tions as direct quotations. His history is not exactly a readable narrative, 
however, because each story is nested in a mind-numbing list of names, the 
isnad, or "chain of transmission": "X reports that Y told him that he heard 
from Z that ... and finally the anecdote." After each anecdote comes a dif-
ferent version of the same anecdote, nested in a different isnad: "A reports 
that he heard from B that C said that D recounts that ... [anecdote]." 
Tabari doesn't say which version is true; he just puts them out there for you 
the reader to decide. Over the centuries, writers have compiled their own 
versions of the most compelling anecdotes, some of which make their way 
into popular and oral accounts and eventually turn into the Islamic version 
of"Bible stories," told to kids like me at home by our elders and in gram-
mar school by our religion teachers. 
Overall, these stories chronicle a tumultuous human drama that un-
folded in the first twenty-nine years after the Prophet's death, a story of 
larger-than-life characters wrestling with epic issues, a story filled with 
episodes that evoke wonder and heartbreak. It's quite possible to take sides 
in retelling these stories, for there are sides to take, and it's quite possible 
to speculate about motives and make judgments about people's decisions. 
On the other hand, these anecdotes have acquired allegorical status: 
different judgments and interpretations support different doctrines and 
represent various theological positions. We cannot know the hard facts of 
this story in a journalistic way because no untouched eyewitness account 

BIRTH OF THE KHALIFATE 
35 
has survived. We have only the story of the story of the story, a sifting 
process that has drawn the mythological significance of the raw events to 
the surface. Here, then, is that story of the succession. 
THE FIRST KHALIFA (I I-I 3 AH) 
The moment Mohammed died, the community faced an overwhelming 
problem. It wasn't just "Who is our next leader?" but "What is our next 
leader?" When a saint dies, people can't simply name some other saint in his 
place, because such figures aren't created by election or appointment, they 
just emerge; and if they don't, oh well; people may be disappointed, but life 
goes on. When a king dies, by contrast, no one says, "Wouldn't it be nice if 
someday we had another king?" The gap must be plugged at once. 
When Prophet Mohammed died, it was like a saint dying but it was 
also like a king dying. He was irreplaceable, yet someone had to take his 
place. Without a leader, the Umma could not hold together. 
The new leader had to be more than a king, however, because this was 
not a community like any other. It was, its members believed, the embod-
iment of the revelations, existing to express Allah's will and thereby trans-
form the world. The leader of this community could not get by on brains, 
bravery, strength, and such traits. He had to have some special religious 
grace or power. Yet Mohammed's successor would not be a God-guided 
messenger, because Mohammed himself had said there would be no more 
of those. So if the leader wouldn't be a king or a God-guided messenger, 
what would he be? 
Curiously enough, the nascent Muslim community had given no con-
sideration to this question before the Prophet died; and it gave no consid-
eration to it in the hours immediately after his death either, for this was 
not a time for grand philosophical discussions. With the Prophet's body 
scarcely cold, Abu Bakr heard a disturbing report: the native Muslims of 
Medina were meeting to elect a leader of their own, as if they and the im-
migrants from Mecca were separate groups: here, quite possibly, was the 
beginning of the end of the Umma! 
Abu Bakr gathered some of Mohammed's closest companions, crashed 
the meeting, and begged the Medinans to reconsider. Muslims should elect 
a single leader for the whole community. He pleaded, not a prophet, not a 

36 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
king, just someone to call meetings, moderate discussions, and hold the 
community together. "Choose one of these two," he suggested, pointing to 
the irascible Omar and to another of the Prophet's close companions. 
Omar himself was appalled. Take precedence over Abu Bakr? Unthink-
able! He grasped the older man's hand and told the assembly that only Abu 
Bakr could serve as leader, now that the Prophet himself was gone. 
Through tears, he swore allegiance to Mohammed's closest friend, a dra-
matic gesture that electrified the room. Suddenly Abu Bakr did seem like 
the obvious and only choice, this sensible, lovable man who had distin-
guished himself all his life by his wisdom, courage, and compassion. In a 
gush of enthusiasm, the meeting gave unanimous consent to letting Abu 
Bakr assume the modest tide of khalifa {or, as most Western accounts 
would have it, "caliph"), which meant "deputy." 
This title did not exist until Abu Bakr took it on. No tribe or nation at 
that time was headed by a khalifa. No one knew what the title meant or what 
powers it conferred. The first titleholder would have to fill in those details. 
For now, Abu Bakr went to the mosque, where a crowd had gathered. 
His accession was announced. In a gracious inaugural speech he told that 
assembly, "I am not the best of you. If I do well, support me. If I make 
mistakes, do not hesitate to advise me .... Ifi neglect the laws of God and 
Prophet, I forfeit claim to your obedience." Everyone at the mosque gave 
him the same acclaim he had received from everyone at the meeting. 
"Everyone," however, was not at the mosque or the meeting. One lead-
ing candidate for the role of successor did not even hear that the issue was 
being discussed. The Prophet's cousin Ali was washing the Prophet's body 
when the elders met. By the time he heard anything about the discussion, 
the decision had already been made. 
You can see how this might have rankled. In the last months of Mo-
hammed's life, Ali may well have felt like he was the Prophet's successor, no 
discussion needed, for he stood closest to the Prophet in every way. Mo-
hammed had several cousins, but Ali was special because his father Abu 
Talib had adopted Mohammed and raised him as a son, which essentially 
made Ali and Mohammed brothers. 
But Ali was almost thirty years Mohammed's junior, and in tribal Arab 
culture a much-older brother had a near paternal status with his sibling. In 
fact, as a little boy, Ali had moved in with Mohammed and Khadija and 

BIRTH OF THE KHALIFATE 
37 
had grown up mostly in their household, so in addition to being practi-
cally like a brother to Mohammed, Ali was practically like a son to him 
too. What's more, Ali was the first person after Khadija to accept Islam: the 
first male Muslim. 
When the assassins were coming to murder Mohammed in his bed, it 
was Ali who wrapped himself in the Prophet's blankets and risked taking 
the knife meant for Mohammed. In Medina, when the Muslims were in 
danger of annihilation, it was Ali who proved himself repeatedly as the vir-
tual Achilles of Islam-for in those days, battles often began with individ-
ual challenges leading to single combat, and at each confrontation, when 
the Quraysh called on the Muslims to send out their best, Mohammed 
nominated Ali. 
At the battle of Uhud, when all seemed lost and some Muslims fled for 
home, Ali was among those who rallied around the Prophet, and bore him 
home wounded but safe. 
As the community flowered and the Prophet became a head of state, he 
kept Ali by his side as his right-hand man. Indeed, on the way home from 
his last sermon, Mohammed told the people, ''Any of you who consider 
me your patron should consider Ali your patron." Now, didn't that 
amount to saying that after he was gone, the Umma should consider Ali 
their leader? 
While all of Mohammed's close companions had charisma, Ali's glow 
seemed uniquely spiritual to a committed group of partisans, many of 
them younger Muslims, who felt something of the same authority radiat-
ing from Ali that everyone had felt radiating from Mohammed. 
All the points mentioned marked Ali as special, but one further factor 
elevated him above all others, and it might have been the most important 
factor of all, or so it seemed in retrospect to later Muslims: Mohammed had 
no sons. Only one of his daughters produced sons who lived past child-
hood, and that one daughter was Fatima, who was married to Ali. Ali's sons 
were therefore Mohammed's grandsons, and Ali's descendents would be the 
prophet's descendents. Ali and Fatima were Mohammed's family. 
Set all this aside, however, and picture Ali indoors with the womenfolk, 
drowning in grief as he bathed the Prophet's body. Then, picture him 
emerging finally into the terrible first day of the rest of his life, still reeling 
from the enormity of what had happened, only to find that while he was 

38 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
preparing Mohammed's body for burial, Mohammed's peer-group com-
panions had been picking a successor for Mohammed, not only passing 
over Ali but failing even to consult him, failing even to inform him that 
the meeting was taking place. Surely, Ali felt he deserved some greater con-
sideration than that! 
On the other hand, every point in Ali's favor counted against him from 
another perspective. Ali was close to the Prophet? Part of his family? Good 
for him, but when did Allah ever say He was conferring special privileges 
upon a particular family? Dynastic succession was the old way, the sort of 
thing Islam proposed to overturn! 
Besides, the Prophet had said there would be no more Messengers after 
him. If this was true, Ali's charisma had no religious significance, in which 
case, shouldn't Muslims separate the Prophet's bloodline from leadership 
roles in the community to prevent undue concentrations of power from 
distorting the egalitarian universalism of the Islamic message? Seen in that 
light, in fact, wasn't Ali's charisma precisely the quality that made him 
questionable? Might it not encourage his more fervid partisans to declare 
him a new prophet? 
No, said Abu Bakr's proponents, what the community needed at this 
point was steady judgment, not youthful passion. Ali was just over thirty 
years of age at this time; Abu Bakr was almost sixty. In the Arabia of that 
time, choosing a thirty-year-old man as leader over a sixty-year-old proba-
bly struck most Arabs as unthinkable. Why, the word sheikh, the title for 
tribal leader, literally meant "old man." 
Some say it took Ali six hard months to concede the election, during 
which some of Abu Bakr's more unruly followers threatened him and 
roughed up his family. In one such shove and scuffle, they say, a door was 
slammed against his wife Fatima's belly, who was pregnant at the time, and 
this manhandling may have caused her to miscarry what would have been 
Prophet Mohammed's third grandson. 
Others claim that Ali swore allegiance to Abu Bakr just a few days after 
the latter took office; they minimize the abuse that Fatima suffered and at-
tribute her miscarriage to an accident. A disagreement like this can never 
now be resolved by an appeal to evidence. It can only reflect the position 
one takes on the theological schism that developed out of the succession, 
for the disagreement between proponents of Abu Bakr and Ali eventually 

BIRTH OF THE KHALIFATE 
39 
engendered two different sects of Islam, the Sunnis and the Shi'i, each of 
whom has a different version of these events. Ali's partisans developed into 
the Shi'i, a word that simply means "partisans" in Arabic, and they remain 
convinced to this day that Ali was the Prophet's only legitimate successor. 
In either case, within six months the rift had closed, and just in time, for 
a new crisis was threatening the survival of Islam. All across Arabia, tribes 
were seceding from the alliance that Mohammed had forged. Most claimed 
they had never pledged allegiance to Abu Bakr or the Umma but only to 
Mohammed himself, and that pledge had been voided by Mohammed's 
death. Nominally, these tribespeople had all converted to Islam, and many 
of them insisted they were still Muslims. They still acknowledged the sin-
gleness of God and Mohammed's authority. They would still pray, still fast, 
still try to keep the drinking and debauchery under control-but zakat? 
The charity tax payable to the treasury at Medina? No, that they could no 
longer tolerate: no more payments to Medina! 
A few tribal leaders went further. They claimed that they themselves 
were now Allah's living Messengers. They claimed they were receiving rev-
elations and had permission to issue divinely authorized laws. These up-
starts thought to use the model pioneered by Mohammed to forge 
sovereign "sacred" communities in competition with the Umma. 
Had Abu Bakr allowed these departures, Islam would surely have gone in 
a very different direction. It might have evolved into a set of practices and 
beliefs that people embraced individually. But Abu Bakr responded to the 
crisis by declaring secession to be treason. The Prophet had said, "No com-
pulsion in religion," and Abu Bakr did not deny that principle. People were 
free to accept or reject Islam as they pleased; but once they were in, he as-
serted, they were in for good. In response to a political crisis, Abu Bakr es-
tablished a religious principle that haunts Islam to this day-the equation of 
apostasy with treason. Braided into this policy was the theological concept 
that the indissoluble singleness of God must be reflected in the indissoluble 
singleness of the Umma. With this decision Abu Bakr even more definitively 
confirmed Islam as a social project and not just a belief system. A Muslim 
community was not just a kind of community, of which there could be any 
number, but a particular community, of which there could be only one. 
The new khalifa proved himself a formidable strategist. It took him a lit-
tle over a year to end the rebellion known as the Apostate Wars and reunite 

40 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Arabia. At home, however, in his dealings with the Muslim community, he 
exhibited nothing but the modesty, affection, and benevolence people 
knew and loved him for. A stoop-shouldered man with deep-set eyes, Abu 
Bakr dressed simply, lived plainly, and accumulated no wealth. His one af-
fectation was to dye his hair and beard red with henna. When disputes 
arose, he dispensed justice with an even hand, involving a council of elders 
in all his decisions, ruling as first among equals, and asserting no claim to 
religious elevation. His word had no greater weight than any other Mus-
lim's, and his authority came only from his wisdom and his devotion to the 
revelation. No one was obliged to follow his rulings except when he was 
right, the caveat being, he was pretty much always right. 
Back in Mecca, before the Hijra, Abu Bakr had been a prosperous mer-
chant. By the time Muslims emigrated to Medina, however, he had spent 
much of his fortune on charitable causes, especially buying freedom for 
slaves who converted to Islam, and he forfeited the rest of his wealth in the 
course of the move. As khalifa, he took only a small salary for guiding the 
Umma and continued to ply his old trade to make a living, getting by as 
best he could on the fruits of his shrunken business. Sometimes, he even 
milked his neighbor's cow for extra cash. 1 As portrayed in the religious sto-
ries of Islamic tradition, children would run up to him shouting, "Papa! 
Papa!" when he walked through the streets of Medina, and he would pat 
their heads and give them candy-he was that kind of guy. 
THE SECOND KHALIFA (13-24 AH) 
One August day, two years into his khalifate, Abu Bakr stepped out of a 
hot bath into a blast of chill wind, and by nightfall he was running a high 
fever. Realizing that death was near, he called in a few of the community's 
top notables and told them he wanted to nominate Omar as his successor 
so there wouldn't be any arguments about it later. 
The notables balked, because Omar could not have been more differ-
ent from the gentle, understated Abu Bakr. He was a giant of a man, loom-
ing half a head above anybody else-in a crowd he was said to stand out 
like a man on horseback. His head was completely bald, his face ruddy, his 
whiskers huge. He was ambidextrous and strong as a bull, and he had an 
epic temper.2 

BIRTH OF THE KHALIFATE 
41 
Before his conversion, Omar had been known to do a certain amount 
of brawling and drinking. Back then, he had hated Islam and Mohammed. 
Then came his oft-recounted conversion: one day, tradition reports, he an-
nounced that he was going to kill the Messenger of God and be done with 
it. He grabbed a sword and went striding across town to commit the deed, 
but on the way he spotted his beloved sister sitting under a tree, studying 
a leaf with some sort of text on it. "What are you doing?" 
"Reading," she said. 
"Reading what?" 
She looked up timorously. "The Qur'an. I've become a Muslim." 
"What? Give me that!" He snatched away what she was reading. It was 
a verse called Ta Ha, and to Omar's astonishment the words seemed ad-
dressed directly to him. At that moment Omar went through a transfor-
mation. He dropped his sword, ran through the streets of Mecca, and 
banged on the Prophet's door, shouting, "I believe you! You are theMes-
senger of God! I believe!" 
After that, he became one of Mohammed's closest companions, but he 
always remained a tough guy's tough guy, subject to outbursts of frighten-
ing rage, and though he had a good heart beneath it all, many wondered if 
the khalifate could be entrusted to a man whose very demeanor frightened 
children. At that critical moment, however, Ali stepped forward to endorse 
Omar, and his word tipped the scales: the Umma accepted their second 
post-Mohammed leader. 
Upon taking office, Omar told the community that he knew he was 
more feared than loved, but he assured people, they had seen only one side 
of him so far. Both the Prophet and Abu Bakr had been tenderhearted 
men, he explained, yet leaders sometimes must take tough action, and 
when such a need had arisen, Omar had been their instrument. He had 
needed to be a sword all the time so that the Prophet, and later Abu Bakr, 
would have a sword available to them any time. Now that Omar was khal-
ifa, however, he would not be a living sword all the time, because he knew 
that a leader must sometimes be gentle. From now on, therefore, the com-
munity would see both sides of him. Wrongdoers and tyrants who tram-
pled on the weak would see the old Omar. The poor, the weak, the 
widows, the orphans, all who sought the good and needed protection, 
would see the tender Omar. 

42 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
The Umma soon realized their second khalifa was a towering personal-
ity, even more imposing than Abu Bakr, perhaps. Omar directed the 
Umma for ten years, and during that time he set the course oflslamic the-
ology, he shaped Islam as a political ideology, he gave Islamic civilization 
its characteristic stamp, and he built an empire that ended up bigger than 
Rome. Any one of these achievements could have earned him a place in a 
who's who of history's most influential figures; the sum of them make him 
something like a combination of Saint Paul, Karl Marx, Lorenzo di 
Medici, and Napoleon. Yet most people outside Islam know him only as a 
name and perhaps a one- or two-sentence descriptor: he's the second khal-
ifa, a successor of Mohammed-that's about it. 
Perhaps this is because Omar made lack of pretension his core princi-
ple. This is so much a part of his legend that Omar becomes in Islamic tra-
dition the embodiment of a principle. His word was not law; his will did 
not rule; he ceded all authority to God-such was his storied claim. He 
envisioned Islam as an absolutely just and egalitarian community and he 
intended to make that vision a reality. In the Muslim community, he said, 
no one ever needed to fear the whims or will of any human power because 
this community had the Qur'an as its law, and the example of the 
Prophet's life as its guide, and nothing else was needed. Omar declared 
that his role was merely to keep the Umma united and moving forward 
along the track indicated by the revelations. 
Omar had never been a rich man, but Ali and others urged him to take 
a suitable salary from the public treasury, arguing that since Islam now in-
cluded all of Arabia, the Umma could no longer afford a part-time khalifa 
who milked a cow for extra cash. Omar agreed but appointed a commis-
sion to calculate how much he needed to live like the average Arab, no bet-
ter and no worse, and supposedly set this amount as his salary. (Imagine 
the CEO of a modern multinational corporation doing that.) 
In imitation of the Prophet, Omar habitually patched his own clothes, 
sometimes while conducting important state business. At night, after his 
official duties were done, the stories portray him shouldering a bag of grain 
and roaming through the city, personally delivering food to families in 
need. Once, somebody who saw him at this labor offered to carry the bag 
for him, but Omar said, "You can carry my burden for me here on Earth, 
but who will carry it for me on the Day ofJudgment?" 

BIRTH OF THE KHALIFATE 
43 
It's easy to suppose such stories are purely apocryphal, or that, if true, 
they merely show Omar the politician demonstrating a common touch for 
show. Personally, I think he must have been strikingly pious, unpreten-
tious, devoted, and empathic, just as the stories suggest: the anecdotes are 
too consistent to dismiss, and something must account for this man's over-
powering impact on his contemporaries. Whatever the reality, however, 
the legend he planted in the Muslim imagination expresses an ideal of how 
rulers should behave. 
Omar adopted a title that became an enduring addendum to khalifa: 
Amir al-Mu'mineen, or "commander of the faithful," a title that conflated his 
spiritual and military roles. As a big-picture military strategist, Omar ranked 
with Alexander and Julius Caesar, but how he acquired such savvy is hard to 
fathom. Until Islam carne along, he was just another small-town merchant. 
He took part in those iconic early battles of Muslim history, but in military 
terms those were little more than skirmishes. Now, suddenly, he was studying 
"world" (i.e., Middle World) maps, calculating the flow of Byzantine or Sas-
sanid resources, gauging what geography dictated for strategy, deciding where 
to force a battle and where to retreat-he was operating on a global scale. 
Fortuitously, at this historical moment, the Umma produced an extra-
ordinary array of brilliant field commanders such as Khaled bin al-Walid, 
hero of the Apostate Wars, Amr ibn al-A' as, conqueror of Egypt, and Sa'd 
ibn Abi Waqqas, who beat the Persians. 
As soon as Omar took office, he finished a piece of military business 
that Abu Bakr had started. Toward the end of the Apostate Wars, seeing 
Arabia in turmoil, the Byzantines had moved troops to the border, intend-
ing to absorb this "troubled" territory. Abu Bakr had sent men to keep 
them at bay, but even before his death the Muslims had pushed the Byzan-
tines back into their own territory. Shortly after Omar took the helm, they 
set siege to the city of Damascus. From that time on, Muslims had the 
Byzantines on the run, and in 636 CE, at a place called Yarmuk, they de-
stroyed the main Byzantine army. 
Meanwhile, the Persians were doing their best to unravel the upstart 
Muslim community with spies and provocateurs. Instead of swatting at in-
dividual Persian agents, Omar decided to throttle the threat at its source. 
He called on Muslims to topple the Sassanid empire, a proposal of breath-
taking audacity: ants vowing to fell a mastiff. 

44 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Omar's decision to call a war of conquest a "jihad" has obvious ramifi-
cations for modern times and has been much debated. In Mohammed's 
day, the word jihad did not loom large. Etymologically, as I said, it didn't 
mean "fighting" but "striving," and though it could be applied to fighting 
an enemy, it could also be used to discuss striving against temptation, 
struggling for justice, or trying to develop one's compassion. The word 
jihad as "fighting" does come up in the Qur'an, bound explicitly to self-
defense. Those verses were revealed at a time when the Quraysh were try-
ing to erase Islam and Muslims from the face of the earth. In that context, 
it was no stretch to argue that fighting had a moral dimension: if the com-
munity of believers was what made justice possible on earth, then those 
who let hostile forces extinguish it were helping Satan, while those who 
put lives and property at risk to defend it were serving Allah. 
But calling upon Muslims to leave home, travel to distant lands, and 
fight people with whom they had virtually no previous interaction-how 
could wars such as these be called defensive? And if they weren't defensive, 
how could they qualify as jihad? 
They were connected through an idea that originated in Mohammed's 
time and that Muslim thinkers began fleshing out during Abu Bakr and 
Omar's khalifates: the idea that the world was divided into the mutually 
exclusive realms of Dar al-Islam and Dar al-Harb, "the realm of peace" and 
"the realm of war." This schema depicted Islam as an oasis of brotherhood 
and peace surrounded by a universe of chaos and hatred. Anything a per-
son did to expand Dar al-Islam constituted action in the cause of peace, 
even fighting and bloodshed, because it shrank the realm of war. 
Personally, I wonder how many people in the seventh century thought 
wars of conquest needed justification. In any case, calling a campaign of 
conquest a jihad met with no dispute among the Umma. Having survived 
the shock of Prophet Mohammed's death, they had regrouped, and Omar 
probably understood that setting them a heroic quest at this juncture 
would consolidate and deepen their unity. 
In 15 AH (or thereabouts), near a town called Qadisiya, an Arab force 
traditionally numbered at thirty thousand warriors found itself facing a 
Sassanid army of sixty thousand crack troops. Only a river separated them. 
Several times, the Arab commander Waqqas sent envoys to negotiate with 
Rustum, the commander of the Sassanid force. As the story goes, General 

BIRTH OF THE KHALIFATE 
45 
Rustum asked one envoy if he headed up the Muslim army. The man 
replied, "No, we're Muslims. Among us, there is no highest and lowest." 
Rustum said, "Look, I know you Arabs are hungry and poor, and I'm 
sure you've been causing trouble out of desperation. So I tell you what, I'll 
give each of you rwo suits of clothing and a bag of dates. Will that con-
vince you to go back where you came from?" 
The Muslim envoy said, "We're not here to take anything from you, 
General. We're here to give you Islam! You are headed to hell; we offer you 
an opportunity to go to heaven." 
Rustum just laughed. "You remind me of the mouse that crept into the 
granary through a hole in the wall and ate till he could eat no more. Then 
he tried to go home, but he had grown too fat to fit back through the hole. 
His greed trapped him in the granary and the cat killed him. Now, you 
greedy Arabs have stolen into our granary and you're trapped. All of you 
will die here, like that mouse." 
Eventually, in all this back and forth, the Muslims told Rustum, "If you 
don't want to convert, just pay the tax, and you won't be harmed." 
"Harmed?" scoffed Rustum. "Tax?" He told his servants to give the 
Muslims a bag of dirt, by which he meant to symbolize the grave. 
But the Muslims received it cheerfully. "You give us your soil? We accept!" 
Both sides then prepared for battle. Despite his own greedy-mouse 
anecdote, Rustum made the mistake of crossing the river to attack the 
Muslims, so his were the forces backed up against the river with nowhere 
to flee. The battle of Qadisiya lasted four days, the Persians riding ele-
phants, the Arabs camels. On the third day, the battle went on through 
the night and into the next day. When the Sassanids gave way at last, 
thousands of their routed warriors tried to swim the river in heavy armor 
and drowned. 
Along with warriors, many poets (including some women} went to this 
battlefield and generated a rich trove of stories, elevating Qadisiya to a 
mythic status, like a (shorter} Trojan War. 
For example, as soon as victory was certain, a courier jumped on a 
horse and headed for Arabia to deliver the good news. Approaching Med-
ina, he passed a geezer by the side of the road, some simple fellow in a 
patched coat, who jumped to his feet and asked the courier if he had come 
from Qadisiya. 

46 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
"Yes," said the courier. 
"What's the news, then? What's the news?" the old man asked eagerly. 
But the courier said he couldn't stop to chat and he rode on. The old 
man trotted after him, pestering him with questions. When they passed 
through the city gates, a crowd gathered. "Out of my way!" the courier 
yelled importantly. "I must see the khalifa at once. Where is Khalifa 
Omar?" 
The crowd burst out laughing. "That's him right behind you." 
No pomp-that was Omar's style, according to legend. 
After Qadisiya, the Arabs took the Sassanid capital of Ctesiphon and 
then just kept marching, eating into the centuries-old Sassanid Empire, 
until the entire territory belonged to Muslims and the Sassanid Empire 
was no more: in three years they put an end to an empire that had gone 
toe-to-toe with Rome for centuries. 
Meanwhile, other armies were routing the Byzantines along the 
Mediterranean coast, down through Egypt, and into North Africa. The 
crown jewel of these conquests was Jerusalem, which ranked just behind 
Mecca and Medina as a holy site for Muslims, in part because Mo-
hammed had reported a vision of being briefly lifted to paradise from this 
city during his lifetime. One of the most famous Omar stories took place 
after this city fell. The khalifa made his way to Jerusalem to accept its sur-
render in person. He traveled with a servant, and since they had only one 
donkey between them, they took turns riding and walking. When they 
reached Jerusalem, the servant happened to be riding. The people of 
Jerusalem mistook him for the khalifa and hastened to pay him obeisance. 
They had to be told, "No, no, that's nobody; it's the other guy you should 
be saluting." 
The Christians assumed that the khalifa of Islam would want to per-
form the Muslim prayer in their most hallowed church as a token of his 
triumph, but Omar refused to set foot in there. "If I do," he explained, 
"some future Muslim will use it as an excuse to seize the building and turn 
it into a mosque, and that's not what we've come here to do. That's not the 
sort of thing we Muslims do. Continue to live and worship as you please; 
just know that from now on we Muslims will be living among you, wor-
shipping in our way, and setting a better example. If you like what you see, 
join us. If not, so be it. Allah has told us: no compulsion in religion."3 

BIRTH OF THE KHALIFATE 
47 
Omar's treatment of Jerusalem set the pattern for relations between 
Muslims and the people they conquered. Christians found that under 
Muslim rule they would be subject to a special poll tax called the jizya. 
That was the bad news. The good news: the jizya would generally be less 
than the taxes they had been paying to their Byzantine overlords-who did 
interfere with their religious practices (because the nuances of ritual and 
belief among various Christian sects mattered to them, whereas to the 
Muslims they were all just Christians.} The idea of lower taxes and greater 
religious freedom struck Christians as a pretty good deal, and so Muslims 
faced little or no local resistance in former Byzantine territory. In fact, Jews 
and Christians sometimes joined them in fighting the Byzantines. 
By the time Omar died, Islamic rule covered more than 2 million 
square miles. How was this possible? Religious Muslims offer the simple 
explanation that Muslims had the irresistible supernatural aid of Allah. 
Academic historians explain that the Byzantine and Sassanid empires had 
just fought a ruinous war with each other, and despite their seeming 
might, they were both rotten to the core and ready to fall. Another often-
cited explanation holds that Muslims fought more ferociously than others 
because they believed that they would go directly to heaven if they were 
killed and get seventy-rwo virgins. I can't comment on that, but I will sug-
gest some other factors. 
Those early Muslims had a sense that they were fighting for something 
apocalyptically great. They felt that fighting for their cause made their lives 
meaningful and would give their deaths meaning as well. People have 
proven time and again that they will attack extraordinary obstacles and en-
dure tremendous hardships if they think the effort will impart meaning to 
their lives. The human hunger for meaning is a craving as fundamental as 
food and drink. Everyday life gives people little opportunity for this sort of 
nourishment, which is one reason why people get swept along by narra-
tives that cast them as key players in apocalyptic dramas. Muslim warriors 
in the time of Khalifa Omar had that sense about their lives. 
Developments back home kept their idealism alive, because Omar en-
forced what he practiced and practiced what he preached. Under his guid-
ance, Medina did reflect the values that Muslims said they were bringing 
to the world: fellowship, fairness, harmony, decency, democratic participa-
tion in decision making, equality, and compassion. At the very least, the 

48 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Muslim community during the early khalifate exemplified these ideals so 
much more than ordinary empires, that later Muslims could easily polish 
the accounts of that time into a memory of lost perfection. 
On the other side of the line, people heard story after story about Mus-
lims scoring military victories against astounding odds. Resistance seemed 
useless against such a force; besides, common folk had little incentive tore-
sist, since the conquest wouldn't affect their lives. Their potentates would 
lose their treasures, but the masses would keep what they had and go on as 
before. Had the Arabs been fighting civilian populations defending their 
homes, it would have been a tougher fight that probably would have 
eroded their idealism over time. But instead, even far from home they were 
mostly fighting mercenaries and draftees. 
Let me not minimize a final factor intertwined with the hunger for 
meaning. War gave Muslims opportunities for plunder. Under Omar, 
however, soldiers had no permission to seize the fixed property of common 
citizens. They got battlefield loot and the treasuries of the monarchs they 
conquered-which, incidentally, was plenty. Four-fifths of whatever they 
won was divided equally among the soldiers, supposedly with no distinc-
tion among commanders and foot soldiers, generals and privates-that 
was the Muslim way. 
One-fifth of the plunder went back to Medina. In the Prophet's day 
much of that money was distributed immediately to the needy, and this 
policy persisted though in ever more diluted form through Omar's day. 
Add all these factors together, and the sudden expansion of Islam was not 
so inexplicable after all. 
Conquest led the surge but conquest was kept separate from conver-
sion. There was no "conversion by the sword." Muslims insisted on hold-
ing political power but not on their subjects being Muslims. Instead, 
wherever Muslim armies flowed, cultural transmission followed. News of 
the Muslim social project proliferated quickly because the expansion cov-
ered pretty much exactly the world historical area sewn together by those 
ancient trade routes running between major seas and waterways. In its first 
fifty years, Islam expanded to the western edge of the Indian Ocean, to the 
eastern lip of the Mediterranean Sea, to the Nile, to the Caspian Sea, to the 
Persian Gul£ In this area, this intercommunicative zone so richly perme-
ated with preexisting channels of interaction, Muslim stories and ideas 

BIRTH OF THE KHALIFATE 
49 
went humming from person to person through gossip and tale-telling, 
street talk and scholarly debate, flowing easily because the ideas were not 
that new. The Zoroastrian world hovered on the brink of monotheism. 
The Byzantine world had come into it with Christianity. And of course, 
ages ago, Judaism had introduced radical monotheism to the Levant (the 
region berween Mesopotamia and Egypt). 
The whole time Omar the conqueror was directing the territorial ex-
pansion oflslam, Omar the spiritual leader was directing the consolidation 
of Muslim doctrine and defining the Islamic way of life. Abu Bakr had es-
tablished that Islam was not just an abstract ideal of community, but one 
particular community with a world-changing destiny. Omar formalized 
this by declaring a new calendar that began, not with the birth of Mo-
hammed, nor with the first revelations, but with the Hijra, the migration 
of Muslims to Medina. Omar's calendar enshrined the conviction that 
Islam was not just a plan for individual salvation, but a plan for how the 
world should run. Many religions say to their followers, "The world is cor-
rupt, but you can escape it." Islam said to its followers, "The world is cor-
rupt, but you can change it." Perhaps this was inherent from the earliest 
days of Mohammed's preaching, but Omar confirmed this course for Islam 
and set it on tracks of iron. 
Abu Bakr had ruled with legendary humility, trying never to impose his 
own will but merely administering the directives set forth by the Qur' an 
and the Prophet. Omar made this attitude a cornerstone of Muslim doc-
trine, a seminal decision because in vowing to do only what the revelations 
directed, he committed Muslims to determining what the revelations di-
rected in every possible case, great and small. 
During Abu Bakr's khalifate, at Omar's suggestion, all the pieces of the 
Qur'an were compiled in one place. It was a miscellaneous collection at 
first, because when the revelations were coming in, people recorded them 
on anything that came to hand-a sheet of parchment, a piece of leather, 
a stone, a bone, whatever. As khalifa, Omar began a sorting process. In his 
presence, each written verse was checked against the memorized version 
kept by the professional reciters whom this society regarded as the most re-
liable keepers of information. Scribes then recorded the authorized copy of 
each verse before witnesses, and these verses were organized into one com-
prehensive collection. 

50 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Whenever a difficult decision came up, Omar looked here for the an-
swer. If the Qur'an didn't provide an answer, he consulted with the com-
munity to find out what the Prophet had said or done in a similar 
situation. In this case, "the community" meant the several hundred men 
and women who had been Mohammed's "companions" during his life-
time. Every time the community made a ruling in this way, Omar had 
scribes record it and sent the ruling out to provincial governors to use as a 
basis for their decisions. 
Omar funded a body of scholars to spend all their time steeping them-
selves in the revelations, the stories of Mohammed's life, and other perti-
nent data, so that when he needed expert advice he could get it from these 
"people of the bench," a seed that grew into one oflslam's major social in-
stitutions, the ulama, or "scholars." 
Even as he was shaping Muslim law, Omar was busy applying the doc-
trine to social life in Medina, which brings us to his stern side. Omar had 
no tolerance for slackards. For example, he banned drinking outright, even 
though the Qur'an had been somewhat ambiguous on this question, seem-
ing in some early verses to disapprove more of drunkenness than of drink-
ing per se (although later verses ban it more definitely). 
The Qur'an specified no particular punishment for drinking, but 
Omar deduced one by analogy. The analogy in this case went as follows: 
the Qur'an prescribed the lash for slander; drinking, said Omar, made a 
person spout slander. Therefore, the punishment for drinking must also be 
the lash. This mode of argument by analogy (qiyas) created a stencil used 
prolifically by later Muslim legal thinkers. 
Dreading the destructive power of unlicensed sex, Omar enforced the 
sternest measures against adultery. In fact, he mandated stoning for adul-
terers, which is not mentioned in the Qur' an but does appear in the law of 
Moses, dating to pre-Qur'anic times (Deuteronomy 22:22}. He also 
banned the Arab custom of temporary marriage, which allowed men to 
marry women for a few days: the khalifa recognized prostitution when he 
saw it. (Shi'ite jurists later relegitimized this practice in their codes.} 
Omar's detractors charge him with misogyny, and his rulings do sug-
gest that he held women responsible for the bad behavior of men. To 
defuse the disruptive power of sexuality, Omar took measures to regulate 
and separate the roles of men and women, mandating, for example, that 

BIRTH OF THE KHALIFATE 
51 
women and men pray separately, presumably so they wouldn't be thinking 
about sex during that ritual. 
This was, however, a far cry from the separation of the sexes and the dis-
empowerment of women that developed in Islamic societies centuries later 
(and persists to this day). It's true, of course, that gender relationships in 
Medina did not conform to modern feminist ideals. Tribal Arabs (and most 
early cultures) saw separate and nonoverlapping roles for men and women, 
and Islam confirmed the separation. In Omar's day, however, education was 
compulsory for both boys and girls in the Muslim community. Women 
worked alongside men; they took part in public life; they attended lectures, 
delivered sermons, composed poetry for public orations, went to war as re-
lief workers, and sometimes even took part in fighting. Important decisions 
facing the community were discussed in public meetings, Omar partici-
pated in those meetings as just another citizen of the community, and 
women as well as men engaged him fearlessly in debate. In fact, Omar ap-
pointed a woman as head of the market in Medina, which was a position of 
great civic responsibility, for it included duties such as regulating construc-
tion, issuing business permits, and policing the integrity of weights and 
measures. Even so, Omar did plant seeds that eventually developed into a 
severe constriction of women's participation in public life. 
In the seventh century CE, every society in the world permitted slavery, 
and Arabia was no exception. Islam did not ban the practice, but it did 
limit a master's power over a slave, and Omar enforced these rulings 
strictly. No Muslim could be a slave. If a man impregnated a slave, he had 
to marry her, which meant that her child would be born a Muslim and 
therefore free. Slavery could not result in breaking up a family, which lim-
ited a master's options: he could only buy or sell whole families. 
Masters could not abuse or mistreat slaves, who had the same human 
rights as free folks, a theme stressed in the Qur'an and specifically reaf-
firmed in Prophet Mohammed's final sermon. Omar ruled a master had to 
give his slaves the same food he was eating and in fact had to have his 
slaves eat with his family. If Omar's rulings had been carried to their logi-
cal conclusions, slavery might have ended in the Muslim world in the early 
days of the khalifate. (Instead, Muslim societies regressed in this matter.) 
Ironically, Omar's own career ended when an emotionally unstable Per-
sian slave drove a knife into his belly at the mosque. On his deathbed, 

52 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
some of the community's notables asked him to nominate his successor as 
Abu Bakr had done, in order to ensure a smooth transition. "How about 
your son?" they suggested. 
Omar flew into his last rage: "Do you think I did this job to benefit 
myself and my family?" He died later that day, but before his death he es-
tablished another consequential precedent. He named a six-man consulta-
tive committee (a shura) to select a new khalifa and seek the consensus of 
the Umma on their choice. Many later Muslim thinkers looked to the 
shura as the basis for democratic institutions in Islam. The shura discov-
ered that two men, Ali and Othman, were everybody's first and second 
choices, some favoring Ali and some Othman. (Ali, remember, was Mo-
hammed's son-in-law who had already been passed over twice.) 
The chairman of the shura interviewed both men in front of an assem-
bly of the people, posing one key question to each: "If you become khal-
ifa, will you be guided by the Qur'an, the sunna, and the precedents set by 
Abu Bakr and Omar?" 
Ali said yes to the Qur'an and yes to the sunna (the example set by 
Mohammed's life), but as for the decisions of his predecessors-no: Ali 
said he had a mind of his own and would consult his own conscience and 
best judgment for his decisions. Othman, by contrast, said yes to every-
thing: "I am not an innovator." So the chairman declared him the right 
man to head the Umma, the people approved, and Ali, not wanting to 
rock the boat, took the oath of loyalty. 

Schism 
24-40AH 
644-661 CE 
THE THIRD KHALIFA (22-36 AH, 644-656 CE) 
Othman was Mohammed's fifth cousin once removed, and he took office 
as Islam's third khalifa at the age of sixty-eight. To understand his stormy 
twelve-year term, it's useful to look at who the man was and how he came 
to head up the community that ruled the Middle World. 
Othman's father had been one of the richest men in Mecca, and Oth-
man inherited his father's millions when he was twenty. With a deft touch 
for business, he managed to multiply that wealth many times over before 
he was even in his thirties, earning the nickname of Othman Ghani, "Oth-
man the wealthy." 
Chaste and modest even before his conversion, Othman never drank, 
smoked, or chased women. Around Mecca, he was famous for his good 
looks-people even went so far as to call him "beautiful"-yet an air of 
anxious melancholy always surrounded this austere, soft-spoken man. 
He converted to Islam about a year after Mohammed began his preach-
ing and nine years before the Hijra. His conversion story begins one 
evening when he was on his way home from a successful business trip. 
53 

54 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Reputedly, Othman had stopped someplace for the night and was lying 
under the stars, looking up at the black dome of the sky, when the immen-
sity of the universe suddenly overwhelmed him. Along with a crushing 
sense of his own insignificance carne a conviction that somebody was in con-
trol, that this universe had a master, and what a master He must be! At that 
moment, even though he was alone, Othman heard a penetrating voice an-
nounce out loud that the Messenger of God was in the world. As soon as he 
got home, the story goes, Othman went to his friend Abu Bakr, who told 
him the curious tale of Mohammed and his message about a single, om-
nipotent God. Othman immediately announced himself a believer. 
His conversion enraged his family. Mter all, his clan, the aristocratic 
Umayyads, was the most rabidly anti-Muslim faction of the Quraysh tribe. 
Othman's uncle Abu Sufyan would soon emerge as the leader of the anti-
Muslim forces. Othman's stepfather had once attacked Mohammed in an 
alley and would have strangled him if Abu Bakr had not intervened. Oth-
man's two wives reviled him for embracing Mohammed's faith. They 
would not convert, so Othman divorced them and married the Prophet's 
famously beautiful daughter Ruqayya. When she died, Othman married 
another daughter of Mohammed's, Urn Kulthum. 
The Muslims were no doubt glad to have a rich man in their ranks, and 
Othman was glad to help his fellow Muslims any way he could, but the 
main way he could think of was to provide money. Once, when abuse of 
Muslims was peaking in Mecca, Mohammed decided that a group of his 
followers should emigrate to Abyssinia, and Othman helped finance that. 
He himself emigrated with the group as well and in Abyssinia forged fruit-
ful business connections that made him even richer than before. A few 
years later he returned to Mecca, where his Abyssinian connections-
yes-served him so well he grew even richer. 
For most Muslims, the Hijra meant losing everything they owned. They 
knew nothing about farming, the main occupation in Medina, so the move 
impoverished them. But not Othman. Although he emigrated with the oth-
ers, he never quite severed his ties to business associates back home, and with 
those associates looking after his properties and business interests, Othman 
continued to prosper, even in Medina. There was never any suggestion that 
he carne by his wealth dishonestly: quite the opposite. Some people simply 
have the golden touch, and Othman was such a man. Nor was he a miser. 

SCHISM 
55 
He spent lavishly for the public good; for example, he expanded the mosque 
in Medina for Mohammed, and when the Muslims needed water, he bought 
a valuable well from one of the Jewish tribes and donated it to the public. 
Staggering wealth, dazzling beauty, two of the Prophet's daughters for 
wives-what did this man lack? And yet Othman seemed haunted by the 
fear that he was not good enough. He spent much of his time fasting, 
praying, and reading the Qur'an. Perhaps his extravagant donations to the 
public good were attempts to deserve the extraordinary good fortune he al-
ready enjoyed. 
Or perhaps he worried that his character was not quite at the level of 
the Prophet's other close companions. He missed the battle of Badr be-
cause his wife was sick. At the battle of Uhud, when a rumor spread that 
Mohammed had been killed, Othman was among the Muslims who aban-
doned hope and left the field. Othman redeemed himself at the Battle of 
the Moat, but shortly after that battle, his son died, and Othman seemed 
to feel that God was still punishing him. To earn forgiveness, he made a 
practice of buying slaves and liberating one each Friday. 
After Mohammed died, Othman worried that the community might fall 
apart, but in addition he seemed particularly afraid for his own individual 
soul. "How will we now be safe from the snares of the devil?" he lamented. 
Fear of the hereafter consumed the poor man. "Every day is doomsday," he 
once said, by which he meant there is never an instant when it's safe to stop 
being good, so he for one stepped up his fasting and praying, and dispensed 
ever more extravagant contributions, trying desperately to deserve a place in 
paradise that the Prophet Mohammed had assured him was already his. This 
haunted giant of benevolence became the third khalifa oflslam. 
When Omar began his khalifate, Islam had been a new kind of social or-
ganism still growing into its identity. Omar's khalifate was filled with a sense 
of spiritual adventure, invention, and discovery. By the time Othman took 
charge, the Islamic community was a government in control of a vast territory. 
It was no longer enough to preach, defend, attack, and spread holy excite-
ment. Muslim leaders now had to collect taxes, run courts, keep bridges and 
highways in repair, set salaries, define duties for various positions-all that 
dull administrative stuff of daily life. Managing this transition fell to Othman. 
One great project Othman saw to fruition during the first half of his 
khalifate was the preparation of a definitive edition of the Qur'an. He set 

56 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
scholars to work combing out redundancies among the copies that existed, 
resolving discrepancies, and evaluating passages whose authenticity was 
subject to doubt. The final product was compiled into a book in which 
the verses were arranged more or less in order of length (rather than the-
matically or chronologically). All other compilations, competing versions, 
and rejected verses were destroyed. From then on, every Qur'an would be 
the same, word for word, and that's the Qur'an all Muslims have today. 
You can see why this had to be done if the priority was to keep the com-
munity unified, but you can also see why this project might have disgrun-
tled some Muslims, especially if they already had suspicions about 
Othman's intentions-as some did. 
Next came the job of setting the community's finances in order. In the 
Prophet's time, there were basically no state expenditures. All money that 
flowed into Medina was distributed more or less immediately. Abu Bakr 
and Omar had operated in much the same way, although Abu Bakr did set 
up a treasury, and Omar did build up a surplus out of which he paid 
stipends to soldiers, the beginnings of a standing army for Islam. Under 
Othman, however, the treasury swelled into a regular organ of govern-
ment, which financed an ever-proliferating array of state expenses. 
This third khalifa dramatically increased the flow of tax revenues from 
his far-flung provinces. When Amr ibn al-A' as, the governor of Egypt, 
failed to send in enough money, Othman dismissed him and appointed his 
own foster brother Abdullah to the post. Abdullah succeeded in getting a 
great deal more money out of the province-in fact, doubling the revenue 
from Egypt-proving that Othman had made a wise business decision, 
but Amr ibn al-A'as grumbled that his successor was getting more milk out 
of the she-camel only by starving the camel's young. Islamic rule was ac-
quiring hints of possible oppression and corruption. 
Othman upheld Omar's prohibitions against confiscating land in con-
quered territories, but he lifted Omar's restrictions on Muslims buying land 
there, for Othman believed in economic freedom. In fact, he let eminent 
Muslims borrow money out of the public treasury to finance such pur-
chases. Soon, Muslim elites, including most of the Prophet Mohammed's 
companions, were amassing fortunes and acquiring immense estates 
throughout the new Islamic empire. Othman's "economic reforms" tended 
to profit his own clan, the Umayyads, above all because they were best sit-

SCHISM 
57 
uated to take out loans from the treasury. This khalifa also appointed his 
relatives and "favorites" to many powerful political posts throughout the 
empire, simply because they were the people he knew best and trusted 
most. As a result, the Umayyads ended up acquiring disproportionate 
clout, both economically and politically. 
The third khalifa continued to practice an austere lifestyle but de-
manded no such austerity from his officials. Being a rich man, he took no 
salary, but he did dole out grants to his favorites and spent lavishly on pub-
lic works. His administration built over five thousand new mosques across 
the empire. Othman promoted a building boom that turned Medina into 
a city of broad streets and imposing buildings paved with fine tile, includ-
ing a palatial mansion for Othman himself, a headquarters suitable to the 
dignity of his powerful office (within this palace Othman lived on bread, 
water, and prayer). 
Throughout the empire, Othman demonstrated his business genius by 
ordering improvements beneficial to commerce. Canals were dug, highways 
built, irrigation systems improved. Ports got new facilities. Proliferating cities 
got new wells and water systems, and new bazaars regulated by government-
appointed market officers. The Muslim enterprise didn't have quite the same 
flavor as it had in Omar's day, but who could argue with prosperity? 
On questions of personal morality such as drinking and sex, Othman's 
asceticism put him beyond criticism. If piety consisted of penance and 
prayer, he had to rank among the top ten most pious men of his time, but 
Othman saw no ethical ambiguity in people making money, so long as 
their moneymaking promoted overall well being. 
One of Othman's great favorites was his cousin Mu'awiya. Omar had 
appointed Mu'awiya governor of Damascus and its surroundings. Othman 
kept adding bits to his cousin's territory, until Mu'awiya governed every-
thing from the headwaters of the Euphrates River down the Mediterranean 
coast to Egypt. 
Mu'awiya was the son of Abu Sufyan, the Meccan tribal aristocrat who 
led the attack on Islam in two of those three iconic battles between Mecca 
and Medina. Mu'awiya's mother, Hind, followed her husband to those bat-
tles, and at Uhud, after the Muslims fled, she reputedly ate the liver of 
Mohammed's fallen uncle Hamzah in an act of triumphalist gloating. The 
Prophet, however, was never one to hold a grudge: as soon as someone 

58 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
embraced Islam, he or she became part of the family, and so it was with the 
Umayyads. The Prophet thought Mu'awiya especially competent and kept 
him close after his conversion. 
No doubt Omar appointed Mu'awiya governor of Damascus because he 
got things done, but perhaps Omar should have paused to consider why 
Mohammed had kept the man so close: once ensconced in Damascus, 
Mu'awiya put his brilliance to work assembling a standing army loyal to 
himsel£ This would have grim consequences after Othman's untimely death. 
Toward the end of Othman's twelve-year reign, grumbling began to 
sound throughout the empire. In Egypt, his foster brother was squeezing 
people so hard for money that riots broke out. Egyptian notables wrote to 
the khalifa, begging him to recall the governor. Hearing nothing back, 
they sent a delegation to petition him in person. As it happened, at this 
very time, groups of disgruntled citizens were converging on the city from 
the north as well. Apparently, Othman had displeased a lot of people. 
All these petitioners made Othman nervous. He begged Ali to go out 
and talk to the malcontents on his behalf, placate them and persuade them 
to go home, but Ali refused, perhaps because he himself disapproved of the 
third khalifa's policies and practices. He advised Othman to secure himself 
by addressing the people's legitimate complaints. Finally, Othman gave in 
and met with the Egyptian delegation. He promised to replace his foster 
brother and told the Egyptians to go home and let the governor know a 
new man would soon be coming to replace him. 
The Egyptians started back, feeling pretty good, but along the way they 
caught up with a slave of Othman's. Something about the man aroused 
their suspicions. They searched him and found a letter on his person, 
seemingly signed by the khalifa and addressed to the governor of Egypt, 
which told Governor Abdullah to arrest the delegation of malcontents as 
soon as they showed up at his court and to execute them as soon as it 
seemed politic! 
The delegation returned to Medina in a fury. Othman came dithering 
out of the palace to meet them on the steps: Back so soon? What was 
wrong? They showed him the letter and Othman expressed shock. He 
swore he had never written such a thing, never heard of it until this mo-
ment. In fact, his troublemaking cousin Marwan, a relative and ally of the 
governor of Damascus, might have penned the letter and forged the khal-

SCHISM 
59 
ifa's signature to it. Poor Othman, nearly eighty at this time, might well 
have been easy to manipulate. 
In any case, the peaceful petitioners turned into an angry mob. First, 
they demanded that the khalifa deliver Mu'awiya's brother to them. The 
khalifa refused. Then they demanded that Othman step down and let 
some better man take over. Othman indignantly refused this too. His 
obligation was to God, he said, and quitting his office at the behest of a 
mob would be an affront to God! He then retired to his private chambers, 
where he lit a little lamp and settled in a corner to do what he always did 
in times of turmoil and doubt: humbly read his Qur' an. 
Outside his palace, the rioters worked themselves into a frenzy, broke 
down palace doors, and burst in with a roar. They found the khalifa in his 
study, and there in the flickering twilight of the old man's lamp, in year 34 
of the Muslim era, they beat their own leader to death. Suddenly, the suc-
cession conundrum had turned into a horrifying crisis that threatened the 
very soul of Islam. 
For four days the mob rampaged through the city. The citizens of Med-
ina cowered in their houses, waiting for the violence to die down. Even 
when the uproar faded, the leaders of the mob said they would not quit 
town until a new khalifa was appointed, someone they could trust. Now, 
at last, all thoughts turned to the one candidate who had been passed over 
time after time, the man some had always called the Prophet's only legiti-
mate successor: Mohammed's son-in-law Ali. 
At first, Ali refused the honor; but every other prominent member of 
the Muslim community turned down the khalifate as well, and the rebels 
threatened to launch a reign of terror unless Medina chose someone they 
could live with and chose him fast, so leading Muslims crowded into the 
mosque and begged Ali to take charge. 
What a strange moment this must have been for Ali. For twenty-five 
agonizing years he must have felt like he was watching the ship drift off 
course. Three times, the Umma had rejected his leadership when he still 
would have had the power to make things right. Each time, he had been a 
good sport, because what else could he do? Trying to seize the helm would 
have split the community. He had to choose between causing trouble or 
watching the enterprise falter; killing it or letting it die. Only now, when 
things had gone so off kilter that Muslims had murdered their khalifa, now 

60 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
when his successor would face an impossible challenge, now the Umma 
was saying, "Take the reins, Ali." 
THE FOURTH KHALIFA (36-40 AH, 656-661 CE) 
Ali finally accepted the khalifate, but in his first oration to the people, he 
told them he had accepted this office under duress. He lamented the un-
raveling of the Umma in the single generation since the Prophet's death. It 
would take a stern hand to put things back in order, Ali said, and he gave 
the Umma fair warning: from him, what they could expect was stern. 
One key segment of the community didn't hear him. The members of the 
Umayyad clan, Othman's close relatives, had fled to Damascus, where their 
kinsman Mu'awiya had quietly been assembling his military force. Mu'awiya 
began touring his province with a professional storyteller. At each stop, the 
storyteller aroused the crowd with a dramatic account of the murder in Med-
ina. At the climactic moment, Mu' awiya himself would burst onstage, waving 
a bloody shirt, the very shirt in which (he claimed) the khalifa had been mur-
dered. It was masterful political theater. Mu'awiya would then call upon the 
new khalifa to arrest and punish Othman's murderers or step down. 
But how could Ali arrest the assassins? No one knew exactly who in 
that mob had dealt the actual blows. In any real sense, the whole mob was 
"the assassin." To meet Mu'awiya's demands, Ali would have had to arrest 
and punish the whole mob. This would never have been practical, but in 
the circumstances, it was utterly impossible: the mob still ruled the streets 
of Medina. Ali simply did not have the power to do as Mu'awiya de-
manded, and the governor knew it. 
Besides, the rioters who murdered Othman had started out as victims 
of injustice and oppression. They had come to Medina with legitimate 
grievances, but in killing the khalifa, they had handed the higher moral 
ground to their oppressors. Now, Ali was forced to choose between align-
ing himself with the oppressors or the murderers-a heartbreaking choice! 
He decided he would start by attacking the corruption rotting the em-
pire. Win or lose, it was his only hope: by reversing Othman's policies and 
restoring rectitude, he might still pull the community back onto the Path, 
thereby acquiring the credibility and stature he needed to do all the other 
things that needed doing. 

SCHISM 
61 
But a whole new class of nouveau riche had sprung out of the compost 
of the Muslim conquests, and this elite was not interested in Ali's idea of 
purity or his reforms. To them, Ali looked like a revolutionary threat, and 
Mu'awiya looked like the guardian of their wealth and safety, the new 
status quo. 
Ali fired all the governors Othman had appointed and sent out new 
men to replace them, but none of the fired governors agreed to step down, 
except the one in Yemen, and he fled with all the money in the treasury, 
leaving a bankrupt province for Ali's appointee to take over. 
Meanwhile, trouble cropped up in another quarter. The Prophet's 
youngest wife Ayesha happened to be in Mecca when Othman was assas-
sinated. When Mu'awiya began his ruckus, Ayesha threw in with him, in 
part because there had always been bad blood between her and Ali. She an-
nounced her alignment with a fiery speech in Mecca. "0 ye people! 
Rebels ... have murdered the innocent Othman .... They violated the 
sanctity of the city of the Holy Prophet in the sacred month of hajj. They 
plundered and looted the citizens of Medina. By God, a single finger of 
Othman was more precious than the lives of all the assassins. The mischief 
has not been crushed, and the murderers of Othman have not been 
brought to book .... Seek satisfaction on these murderers. Only vengeance 
for the blood of Othman can vindicate the honor oflslam." 
Capitalizing on the passion she aroused, she assembled an army, con-
vened a war council, and mapped out a campaign. The ousted governor of 
Yemen pledged all his stolen treasure to her cause. Flush with funds, 
Ayesha led her troops north and stormed Basra, a key city in southern Iraq. 
She dispatched Ali's loyalists quickly and took over. 
At this point, someone started a whispering campaign charging Ali 
himself with complicity in the assassination of Othman. Poor honest Ali 
admitted that he bore some responsibility for the crime because when 
Othman was pleading for protection, Ali had withheld his sword arm. The 
thought that he might have saved Othman tormented the fourth khalifa of 
Islam, and his honesty only fueled the rumors that undermined him. 
Ali tried to raise an army to fight Ayesha, preaching that this was a 
jihad and that people should rally to defend Islam as they had in days of 
yore. But Muslims were confused, because Ayesha was calling for jihad 
too, against Ali. Both sides claimed to be fighting for truth, justice, and 

62 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
the Islamic way, yet each was calling on Muslims to fight other Muslims. 
This wasn't what they called jihad back in the good old days! 
Curiously, Ayesha's cohorts included two men, Talha and Zubayd, 
companions of the Prophet, who may have been part of the mob that at-
tacked Othman's palace that day. If not themselves assassins, they were cer-
tainly associated with the assassins-yet here they were, leading members 
of a force vowing to avenge the assassination of Othman by toppling Ali! 
Ali marched out of Medina with the few troops he could muster, but 
various tribal warriors joined him on his way north, and his army grew to 
imposing size. When he reached Basra, he sent a trusted comrade into the 
city to negotiate with Ayesha. Remarkably, the spokesman's arguments got 
through to the fierce young woman. First, she admitted that she didn't re-
ally think Ali had anything to do with Othman's murder. What she 
blamed him for was failing to arrest the criminals responsible. Then, she 
agreed that the criminals were part of a mob, and that the mob, which was 
still in charge, drew its strength from chaos. Next, she admitted that by 
fighting Ali, she was promoting chaos and so, yes, in a sense she herself was 
helping the assassins escape justice. By the end of the day, she had agreed 
to lay down her weapons, disband her army, and join forces with Ali. She 
would meet with him in the morning to discuss terms. 
The interaction reflected credit on both leaders: on Ali for seeking ne-
gotiation before battle, on Ayesha for the intellectual honesty that enabled 
her, even in the heat of anger, even while surrounded by the smell of war 
and the threat of death, to listen to Ali's case and admit the validity of 
points that eroded her position-just because they were true. In this, there 
was heroism. 
The envoy returned to Ali's camp to give him the good news, and that 
night celebration rang out on both sides. There would be peace! There was 
just one problem that no one took into account: both armies contained 
members of the very mob that had killed Othman and would be brought 
to book if Ali and Ayesha made common cause. These men obviously 
could not afford to give peace a chance. 
Early the next morning, a gang of them crept out of Ali's camp and 
launched a surprise attack on Ayesha's sleeping forces. By the time Ali 
woke up, Ayesha's men were striking back. Both Ali and Ayesha thought 
the other had double-crossed them, and thus began the Battle of the 

SCHISM 
63 
Camel, so-called because Ayesha rode a camel right into the battlefield and 
directed her troops from its back; the battle ended only when her camel 
was cut down and she was captured. Ali won the day, but what a bitter vic-
tory! It's difficult to imagine how the two of them must have felt, meeting 
after the carnage ended, the Prophet's adored wife and the Prophet's 
beloved son-in-law, face to face on a blood-soaked field littered with ten 
thousand Muslim dead, many of them close companions of the Messenger 
of God. 
As they pieced together how people and events had betrayed them 
both, these two survivors made some sort of peace with one another. Per-
haps they found their way to a friendship, even. Perhaps, in some strange 
way, the tragedy that engulfed them both, and the horrors that neither 
could have wanted, drew them together. In any case, they never fought 
again. After the Battle of the Camel, Ayesha retired to Medina, and spent 
the rest of her life recording the sayings of the Prophet and writing com-
mentaries on them. She ended her days as one of the most respected early 
scholars of Islam. 
Ali never went back to Medina. He made the city ofKufa, in modern-
day Iraq, his seat of government to reward the people of that city for sup-
porting him, and he tried to piece together the remains of his khalifate, 
but the heartbreaking war with Ayesha only marked the beginning of his 
troubles. The master troublemaker still loomed in the wings, sharpening 
his scimitar and drilling his troops. Mu'awiya was getting ready for his 
final push. 
By this time, Mu'awiya had formally refused allegiance to Ali and de-
clared that the khalifate belonged to him. Both sides led armies into the 
field. In the year 36 AH, (657 CE), Ali confronted Mu'awiya at the battle 
of Siffin. It started when Mu'awiya's army tried to block Ali's access to 
water. A brief battle burst out, but Ali's men gained the river bank, and the 
fighting subsided into a stalemate that lasted for months, interrupted only 
by sporadic skirmishes. Both sides were holding back, looking for a way to 
win without brutality, because each side stood to lose religious authority 
by spilling Muslim blood. 
The standoff ended with a four-day outburst of violence in which some 
sources reckon that sixty-five thousand people died. The slaughter led to 
calls that both armies pull back and let the two leaders settle the dispute 

64 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
with hand-to-hand combat. Ali, who was fifty-eight years old but still a 
fearsome physical specimen, eagerly accepted the challenge. Mu'awiya, 
who was about the same age as Ali, but dissipated and fat, said no. 
Ali's troops renewed the attack, this time felling Mu' awiya's soldiers like 
weeds, but Mu'awiya devised a stratagem to give them pause: he had his 
soldiers attach pages of the Qur'an to their lance tips and march behind 
recitation experts who chanted Qur'anic verses and exhorted Ali to nego-
tiate in the name of peace among Muslims. Ali's troops quailed at the 
prospect of defiling the Qur'an and Ali agreed to negotiations. 
He probably didn't think of himself as giving into anything, since he 
had been calling for negotiation from the start; but no doubt he was think-
ing of talks that would end with Mu'awiya acknowledging his right to rule 
in exchange for some concession such as a guarantee to let him stay on as 
governor of Syria. Instead, when the representatives of the two leaders met, 
they agreed that the two men were equals, and that each should remain in 
charge of his own territories, Mu' awiya ruling Syria and Egypt, Ali ruling 
everything else. 
This wasn't what Ali had been looking for, and it certainly infuriated 
his partisans, his shi'i, to use the Arabic word-a word that became the 
name of the sect that grew out of this rift. But Ali could not now reject the 
results without seeming to show bad faith. Mu'awiya had snookered him! 
Besides, Ali was operating with a handicap. For twenty-six years Ali's 
shi'i had been declaring that he possessed God-given powers of leadership, 
powers that could save the Muslim community from its ills. Originally, 
this claim referred to his blood relationship with the Prophet, but over the 
decades, as the first three khalifas were shaping a new social order, Ali had 
been delivering mystical sermons that held forth rapturously on the nature 
of Allah's omnipotence, immensity, oneness, and beyondness. In short, 
while the other khalifas had made themselves the guardians of Mo-
hammed's communitarian vision, Ali had established himself as the keeper 
of the inner flame. So his partisans' proposition came to be that unlike all 
other claimants to the khalifate, Ali had some mystical personal access to 
Allah's guidance. His whole case rested on this image. 
Now he was ... negotiating? With Mu'awiya, the utter embodiment of 
anti-Muslim materialism? What kind of God-gifted avatar of Allah-guided 
truth was he? 

SCHISM 
65 
Compromising with the enemy disappointed a faction of Ali's most 
committed followers, and these younger, more radical of his partisans split 
away. They carne to be known as Kharijites, "ones who departed." This 
splinter group reformulated the ideals of Ali's followers into a revolution-
ary new doctrine: blood and genealogy meant nothing, they said. Even a 
slave had the right to lead the community. The only qualification was 
character. No one was born to leadership, and mere election could not 
transform someone into the khalifa. Whoever exhibited the greatest au-
thentic devotion to Muslim values simply was the khalifa, no election 
needed. He was, however, accountable to the people. If he ever fell a hair 
short of complete moral excellence, he forfeited his right to high office and 
someone else became khalifa. Through what actual machinery all this de-
motion and promotion was to occur, the Kharijites didn't say. Not their 
problem. They only knew that Ali had squandered his entitlement and 
needed to step down; and since he didn't step down, one young Kharijite 
took matters into his own hands. In the year 40 AH, this hothead assassi-
nated Ali. 
Ali's partisans immediately looked to his son Hassan as his successor, 
but Mu' awiya swept this challenge aside by offering Hassan a sum of 
money to renounce all claim to the khalifate. Mohammed's older grand-
son, heartbroken and war-weary at this point, stepped aside. He had no 
stomach for continuing the fight, and under the circumstances now pre-
vailing, claiming the khalifate could only constitute a power grab, and 
what good was that? And so the Umayyad dynasty began. 
Ali's death ended the first era of Islamic history. Muslim historians 
carne to call the first four post-Mohammed leaders the Rightly Guided 
Khalifas. Life in their time was certainly not undiluted sweetness and won-
der, but in calling them the Rightly Guided Ones, I don't think responsi-
ble Muslim historians mean to suggest such perfection. Rather, they're 
saying that the evolution of the community from the time of the Hijra to 
the assassination of Ali was a religious drama. Yes there was bloodshed and 
heartache, but the turmoil didn't stem from petty people vying for power, 
money, or ego gratification. The four khalifas and Mohammed's close 
companions who formed the core of the Umma in this period were hon-
estly striving to make the revelations work. Each of them had a handle on 
some essential aspect of the project, but no one of them was big enough to 

66 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
grasp the whole of it, as Mohammed had done. The Prophet's immediate 
successors were like the six blind men trying to discern whether the ele-
phant was more like a rope, a wall, a pillar, or what. All the struggles over 
the khalifate in the period of the Rightly Guided Ones had theological 
meaning because the issues they struggled with were essentially theologi-
cal. After Ali's death, the khalifate was just an empire. 

5 
~ 
Empire of the 
Umayyads 
40-120 AH 
661-737 CE 
0 
F couRsE, MU' AWIYA did not present himself as the man who ended 
the religious era. He titled himselfkhalifa and said he was continuing 
the same great mission as his predecessors. Toward the end of his life, how-
ever, he convened a council of Arab tribal leaders to discuss who his succes-
sor would be, a meeting that had the outward form of a shura, a 
consultative committee like the one Omar established. The chieftains 
thought their opinions were sincerely being solicited and began discussing 
the merits of this and that candidate. Suddenly one of the khalifa's hench-
men jumped to his feet and glowered around the circle. "Right now," he 
scowled, "this is the commander of the faithful." He pointed to Mu'awiya. 
''After he dies, it's this one." He pointed to Yazid, the emperor's eldest son. 
''And if any of you object, it's this one!" He pulled out his sword." 1 
The chiefs got the point. They went on through all the proper Muslim-
democratic forms and made all the appropriate noises and gestures, but in 
the end they dutifully chose Yazid to be their next khalifa, and when they 
67 

68 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
went home that night, they all knew the principle of succession would 
never come up for discussion again. 
When Yazid succeeded to the throne, however, he knew his father had 
not eliminated but merely suppressed rebellious elements. Yazid therefore 
kept close tabs on all who might challenge his power, especially Ali's rela-
tives and descendents. Hassan had passed away by this time, but his 
brother Hussein was still alive, and just to be on the safe side, the emperor 
decided to have this man assassinated on his next pilgrimage to Mecca. 
Hussein was now in his forties. He knew his father's partisans consid-
ered him to be the true khalifa; he knew that zealous Muslims looked to 
him to keep the spiritual revolution alive; but no one man could shoulder 
such a heavy mantle. Hussein had opted out of politics and lived a quiet 
life of prayer and contemplation all these years, meditating on his grand-
father's mission. 
But when he learned of the plot to have him killed, and that Yazid's as-
sassins planned to murder him in the Ka'ba itself, Hussein could take no 
more. He had no troops and no military experience. Yazid had a network 
of spies, a treasury, and an army. Even so, in the year 60 AH (680 by the 
common calendar), Hussein announced that he was going to challenge 
Yazid and left Medina with a force of seventy-two people. 
Actually, calling it a "force" goes too far: the seventy-two included 
Hussein's wife, his children, and some doddering elderly relatives. Only a 
handful of the company were fighting-age males. What was the man 
thinking? Did he really imagine he could topple the Umayyad monarch 
with this tiny band? Was he perhaps thinking that if he just started 
marching, he would ignite a firestorm of revolt and inspire the tribes to 
join him? 
Probably not. In a final sermon before his departure, Hussein told his 
followers that he was sure to be slain but was not afraid, because death 
"surrounds Adam's offspring as a necklace surrounds a young girl's neck."2 
He noted a Qur'anic verse that told people to stand up to unjust rulers like 
Yazid. If the son of Ali and Fatima, the grandson of the Prophet himself, 
did not stand up to tyranny, who would? As portrayed in traditional ac-
counts, therefore, Hussein was determined to make an example of his own 
life: right from the start, he saw himself as embarking on a pilgrimage with 
ritual significance. In a sense, he was committing noble suicide. 

EMPIRE OF THE UMAYYADS 
-a-
Place where Hussein 
stopped for the night 
-
Modern Political l:lorders 
IMAM HUSSEIN 'S ROUTE TO KARBALA 
69 
When Yazid heard that the Prophet's younger grandson was on the 
move, he sent an army to swat him down. Hussein posed no real threat to 
the empire, but Yazid wanted to crush him with overwhelming force as a 
warning to other radicals who might be tempted to play the God-chose-
me card. The army he sent outnumbered Hussein's little group by enough 
to make it no contest. Legends put that number at anywhere from four 
hundred to forty thousand. 
Whatever its size, this imperial army caught up with Hussein in the 
desert just south of Karbala, a city near the southern border of Iraq. If you 
glance at weather reports for that part of the world on any summer day, 
you'll see temperatures ranging upward of 115 degrees. On just such a 
sweltering day, the emperor's army trapped Hussein's little band within 
smelling distance of the Euphrates River but cut off from the water. Hus-
sein, however, did what his father had failed to do. He refused to settle, 
compromise, or bargain. God had chosen him to lead the community of 
virtue, he said, and he would not disavow that truth. 

70 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
One by one, the warriors in Hussein's band sallied forth to fight Yazid's 
army. One by one they fell. The women, children, and old folks, mean-
while, all died of thirst. When the last of the party was gone, the victori-
ous general swooped in, cut off Hussein's head, and shipped it to the 
emperor with a gloating note. 
The severed head arrived just as Yazid was entertaining a Byzantine 
envoy, and it spoiled the whole dinner party. The Byzantine envoy said, "Is 
this how you Muslims behave? We Christians would never treat a descen-
dant ofJesus in this manner." The criticism angered Yazid, and he had the 
"Roman" thrown into prison. Later, however, he saw that keeping the sev-
ered head might be bad public relations, so he sent it back to Karbala to be 
buried with the body. 
Yazid no doubt believed he had solved his problem: surely Ali's descen-
dents would never make trouble again. He was quite wrong, however. By 
crushing Hussein at Karbala, this emperor lit a spark. The passionate embrace 
of Ali's cause now became a prairie fire called Shi'ism. What is Shi'ism? 
One often hears it summed up as if it were just another quarrel about dynas-
tic succession, like the battles between Maud and Stephen in twelfth-century 
England. If that had really been the case, the movement would have faded out 
after Ali died. Who today calls himself a Maudist or a Stephenist? Who today 
even cares which of these two had the more legitimate claim to the English 
throne? Ali, however, kept gaining new adherents after his death. The ranks 
of his Shi'i kept on swelling. People who were not even born when Ali died 
grew up to embrace his cause and shape their identities around the conviction 
that he should have been the first khalifa. How could this be? 
The answer, of course, is that the dispute about the khalifate was no 
mere dynastic struggle. Key religious issues were embedded in it, because 
the choice involved not just who but also what the leader would be. Ali's 
partisans saw in him something that they did not see in other claimants to 
the khalifate: a God-given spiritual quality that made him more than an 
ordinary mortal, a quality they had seen in Mohammed as well. No one 
said Ali was another Messenger of God. No one would have made that 
claim (at that point, anyway), and so they gave Ali a different title. They 
said he was the imam. 
Originally, imam was simply the term for a person who led communal 
prayer. To most Muslims, that's still what the word means today. It's a title 

EMPIRE OF THE UMAYYADS 
71 
of respect, to be sure, but no more grandiose than, say, reverend or honor-
able. After all, every time a group of Muslims gathers to pray communally, 
one person among them has to lead the prayer; and he does nothing dif-
ferent than the others do; he just does it standing alone in front of the oth-
ers to help keep the group moving in tandem through the ritual. Every 
mosque has an imam, and when he's not leading prayer, he might be 
sweeping the floor or patching the roof. 
But when Shi'i say "imam," they mean something considerably more 
elevated. To Shi'i there is always one imam in the world, and there is never 
more than one. They proceed from the premise that Mohammed had 
some palpable mystical substance vested in him by Allah, some energy, 
some light, which they call the baraka of Mohammed. When the Prophet 
died, that light passed into Ali, at which moment Ali became the first 
imam. When Ali died, that same light passed into his son Hassan, who be-
came the second Imam. Later, the spark passed into Hassan's younger 
brother Hussein, who became the third imam. When Hussein was mar-
tyred at Karbala, the whole "imam" idea flowered into a rich theological 
concept that addressed a religious craving left unnourished by the main-
stream doctrines of that time. 
The mainstream doctrine, as articulated by Abu Bakr and Omar, said 
that Mohammed was strictly a messenger delivering a set of instructions 
about how to live. The message was the great and only thing. Beyond de-
livering the Qur'an, Mohammed's religious significance was only his sunna, 
the example he set by his way of life, an example others could follow if they 
wanted to live in God's favor. People who accepted this doctrine eventually 
came to be known as Sunnis, and they comprise nine-tenths of the Muslim 
community today. 
The Shi'i, by contrast, felt that they couldn't make themselves worthy of 
heaven simply by their own efforts. To them, instructions were not enough. 
They wanted to believe that direct guidance from God was still coming into 
the world, through some chosen person who could bathe other believers in 
a soul-saving grace, some living figure who would keep the world warm and 
pure. They adopted the term imam for this reassuring figure. His presence 
in the world ensured the continuing possibility of miracle. 
When Hussein went to Karbala, he had no chance of winning. His only 
hope lay in the possibility of God producing a miracle-but then, the 

72 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
continuing possibility of miracle was the principle he embodied. He and 
his band chose death as symbolic refusal to disavow this possibility, and, in 
the final analysis, to Shi'i, a miracle did occur at Karbala, the miracle of 
Hussein's martyrdom. 
To this day, Shi'i around the world commemorate the anniversary of 
Hussein's death with a day of cathartic mourning. They gather in "lamen-
tation houses" to recount the story of the martyrdom, a religious narrative 
that casts Hussein in the role of a redemptive figure on an apocalyptic 
scale. By his martyrdom, Hussein has gained a place next to God and 
earned the privilege of interceding for sinners. Those who embrace him 
and believe in him will be saved and go to heaven, no matter what trans-
gressions may foul their record. Hussein gave Shi'i this back door to the 
miracle they had hoped for all along. Believing in Hussein could not get 
you gold or high office or luck in love, but it could get you into heaven: 
that was the miracle. 
And now for the political story that unfolded after Mu'awiya took power. 
The Umayyad ascension may have ended the birth oflslam as a religious 
event, but it launched the evolution of Islam as a civilization and a po-
litical empire. In the annals of conventional Western history, the 
Umayyads marked the beginning of Muslim greatness. They put Islam 
on the map by kicking off a golden age that lasted long after they them-
selves had fallen. 
Whatever his shortcomings as a saint, Mu'awiya possessed tremendous 
political skill. The very qualities that helped him defeat the tormented Ali 
made him a successful monarch, and his reign institutionalized practices 
and procedures that would hold an Islamic empire together for centuries. 
This is all very ironic because, let us not forget, when Mohammed's 
prophetic career began, the Umayyads were a leading dan among the rich 
elite of Mecca. When Mohammed as Messenger denounced the malefac-
tors of great wealth who ignored the poor and exploited the widows and 
orphans, the Umayyads were some of the main people he was talking 
about. When Mohammed still lived in Mecca, the Umayyads outdid each 
other in harassing his followers. They helped plot the assassination of Mo-
hammed before the Hijra and led some of the forces that tried to extin-
guish the Umma in its cradle after the Muslims moved to Medina. 

EMPIRE OF THE UMAYYADS 
73 
But once Islam began to look like a juggernaut, the Umayyads con-
verted, joined the Umma, and climbed to the top of the new society; and 
here they were again, back among the new elite. Before Islam, they were 
merely among the elite of a city. Now, they were the top elite of a global 
empire. I'm sure many among them were scratching their heads, trying to 
remember what they ever found to dislike in this new faith! 
As rulers, the Umayyads possessed some powerful instruments of policy 
inherited from their predecessors, especially Omar and Othman. Omar 
had done them a great favor by sanctifying offensive warfare as jihad so 
long as it was conducted against infidels in the cause of Islam. This defin-
ition of jihad enabled the new Muslim rulers to maintain a perpetual state 
of war on their frontiers, a policy with pronounced benefits. 
For one thing, perpetual war drained violence to the edges of the em-
pire and helped keep the interior at peace, reinforcing the theory of a 
world divided between the realm of peace (Islam) and the realm of war 
(everything else), which developed in the days of the first khalifas. 
Perpetual war on the frontiers helped to reify this concept of war and 
peace, first of all, by making the narrative seem true-the frontier was 
generally a violent place, while the interior was generally a place of peace 
and security-and second, by helping to make it actually be true. By uni-
fying the Arab tribes against a surrounding Other, this concept of jihad 
reduced the incessant internecine warfare that marked Arab tribal life be-
fore Islam and thus really did help to make the Islamic world a realm of 
(relative) peace! 
You can see this dynamic more clearly when you consider who fought 
the early wars of expansion. It wasn't so much a case of emperors dis-
patching armies of professional soldiers to do their bidding according to 
some master plan. The campaigns were fought by tribal armies who went 
off to battle more or less when they felt like it, as volunteers for the faith, 
responding more to the wishes than the orders of the khalifa. If they hadn't 
been fighting at the borders to expand the territory under Muslim rule, 
they might well have been fighting at home to wrest booty from their 
neighbors. 
Perpetual war also worked to confirm Islam's claim to divine sanction, so 
long as it kept leading to victory. From ilie start, astonishing military and 
political success had functioned as Islam's core confirming miracle. Jesus may 

74 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
have healed the blind and raised the dead. Moses may have turned a staff 
into a snake and led an exodus for which the Red Sea parted. Visible mira-
des of this ilk proved the divinity or divine sponsorship of those prophets. 
Mohammed, however, never really dealt in supernatural miracles such 
as those. He never solicited followers with displays of power that contra-
dicted the laws of nature. His one supernatural feat, really, was ascending 
to heaven on a white horse from the city of Jerusalem, and this was not a 
miracle performed for the multitudes. It happened to him unseen by any 
public, and he reported it later to his companions. People could believe 
him or not, as they wished; it didn't impact his mission, because he wasn't 
offering his ascent to heaven as proof that his message was true. 
No, Mohammed's miracle (aside from the Qur'an itself and the persuasive 
impact it had on so many who heard it) was that Muslims won battles even 
when outnumbered three to one. This miracle continued to unfold under the 
first khalifas as Muslim-ruled territory kept expanding at a breathtaking pace, 
and what could explain success like that except divine intervention? 
The miracle continued under the Umayyads. The victories didn't come 
as fast, nor as dramatically, but then, the opportunity for truly dramatic 
victories diminished over time simply because Muslims rarely found them-
selves as outnumbered as they were at first. The bottom line was that the 
victories kept coming and the territory kept expanding-it never shrank. 
So long as this was true, perpetual war continued to confirm the truth of 
Islam, which fed the fervor that enabled the victories, which confirmed the 
truth that fed the fervor, which enabled the victories that confirmed the 
truth ... and so on, round and round. 
Perpetual war had some tangible benefits too. It brought in revenue. As 
Muslims told it, some Allah-defying potentate would tax his subjects until 
his coffers were overflowing; then the Muslims would appear, knock him 
off his throne, liberate his subjects from his greed, and take his treasures. 
This made the liberated people happy and the Muslims rich: everybody 
ended up ahead except the defeated princes. 
One-fifth of the plunder was sent back to the capital, and at first all of 
it was distributed among the Umma, with the neediest taken care of first. 
But with each khalifa, an increasing percentage went into the public trea-
sury; when the Umayyads took over, they started funneling virtually all 
revenue into the public treasury and using it to cover the costs of govern-

EMPIRE OF THE UMAYYADS 
75 
ment, which included lavish building projects, ambitious public works, 
and extravagant charitable endowments. Revenue from the perpetual bor-
der wars thus enabled the Umayyad government to operate as a positive 
force in society, lavishing benefits on citizens without raising taxes. 
Then there were precedents bequeathed to the Umayyads by Khalifa 
Othman, who allowed Muslims to spend their money any way they 
wanted, so long as they followed Islamic strictures. Based on Othman's rul-
ings, the Umayyads allowed Muslims to purchase land in conquered terri-
tory with money borrowed from the treasury. Of course one had to be very 
well connected to get such loans, even more so than in Othman's time, and 
since Islam outlawed usury, these loans were interest-free, which is nice fi-
nancing if you can get it. 
Omar had ordered that Muslim Arab warriors moving into new terri-
tories stay in garrisons apart from local populations, in part to avoid 
trampling on the rights and sensibilities of the locals, in part to keep Mus-
lims from being seduced by pagan pleasures, and in part to keep the mi-
nority Muslims from being absorbed into the majority locals. In Umayyad 
times, these garrisons evolved into fortified Arab cities housing a new 
landed aristocracy, who owned and profited from vast estates in the sur-
rounding countryside. 
Islamic society bore no resemblance to feudal Europe, however, where 
manors were largely self-sufficient economic units, producing for immedi-
ate consumption. The Umayyad Empire hummed with handicrafts, and it 
was sewn together by intricate trade networks. Wealth milked out of the 
vast estates didn't just sit there but proliferated into trade goods that 
flowed to distant lands and brought other trade goods flowing back. Gar-
rison cities softened into busy commercial entrepots. The Islamic world 
was dotted with vigorous cities. It was an urbane world. 
Mu'awiya himself, reviled by the devout as a poor show next to such 
spiritual giants as the Rightly Guided Khalifas, proved himself no slouch as 
an economic manager and politician. Ruthless but charming, he gained the 
cooperation of fractious Arab chieftains, mostly with persuasion, using his 
military and police powers largely to put down revolts and impose law and 
order, which benefited him but also smooilied the way for civilized life. 
Consider the mixture of stick and carrot in this warning to ilie people of 
Basra, issued by Mu'awiya's adopted brother Ziyad, whom he had appointed 

76 
Atlantic 
Ocean 
THE UMAYYAD EMPIRE 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Indian 
Ocean 
governor of Basra: "You allow kinship to prevail and put religion second; you 
excuse and hide your transgressors and tear down the orders which Islam has 
sanctified for your protection. Take care not to creep about in the night. I 
will kill every man found on the streets after dark. Take care not to appeal to 
your kin; I will cut off the tongue of every man who raises that call. ... I rule 
with the omnipotence of God and maintain you with God's wealth. I de-
mand obedience from you and you can demand uprightness from me ... I 
will not fail in three things: I will at all times be there for every man to speak 
to me. I will always pay your pensions punctually and I will not send you 
into the field for too long a time or too far away. Do not be carried away by 
your hatred and anger against me; it would go ill with you. I see many heads 
rolling. Let each man see that his own head stays upon his shoulders!" 3 
Worldly tough guys though they were, the Umayyads nurtured there-
ligious institutions of Islam. They supported scholars and religious 
thinkers, built mosques, and enforced laws that allowed the Islamic way of 
life to flourish. 

EMPIRE OF THE UMAYYADS 
77 
Under the Umayyads, it wasn't just Arab-inspired commercial energy 
that permeated the Muslim world but also Islam-inspired social ideals. 
Nouveau riche lords made abundant donations to philanthropic religious 
foundations called waqfi. Social pressure drove them to it, but so did reli-
gious incentives: everyone wants the esteem of his or her society, and a rich 
man could garner such esteem by patronizing a waqf. 
In theory, a waqf could not be shut down by its founder. Once born, it 
owned itself and had a sovereign status. Think of it as a Muslim version of 
a nonprofit corporation set up for charitable purposes. Under Muslim law, 
the waqfs could not be taxed. They collected money from donors and dis-
tributed it to the poor, built and ran mosques, operated schools, hospitals, 
and orphanages, and generally provided the burgeoning upper classes with 
a means for expressing their religious and charitable urges and to feel good 
about themselves even while lolling in wealth. 
Of course, someone had to administer a waqf. Someone had to conduct 
its business, set its policies, and manage its finances, and it couldn't be just 
anyone. To possess religious credibility, a waqf had to be staffed by people 
known for piety and religious learning. The more famously religious its 
staff, the more prestigious the waqf and the more respect accrued to its 
founders and donors. 
Since the waqfs ended up controlling real estate, buildings, and endow-
ment funds, their management offered an avenue of social mobility in 
Muslim society (even though many waqfs became a device by which rich 
families protected their wealth from taxation). If you acquired a reputation 
for religious scholarship, you might hope to gain a position with a waqf, 
which gave you status if not riches, and you didn't have to hail from a fa-
mous family to become a famous religious scholar. You just had to have 
brains and a willingness to practice piety and study hard. 
On the other hand, you did have to know Arabic, because it was the sacred 
language: to Muslims, the Qur'an itself, in Arabic, written or spoken, is the 
presence of God in the world: translations of the Qur' an are not the Qur' an. 
Besides, all the pertinent scholarly books were written in Arabic. And you did, 
of course, have to be Muslim. What's more, the Umayyads soon declared Ara-
bic the official language of government, replacing Persian in the east and 
Greek in the west and various local languages everywhere else. So Umayyad 
times saw an Arabization and Islamification of the Muslim realm. 

78 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
When I say Islamification, I mean that growing numbers of people in 
territories ruled by the khalifa abandoned their previous faiths-Zoroastrian, 
Christian, pagan, or whatever-and converted to Islam. Some no doubt 
converted to evade the poll tax on non-Muslims, but this probably wasn't 
the whole story, because after conversion people were liable for the charity 
tax incumbent on Muslims but not on non-Muslims. 
Some may have converted in pursuit of career opportunities, but this, 
too, can be overstated, because conversion really only opened up the religion-
related careers. The unconverted could still own land, operate workshops, 
sell goods, and pursue business opportunities. They could work for the 
government too, if they had skills to offer. The Muslim elite did not hesi-
tate to take from each according to his abilities. If you knew medicine, you 
could be a doctor; if you knew building, you could be an architect. In the 
Islamic empire, you could become rich and famous even if you were a 
Christian or a Jew, the ''Abrahamic" religions, or eventually Zoroastrian, 
even though this was more distant from Islam. 
But most people, I think, in the world Muslims came to rule, converted 
to Islam because it looked like the Truth. Certainly, no other force or move-
ment in the Middle World at this time had the muscular self-confidence 
and the aura of inexorable success of Islam. Who would not want to join 
the Umma if they could? 
And they could. It was easy! All a person had to do was say "La illaha 
if-Allah wa Muhammad ur-Rasulillah':· "There is no god but God and Mo-
hammed is his messenger." That's all it took to gain membership in this 
triumphant dub. 
But the core creed was much more loaded than it may have looked at 
first blush. 
"No god but God"-that phrase alone has engendered countless thou-
sands of volumes of commentary, and no one has yet come to the end of 
what it means. 
And on top of that: "Mohammed is his messenger!" Sign on to that 
one, and you've accepted everything Mohammed prescribed as Messenger. 
You've committed yourself to five daily prayers; to avoidance of pork; to 
the Ramadan fast; to sobriety; and to much, much more. 

The Abbasid Age 
120-350AH 
737-961 CE 
T
HE DESCENDANTS OF Yazid ruled for a number of generations. They 
wove a skein of entrenched power over the Muslim world, extended 
their suzerainty to Spain in the west and India in the east. Under their ad-
ministration, the doctrines of Islam were elaborated, written down, and 
sealed into codebooks. A body of religious scholars came to own those 
codebooks, the way lawyers in America own the constitution and the laws 
spun from it, and those religious scholars worked in tandem with the 
politicians and bureaucrats of the Umayyad court to forge a distinctly Is-
lamic society. 
Mainstream Western histories usually praise this process. The Umayyads 
introduced that wonderful quality called stability to the civilized world. 
Stability enabled farmers to plan next year's crop. It enabled businessmen 
to invest in long-term projects. It encouraged students to enter upon 
long courses of study with confidence that what they learned would still 
apply by the time they had graduated. Stability gave scholars the free-
dom to lose themselves in study and dig deep into the mysteries of na-
ture without having to worry that their families were meanwhile getting 
killed by thugs. 
79 

80 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
All this came at a price however, the usual price of stability, which en-
sures that whatever is the case one day is even more the case the next day. 
The rich got richer. The poor increased in numbers. Cities with magnifi-
cent architecture sprang up, but so did vast slums sunk in squalid poverty. 
Justice became a commodity that only the rich could afford. 
Other problems bubbled up too. The rapid expansion of Islamic rule 
brought many different ethnicities under the Muslim umbrella, and there 
was some question about how to make the Muslim promise of brother-
hood and equality work for all of them. 
Umayyad policies may have promoted Arabization and Islamification 
but not both of them equally everywhere. In North Africa, Arabization 
proceeded rapidly, perhaps because the patchwork of indigenous cultures 
had long ago been fragmented by Phoenician colonization-the Romans 
had deposited a Latin layer, the Vandals had come in with a Germanic 
glaze, and finally Christianity had permeated the region. North Africa had 
no single language or culture to bind it together; when the Arabs arrived 
with their powerful conviction, no correspondingly unified and powerful 
indigenous conviction was there to resist them. So the Arabs thoroughly 
dissolved and absorbed whatever was there before. 
Egypt and the Levant were somewhat easily digested too, because many 
of these peoples shared a historical narrative with the Arabs, harking back 
to common traditional ancestors such as Abraham, Noah, and Adam him-
self. Most of the inhabitants had already subscribed to the idea of 
monotheism. Hebrew and Aramaic were Semitic languages, like Arabic. 
Persia, however-ah, that was quite a different matter! The Persians 
were an Indo-European people, not Semitic. They had an ancient civiliza-
tion of their own, a proud history, and a language that would not be sub-
dued. Many Persians accepted Islam, but they would not be Arabized. 
Those who did convert to Islam presented the society with a challenging 
religious contradiction. Islam claimed to make every Muslim equal to 
every other. Join the Umma and you join an egalitarian brotherhood-
such was the promise of this new religion, this powerful movement. But 
the Arab-dominated society forged by the Umayyads couldn't deliver on 
the promise. Arabs were the rulers now; they were the aristocrats. Far from 
making even a show of equal status for all, Umayyad society spawned for-
mal institutions to discriminate among various gradations of folk in soci-

THE ABBASID AGE 
81 
ety and to keep them layered: pure-blooded Arab Muslims at the top; 
below them, Muslims with one Arab and one non-Arab parent; then non-
Arab Muslims; then non-Arab Muslims with non-Muslim parents; then 
non-Muslims who at least belonged to one of the monotheistic faiths; and 
so on down to the lowest of the low, rank polytheists born of polytheistic 
parents, who had virtually no legal rights. 
Friction among all these designated social gradients, and especially the 
friction between the Arab nouveau aristocrats and the Persian former aris-
tocrats, kept a sense of grievance smoldering beneath the surface in this 
portion of the Muslim realm. 
Another shadow haunted the conscience of the Islamic world as well. 
Muslim sacred history was problematically rich with anecdotes about the 
simple, rugged lifestyle of the founders. Their simplicity and humbleness 
went to the very essence of their appeal as religious figures. Inevitably, there-
fore, a feeling started percolating in the lower reaches of this new society that 
something about all this splendor wasn't right. This prosperous, pleasure-
plump society could not be what Allah had meant when he charged Mo-
hammed with establishing a just community devoted to worship of the one 
God. Of course, the richer you were, the less likely that such considerations 
would trouble your dreams. For the poor, however, tales of luxury at court 
and the sight of perfumed Arab noblemen riding through the streets clad in 
silk had to evoke comparisons with Mohammed's simple blanket folded four 
times to provide both mattress and cover and Khalifa Omar at his cobbler's 
bench, mending his own shoes. Add to all this the odor left by the way in 
which the Umayyads came to power, a process that had generated two en-
during opposition movements, the Shi'i and the Kharijites. 
The Kharijites were the less numerous, but their movement was more 
radical. Their theology had come to focus on extravagant demands for pu-
rity. They said the leadership of the Muslim world belonged to the person 
who most assiduously practiced what the religion preached. No secular 
ruler could ever meet the standards of the Kharijites. In fact, quite proba-
bly, no ruler anywhere could ever meet their standards, period, so the 
Kharijites could preach revolution no matter what the circumstances. As 
long as anyone was in power, someone would feel oppressed, and as long 
as anyone felt oppressed, Kharijite agitators could use their doctrines to 
fuel insurgencies. 

82 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
As time went on, however, Kharijites fizzled out because they were such 
extreme purists at a time when more and more people were acquiring a 
stake in the new prosperity. Society's losers might have been discontented, 
but they were even less ready to trade in the little they had for the joyless 
nothing the Kharijites offered. It was the Shi'i who remained the real 
threat to the established order, and after the death of Hussein and his fol-
lowers at Karbala, this threat picked up force. 
The Shi'ite imams no longer directly challenged the throne very much; 
they began to separate the meaning of imam from the meaning of khalifa, 
defining themselves ever more purely in religious terms. But Shi'ite rebels 
kept organizing trouble in the name of the imams, kept sparking rebellions 
aimed at bringing one or another of Ali's descendents to power, kept nur-
turing the notion that the khalifate did not belong to the Umayyads, kept 
undermining the legitimacy of Islam's secular rulers. 
The Shi'ite threat metastasized because of an ominous synchronicity 
that developed in Umayyad times. It was this: 
The Shi'i were the suppressed religious underdogs of Islam. 
The Persians were the suppressed ethnic underdogs of Islam. 
The Shi'i chaffed against the orthodox religious establishment. 
The Persians chaffed against the Arab political establishment. 
Inevitably, the one mapped onto the other. Persians began to embrace 
Shi'ism, and Shi'ite agitators began looking to the Persian east for recruits. 
When the two currents mingled, rebellion began to bubble. It bubbled ever 
harder the further east one traveled, for Umayyad police power ran ever thin-
ner in that direction, while anti-Arab sentiment mounted ever higher. 
One day, around 120 AH, a mysterious man blew into the city of 
Merv. This distant outpost of the empire lay almost fifteen hundred miles 
east of Damascus. Here in the wild, wild east, this stranger began to agi-
tate against the Umayyads by promulgating a millennia! religious narra-
tive that spoke of an impending apocalyptic showdown between good 
and evil. 
No one knew much about this fellow, not even his real name. He went 
by the handle Abu Muslim, but that was obviously a pseudonym, since it 
was short for Muslim abu Muslim bin Muslim, which means "Muslim man, 

THE ABBASID AGE 
83 
son of a Muslim father, father of a Muslim son." As you can see, this man 
was at pains to assert that he had no-doubt-about-it Muslim credentials. 
In truth, Abu Muslim was a professional revolutionary, dispatched to 
Merv by a secretive underground group based in Iraq, a group called the 
Hashimites. This group was a cross between a cult and a political party, 
whose core membership probably never exceeded thirty. Its name referred 
to the Prophet's clan, the Banu Hashim, and its purpose, supposedly, was 
to put a member of the Prophet's family at the head of the Muslim world. 
This was just one of many angry little hard-core bands of antigovernment 
conspirators active at this time, all preaching some version of the same 
message: the community had fallen off the track, history had gone off 
course, the Messenger's mission had been subverted, and toppling the 
Umayyads and empowering a member of the Prophet's family in their 
stead would set everything right again. Let me note that this narrative has 
been reinvented again and again in the Muslim world over the course of 
history, and some version of it is being recited even today, by revolution-
aries who have substituted "the West" for "the Umayyads." 
Sadly for the Hashimites, they didn't have an actual member of the 
Prophet's family to promote. They did, however, have Abu al-Abbas, a fel-
low who claimed descent from Abbas ibn Abd al-Muttalib, one of 
Prophet Mohammed's uncles, so he was at least related to the Prophet by 
blood and, more important, was willing to lend his name to the Hashimite 
enterprise. 
The ancestral uncle in question, the original Abbas, was among the later 
converts to Islam, and in his day, inconveniently enough, no one had even 
considered him a candidate to succeed Mohammed, so he wasn't the ideal an-
cestor for a revolutionary purist. A direct descendant of Ali and Fatima would 
certainly have been better, but none of the Alids-that is, Ali's real and puta-
tive descendants-would make common cause with the Hashimites, so Abu 
al-Abbas would have to do. Sometimes you have to go into battle with the fig-
urehead you have, not the figurehead you wish you had. 
Abu Muslim didn't have much trouble tapping into the Shi'ite and Per-
sian discontent seething in Khorasan, the province that stretched from 
Iran through Afghanistan. At key points in his speeches, Abu Muslim be-
came a little vague about who exactly would become the khalifa once the 
revolution succeeded. Those who longed for a descendant of Ali could 

84 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
imagine that such a figure was waiting in the wings, anonymous for the 
moment only for security reasons. 
Daring, ruthless, and charismatic, Abu Muslim quickly outgrew his 
role as anybody's agent and emerged as the leader of the Abbasid revolu-
tion (so named for its putative leader, Abu al-Abbas.) There in Khorasan, 
Abu Muslim recruited a revolutionary cadre, trained them to fight, and 
steeped them in Hashimite doctrines. His recruits could be recognized by 
the black clothes they wore and the black banners they carried. They even 
dyed their weapons black. The Umayyad army, incidentally, adopted white 
as its color. Lest you think this color coding strange for a cult that 
preached an apocalyptic showdown between good and evil, you should 
know that in Persia white was regarded as the color of mourning, the color 
of death. (The recent revolutionary Afghan Muslims called the Taliban fa-
vored black clothing as a uniform.) 
In the year 125 AH (747 CE) Abu Muslim and his black-suited war-
riors began moving west. They encountered little resistance passing 
through Persian territory, where most people were eager to help topple the 
arrogant Umayyads. In fact, they gained recruits and momentum as they 
marched along. 
In 750 CE, the armies of white and black clashed on the banks of the 
Great Zab River in Iraq. Although outnumbered, the men in black routed 
the emperor's forces, and the last Umayyad khalifa had to run for his life, 
south into Egypt; within the year, Abbasid agents hunted him down there 
and killed him. 
The Hashimites proclaimed Abbas the new khalifa of Islam. Nobody 
really commented on the process that had just taken place: it wasn't an in-
evitable God-shaped outcome, nor an election, nor even a decision made 
by a council of wise men. No, the new khalifa was placed in power by one 
man with a tightly organized gang of enforcers. It didn't matter. Leadership 
was (phew!) back where it belonged at last, in the hands of a member of 
the Prophet's family. Now, finally, the Muslim social project could get back 
on course. 
That was probably the happiest year of Abu Muslim's life, the year his 
life's work came to fruition at last! Perhaps he really thought that toppling 
the Umayyads would restore the quest for the lost community. Disillu-
sionment soon set in, however. For one thing, the puppet did not, it 

THE ABBASID AGE 
85 
==- Umayyad Army 
ABU MUSLIM AND THE ABBASID REVOLUTION 
turned out, consider himself a puppet. Over the years, Abbas had built a 
real base within the movement that had chosen him as its figurehead, and 
now that Abu Muslim had done the donkey work, he said thank you very 
much and took the throne. 
The new khalifa remembered that Mu'awiya had consolidated his 
power by slipping a velvet glove over his iron fist and winning over former 
foes with courtesy and charm. Accordingly, the new ruler invited leading 
members of the Umayyad clan to break bread with him, just to show that 
there were no hard feelings. 
Well, I shouldn't say "break bread." That makes it sound like he was 
going to serve his guests a simple meal of barley bread and soup, such as the 
Prophet might have shared with Omar. That sort of thing was now out of 
fashion. No, the Umayyad survivors found themselves lolling on cushions 
while servants pranced in with lovely trays piled high with gourmet delica-
cies. The laughter rang out, the conversation turned spirited, and a sense of 
camaraderie swelled. Just as everyone was getting ready to tie into the meal, 
however, the waiters threw off their robes to reveal armor underneath. They 
weren't waiters, it turned out, but executioners. The Umayyads jumped to 

86 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
their feet, but too late: the doors had all been locked. The soldiers pro-
ceeded to club the Umayyads to death. From that time on, Abbas went by 
a new title, al-Saffah, which means "the slaughterer." Apparently, he took 
some pride in what he had done. 
Little good it did him, however, for he soon died of smallpox and his 
brother al-Mansur took over. Mansur had to tussle with rivals a bit, but 
Abu Muslim stepped in and secured the throne for him, then returned to 
Khorasan. Abu Muslim made no bid for the khalifate on his own behalf, 
even though he had the military power to take what he wanted. He 
seemed to accept the legitimacy of Abbasid rule. Perhaps he really was a 
principled idealist. 
And yet there was something Mansur just didn't like about this man, 
Abu Muslim. Well, perhaps it was one particular thing: Abu Muslim was 
popular. All right, two things: he was popular, and he had soldiers of his 
own. A ruler can never trust a popular man with soldiers of his own. One 
day, Mansur invited Abu Muslim to come visit him and share a hearty 
meal. What happened next illustrates the maxim that when an Abbasid 
ruler invites you to dinner, you should arrange to be busy that night. The 
men got together at a pleasant riverside campsite and Mansur spent the 
first day lavishly thanking Abu Muslim for all his selfless services; the next 
night he had his bodyguards cut Abu Muslim's throat and dump his body 
in the river. 
Thus began the second dynasty of the Muslim khalifate. 
Abbasid propagandists got busy creating a narrative about the mean-
ing of this transition. They called it a revolutionary new direction for the 
Umma. Everything would be different now, they said. In fact, everything 
remained pretty much the same, only more so, both for better and for 
worse. 
The Umayyads had steeped themselves in pomp and luxury, but the 
Abbasids made them seem by comparison like rugged yeomen living the 
simple life. Under the Umayyads, the Muslim realm had grown quite pros-
perous. Well, under the Abbasids, the economy virtually exploded with 
vigor. And like the Umayyads, the Abbasids were secular rulers who used 
spies, police power, and professional armies to maintain their grip. 
Since the Abbasids had risen to power on a surge of Shi'ite discontent, 
you might suppose that in this regard at least they would have differed 

THE ABBASID AGE 
87 
from the Umayyads, but in this supposition you would be dead wrong. 
The Abbasids quickly embraced the orthodox approach to Islam, probably 
because the orthodox religious establishment, all those scholars, had se-
cured so much social power in Islam that embracing their doctrines was 
the politic thing to do. Indeed, it was only in Abbasid times (as we shall see 
in the next chapter) that the mainstream approach to Islam acquired the 
label Sunnism, since only now did it congeal into a distinct sect with a 
name of its own. 
In the first days of the Abbasid takeover, many naive Shi'i thought that 
Saffah and his family were going to put the recognized Shi'ite imam on the 
throne, thereby inaugurating the millennial peace predicted in Hashimite 
propaganda. Instead, the hunt for Alids intensified. In fact, when the third 
khalifa of this dynasty died, according to one of his maids, his successor 
found a secret room in his palace, which led to an underground vault 
where he had collected the corpses of all the Alids he had captured and 
killed. (They weren't necessarily Fatima's descendants, since Ali had other 
wives after Fatima died). 
Yet the Abbasids also maximized everything that was good about 
Umayyad rule. The Umayyads had presided over a flowering of prosperity, 
art, thought, culture, and civilization. All this splendor and dynamism ac-
celerated to a crescendo during the Abbasid dynasty, making the first two 
centuries or so of their rule the one that Western history (and many con-
temporary Muslims) remember as the Golden Age of Islam. 
One of Mansur's first moves, for example, was to build himself a brand 
new capital, a city called Baghdad, completed in 143 AH (765 CE). The 
city he built has survived into the present day, though it has been de-
stroyed and rebuilt several times over the centuries, and is in the process of 
being destroyed again. 
Mansur toured his territories for several years before he found the per-
fect site for his city: a place between the Tigris and Euphrates where the 
rivers came so dose together that a city could be stretched from the banks 
of one to the banks of the other. Smack dab in the middle of this space, 
Mansur planted a perfectly circular ring of wall, one mile in circumfer-
ence, 98 feet high, and 145 feet thick at the base. The "city" within this 
huge doughnut was really just a single enormous palace complex, the new 
nerve center for the world's biggest empire. 1 

88 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
It took five years to build the Round City. Some one hundred thousand 
designers, craftspeople, and laborers worked on it. These workers lived all 
around the city they were building, so their homes formed another, less or-
derly ring of city around the splendid core. And of course shopkeepers and 
service workers flocked in to make a living selling goods and services to the 
people working on the Round City, which added yet another urban 
penumbra around the disorderly ring that surrounded that perfect circular 
core. 
Within twenty years, Baghdad was the biggest city in the world and 
possibly the biggest city that had ever been: it was the first city whose pop-
ulation topped a million.2 Baghdad spread beyond the rivers, so that the 
Tigris and Euphrates actually flowed through Baghdad, rather than beside 
it. The waters were diverted through a network of canals that let boats 
serve as the city's buses, making it a bit like Venice, except that bridges and 
lanes let people navigate the city on foot or on horseback too. 
Baghdad might well have been the world's busiest city as well as its 
biggest. Two great rivers opening onto the Indian Ocean gave it tremendous 
port facilities, plus it was easily accessible to land traffic from every side, so 
ships and caravans flowed in and out every day, bringing goods and traders 
from every part of the known world-China, India, Africa, Spain .... 
Commerce was regulated by the state. Every nationality had its own 
neighborhood, and so did every kind of business. On one street you might 
find doth merchants, on another soap dealers, on another the flower mar-
ket, on yet another the fruit shops. The Street of Stationers featured over a 
hundred shops selling paper, a new invention recently acquired from 
China (whom the Abbasids met and defeated in 751 CE, in the area that 
is now Kazakhstan). Goldsmiths, tinsmiths, and blacksmiths; armorers 
and stables; money changers, straw merchants, bridge builders, and cob-
blers, all could be found hawking their wares in their designated quarters 
of mighty Baghdad. There was even a neighborhood for open-air stalls and 
shops selling miscellaneous goods. Ya'qubi, an Arab geographer of the 
time, claimed that this city had six thousand streets and alleys, thirty thou-
sand mosques, and ten thousand bathhouses. 
This was the city of turrets and tiles glamorized in the Arabian Nights, 
a collection of folk stories transformed into literature during the later days 
of the Abbasid dynasty. Stories such as the one about Aladdin and his 

THE ABBASID AGE 
89 
magic lamp hark back to the reign of the fourth and most famous Abbasid 
khalifa, Haroun al-Rashid, portrayed as the apogee of splendor and justice. 
Legends about Haroun al-Rashid characterize him as a benevolent 
monarch so interested in the welfare of his people that he often went 
among them disguised as an ordinary man, so that he might learn first-
hand of their troubles and take measures to help them. In reality, I'm 
guessing, it was the khalifa's spies who went among the people disguised as 
ordinary beggars, not so much looking for troubles to right as malcontents 
to neutralize. 
Even more than in Umayyad times, the khalifa became a near mythic 
figure, whom even the wealthiest and most important people had little 
chance of ever seeing, much less petitioning. The Abbasid khalifas ruled 
through intermediaries, and they insulated themselves from everyday real-
ity with elaborate court rituals borrowed from Byzantine and Sassanid tra-
ditions. So, yes, Islam conquered all the territories ruled by the Sassanids 
and much that had once been ruled by the Byzantines, but in the end the 
ghosts of those supplanted empires infiltrated and altered Islam. 


Scholars, 
Philosophers, and Sufis 
10-505 AH 
632-1111 CE 
S
o FAR r HAVE been recounting political events at the highest levels as 
Muslim civilization evolved into the civilization of the middle world. 
Big stories were unfolding, however, below that highest level, and none 
was bigger than the development of Muslim doctrine, and the social class 
it generated, along with the opposing and alternative ideas it engendered. 
Looking back, it's easy to suppose that Mohammed left his followers 
exact instructions for how to live and worship, complete in every detail. 
How complete they were, however, is difficult to gauge. What's pretty cer-
tain is that, in his lifetime, Mohammed established the primacy of five 
broad duties, now called the five pillars of Islam: 
shahadah, to attest that there is only one God and Mohammed is his 
messenger; 
salaat (or namaz), to perform a certain prayer ritual five times every 
day; 
91 

92 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
zakat, to give a certain percentage of one's wealth to the poor each year; 
sawm (or roza), to fast &om dawn to dusk during the month of Ramadan 
each year; and 
hajj, to make a pilgrimage to Mecca at least once in a lifetime, if possible. 
Notice both the simplicity and "externalness" of this program. Only one 
of the five pillars is a belief, a creed, and even that is given in terms of an ac-
tion: "to attest." The other four pillars are very specific things to do. Again, 
Islam is not merely a creed or a set of beliefs: it is a program every bit as 
concrete as a diet or an exercise regiment. Islam is something one does. 
The five pillars were already part of life in the Muslim community by 
the time of Mohammed's death, but so were other rituals and practices, 
and any of them may have been parsed somewhat differently back then. 
The fact is, when Mohammed was alive, there was no need to fix the de-
tails inflexibly because the living Messenger was right there to answer ques-
tions. Not only could people learn from him every day, but through him 
they might receive fresh instructions at any time. 
Indeed, Mohammed did receive revelations continually, not just about 
general values and ideals but about practical measures to take in response 
to particular, immediate problems. If an army was approaching the city, 
God would let Mohammed know if the community should get ready to 
fight, and if so, how. If Muslims captured prisoners and after the battle was 
over wondered what to do with them: Kill them? Keep them as slaves? 
Treat them as members of the family? Set them free? God would tell Mo-
hammed, and he would tell everyone else. 
It's well known that Muslims face Mecca when they pray, but this was 
not always the case. At first, in fact, Muslims performed their prayers fac-
ing Jerusalem. At a certain point in the maturation of the community, 
however, a revelation came down instructing them to shift direction, and 
it has been Mecca ever since. 
And it will always be Mecca from now on, because Mohammed is gone 
and there will never be another Messenger, which means that no one will 
ever again have the authority to change the direction of prayer. In short, 
while Mohammed was alive, the Islamic project had an organic vitality. It 
was constantly in the process of unfolding and evolving. Any element of it 
might change at any time. 

SCHOLARS, PHILOSOPHERS, AND SUFIS 
93 
But the moment Mohammed died, Muslims had to ask themselves, 
"What exactly are we supposed to do? How are we supposed to do it? 
When we pray, should we hold our hands up here or down lower? In 
preparing for prayer, must we wash our feet all the way to the shins or 
would just to the ankles be enough?" 
And, of course, there was a lot more to being a Muslim than the five 
pillars. Beyond individual duties such as fasting, alms, and the testament 
of faith, there was the social aspect of Islam, a person's obligations to the 
community, the good-citizenship behaviors that fed into making the com-
munity an instrument of God's will. For example, there was certainly a 
proscription against drinking. Certainly Muslims had some obligation to 
defend the community with their lives and fortunes when necessary in the 
obligation famously called jihad. In general, making sacrifices for the com-
munal good devolved upon every Muslim because the community might 
not otherwise endure, and to many if not most Muslims, the community 
was the template of a new world, charged with an obligation to set a con-
tinuous example of how all people should live. Anyone, therefore, who 
contributed to the health of the community was doing God's work, and 
anyone who fell short was misbehaving. But what contributed to the 
health of the community? And how much contribution was enough? 
Once Mohammed died, Muslims had to bring their obligations into 
focus and get the details down in writing to secure their faith from drift, 
divergence, and the whims of the powerful. That's why the first two khal-
ifas collected every scrap of Qur'an in one place and why the third khalifa 
created that single authorized edition. 
But the Qur'an did not explicitly address many questions that cropped 
up in real life. As a matter of fact, most of the Holy Book spoke in very 
general terms: Stop sinning; behave yourself; have a heart; you will be 
judged; hell is an awful place; heaven is wonderful; be grateful for all that 
God has given you; trust in God; obey God; yield to God-such is the gist 
of the message one gets from much of the Holy Book. Even where the 
Qur'an gets specific, it is often open to interpretation. 
And "interpretation" portended trouble. If everyone were allowed to in-
terpret the ambiguous passages for themselves, their conclusions might di-
verge wildly. People would move apart in as many different directions as 
there were people, the community would fragment, and the world might 

94 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
swallow up the pieces and who was to say the great revelation would not 
then vanish as if it had never been? 
THE SCHOLARS 
Clearly Muslims had to come to unified agreements about the ambiguous 
passages and do it fast, while the original excitement still burned in commu-
nal memory. No one in that early time wanted to offer a personal interpre-
tation of the Truth backed only by his or her reason. If reason were enough, 
revelation would never have been needed. Certainly, none of the early khal-
ifas laid claim to any such authority. They were devout people who refused 
to tamper with instructions from God. Their humble modesty was precisely 
what made them great. They wanted to get the instructions exactly right in 
letter and spirit-and by "right," they meant, "exactly as God intended." 
From the start, therefore, Muslims tried to rely on their memories of 
the Prophet to fill in any gaps in the Qur'an's guidelines. It was Omar who 
really set the course here. Whenever a question came up for which no ex-
plicit answer could be found in the Qur'an, he asked, "Did Mohammed 
ever have to deal with a situation like this one? What did he decide?" 
Omar's approach got people motivated to collect everything Mo-
hammed had ever said and done, quotations and anecdotes known to 
Muslims as hadith. But many people had heard Mohammed say many 
things. Which ones were credible? Some quotations contradicted other 
quotations. Some people might have been making stuff up. Who could 
tell? And some, it turned out, hadn't actually heard a quotation themselves, 
but had it only on good authority-or so they claimed, which of course 
raised the question, who was the original source? Was that person reliable? 
What about the other people who had transmitted it? Were they all reli-
able? What, finally, constituted a "good authority?" 
Omar, as I mentioned, established a body of full-time scholars to ex-
amine such questions, thereby establishing a consequential precedent: be-
fore Islam had a standing army of professional soldiers, it had a standing 
army of professional scholars (called "people of the bench'' or sometimes 
"people of the pen"). 
Hadith, however, proliferated faster than any small group of scholars 
could control. New ones were constantly coming to light. By Umayyad 

SCHOLARS, PHILOSOPHERS, AND SUFIS 
95 
times, thousands of remembered statements, quotations, and decisions of 
Mohammed's were floating around. Combing through this jungle and de-
termining which ones were authentic provided employment for an ever-
greater number of scholars. The court funded this sort of work, but so did 
rich men eager to earn merit in God's eyes. Independent scholars applied 
themselves to the great task on their own time, as well. If they gained 
enough fame, they attracted students and patrons. Informal groups of this 
type ripened into academies, sometimes as adjuncts to the waqfs men-
tioned earlier. 
The word hadith is sometimes translated as "sayings," but that term can 
be misleading. The sayings of Mohammed are not like the sayings of 
Shakespeare or Einstein or the local wit. They're not remembered for their 
felicity of phrasing. No one would bother to record the sayings of the local 
wit, or even of Shakespeare, unless they were witty, pithy, or profound, but 
with hadith, what counts is the fact that Mohammed actually said them. 
It's true that some hadith have an epigrammatic quality. One can admire 
the economy of the admonition: "Food for one is enough for two, food for 
two is enough for three .... " But many hadith come off as ordinary, even 
casual, statements. They might have been remarks Mohammed tossed off 
in the course of daily life. One hadith reports the Prophet telling a fellow 
who had a sparse beard and had shaved those few scant hairs that he 
should not have shaved his beard. This comment from anyone else would 
have been forgettable and forgotten, but anything Mohammed said might 
offer one more clue about how to live a life pleasing to God. 
Since the authenticity of a hadith was absolutely crucial, the authenti-
cation of hadith developed into an exacting discipline. At its core, it con-
sisted of nailing down the chain of transmission and testing the veracity of 
every link. A hadith was only as good as the people who transmitted it. 
The chain of transmission had to extend to someone who knew the 
Prophet personally. Only then could a purported hadith be taken seriously. 
Ideally, it would trace to one of Mohammed's close companions, and the 
closer the companion the more sound the hadith. In addition, every per-
son who transmitted it after that had to enjoy an impeccable reputation 
for piety, honesty, and learning. 
I heard that once the great scholar Bukhari was investigating the chain 
of transmission for a particular hadith. He found the first link credible; the 

96 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
second man passed muster too; but when Bukhari went to interview the 
third man in the chain of transmission, he found the fellow beating his 
horse. That did it. The word of a man who beat his horse could not be 
trusted. That hadith had to be discarded. 
In short, to gauge the credibility of the people who transmitted aha-
dith, a scholar had to know a great deal about them and about their times. 
A scholar also had to know the circumstances in which a hadith was spo-
ken so that its intention might be judged from context. The "science ofha-
dith" thus generated an elaborate discipline of critical historiography. 
Some seven or eight decades after Mohammed's death, scholars across 
the Muslim world began compiling sifted collections of hadith grouped 
under specific topics, which functioned as organized statements oflslamic 
doctrine and as reference works on Islamic living. If you wondered, for ex-
ample, what Prophet Mohammed had to say about diet, or clothing, or 
warfare, you could look it up in such a book. The enterprise began in late 
Umayyad times, but it matured in the Abassid era, and new collections 
kept emerging for centuries. (In fact, just last year, a distant Afghan ac-
quaintance sent me a handwritten manuscript he was hoping I would 
translate into English. It constituted, he said, a new set of hadith he him-
self had collected-after fourteen centuries.) 
Even though new hadith kept emerging, however, six collections 
achieved canonical status by the end of the third century AH. These com-
plemented the Qur'an and came to constitute a second level of authority 
on the dos, don'ts, shoulds, and shouldn'ts of Muslim life. 
Yet even the Qur'an and hadith together failed to give a definitive an-
swer to every real-life question, as you can imagine. Sometimes, therefore, 
it was necessary for someone to make an original decision about a disputed 
situation. Given the legalistic spirit of Islam, Muslims conceded this right 
of original decision making only to scholars who had thoroughly absorbed 
Qur'an and hadith and had mastered the "science ofhadith," the discipline 
of authentication. Only such folks could be sure their rulings did not con-
tradict some point set forth in the revelations. 
Even qualified scholars were to make decisions based strictly on qiyas 
or analogical reasoning, the method Khalifa Omar used to discover the 
punishment for drinking (and to make many other rulings). That is, for 
each unprecedented contemporary situation, scholars had to find an anal-

SCHOLARS, PHILOSOPHERS, AND SUFIS 
97 
ogous one in classical sources and derive a judgment parallel to the one al-
ready made. And if ambiguities arose about the way to apply qiyas, the 
matter was settled by ijma, the consensus of the community-which re-
ally meant the consensus of all the recognized scholars of the time. Such 
a consensus could guarantee the veracity of an interpretation because 
Prophet Mohammed had once said, "My community will never agree on 
" 
an error. 
If a scholar had exhausted Qur'an, hadith, qiyas, and ijma, then and 
only then could he move on to the final stage of ethical and legislative 
thinking, ijtihad, which means "free independent thinking based on rea-
son." Scholars and judges could apply this type of thinking only in areas 
not derived directly from revelation or covered by established precedents. 
And over the centuries, even those cracks grew narrower, because once 
an eminently qualified scholar weighed in on some subject, his pro-
nouncements also joined the canon. Scholars who came later had to mas-
ter not just Qur'an, hadith, authentication, qiyas, and ijma, but also this 
ever-growing corpus of precedents. Only then were they qualified to exer-
cise ijtihad! 
In this way, an architectonic code took shape by the end of the third 
century AH, a set of proscriptions and prescriptions, obligations, recom-
mendations, and warnings, guidelines, rules, punishments, and rewards 
covering every aspect of life from the grandest social and political ques-
tions to the minutest minutiae of daily life such as personal hygiene, diet, 
and sexual activity. This bill of particulars marks out the shari'a. The word 
comes from a cognate meaning "path'' or "way," and shari' a refers to some-
thing bigger than "Islamic law." It is the whole Islamic way of life, which 
is not something to be developed but something to be discovered, as im-
mutable as any principle of nature. All the specific legal points elaborated 
by scholars and jurists are markers that reveal this "path to Allah," the way 
stones, signs, and guideposts might show a traveler where the path is amid 
the brambles and brush of a wilderness. 
On the Sunni side, four slightly different versions of this code took 
shape, and the Shi'i developed yet another one of their own, similar to the 
Sunni ones in spirit and equally vast in scope. These various codes differ in 
details, but I doubt that one Muslim in a thousand can name even five 
such details. 

98 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
The four schools of Sunni law are named for the scholars who gave 
them final shape. Thus, the Hanafi school was founded by Abu Hanifa, 
from the Mghanistan area {though he taught in Kufa, Iraq); the Maliki 
school, by the Moroccan jurist Ibn Malik {though he worked and taught 
in Medina); and the Shafi'i school, by Imam al-Shafi'i of Mecca {though 
he settled finally in Egypt.) The last to crystallize was the Hanbali school, 
founded by the rigidly uncompromising Ahmed Ibn Hanbal, about whom 
I will say more later in this chapter. 
The schools promote slightly different methods of deriving rulings, 
which has led to minor variations in the details of their laws, but ever since 
Abbasid times all four have been considered equally orthodox: a Muslim 
can subscribe to any of them without taint of heresy. Developing and ap-
plying this code in all its versions was itself a gigantic social enterprise that 
spawned and employed an entire social class of scholars known as the 
ulama-the title is simply the plural of alim, which means "learned one." 
If you had a reputation for religious scholarship-if you were, that is, a 
member of the ulama-you might be invited to participate in the admin-
istration of a waqf. You might teach students, or even run a school. You 
might work as a judge, and not just one who heard particular cases, but a 
judge who issued rulings on broad social issues. In the khalifate, your 
scholarly status might well lead powerful officials to seek your advice, even 
though the government and the ulama tended to butt heads, being sepa-
rate {sometimes even competing) loci of power. The ulama defined the 
law, controlled the courts, ran the educational system, and permeated 
Muslim social institutions. They had tremendous social power throughout 
the civilized world, the power to muster and direct the approval and dis-
approval of the community against particular people or behaviors. I em-
phasize social power, because in Muslim society, which is so community 
oriented, social pressure-the power of shaming-might be the most pow-
erful of all forces, as opposed to political power, which operates through 
procedural rules, control of money, monopoly control of the instruments 
of force, and so on. 
Let me emphasize that the ulama were not {and are not) appointed by 
anyone. Islam has no pope and no official clerical apparatus. How, then, 
did someone get to be a member of the ulama? By gaining the respect of 
people who were already established ulama. It was a gradual process. There 

SCHOLARS, PHILOSOPHERS, AND SUFIS 
99 
was no license, no certificate, no "shingle" to hang up to prove that one 
was an alim. The ulama were (and are) a self-selecting, self-regulating class, 
bound entirely by the river of established doctrine. No single alim could 
modify this current or change its course. It was too old, too powerful, too 
established, and besides, no one could become a member of the ulama 
until he had absorbed the doctrine so thoroughly that it had become a part 
of him. By the time a person acquired the status to question the doctrine, 
he would have no inclination to do so. Incorrigible dissenters who simply 
would not stop questioning the doctrine probably wouldn't make it 
through the process. They would be weeded out early. The process by 
which the ulama self-generates makes it an inherently conservative class. 
THE PHILOSOPHERS 
The ulama, however, were not the only intellectuals of Islam. While they 
constructed the edifice of doctrine, another host of thoughtful Muslims 
were hard at work on another vast project: interpreting all previous 
philosophies and discoveries in light of the Muslim revelations and inte-
grating them into a single coherent system that made sense of nature, the 
cosmos, and man's place in all of it. This project generated another group 
of thinkers known to the Islamic world as the philosophers. 
The expansion of Islam had brought Arabs into contact with the ideas 
and achievements of many other peoples including the Hindus of India, 
the central Asian Buddhists, the Persians, and the Greeks. Rome was vir-
tually dead by this time, and Constantinople (for all its wealth) had de-
generated into a wasteland of intellectual mediocrity, so the most 
original thinkers still writing in Greek were clustered in Alexandria, 
which fell into Arab hands early on. Alexandria possessed a great library 
and numerous academies, making it an intellectual capital of the Greco-
Roman world. 
Here, the Muslims discovered the works ofPlotinus, a philosopher who 
had said that everything in the universe was connected like the parts of a 
single organism, and all of it added up to a single mystical One, from 
which everything had emanated and to which everything would return. 
In this concept of the One, Muslims found a thrilling echo of Prophet 
Mohammed's apocalyptic insistence on the oneness of Allah. Better yet, 

100 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
when they looked into Plotinus, they found that he had constructed his 
system with rigorous logic from a small number of axiomatic principles, 
which aroused the hope that the revelations of Islam might be provable 
with logic. 
Further exploration revealed that Plotinus and his peers were merely 
the latest exponents of a line of thought going back a thousand years to a 
much greater Athenian philosopher named Plato. And from Plato, the 
Muslims went on to discover the whole treasury of Greek thought, from 
the pre-Socratics to Aristotle and beyond. 
The Abbasid aristocracy took great interest in all of these ideas. Anyone 
who could translate a book from Greek, Sanskrit, Chinese, or Persian into 
Arabic could get high-paying work. Professional translators flocked to 
Baghdad. They filled whole libraries in the capital and in other major cities 
with classic texts translated from other languages. Muslims were the first 
intellectuals ever in a position to make direct comparisons between, say, 
Greek and Indian mathematics, or Greek and Indian medicine, or Persian 
and Chinese cosmologies, or the metaphysics of various cultures. They set 
to work exploring how these ancient ideas fit in with each other and with 
the Islamic revelations, how spirituality related to reason, and how heaven 
and earth could be drawn into a single schema that explained the entire 
universe. One such schema, for example, described the universe as ema-
nating from pure Being in a series of waves that descended to the material 
facts of immediate daily life-like so: 
Indivisible Being 
J. 
First Intelligence 
J. 
World Soul 
J. 
Primitive Matter 
Nature 
Spatial Matter 
J. 

SCHOLARS, PHILOSOPHERS, AND SUFIS 
101 
Elements 
Minerals, Plants, and Animals 
Plato had described the material world as an illusory shadow cast by a 
"real" world that consisted of unchangeable and eternal "forms": thus, 
every real chair is but an imperfect copy of some single "ideal" chair that 
exists only in the realm of universals. Following from Plato, the Muslim 
philosophers proposed that each human being was a mixture of the real 
and the illusory. Before birth, they explained, the soul dwelt in a realm of 
Platonic universals. In life, it got intertwined with body, which was made 
up of matter. At death, the two separated, the body returning to the world 
of all matter while the soul returned to Allah, its original home. 
For all their devotion to Plato, the Muslim philosophers had tremen-
dous admiration for Aristotle, as well: for his logic, his techniques of classi-
fication, and his powerful grasp of particularities. Following from Aristotle, 
the Muslim philosophers categorized and classified with obsessive logic. Just 
to give you a taste of this attitude: the philosopher al-Kindi described the 
material universe in terms of five governing principles: matter, form, mo-
tion, time, and space. He analyzed each of these into subcategories, divid-
ing motion, for instance, into six types: generation, corruption, increase, 
decrease, change in quality, and change in position. He went on and on like 
this, intent on parsing all of reality into discrete, understandable parts. 
The great Muslim philosophers associated spirituality with rationality: 
our essence, they said, was made up of abstractions and principles, which 
only reason could access. They taught that the purpose of knowledge was 
to purify the soul by conducting it from sensory data to abstract principles, 
from particular facts to universal truths. The philosopher al-Farabi was 
typical in recommending that students begin with the study of nature, 
move on to the study of logic, and proceed at last to the most abstract of 
all the disciplines, mathematics. 
The Greeks invented geometry, Indian mathematicians came up with 
the brilliant idea of treating zero as a number, the Babylonians discovered 
the idea of place value, and the Muslims systematized all of these ideas, 
adding a few of their own, to invent algebra and indeed to lay the founda-
tions of modern mathematics. 

102 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
On the other hand, their interests directed the philosophers into prac-
tical concerns. By compiling, cataloging, and cross-referencing medical 
discoveries from many lands, thinkers like Ibn Sina (Avicenna to the Eu-
ropeans) achieved a near-modern understanding of illness and medical 
treatments as well as of anatomy-the circulation of blood was known to 
them, as was the function of the heart and of most other major organs. 
The Muslim world soon boasted the best hospitals the world had ever seen 
or was to see for centuries to come: Baghdad alone had some hundred of 
these facilities. 
These Abbasid-era Muslim philosophers also laid the foundations of 
chemistry as a discipline and wrote treatises on geology, optics, botany, 
and virtually all the fields of study now known as science. They didn't 
call it by a separate name. As in the West, where science was long called 
natural philosophy, they saw no need to sort some of their speculations 
into a separate category and call it by a new name, but early on they rec-
ognized quantification as an instrument for studying nature, which is 
one of the cornerstones of science as a stand-alone endeavor. They also 
relied on observation for data upon which to base theories, a second cor-
nerstone of science. They never articulated the scientific method per se-
the idea of incrementally building knowledge by formulating hypotheses 
and then setting up experiments to prove or disprove them. Had they 
bridged that gap, science as we know it might well have sprouted in the 
Muslim world in Abbasid times, seven centuries before its birth in west-
ern Europe. 
It didn't happen, however, for two reasons, one of which involves the 
interaction between science and theology. In its early stages, science is in-
herently difficulty to disentangle from theology. Each seems to have impli-
cations for the other, at least to its practitioners. When Galileo promoted 
the theory that the earth goes around the sun, religious authorities put him 
on trial for heresy. Even today, even in the West, some Christian conserv-
atives counterpose the biblical narrative of creation to the theory of evolu-
tion, as if these two are competing explanations of the same riddle. Science 
challenges religion because it insists on the reliability and sufficiency of its 
method for seeking truth: experimentation and reason without recourse to 
revelation. In the West, for most people, the two fields have reached a 
compromise by agreeing to distinguish their fields of inquiry: the princi-

SCHOLARS, PHILOSOPHERS, AND SUFIS 
103 
ples of nature belong to science, the realm of moral and ethical value be-
longs to religion and philosophy. 
In ninth and tenth century Iraq {as in classical Greece), science as such 
did not exist to be disentangled from religion. The philosophers were giv-
ing birth to it without quite realizing it. They thought of religion as their 
field of inquiry and theology as their intellectual specialty; they were on a 
quest to understand the ultimate nature of reality. That {they said) was 
what both religion and philosophy were about at the highest level. Any-
thing they discovered about botany or optics or disease was a by-product 
of this core quest, not its central object. As such, philosophers who were 
making discoveries about botany, optics, or medicine did not hesitate to 
pronounce on questions we moderns would consider theological and quite 
outside the purview of, say, a chemist or a veterinarian--questions such as 
this one: 
If a man commits a grave sin, is he a non-Muslim, or is he (just) a bad 
Muslim? 
The question might seem like a semantic game, except that in the Mus-
lim world, as a point of law, the religious scholars divided the world be-
tween the community and the nonbelievers. One set of rules applied 
among believers, another set for interactions between believers and nonbe-
lievers. It was important, therefore, to know if any particular person was in 
the community or outside it. 
Some philosophers who took up this question said Muslims who were 
grave sinners might belong to a third zone, situated between belief and un-
belie£ The more rigid, mainstream scholars didn't like the idea of a third 
zone, because it suggested that the moral universe wasn't black-and-white 
but might have shades of gray. 
Out of this third-zone concept developed a whole school of theolo-
gians called the Mu'tazilites, Arabic for "secessionist," so called because 
they had seceded from the mainstream of religious thought, at least ac-
cording to the orthodox ulama. Over time, these theologians formulated 
a coherent set of religious precepts that appealed to the philosophers. 
They said the core of Islam was the belief in tawhid: the unity, singleness, 
and universality of Allah. From this, they argued that the Qur'an could 

104 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
not be eternal and uncreated (as the ulama proclaimed) because if it were, 
the Qur'an would constitute a second divine entity alongside Allah, and 
that would be blasphemy. They argued, therefore, that the Qur'an was 
among Allah's creations, just like human beings, stars, and oceans. It was 
a great book, but it was a book. And if it was just a book, the Qur'an 
could be interpreted and even (gasp) amended. 
Tawhid, they went on to say, prohibited thinking of Allah as having 
hands, feet, eyes, etc., even though the Qur'an spoke in these terms: all 
such anthropomorphic references in the Qur'an had to be taken as 
metaphorical language. 
God, they went on to say, did not have attributes, such as justice, 
mercy, or power: ascribing attributes to God made Him analyzable into 
parts, which violated tawhid-unity. God was a single indivisible whole 
too grand for the human mind to perceive or imagine. What human be-
ings called the attributes of God only named the windows through which 
humans saw God. The attributes we ascribe to Allah, the Mu'tazilites said, 
were actually only descriptions of ourselves. 
From their conception of Allah, the Mu'tazilites derived the idea that 
good and evil, right and wrong, were aspects of the unchanging reality of 
God, reflecting deep principles that humans could discover in the same 
way that human beings could discover the principles of nature. In short, 
this or that behavior wasn't good because scripture said so. Scripture man-
dated this or that behavior because it was good, and if it was already good 
before scripture said so, then it was good for some reason inherent to itself, 
some reason that reason could discover. Reason, therefore, was itself a valid 
instrument for discovering ethical, moral, and political truth independently 
of revelation, according to the Mu'tazilites. 
This is where this quarrel among theologians has implications for the de-
velopment of science, a mode of inquiry that depends on the application of 
reason without recourse to revelation. The Mu'tazilites were talking about 
reason as a way of discovering moral and ethical truths, but in this time and 
place, the principles of human conduct and the principles of nature all be-
longed to the same big field of inquiry: the quest for absolute truth. 
The philosopher scientists generally affiliated themselves with the 
Mu'tazilite school, no doubt because it validated their mode of inquiry. 
Some of these philosophers even rated reason above revelation. The 

SCHOLARS, PHILOSOPHERS, AND SUFIS 
105 
philosopher Abu Bakr al-Razi blatantly asserted that the miracles ascribed 
to prophets of the past were legends and that heaven and hell were mental 
categories, not physical realities. 
You can see how beliefs such as these would put the philosophers and 
the ulama at odds. For one thing, the precepts of the philosophers implic-
itly rendered the ulama irrelevant. If any intelligent person could weigh in 
on whether a law was right or wrong, based on whether it made rational 
sense, why would anyone need to consult scholars who had memorized 
every quotation ever ascribed to Prophet Mohammed? 
The ulama were in a good position to fight off such challenges. They 
controlled the laws, education of the young, social institutions such as 
marriage, and so on. Most importantly, they had the fealty of the masses. 
But the Mu'tazilites had advantages too--or rather, they had one advan-
tage: the favor of the court, the imperial family, the aristocrats, and the top 
officials of the government. In fact, the seventh Abbasid khalifa made 
Mu'tazilite theology the official doctrine of the land. Judges had to pass 
philosophy tests and would-be administrators had to swear allegiance to 
reason, in order to qualify for office. 
Then the Mu'tazilites and their supporters went further: they began using 
the power of government to persecute people who disagreed with them. 
Which brings me back to Ahmed Ibn Hanbal, founder of the Han bali 
school of law, the last of the orthodox schools to develop, and the most 
rigidly conservative of them all. Ibn Hanbal was born in Baghdad in 164 
AH, just thirty-six years after the Abbasid dynasty began. He came of age 
amid the disillusionment that must have permeated certain strata of soci-
ety when people realized that Abbasids were going to be just as worldly as 
the Umayyads. He captured the imagination of the crowds by preaching 
that Islam had gone wrong and that the world was headed to hell unless 
the community corrected its course. The only hope of salvation, he said, 
lay in scraping away all innovations and going back to the ways of the first 
community, the Medina of Prophet Mohammed's time. Above all, he de-
clared uncompromisingly that no one could know what was right or 
wrong on their own. They could guarantee their soul's safety only by fol-
lowing in the footsteps of Mohammed and trusting strictly to revelation. 
The other schools of Islamic law gave analogical reasoning (qiyas) a high 
place as a way to discover how the shari' a applied to new situations, but 

106 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Ibn Hanbal drastically demoted such methods: rely only on Qur'an and 
hadith, he said. 
He was hauled into the imperial court and made to debate a leading the-
ologian on the question of whether the Qur'an was created or uncreated, an 
issue that contained the whole question of the role of reason in moral in-
quiry. The philosopher hit Ibn Hanbal with logic, the scholar struck back 
with scripture. The philosopher tied him up in knots of argument, Ibn Han-
bal burst free with invocations to Allah on high. Obviously, no one could re-
ally "win" a debate of this sort because the debaters did not agree on terms. 
When Ibn Hanbal refused to disavow his views, he was physically beaten, 
but it didn't change his mind. He was clapped into prison. Still he dung to 
his principles: never would he let reason trump revelation, never! 
So the authorities ratcheted up the pressure. They beat Ibn Hanbal 
until his joints popped out of their sockets, bound him in heavy chains, 
and tossed him into prison for several years. Ibn Hanbal refused to re-
nounce his views. As you might guess, the well-publicized abuse failed to 
discredit his ideas but instead gave them a certain prestige. Common folks, 
who already resented the Abbasids for their wealth and pomp, grew restive 
now; and when the masses grew restive, even the mighty Abbasids had to 
pay attention because almost every time a khalifa died, a scuffie broke out 
to determine his successor, a scuffie in which either side might use the pas-
sions of the crowd as artillery. When the aging, aching Ibn Hanbal was re-
leased from prison, reverent crowds greeted him and cheered him and 
carried him home. Seeing this, the imperial court developed some reserva-
tions about Islamic philosophy and the Greek ideas from which it derived. 
The next khalifa demoted the Mu'tazilites and heaped honors upon Ibn 
Hanbal, which signaled the waning prestige of the Mu'tazilites, and with 
them the philosophers. And it signaled the rising status of the scholars who 
maintained the edifice of orthodox doctrine, an edifice that eventually 
choked off the ability of Muslim intellectuals to pursue inquiries without 
any reference to revelation. 
THE SUFIS 
Almost from the start, however, as the scholars were codifying the law, 
some people were asking, "Is this all the revelation comes to in the end-

SCHOLARS, PHILOSOPHERS, AND SUFIS 
107 
a set of rules? Because I'm not feeling it. Is there nothing more to Islam?" 
Instructions from God on high were all very well, but some people longed 
to experience God as a palpable living presence right now, right down 
here. What they wanted from the revelations was transformation and 
transcendence. 
A few of these people began to experiment with spiritual exercises that 
went way beyond the requirements of duty. They read the Qur'an inces-
santly or spent hours reciting the names of Allah. In Baghdad, for exam-
ple, there was a man named al-Junayd who habitually performed four 
hundred units of the Muslim prayer ritual after work every day. In reac-
tion, perhaps, to the luxurious lifestyles of Muslim elite, some of these 
seekers embraced voluntary poverty, living on bread and water, dispensing 
with furniture, and wearing simple garments made of rough, uncarded 
wool, which is called sufin Arabic, for which reason people began to call 
these people Sufis. 
They professed no new creed, these Sufis. They were not out to launch 
another sect. Sure, they opposed worldly ambition and corruption and 
greed, but so did every Muslim, in theory. The Sufis differed from the oth-
ers only in saying, "How do you purify your heart? Whatever the exactly 
correct gestures and litanies may be, how do you actually get immersed in 
Allah to the exclusion of all else?" 
They began to work out techniques for eliminating distractions and 
cravings not just from prayer but from life. Some spoke of engaging in 
spiritual warfare against their own meanest tendencies. Harking back to a 
hadith in which Mohammed distinguished between a "greater" and a 
"lesser" jihad, they declared that the internal struggle to expunge the ego 
was the real jihad, the greater jihad. {The lesser jihad they identified as the 
struggle against external enemies of the community.) 
Gradually a buzz got started about these eccentrics-that some of them 
had broken through the barriers of the material world to a direct experi-
ence of Allah. 
In Basra, for example, lived the poet Rabia al-Basri, whose life is now 
laced with legend. Born in the last years ofUmayyad rule, she was a young 
woman when the Abbasids took over. As a little girl, she had been travel-
ing somewhere with her family when bandits hit the caravan. They killed 
her parents and sold Rabia into slavery. That's how she ended up in Basra 

108 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
as a slave in some rich man's household. Her master, the stories say, kept 
noticing a luminous spirituality about her that made him wonder .... One 
night, when she was lost in prayer, he observed a halo surrounding her 
body. It struck him suddenly that he had a saint living in his house, and 
awe took hold of him. He set Rabia free and pledged to arrange a good 
marriage for her. He would get her connected to one of the best families in 
the city, he vowed. She had only to name the man she wanted to marry, 
and he would open up negotiations at once. 
But Rabia said she could not marry any man, for she was already in 
love. 
"In love?" gasped her recent master. "With whom?" 
"With Allah!" And she began to pour forth poetry of such rapturous 
passion that her former owner became her first and lifelong disciple. Rabia 
entered upon a life of ascetic contemplation, mystic musings that fre-
quently erupted into a love poetry so intensely emotional it sounded al-
most carnal, except that the "lover" she addressed was Allah: 
0 my own Lord, the stars glitter 
and the eyes of men are closed. 
Kings have locked their doors. 
Lovers are alone with their beloved ones . . . 
And here I am alone with You. 1 
How much poetry she poured forth, I don't know. The canon that survives 
is slight, but in her day, her fame was great: many journeyed to Basra just 
to see Rabia for themselves. Many came away convinced that she had 
found the key to union with Allah. To her, the key was not fear but love, 
utterly abandoned, reckless, and unlimited love. 
Easy enough to say but how could one actually fall into such love? 
Hungry seekers hung around with the charismatic mystic herself, hoping 
to catch her passion like a fever. Some did catch it, they said, which of 
course brought more seekers to her gates. I don't call them students, be-
cause no books were involved, no scholarship, no study. Rabia of Basra did 
not teach. She simply radiated, and people in her vicinity changed. This 
became the pattern in Sufism: direct transmission of techniques leading to 
enlightenment from master to mureed, as would-be Sufis were called. 

SCHOLARS, PHILOSOPHERS, AND SUFIS 
109 
Until this time, most Muslim mystics were "sober" Sufis, rigorously de-
voted to rituals and recitation. Their devotions focused on fear (of God). 
Rabia Basri put love at the center and helped spawn a long tradition of 
"God-intoxicated Sufis." Let's be clear, though: all of these people were 
Muslims first and Sufis next. I state this caveat simply because today lots 
of people call themselves Sufis when they're really just singing and dancing 
themselves into a state of euphoria. The Sufis were not after a mere emo-
tion. They weren't trying to get high. Their spiritual practices began with 
the known devotions of Islam and then added more on top. 
People flocked to Sufis with a definite goal in mind. They hoped to "get 
somewhere." Working with a Sufi master smacked of learning a method-
ology. Indeed, what Sufis did came to be labeled the tariqa, the "method." 
Those who entered upon the method expected to move through distinct 
stages to annihilation of their egos and immersion in God. 
The jurists and the orthodox scholars did not look kindly on the Sufis, 
especially the God-intoxicated variety. The language employed by these 
saints began to sound a bit heretical. Their claims grew ever more extrava-
gant. Common folks began to ascribe magical powers to the most famous 
Sufis. The hostilities came to a head in the late tenth century CE with a 
Persian Sufi named al-Hallaj. 
Hallaj means "cotton carder." This was his father's profession, and he too 
started out in the family trade; but the longing for union with God sank 
talons into his heart, and he abandoned his home to search for a master who 
would initiate him into Sufi secrets. At one point, he spent an entire year 
standing motionless in front of the Ka'ba, never uttering a sound. One year! 
Imagine the attention this might have drawn to him. Later, he went travel-
ing to India and to Central Asia, and everywhere he went he spouted poetry 
and gave strange speeches, and he attracted countless followers. 
But the sober Sufis began to back away from him, because Hallaj was 
saying things like, "My turban is wrapped around nothing but God." And 
again, "Inside my clothes you'll find nothing but God." And finally, in case 
someone didn't get his point, "I am God." Well, actually, he said, "I am 
Truth," but "Truth" was famously one of the ninety-nine names of God 
and given Hallaj's recent history, no one could miss what he was getting at. 
This was too much. The orthodox scholars demanded action. The Ab-
basid khalifa wanted to appease the scholars so they would get off his back 

110 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
about the philosophers. He therefore had Hallaj clapped in prison for 
eleven years, but Hallaj was so lost to the world by this time, he didn't care. 
Even in his cell he kept spouting his God-intoxicated utterances, some-
times associating himself with Jesus Christ, and often mentioning martyr-
dom. One thing was for sure: he recanted nothing. Finally, the orthodox 
establishment decided they had run out of options. They would have to 
pressure the state to apply the time-tested, never-fail method of discredit-
ing a message: kill the messenger. 
The authorities did not just execute Hallaj. They hung him, cut off his 
limbs, decapitated him, and finally burned his corpse. Oddly enough, it 
didn't work. Hallaj was gone, but Sufism continued to proliferate. Charis-
matic individuals kept emerging, hundreds of them, maybe thousands, all 
across the civilized world. Some were "sober" Sufis like Junayd and some 
were the God-intoxicated variety, like Rabia Basri and Hallaj. 
In sum, by the mid-eleventh century, Muslims were hard at work on 
three great cultural projects, pursued respectively by scholar-theologians, 
philosopher-scientists, and Sufi mystics: to elaborate Islamic doctrine and 
law in full; to unravel the patterns and principles of the natural world; and 
to develop a technique for achieving personal union with God. Yes, the 
three groups overlapped somewhat, but overall they pulled in competing 
directions, and their intellectual disagreements had high and sometimes 
bloody political and financial stakes. At this juncture, one of the intellec-
tual giants of world history was born of Persian-speaking parents in the 
province ofKhorasan. His name was Abu Hamid Muhammad al-Ghazali. 
By his early twenties, Ghazali had already earned acclaim as one of the 
foremost ulama of his age. No matter how many hadith you knew, he knew 
more. In his day, some ulama had elaborated a theology to compete with 
that of the Mu'tazilites. The Asharite school, as it was called, insisted that 
faith could never be based on reason, only on revelation. Reason's function 
was only to support revelation. Asharite theologians were constantly squar-
ing off against prominent Mu'tazilites in public debates, but the Mu'tazilites 
knew fancy Greek tricks for winning arguments, such as logic and rhetoric, 
so they were constantly making the Asharites look confused. 
Ghazali came to their rescue. The way to beat the philosophers, he de-
cided, was to join them enough to use their tricks against them. He 
plunged into a study of the ancients, mastered logic, and inhaled the trea-

SCHOLARS, PHILOSOPHERS, AND SUFIS 
111 
tises of the Greek. Then he wrote a book about Greek philosophy called 
The Aims of the Philosophers. It was chiefly about Aristotle. In the preface, 
he said the Greeks were wrong and he would prove it, but first-in this 
book-he would explain what Greek philosophy was all about so that 
readers would know what he was refuting when they read his next book. 
One has to admire Ghazali's fair-mindedness. He didn't set up a straw 
man for himself to knock down. His account of Aristotle was so lucid, so 
erudite, that even hard-core Aristotelians read the book and said, ''Aha! 
Now at last I understand Aristotle!" 
Ghazali's book made its way to Andalusia and from there into Christ-
ian Europe, where it dazzled those few who could read. Western Euro-
peans had pretty much forgotten classical Greek thought since the fall of 
Rome. For most, this was their first exposure to Aristotle. Somewhere 
along the way, however, Ghazali's preface had dropped out, so Europeans 
didn't know Ghazali was against Aristotle. Some, indeed, thought he was 
Aristotle, writing under a pen name. In any case, The Aims of the Philoso-
phers so impressed Europeans that Aristotle acquired for them an aura of 
imposing authority, and later Christian philosophers devoted much energy 
to reconciling church doctrines with Aristotelian thought. 
Meanwhile, back in Persia, Ghazali had written his follow-up to The 
Aims of the Philosophers, a second seminal volume called The Incoherence of 
the Philosophers. Here, Ghazali identified twenty premises on which Greek 
and Greco-Islamic philosophy depended, then used syllogistic logic to dis-
mantle each one. His most consequential argument, to my mind, was his 
attack on the notion of cause-and-effect relationships among material phe-
nomena. No such connections exist, according to Ghazali: we think fire 
causes cotton to burn, because fire is always there when cotton burns. We 
mistake contiguity for causality. Actually, says Ghazali, it's God who causes 
cotton to burn, since He is the first and only cause of all things. The fire 
just happens to be there. 
If I'm making Ghazali sound ridiculous here, it's only because I'm not 
as fair-minded as he was with Aristotle. I disagree with him. Not everyone 
does. Ghazali's case against causality was resurrected in the West, by the 
eighteenth-century Scottish philosopher David Hume; and in the 1970s, I 
read essentially the same argument made again by the American Zen Bud-
dhist Alan Watts, who likened cause and effect to a cat walking back and 

112 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
forth past a narrow slit in a fence. If we're looking through the slit from the 
other side, Watts said, we keep seeing first the head of the cat and then the 
tail, which doesn't mean the head causes the tail. (Actually, I think it does, 
in a sense, but I won't get into that here.) 
Take it however you will, the argument against causality undermines the 
whole scientific enterprise. If nothing actually causes anything else, why 
bother to observe the natural world in search of meaningful patterns? If 
God is the only cause, the only way to make sense of the world is to know 
God's will, which means that the only thing worth studying is the revela-
tion, which means that the only people worth listening to are the ulama. 
Ghazali allowed that mathematics, logic, and even the natural sciences 
could lead to true conclusions, but wherever they conflicted with the rev-
elations, they were wrong. But if science is right only when it reaches the 
same conclusions as revelation, we don't need science. All the truth we 
need we can get from the revelations. 
Some of the philosophers struck back. Ibn Rushd (known to Europeans 
as Averroes) wrote a riposte to Ghazali called The Incoherence of the Inco-
herence, but it did little good: when the smoke cleared, Ghazali had won 
the day. From his time forward, Greek-based Muslim philosophy lost 
steam and Muslim interest in natural science foundered. 
Ghazali won tremendous accolades for his work. He was appointed 
head of the prestigious Nizamiya University in Baghdad, the Yale of the 
medieval Islamic world. The orthodox establishment acknowledged him as 
the leading religious authority of the age. Ghazali had a problem, however: 
he was an authentically religious man, and somehow, amid all the status 
and applause, he knew he didn't have the real treasure. He believed in the 
revelations, he revered the Prophet and the Book, he was devoted to the 
shari' a, but he wasn't feeling the palpable presence of God-the very same 
dissatisfaction that had given rise to Sufism. Ghazali had a sudden spiritual 
crisis, resigned all his posts, gave away all his possessions, abandoned all his 
friends, and went into seclusion. 
When he came out of it many months later, he declared that the schol-
ars had it right, but the Sufis had it righter: The Law was the Law and you 
had to follow it, but you couldn't reach Allah through book learning and 
good behavior alone. You needed to open your heart, and only the Sufis 
knew how to get the heart opened up. 

SCHOLARS, PHILOSOPHERS, AND SUFIS 
113 
Ghazali now wrote two more seminal books, The Alchemy of Happiness 
and The Revival of the Religious Sciences. In these, he forged a synthesis be-
tween orthodox theology and Sufism by explaining how the shari'a fit in 
with the tariqa, the Sufi method for becoming one with God. He created 
a place for mysticism within the framework of orthodox Islam and thus 
made Sufism respectable. 
Before Ghazali came along, three intellectual movements were compet-
ing for adherents in the Islamic world. After Ghazali, two of those currents 
had come to an accommodation and the third had been eliminated. 
I don't say the philosophers acknowledged that Ghazali had proved 
them wrong and as a result shriveled up and died. Nor do I even say that 
public opinion turned against the philosophers because Ghazali had 
proved them wrong. Public opinion rarely believes or disbelieves anything 
based on proof. Besides, hardly anything in philosophy is ever definitively 
proven right or wrong. 
I say, rather, that some people wanted to turn away from philosophy 
and natural science in this era. Some already regarded reason as dangerous 
trickery leading only to chaos, and Ghazali gave such people the ammuni-
tion they needed to look respectable, and even smart while they were de-
nouncing philosophy and reason. 
In the years that followed, more and more people turned in this direc-
tion. The assumption that many shades of gray exist in ethical and moral 
matters allows people to adopt thousands of idiosyncratic positions, no 
two people having exactly the same set of beliefs, but in times of turmoil, 
people lose their taste for subtleties and their tolerance for ambiguity. Doc-
trines that assert unambiguous rules promote social solidarity because they 
enable people to cohere around shared beliefs, and when no one knows 
what tomorrow may bring, people prefer to clump together. 
Sometime during this period, the status of women in Islamic society 
seems to have changed as well. Various clues suggest to me that in the early 
days oflslam, women had more independence and a greater role in public 
affairs than they had later on, or than many have in the Islamic world 
today. The Prophet's first wife Khadija, for example, was a powerful and 
successful businesswoman who started out as Mohammed's employer. The 
Prophet's youngest wife Ayesha led one major party during the schism that 
followed Othman's death. She even commanded armies in the field, and 

114 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
no one seemed surprised that a woman would take on this role. Women 
were present at the iconic early battles as nurses and support staff and even 
sometimes as fighters. In the battle of Yarmuk, the chronicles tell of the 
widow Umm Hakim fighting Byzantine soldiers with a tentpole for a 
sword.2 Also, details about some of the battles come from women bards, 
who observed the fighting and composed poems about it, essentially act-
ing as war correspondents. 
Women must also have been present at crucial community meetings in 
those early days, since the fact of their public arguments with Khalifa Omar 
are recorded-and yet Omar appointed a woman to administer the market 
in Medina.3 Besides all this, women figure prominently among the scholars 
of early Islam. In the first century after the Hijra, women such as Hafsa, 
Umm al-Darda, Amra bin Abdul Rahman, and others rose to eminence as 
authorities on hadith. Some were famous calligraphers. They and others 
taught classes, took in students of both sexes, and gave public lectures. 
Clearly, these women were not shut out of public life, public recog-
nition, and public consequence. The practice of relegating women to an 
unseen private realm derived, it seems, from Byzantine and Sassanid prac-
tices. Among the upper classes of those societies, women were sequestered 
as a mark of high status. Aristocratic Arab families adopted the same cus-
toms as a way of appropriating their predecessors' status. The average Mus-
lim woman probably saw her access to public life markedly reduced in the 
fourth century AH (that is, after about 1000 CE) or at least that's what the 
tone of scholars' remarks on gender roles imply. The radical separation of 
gender roles into nonoverlapping spheres accompanied by the sequestra-
tion of women probably froze into place during the era of social break-
down that marked the latter days of the Abbasid khalifate. The same forces 
that squeezed protoscience out of Islamic intellectual life, the same forces 
that devalued reason as an instrument of ethical and social inquiry, acted 
to constrict the position of women. 
Ghazali devotes one-fourth of his oeuvre, The Revival of the Religious 
Sciences, to a discourse on marriage, family life, and the proper etiquette 
for the sexes. Here, he says that a woman "should remain in the inner sanc-
tum of her house and tend to her spinning; she should not enter and exit 
excessively; she should speak infrequently with her neighbors and visit 
them only when the situation requires it; she should safeguard her hus-

SCHOLARS, PHILOSOPHERS, AND SUFIS 
115 
band in his absence and in his presence; she should seek his pleasure in all 
affairs .... She should not leave his home without his permission: if she 
goes out with his permission, she should conceal herself in worn-out 
clothes ... being careful that no stranger hear her voice or recognize her 
personally .... She should ... be ready at all times for {her husband) to 
enjoy her whenever he wishes."4 Ghazali also discusses men's obligations to 
their wives, but add up all his remarks and you can see that he's envision-
ing a social world divided strictly into public and private realms, with 
women restricted to the private one and the public realm reserved exclu-
sively for men. 
Anxiety about change and a longing for stability tend to deepen tradi-
tional and familiar patterns of society. In the Muslim world, these included 
patriarchal patterns inherent not just in Arabic tribal life but also in pre-
Islamic Byzantine and Sassanid societies. Ghazali's ideas proved persuasive 
in his time and in the centuries following his death because this was a 
period of rising disorder, a time of anxiety that cast a pall over civilized life, 
a time of instability that came finally to a horrifying crescendo. 


Enter the Turks 
120-487 AH 
737-1095 CE 
W
HAT GAVE RISE to all the anxiety? The answer lies in the political 
story unfolding alongside the intellectual movements I have de-
scribed. From the Prophet's day through the first two centuries or so of 
Abbasid rule, people in the Muslim world had good reason to think they 
were living at the very center of world civilization. European culture barely 
existed. India had fragmented into many small kingdoms. Buddhism had 
receded into China, and although it's true that there in "Cathay" the Tang 
and Sung dynasties presided over a glorious renaissance almost exactly co-
extensive with the Muslim one flowering in the middle world, China was 
too far away to have much resonance in places like Mesopotamia or Egypt. 
If the Muslim realm was the heart of the world, then the underlying 
driving force of world history was the quest to perfect and universalize the 
Muslim community. All the major issues of the time-the struggle be-
tween Shi'ism and orthodoxy, philosophy and theology, Persians and 
Arabs-could be understood within this framework. For a long while, op-
timistic observers could look at world events and believe that things were 
generally moving forward. The implications of the holy miracle that blos-
somed in Mecca and Medina were still flowering. Islam had permeated 
117 

118 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
deeply and rippled far. Even the Hindus of the Indian heartland were 
weakening. Even sub-Saharan Africa had Muslim converts now. Only 
Cathay and darkest Europe remained fully outside the realm. It seemed 
only a matter of time before Islam fulfilled its destiny and bathed even 
those regions with light. 
But the dream of the universal community of piety and justice re-
mained elusively out of reach and then began to slip away. At the very 
height of its power and glory, the khalifate began to crack. Indeed, looking 
back, historians could plausibly say the cracking began before the heights 
were achieved. It began when the Abbasids took power. 
In that cataclysmic transition, the new rulers lured all the Umayyads 
into a room and clubbed them to death. Well, not quite all. One Umayyad 
nobleman skipped the party. This man, the last of the Umayyads, a young 
fellow by the name of Abdul Rahman, fled Damascus in disguise and 
headed across North Africa, and he didn't stop running until he got to the 
furthest tip of the Muslim world: Andalusian Spain. Any further and he 
would have been in the primitive wilderness of Christian Europe. 
Abdul Rahman impressed the locals in Spain. A few hard-core Kharijite 
insurgent types skulking about there at the ends of the Earth pledged their 
swords to the youngster. There in Spain, so far from the Muslim heartland, 
no one knew much about the new regime in Baghdad and certainly felt no 
loyalty to them. Andalusians were accustomed to thinking of the 
Umayyads as rulers, and here was a real-life Umayyad asking to be their 
ruler. In a less tumultuous time, Abdul Rahman might simply have been 
posted here as governor and the people would have accepted him. There-
fore, they accepted him as their leader now, and Andalusian Spain became 
an independent state, separate from the rest of the khalifate. So the Mus-
lim story was now unfolding from two centers. 
At first, this was only a political fissure, but as the Abbasids weakened, 
the Andalusian Umayyads announced that they were not merely indepen-
dent of Baghdad but were, in fact, still the khalifas. Everyone within a few 
hundred miles said, "Oh, yes, sir, you're definitely the khalifa of Islam; we 
could tell from the very look of you." So the khalifate itself, this quasi-
mystical idea of a single worldwide community of faith, was broken in two. 
The Umayyad claim had some resonance because their Andalusian cap-
ital of Cordoba was far and away the greatest city in Europe. At its height it 

ENTER THE TURKS 
119 
had some half a million inhabitants and boasted hundreds of bathhouses, 
hospitals, schools, mosques, and other public buildings. The largest of 
many libraries in Cordoba reputedly contained some five hundred thou-
sand volumes. Spain had other urban centers as well, cities of fifty thousand 
or more at a time when the biggest towns in Christian Europe did not ex-
ceed twenty-five thousand inhabitants. Once-mighty Rome was merely a 
village now, with a population smaller than Dayton, Ohio, a thin smatter-
ing of peasants and ruffians eking out a living among the ruins. 
At first, therefore, the political split in Islam did not seem to imply any 
loss of civilizational momentum. Andalusia traded heavily with the rest of 
the civilized world. It sent timber, grains, metals, and other raw materials 
into North Africa and across the Mediterranean to the Middle World, im-
porting from those regions handcrafted luxury goods, ceramics, furniture, 
rich textiles, spices and the like. 
Trade with the Christian countries to the north and east, by contrast, 
amounted to a mere trickle-not so much because of any hostility be-
tween the regions, but because Christian Europeans had virtually nothing 
to sell and no money with which to buy. 
Muslims formed the majority in Andalusia, but many Christians and 
Jews lived there as well. Umayyad Spain may have been at odds with the 
Baghdad khalifate, but its rulers followed much the same social policies as 
in all the Muslim conquests so far. Both Christian and Jewish communi-
ties had their own religious leaders and judicial systems and were free to 
practice their own rituals and customs. If one of them got into a dispute 
with a Muslim, the case was tried in a Muslim court by Islamic rules but 
disputes among themselves were adjudicated by their own judges accord-
ing to their own rules. 
Non-Muslims had to pay the poll tax but were exempt from the char-
ity tax. They were excluded from military service and the highest political 
positions, but all other occupations and offices were open to them. Chris-
tians, Muslims, and Jews lived in fairly amicable harmony in this empire 
with the caveat that Muslims wielded ultimate political power and proba-
bly radiated an attitude of superiority, stemming from certainty that their 
culture and society represented the highest stage of civilization, much as 
Americans and western Europeans now tend to do vis-a-vis people of third 
world countries. 

120 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
The story of King Sancho illustrates how the various communities got 
along. In the late tenth century CE, Sancho inherited the throne of Leon, 
a Christian kingdom north of Spain. Sancho's subjects soon began refer-
ring to him as Sancho the Fat, the sort of nickname a king never likes to 
hear his subjects using with impunity. Poor Sancho might more accurately 
have been called Sancho the Medically Obese, but his nobles could not 
take the large view. They regarded Sancho's size as proof of an internal 
weakness that made him unfit to rule, so they deposed him. 
Sancho then heard about a Jewish physician named Hisdai ibn Shaprut 
who reputedly knew how to cure obesity. Hisdai was employed by the Mus-
lim ruler in COrdoba, so Sancho headed south with his mother and retinue 
to seek treatments. The Muslim ruler Abdul Rahman the Third welcomed 
Sancho as an honored guest and had him stay at the royal palace until His-
dai had shrunk him down, whereupon Sancho returned to Leon, reclaimed 
his throne, and signed a treaty of friendship with Abdul Rahman. 1 
A Christian king received treatments from a Jewish physician at the 
court of a Muslim ruler: there you have the story of Muslim Spain in a 
nutshell. When Europeans talk about the Golden Age of Islam, they are 
often thinking of the Spanish khalifate, because this was the part of the 
Muslim world that Europeans knew the most about. 
But COrdoba was not the only city to rival Baghdad. In the tenth century, 
another city emerged to challenge the supremacy of the Abbasid khalifate. 
When the Abbasids decided to rule as Sunnis, they revived the Shi'ite 
impulse to rebellion. In 347 AH (969 CE) Shi'i warriors from Tunisia 
managed to seize control of Egypt and declared themselves the true khali-
fas of Islam because (they said) they were descended from the Prophet's 
daughter Fatima, for which reason they called themselves the Fatimids. 
These rulers built themselves a brand new capital they called Qahira, the 
Arabic word for "victory." In the West, it is spelled Cairo. 
The Egyptian khalifate had the resources of North Africa and the gra-
naries of the Nile valley to draw upon. It was well situated to compete in 
the Mediterranean Sea trade, and it dominated the routes along the Red 
Sea to Yemen, which gave it access to markets bordering the Indian Ocean. 
By the year 1000 CE, it probably outshone both Baghdad and Cordoba. 
In Cairo, the Fatimids built the world's first university, Al Azhar, which is 
still going strong. Everything I've said about the other two khalifates-big 

ENTER THE TURKS 
121 
THE THREE KHALIFATES 
cities, busy bazaars, liberal policies, lots of cultural and intellectual activity-
was true of this khalifate as well. Rich as it was, however, Egypt represented 
yet another fragmentation of what was, in theory, a single universal commu-
nity. In short, as the millennium approached, the Islamic world was divided 
into three parts. 
Each khalifate asserted itself to be the one and only true khalifate-
"one and only" being built into the very meaning of the word khalifote. 
But since the khalifas were really merely secular emperors by this time, the 
three khalifates more or less coexisted, just like three vast secular states. 
The Abbasids had the most territory (at first), and theirs was the rich-
est capital, but the very size of their holdings made them, in some ways, 
the weakest of the three khalifates. Just as Rome grew too big to adminis-
ter from any single place by any single ruler, so, too, did the Abbasid khal-
ifate. A vast bureaucracy that developed to carry out the khalifa's orders 
encrusted into permanence. The khalifa disappeared into the stratosphere 
above this machinery of state until he became invisible to his subjects. 
Just like the Roman emperors, the Abbasid khalifas surrounded them-
selves with a corps of bodyguards, which became the tail that wagged the 

122 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
dog. In Rome, this group was called the Praetorian Guard, and it was 
(ironically) well staffed with Germans recruited from the territories of the 
barbarians north of the frontiers, those same barbarians with whom Rome 
had been at war for centuries and whose excursions posed a constant threat 
to civilized order. 
The same pattern emerged in the Abbasid khalifate. Here, the imperial 
guards were called mamluks, which means "slaves," although these were 
not ordinary slaves but elite slave soldiers. Like Rome, the Abbasid khali-
fate was plagued by nomadic barbarians north of its borders. In the west, 
the barbarians of the north were Germans; here they were Turks. (There 
were no Turks in what is now called Turkey; they migrated to this area 
much later. The ancestral home of the Turkish tribes was the central Asian 
steppes north oflran and Afghanistan.) As the Romans had done with the 
Germans, the Abbasids imported some of these Turks-purchasing them 
from the slave markets along the frontier-and used them as bodyguards. 
The khalifas did this because they didn't trust the Arabs and Persians 
whom they ruled and among whom they lived, folks with too many local 
roots, too many relatives, and interests of their own to push. The khalifas 
wanted guards with no links to anyone but the khalifas themselves, no 
home but their court, no loyalties except to their owners. Therefore, the 
slaves they brought in were children. They had these kids raised as Mus-
lims in special schools where they were taught martial skills. When they 
grew up they entered an elite corps that formed something like an exten-
sion of the khalifa's own identity. In fact, since the public never saw the 
khalifa anymore, these Turkish bodyguards became, for most folks, the 
face of the khalifate. 
Of course they were arrogant, violent, and rapacious-they were raised 
to be. Even while keeping the khalifa safe, they alienated him from his 
people, their depredations making him ever more unpopular and therefore 
unsafe and therefore ever more in need of bodyguards. Eventually, the 
khalifa had to build the separate soldier's city of Samarra just to house his 
troublesome mamluks, and he himself moved there to live among them. 
Meanwhile, a Persian family, the Buyids, insinuated themselves into the 
court as the khalifa's advisers, clerks, helpers. Soon, they took control of the 
bureaucracy and thus of the empire's day-to-day affairs. Boldly, they passed 
the office of vizier (chief administrator) down from father to son as a hered-

ENTER THE TURKS 
123 
itary title. (A similar thing happened in the Germanic kingdoms of Europe 
where a similar officer, the "mayor of the palace" developed into the real 
ruler of the land.) The Buyids, like the khalifas, began importing the chil-
dren ofTurkish barbarians to Baghdad as slaves and raising them in dormi-
tories over which they had absolute control, to serve as their personal 
bodyguards. Once the Buyids had their system in place, no one could op-
pose them, for their Turkish bodyguards had come to town at such a young 
age they had no memory of their families, their fathers, their mothers, their 
siblings: they knew only the camaraderie of the military schools and camps 
in which they grew up, and they felt soldierly allegiance only to one another 
and to the men who had controlled their lives in the camps. The Buyids, 
then, became a new kind of dynasty in Islam. They kept the khalifa in place 
but issued orders in his name and enjoyed a high life behind the throne. 
Thus, Persians came to rule the capital of the Arab khalifate. 
These Persian viziers couldn't rule the rest of the empire, however, nor 
did they even care to. They were perfectly content to leave distant locales 
to the domination of whatever lord happened to have the most strength 
there. Major governors thus turned into minor kings, and Persian mini 
dynasties proliferated across the former Sassanid realm. 
You might think that training slaves to be killers, giving them weapons, 
and then stationing them outside your bedroom door would be such a bad 
idea that no one would ever do it, but in fact almost everyone did it in these 
parts: every little breakaway Persian kingdom had its own corps ofTurkish 
mamluks guarding and eventually controlling its little Persian king. 
As if that were not enough, the empire as a whole was constantly fight-
ing to keep whole tribes ofTurkish nomads from crossing the frontier and 
wreaking havoc in the civilized world, just as the Romans had struggled to 
keep the Germans at bay. At last the Turks grew too strong to suppress, 
both inside and outside the khalifate. In some of those little outlying king-
doms, mamluks killed their masters and founded their own dynasties. 
Meanwhile, with the empire decaying and the social fabric fraying, bar-
barians began to penetrate the northern borders, much as the Germans 
had done in Europe when they crossed the Rhine River into Roman terri-
tory. Rude Turks came trickling south in ever growing numbers: tough 
warriors, newly converted to Islam and brutal in their simplistic fanati-
cism. Accustomed to plunder as a way of life, they ruined cities and laid 

124 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
waste to crops. The highways grew unsafe, small-time banditry became 
rife, trade declined, poverty spread. Turkish mamluks fought bitterly with 
Turkish nomads-it was Turks in power everywhere. This is part of why 
anxiety permeated the empire in Ghazali's day. 
A light did shine at the edges, however, under a Persian dynasty called 
the Samanids. Their kingdom radiated from cities on either side of the 
Oxus River, which now forms the northern border of Afghanistan. Here, 
in the great urban centers ofBalkh and Bokhara, the literary culture of an-
cient Persia revived, and Persian began to compete with Arabic as the lan-
guage of learning. 
But the Samanids, too, had mamluks, and one of their mamluk gener-
als decided he would rather give orders than take them. Goodbye, 
Samanids; hello, Ghaznavids. The new rulers were called Ghaznavids be-
cause they moved their capital to the city of Ghazni, southeast of Kabul. 
The Ghaznavid dynasty peaked with a long-lived conqueror named Mah-
mud, a Charlemagne of the Islamic East. By the time this man was done, 
his empire sprawled from the Caspian to the Indus. Just as Charlemagne 
saw himself as a "most Christian emperor," Mahmud considered himself a 
most Muslim monarch. He appointed himself coruler of the Muslim 
world, giving himself the brand new title of sultan, which means some-
thing like "sword arm." As he saw it, the Arab khalifa was still the spiritual 
father of the Islamic community, but he, Mahmud, was the equally im-
portant military leader, the Enforcer. From his day until the twentieth cen-
tury, there was always at least one sultan in the Muslim world. 
Sultan Mahmud was bright enough to staff his imperial service with 
educated Persians who could read and write. He announced handsome re-
wards for men of learning, offers that attracted some nine hundred poets, 
historians, theologians, philosophers, and other literati to his court, which 
added to his prestige. 
One of these literati was the poet Firdausi, who was writing Shahnama 
(The Book of Kings), an epic history of the Persian nation from the begin-
ning of time to the birth of Islam, all in rhyming couplets. In the Middle 
World he has a stature comparable to Dante. Mahmud extravagantly 
promised this man one piece of gold for each couplet of his finished epic. 
He was shocked when Firdausi finally presented him with the longest 
poem ever penned by a single man: The Book of Kings has over sixty thou-

ENTER THE TURKS 
125 
sand couplets. "Did I say gold?" the sultan frowned. "I meant to say silver. 
One piece of silver for each couplet." 
The offended Firdausi went off in a huff and offered his poem to an-
other king. According to legend, Sultan Mahmud later regretted his 
penny-pinching and sent servants with trunk loads of gold to coax the 
poet back, but they were knocking on the front door of the poet's house 
while his corpse was being carried out the back for burial.2 
The Book of Kings represents all of history as a struggle between the de-
scendants of two legendary brothers, Iran and Turan, who (it is often 
thought) represent the Persians and the Turks, respectively: Iran is the 
good guy, and Turan the bad guy. Not surprisingly, The Book of Kings is 
now the national epic of Iran, and I wonder if it was actually the cost of 
the book that gave the sultan pause: maybe he didn't like seeing Turks pre-
sented as the bad guys of history. 
Firdausi also heaped scorn on the Arabs and devoted a long passage at 
the end to detailing their primitive savagery as compared to the civilized 
grace of the Persians at the time Islam was born. His book was just one 
more sign of the decline of Arab power and the rising prestige of Persian 
culture within Islam. In fact, his attitude about Arabs was not unique. As 
another poet of the era wrote, 
Arabs were eating crickets in the wasteland, living on the brink, 
While in Mashad, even dogs had ice water to drink.3 
Sultan Mahmud was not only first in patronage of the arts; he also prided 
himself on the number of Hindu temples he sacked and how thoroughly 
he sacked them and what quantities of loot he snatched away from infidel 
fingers. He hauled his plunder home to ornament his capital and pay the 
nine-hundred-plus literati living at his court. His invasions of India and 
his slaughter of Hindus made him, he felt, a hero of Islam. 
Mahmud's son Masud built himself a winter capital on the banks of the 
Helmand River, about a mile downriver from my own boyhood town of 
Lashkargah. The ruins of the city are still there. Growing up, I often won-
dered if Masud might have hunted deer on the same wooded island in the 
middle of the river where my buddies and I used to roam, woods that in 
my day teemed with jungle cats, jackals, and wild boar. 

126 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Masud himself was a formidable specimen of a man. Too heavy for most 
horses, he customarily rode an elephant, of which he had a whole battalion 
penned up in the marshy canebrakes along the Helmand River. Make no 
mistake, however, his great girth was all muscle. He went into battle with a 
sword only he could swing and a battleaxe so huge, no one else could even 
lift it. Even the great Sultan Mahmud reputedly feared his boy. 
When the father died, Masud happened to be in Baghdad. The 
courtiers proclaimed his brother the new king. Masud came rushing back, 
gathering up an army along the way, dethroned his brother lickety-split, 
and put out both his eyes to make sure he would never try anything like 
that again. Then he took over the Ghaznavid Empire and, like his father, 
welded art and war into a potent cultural combination of grandeur and 
gold and savagery. At that point, it must have seemed like Ghaznavid do-
minion would last forever. 
Yet four times during Masud's reign, rugged Oghuz Turks from the 
north stormed across the Oxus River to attack Ghaznavid realms. Led by 
a family called the Seljuks, they made their way into Khorasan (eastern 
Iran, western Afghanistan). Four times Sultan Masud sallied forth to meet 
them on the field of battle. Three times he beat them back, but in the 
fourth battle, his forces got hammered. In 1040 he lost Lashkargah and 
his western strongholds to those Seljuks. I've described the dread de-
meanor of the frightening Masud; now imagine what kind of men it must 
have taken to beat him. Masud retreated to the city his father had built 
and lived out his reign, but the glory days of the Ghaznavids were done. 
The Seljuk era had begun. 
The Seljuks moved west, nibbling away at the empire based in Baghdad. 
These chieftains couldn't read or write and saw no point in learning. A 
strong swordsman could command enough gold to hire a hundred tallow-
faced clerks to read and write for him. They sacked cities and exacted trib-
ute, but preferred to live in tents, which they furnished as gloriously as was 
possible for a people constantly on the move. (In time, they also funded the 
construction of wonderful architecture in their major cities.) Once they 
crossed the border, they dropped their ancient shamanistic religion and 
converted to Islam, but it was a rough-and-ready Islam that didn't concern 
itself with doctrines or ethical ideas very much: it was more a rah-rah 
locker-room ideology that marked off Us Guys from Them Guys. 

ENTER THE TURKS 
127 
In 1053 CE, a young Seljuk prince was sent to govern the province of 
Khorasan. His name was Alp Arslan, which means "heroic lion"-a nick-
name his troops gave him. Alp Arslan took along his Persian secretary, 
soon to be known as Nizam al-Mulk, which means "order of the realm." 
Alp Arslan stood out in any crowd, not only because he stood well over six 
feet tall, but because he had grown his moustache so long he could sling 
the two strands of it over his shoulders to hang down behind his back, and 
when he rode his white horse at top speed, the braids streamed behind him 
like whip-shaped banners. 
His Persian adviser managed to set Khorasan in order and get the 
economy humming, which gave his sponsor such prestige that when the 
old Seljuk chieftain died and the usual fighting broke out among brothers, 
sons, and nephews, Alp Arslan quickly emerged triumphant, thanks in 
part to the crafty Nizam al-Mulk's advice. After crowning himself sultan, 
Alp Arslan began poring over maps to see what else he might conquer. 
He extended Seljuk power into the Caucasus region and then kept 
moving west, finally leading his armies into Asia Minor, most of which was 
ruled by Constantinople, the fortress capital of an empire the Muslims 
were still calling Rome. 
In 1071, on the outskirts of a town called Manzikert, Alp Arslan met 
the Byzantine emperor Romanus Diogenes in battle and smashed his 
hundred-thousand-man army. He took the emperor himself prisoner, 
sending a shock rippling through the Western world. Then he did the un-
thinkable; he released the emperor and sent him home to Constantinople 
with gifts and admonishments never to make trouble again, a courtesy that 
only underscored Seljuk might and added to the Christian emperor's hu-
miliation. The battle of Manzikert was one of history's truly seminal bat-
tles. At the time, it seemed like the greatest victory these Seljuks could ever 
achieve. In fact, it may have been their biggest mistake, but no one would 
realize this for another twenty-six years. 
Alp Arslan died the following year in Khorasan, but his son Malik Shah 
stepped right into his shoes, and under the expert tutelage of Nizam al-
Mulk proved himself nearly the equal of his father. It was he who con-
quered Syria and the Holy Lands for the Turks. 
The partnership between the Persian vizier and the two Seljuk sultans 
served both sides well. The sultans devoted themselves to conquests, 

128 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
SELJUK EMPIRE: THE TURKS INVADE THE ISLAMIC WORLD 
Nizam al-Mulk to organizing their conquests. There was much to organize 
because the sultans put diverse relatives in charge of various lands as they 
moved on, and the relatives regarded the territories given to them as their 
personal possessions. Fresh off the steppes, these Turks did not fully grasp 
the distinction between taxing and looting. 
Nizam al-Mulk got the tax system straightened out and created a cadre 
of roving inspectors to make sure the tax collectors didn't cheat. He used 
the Sultan's war revenues to build roads and organized a police force to 
protect travelers, so that merchants might feel safe transporting goods. He 
also set up state-funded hostels spaced about a day's journey apart for their 
convenience. This great vizier also built a network of schools and colleges 
called madrassas to teach future officials of his Islamic society a uniform 
doctrine. He ensured the uniformity of it by putting the curriculum in the 
hands of orthodox Sunni ulama. 
These measures were all part of his struggle against the centripetal 
forces of his times. Nizam al-Mulk hoped to weave a stable Islamic com-
munity out of three ethnic strands. The Turks would keep order with their 
military strength, the Arabs would provide unity by contributing reli-

ENTER THE TURKS 
129 
gious doctrine, and the Persians would contribute all the remaining arts of 
civilization-administration, philosophy, poetry, painting, architecture, 
science-to elevate and beautify the world. The new ruling class would 
thus consist of a Turkish sultan and his army, an Arab khalifa and the 
ulama, and a Persian bureaucracy staffed by artists and thinkers. 
The stability this engendered would, he hoped, let farmers and mer-
chants generate the wealth needed to ... provide the taxes needed to ... 
fund the armies needed to ... keep the order needed to ... let farmers and 
merchants keep generating wealth. 
But Nizam al-Mulk had a sinister opponent working to unravel his fab-
ric, a ruthless genius named Hassan Sabbah, founder of the Cult of the As-
sassins. I call them a cult because "sect" seems too mainstream. They were 
a branch that split away from a branch that split away from Shi'ism, itself 
a branch of Islam. 
Shi'is believe in a central guiding religious figure called an imam, of 
whom there is always one in the world. As soon as the imam dies, his spe-
cial grace passes into one of his sons, making him the imam. The trouble 
is that every time an imam passes away, disagreements can arise about 
which of his sons is the next imam. Each such disagreement can lead to a 
split that gives birth to a new branch of the sect. 
Just such a disagreement had broken out about who was the fifth 
imam, spawning the Zaidi sect, also known as the Fivers. A more serious 
disagreement arose after the death of the sixth imam, giving rise to a sect 
called the lsma'ilis, who became the dominant branch of Shi'ism for a 
while, since the Fatimids who captured Egypt and set up a rival khalifate 
were lsma'ilis. 
In the late eleventh century the lsma'ilis themselves branched into two. 
The minority was a revolutionary offshoot angered by the wealth and 
pomp of the now-mighty Fatimid khalifate and dedicated to leveling rich 
and poor, empowering the meek, and generally getting the Islamic project 
back on course. The leaders of this movement sent an operative named 
Hassan Sabbah to Persia to recruit adherents. 
In Persia, Sabbah developed his own power base. He took control of a 
fortress called Alamut {"the eagle's nest"), situated high in the Elburz 
mountains of northern Iran. No one could touch him there because the 
only approach to the fortress was a footpath too narrow to accommodate 

130 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
an army. How Sabbah conquered it, no one knows. Some legends say 
trickery was involved, some that he used supernatural means, some that he 
converted the staff of the fortress and then simply bought the place from 
its master for a small sum. Whatever the case, there at Alamut, Sabbah got 
busy organizing the Assassins. 
Did his cult adopt this name because they were devoted to political 
murder? Quite the opposite: political murder is now called assassination 
because it was a tactic practiced by this cult. Centuries later, Marco Polo 
would claim that Sabbah's agents smoked hashish in order to hop them-
selves up for murder and were thus called hashishin, from which derived 
the word assassin. I doubt this etymology, and I'll tell you why. 
Sabbah was the archetypal prototerrorist, using murder largely for its 
propaganda value. Since he lacked the resources and troops to fight battles 
or conquer cities, he sent individuals, or at most small groups, to assassi-
nate carefully targeted figures chosen for the shock their death would 
spark. The Assassins plotted their killings for months or even years, some-
times contriving to make friends with the victim or enter his service and 
work their way up to a position of trust. 
Where in this long process was the hashish smoking supposed to take 
place? It doesn't add up. The Lebanese writer Amin Malouf suggests that 
actually the word assassin probably derives from the Persian word assas, 
which means "foundation." Like most religious schismatics, Sabbah 
taught that the revelations had been corrupted and that he was taking his 
followers back to the foundation, the original. Of course, every schismatic 
has a different idea about what the founding revelation was. Sabbah's doc-
trine strayed pretty far from anything most scholars recognize as Islam. 
For one thing, he taught that while Mohammed was indeed the messen-
ger of Allah, Ali was an actual incarnation of Allah-as were the succeed-
ing imams. 
Sabbah further taught that the Qur'an had a surface or exterior meaning 
but many levels of esoteric or interior meanings. The surface meaning pre-
scribed the rituals of religion, the outward show, the rules of conduct, the 
ethical and moral mandates; all of this was for the brutal masses who 
couldn't aspire to deeper knowledge. The esoteric Qur'an-and every verse, 
every line, every letter had an esoteric meaning-provided a secret code that 
allowed cognoscenti to unlock the cryptogram of the created universe. 

ENTER THE TURKS 
131 
The Assassins were organized as the ultimate secret society. Out in the 
world, they gave no indication of their identity or their real beliefs. No one 
knew, therefore, how many Assassins there were or which of the people in 
the bazaar, or the mosque, or anywhere else was actually an Assassin. Re-
cruits went through intensive indoctrination and training, but once ac-
cepted into the sect, each member had a rank reflecting his level of 
knowledge. Initiates moved from stage to stage as they presumably 
plumbed ever deeper levels of meaning in the Qur'an, until they reached 
the foundation upon which all was built, whereupon they were admitted 
to Sabbah's innermost circle. 
Although they crafted their plots in utmost secrecy, the Assassins killed 
with utmost publicity: their object was not really to remove this or that 
person from power but to make people throughout the civilized world be-
lieve that the Assassins could kill any person, anytime, anywhere. Sabbah 
wanted people to worry that anyone they knew-their best friend, their 
most trusted servant, even their spouse-might actually be an Assassin. In 
this way, he hoped to control the policies of men who, unlike himself, did 
hold territory, did possess resources, and did command troops. 
The agents who did the murders for him were called Fedayeen, which 
means "sacrificers." When they plotted a public assassination, they knew 
they would be caught and killed within moments of completing their 
deed, but they made no effort to evade this outcome. Indeed, dying was a 
key element of the ritual they were enacting: they were suicide knifers. By 
embracing death, they let the authorities know that not even the threat of 
execution could intimidate them. 
The Assassins added to the anxiety of a world already in turmoil. Sun-
nis were struggling with Shi'i. The Abbasid khalifate in Baghdad was 
wrestling with the Fatimid khalifate in Cairo. Nearly a century of Turkish 
invasions had brutalized society. And now this cult of killers extending its 
secret tendrils throughout the Middle East injected society with a persis-
tent underlying nightmare. 
The Assassins announced themselves with a series of ever more spectac-
ular assassinations. They killed Seljuk officials and well-known Sunni cler-
ics. They killed two of the khalifas. As often as possible, they carried out 
their assassination in the biggest mosques during Friday prayer, when they 
could be sure of an audience. 

132 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Then in 1092 they murdered the recently retired Nizam al-Mulk him-
sel£ Scarcely a month later, they dispatched his master, Sultan Malik Shah, 
son of Alp Arslan. In the space of weeks, they had eliminated the two men 
most crucial to the shaky unity the empire enjoyed. These murders set off 
a debilitating power struggle among Seljuk sons, brothers, cousins, and rel-
atives, as well as miscellaneous adventurers, a struggle that left the western 
portion of the empire in pieces. From Asia Minor to the Sinai, practically 
every city ended up in the hands of a different prince-Jerusalem, Damas-
cus, Aleppo, Antioch, Tripoli, Edessa--each was a de facto sovereign state 
owing only nominal fealty to the sultan in Baghdad. Each petty prince 
huddled over his possession like a dog over a bone and eyed all the other 
princes with suspicion. 
By 1095 CE, the dream of a universal community had failed at the po-
litical level. The ulama were barely holding society together with Qur'an, 
hadith, and shari' a. The philosophers were a scattered breed, still adding to 
the conversation, but with voices that were growing ever dimmer. This was 
the world in which Ghazali lived and worked, a world in which trusting to 
reason could easily seem unreasonable. 
And then the catastrophes began. 

Havoc 
474-783 AH 
1081-1381 CE 
ASSAULT FROM THE WEST 
Really, there were two catastrophes, one little, one big. The little one came 
from the west. At this time, the Muslim world knew as little of western Eu-
rope as Europeans later knew about the African interior. To Muslims, every-
thing between Byzantium and Andalusia was a more or less primeval forest 
inhabited by men so primitive they still ate pig flesh. When Muslims said 
"Christians," they meant the Byzantine church or the various smaller 
churches operating in Muslim controlled territory. They knew that an ad-
vanced civilization had once flourished further west: a person could still make 
out traces of it in Italy and parts of the Mediterranean coast, which Muslims 
regularly raided; but it had crumbled during the Tune of Ignorance, before 
Islam entered the world, and was now little more than a memory. 
This Muslim view was not far wrong. Europe had been in terrible shape 
for a long time. Under attack for centuries from Germanic tribes, from 
Huns, from Avars, from Magyars, from Muslims, from Norsemen and 
others, it had sunk to a level of bare subsistence. Almost everybody in Eu-
rope was a peasant. Almost every peasant did backbreaking labor from 
133 

134 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
dawn to dark just to scratch up enough food to keep from starving and 
support a thin upper class of military aristocrats and clerics (and since cler-
ics couldn't marry, their ranks were replenished largely out of the military 
aristocracy.) Except for those few who went into the church, upper-class 
boys studied hardly anything except how to fight. 
Sometime in the eleventh century, however, the consequences of vari-
ous tiny technological innovations accumulated to a tipping point. These 
innovations were so subtle that they probably went all but unnoticed at the 
time. One was a modified, steel-tipped "heavy" plow that could cut 
through roots and, compared to the older models, dig a deeper furrow in 
the dense, wet soil of northern Europe. The heavy plow enabled peasants 
to clear forests and extend their fields into areas previously considered un-
suitable for farming. In effect, it gave peasants more land. 
A second invention was the horse collar, which was just a slight im-
provement of the yoke used to harness a beast of burden to a plow. The 
earlier version could be used only with oxen, due to its shape. If a horse 
were strapped to that yoke, the strap would press against the horse's neck 
and choke off its air supply. At some point, some unknown innovator 
modified that yoke just enough to have it press against a horse's shoulders 
and a lower spot on its neck. With this yoke, peasants could use horses in-
stead of oxen to plow their fields, and since horses plow about fifty percent 
faster than oxen, they could till more land in the same amount of time. 
A third innovation was three-field crop rotation. Farming the same plot 
of land year after year exhausts the soil, so farmers have to let their fields 
"rest" from time to time. But the stomach never rests, so European peas-
ants customarily divided their land into two fields. Each year they planted 
crops in one field and let the other field lie fallow. The next year, they 
planted crops in the second field and let the first lie fallow. 
Over the centuries, however, Europeans came to realize that a field 
didn't have to rest every second year. It stayed just as fertile if it lay fallow 
one year out of three. Gradually, peasants started dividing their land into 
three plots, and planting two of them each year while letting one lie fallow. 
In effect, this gave peasants one-sixth more arable land each year. 
What did these little changes add up to? Not much. They merely al-
lowed peasants to produce a slight surplus from time to time. When they 
had a surplus, they took it to certain crossroads on designated days and 

HAVOC 
135 
traded with peasants who had a surplus of something else. As the goods 
they had access to grew more various and more abundant, they were able 
to borrow some time from the backbreaking business of sheer subsistence 
to make handcrafted items to trade, whatever they were good at. Certain 
crossroads turned into more or less permanent market sites, which then 
developed into towns. Towns began to attract people who could work full 
time making things to sell for cash. Cash allowed some people to spend all 
their time going from market to market, just buying and selling. Money 
came back into use in Europe, and as money proliferated, the wealthiest 
Europeans acquired the means to travel. 
And where did they travel? Well, this being a world steeped in religion 
and religious superstition, they went to shrines in search of miracles. If 
they had limited means, they visited local shrines, but if they could afford 
better, they went to the great shrines in the Holy Lands. This was a long 
and dangerous journey for western Europeans, and without a universal 
currency the only way to pay for it was with gold or silver, which made 
such travelers prime targets for bandits; so pilgrims often formed groups, 
hired bodyguards, and organized communal expeditions to Palestine. 
There, they visited the places where Christ and his disciples had walked 
and worked and lived and died. They begged forgiveness of the Lord, got 
a leg up in the quest for heaven, bought charms to treat their physical ills, 
purchased some of the marvelous items to be had in the bazaars of the east, 
acquired relics and souvenirs for their relatives, and headed home to con-
template their life's greatest adventure. 
Then the Seljuk Turks wrested control of Palestine away from the tol-
erant Fatimids and the indolent Abbasids. As new converts, these Turks 
tended toward zealotry. They weren't zealous about sobriety, modesty, 
charity, and the like, but they ceded second place to none when it came to 
expressing chauvinistic disdain toward followers of other religions, espe-
cially those from faraway and more-primitive lands. 
Christian pilgrims began to find themselves treated rather shabbily in the 
Holy Lands. It wasn't that they were beaten, tortured, or killed-nothing 
like that. It was more that they were subjected to constant little humilia-
tions and harassments designed to make them feel second-class. They 
found themselves at the end of every line. They needed special permission 
to get into their own shrines. Every little thing cost money; shopkeepers 

136 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
ignored them; officials treated them rudely; and petty indignities of every 
sort were piled upon them. 
When they got back to Europe, they had much to swear and gripe 
about, but they also had tales to tell about the opulence of the East: the 
gorgeous houses they had seen, the silk and satin even commoners wore, 
the fine foods, the spices, the perfumes, the gold, the gold ... stories that 
stirred up both anger and envy. 
The battle of Manzikert in 1071 CE, the one in which the Seljuk 
Turks crushed the Byzantines and took their emperor prisoner, came as 
stunning news. It also triggered a stream of messages from the Byzantines. 
The Byzantine emperors harangued the knights of the West to come to 
their aid in the name of Christian unity. The patriarch of Constantinople 
sent urgent messages to his diehard western rival, the pope, warning that 
if Constantinople fell, the heathen "Mohammedans" would stream right 
to Rome. 
Meanwhile, with the European economy on the mend, the population 
was rising, but European customs had not kept pace in two crucial ways. 
First, productive labor was still considered unsuitable to the dignity of the 
noble born: their job was to own land and make war. Second, ancient cus-
tom still decreed that when a landowner died, his eldest son inherited the 
whole estate, leaving the younger sons to make their way as best they 
could. Ironically, this custom of"primogeniture" was only reinforced by an 
opposite process at the highest levels, the tendency of kings and princes to 
divide their realms among their sons, which fragmented kingdoms into 
ever-smaller units. France, for example, had dissolved into semisovereign 
units called counties and even smaller units ruled by really minor noble-
men called castellans, whose nobility consisted of possessing one castle and 
whatever surrounding area it could dominate. A castle could not be di-
vided among several sons, and so at this level, the level where knights were 
generated, the custom of "eldest son inherits all" became pervasive. 1 
Every generation therefore saw a larger pool of landless noblemen for 
whom there was no suitable occupation except war, and with the invasions 
sloping off, there wasn't even enough war to go around. The Vikings, the last 
major wave of invaders, no longer posed a threat because, by the eleventh 
century they had crammed into Europe and settled down. "They'' had be-
come "us." Even so, the system kept producing knights and more knights. 

HAVOC 
137 
Enter the pilgrims, stage left, complaining of the indignities visited 
upon them by heathens in the Holy Lands. Finally, in 1095, Pope Urban 
II delivered a fiery open-air speech outside a French monastery called 
Claremont. There, he told an assembly of French, German, and Italian no-
bles that Christendom was in danger. He detailed the humiliations that 
Christian pilgrims had suffered in the Holy Lands and called upon men of 
faith to help their brethren expel the Turks from Jerusalem. Urban sug-
gested that those who headed east should wear a cross-shaped red patch as 
a badge of their quest. The expedition was to be called a croisade, from 
croix, French for "cross," and from this came the name historians give to 
this whole undertaking: the Crusades. 
By focusing on Jerusalem, Urban linked the invasion of the east to pil-
grimage, thus framing it as a religious act. Therefore, by the authority 
vested in him as pope, he decreed that anyone who went to Jerusalem to 
kill Muslims would receive partial remission of his sins. 
One can only imagine how this must have struck those thousands of 
restless, rowdy, psychologically desperate European knights: "Go east, 
young man," the pope was saying. "Unleash your true self as the awesome 
killing machine your society trained you to be, stuff your pockets with 
gold guilt-free, get the land you were born to own, and as a consequence 
of it all-get into heaven after you're dead!" 
When the first crusaders came trickling into the Muslim world, the lo-
cals had no idea who they were dealing with. Early on, they assumed the 
interlopers to be Balkan mercenaries working for the emperor in Constan-
tinople. The first Muslim ruler to encounter them was a Seljuk prince, 
Kilij Arslan, who ruled eastern Anatolia from the city of Nicaea, about 
three days' journey from Constantinople. One day in the summer of 1096, 
Prince Arslan received information that a crowd of odd-looking warriors 
had entered his territory, odd because they were so poorly outfitted: a few 
did look like warriors, but the rest seemed like camp followers of some 
kind. Almost all wore a cross-shaped patch of red cloth sewn to their gar-
ments. Arslan had them followed and watched. He learned that these peo-
ple called themselves the Franks; local Turks and Arabs called them 
al-Ifranj ("the Franj"). The interlopers openly proclaimed that they had 
come from a distant western land to kill Muslims and conquer Jerusalem, 
but first they intended to take possession ofNicaea. Arslan plotted out the 

138 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
route they seemed to be taking, laid an ambush, and smashed them like so 
many ants, killing many, capturing many more, and chasing the rest back 
into Byzantine lands. It was so easy that he gave them no more thought. 
He didn't know that this "army" was merely the ragtag vanguard of a 
movement that would plague Muslims of the Mediterranean coast for an-
other two centuries. While Urban had been speaking to the aristocracy up 
at the monastery, a vagabond named Peter the Hermit had been preaching 
the same message out on the streets. Urban had addressed nobles and 
knights, but presumably any Christian who went crusading could get the 
remission of sins the pope was offering, so Peter the Hermit was able to re-
cruit from all classes-peasants, artisans, tradespeople, even women and 
children. His "army'' left before the formal army could get organized, in 
part because his "army" didn't feel much need to get organized. They were 
off to do God's work; surely God would take care of the arrangements. It 
was these tens of thousands of cobblers, butchers, peasants and the like 
that Kilij Arslan succeeded in crushing. 
The next year, when Kilij Arslan heard that more Franj were coming, he 
dismissed the threat with a shrug. But the Crusaders in this next wave were 
real knights and archers led by combat-hardened military commanders from 
a land where the combat never stopped. Arslan's engagement with them came 
down to a battle oflightly clad mobile horseman firing arrows at the armored 
tanks that were the medieval knights of western Europe. The Turks picked off 
the Franj foot soldiers, but the knights formed defensive blocks that arrows 
could not penetrate and kept moving slowly, ponderously, and inexorably for-
ward. They took Arslan's city and sent him running to one of his relatives for 
refuge. The knights then split up, some heading inland toward Edessa, the 
rest heading down the Mediterranean coast toward Antioch. 
The king of Antioch sent a desperate appeal to the king of Damascus, 
a man named Daquq. The king of Damascus wanted to help, but he was 
nervous about his brother Ridwan, the king of Aleppo, who would swoop 
in and grab Damascus ifDaquq were to leave it. The ruler ofMosul agreed 
to help, but he got distracted fighting someone else along the way, and 
when he did arrive-late-he got into a fight with Daquq who had also fi-
nally arrived-late-and these two Muslim forces ended up going home 
without helping Antioch at all. From the Muslim side, this was the story 
of the early Crusades: a tragicomedy of internecine rivalry played out in 

HAVOC 
139 
city after city. When Antioch fell, the knights took vengeance for the city's 
resistance with some indiscriminate killing, and then kept heading south, 
towards a city called Ma'ara. 
Knowing what had happened at Nicaea and Antioch, the Ma'arans 
were terrified. They too sent urgent messages to nearby cousins, begging 
for help, but their cousins were only too glad to see the wolves from the 
west batter Ma'ara, each one hoping to absorb the city for himself once the 
Franj had blown by. So Ma'ara had to face the Franj alone. 
The Christian knights set siege to the city and reduced it to desperation-
but in the process reduced themselves to desperation as well, because they ate 
every scrap of food in the vicinity and then commenced to starve. Obviously, 
no one was going to feed these invaders, and that was the problem with set-
ting a long siege in a strange land. 
At last Franj leaders sent a message into the city assuring the people of 
Ma'ra that none of them would be harmed if they simply opened their 
gates and surrendered. The city notables decided to comply. But once the 
Crusaders made it into Ma'ara, they did more than slaughter. They went 
on a frightening rampage that included boiling adult Muslims up for soup 
and skewering Muslim children on spits, grilling them over open fires, and 
eating them. 
I know this sounds like horrible propaganda that the defeated Muslims 
might have concocted to slander the Crusaders, but reports of Crusader 
cannibalism in this instance come from Frankish as well as Arab sources. 
Frankish eyewitness Radulph of Caen, for example, reported on the boiling 
and grilling. Albert of Aix, also present at the conquest of Ma'ara, wrote, 
"Not only did our troops not shrink from eating dead Turks and Saracens; 
they also ate dogs!"2 What strikes me about this statement is the implica-
tion that eating dogs was worse than eating Turks, which makes me think 
that this Franj, at least, considered Turks a different species from himsel£ 
Amazingly enough, even after this debacle, the Muslims could not 
unite. Examples abound. The ruler of Horns sent the Franj a gift of horses 
and offered them advice about what they might sack next (not Horns). 
The Sunni rulers ofTripoli invited the Franj to make common cause with 
them against the Shi'i. (Instead, the Franj conquered Tripoli.) 
When the Crusaders first arrived, the Egyptian vizier al-Afdal sent a let-
ter to the Byzantine emperor, congratulating him on the "reinforcements" 

140 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
and wishing the Crusaders every success! Egypt had long been locked in a 
struggle with both the Seljuks and the Abbasids, and al-Afdal really 
thought the newcomers would merely help his cause. It didn't seem to 
dawn on him until too late that he himself might be in the line of pillage. 
After the Franj conquered Antioch, the Fatimid vizier wrote to them to ask 
if there was anything he could do to help. When the Franj moved against 
Tripoli, Afdal took advantage of the distraction to assert control of 
Jerusalem in the name of the Fatimid khalifa. He posted his own governor 
there and assured the Franj they were now welcome to visit Jerusalem any-
time as honored pilgrims: they would have his protection. But the Franj 
wrote back to say they were not interested in protection but in Jerusalem, 
and they were coming "with lances raised."3 
The Franj marched through largely empty country, for their reputation 
had preceded them. Rural folks had fled at their approach, and small towns 
had emptied into larger cities with higher walls for protection. Jerusalem had 
some of the highest walls around, but after a forty-day siege, the Crusaders 
tried the same gambit they had run successfully at Ma'ara-open the gates, 
no one will be harmed, they told the citizens-and it worked here too. 
Upon securing this city, the Franj indulged in an orgy of bloodletting 
so drastic it made all the previous carnage seem mild. One crusader, writ-
ing about the triumph, described piling up heads, hands, and feet in the 
streets. {He called it a "wonderful sight.") He spoke of crusaders riding 
through heathen blood up to their knees and bridle reins.4 Edward Gib-
bon, the British historian who chronicled the fall of the Roman Empire, 
said the Crusaders killed seventy thousand people here over the course of 
two days. Of the city's Muslims, virtually none survived. 
The city's Jewish denizens took refuge in their gigantic central synagogue, 
but while they were in there praying for deliverance, the Crusaders block-
aded all the doors and windows and set fire to the building, burning up 
pretty much the entire Jewish community of Jerusalem in one fell swoop. 
The city's native Christians did not fare so well either. None of them 
belonged to the Church of Rome but to various Eastern churches such as 
the Greek, Armenian, Coptic, or Nestorian. The crusading Franj looked 
upon them as schismatics bordering on heresy, and since heretics were al-
most worse than heathens, they confiscated the property of these eastern 
Christians and sent them into exile. 

D 
County of Edessa 
• 
Principality of Antioch 
~ County of Tripoli 
~ 
Kingdom of Jen1salem 
-
Route of Crusaders 
o Crusader Stop-Over 
HAVOC 
THE THEATER OF THE CRUSADES 
141 
The taking of Jerusalem marked the high-water mark of the Franj in-
vasion. The victorious crusaders proclaimed Jerusalem a kingdom. It 
ranked the highest of the four small crusader states that took root in this 
area, the others being the principality of Antioch and the counties of 
Edessa and Tripoli. 
Once these four crusader states had been established, a sort of deadlock 
developed, which ground on dismally for decades. The two sides contin-
ued to clash sporadically during these decades, and the Franj won some 
battles, but they also lost some battles. They pounded the Muslims, but 
also got pounded, and they quarreled with one another, just as the Mus-
lims were doing among themselves. Sometimes they forged temporary al-
liances with some Muslim prince to gain an advantage against a rival Franj. 
Strange alignments formed and died. In one battle Christian king Tan-
cred of Antioch fought Muslim amir Jawali of Mosul. One third of Tan-
cred's force that day consisted of Turkish warriors on loan from the 
Muslim ruler of Aleppo, who was allied with the Assassins, who had links 
with the Crusaders. On the other side, about one third of Jawali's troops 

142 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
were Franj knights on loan from King Baldwin of Edessa, who had a ri-
valry going with Tancred.5 And this was typical. 
On the Muslim side, the absence of unity was breathtaking. It stemmed 
partly from the fact that the Muslims saw no ideological dimension to the 
violence, at first. They felt themselves under attack not as Muslims but as 
individuals, as cities, as mini states. They experienced the Franj as a horri-
ble but meaningless catastrophe, like an earthquake or a swarm of snakes. 
It's true that after the carnage at Jerusalem, a few preachers tried to 
arouse Muslim resistance by defining the invasion as a religious war. Sev-
eral prominent jurists began delivering sermons in which they used the 
word jihad for the first time in ages, but their harangues fell flat with Mus-
lim audiences. The word jihad merely seemed quaint, for it had fallen out 
of use centuries earlier, in part because of the rapid expansion of Islam, 
which had left the vast majority of Muslims living so far from any frontier 
that they had no enemy to fight in the name of jihad. That early sense of 
Islam against the world had long ago given way to a sense of Islam as the 
world. Most wars that anyone could remember hearing of had been fought 
for petty prizes such as territory, resources, or power. The few that could be 
cast as noble struggles about ideals were never about Islam versus some-
thing else, but only about whose Islam was the real Islam. 
Given the turmoil of the Muslim world, perhaps some disunity was in-
evitable: when the Franj dropped into this snake pit, fractious Muslims 
simply incorporated them into their ongoing dramas. Not all the disunity 
was spontaneous, however. The Assassins were busy behind the scenes, 
sowing turmoil, and quite successfully. 
Just before the Crusades began, Hassan Sabbah had established a sec-
ond base of operations in Syria, run by a subsidiary master whom the Cru-
saders came to know as the Old Man of the Mountains. By the time the 
Crusades began, virtually everyone who wasn't an Assassin hated the As-
sassins. Every power in the land was trying to hunt them down. The As-
sassins' enemies included the Shi'i, the Sunnis, the Seljuk Turks, the 
Fatimid Egyptians, and the Abbasid khalifate. As it happened, the Cru-
saders were making war against the same gallery-the Shi'i, the Sunnis, 
the Seljuk Turks, the Fatimid Egyptians, and the Abbasid khalifate. The 
Assassins and Crusaders had the same set of enemies so, inevitably, they 
became de facto allies. 

HAVOC 
143 
During the first century of the Franj invasions, every time the Muslims 
began moving toward unity, the Assassins murdered some key figure and 
triggered turmoil anew. 
In 1113 CE the governor of Mosul called a conference of Muslim lead-
ers to organize a unified campaign against the Franj. Just before the meet-
ings began, however, a mendicant approached the governor on his way to 
the mosque, pretended to beg for alms, then suddenly plunged a knife in 
his chest. So much for the unity campaign. 
In 1124, Assassin agents murdered the second most influential cleric 
preaching the new jihad. The next year, a group of supposed Sufis attacked 
and killed another such preacher, the most influential proponent of jihad, 
the first of this era to revive the call. 
In 1126, the Assassins killed al-Borsoki, the powerful king of Aleppo 
and Mosul who, by uniting these two major cities, had forged the poten-
tial core of a united Muslim state in Syria. Borsoki had even taken the pre-
caution of wearing armor under his clothes-he knew that Assassins were 
lurking about. But as fake Sufis attacked him, one of them cried, ''Aim for 
his head!" They knew about his armor. Borsoki died of neck wounds. His 
son immediately took command and might have saved the nascent state, 
but Assassins killed him too, and four rival claimants to the throne 
plunged this part of Syria back into war. 
Murders of this sort happened an astounding number of times during 
the early Crusades. Some of the murders were not proven to have been the 
work of the Assassins, but once the terrorist narrative had been reified, the 
terrorists didn't need to commit all the terrorist acts. They could claim any 
murder that bore their stamp and use it to forward their cause. Apparently, 
they kept detailed records of their work, but because they were so very se-
cretive, no outsiders had access to these records at the time, and when the 
cult was finally destroyed by the Mongols in 1256, it was destroyed so 
thoroughly its records were almost all erased from history. Therefore no 
one now knows how many of the murders attributed to Assassins were ac-
tually committed by them. Rumors and whispers tell us they cast a grim 
shadow over their times but we will never know the scope of their impact 
on the Crusades: the records are gone. 
What finally turned the tide against the Franj was a series of Muslim 
leaders, each of whom was greater than the one before. The first of them 

144 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
was the Turkish general Zangi, who governed Mosul, then took Aleppo, 
and then absorbed many other cities into his domains until he could rea-
sonably call himself the king of a united Syria. This was the first time in 
fifty years that a Muslim country larger than a single city and its environs 
had existed in the Levant {the region between Mesopotamia and Egypt). 
Zangi's troops revered him because he was the archetypal soldier's sol-
dier. He lived as ruggedly as his men, ate what they ate, and put on no airs. 
He soon decided that Muslims had a single common enemy and began to 
organize a unified campaign against this enemy. First, he squeezed the 
weakness out of his machine: he eliminated flatterers from his court and 
courtesans from his armies. More important, he built a network of inform-
ers and propagandists throughout Syria that kept his governors in line. 
In 1144, Zangi conquered Edessa, which made him a hero to the Mus-
lim world. Edessa wasn't the biggest city in the east, but it was the first siz-
able city the Muslims had taken back from the Franj, and with recapture 
ofEdessa, one of the four "Crusader Kingdoms" ceased to exist. A wave of 
hope ran through the Levant. A wave of dismay and war fever swept west-
ern Europe, inspiring a group of monarchs to organize what turned out to 
be a dismally ineffectual Second Crusade. 
Zangi supported preachers who promoted jihad because he saw jihad as 
an instrument for unifying the Muslims. Unfortunately Zangi could not 
very well put himself at the head of a new jihad because he was a hard-
drinking, foulmouthed brawler; the very qualities that endeared him to his 
men offended many of the ulama. He did, however, create an anti-Franj 
movement that another more pious ruler could build into a real jihad. 
His son and successor, Nuruddin, possessed the qualities his father had 
lacked. Though he shared his father's martial energy, Nuruddin was pol-
ished, diplomatic, and devout. He called on Muslims to unite around one 
set of religious beliefs {Sunni Islam) and make jihad their central objective 
in life. He revived the image of the just and pious man who fought not for 
ego, not for wealth, nor for power, but for the community. In restoring to 
Muslims this sense of themselves as a single Umma, he gave them back 
their sense of destiny, nurturing a fervor for jihad that another, greater 
ruler could use to craft a real political victory. 
This greater ruler turned out to be Salah al-Oin Yusuf ibn Ayub, com-
monly known as Saladin, the nephew of one of Nuruddin's top generals. 

HAVOC 
145 
In 1163, Nuruddin sent Saladin's uncle off to conquer Egypt, just to keep 
it out of Franj hands, and the general took along his nephew. The general 
succeeded in taking Egypt, and then promptly died, leaving Saladin in 
charge. Officially, Egypt still belonged to the Fatimid khalifa, but real 
power belonged to his vizier, and the Egyptian court gladly accepted Sal-
adin as the new vizier, mostly because he was only twenty-nine years old, 
and the courtiers thought his youth and inexperience would make him 
their tool. 
Saladin had indeed shown little hint of greatness while living in his 
uncle's shadow. Retiring by nature and modest to a fault, he showed no in-
clination for war. As soon as he took charge of Egypt, Nuruddin told him 
to abolish the Fatimid dynasty, and the order distressed him. The Fatimid 
khalifa was a sickly twenty-year-old at this time, who didn't really rule any-
thing anyway. He was just a figurehead, and Saladin was loathe to hurt his 
feelings. He obeyed his orders, but he abolished the khalifate so quietly, 
the khalifa never even knew about it. One Friday, Saladin simply arranged 
for a citizen to get up in the mosque and recite a sermon in the name of 
the Abassid khalifa in Baghdad. No one protested and so the deed was 
done. The frail young khalifa soon expired of natural causes without learn-
ing that he was a private citizen and that his dynasty had ended. His death 
left Saladin as the sole ruler of Egypt. 
Now came a series of nonencounters with his supposed boss. Nuruddin 
kept arranging meetings; Saladin kept making excuses not to be there: his 
father was sick, he himself was feeling under the weather-it was always 
something. In truth, he knew that if he met his master face-to-face, he 
would have to break with him, because he was already the bigger man, 
king of a more powerful country, and incipient leader of the Muslim cause, 
and he didn't want to quarrel about it. So he maintained the fiction that he 
was Nuruddin's subordinate until the older man passed away. Then, Sal-
adin proclaimed himself king of Syria as well as Egypt. Some of Nurud-
din's followers cursed him then and called him a disloyal upstart and an 
arrogant young fool, but they were swimming against history. The Muslim 
savior had arrived. 
He was a man of slight build, this Saladin. He had a pensive air and 
melancholy eyes, but when he smiled, he could light up a room. Charita-
ble to the point of penury, he was humble with the humble, but majestic 

146 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
with men of might. No one could intimidate him, yet he never stooped to 
intimidating anyone over whom he had power. As a military leader, he was 
okay, but nothing special. His power ultimately lay in the fact that people 
simply adored him. 
Saladin sometimes wept at sad news and often went out of his way to 
perform acts of hospitality and grace. A Franj woman once carne to him 
devastated because bandits had kidnapped her daughter and she didn't 
know where to turn for help. Saladin sent his soldiers out to look for the 
girl. They found her in the slave market, bought her, and brought her back 
to her mother, and the two went back to the Franj encampment. 
In his personal habits Saladin was just as ascetic and demanding of 
himself as Nuruddin had been, but he was less demanding of others. He 
was religious but lacked a streak of dogmatism that had marred Nuruddin's 
personality. 
The Assassins tried hard to kill Saladin. Twice they penetrated right to 
his bedside while he was sleeping. Once they wounded him in the head 
but he was wearing a leather neck-guard and a metal helmet under his tur-
ban. After these two attempts, Saladin decided to smash the Assassins once 
and for all. He set siege to their fortress in Syria, but then-
Something happened. To this day, no one knows what. Some say that 
Sinon, the Syrian head of the Assassins, sent a letter to Saladin's maternal 
uncle promising to have every member of the family killed unless the siege 
was lifted. The Assassins' own sources say that in the middle of the night, 
after having surrounded himself with guards and every other possible pre-
caution against assassination, Saladin woke up to see a shadow passing 
through his tent wall and to find a piece of paper pinned to his pillow bear-
ing the message, "You are in our power." That story is surely apocryphal, 
but the fact that people believed it gives an idea of the power the Assassins 
had acquired in the popular imagination. This time, however, the usual As-
sassin tactic backfired, for having tried and failed twice to kill him, the As-
sassins succeeded only in adding to the legend of Saladin's invincibility. 
Saladin moved carefully, letting his reputation unite his people and soften 
his enemies. He retook most of the Crusaders' holdings bloodlessly through 
encirclement, economic pressure, and negotiation. In 1187, when he finally 
moved on Jerusalem, he began by sending in a proposal that the Franj relin-
quish this city peacefully as well. In exchange, Christians who wanted to 

HAVOC 
147 
leave could take their property and depart, Christians who wanted to stay 
could do so and practice their religion unmolested, Christian places of wor-
ship would be protected, and pilgrims would be welcome to come and go. 
The Franj indignantly rejected giving up Jerusalem, their main prize and the 
whole point of these Crusades, so Saladin encircled the city, took it by force, 
and then dealt with it as Khalifa Omar had done: no massacres, no plunder-
ing, and all prisoners set &ee upon payment of a ransom. 
Despite the gentility of it, Saladin's recapture of Jerusalem did fully re-
verse the gains of the First Crusade, arousing new consternation in Europe 
and leading the continent's three most important monarchs to organize 
the famous Third Crusade. One was the German Frederick Barbarossa, 
who fell off his horse in a few inches of water and drowned on the way to 
the Holy Lands. One was French monarch Phillip II of France, who made 
it to the Holy Lands, took part in the conquest of the port of Acre, and 
then went home exhausted. That left only the English king Richard I, 
known to his countrymen as the Lionheart. Richard was a formidable war-
rior, but scarcely deserved the reputation he enjoyed back home as a 
paragon of chivalry. He broke promises lightly and did whatever it took to 
win battles. He and Saladin danced around each other for about a year, 
and Richard won the main battle they fought, but by the time he laid siege 
to Jerusalem in June of 1192, illness had reduced his strength and the heat 
had him panting. Saladin sympathetically sent him fresh fruit and cool 
snow and waited for Richard to realize that he didn't have the men to re-
take Jerusalem. Finally, Richard agreed to terms with Saladin, which were 
roughly as follows: Muslims would keep Jerusalem but protect Christian 
places of worship, let Christians live in the city and practice their faith 
without harassment, and let Christian pilgrims come and go as they 
pleased. Richard then headed home, preceded by the news that he had 
won a sort of victory at Jerusalem: he had forced Saladin to be nice. In fact, 
he had secured exactly the terms Saladin had offered from the start. 
After this Third Crusade nothing of much significance happened, un-
less you count the Fourth Crusade of 1206 in which the Crusaders never 
even made it to the Holy Land because along the way they got preoccu-
pied with conquering and sacking Constantinople and defiling its 
churches. By the mid-thirteenth century the whole crusading impulse had 
grown feeble in Europe and at last it just died away. 

148 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Historians traditionally count eight Crusades over the course of two 
hundred years, but really there was at least a trickle of crusaders arriving 
and leaving at any given time during those years. So it's probably more 
accurate to say that the Crusades lasted about two hundred years, with 
eight periods during which the traffic swelled, usually because some 
monarch or coalition of monarchs organized a campaign. Over these two 
centuries, "crusading" simply became an ongoing activity for Europeans, 
with some families sending one or two sons off to the wars in every gen-
eration, these sons departing when they came of age, not when "the next 
crusade" was leaving. 
The first wave of European knights took a handful of cities and estab-
lished four quasi-permanent "Crusader kingdoms," after which would-be 
crusaders from England or France or Germany always had a place to land 
and an army to join if they headed east. Some Christians of western Euro-
pean stock were of course born in these kingdoms and lived and died 
there, but many came east for a few years, did some fighting for the cause, 
acquired some booty if they were lucky, and went home. The Crusaders 
built impressive stone fortresses, but their sojourn in the east always had a 
temporary feel to it. 
Some modern-day Islamist radicals (and a smattering of Western pun-
dits) describe the Crusades as a great clash of civilizations foreshadowing 
the troubles of today. They trace the roots of modern Muslim rage to that 
era and those events. But reports from the Arab side don't show Muslims 
of the time thinking this way, at least at the start. No one seemed to cast 
the wars as an epic struggle between Islam and Christendom-that was the 
story line the Crusaders saw. Instead of a clash between two civilizations, 
Muslims saw simply a calamity falling upon ... civilization. For one thing, 
when they looked at the Franj, they saw no evidence of civilization. An 
Arab prince named Usamah ibn Munqidh described the Franks as being 
like "beasts, superior in courage and in fighting ardor, but in nothing else, 
just as animals are superior in strength and aggression."6 The Crusaders so 
disgusted the Muslims that they came to appreciate the Byzantines by con-
trast. Once they understood the political and religious motives of the Cru-
saders, they made a distinction between "al Rum" (Rome-i.e., the 
Byzantines) and "al-Ifranj." Instead of"the Crusades," Muslims called this 
period of violence the Franj Wars. 

HAVOC 
149 
In areas under attack, Muslims did, of course, feel threatened by the 
Franj, even horrified by them, but they didn't see in these attacks any in-
tellectual challenge to their ideas and beliefs. And although the Crusades 
were certainly a serious matter for Muslims living along the eastern 
Mediterranean coast, the Crusaders never penetrated deeply into the Mus-
lim world. For example, no real army ever reached Mecca and Medina, 
only a small raiding party led by a renegade whom even other Franj re-
garded as a despicable rogue. The Crusaders never laid siege to Baghdad 
nor did they penetrate historic Persia. People in Khorasan and Bactria and 
the Indus Valley remained completely unaffected by the incursion and 
largely unaware of it. 
What's more, the Crusades stimulated no particular curiosity in the 
Muslim world about Western Europe. No one expended much energy 
wondering where these Franj had come from, or what their life was like 
back home, or what they believed. In the early 1300s, Rashid al-Din Fa-
zlullah, a Jewish convert to Islam, wrote an epic Collection of All Histories, 
which included the history of China, India, the Turks, the Jews, the pre-
Islamic Persians, Mohammed, the khalifas, and the Franj, but even at this 
late date, the part about the Franks was perfunctory and undocumented.? 
In short, the Crusades brought virtually no European cultural viruses into 
the Islamic world. The influence ran almost entirely the other way. 
And what flowed the other way? Well, the Crusaders opened up op-
portunities for European merchants in the Levant and Egypt. During the 
Franj wars, trade between western Europe and the Middle World in-
creased. As a result, people in places like England, France, and Germany 
obtained exotic goods available in the East, products such as nutmeg, 
cloves, black pepper, and other spices, as well as silk, satin, and a fabric 
made from a wonderful plant called cotton. 
European merchants, pilgrims, and Crusaders (the categories were not 
always distinct) returning to Europe reported on the riches of the Muslim 
world and told tales about even more distant lands, places such as India, 
and the near-mythic islands of"the Indies." These stories aroused appetites 
in Europe that kept growing over the years and were to have tremendous 
consequences later on. 
In the Middle World, however, just as the calamity of the Crusades was 
subsiding, a second and far more catastrophic assault broke out. 

150 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
ASSAULT FROM THE EAST 
The Mongols originated in the steppes of Central Asia, a vast treeless grass-
land with hard soil and few rivers. The landscape precluded agriculture but 
it was perfect for herding sheep and grazing horses, so the Mongols lived on 
mutton, milk, and cheese, burned dung for fuel, got drunk on fermented 
mare's milk, and used oxen to pull their carts. They had no cities or perma-
nent encampments but lived on the move, sleeping in felt huts called gers 
(known elsewhere as yurts), which they could easily dismantle and transport. 
The Mongols were closely related to the Turks ethnically, linguistically, 
and culturally, and historians often group them together as the Turko-
Mongol tribes. To the extent that they can be considered separately, how-
ever, the Turks generally lived further west and the Mongols further east. 
Where they overlapped, they intermingled somewhat. 
Over the centuries a number of nomadic empires had formed and dis-
solved on the steppes, tribal confederacies that had no core principle of 
uniry to hold them together. In the days of the Roman republic, a group 
ofTurko-Mongol tribes called the Hsiung-nu congealed into a force so 
fearsome that the first emperor of a united China put about a million men 
to work building the Great Wall to keep them out. Once they couldn't raid 
eastward, the Hsiung-nu turned west and by the time they got to Europe 
these steppe nomads were known as the Huns. Under Attila they swept all 
the way to Rome before they dissolved. 
In the early days of Islam, a series of ill-defined Turkish confederacies 
dominated the steppes, but once they moved south they morphed into 
Muslim dynasties, such as the Ghaznavids and the Seljuks. 
The Mongols had raided the Chinese world for many centuries, and a 
succession of Chinese dynasties had kept them in check by giving them 
subsidies to stay away, by pitting Mongol chieftains against one another, 
and by funding upstarts against established chieftains. In this way they had 
kept the Mongols divided, although truth to tell, the Mongols, like tribal 
nomads generally, didn't need much outside help to stay divided. 
Then around 560 AH (1165 CE) the brilliant and charismatic Temu-
jin was born. History knows him as Chengez Khan (in the West, Genghis 
Khan), which means "universal ruler," a title he did not take on until he 
was about forry years old. 

HAVOC 
151 
Chengez's father was a chieftain among the Mongols but was murdered 
when Chengez was nine. His supporters drifted away, and the family fell 
upon hard times. For several years, Chengez, his mother, and his younger 
siblings were forced to live on berries and small game, such as marmots 
and field mice. Even so his father's killers felt they would be safer if the son 
never grew up, so they hunted him throughout his teenage years, and even 
captured him once, but the boy escaped and did grow up, and lived to 
make his father's enemies sorry. 
Along the way, he attracted a posse of close companions called nokars. 
In Persian-speaking lands, the word later came to mean "hired help," but 
in Chengez's day it meant "comrade in arms." Significantly, Chengez's 
nokars did not belong to any single clan or tribe. What held them together 
as a group was one man's charisma, so Chengez had, in his nokars, the 
seeds of an organization that transcended tribal loyalty and eventually 
helped him unite the Mongols into a single nation under his rule. 
In 607 AH (1211 CE), Chengez's Mongols attacked China's decrepit 
old Sung Empire and cut through it like a knife into warm cheese. Seven 
years later, in 614 (1218 CE), the Mongols entered the history of the Mid-
dle World. 
What sort of world did they come upon? Well, after the Seljuks con-
quered the Muslim world, other Turkish tribes followed them, gnawing 
away at the earlier Turkish victors' holdings, and carving out frontier king-
doms of their own. One such kingdom had just started to emerge in Tran-
soxiana, and was looking very much like the next big thing in the region. 
It was the kingdom of the Khwarazm-Shahs. Their king Alaudin Mo-
hammed considered himself quite the military mastermind, and in his ar-
rogance decided to teach the Mongols a lesson. He started by intercepting 
450 merchants traveling through his kingdom under Mongol protection. 
Accusing these poor merchants of spying for the Mongols, he had them 
killed and took their goods, but he quite deliberately let one man escape so 
that he would take news of the massacre back to Chengez. He was looking 
for trouble. 
The Mongol lord sent three envoys west to demand reparations. It was 
probably the last time Chengez would show himself so forbearing. And 
now, Alaudin Mohammed made his really big mistake. He executed one of 
the envoys and sent the other two home with their beards plucked out. In 

152 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
this region, one could offer a man no more grievous insult than to pluck 
out his beard. Alaudin knew this full well, but he wanted to give offense, 
because he was spoiling for a fight-and he got one. In 615 AH {1219 
CE) the great catastrophe began. 
We often hear about the Mongol "hordes," a word that evokes pictures 
of howling savages swarming over the horizon by the millions to over-
whelm their victims with sheer numbers. In fact, horde is simply the Tur-
kic word for "military camp." The Mongols did not actually field 
incomparably huge armies. They won battles with strategy, ferocity, and, 
yes, technology. For example, when they attacked fortified cities, they em-
ployed sophisticated siege machinery acquired from the Chinese. They had 
"composite" bows made of several layers of wood glued together, which 
could shoot harder and further than the bows used in the "civilized" world. 
They fought on horseback, and their riding skills were such that some of 
their victims thought the Mongols were some new species of half-human, 
half-horse creature previously unknown to civilization. Their horses were 
hardy and fast but rather small, so a Mongol warrior could grip his horse 
with his legs, hang off on one side, and fire his arrows from under the 
horse's belly, thus using the body of the beast itself as a shield. Mongols 
could ride their horses for days and nights on end, sleeping in the saddle 
and taking nourishment from veins they opened on their horse's necks, so 
that after sacking one city they might suddenly appear at some distant 
other city so fast they seemed almost to have supernatural powers. Some-
times, the Mongols did bring along extra horses with dummies mounted 
on them to convey an impression of overwhelming numbers: it was just 
one more of their many military tricks. 
In 615 AH {1219 CE) Alaudin Mohammed commanded far more 
troops than Chengez, but his immense army did him no good. Chengez 
smashed it and sent Alaudin fleeing for his life. Fragments of the 
Khwarazmi Turkish armies turned into gangs of thugs who rolled west, 
disrupting law and order, and even helped dislodge the last Crusaders from 
their fortresses, a foretaste of things to come. Chengez scorched Transoxi-
ana, the lands on either side of the Oxus River and destroyed famous cities 
such as Bokhara, where the renaissance of Persian literature had begun two 
centuries earlier. He razed the legendary old city of Balkh, known to the 

HAVOC 
153 
ancients as "the Mother of Cities," dumping its library into the Oxus 
River, hundreds of thousands of handwritten volumes swept away. 
Then he marched on Khorasan and Persia, and here the Mongols at-
tempted genocide. No other word really seems appropriate. Writing 
shortly after the events in question, the Muslim historian Sayfi Heravi said 
the Mongols killed 1,747,000 when they sacked the city of Naishapur, 
killing everything down to the cats and dogs. At the city of Herat, he put 
the toll at 1 ,600,000. Another Persian historian, J uzjani, claimed that 
2,400,000 died in Herat. Obviously these number are inflated. Herat and 
Naishapur could not possibly have had anywhere near this number of in-
habitants in the 1220s.8 
Yet the numbers might not be quite as inflated as they may seem at first 
because when the Mongols came down upon the Islamic world, people 
fled from their depredations-they had to. The Mongols burned fields, 
destroyed crops, stripped peasants of their livelihood, and promoted tales 
of their murderous fury as a strategy of war. They intended for the news 
and fear of their deeds to travel fast and far so that subsequent cities they 
attacked would not put up any fight. 
One city they attacked in northern Afghanistan was called-well, I 
don't even know what it was called originally. Today, it's called Shari 
Gholghola-the City of Shrieking, and all you see there now is a heap of 
rubble and mud and stones. So it's quite possible that by the time the 
Mongols attacked any major city such as Herat, it was swollen by refugees 
from hundreds of miles around. It may be that when these cities finally 
fell, it wasn't just their original population but the population of the entire 
region that perished. 
No one could really know how many died. Surely no one actually went 
out to the battlefields and counted the dead. But even if these numbers 
aren't really statistics, they function as impressions of scale, as expressions 
of how it felt to be alive in the shadow of such massacres, such horror. No-
body told any such stories about the Seljuks or the other earlier Turks. The 
Mongol invasion was clearly a disaster on a different scale. 
Whatever the numbers were based on, there must have been some truth 
to them. Two histories completed around 658 AH {1260 CE), one in 
Baghdad, one in Delhi, gave almost exactly similar accounts of these 

154 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
THE MONGOL INVASIONS OF THE ISLAMIC WORLD 
horrors, roughly the same statistics for the casualties. The two historians 
could not have known each other, and they were writing more or less si-
multaneously, so neither one could have used the other as his source. Both 
then were recounting what was in the air, what people were saying from 
Delhi to Baghdad. 
When the Mongols attacked Persia, they destroyed, among other 
things, the qanat, ancient underground canal works that were, to an agri-
cultural society in a riverless land, life's blood itself. Some of the qanats 
were destroyed outright and some filled up with sand and vanished just as 
surely as if they had been deliberately destroyed because no one was left 
to repair them. When the Arab geographer Yaqut al-Hamawi wrote a de-
scription of western Iran, northern Afghanistan, and the republics north 
of the Oxus River a few years before the Mongol invasion, he described a 
fertile, flourishing province. A few years after the invasion, it was a desert. 
It still is. 
Chengez did not live to carry out all the destruction wrought by the 
Mongols. He died in 624 AH (1227 CE), but after his death his empire 

HAVOC 
155 
was divided among his various sons and grandsons, who continued the 
holocaust. The core of the Muslim world fell into the hands of Chengez's 
grandson Hulagu, and since not all of this territory had been conquered 
yet, Hulagu took up where his grandfather had left of£ 
A curious footnote to the Mongol holocaust occurred in 653 AH (1256 
CE), when Hulagu was passing through Persia. A Muslim jurist near Ala-
mut complained to the Mongol khan that he had to wear armor under his 
clothes all the time for fear of the Assassins headquartered nearby. A short 
time later, two Fedayeen (suicidal Assassin agents) disguised as monks tried 
to kill Hulagu-and failed. They might as well have tried to pluck out the 
man's beard. The cult that could kill anyone met the army that could kill 
everyone. Hulagu took time out from his westward drive to storm Alamut. 
He then did to the Assassins what the Mongols had done and would do to 
many others: he destroyed them physically; he destroyed their stronghold; 
he destroyed their records, libraries, and papers-in that moment, the 
menace of the Assassins came to an end.9 
After Hulagu had annihilated the Assassins, he marched on to Bagh-
dad. There, he posted a threatening letter to the last Abassid khalifa, in 
which, according to the historian Rashid al-Din Fazlullah, he said, "The 
past is over. Destroy your ramparts, fill in your moats, turn the kingdom 
over to your son, and come to us .... If you do not heed our advice ... 
get ready. When I lead my troops in wrath against Baghdad even if you 
hide in the sky or in the earth, I shall bring you down. I shall not leave 
one person alive in your realm, and I shall put your city and country to 
the torch. If you desire to have mercy on your ancient family's heads, 
heed my advice." 
The Abbasid khalifate, however, had been showing signs of life recently, 
and an occasional khalifa had even bid for real power, at the head of actual 
troops. The khalifa in place at this moment was one of the cocky ones. In 
his pride, this khalifa wrote back to Hulagu: "Young man, you have just 
come of age and have expectations of living forever. You ... think your 
command is absolute .... You come with strategy, troops, and lasso, but 
how are you going to capture a star? Does the prince not know that from 
the east to the west, from king to beggar, from old to young, all who are 
God-fearing and God worshipping are servants of this court and soldiers 

156 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
in my army? When I motion for all those who are dispersed to come to-
gether, I will deal first with Iran and then turn my attention to Turan, and 
I will put everything in its proper place."10 
The attack on Baghdad began on February 3, 1258. By February 20, 
Baghdad was not just conquered. It was pretty much gone. The Mongols 
had a proscription against shedding royal blood; it ran against their tradi-
tions; they just didn't do that sort of thing. So they wrapped the khalifa 
and members of his family in carpets and kicked them to death. As for the 
citizens of Baghdad, Hulagu's Mongols killed virtually every one of them. 
The only ambiguity about how many people the Mongols killed at Bagh-
dad has to do with how many there were to kill. Muslim sources put the 
toll at eight hundred thousand. Hulagu himself was more modest. In a let-
ter to the king of France, he claimed he had killed only two hundred thou-
sand. Whichever the case might be, the city itself was burned down, for 
Hulagu kept his promises. All the libraries and schools and hospitals, all of 
the city's archives and records, all the artifacts of civilization enshrined 
there, all the testimonials to the great surge of Islamic civilization in its 
golden age, perished utterly. 
Only one power managed to hold the line against the Mongols and 
that was Egypt. No one else ever dealt the Mongols a straight-up military 
defeat, not here, not anywhere. 
Saladin's descendants still ruled this region when the Mongol on-
slaught began, but by 1253 they were exhibiting the typical ailments of 
aging dynasties: pampered weaklings occupied the throne and predatory 
rivals circled round it. One day the king died, leaving no obvious heir. 
His wife Shajar al-Durr briefly took over as sultan, but then the mam-
luks, that corps of elite slave soldiers, got together and chose one of 
their own number to marry the sultan, whereupon he became the de 
facto sultan. 
Hulagu was destroying Baghdad right about then. When he finished, 
he started south, following the well-traveled route of conquerors. But 
Egypt's greatest mamluk general, Zahir Baybars, confronted Hulagu at 
Ayn Jalut, which means "Goliath's spring." In biblical times, according to 
legends, David had defeated Goliath at this spot. Now, in 1260 CE, Bay-
bars was the new David and Hulagu the new Goliath. 11 

HAVOC 
157 
David won again. (Incidentally, the Muslims used a new type of weapon 
in this battle: the hand cannon, or as we now call it, the gun. This might 
have been the first battle in which guns were used to any significant effect.) 
Back in Cairo, meanwhile, Shajar al-Durr and her husband somehow 
killed each other in the bath-the sordid details remain murky. Baybars, 
covered with glory from his victory at Ayn Jalut, came marching into the 
confusion and took control, founding the so-called Mamluk dynasty. 
A mamluk, as I mentioned, was a slave, usually Turkish, brought to the 
palace as a young boy and trained in all the military arts. Quite often in 
the history of the middle world, a mamluk had overthrown his master and 
launched a dynasty of his own. The one that Baybars founded, however, 
was different. 
It wasn't a true "dynasty" because the principle of succession wasn't 
from father to son. Instead, each time a sultan died, his inner circle of 
most powerful mamluks chose one of their own number to be the new sul-
tan. In the meantime, new mamluks kept rising through the ranks on 
merit, ascending into the circle of most-powerful mamluks, a position 
from which any of them might become the next sultan. Egypt, therefore, 
was not ruled by a family, but by a military corporation constantly re-
freshing its ranks with new mamluks. It was a meritocracy, and the system 
worked. Under the mamluks, Egypt became the leading nation in the Arab 
world, a status it has never really relinquished. 
Although the Mongols conquered the Islamic world in a roaring flash, 
the Muslims ended up reconquering the Mongols, not by taking territories 
back through war, but by co-opting them through conversion. The first 
conversion occurred in 1257 CE, a khan named Berke. One of Hulagu's 
successors, Tode Mongke, not only converted but declared himself a Sufi. 
After that the Mongol ruling house of Persia produced more rulers with 
Muslim names. In 1295, Mahmoud Ghazan inherited the Persian throne. 
He had been a Buddhist but converted to Shi'ite Islam, and his nobles 
soon converted as well; his descendants went on to rule Persia as the 
Muslim 11-Khan dynasty. 
After his conversion, Ghazan told his Mongol nobles to let up on the 
locals. "I am not protecting the Persian peasantry," he assured them. "If it 
is expedient, then let me pillage them all-there is no one with more 

158 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
power to do so than I. Let us rob them together! But-if you commit ex-
tortion against the peasants, take their oxen and seed, and cause their crops 
to be consumed-what will you do in the future? You must think, too, 
when you beat and torture their wives and children, that just as our wives 
and children are dear to our hearts, so are theirs to them. They are human 
beings, just as we are." 12 That doesn't sound like something Hulagu or 
Chengez would have said. Ghazan's words were one small sign that in the 
wake of the Mongol holocaust, Islam and civilization were going to come 
back to life after all. 

10 
~ 
Rebirth 
661-1008 AH 
1263-1600 CE 
T
HE MONGOL HOLOCAUST wasn't like the Dark Ages of Europe. It 
didn't set in slowly and lift gradually. It was a terrible but brief explo-
sion, like the Black Death that swept Europe in the fourteenth century, or 
the World Wars that wracked the globe in the twentieth. 
Princeton historian Bernard Lewis, among others, has taken this to mean 
that the Mongols weren't really so bad. Yes, they destroyed whole cities, but 
look on the bright side: they left whole cities intact. Lewis has even said that 
"by modern standards," the destruction wrought by the Mongols was "triv-
ial." His argument rests partly on the fact that within the Muslim world, Is-
lamic civilization rapidly absorbed the Mongols. The ones who ended up in 
charge of Persia soon evolved into the benign Shi'ite 11-Khan dynasty. In 
converting to their subjects' religion, the Mongols even brought a fresh 
breeze, a new spirit, a duster of new ideas into the Islamic world. 
This is all very true, but it's a bit like saying the World Wars of the 
twentieth century were, in the final analysis, "trivial" because even though 
millions were killed, millions weren't, and even though countries such as 
Russia, Germany, France, and Great Britain were devastated, they quickly 
rebuilt and look at them now. 
159 

160 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Some admiration has even accrued to Genghis Khan and his immedi-
ate successors based on the fact that they conducted mass-murder as a 
canny battle strategy and not out of sheer cruelty, destroying some cities 
utterly in order to make other cities give in without a fight. Reading such 
analyses, one might almost suppose the Mongols did their best to avoid 
needless bloodshed! 
It is true that the most famous Mongol conquerors from Genghis to 
Hulagu look almost good in comparison to their descendant Timur-i-lang 
(Tamerlane, to the west) who emerged from Central Asia at the end of the 
fourteenth century and went on a bloody rampage that claimed countless 
further lives. Timur represented a last burst of the horror that began with 
Chengez Khan, rather like one of those movie monsters that twitches its 
tail after it seems dead and with that one final twitch cuts a sickening 
swath of new destruction. 
For Timur, bloodshed was not just a canny battle strategy. He seemed 
to relish it for its own sake. It was he (not Chengez) who took pleasure in 
piling up pyramids of severed heads outside the gates of cities he had plun-
dered. It was he, too, who executed captives by dropping them, still living, 
into tall, windowless towers until he had filled the towers to the brim. 
Timur banged and slaughtered his way to Asia Minor and then banged 
and slaughtered his way back again to India, where he left so many corpses 
rotting on the roads to Delhi that he made the whole region uninhabitable 
for months. His rampage was too horrific to go entirely unmentioned in 
any world history, but it doesn't deserve long consideration because it was 
essentially meaningless: he came, he saw, he killed, and then he died and 
his vast empire crumbled at once and no one remembers much about him 
anymore except that he was scary. 
So yes, as an embodiment of pure savagery, Chengez Khan looks good 
compared to his descendant Timur (at least Timur claimed Chengez as an 
ancestor, though the line of descent remains obscure). But the original 
Mongol conquests had greater impact: they altered the trajectory of 
history. 
First of all, they sparked a crisis for Muslim theology, and some re-
sponses to that crisis had ramifications that we are still wrestling with 
today. The crisis was rooted in the fact that Muslim theologians and schol-
ars, and indeed Muslims in general, had long felt that Islam's military sue-

REBIRTH 
161 
cess proved its revelations true. Well, if victory meant the revelations were 
true, what did defeat mean? 
Muslims had never before experienced such sweeping defeats, not any-
where in the world, not even in their nightmares. The historian Ibn al-
Athir called the Mongol onslaught "a tremendous disaster" the likes of 
which the world might never experience again "from now until its end." 
Another major Muslim historian speculated that the coming of the Mon-
gols portended the end of the world. According to yet another, the Mon-
gol victories showed that God had abandoned Muslims. 1 
The Crusaders had at least been Christians, but the Mongols? They 
weren't even "people of the book." Their victories posed an agonizing puz-
zle for theologians and tested the faith of the masses in some pervasive way 
that many people probably felt but didn't intellectualize. Especially in 
post-Crusader Mesopotamia, after the sack of Baghdad, where the Muslim 
community had suffered its most devastating setback, any thinking person 
who subscribed to the premise that universalizing the Muslim community 
was the purpose of history might well have asked, "What went wrong?" 
The hardest-hitting response was delivered by the Syrian jurist Ibn 
Taymiyah. His family originated in Harran, a town near the intersection of 
present-day Syria, Iraq, and Turkey, right in the path of the Mongol inva-
sion. They fled the wrath ofHulagu with nothing but their books, ending 
up in Damascus, where Ibn Taymiyah grew up. He studied the standard 
Islamic disciplines with unusual brilliance and earned, at an early age, the 
standing to issue fotwas, religious rulings. 
Intense horrors tend to spawn extreme opinions, and Ibn Taymiyah was 
rooted in his times. No doubt the anxiety of his uprooted family gave him 
an emotional stake in puzzling out the meaning of the Mongol catastro-
phe, or perhaps his personality would have inclined him to the views he 
propounded no matter when or where he was born-who can tell? But in 
a Syria so recently crushed by the Mongols and still suffering the residue of 
the Crusades, Ibn Taymiyah at least found a ready audience for his 
thoughts. If he had never been born, the audience that embraced him 
might well have found someone else to express those same ideas. 
Ibn Taymiyah propounded three main points. First, he said there was 
nothing wrong with Islam, nothing false about the revelations, and noth-
ing bogus about seeing Muslim victories as proof of them. The problem, 

162 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
he proposed, lay with Muslims: they had stopped practicing "true" Islam, 
and God therefore had made them weak. To get back to their victorious 
ways, Muslims had to go back to the book and purge Islam of all new 
ideas, interpretations, and innovations: they must go back to the religious 
ways of Mohammed and his companions, back to those values and ideals, 
back to the material details of their everyday lives: the earliest rulings were 
the best rulings. That was the core of his judicial creed. 
Second, Ibn Taymiyah asserted that jihad was a core obligation of every 
Muslim, right in there with praying, fasting, abjuring deceit, and other 
sacramental practices; and when Ibn Taymiyah said "jihad" he meant 
"strap on a sword." The Umma, he said, was special because they were 
martial. No previous recipients of revelations from God had "enjoined all 
people with all that is right, nor did they prohibit all that is wrong to all 
people." Some of them did not "take up armed struggle at all," while oth-
ers struggled merely "for the purpose of driving their enemy from their 
land, or as any oppressed people struggles against their oppressor." To Ibn 
Taymiyah, this limited, defensive idea of jihad was inaccurate: jihad meant 
actively struggling, fighting even, not just to defend one's life, home, and 
property but to expand the community of those who obeyed Allah. 
Ibn Taymiyah went to war himself, against some Mongols. The Mon-
gols he was fighting had converted to Islam by this time, which raised a 
question about Muslims fighting Muslims. But fighting these Muslims was 
legitimate jihad, Ibn Taymiyah expounded, because they were not real 
Muslims. He also opposed Christians, Jews, Sufis, and Muslims of other 
sects than his own-chiefly Shi'is. He once overheard a Christian making 
derogatory comments about the Prophet, and that night, he and a friend 
tracked down that Christian and beat him up. 
You can see why his aggressive stance might have resonated for some of 
his contemporaries. Basically, he was saying, "We can't roll over for pagan 
Mongols and Crusaders; let's come together and fight back, finding 
strength in unity and unity in singleness of doctrine!" This sort of rallying 
cry has inevitable appeal in societies under attack by outsiders, and by this 
time the Islamic world had been under fearsome attack for over a century. 
Ibn Taymiyah expanded the list of those against whom jihad was valid 
to include not just non-Muslims but heretics, apostates, and schismatics. 
In these categories he included Muslims who attempted to amend Islam or 

REBIRTH 
163 
promoted division by interpreting the Qur'an and hadith in ways that de-
parted from what the texts literally stated. 
Ibn Taymiyah never conceded that he was pressing for his interpreta-
tion versus some other interpretation. He maintained that he was trying to 
stamp out unwarranted interpretation per se and urging Muslims to go 
back to the book, implying that the Qur'an {and hadith) existed in some 
absolute form, free of human interpretation. 
Some would say that singling out heretics and schismatics had not been 
the spirit of early Islam. Arguments about the succession, yes; even bloody 
arguments. But Mohammed himself and the early Muslims in general 
tended to accept that people who wanted to be Muslims were Muslims. 
{"Hypocrites"-traitors pretending to be Muslims in order to undermine 
the community from within-were obviously a different case.) With all 
would-be Muslims accepted into the group, the group could sort out dis-
agreements about what "Muslim" meant. Ibn Taymiyah, however, insisted 
that there was one way to be a Muslim, and the main Muslim duty was to 
ascertain that one way and then follow it. Interpretation did not come into 
it, since everything a person needed to know about Islam was right there 
in the book in black and white. 
Ibn Taymiyah mythologized the perfection of life in that first commu-
nity, referring to Mohammed's companions as al-salafal-salihin, "the pious 
{or pristine) originals." Versions of his doctrines eventually reemerged in 
India and North Africa as the movement called Salafism, which is with us 
to this day. The word comes up often in news stories about "Islamists." It 
started here, in the shadow of the Mongol holocaust. 
In his own day, Ibn Taymiyah built up only a moderate following. The 
masses didn't care for him much, probably because he punished Muslims 
for folk practices they had incorporated into their idea of Islam and also 
for visiting shrines. Ibn Taymiyah claimed that showing reverence for 
human beings, even great ones, went against the precepts of the Pious 
Originals. 
The authorities liked him even less because he denounced rulings they 
accepted as established. When called before a panel of ulama to defend his 
rulings, he rejected their authority, charging that they had lost their legiti-
macy by succumbing to innovations and interpretations. On one disputed 
doctrine after another, Ibn Taymiyah would not go along to get along. The 

164 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
actual points disputed will strike non-Muslims as minutely technical: for 
example, was a divorce uttered three times merely final or irrevocably final? 
The establishment said it was irrevocable; Ibn Taymiyah said final but not 
irrevocable. In this instance, the authorities settled the argument by clap-
ping Ibn Taymiyah in prison. He spent a lot of time in prison. In fact, he 
died there. 
Ibn Taymiyah does not sum up what Islam is, nor even what it was in 
the thirteenth century-there are so many schools of thought, so many 
approaches-but the very attitudes that made so many clerics and officials 
angry with Ibn Taymiyah led many others to admire him. Ibn Taymiyah 
belonged to the school of Muslim jurisprudence founded by Ibn Hanbal, 
that Abbasid-era scholar who took a bulldog stand against the primacy and 
sufficiency of reason. Ibn Hanbal had favored the most literal reading of 
the Qur'an and the most literalist methods for applying it, for the most 
part rejecting even analogical reasoning as a way of expanding the doc-
trines, and so did Ibn Taymiyah. Both men had flinty, combative, un-
bending temperaments. The fact that both went to prison for their ideas 
tended to ennoble their legacy quite apart from whatever intellectual mer-
its their ideas may have had. 
The identification of courage with truth pops up often in history, even 
in our day: talk-show host Bill Maher was kicked off network TV for sug-
gesting that the suicide hijackers of9/ll were brave. Common decency de-
mands that no positive character traits be associated with someone whose 
actions and ideas are vicious. Unfortunately, this equation enables people 
to validate questionable ideas by defending them with courage, as if a 
coward cannot say something that is true or a brave man something that 
is false. Ibn Hanbal had benefited from this syndrome and, now, so did 
Ibn Taymiyah. 
Ibn Taymiyah reputedly wrote about four thousand pamphlets and five 
hundred books. With these, he planted a seed. The seed didn't flourish at 
once, but it never died out, either. It just lay there, under the surface ofls-
lamic culture, ready to bud if circumstances should ever favor it. Four and 
a half centuries later, circumstances did. 
There was another response to the centuries of breakdown that climaxed 
with the Mongol holocaust, a more popular and gentler response than 

REBIRTH 
165 
Salafism, and this was the efflorescence of Sufism, which was as broad-
minded and undogmatic as Ibn Taymiyah's ideology was literalist and re-
strictive. Indeed, ecstatic Sufism (as opposed to "sober Sufism") disturbed 
Ibn Taymiyah almost as much as pagan invaders, because to him infidels 
were merely the enemy outside, assaulting Islam, whereas Sufism was the 
enemy within, insidiously weakening the Umma by enlarging and blurring 
the singleness of the doctrine that defined it. 
Sufism was that characteristically Islamic type of mysticism which had 
some ideas and impulses in common with Buddhism and Hindu mysti-
cism. Sufis were individuals who, dissatisfied with the bureaucratization of 
religion, turned inward and sought methods of achieving mystical union 
with God. 
All Sufis had pretty much the same idea about where they were going, 
but diverse ideas about how to get there, so different Sufis espoused different 
spiritual techniques. Every time a Sufi seemed to break through, the word 
spread and other seekers flocked to the enlightened soul for guidance, hop-
ing that direct contact with his or her charisma would fuel their own quest 
for transcendence. In this way, "Sufi brotherhoods" formed around promi-
nent individual Sufis: groups of seekers who lived, worked, and practiced 
their devotions together under the guidance of a master called a sheikh or pir 
(both words mean "old man," the one in Arabic, the other in Persian). 
Typically, a few of a sheikh's closest disciples earned recognition as Sufi 
masters in their own right. When a sheikh died, one of these disciples 
would inherit his authority and continue guiding his community. Some 
others might go off and form new communities, still expounding their 
master's mystical method but attracting disciples of their own. Sufi broth-
erhoods thus evolved into Sufi orders, traditions of mystical methodology 
passed down directly from master to initiate, down through the years and 
the decades and the centuries. 
Successful Sufi orders might boast of many enlightened sheikhs at any 
given time, living in different places, often with their mureeds (spiritual ap-
prentices), in lodges called khanqas, where they also offered sustenance to 
travelers and comfort to strangers. In a way, then, Sufi brotherhoods be-
came an Islamic equivalent of Christianity's monastic orders which, in me-
dieval times, built monasteries and nunneries throughout Europe, places 
where people retired to make spiritual effort their main occupation. 

166 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Yet Sufi brotherhoods also differed in crucial ways from monastic or-
ders. For one thing, every monastic order had a set of strict rules that 
monks or nuns had to follow, under the direction of an abbot or abbess. 
Sufi brotherhoods were much looser and more informal, more about com-
panionship and less about externally imposed discipline. 
Furthermore, taking the vows of any of the Christian monastic orders 
meant renunciation of the world and some commitment to "mortification 
of the flesh." That's because Christianity focused essentially on personal 
salvation, and saw salvation as something people needed because they were 
born guilty of "original sin," the discovery of sexuality in the Garden of 
Eden. For this sin, humanity had been sentenced to imprisonment in bod-
ies that lived (and died) in the material world. 
Monks or nuns joined an order specifically to separate themselves from 
the world, the emblem of man's fallen state. Their devotions were aimed at 
punishing their bodies, because the body was the problem. They practiced 
celibacy as a matter of course, because Christianity saw spirituality as the 
remedy for sexuality. 
In Islam, however, the emphasis was not on the personal salvation of 
the isolated soul but on construction of the perfect community. People 
were not sinners to be saved but servants enjoined to obedience. They 
were born innocent and capable of ascent to the highest nobility but also 
of descent to the lowest depravity.2 The mureeds in a Sufi order joined 
up not to be saved but to attain a higher state; their rituals were aimed 
not at punishing their bodies but at focusing their energies on Allah 
alone; if they fasted, for instance, it was not to mortify their flesh but to 
strengthen their self-discipline. They saw no equation between celibacy 
and spirituality and did not separate from the world. Sufis and would-be 
Sufis usually plied trades, bought and sold, married, reared children, and 
went to war. 
In fact, some Sufi brotherhoods evolved into bands of mystical knights, 
espousing an ethos called fotuwwah, which resembled the European code of 
knightly valor, courtly love, and chivalric honor. Whether the influence ran 
from west to east, or vice versa, or both ways is a dispute I won't get into. 
In any case, Sufis illustrated futuwwah ideals through mytho-poetic 
anecdotes about Muslim heroes of the first community. One such story, 
for example, told of a young traveler arrested for killing an old man. The 

REBIRTH 
167 
victim's sons brought this young man before Khalifa Omar. The traveler 
admitted his deed. Extenuating circumstances existed, but he refused to 
plead them; he had taken a life and so must forfeit his own. He did make 
one request, however: could the execution be delayed for three days while 
he went home and took care of a bit of business? He had an orphan in his 
care back there, he had buried this child's inheritance in a spot no one 
knew about, and if he didn't dig it up before he died, the child would be 
left penniless. It wasn't fair that the child suffer for his guardian's crime. "If 
you let me go today," the murderer said, "I promise I'll come back three 
days from now and submit to execution." 
The khalifa said, "Well, okay, but only if you name someone to act as 
your proxy, someone who will agree to suffer the penalty in your stead if 
you don't come back." 
Well, that stumped the young traveler. He had no friends or relatives in 
these parts. What stranger would trust him enough to risk execution in 
his place? 
At that moment, Abu Dharr, one of the Prophet's companions, declared 
that he would be the young man's proxy. And so the murderer departed. 
Three days later he had not returned. No one was surprised but they 
did weep for poor Abu Dharr who faithfully set his head on the chopping 
block. The executioner was just oiling his ax and getting ready to chop 
when the young man came galloping up on a dusty horse, all covered with 
sweat. "I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I was delayed," he said, "but here I am now. 
Let's proceed with the execution." 
The spectators were amazed. "You were free; you had totally escaped. 
No one could have found you and brought you back. Why did you return?" 
"Because I said I would, and I am a Muslim," the young man replied. 
"How could I give the world cause to say that Muslims no longer keep 
their promises?" 
The crowd turned to Abu Dharr. "Did you know this young man? Did 
you know of his noble character? Is this why you agreed to be his proxy?" 
"No," said Abu Dharr, "I never met him before in my life, but how could 
I be the one to let the world say Muslims are no longer compassionate?" 
The victim's relatives now dropped to their knees. "Don't execute him," 
they pleaded. "How can we be the ones to make the world say there is no 
forgiveness in Islam?" 

168 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Many proponents of Sufi chivalry traced their lineage back to Ali, not 
necessarily because they were Shi'i but because Ali enjoyed legendary 
renown as the perfect knight, the ideal combination of strength, courage, 
piety, and honor. It was said, for example, that in one of those iconic bat-
tles of early Islam, a young man came toward Ali, swinging a sword. Ali 
said, "Don't you know who I am, you foolhardy youngster? I'm Ali! You 
can't beat me. I'll kill you. Why are you attacking me?" 
"Because I am in love," said the young fellow, "and my sweetheart says 
that ifi kill you, she'll be mine." 
"But if we fight, I am more likely to kill you," Ali pointed out. 
"What's better than dying for love?" the young man said. 
Upon hearing those words, Ali took off his helmet and stretched out 
his neck. "Strike right here." 
Seeing Ali's willingness to die for love, however, set that young man's heart 
ablaze and turned his love for a woman into something higher-love of Allah. 
In a single moment, Ali transformed an ordinary young man into an enlight-
ened Sufi.3 Such were the legends that inspired these Muslim knights. 
THE OTTOMANS (ABOUT 700 TO 1341 AH) 
Although Sufi orders proliferated through the Muslim world, they had the 
most profound consequences in Asia Minor, also known as Anatolia, the 
territory that constitutes modern Turkey. It was here that the post-Mongol 
recovery of Islam began. 
In Asia Minor, Sufi orders linked up with merchants' and artisans' 
guilds called akhi (the Turkish word for futuwwah). These outfits cush-
ioned ordinary folks against the uncertainties of the time. Certainly, peo-
ple needed some cushioning. Asia Minor had long been the frontier 
between Turkish Muslims and European Christians. The Seljuks and 
Byzantines had torn the land up, fighting over it. One Seljuk prince had 
forged a fairly stable sovereign state here called the Sultanate of Rum (Rum 
being the Arabization of Rome) but then armies of Crusaders crisscrossing 
the land had disrupted order, and Seljuks fighting among themselves had 
eroded stability further. 
By the time the Crusades were winding down, various Turkish princes 
more or less controlled eastern Asia Minor, but only more or less; the Byzan-

REBIRTH 
169 
tine more or less controlled the western parts, but only more or less; and no 
claim went undisputed by the other. Asia Minor had become a lawless no-
man's land, inhabited by both Christians and Turks and ruled by no one. 
The Mongol eruptions drove fresh hordes ofTurkish pastoral nomads 
out of Central Asia. They drifted until they reached Asia Minor, but here 
finally they felt at home. Why here? Because pastoral nomads tended to 
like this sort oflawless environment. As autonomous self-ruling dans, they 
had their own leaders and laws and just felt crimped by the sort oflaw and 
order governments imposed. In a disputed frontier zone they could roam 
where they wanted, graze their herds where they wished, and supplement 
their needs by raiding settled folks according to the time-tested traditions 
of the steppes they had once called home. 
Christians still lived in this anarchic zone, small towns and villages en-
dured, but no government guaranteed the safety of the roads, no police 
came to the aid of anyone whose store got robbed, and no agency rushed 
to help in cases of fire, flood, or other catastrophe. The public sphere had 
eroded, so one had nobody to turn to in times of trouble except one's dan, 
one's friends and--one's Sufi brothers. 
As the new Sufism proliferated through this region, itinerant mystics 
began to roam the land. Some came from Persia and further east; some 
emerged locally. Many were dervishes, men who embraced voluntary 
poverty as a spiritual exercise. They didn't work but lived on alms in order 
that they might free up all their time to contemplate God. 
Many of these mystic vagabonds were also eccentrics; if you were living 
on alms, there was probably some advantage to standing out from the 
crowd. Kalendar, one of the earliest of these mystic vagabonds, wandered 
from town to town with bands of followers, all beating drums, chanting, 
singing, shouting, ranting, wildly exhorting people to come to Allah and 
urging them also to fight the infidels, fight them, fight! He and his fol-
lowers had unkempt hair, they dressed in rags, and they disturbed the 
peace, but they excited fervid passions and strange ideas, and wherever 
Kalendar went, Kalendari brotherhoods sprouted in his wake. 
Almost as a defense against wild men like Kalendar, more respectable 
people embraced another mystic named Bektash, an austere ascetic. For all 
his clerical sobriety, Bektash had a disturbing intensity about him, but at 
least he didn't shout. He became the favorite Sufi of the ulama. 

170 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Then there were the Mevlevi dervishes, darlings of the intellectuals and 
cognoscenti. They sprang up around a poet named Jalaludin, who was born 
in Ballm, for which reason, in Afghanistan, he is known as Jalaludin-i Balkhi. 
He was a boy when Mongol power began to coalesce around Genghis 
Khan. His father smelled trouble coming and moved the family west to 
what was left of the sultanate of Rum, for which reason most of the world 
knows this poet as Jalaludin-i Rumi ("Jalaludin the Roman.") 
Rumi's learned father founded a school, and Rumi began teaching there 
once he carne of age, for he acquired his own reputation for learning. He 
wrote conventional religious treatises that gained him great respect and at-
tracted numerous students, who crowded into his lectures and hung on his 
every word. 
The key moment in Rumi's legendary biography occurred one day 
when a ragged stranger carne into his classroom. The stranger sat in the 
back but he wouldn't keep his mouth shut. He kept bursting into song, 
disrupting the lecture-he seemed crazy. The stories about this stranger re-
mind one of the young Jack Kerouac ceaselessly shouting "Go!" from the 
back of the room when Alan Ginsberg was reading Howl for the first time 
in public. Rumi's students grabbed hold of the beggar and tried to throw 
him out of the room, but their professor made them stop and asked the 
man who he was and what he wanted. 
"I am Shams-i Tabrez," the stranger said, "and I have come for you." 
To the astonishment of his students, Rumi dosed his book, cast off his 
scholar's cloak, and said, "My teaching days are over. This is my master." 
He walked out of the classroom with Shams, never to return. 
Jalaludin and the beggar became inseparable. These two bonded pas-
sionately but on a purely spiritual level, bonded so utterly that Rumi began 
to sign his poetry with his master's name: his lyrics from this period have 
been collected as The Works ofShams-i Tabrez. Before Rumi met Shams, he 
was a respected writer whose work might have been read for a hundred 
years. After he met Shams, he became one of the greatest mystic poets in 
the history of literature. 
After a number of years, Shams mysteriously disappeared, and Rumi 
went on to compose a single thousand-page poem called Mathnawi Ma'nawi 
(The Spiritual Manuscript). In the famous opening passage, Rumi poses 
a question: why is the melody of the flute so piercingly sad? Then he an-

REBIRTH 
171 
swers his own question: because the flute started out as a reed, growing 
by the river bank, rooted in soil. When it was made into a flute, it was 
severed from its roots. The sorrow keening in its song is the reed's wist-
ful memory of its lost connection to the source. In the next thirty thou-
sand couplets, Rumi delivers hundreds of stories in a language thrumming 
with eroticized religiosity, illustrating how we human flutes can recover 
our connection to the source. Rumi remains influential, even in the 
English-speaking world, where translations of his work outsell those of 
every other poet.4 
In short, Sufism had something for every taste and class. Sufis con-
verted the pastoral nomads to Islam, so these tribes imbibed the passions 
of Islam before absorbing its doctrines. Sufi orders intertwined with arti-
sans' guilds, with merchants associations, with the peasantry, with aristo-
cratic military groups-like a web, Sufism connected all the disparate 
groups in this atomized world. 
Some Sufi brotherhoods devoted to futuwwah ideals developed into 
ghazi corporations. The word ghazi meant something like "warrior saint." 
Ghazis were reminiscent of the Knights Templar and other Christian mil-
itary orders spawned during the Crusades, except that no one ordained 
them, Islam having no pope-like figure to do the ordaining. Instead, ghazis 
ordained themselves, forming around some masterful knight and taking 
inspiration from some charismatic sheikh. They adopted special headgear 
and cloaks and other accessories as badges of membership in their group. 
They had initiation rituals involving vows, pledges, iconic artifacts and ar-
cane relics, much the same sorts of things boys cook up when they form 
"secret clubs." 
Members of ghazi orders centered their lives around campaigns into 
Christian territory to perform great deeds of valor for the advancement of 
the one true faith. They were very much like an Islamic version of the 
knights of Arthurian legend. 
Hundreds of these ghazi group sprang up, big ones and little ones. In 
search of fame and fortune, these knights sallied into the frontier 
"marches," that ever-growing belt of territory that the Byzantines still offi-
cially claimed but where their authority had grown dubious. Once in a 
while some ghazi chieftain secured enough territory to claim a little state 
of his own, whereupon he promptly declared himself an amir (also emir) 

172 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
and his little state an emirate. ''Amir" was an Islamic title that had once 
meant "commander" but now meant something more like "prince." 
With eastern Anatolia crystallizing into numerous little ghazi emirates, 
Byzantine power shrank and the lawless frontier zone receded westward-
which posed an ironic contradiction: the frontier marches were mother's 
milk to the ghazi states. As the disputed zone moved, so did the ghazi 
knights; they leaked away from the established emirates and off into the 
wild west, where a man could still prove himself in battle and incidentally 
score some plunder. 
At a certain point, however, the wild west stopped receding because the 
frontier was close enough to Constantinople that the Byzantines could 
make a stand. Ghazi knights draining from the east began to accumulate 
in these frontline states situated nose to nose with Byzantine power. 
Knights could find employment here for at least fifty years after fighting 
had faded out in the rest of Anatolia. The frontline states accordingly grew 
ever stronger while the eastern emirates grew ever weaker. It was here on 
this militarized frontier, therefore, that a new world empire was born.s 
In 1258 CE, the very year Hulagu destroyed Baghdad, a boy named 
Othman was born to a leading ghazi family in Anatolia. Othman's descen-
dants were called the Othmanlis, or Ottomans, as people in the West pro-
nounced it, and they ended up building a mighty empire. 
Not that Othman himself built an empire; he only managed to con-
struct the toughest little ghazi emirate in Anatolia. His recent ancestors 
had been pastoral nomads out of Central Asia, a clan of about four hun-
dred fleeing the Mongols, and he had not moved far from his roots. His 
palace was his horse, his throne his saddle, and his office his saddlebag. His 
capital was wherever he camped for the night. All he really bequeathed to 
his successors was a process. In the fighting season, he would lead his men 
into the frontier provinces and accumulate booty by fighting Christians. 
In the "off-season," he collected taxes from any productive settled folks he 
found in areas he controlled. 
As the Ottomans grew stronger, they began to absorb other ghazi states, 
sometimes by conquering them, sometimes by out-and-out buying them. 
Ghazi chieftains who had been sovereign emirs became feudal aristocrats, 
still powerful in their own right but subservient to an even greater power, 
the head of the Ottoman dynasty. 

REBIRTH 
173 
The Ottomans profited from the single most crucial bit of luck that 
makes the difference between success and failure for a family dynasty: it 
had a series of long-lived rulers, all of them pretty capable. One of them, 
Murat I, sailed across the Black Sea and began adding bits of Europe to his 
conquests. By his era (1350-1389 CE) the Ottoman dynasty no longer 
ruled from horseback but had an urban capital, a palace, a government bu-
reaucracy, a tax policy, a treasury. Ottoman rulers adopted a veneer of high 
Islamic civilization, not to mention some of the rituals, pomp, and cere-
monials of the Byzantine court. 
Another Ottoman ruler, Bayazid I (1389-1402) launched a program 
called the devshirme, which consisted of bringing captured boys from 
Christian Europe back to his palace, raising them as Muslims, and devel-
oping them into crack soldiers. These were really just the familiar mam-
luks of Islamic history by another name; mamluks were Turkish boys 
growing up in Arab or Persian courts, these were Christian boys growing 
up in a Turkish court. The soldiers developed by the devshirme were 
called janissaries, a corruption of the Turkish phrase Yeni Ceri, which 
means "new troops." 
Bayazid's janissaries liberated him from his own feudal lieges, those re-
cently sovereign aristocratic ghazis who traced their descent back to Cen-
tral Asia. Their troops still provided Bayazid with foot soldiers, but the 
janissaries gave him a professional corps of officers to lead them. 
Bayazid's raids reached ever deeper into Europe. The kings of France 
and Hungary got together and organized a force to check him, but Bayazid 
demolished their joint army in 1396, at Nicopolis, a town in present-day 
Bulgaria. Now the amir of the Ottomans truly ruled an empire. In fact, 
Bayazid had outgrown the title of amir. He called himself the sultan, 
thereby declaring himself the chief executive of Dar al-Islam, a secular ver-
sion of the khalifa. His military adventures became full-blown campaigns, 
and every year he launched a new one, striking west one year, heading east 
the next year to absorb more ghazi emirates and extend his rule into the 
old Muslim heartland. Back and forth he scuttled, moving at such speed 
that people began to call him the Thunderbolt. Bayazid acquired the swag-
ger of a Caesar. 
Then it all came crashing down. On one of his forays east, Bayazid ran 
into a warrior tougher than himself-the dreaded Timur-i-lang. Bayazid's 

174 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
own feudal lieges had called Timur into Anatolia. They resented having 
lost sovereignty to the Ottomans, and so they sent a message to Timur, 
complaining that Bayazid was spending so much time in Europe, he was 
turning into a Christian. Well, Timur-i-lang would have none of that, for 
along with being a ruthless savage of unparalleled cruelty, Timur was also 
a Muslim who fancied himself a patron of the high arts, a scholar in his 
own right, and a devout defender of Islam. 
In 1402, near the city of Ankara, these two civilized patrons of the arts 
set niceties aside and went at each other blade to axe, and may the worst 
man win. Timur-i-lang proved himself the more brutal of the two. He 
crushed the Ottoman army, took Emperor Bayazid himself prisoner, 
clapped him in a cage like some zoo animal, and hauled him back to his 
jewel-encrusted lair in Central Asia, the city of Samarqand. Despair and 
humiliation so overwhelmed Bayazid that he committed suicide. Out 
west, Bayazid's sons began to war with each other over the truncated re-
mains of his one-time empire. 
It looked like the end of the Ottomans. It looked like they would end 
up having been just another of the many meteoric Turkish kingdoms that 
flashed and fizzled. But in fact, this kingdom was different. From Othman 
to Bayazid, the Ottomans had not just conquered; they had woven a new 
social order {which I will describe a few pages further on). For now, suffice 
to say that in the aftermath ofTimur's depredations, they had deep social 
resources to draw upon. Timur died within decades, his empire tattered 
quickly down to a small {but culturally brilliant) kingdom in western 
Afghanistan. The Ottoman Empire, by contrast, not only recovered, it 
began to rise. 
In 1452 it jumped to a higher level, a stage that began when a new em-
peror named Sultan Mehmet took the throne. Mehmet inherited an em-
pire in good shape, but he brought one problem to the throne. He was 
only twenty-one and tougher, older men circled him hungrily, each one 
thinking that an older, tougher, hungrier man {like himself) might make a 
better sultan. Mehmet knew he had to do something spectacular to back 
down potential rivals and cement his grip on power. 
So he decided to conquer Constantinople. 
Constantinople no longer represented a really important military prize. 
The Ottomans had already skirted it, pushing into eastern Europe. Con-

REBIRTH 
175 
stantinople was more of a psychological prize: the city had immense sym-
bolic significance for both east and west. 
To the west, an unbroken line ran from Constantinople back to the 
Rome of Augustus and Julius Caesar. To Christians, this was still the capi-
tal of the Roman Empire, which Constantine had infused with Christian-
ity. It was only later historians who looked at this eastern phase of Roman 
history and called it by a new name. The Byzantines themselves called 
themselves Romans, and thought of their city as the new Rome. 
As for Muslims, Prophet Mohammed himself had once said that the 
final victory oflslam would be at hand when Muslims took Constantino-
ple. In the third century oflslam, the Arab philosopher al-Kindi had spec-
ulated that the Muslim who took Constantinople would renew Islam and 
go on to rule the world. Many scholars said the conqueror of Constan-
tinople would be the Mahdi, "the Expected One," the mystical figure 
whom many Muslims expected to see when history approached its end-
point. Mehmet therefore had good reason to believe that taking Constan-
tinople would be a public relations coup that would make the whole world 
look at him differently. 
The many technical experts now working for the Ottomans included a 
Hungarian engineer named Urban, who specialized in building cannons, 
still a relatively new type of weapon. Sultan Mehmet asked Urban to build 
him something special along these lines. Urban set up a foundry about 150 
miles from Constantinople and poured out artillery. His masterpiece was a 
cannon rwenty-seven feet long and so big around that a man could crawl 
down inside it. The so-called Basilic could fire a rwelve-hundred-pound 
granite stone a mile. 
It took ninety oxen and about four hundred men to transport this mon-
strous gun to the battlefield. As it turned out, the Basilic was too big: it took 
more than three hours to load, and each time it fired it recoiled so hard it 
tended to kill more people behind it than in front of it. Besides, at a distance 
of a mile, it was so inaccurate it actually missed the whole city of Constan-
tinople; but this didn't matter. The big gun wasn't an important military 
asset so much as an important symbolic asset-announcing to the world 
that this was the sort of weapon the Ottomans brought to the field. In addi-
tion to the Basilic they had, of course, many smaller cannons. They were the 
best armed and most technologically advanced army of their time. 

176 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
CONSTANT IN OPLE 
i/2 mil~ 
500m.,u;r> 
GA LATA 
S e a 
0 f 
Marmara 
CONSTANTINOPLE: THE WORLD'S MOST IMPREGNABLE CITY 
The siege of Constantinople lasted fifty-four days, the city being all but 
impregnable. Located on a triangular spit of land shaped like a rhinoceros 
horn, it faced the Bosporus Straits on one side and the Sea of Marmara on 
another. On these sides it had high sea walls and promontories command-
ing the narrow straits, from which the Byzantines could bombard any 
ships approaching the city. On the land side, it had a series of stone walls 
that stretched across the whole peninsula from sea to sea, each wall with its 
own moat. Each moat was broader and deeper and each wall thicker and 
taller than the one before. The innermost wall stood ninety feet high and 
was more than thirty feet thick; no one could get past that barrier, espe-
cially since the Byzantines had a secret weapon called Byzantine fire, a 
glutinous burning substance that was launched from catapults and 
splashed when it landed, sticking to flesh. It could not be doused with 
water-in fact, it was probably some primitive form of napalm. 

REBIRTH 
177 
The Ottomans persisted, however. The cannons kept booming, the 
janissaries kept charging, the immense besieging army made up of recruits 
from many different tribes and populations including Arabs, Persians, and 
even European Christians kept storming the ramparts, but in the end, the 
battle turned on the fact that someone forgot to close one small door in 
one corner of the third and most impregnable wall. A few Turks forced 
their way in through there, secured the sector, opened a larger gate to their 
compatriots, and suddenly the most enduring capital of the western 
world's longest lasting empire was going down in flames. 
Mehmet gave his troops permission to loot Constantinople for three 
days but not one minute longer. He wanted his troops to preserve the city, 
not destroy it, because he meant to use it as his own capital. From this 
time on, the city came to be known informally as Istanbul {the formal 
name change would not occur until centuries later) and the victorious sul-
tan was henceforth called Mehmet the Conqueror. 
Imagine for a moment what might have happened if Muslims had 
taken Constantinople during the prime of Islam's expansion, if Constan-
tinople rather than Baghdad had been the capital of the Abbasids: strad-
dling the waters linking the Black Sea to the Mediterranean, possessing all 
the ports they needed to launch navies across the Aegean and Mediter-
ranean to Greece and Italy and on to Spain and the French Coast and 
through the Straits of Gibraltar up the Atlantic coast to England and Scan-
dinavia, combined with their proven prowess in land warfare-all of Eu-
rope might well have been absorbed into the Islamic empire. 
But seven hundred years had passed since the prime of the khalifate. Eu-
rope was no longer a wretched continent eking out a meager existence in 
squalid poverty. It was a continent on the rise. On the Iberian peninsula, 
Catholic monarchs were busy driving the last embattled Muslims back to 
Africa and funding sailors like Columbus to go explore the world. Belgium 
had developed into a banking capital, the Dutch were busy cooking up an 
awesome business expertise, the continent of Italy was muscling up into the 
Renaissance, and England and France were coalescing into nation-states. 
Constantinople {Istanbul) gave the Ottomans a peerless base of operations, 
but Christian Europe was no longer any pushover. At the time, however, no 
one knew who was on the rise and who on the decline, and with the Ottoman 
triumph, Islam certainly looked resurgent to the Muslim world at large. 

178 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Istanbul had only about seventy thousand people at the time of the 
conquest, so Mehmet the Conqueror launched a set of policies such as tax 
concessions and property giveaways to repopulate his new capital. 
Mehmet also reestablished the classical Islamic principles of conquest: 
non-Muslims were accorded religious freedom and left in possession of 
their land and property but had to pay the jizya. People of every religion 
and ethnicity came flowing in, making Istanbul a microcosm of an em-
pire pulsing with diversity.6 
Now the Ottomans ruled an empire that straddled Europe and Asia 
with substantial territory in both continents. The greatest city in the world 
was theirs. Their greatest achievement, however, wasn't conquest. Some-
how, in the course of their fifteen decades of rule, they had brought a 
unique new social order into being. Somehow, that anarchic soup of no-
mads, peasants, tribal warriors, mystics, knights, artisans, merchants, and 
miscellaneous others populating Anatolia had coalesced into a society of 
clockwork complexity full of interlocking parts that balanced one another, 
each acting as a spur and check on the others. Nothing like it had been 
seen before, and nothing like it has been seen again. Only contemporary 
American society offers an adequate analogy to the complexity of Ot-
toman society-but only to the complexity. The devil is in the details, and 
our world differs from that of the Ottomans in just about every detail. 
Broadly speaking, the Ottoman world was divided horizontally be-
tween a ruling class that taxed, organized, issued orders, and fought, and a 
subject class that produced and paid taxes. But it was also organized verti-
cally by Sufi orders and brotherhoods. So people separated by their classes 
might find themselves united in reverence to the same sheikh. 
On the other hand, Ottoman society as a whole was compartmental-
ized into the major religious communities, each with its own vertical and 
horizontal divisions, and each a semi-autonomous nation or millet, in 
charge of its own religious rites, education, justice, charities, and social 
services. 
The Jews, for example, were one millet, headed by the grand rabbi in 
Istanbul, a considerable community because Jews came flocking into the 
Ottoman world throughout the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, fleeing 
from persecution in western Europe-England had expelled them during 
the Crusades, they had endured pogroms in eastern Europe, they were fac-

REBIRTH 
179 
ing the Spanish Inquisition in Iberia, and discrimination hounded them 
just about everywhere. 
The Eastern Orthodox community was another millet, headed by the 
patriarch of Constantinople (as Christians still called it), and he had au-
thority over all Slavic Christians in the empire, a number that kept in-
creasing as the Ottomans extended their conquests in Europe. 
Then there was the Armenian millet, another Christian community 
but separate from the Greeks because the Greek and Armenian churches 
considered one another's doctrines heretical. 
The leader of each millet represented his people at court and answered 
directly to the sultan. In a sense, the Muslims were just another of these 
millets, and they too had a top leader, the Sheikh al-Islam, or "Old Man of 
Islam," a position created by Bayazid shortly before he was crushed by 
Timur-i-lang. The Sheikh al-Islam legislated according to the shari'a and 
presided over an army of muftis who interpreted the law, judges who ap-
plied the law, and mullahs who inducted youngsters into the religion, 
provided basic religious education, and administrated rites in local neigh-
borhoods and villages. 
The shari' a, however, was not the only law in the land. There was also 
the sultan's code, a parallel legal system that dealt with administrative mat-
ters, taxation, interaction berween millets, and relationships among the 
various classes, especially the subject class and the ruling class. 
Don't try to follow this complexity: the complexity of the Ottoman sys-
tem defies a quick description. I just want to give you a flavor of it. This 
whole parallel legal system, including the lawyers, bureaucrats, and judges 
who shaped and applied it, was under the authority of the grand vizier, 
who headed up the palace bureaucracy (another whole world in itself}. 
This vizier was the empire's second most powerful figure, after the sultan. 
Or was he third? After all, the Sheikh al-Islam had the right to review 
every piece of secular legislation and veto it if he thought it conflicted with 
the shari' a, or send it back for modification. 
On the other hand, the Sheikh al-Islam served at the pleasure of the 
sultan, and it was the sultan's code the grand vizier was administering. So 
if the grand vizier and the Sheikh al-Islam came into conflict ... guess 
who backed down. Or did he? 
You see how it was: check, balance, check, balance .... 

180 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Another set of checks and balances built into Ottoman society involved 
the devshirme instituted by Bayazid. At first, as I mentioned, this was just 
the mamluk system by another name. Like the mamluks, the janissaries 
were trained to serve as the ruler's bodyguards-at first. But then the janis-
saries' function expanded. 
For one thing, they didn't all end up as soldiers anymore. Some were 
taught administrative skills. Others received cultural training. The sultan 
began appointing janissaries to top posts in his government as well as his 
armies and navies. He put janissaries in charge of important cultural insti-
tutions as well. Sinon, the Ottoman architect most responsible for estab-
lishing that characteristic style of Ottoman mosque-a solid edifice capped 
with one big dome and many smaller mushroom domes and four pencil-tin 
minarets at the corners-was a janissary. 
Originally, the devshirme took boys only from Christian families in 
newly conquered territory. But Mehmet the Conqueror instituted another 
crucial innovation: he extended the devshirme into the empire itself. 
Henceforth, any family under Ottoman rule, Muslim or non-Muslim, high 
or low, might see some of its sons sucked into this special form of "slavery," 
which was, paradoxically, a route to the highest strata of Ottoman society. 
Through the devshirme, the Ottomans crafted a brand new power elite 
for their society. Unlike the elite of other societies, however, the janissaries 
were forbidden to marry or have {legitimate} children. They could not, 
therefore, become a hereditary elite. In fact, the devshirme was a mecha-
nism for constantly turning the social soil. It sought out promising young-
sters from all sectors of society, gave them the most rigorous possible 
intellectual and physical training, and then charged them with running the 
empire. Naturally, they sucked a good deal of power away from the old, 
traditional, military, Turkish aristocracy, those families whose ancestral 
roots went back to central Asia, which was all to the good as far as the Ot-
tomans were concerned. It weakened their potential rivals. 
And yet the Ottomans did not eliminate these potential rivals, even 
though they could have. No, the Ottoman genius for checks and balances 
kept the old aristocratic families in place and left them some power to 
serve as a check on the janissaries should the latter ever get any big ideas. 
What power was left to the old nobility? Well, for one thing, they re-
mained the biggest landowners in the empire and the major taxpayers. 

REBIRTH 
181 
"Landowner" is a bit of a misnomer, however, because officially the sultan 
owned every scrap of soil in his empire. He only leased out parcels of it to 
favored people as "tax farms" (timars in Turkish}. A timar was a rural prop-
erty from whose inhabitants the timar holder was allowed to collect taxes. 
Those inhabitants were, of course, mostly peasant cultivators living on the 
land. Tax farmers had permission to collect as much as they wanted from 
these people. In exchange for the privilege, they had to pay the govern-
ment a fixed fee every year. Whatever they collected beyond that sum was 
theirs to keep; and there was no limit on how they were allowed to collect. 
The government's share did not depend on how much the tax farmer col-
lected but on how much land was in the "farmer's" care. It was a tax on 
land, not a tax on income. If a property produced beyond all expectations, 
the tax farmer benefited, not the government. If a timar did poorly, the tax 
farmer took the hit. If he could not pay his tax for a number of years in a 
row, the timar was taken away from him and given to someone else. 
After a successful campaign, the sultan might reward his best generals 
by giving them timars. Typically, of course, except in newly conquered 
areas, the sultan had to take a timar away from one person in order to re-
ward another. The fact that people could lose their timars meant that the 
landed aristocracy was only semi-hereditary. Here then was another mech-
anism that promoted social fluidity and kept the Ottoman world in flux. 
You might suppose that this timar system encouraged Ottoman aristo-
crats to wring peasants dry. After all, they got to keep whatever they ex-
tracted after paying the government fee. But the timar holders were not, in 
fact, free to do as they wished, because the peasants could appeal to the 
shari' a courts for justice, and these were a whole separate institution, a sep-
arate power base in society, controlled and staffed by the ulama. The no-
bility had no shortcut into it. If a family wanted to "place" a son in this 
legal system, the son had to go through the same long process as anyone 
else for joining the ulama, such a long process, in fact, that by the time he 
made it, his social ties would mostly be with other ulama. So his interests 
would be aligned with theirs and shaped by the ancient doctrine more 
than by his clan or family roots. 
Despite its pervasive power, however, the clerical establishment did not 
own the religious life of Muslims in the Ottoman empire. Sufism contin-
ued to prosper as the religion of the masses, with most people claiming at 

182 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
least nominal affiliation with one or another of the Sufi orders and a great 
many actively belonging to some brotherhood. This is not to say that all 
(or very many) of the common folks in the Ottoman Empire were prac-
ticing mystics. It's more to say that Sufism, for most people, had come to 
mean folklore, superstitions, shrines, amulets, remedies, spells, and the 
veneration of Sufi "saints" alleged to possess supernatural abilities. 
Besides, these Sufi orders were intertwined with the akhis, the associa-
tions of craftsmen and merchants I mentioned earlier. The akhi guilds had 
their own autonomous status as social organizations. They set standards for 
their members, licensed new businesses, collected dues, extended credit, paid 
out old-age pensions, took care of funeral expenses, offered health care, op-
erated shelters and soup kitchens, gave out scholarships, and also organized 
fairs, festivals, processions, and other public entertainments. Every guild had 
its own masters, councils, sheikhs, and internal political processes. Members 
with complaints could go to guild officials the way modern industrial work-
ers go to their union reps (where unions still exist}. If necessary, guild offi-
cials represented their members in lawsuits and petitioned the state on 
members' behal£ By the same token, the state regulated the guilds, imposing 
standards of its own and controlling prices in the public interest. 
Every craftsman belonged to a guild, and many guild members also be-
longed to some Sufi brotherhood that might cut across guild lines. The 
brotherhoods generally had lodges where members could gather to social-
ize, not just with one another, but also with merchants and other travelers 
passing through, for the akhi-Sufi lodges actively served as traveler's aid so-
cieties and hospitality centers. 
This glimpse into the Ottoman social clockwork does not begin to ex-
haust its fractal intricacy: look closer and deeper into Ottoman society and 
you'll see the same order of complexity at every level. Everything was con-
nected to everything else and connected in many ways, which was fine 
when all the connections balanced out and all of the parts were working. 
Centuries later, when the empire entered its decrepitude, all the intertwin-
ing parts and intermeshing institutions became a peculiarly Ottoman lia-
bility; their intricacy meant that trouble in one place or sphere translated 
mysteriously to trouble in a dozen other places or spheres-but that came 
later. In the sixteenth century, the Ottoman Empire was an awesomely 
well-functioning machine. 

REBIRTH 
183 
The Ottoman's eastward expansion did get blocked by another rising 
power, the Safavids (about whom more later}, but the Ottomans simply 
headed south at that point and conquered the old Arab heartland from the 
Indian Ocean to the Mediterranean, then conquered Egypt, eliminating 
the mamluk dynasty from history, and then went on expanding west along 
the North African coast. 
At their apogee, during the reign of the sixteenth century Suleiman the 
Magnificent (the title Europeans gave him-among his own he usually 
wore the honorific of Suleiman the Lawgiver} the Ottoman empire proba-
bly ranked as the world greatest power. It straddled Europe and Asia, it 
possessed both Rome (i.e., Constantinople} and Mecca, not to mention 
Cairo; and its monarch ruled over more people and more territory than 
any other. No wonder the Ottoman ruler began to call himself khalifa. No 
one disputed the title. Of course, that's partly because no one thought it 
worth disputing. The title had only ceremonial significance by this time, 
but still it's worth noting that the Ottoman emperor claimed the two most 
important titles of universal authority in Islam: for the first time in history 
khalifa and sultan were the same man. For the ordinary Muslim citizen, 
this meant that surely history was moving forward again: the Umma was 
back on track to becoming the global community. 
THE SAFAVIDS (906-1 I 38 AH) 
"Khalifa'' and "sultan" were not, however, the only titles of universal au-
thority in Islam: there was also "imam," as understood by that other sect 
of Muslims, the Shi'i-which brings us to the Safavids of Persia, the ones 
who blocked Ottoman expansion eastward. 
The Safavids came to power in a most unusual way. Their roots go back 
to a Sufi brotherhood that took shape just after the Mongol eruption. The 
order coalesced in northern Persia around a spiritual master named Sheikh 
Safi al-Din and came to be known as the Safavids. 
For three generations, this brotherhood functioned pretty much like 
any other Sufi order of the time: it was a peaceful, apolitical group that 
offered spiritual companionship and a refuge from the turmoil of the 
world. But then the order began to change. For one thing, when the third 
sheikh died, his son became the new sheikh, and when he died, his son, 

184 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
and after that his son, and so on. In short, leadership of the group became 
hereditary. 
Second, somewhere along the way, these sheikhs developed political 
ambitions. They enlisted chosen initiates into an elite corps who not only 
learned techniques for refining their spiritual devotions but also learned 
martial arts. They became the sheikh's bodyguards, then his enforcers, and 
then they grew into a serious military caste. 
As an emblem of membership in the Safavid guard, these soldier-mystics 
wore special red hats, and so they were called the Qizilbash, Turkish for 
"the redheads." The hat they wore had a distinctive twelve-fold design, 
which reflected the third and most important change in the Safavid order: 
their switch to Shi'ism. 
The twelve folds stood for the twelve imams of mainstream Shi'ism. As 
I mentioned earlier, Shi'i felt that absolute and hereditary religious au-
thority belonged to a figure called the imam, who was God's representative 
on Earth. There was always one imam in the world; there were never two; 
and the true imam of the age was always descended from Prophet Mo-
hammed through his daughter Fatima and her husband Ali. 
Whenever an imam had more than one son, his death opened up the 
possibility of disagreement about which of his progeny was truly the next 
imam. Just such a disagreement over the fifth imam gave birth to a mi-
nority sect called the Zaidis (or Fivers.) Another disagreement over the sev-
enth imam had spawned the lsma'ilis (or Seveners). 
The remaining Shi'i agreed on the imam all the way to the twelfth gen-
eration down from Ali, but the twelfth imam disappeared when he was a 
little boy. Non-Shi'i assume he was murdered. Shi'i, however, believe he 
never died but went into "occultation," a concept peculiar to Shi'ism: oc-
cultation meant he could (can) no longer be seen by ordinary people. 
Mainstream Shi'i (or Twelvers) call this twelfth imam the "hidden 
imam." Shi'ite doctrine holds that the Hidden Imam is and always will be 
alive, that he is still in direct communication with God and is still guiding 
the world in some unseen way. The doctrine doesn't say exactly how the 
Hidden Imam remains hidden. It doesn't say whether he has become invisi-
ble, donned a disguise, changed form, gone to ground in some cave, or what. 
Instrumental explanations like these belong to the world of science; occulta-
tion is a mystical concept to which instrumental explanations are irrelevant. 

REBIRTH 
185 
Shi'ite doctrine declares that the twelfth imam will reveal himself at the 
end of history, sparking the perfection of Allah's community and inaugu-
rating the final Age of Justice, the endpoint sought by all good Muslims. 
Upon reaching its endpoint, history will end, the dead will be resurrected, 
and Allah's judgment will sort all who have ever lived into heaven or hell 
according to their just desserts. Because of this expectation that the Hidden 
Imam will appear again at the end of days, Shi'i sometimes refer to him as 
the Mahdi "the expected one" {a concept that exists in Sunni Islam too, 
but less vividly.) Most of today's Iranians adhere to this branch of Shi'ism, 
making the Twelvers the mainstream Shi'i of modern times. 
In the mid-fifteenth century, the Safavids embraced this complex of be-
liefs. The twelve folds on the red hats worn by the Qizilbash symbolized 
the twelve imams. By this time the Safavids were a cultlike group headed 
by an ambitious sheikh with a growing army of soldiers at his command. 
The soldiers saw him not just as their commander in chief but as their life-
line to heaven. 
These politicized Safavids were operating in a context of social chaos. 
The Persian world, smashed once by Genghis Khan and smashed again by 
Timur-i-lang, was fragmented into many little principalities ruled by di-
verse Turkish chieftains. The Turkish chieftains were all resolute Sunnis. 
Shi'ism, by contrast, had long been identified with Persian resistance to in-
vasive aliens, a pattern that began in the days of Arab dominance and 
picked up again once Turks took over. Now, in the wake of the Mongol 
catastrophe, this militant Shi'ite cult known as the Safavids easily linked 
up with all the antistate, revolutionary activity going on. No wonder the 
Safavids made local princes uneasy. 
In 1488, one of these princes decided to take action. He had the head 
of the Safavid order killed. Then for good measure he had the man's eldest 
son murdered as well. He probably would have done away with his 
younger son too, a two-year-old boy by the name oflsmail, except that the 
Qizilbash whisked this little fellow into hiding, just a few steps ahead of 
the state-paid killers. 
Over the next ten years, the Safavids hardened into a formidable secret 
society. Ismail grew up in hiding, hustled constantly from safe house to safe 
house. The whole time, the Qizilbash regarded him as the head of their 
order, and not just a figurehead. They revered the boy and believed he had 

186 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
the spark of divinity in him. Imagine how he must have seen the world (and 
himself) by the time he reached adolescence, having spent his whole life in 
secrecy, imbued with a sense of mortal danger, and surrounded, even in his 
earliest memories, by a shadowy corps of men in red hats who bowed to 
him, hung on his words, and obeyed his every whim. By chance, the boy 
bred to such a sense of self-importance, happened to be brilliant and tough. 
Around the age of twelve, Ismail carne out of hiding with his force of 
Qizilbash. He disposed quickly of the prince who had killed his father. 
Other princes rushed to smash him, thinking, how hard could it be to de-
feat a twelve-year-old boy? Very hard, it turned out. 
In 1502, at the age of fifteen, Ismail declared himself Shahanshah of 
Iran. Shahanshah meant "king of kings." It was the title the Sassanid mon-
archs had used, and the ancient Persian monarchs before them. In reject-
ing the titles of "khalifa'' and "sultan," Ismail was rejecting Arab and 
Turkish historical tradition in favor of a nativist Persian identity. In calling 
his realm Iran, he was invoking the ancestral king named in Firdausi's epic 
of the Persian people, The Book of Kings. In fact, Ismail's propagandists said 
he was related by blood to the Sassanid kings of yore. 
Ismail also separated himself from his neighbor by declaring Twelver 
Shi'ism the state religion. He had his henchman publicly curse the first three 
khalifas of Islam: Abu Bakr, Omar, and Othman. The state declared that Ali 
was the Prophet's only legitimate successor and the imams descended from 
him the only religious authorities. Ismail's propagandists spread the news 
that in addition to being descended from the Sassanids, Ismail was also de-
scended from Ali. They suggested that he was even in direct communication 
with the Hidden Imam (who was, of course, in direct communication with 
God). In fact, Ismail carne pretty close to declaring that he himself was the 
Hidden Imam and may well have believed this of himself-how could he 
not, given his upbringing? Some people say he even thought he was God. 
Fortified by his sense of destiny, Ismail sent preachers into the Ot-
toman Empire to spread his religious message. His agents called upon Ot-
toman subjects to convert to Shi'ism and accept Ismail as their sole 
divinely guided leader. He also set to work vigorously persecuting Sunnis 
under his power. Some saw signs of madness in the king's conduct and im-
migrated hastily into the Ottoman empire. Of those who stayed, many 
were imprisoned or killed. 

REBIRTH 
187 
Well, wouldn't you know it: the Ottoman sultan Selim the Grim retali-
ated by locking up or executing Shi'is living in his realm. Inevitably, as Sun-
nis fled west into Anatolia, Shi'is fled east into Persia. The whole process led 
to an ever greater concentration of Shi'ism in the Safavid empire (and Sun-
nism in the Ottoman) and the Safavids did everything they could to pro-
mote this trend as well as to fuse Shi'ism with Persian culture. This fusion of 
Shi'ism and Persian nationalism became the ideological foundation of their 
new empire, the core of which later became the modern nation of Iran. 
As part of this campaign, the Safavids elevated the Tazieh into ana-
tional ritual drama. The Tazieh was a cycle of Shi'ite passion plays re-
counting the martyrdom of Hussein at Karbala. The plays came out of a 
mourning ritual conducted in special buildings called takiah khanas. Tra-
ditionally, on the tenth day of the month of Muharam (the day of Hus-
sein's martyrdom) Shi'i got together in these places to mourn communally: 
the custom had been going on for centuries. During the mourning, any-
one who felt an urge to tell a piece of the story would jump up and do so 
in order to arouse and stoke the grief. Shi'i became thoroughly familiar 
with every detail of the martyrdom and every story that could possibly be 
told about it. For the telling of these plays they developed a distinctive 
style of oration designed to trigger lamentation. The collection of all these 
stories constituted the Tazieh (many pieces were written down, but there 
was no single written version) and every year, on the Tenth of Muharram, 
now that the Safavids held power, Shi'i through the empire took to the 
streets (not just to takiah khanas) for a cathartic outburst of public lamen-
tation and then made their way to state-funded theaters where government-
funded professionals enacted the ritual on stage. 
When Ismail was twenty-seven years old, he discovered that he wasn't 
God after all. The Ottomans dealt him this lesson by invading his realm. 
Spoiling for a fight, Ismail rushed to meet them. The two armies clashed on 
the plains of Chaldiran, near the city ofTabrez. The Ottomans had firearms, 
but the Safavids thought they had something better: old-fashioned reli-
gious fervor and a divinely guided leader. This time, firearms proved more 
useful. Selim crushed Ismail's forces, almost killed Ismail, and took his 
capital ofTabrez. 
The battle ofChaldiran was as seminal as the Battle ofHastings, which 
marked the birth of England as a nation-state. Historians usually score 

188 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Chaldiran as a victory for the Ottomans, but overall it was more of a draw, 
because Selim could not hold Tabrez. With winter coming, he fell back to 
more secure bases deeper inside Anatolia, and by the following year the 
Persians had reoccupied Tabrez and inoculated it with a scorched-earth 
campaign that left nothing for invaders to feed on if they wanted to attack 
again. So the battle of Chaldiran actually ended up defining the frontier 
between the Ottoman and Safavid realms, which hardened eventually into 
the border between the successor states, Iran and Turkey, and remains the 
border between those countries to this day. 
Ismail went home from Chaldiran a sad and broken man. Losing a bat-
tle made him rethink his identity. He spent his remaining years more or 
less in seclusion, pondering the cosmos and writing religious poetry. Is-
mail's empire not only survived his dejection but prospered, in part be-
cause it enjoyed a succession of gifted and long-lived rulers. 
With the border more or less firmed up, hostilities between the Ot-
toman and Safavid empires went into remission and trade began flowing 
in both directions to the benefit of both societies. The Safavid Empire was 
always smaller than the Ottomans' and never quite as powerful, but with 
its single state religion and its single dominant ethnic group, it was cultur-
ally more unified. 
This no-doubt-about-it Persian Empire peaked under Ismail's great 
grandson Shah Abbas the Great, who died in 1629 after a forty-two-year 
reign. Abbas equipped his armies with firearms and cannons, and in his era 
Iran developed booming state-supported textile, ceramics, garment, and 
carpet industries, which exported goods to places as distant as western Eu-
rope, Africa, and India. 
The art of painting, and particularly of the "Persian miniature"-
exquisitely detailed scenes surrounded by floral and geometric borders-
climaxed in Safavid Persia. Calligraphy, regarded as a major art form in the 
Islamic world due to Muslim reverence for the written Qur'an, also reached 
perfection here. The two arts came together in illuminated books, the high-
est artistic products of the age, and the culminating work in this form was a 
Book of Kings, Firdausi's epic, produced for a Safavid monarch: it had 258 
paintings and sixty thousand lines of calligraphy by various artists-essen-
tially, an entire museum between two covers. 

REBIRTH 
189 
Safavid creativity climaxed in architecture. For example, unlike the 
monumental Ottoman mosques-those somber mounds of domes brack-
eted by minarets-the Safavids built airy structures that shimmered with 
glazed mosaic tiles and seemed almost to float, so that even gigantic 
mosques looked like they were made of lace and light. 
And if architecture was the highest art form of Safavid Persia, then city 
building was its meta-art. The Safavids kept moving their capital (seeking 
safety from the ever-looming Ottomans} and every time they adopted a 
new city as their home, they remade it aesthetically. In 1598, after choos-
ing Isfahan as his new capital, Shah Abbas launched a building program 
that transformed the entire city into a single integrated jewel: by the time 
he was done, it abounded in public squares, gardens, mosques, mansions, 
pools, palaces, and public buildings interlaced with handsome boulevards. 
Awestruck visitors coined the phrase Isfahan Nisfi-jahan, "Isfahan, half the 
world" (their point being that if you hadn't seen Isfahan, you'd missed half 
of all there was to see in the world). 
The Ottoman and Safavid worlds had distinctive differences and yet, 
for all the hostility between the governments, a sort of civilizational unity 
ran between them. They were no more different than, say, England and 
France, and perhaps less so. A traveler going from Istanbul to Isfahan or 
vice versa would have felt on more or less familiar ground in either place. 
It's quite remarkable that two such powerful and distinctive empires could 
emerge in exactly the same period side by side. What's even more amazing 
is that yet another enormous, distinctive, grandiose, and powerful Muslim 
empire coalesced in just about this same period: the empire of the 
Moghuls, which eventually stretched from Burma, across India, to the 
middle of Afghanistan where it butted right up against the Safavid frontier. 
THE MOGHULS (ROUGHLY 900 TO 1273 AH) 
The Moghuls were every bit the equal of the Ottomans in wealth and 
strength. About 20 percent of the world's current population lives in the 
territory they once ruled, including all or part of five modern countries, 
Afghanistan, Pakistan, India, Bangladesh, and Burma. The man who 
founded this gigantic empire was an almost exact contemporary of Shah 

190 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Ismail's named Babur, which means "tiger," and in some ways, he was even 
more remarkable than the prodigious Safavid teenager. 
Babur claimed descent from both Timur-i-lang and Chengez Khan. 
What the blood ties really were, who knows, but Babur took his genealogy 
seriously; it give him a lifelong sense of mission. His father ruled a little 
kingdom called Farghana, just north of today's Afghanistan, and when he 
died in 1495, Babur inherited this throne. He was twelve years old. 
Within a year he had lost his kingdom, which is hardly surprising: he 
was only twelve, after all! But he regrouped and conquered legendary 
Samarqand, Timur's one-time capital-then lost it. He went back to 
Farghana and took that again. But his enemies won it back. Then he con-
quered Samarqand a second time, this time with just 240 men-but could 
not hold it. By the time he was eighteen, Babur had gained and lost two 
kingdoms twice apiece and found himself on the run through the moun-
tains of Afghanistan with his mother and sisters and a few hundred fol-
lowers. For three years, he and his band roamed the wilds, looking for a 
new kingdom: kinging was all he knew, and king was the only job title he 
was seeking. 
I dare say any teenager who holds together a band of adult warriors 
over many years of homeless exile must have something going for him; and 
Babur was certainly an intimidating physical specimen. The stories say he 
could jump across a stream holding a full-grown man tucked under each 
arm. (They don't say what the full-grown men thought of this exercise.) 
Unlike most tough guys, however, Babur was sensitive, artistic, and ro-
mantic. He kept a diary throughout his adventures, and late in life penned 
an autobiography that became a classic of Turkish literature. After his 
grandson had it translated into the more prestigious Persian, the book 
achieved a high place in that canon as well. In his book, Babur reveals him-
self with extraordinary honesty. After a crucial military loss, for example, 
he tells us he could not help "crying a great deal." What kind of tough guy 
admits such a thing? Later he reports on his arranged marriage and his fail-
ure to work up any enthusiasm for his wife, despite his earnest efforts. He 
visits her only every week or two, he says, and then only because his 
mother nags at him. Then he falls in love-with a boy he sees in the 
bazaar. "In that frothing up of desire and passions and under the stress of 
youthful folly, I used to wander bare-headed, bare-footed, through street 

REBIRTH 
191 
and lane, orchard and vineyard; I showed civility neither to friend nor 
stranger, took no care for myself or others .... "7 Thus does the future em-
peror expose his vulnerable adolescent passions to us-and yet this is the 
fellow who has, twice already, conquered and lost Samarqand. 
In the course of his wandering, Babur and his band came over a rise in 
the hills and saw a charming city tucked into a crack of a valley below. 
Babur fell in love again, this time with Kabul. And Kabul, he tells us, re-
turned his affection: the citizens hated their own ruler and begged Babur 
to be their king instead. Does this sound like a conqueror's implausible 
propaganda? Maybe so, but I can tell you that Kabul's affection for Babur 
lingers to this day. The public gardens he built overlooking the city remain 
a favorite park, and his grave up there is still a beloved shrine. 
Babur was crowned king of Kabul in 1504, and now he had a base. He 
considered and rejected another attempt on Samarqand. He and his advis-
ers decided to head south, instead, as so many other Turko-Mongol con-
querors had done before. Babur entered India with ten thousand men and 
the sultan of Delhi met him on the plains of Panipat with one hundred 
thousand. Ten to one odds-the stuff of legends! What's more, the sultan 
had a thousand elephants, but Babur had an advantage too: firearms. The 
new technology trumped the old biology as Babur routed the sultan and 
took possession of Delhi. Like the Ottomans and the Safavids, the 
Moghuls overwhelmed their enemies because they were fighting spears and 
arrows with bullets and cannonballs. The third of the three great Muslim 
"gunpowder" empires was now on the map. 
The Moghuls, even more than the Safavids, benefited from a series of 
long-lived and brilliant rulers. Just six men saw the empire through its first 
two hundred years. Most were passionate, romantic, and artistic. At least 
three were military geniuses. One was a poor administrator, but his wife 
Nur Jahan ruled from behind the throne, and she was the fiery equal of the 
best Moghuls-a savvy businesswoman, a poet and patron of the arts, an 
extraordinary sportswoman, and one of the most cunning politicians of 
her age. 
Only one of the six was a dud, and that was Babur's son. It took this 
drunkard ten years to lose the entire empire his father had built. While he 
was on the run through the mountains of Afghanistan, however, his 
beloved wife gave birth to a boy who would become Akbar the Great, the 

192 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
most remarkable monarch of his age, a contemporary and equal of Eng-
land's Queen Elizabeth. His father managed to win his throne back just in 
time for Akbar to celebrate his twelfth birthday as a prince. Shortly after 
that, his father heard the call to prayer when he was standing at the top of 
a staircase in his library and had a sudden inspiration to reform his life. He 
hustled down to start living as a saint but on the way down tripped and 
broke his neck, which put his teenaged son on the throne. 
Akbar consolidated his grandfather's conquests, extended them, and set 
his whole empire in order. These achievements alone would have made 
him an important monarch, but Akbar was much more than a conqueror. 
Early on, he recognized his empire's key weakness: a small group of 
Muslims was attempting to rule a vast population of Hindus, whom Mus-
lims had been sacking, pillaging, looting, and killing since the days of Sul-
tan Mahmud the Ghaznavid, some five centuries earlier. Akbar attacked 
this flaw with a principle he called sulahkul, "universal tolerance." To prove 
his sincerity, he married a Hindu princess and declared her first son his heir. 
Akbar opened all government positions to Hindus on equal terms with 
Muslims. He abolished a punitive tax Muslim rulers of this region had 
long imposed on pilgrims visiting Hindu shrines. Akbar also eliminated 
the jizya, the Qur'anic tax on non-Muslims. He replaced both with a land 
tax that applied uniformly to all citizens, high and low. Virtually no other 
state in the world at this time taxed the nobility, but Akbar broke the 
mold. He also ordered his troops to protect the shrines and holy places of 
all religions, not just Islam. 
This great Moghul emperor abolished the standing military aristocracy 
on which his predecessors had depended and set up an administrative sys-
tem in which every official was appointed and could hold office for only a 
specified period, after which he had to move on to a new job in another 
place. Essentially, Akbar pioneered the concept of term limits, interrupting 
a process that had produced all too many troublemaking regional warlords 
in the past. 
Born and raised a Muslim, Akbar certainly considered himself a Mus-
lim monarch, but he was deeply curious about other religions. He called 
leading Hindus, Muslims, Christians, Jains, Zoroastrians, Buddhists, 
and others to his court to explain and debate their views while the em-
peror listened. Finally Akbar decided every religion had some truth in it 

REBIRTH 
193 
and no religion had the whole truth, so he decided to take the best from 
each and blend them into a single new religion he called Din-i Illahi, 
"the God Religion." The doctrines of this new religion included, first, 
that God was a single, all-powerful unity; second, that the universe was 
a single integrated whole reflecting its creator; third, that every person's 
first religious obligation was to do no harm to others; and fourth, that 
people could and should model themselves on Perfect Lives, of which 
many examples existed-Mohammed provided such a model, said 
Akbar, and so did the Shi'i imams. Akbar went on to suggest modestly 
that he himself provided yet another. 
Ablaze with fervor for his new religion, Akbar built a whole new city 
dedicated to it. Constructed of red sandstone, Fatehpur Sikri rose in the 
desert around the grave and shrine of Akbar's favorite Sufi mystic. The 
main building here was the private-audience hall, a single large room that 
had a high domed ceiling and only one element of furniture: a tall pillar 
connected by catwalks to balconies along the walls. Akbar sat atop this 
pillar. People who wanted to petition the emperor addressed him from 
the balconies. Courtiers and other interested parties listened from the 
floor below. 
It's a testament to Akbar's charm and majesty that no one revolted 
against him for trying to promulgate his new religion, but the religion did 
not take. It wasn't Muslim enough for Muslims or Hindu enough for Hin-
dus. Fatehpur Sikri didn't last, either: its water sources dried up and the 
city withered. 
But Akbar's ideas had not sprung full-blown out of nothing. Move-
ments to blend the best of Islam and Hinduism had been percolating on 
the subcontinent since Babur's days, with mysticism providing the point of 
intersection. In 1499, for example, a man named Nanak had a religious ex-
perience that led him to declare, "There is no Hindu, there is no Muslim." 
Although born Hindu, he reached toward Sufism and devoted his life to 
rejecting and repudiating the caste system. He launched a tradition of spir-
itual techniques transmitted directly from master to initiate, echoing both 
Hindu masters and Sufi saints. Guru Nanak's followers ended up calling 
themselves Sikhs, a new religion. 
A contemporary of Guru Nanak's, the illiterate poet Kabir, was born of 
a widowed Hindu mother but raised by a family of Muslim weavers. He 

194 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
began spouting lyrics celebrating love in a spirit that smacked of both Su-
fism and Hinduism, and scribes recorded his utterances. The lyrics have 
survived to this day. 
While folk mystics in Moghul India were producing passionate lyrics 
rooted in oral traditions, court poets were elaborating a complex meta-
physical style of Persian-language poetry. At the same time, Moghul artists 
were developing their own more robust version of the painted "Persian" 
miniatures and illuminated books. 
Moghul creativity reached its apogee in architecture, which managed to 
combine the solid majesty of Ottoman styles with the airy lightness of the 
Safavid. The fifth Moghul monarch Shah Jahan was himself a genius in 
this field. In his time, he was called the Just King, but few today remem-
ber his many political or military achievements: what they remember 
about him is his consuming love for his wife Mumtaz Mahal, "ornament 
of the palace," who died shortly after Shah Jahan began his reign. The 
grieving emperor devoted the next twenty years to building a mausoleum 
for her: the Taj Mahal. Often called the most beautiful building in the 
world, the Taj Mahal is a masterpiece as singular and universally famous as 
the Da Vinci's Mona Lisa or Michelangelo's Sistine Chapel. What's as-
tounding is that the artist responsible for this tour de force had a day job 
running an empire, for while many architects and designers contributed to 
the Taj Mahal, it was the emperor who oversaw every detail of its con-
struction: his was the master eye. 8 
Shah Jahan's son Aurangzeb, the last of the great Moghuls, had no artis-
tic leanings. Music, poetry, and painting left him cold. His passion was re-
ligion, and nothing irritated him more than the tradition of tolerance his 
family had pioneered in the subcontinent. Toward the end of his father's 
reign, he went to war with Shah Jahan and seized power. He had the old 
man clapped in a stone fortress, where the old emperor lived out his life in 
a one-room cell with a single window too high for him to see through. 
After his death, however, his jailers found a small mirror affixed to one 
wall. In that mirror, it turned out, from his bed, Shah Jahan could view the 
outside world and the only thing he could see out there through that one 
high window was the Taj Mahal. 
Restoring orthodox Islam to a position of privilege in the Moghul em-
pire was Aurangzeb's obsession. He was a military genius equal to his great 

REBIRTH 
195 
grandfather Akbar, and like Akbar he ruled for forty-nine years, so he had 
time and power to work deep changes in the subcontinent. 
The changes he sought and wrought were exactly the opposite of those 
promoted by his great-grandfather Akbar the Great. He reinstated the 
jizya. He reimposed special taxes on Hindus. He had his security forces de-
molish all new Hindu shrines. He expelled Hindus from government po-
sitions and went to war with the Rajputs, semiautonomous Hindu rulers 
in the south, in order to bring them more firmly under the power of his 
Moghul government and the Muslim clerical establishment, India's ulama. 
Aurangzeb also tried to exterminate the Sikhs. Guru Nanak had been a 
resolute pacifist, but Aurangzeb's persecution transformed the Sikhs into a 
warrior sect whose sacred ritual objects ever since have included a long, 
curved knife carried by every pious Sikh man. 
Even though the last of the Moghul titans was a grim zealot, this dy-
nasty cut a fiery swath through history, and at its peak, around the year 
1600, it was surely one of the world's three greatest and most powerful 
emptres. 
Indeed, in the year 1600, a traveler could sail from the islands of In-
donesia to Bengal, cross India, go over the Hindu Kush to the steppes 
north of the Oxus River and back down through Persia, Mesopotamia, 
and Asia Minor to the Balkans, and then back across or around the Black 
Sea through the Caucusus region and south through Arabia into Egypt 
and then west to Morocco, and always find himself in a generally familiar 
world permeated by a single coherent civilization-in much the same way 
that a modern traveler roaming from San Francisco to London and all 
across Europe would find himself in a generally familiar civilization with a 
German flavor here, a Swedish flavor there, a Spanish, British, or Dutch 
flavor somewhere else. 
Yes, that seventeenth-century traveler through the Muslim world would 
encounter diverse local customs and come across a variety of languages, 
and yes, he would cross borders and present paperwork to officials work-
ing for different sovereign powers, but everywhere he went, he would find 
certain common elements as well. 
In all three of the great Muslim empires and their satellite regions, for 
example, he would find that Turks generally held political and military 
power. (Even in Safavid Persia, the ruling family was actually ethnically 

196 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
THE THREE ISLAMIC EMPiRES OF THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY 
Turkish and so were many of the Qizilbash.) Throughout this world, the 
traveler would find that the educated literati tended to know Persian and 
the classic literature written in that language. Everywhere, he would hear 
the azan, the call to prayer, chanted in Arabic at certain times of day from 
numerous minarets, and he would hear Arabic again whenever people per-
formed religious rites of any kind. 
Everywhere he went, not just in the three empires but in the outlying 
frontier zones such as Indonesia and Morocco, society would be perme-
ated with a web of rules and recommendations that shaded up into law 
and down into the practices and rituals of everyday life with no border 
between the two. And every society would have its ulama, that powerful, 
self-regenerating, unelected class of scholars, and they would have an in-
fluential grip on daily life. Everywhere, the traveler would come across 
Sufism and Sufi orders as well. Merchants and traders would have an ele-
vated status, but it would be lower than that of bureaucrats and officials 
connected to the court, itself a distinct and significant class in society. 
Passing through the public realm, the traveler would see very few 
women. Throughout this world stretching from Indonesia to Morocco, he 

REBIRTH 
197 
would have found society divided to a greater or lesser extent into public 
and private realms, and women would have been sequestered in the private 
world, while men exercised near total possession of the public realm. 
What women the traveler did see in the public world-shopping, for 
example, or going from one house to another on a visit-would probably 
have a garment of some kind at least obscuring and perhaps covering their 
faces. If he saw women with uncovered faces, he would know that they be-
longed to the lower classes: they might be peasants, for example, or ser-
vants, or laborers of some kind. Whatever the women might be wearing, it 
would not expose their arms, legs, or cleavage, and they would wear a head 
covering of some kind. 
Men's clothing styles would differ from place to place, but everywhere 
the traveler went, men's heads, too, would be covered, their garments 
would be loose rather than form fitting, and they would wear something 
that would not permit their crotches to show when they prostrated them-
selves in the prayer ritual. 
Throughout this world, calligraphy would have prestige as an art form, 
representational (as opposed to abstract and decorative} art would be rare 
except in illuminated books, and the spoken and written word would be 
honored. 
Every city the traveler passed through would be like a collection of vil-
lages without many big through-streets; none would be set up on the 
checkerboard pattern of Hellenic cities. Every neighborhood would have 
its own bazaar, every city its spectacular mosques, and the mosques would 
always feature domes and minarets and would very commonly be deco-
rated with glazed mosaic tiles. 
If the traveler struck up a conversation with some stranger in this 
world, he would find that he and this stranger shared certain mythological 
references: both would know the leading personalities of the Abrahamic 
tradition-Adam, David, Moses, Noah, and so on; both would also know 
not just all about Mohammed but also Abu Bakr, Omar, Ali and Othman, 
and they would have impressions of and opinions about these personali-
ties. They would share knowledge of major events in history as well; they 
would know, for example, about the Abbasids and the Golden Age over 
which they presumably presided, and they would know about the Mon-
gols and the devastation they wrought. 

198 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
In 1600, in fact, ordinary folks anywhere in this world would have as-
sumed that the Muslim empires and their adjacent frontier territories 
were in fact "the world." Or, to quote University of Chicago historian 
Marshall Hodgson, "In the sixteenth century of our era, a visitor from 
Mars might well have supposed that the human world was on the verge of 
becoming Muslim."9 
The Martian would have been mistaken, of course; the course of his-
tory had already tipped, because of developments in Europe since the 
Crusades. 

II 
~ 
Meanwhile 1n Europe 
689-1008AH 
1291-1600 CE 
T
HE LAST CRUSADERS fled the Islamic world in 1291, driven OUt by 
Egypt's mamluks, but in Europe residues of the Crusades persisted for 
years to come. Some of the blowback came from those military religious or-
ders spawned by the Church of Rome. The Templars, for example, became 
influential international bankers. The Knights Hospitaller took over the is-
land of Rhodes, then moved their headquarters to Malta, from which place 
they operated more or less as pirates, looting Muslim shipping in the 
Mediterranean. The Teutonic Knights actually conquered enough of Prus-
sia to establish a state that lasted into the fifteenth century. 
Meanwhile, Europeans kept trying to launch new campaigns into the 
Muslim world too, but these were ever more feeble, and some dissipated 
along the way, while others veered off on tangents. The so-called Northern 
Crusade ended up targeting the pagan Slavs of the Baltic region. Many lit-
tle wars against "heretical" sects within Europe, whipped up by the pope 
and conducted by this or that monarch, were also labeled "crusades." In 
France, for example, there was a long "crusade" against a Christian sect 
called the Albigensians. Then there was Iberia, where Christians kept on 
crusading until 1492, when they overran Granada finally and drove the 
last of the Muslims out of the peninsula. 
199 

200 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
The crusading spirit persisted in part because over the course of the real 
crusades, a new motivation had entered the drive to the east: an appetite 
for trade goods coming from places like India and the islands beyond 
them, which Europeans called the Indies. One of many desirable goods to 
be found in India was an amazing product called sugar. From Malaysia and 
Indonesia came pepper, nutmeg, and many other spices. Chefs of the High 
Middle Ages put spices in everything they cooked--often the same spices 
in savories and desserts; they just liked spicesP 
The trouble was, the Crusades stoked an appetite for the goods but also 
separated European merchants from those goods by creating a belt of anti-
Christian hostility that stretched from Egypt to Azerbaijan. European busi-
nessmen couldn't get past that wall to trade directly with the source: they had 
to deal with Muslim middleman. It's true that Marco Polo traveled to China 
in this period, but he and his group were just one anomalous band, and Eu-
ropeans were amazed that they had made it all the way there and back. Most, 
in fact, didn't believe he had really done it: they called Marco Polo's book 
about his adventures "The Millions," referring to the number of lies they 
thought he had packed into it. Muslims owned the eastern shores of the 
Black Sea, they owned the Caucasus mountains, they owned the Caspian 
coastline. They possessed the Red Sea and all approaches to it. Europeans 
were forced to get the products of India and the Indies from Muslim mer-
chants in Syria and Egypt, who no doubt jacked the prices up as high as the 
market would bear, especially for their European Christian customers, given 
the ill will from all that happened during the Crusades, not to mention the 
fact that the Farangi Christians had aligned themselves with the Mongols. 
What were western Europeans traders to do? 
This is where the crusading spirit bled into the exploring impulse. 
Muslims straddled the tangle of the land routes that connected the world's 
important ancient markets, but over the centuries, unnoticed by Muslim 
potentates and peoples, western Europeans had been developing tremen-
dous seafaring prowess. For one thing, Europeans of the post-Crusades era 
included Vikings, those invading mariners from the north who were so 
good at seafaring, they had even crossed the North Atlantic to Greenland 
in their dragon boats. One wave invaded England where the word North-
men slurred into Norman. A few of these then moved to the coast of 
France, where the region they inhabited came to be known as Normandy. 

~ North 
·~
Sea 
Atlantic 
Ocean 
MEANWHILE IN EUROPE 
Indian 
Ocean 
THE EUROPEAN QUEST FOR A SEA ROUTE TO THE INDIES 
201 
But it wasn't just the Vikings. Everyone who sailed regularly between 
Scandinavia and southern Europe had to develop rugged ships and learn 
how to manage them in the big storms and high seas of the North At-
lantic; western Europeans, therefore, ended up very much at home on the 
water. With such accomplished mariners amongst their subjects, some am-
bitious monarchs began to dream of finding a way to skirt the whole land 
mass between Europe and east Asia and with it the whole Muslim prob-
lem: in short, they got interested in finding a way to get to India and the 
islands further east entirely by sea. 
One aristocrat who poured serious support into this enterprise was 
Prince Henry of Portugal (called "Henry the Navigator" even though he 
never went on any of the expeditions he sponsored). Prince Henry was 
closely connected to the king of Portugal, but more important, he was one 
of the richest men in western Europe. He funded sea captains to sail south 
along the coast of Africa looking for a way around it. Henry's letters and 
proclamations show that he originally saw himself as a crusader, out to 
prove himself a great Christian monarch by scoring victories against the 
Moors and finding new souls to save for the one true faith. 2 

202 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Many of the new souls his sailors found were living in black-skinned 
bodies and had commercial value as slaves, it turned out, and Prince 
Henry the Navigator morphed into Prince Henry the Slave Trader. In 
addition to slaves, as the Portuguese made their way south, they found 
all sorts of other marketable commodities such as gold dust, salt, ostrich 
eggs, fish oil-the list goes on and on. The constant discovery of new 
trade goods infused the crusader's dream with an economic motive, and 
the Crusades gave way to what Europeans call the Age of Discovery. Per-
haps the most dramatic discovery occurred in 1492, when Christopher 
Columbus sailed across the Atlantic, looking for a route to India, and 
stumbled across the Americas. His voyage was funded by Ferdinand and 
Isabella, the Christian monarchs who completed the Crusade against the 
Muslims of Iberia and founded a single, unified, Christian kingdom of 
Spain. 
When Columbus landed on the Caribbean island of Hispaniola, he fa-
mously believed he had reached the Indies. Mter his mistake became 
known, the islands east of India were called the East Indies, and these is-
lands in the Caribbean the West Indies. Most Muslims were only vaguely 
aware of this momentous discovery. Ottoman sources mention Colum-
bus's voyage in passing, although by the 1570s, a few Ottoman cartogra-
phers were creating fairly accurate maps of the world showing the two 
Americas right where they are in fact located. By then, Spain had built the 
rudiments of a new empire in Mexico and the English, French, and others 
had planted settlements further north. 
Meanwhile, at the eastern end of the Middle World, Muslims had al-
ready discovered what the Europeans were originally seeking: Muslim 
traders had been sailing to Malaysia and Indonesia for centuries. Many 
Muslim traders who plied these waters belonged to Sufi orders, and 
through them Islam had taken root in the {east) Indies long before the first 
Europeans arrived. 
Even before the Portuguese, Spaniards, English, Dutch, and other 
northern Europeans caught the exploring fever, southern Europeans were 
already making their clout known at sea, for their civilization had emerged 
out of seafaring, and their sailing prowess went back to the Romans, the 
Greeks, the Mycenaeans before them, and the Cretans and Phoenicians be-
fore that. 

MEANWHILE IN EUROPE 
203 
By the fourteenth century CE, the Genovese and the Venetians were 
competing for the Mediterranean trade in some of the biggest, sturdiest 
fleets around, and on the water, these Italians could fight. Venetians did 
vigorous business in Constantinople, and after the Ottomans took over 
they boldly opened commercial offices at Istanbul. 
The Mediterranean trade drew tremendous wealth into Italy and 
spawned booming city-states, not just Venice and Genoa, but also Flo-
rence, Milan, and others. Here in Italy, money supplanted land as the chief 
marker of wealth and status. Merchants became the new power elite; fam-
ilies like the Medicis of Florence and the Sforzas of Milan supplanted the 
old military aristocracy of feudal landowners. All the money, all that en-
trepreneurial energy, all that urban diversity, all those sovereign entities in 
such close proximity competing for grandeur, eminence, and reputation 
generated a dynamism unprecedented in history. Any talented artist or 
craftsman with a skill to sell could have a field day in the Italy of this era 
because he could get so many patrons bidding against one another for his 
services. Dukes and cardinals and even the pope competed to lure artists 
such as Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci to their courts because their 
works were not only beautiful but represented great status symbols. Italy 
began to overflow with the art, invention, creativity, and achievement that 
was later labeled "the Italian Renaissance." 
Books, meanwhile, were coming back into fashion. During the Dark 
Ages, hardly anyone in Europe knew how to read except clerics, and cler-
ics learned the skill just to read the Bible and conduct services. Among 
Germanic Christians, in Charlemagne's time for example, clerics revered 
Latin, the language in which Christian services were performed, because 
they thought of it as the language God spoke. They worried that if their 
Latin deteriorated, God would not understand their prayers, so they pre-
served and studied a few ancient books written by pagans such as Cicero 
purely as an aid to mastering the grammar and structure and pronuncia-
tion of the old tongue. They wanted to ensure that they would be able to 
continue sounding out syllables that would reach God. When reading 
writers such as Cicero, they tried assiduously to ignore what they were say-
ing and focus only on their style so as not to be contaminated by their 
pagan sensibilities. Their efforts to preserve Latin petrified it into a dead 
language suitable only for ritual and incantatory purposes, incapable of 

204 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
serving as a vehicle for discussion and thought.3 Nonetheless, their rever-
ence for books as artifacts meant that some churches and monasteries kept 
books tucked away in basements and back rooms. 
Then, in the twelfth century, Christian scholars visiting Muslim An-
dalusia stumbled across Latin translations of Arabic translations of Greek 
texts by thinkers such as Aristotle and Plato. Most of these works were gen-
erated in Toledo, where a bustling translation industry had developed. 
From Toledo, the books filtered into western Europe proper, finding their 
way at last into church and monastery libraries. 
The Arabic works found in Andalusia included a great deal of com-
mentary by Muslim philosophers such as Ibn Sina (Avicenna to the Euro-
peans) and Ibn Rushd (Averroes). Their writings focused on reconciling 
Greek philosophy with Muslim revelations. Christians took no interest in 
that achievement, so they stripped away whatever Muslims had added to 
Aristotle and the others and set to work exploring how Greek philosophy 
could be reconciled with Christian revelations. Out of this struggle carne 
the epic "scholastic" philosophies of thinkers such as Thomas Aquinas, 
Duns Scotus, and others. The Muslim connection to the ancient Greek 
works was erased from European cultural memory. 
European scholars began gravitating to monasteries that had libraries be-
cause the books were there. Then, would-be students began gravitating to 
monasteries with libraries because the scholars were there. While pursuing 
their studies, penniless scholars eked out a living teaching classes. Learning 
communities formed around the monasteries and these ripened into Eu-
rope's first universities. One of the earliest emerged around Notre Dame 
cathedral in Paris. Another very early learning community became the Uni-
versity of Naples. Then a university developed at Oxford, England. When a 
fight broke out among the scholars there, the dissident group migrated to 
Cambridge in a huff and started a learning community of its own. 
The scholars in these proto universities carne to realize that most would-
be students didn't know enough to even begin studying, so they developed 
a set of standard courses designed to get students ready to begin, courses in 
rhetoric, grammar, logic, and arithmetic, for example, that were designed 
to teach students merely how to read, write, and think. Students who suc-
cessfully completed this basic course were called baccalaureates, Latin for 
"beginners"; now they could begin to learn some actual subject such as the-

MEANWHILE IN EUROPE 
205 
ology, philosophy, medicine, or law. Today, of course, the baccalaureate is 
the degree one gets for graduating from a four-year liberal arts college. 
As wealth accumulated in Europe, a few people were able to spend all 
their time studying, reading, writing, and making art. With Greek thought 
back in the mix, a set of new ideas filtered into the imagination of learned 
Europeans. The Greeks had said, "Man is the measure of all things," and 
their pagan pantheon had represented "God" as a collection of deities with 
human personalities who interacted with one another and with humanity 
in dramatic ways. The Greeks had taken a penetrating interest in the nat-
ural world and the human here-and-now. They had made great strides in 
discerning patterns among natural events as a first step toward explaining 
them. People who read and discussed the ancient Greek texts got inter-
ested, therefore, in unraveling the mysteries of life on earth, an orientation 
quite at odds with the attitudes fostered by the church since the fall of 
Rome, for in the Christendom of the Middle Ages, the prevailing doctrine 
declared the material world to be evil. The only point of being here was to 
get out of here, and so the only subject worth studying was the hereafter 
and the only texts worth consulting were the scriptures and scriptural 
commentaries. The new humanists did not think of themselves as com-
peting with Christianity; they were hardly godless atheists; but Church of-
ficials saw a threat in the new forms of thought. They could feel where all 
this was going. 
Christianity grew within the framework of a dying Rome. It developed 
a hierarchy that resembled and shadowed the administrative hierarchy of 
Rome. As the imperial structure crumbled, the Christian structure took its 
place by default, becoming the framework that continued to support civi-
lized life. The Byzantine emperor, always the head of the imperial hierar-
chy, automatically evolved into the head of this Christian hierarchy. The 
various bishops were subservient to him as the head of the Church, just as 
the governors had been (and were still) subservient to him as the head of 
the empire. The doctrines of the Christian religion were formulated by 
bishops at councils convened by the emperor and updated periodically at 
similar councils, with the emperor always having the final say. 
So closely did Christianity intertwine with Rome that when the empire 
split in two, the church divided too. In the east, the emperor remained the 
head of the church. In the west, the very title of "emperor" dropped out of 

206 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
existence. Politically, the continent fragmented into small realms ruled, es-
sentially, by warlords. In this context, the Church emerged as the single 
source of cultural coherence and unity in western Europe, the cultural 
medium through which people who spoke different languages and served 
different sovereigns could still interact or travel through one another's 
realms. To serve this function, the doctrines of the Church had to be uni-
form, universally understood, and universally accepted, so the Church de-
veloped a ferocious propensity for spotting and stamping out heresies. 
By the time of the Crusades, church officials in western Europe were 
regularly executing heretics-anyone whose publicly stated convictions de-
parted from the prevailing doctrine-by tying them to stakes and lighting 
bonfires under them. 
As the Church tightened its grip on daily life, the bishop of Rome be-
came the preeminent figure in western Europe. People called him il pape, 
the pope, because they considered him the "father" of the Christian com-
munity. In the east, the patriarch of Constantinople was the leading reli-
gious figure, but there were many patriarchs and he was only the first 
among equals. In the west, the pope acquired an authority transcending 
that of all other bishops. Around the time of the Crusades, Catholics 
began to propound the doctrine that the pope was infallible. 
Meanwhile, the church was extending its reach across the continent 
and down into every cranny. Every rural village, every town, every neigh-
borhood in every city had its parish priest and its local church and every 
priest was administering exactly the same rites in the same way and in the 
same language. The hierarchy became fully rationalized and embedded: 
every priest answered to a higher bishop, every bishop to an archbishop, 
archbishops to cardinals, and cardinals to the pope. 
But then, as the Crusades died away, this hegemony began to crack. 
Here and there, reformers began to question the authority of the church. 
In the late fourteenth century, an Oxford professor named John Wycliffe 
shocked church officials by translating the Bible into that most vulgar of 
languages, common English. And why? So that common, ordinary folks 
could read and understand what the Bible said for themselves. Church 
officials couldn't fathom why ordinary folks would need to understand 
the Bible for themselves when they had priests to do the understanding 
for them. 

MEANWHILE IN EUROPE 
207 
Wycliffe went further. He suggested that clerics should all be poor, like 
the apostles, and that land should be taken away from churches and monas-
teries and put to secular uses, which offended the church deeply. Wycliffe 
had powerful political protectors, so he managed to live out his natural life 
span, but four decades after his death, a pope had his bones dug up, crushed 
into powder, and scattered over a river: the rage, it seemed, persisted. 
It persisted in part because Wycliffe's ideas would not die out. In the 
generation after his, for example, the Bohemian priest Johann Huss em-
braced Wycliffe's idea that all people had a right to a Bible in their own 
language. He commenced a great translation project. When church offi-
cials quoted canon law at him to show that his actions were wrong, he 
quoted scripture back at them and declared that the Bible trumped church 
councils. This was too much. The church arrested Huss and burnt him at 
the stake in a fire fueled with copies of the vulgate Bibles he had been pro-
moting. In short, Christianity did to its first reformers what Islam had 
done to the proto-Sufi Hallaj. 
Killing reformers, however, could not kill the hunger for reform. 
Wycliffe, Huss, and others of their ilk had scratched through to something 
smoldering dangerously among the people: an unrequited desire for real 
religious experience. 
The bureaucratization of religion had made the church powerful and 
given Europe cultural unity, but the religious bureaucracy eventually 
couldn't deliver the core experience that was its raison d' etre. German the-
ology professor Martin Luther put his finger most precisely on the dys-
function. Luther was a man tormented by guilt. No matter what he did, he 
felt like a sinner headed for hell. The Christian rites were supposed to alle-
viate this guilt by washing him clean of sin, but for Luther the rites weren't 
working. He tried everything-fasting, self-flagellation, daily communion, 
endless penances, but at the end of it all, when the priest told him he was 
pure now, Luther didn't believe him. He had only to look into his heart to 
see that he was still impure. He knew because he still felt the guilt. 
Then one day, a great insight hit Luther. He could not have salvation 
until he believed himself saved. If he lacked this belief, it didn't matter 
what the priest said or did. If he had this belief, it didn't matter what the 
priest said or did. Which raised a big, big question: of what use was the 
priest? Why was he even in the mix? 

208 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
In fact, the conviction gripped Luther that salvation could not be 
earned, like a pension. It was a gift, which could only be received, and then 
only through faith, an inner process, never through "works," external 
deeds and doings. 
Armed with this insight, Luther looked around and saw a world full of 
people pursuing salvation through "works," and to make it all worse, 
works prescribed by a vast, wealthy, well-organized bureaucracy, the 
Church of Rome. It filled him with horror, for if his insight was true, all 
these "works" were for naught! 
Of all the "works" prescribed by the Church, the one that most alarmed 
and offended Luther was the granting of indulgences. An indulgence was 
a remission of punishment for certain sins, which the Church proclaimed 
itself empowered to give, in exchange for good and valuable considera-
tions. The practice went back to the Crusades, when the pope offered in-
dulgences to those who signed up to fight the heathen Turk. Later, as 
crusading opportunities faded out, the Church began to grant indulgences 
in exchange for cash contributions. Given the petty corruption that in-
evitably infests any far-flung bureaucratic system, some clerics here and 
there-let's face it-probably handed out indulgences in exchange for cash 
contributions to, well, themselves. Any way you look at it, by Martin 
Luther's time, the whole practice of granting indulgences had come to 
mean that people could supposedly buy their way out of purgatory and 
fast-track their way into heaven. 
Making people pay to get into heaven was bad enough. But to Luther 
the practice smacked of something worse. If salvation was a direct, per-
sonal interaction between each individual and God, then the Church was 
extorting bribes to let people through a gate they had no actual power to 
open or keep shut. It wasn't just corruption. It was thievery and deception 
of the worst sort! 
On Halloween night, 1517, Luther nailed an inflammatory document 
to the door of a church in Wittenberg in which he set forth ninety-five 
"theses," ninety-five objections to the Church and its doings. Luther's paper 
was an overnight sensation, and it sparked the Protestant Reformation. 
The Protestant Reformation was no single thing. Once Luther opened 
the gates, the passion spread in numerous directions with numerous re-
formers launching separate movements and many new sects springing up, 

MEANWHILE IN EUROPE 
209 
each with its own idiosyncratic creed; but generally they had four tenets in 
common: 
• Salvation could be a palpable, right-here/right-now experience. 
• Salvation could be achieved through faith alone. 
• No person needed an intermediary to connect with God. 
• People could get everything they needed to know about religion 
from the Bible; they didn't need to know Latin or the conclusions 
of church councils or the pronouncements of priests and scholars. 
In some ways, the Protestant Reformation carne out of the same sorts 
of dissatisfactions and hungers that had given birth to Sufism. In the West, 
however, no Ghazali appeared to synthesize orthodox dogmas with the 
quest for personal religious breakthrough. 
In other regards, the Protestant Reformation resembled the movements 
of Ibn Hanbal and Ibn Taymiyah-the exact opposite of Sufism. Like 
those Muslim theologians, Protestant reformers sought to delegitimize all 
later accretions of doctrine and go back to the original source: the Bible. 
The Book. 
But ultimately, the Protestant Reformation was nothing like anything 
that had happened in Islam. Protestant Reformers rebelled against the 
Church and the pope, but in Islam, there was no church or pope to rebel 
against. In the West, the religious reformers who broke the hegemony of 
the Catholic Church didn't do so to raise up some monolithic new church 
but to empower the individual. Such a quest in no way pitted them against 
Christianity itself, because Christianity was inherently about the individual: 
a plan for the salvation of each person. Islam, however, was a plan for how 
a community should work; any reform movement that sought to secure for 
each individual the right to practice the religion as he or she thought best 
would inherently go up against the core doctrines of Islam itsel£ 
By empowering the individual, the Protestant Reformation had conse-
quences that went far beyond religion. At some level, breaking the hold of 
"the Church" amounted to breaking the hold of any church. It's true that 
the Protestant reformers of the sixteenth and seventeenth century were 
talking only about religious strivings, and it's true that each sect had a 
pretty definite and limited idea of a person's proper relationship to God. 

210 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Probably none of the reformers thought they were encouraging people to 
think outside the box on matters of faith. And yet, calling the quest for sal-
vation the province of the individual legitimized the authority of each in-
dividual to think what he or she wanted about God, no matter what the 
reformers intended. And legitimizing the authority of individuals to think 
what they wanted about God implicitly legitimized their authority to 
think what they wanted about anything. 
It was this aspect of the Reformation that cross-fertilized with the Eu-
ropean rediscovery of ancient Greek thought, the renewal of interest in 
pagan Latin writers, and the trickling influence of Arab thinkers. Individ-
uals who felt they could seek salvation on their own terms were naturally 
going to speculate freely on the nature of God and the world and with all 
these interesting ideas floating around, some people inevitably were going 
to start playing with new ways to put together the pieces of the puzzle they 
saw around them. 
If the Church had still been ubiquitous and all-powerful, every idea 
would have required that an addendum be accounted for: how does it re-
late to the faith? If one were thinking, "I wonder why everything falls 
down instead of up," the voice of the church inside one's conscience would 
immediately ask, "and how will the explanation help me to be a better 
Christian?" There's only so far and so fast a mind can roam if it's dragging 
around this baggage all the time. 
Liberated from this baggage, Copernicus could posit that the Earth 
went around the sun. This simple and daring hypothesis explained every-
thing about the motion of the stars and planets except for why God would 
make the universe revolve around something other than His most precious 
creation. If you didn't have to deal with that second part, you could much 
more easily work out an answer to the first part. A lot of nature's puzzles 
were like that: they became much easier to explain if you didn't have to 
square your explanation with the dictates of the faith. 
For most thinkers, this didn't mean contradicting the faith; it just 
meant that faith was one thing and explaining nature was another: they 
were two separate fields of inquiry and never did the twain have to meet. 
Separating inquiries about nature from the framework of faith enabled Eu-
ropeans to come up with a dazzling array of scientific concepts and dis-
coveries in the two centuries following the Reformation. 

MEANWHILE IN EUROPE 
211 
Francis Bacon and Rene Descartes, for example, overturned the Aris-
totelian method of inquiry and elaborated the scientific method in its 
stead. They and others also helped establish the mechanistic model of the 
universe, which held that every physical event had a purely physical cause. 
Galileo, Descartes, and others went on to dismantle the Aristotelian idea 
that everything is made earth, air, water, and fire, replacing it with the 
atomic theory of matter, which laid the basis for modern chemistry. 
Andreas Vesalius mapped the anatomy of the human body for the first 
time, and William Harvey discovered the circulation of blood. Together, 
they and others laid the basis for modern medicine. Antonie Van 
Leeuwenhoek discovered the world of microorganisms, which eventually 
led to Pasteur's powerful germ theory of disease. 
Robert Boyle began the process that led to formulating the four laws 
of thermodynamics, just four laws that govern the transformation of en-
ergy into work in any system from a rabbit's digestive tract to the birth of 
the universe. 
And let us not forget to mention the greatest scientist of them all, Isaac 
Newton, who invented differential calculus, explained the motion of all 
objects in the universe from pebbles to planets with three simple formulas, 
and discovered the laws of gravitation, thereby definitively explaining the 
motion of all heavenly bodies, the work begun by Copernicus and Galileo. 
Just for a capper, he described the particle nature of light and discovered 
the spectrum. No scientist had ever done so much and none has equaled 
his achievements since. It's ironic, therefore, that he himself felt his proud-
est accomplishment was remaining celibate all his life. 
But here's the really interesting mystery to think about. Muslim scien-
tists had come right to the threshold of virtually all these discoveries long 
before the West arrived there. In the tenth century, for example, al-Razi re-
futed Galen's theory of four humors as a basis for medical treatment. In the 
eleventh century, Ibn Sina analyzed motion mathematically, as Newton 
was to do so fruitfully six centuries later. In the thirteenth century, about 
three hundred years before Vesalius, Ibn al-Nafis described how blood cir-
culated in the body. Ibn al-Haytham, who died in 1039, discovered the 
spectrum, described the scientific method, and established quantification 
and experiment as the basis for scientific exploration: he pretty much pre-
Newtoned Newton and pre-Descarted Descartes. Muslims had already 

212 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
elaborated the atomic view of matter, which they took from Indian scien-
tists, and some had elaborated the mechanistic model of the universe, 
which they had gotten from the Chinese. 
The momentous thing was not so much the discoveries themselves as 
the fact that in the West they persisted, they accumulated, and they rein-
forced one another until they brought about a complete and coherent new 
way to view and approach the world, the scientific view, which enabled the 
West's later explosive advances in technology. Why did all this happen in 
the West but not in the East? 
Possibly because Muslims made their great scientific discoveries just as 
their social order started crumbling, whereas the West made its great scien-
tific discoveries just as its long-crumbled social order was starting to recover 
and in the wake of a religious reformation that broke the grip of church 
dogma on human thought, empowering individuals to speculate freely. 
The Protestant Reformation was thus a key to the resurgence of Eu-
rope. But the Reformation also intertwined with another European devel-
opment of tremendous consequence, the emergence of the nation-state as 
a form of political organization. The two were intertwined because when 
Luther and the others defied the Church, they took refuge with one or an-
other of the monarchs of Europe, monarchs who had variously been strug-
gling with the pope for some time now over who had final power in any 
given locale, the religious establishment or the secular one. The Reforma-
tion triggered an outburst of violence throughout Europe that ended with 
the Peace of Augsburg (1555). There the contending forces agreed on a 
landmark principle: that each monarch would have the authority to say 
whether his state, big or little, would stay with the Church of Rome or 
adopt one of the new Christian sects. Augsburg was only a ceasefire, it 
turned out. The pressure burst out again as the Thirty Years' War, a kind 
of civil war that raged all over Europe, basically over the issue of which re-
ligion was to prevail. When the conflict wound down finally, and a treaty 
was signed at Westphalia, in 1648, the principle established at Augsburg 
was confirmed. So along with empowering individualism, the Reforma-
tion ended up dismantling a Europe-wide ideology in favor of a system in 
which church and state reinforced each other to promote nationalism. 
Some of the first germs of nation-states formed in England and France, 
whose monarchs had fought the sporadic Hundred Years' War from 1337 

MEANWHILE IN EUROPE 
213 
to 1453. It wasn't actually one continuous war, of course, but a series of 
campaigns interrupted by periods of peace. Before the war, there really was 
no such thing as "England" and "France." There was just territory, con-
trolled by various nobles, who had various affiliations with other nobles. 
Empires, such as that of the medieval Carolingians, had been collections of 
territories. Being the emperor of these territories meant possessing the 
right and power to collect taxes there and draft soldiers from among its 
people. Emperors could mix and match and shuffle their collections of ter-
ritory, trading or fighting over patches with other monarchs the way chil-
dren fight over toys or exchange baseball cards. The people of two 
territories owned by the same emperor did not feel any sense of common 
peoplehood on that account. They weren't united in a feeling of kinship 
just because they both belonged to Charles the Bald. 
A sense of shared peoplehood did, however, begin to develop over the 
course of the Hundred Years' War. For one thing, it became more dis-
tinctly the case that people in France spoke French and people in England 
spoke English. The French began to feel ever more united with others who 
spoke their language and lived in the same invaded territory and ever more 
distinct from the English-speaking armies who kept coming amongst 
them. Meanwhile, English soldiers, thrown together with one another over 
long campaigns that might recapitulate a campaign their fathers had been 
on, and which their sons might go on, felt ever more united with each 
other in a team-spirit kind of way. Over this period the "king" developed 
into something more than just the biggest nobleman: the idea of"king" as 
embodiment of "nation" began to form. 
The Hundred Years' War began as a war between big-shot nobles and 
their knights, with yeomen who carne along to carry the baggage and some-
times shoot their silly bows at other yeoman, those arrows being completely 
ineffectual against the real warriors, the men in metal suits. Partway through 
the Hundred Years' War, however, the English longbow was invented, a bow 
that could shoot harder and further than previous bows and whose arrows 
could pierce armor. Suddenly, a team of archers standing far behind the 
lines, could bring down a row of knights before they even got off their lists. 
From that moment on, knights no longer determined the outcomes of 
battles, which meant that knights were obsolete. Feudal political organiza-
tions consisted of networks of personal connections. As feudalism faded, 

214 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
people who controlled money could organize large impersonal forces for 
war and eventually for work too. On the one hand, this transformed the 
king as a power figure in his country: he was the one person best situated 
to organize funding for large-scale military campaigns. But on the other 
hand, kings had to organize their fundraising through their nobles. In 
England, the organization of nobles whom the king had to call together to 
ratify a new military campaign was called "parliament." The English 
monarch's dependence on parliament to legitimize taxation eventually led 
to the development of democratic institutions in England-but that was 
still far down the line. In 1400, the transcendent grandeur of a king was 
big news all by itsel£ 
Before nation-states emerged, the strongest forms of political organiza-
tion were loose collections of territory with quasi-independent authority 
vested in many figures, at many levels. The overall leader had to operate 
through many intermediaries. Any order he gave was likely to be modified 
by every authority figure through whom it passed, not to mention dis-
torted as it was translated into various languages, not to mention altered as 
it was made to fit local customs, not to mention lost entirely as people at 
the final, most local levels forgot (or refused) to pass it on. The greatest 
roar of the greatest emperor was likely to dissipate into a faint noise by the 
time it reached the smallest villages in the most outlying provinces. But in 
a nation-state, where everyone spoke more or less the same language, 
where a single network of officials administered the rules from top to bot-
tom, where everyone was more or less on the same page, the king's policies 
traveled without much distortion to every cranny and corner of his realm. 
That's not to say that England or France was that kind of nation-state 
in 1350 or 1400, but both were heading that way, and so were some of the 
principalities in northern Europe. The emergence of the nation-state en-
abled a single coherent government to set policies that affected all aspects 
of the lives of all the people living in its realm of control, people who still 
thought of themselves as subjects but were on their way to becoming citi-
zens. So later, when the West went east, it was a case of nation-states, hard 
and sharp as knives, cutting into empires, loose and soft as bread. 
The European quest for a sea route to the Indies, a direct aftermath of 
the Crusades, carne to a head just as nation-states were emerging in Europe, 
just as the Protestant Reformation was turning the individual into a major 

MEANWHILE IN EUROPE 
215 
actor on the historical stage, and just as the synergy between individualism 
and resurgent classical learning was giving rise to modern science. 
In 1488, the Portuguese explorer Bartholomew Diaz rounded the Cape 
of Good Hope, proving at last that a ship could sail from the Atlantic 
Coast to the Indian Ocean. A stream of traffic followed his route. In 1492, 
Christopher Columbus sailed west across the Atlantic and discovered two 
big continents hitherto unknown to Europeans. A stream of traffic was 
soon going back and forth to the Americas. 
Because Spain financed Columbus, Spain got first crack at the wealth 
of the Americas. This good fortune made Spain the richest nation in Eu-
rope for a while. Spain sucked so much gold out of the Americas, and 
spent it so freely at home, that the European gold market crashed. Ironi-
cally, that crash destroyed the Spanish economy, and Spain ended up as 
one of the poorest European nations. 
The gold of the Americas, however, also washed through the whole 
economy of Europe. This happened just around the time that western Eu-
rope was firming up into nation-states, and nation-states have such coher-
ence that they tend to operate as if they were individual persons. Before 
the nation-state emerged, it wasn't possible for some guy in England to 
hope that "England" would get richer, and to take personal satisfaction 
and pride in this happening. He might want wealth to flow to his area; he 
might want his town to get richer, or his family, or even his king, but Eng-
land? What was England? Now, however, in areas where the people 
thought of themselves collectively as "a nation" it was easy and inevitable 
for people to think in terms of policies that would benefit the nation. One 
such policy was mercantilism. 
Mercantilism was quite a simple concept, really. It was based on the 
notion that the economy of nations was like that of individual people. An 
individual person who earns a lot of money and spends very little be-
comes rich: guaranteed. For any individual person, the most desirable 
form that (incoming) money can take is gold. Accumulate lots of gold 
and you're set. So people in western Europe easily fell into thinking that 
the wealth of their nations depended on bringing in as much gold as they 
could and letting out as little as possible. And they saw how this could be 
done: by selling lots of products to their friends and neighbors for gold 
and buying-ideally-nothing. 

216 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
To sell a lot you have to make a lot. To buy nothing, you have to be 
self-sufficient. But how could a nation sell and sell and never buy? Where 
would the raw materials come from? This is where mercantilism, which 
was intertwined with nationalism, which was intertwined with the Protes-
tant Reformation, which was intertwined with the ethos of individualism, 
which was intertwined with Renaissance humanism-intersected with Eu-
ropean sea prowess and the urge to explore the world-which came right 
out of the Crusades. 
All these synergistic, cross-fertilizing developments were beginning to 
peak in Europe just around 1600. At that moment, Europeans were mas-
ter mariners. They were rapidly getting organized as compact nation-
states. They were rethinking the world in scientific terms. They had the 
gold of the Americas burning holes in their pockets. And they were eco-
nomically energized by protocapitalist entrepreneurs armed with a new 
ethos of individualism. 
Incredibly enough, all of this development went virtually unnoticed by 
the Muslim world where, at that very moment, Moghul civilization was 
peaking in India, Safavid culture was peaking in Persia, and the Ottoman 
empire was only just past its peak period of efflorescence in Asia Minor, 
Mesopotamia, the Levant, the Hijaz, Egypt, and North Africa. 
And then the two worlds began to intermingle. 

12 
~ 
West Comes East 
905-1266AH 
1500-1850 CE 
B
ETWEEN 1500 AND 18oo CE, western Europeans sailed pretty much 
all over the world and colonized pretty much everything. In some 
lands, they simply took possession, entirely supplanting the original in-
habitants: North America and Australia suffered this fate, ending up as vir-
tual extensions of Europe. 
In other areas, they left the original inhabitants in place but moved in 
above them as a ruling elite in control of all-important resources. Some 
portion of the original population ended up as their servants or slaves 
while the rest went on living as best they could in constricted circum-
stances. Such was the fate of the people in most of South America and sub-
Saharan Africa. 
In some places, however-most notably China and the Islamic heart-
land-Europeans came up against well-organized, wealthy, technologically 
advanced societies seemingly quite able to hold their own, and here the in-
teraction between newcomers and natives took a subtler course. The Is-
lamic world presented a particularly complex psychosocial drama, first, 
because western Europeans had a tangled history with Muslims already, 
and second, because they started trickling into the Muslim world just as 
217 

218 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
• 
C.rrot an ... in 
• 
$p.>in 
C::) ll.u«•• n Zone of lnOuen.oe 
• 
fw~ee 
G::rm~"Y 
C"EJ Brit"h Zone of Influence 
• 
l'unu~ral 
• 
h•ly 
- Shoppon ~Tra<kRoutc• 
WESTERN IMPERIALISM : THE GLOBAL REACH OF SEA POWER 
the three great Islamic empires were rising toward their peak of power and 
brilliance. 
Let's be clear about one thing: the European penetration of the Muslim 
world never amounted to a clash of civilizations (to use a term coined in 
the 1990s). In this period of colonization, "European civilization" never 
went to war with "Islamic civilization," and that's one key to understand-
ing all that followed. In fact, after 1500, western Europeans arrived in the 
eastern Islamic world mainly as traders. What could be less threatening? 
Trade is what people do instead of making war. Trade-why, it's practically 
a synonym for peace! 
Nor did the Europeans come in great numbers. The first European ex-
pedition to reach India by sea was led by Portuguese aristocrat Vasco da 
Gama and consisted of four ships and a total crew of 171 men. They ar-
rived at Calicut on the west coast of India in 1498 and asked the local 
Hindu ruler if they might set up a trading post along the coast there and 
do a little buying, maybe a little selling. The ruler said sure. Why wouldn't 
he? If these strangers wanted to buy cloth, or raw cotton, or sugar or what-

WEST COMES EAST 
219 
ever, why would he say no? His people had businesses to run! You don't 
make money by refusing to sell your products. 
The Europeans did encounter a flash of hostility from Muslims there-
abouts a bit later, but the Muslims were interlopers themselves that far 
south and so the Portuguese got local Hindu support to build a little town 
and fort at a place called Goa. They had nothing very remarkable to trade, 
but they did have money to buy, and as the years went by more of them 
were coming along with more and more money to spend, as the gold of 
the Americas flooded the European economy. Goa became a permanent 
Portuguese implant in India. 
Then more traders came along from other parts of western Europe. 
The French set up a "trading post" at Pondicherry and the British set up 
one at Madras. 1 The Dutch sailed by and looked in as well. These Euro-
pean communities started fighting among themselves for business advan-
tages, but the Indians paid little notice. Why should they care who won? 
Babur and his descendents were just establishing the Moghul empire up 
north, and they were the big story of the time, much bigger than a few 
obscure traders building little forts along the coast. And so the sixteenth 
century passed without Europeans making much of an impact on the Is-
lamic world. 
Then again, not all Europeans came to the Muslim world as traders. Some 
came as business advisers or technical consultants. In 1598, a pair of Eng-
lish brothers, Robert and Anthony Sherley, found their way to Persia, 
which was well into its "golden age" under the greatest of the Safavid mon-
archs, Shah Abbas. The Englishmen said they came in peace with an in-
teresting proposition for the Persian king: they wanted to sell him cannons 
and firearms and they could promise technical support to back up their 
products-they would have their people come in and train the Shah's peo-
ple in the new weapons, teach military strategy to go with them, plus how 
to fix the weapons if they broke, things like that. 
Shah Abbas liked what he heard. Safavid Persia lagged behind its 
neighbors in military technology. The Qizilbash didn't like firearms; they 
were still fighting mostly with spears and swords and bows; this deficit 
had cost the Safavids the battle of Chaldiran, and now the hated Ot-
tomans were trying to stop weapons shipments to Persia. Getting 

220 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
weapons and consultants from some distant, insignificant speck of an is-
land west of Europe seemed like a perfect solution. The Englishmen knew 
their stuff, and a few of them from so far away couldn't possibly do much 
harm, it seemed. And so it began: the practice of giving European advis-
ers commanding positions in the Persian army. 
It's true, however, that not all interactions between westerners and Mus-
lims were peaceful. The Ottoman Turks had been fighting with Christian 
Europeans for centuries; their western border was the frontier between 
the two worlds, and here the friction showed. Between battles, however, 
and even while pitched battles were raging in some places, a lot of trading 
was going on in other places, because this was not a World War II-type 
total-war situation. Battles were geographically contained. At the very 
moment that two armies were clashing one place, business-as-usual might 
well be going on just a few miles away. The friction had an ideological di-
mension left over from the Crusades, to be sure-Christianity versus 
Islam-but in any practical sense the battles were outbursts of profes-
sional violence between monarchs over territory. Lots of Christians and 
Jews lived within the Ottoman empire, after all, and some of them were 
in the Ottoman armies, fighting for that side, not out of patriotic fervor 
for the House of Othman but because it was a job, and they needed the 
money. This kind of fighting certainly allowed for other people to be 
going back and forth, buying and selling. 
By the seventeenth century, it wasn't just Venetians but also French, Eng-
lish, German, Dutch, and other European traders who were traveling into 
the Muslim world armed not with gold but with guns. These businessmen 
contributed to a process that slowly and inexorably transformed the mighty 
Ottoman Empire into the lumbering monstrosity that Europeans called the 
Sick Man of Europe, or sometimes-more gently but in some ways even 
more condescendingly-"the Eastern question." The process was so slow, 
however, and so pervasive and so complex that it was hard for anyone going 
through the history of it all day by day to make a connection between the 
European encroachment and the burgeoning decay. 
The first thing to note about the process is what didn't happen. The Ot-
toman Empire did not go down in flames to conquering armies. Long 
after the empire was totally moribund, long after it was little more than a 

WEST COMES EAST 
221 
virtual carcass for vultures to pick over, the Ottomans could still muster 
damaging military strength. 
Historians identify two seminal military defeats that spelled the begin-
ning of the end for the Ottomans, though both went more or less unno-
ticed by the Turks at the time. One was the battle of Lepanto, which took 
place in 1571. In this naval engagement, the Venetians and their allies de-
stroyed virtually the entire Ottoman Mediterranean fleet. In Europe, the 
battle was hailed as a thrilling sign that the heathen Turk was finally, finally 
going down. 
In Istanbul, however, the grand vizier compared the loss of the fleet to 
the shaving of a man's beard: it would only make the new beard grow in 
thicker. Indeed, within one year, the Ottomans replaced the whole lost 
fleet with an even bigger and more modern fleet, featuring eight of the 
largest ships ever to ply the Mediterranean. Within six months after that, 
the Ottomans won back the eastern Mediterranean, conquered Cyprus, 
and began to harass Sicily. Small wonder that contemporary Ottoman 
analysts didn't see the battle of Lepanto as any big turning point at the 
time. It would take at least another century before European naval dom-
inance would become fully evident and the significance of that domi-
nance unmistakable. 
The other seminal military event took place a bit earlier with a follow-
up much later. The earlier bracket was Suleiman the Magnificent's failure 
to take Vienna. Ottoman forces had never stopped pushing steadily west, 
and in 1529 they reached the gates of Vienna, but the sultan set siege to 
the famous Austrian city too late in the season. With winter coming on, he 
decided to let Vienna go this time and conquer it the next time around. 
But there was no next time for Suleiman, because other issues cropped up 
and he got distracted-the empire was so big, after all, and its borders so 
long, that distractions were constantly sprouting up on those borders some-
where. The sultan never made another attempt on Vienna but his contem-
poraries saw no sign of weakness in this. "Conquer Vienna'' remained on 
his to-do list always; it's just that the man was busy. He was fighting and 
winning other battles, and his rule was so successful that only a blithering 
idiot would have suggested that the Ottomans were in decline in his day 
just because they had not taken Vienna. It wasn't a military defeat, after all, 
just a failure to score the usual crushing victory. 

222 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
And yet historians looking back can see quite clearly that Suleiman's 
failure to take Vienna marked a watershed. At that moment the empire 
had reached its greatest extent. After that moment, it was no longer ex-
panding. This was less than obvious at the time because the empire was 
still fighting someone somewhere all the time, and the news from the bat-
tlefield was often good. Maybe the Ottomans were losing battles here and 
there, but they were also winning battles here and there. Were they losing 
more than they were winning? Were they losing the big ones and winning 
only the little ones? That was the real question, and the answer was yes, 
but that was hard to gauge for people swimming through the historical 
moment. How does one weigh the significance of a battle? Some people 
raised alarmist cries, but some people always do. After all, in 1600, the em-
pire certainly was not shrinking. 
Unfortunately, however, not shrinking was not good enough for the 
Ottoman Empire. In truth, this empire was built on the premise of perma-
nent expansion. It needed a constant and generally successful war on its 
borders for all of its complicated internal mechanisms to work. 
First of all, expansion was a source of revenue, which the empire could 
ill afford to lose. 
Second, war served as a safety valve, which vented all internal pressures 
outward. For example, peasants who were forced off the land for one rea-
son or another didn't hang around hungry and hopeless, turning into a 
surly rabble. They could always join the army, go on a campaign, score 
some booty, and then come home and start a little business .... 
Once expansion stopped, however, all those pressures began to press in-
ward. Those who could no longer make a living off the land for any reason 
now drifted to the cities. Even if they had a skill, they might not be able to 
ply it. The guilds controlled all manufacturing and they could absorb only 
so many new members. A good many of the drifters ended up unemployed 
and disgruntled. And there were lots of other little consequences like this, 
generated by no longer expanding. 
Third, the classic devshirme depended on the constant conquest of new 
territories out of which "slaves" could be drafted for the institutes that pro-
duced the empire's elite. The janissary had originally labored under one 
important restriction: they were not allowed to marry and produce heirs, a 
device designed to keep new blood flowing into the administration. But 

WEST COMES EAST 
223 
once the expansion stopped, the devshirme began to stagnate. And then 
the janissaries began to marry. And then they did what people do for their 
children: swing their clout to get the kids the best possible educational and 
employment opportunities. It was perfectly natural, but it did mean the 
janissaries encrusted into a permanent, hereditary elite, which reduced the 
vigor of the empire because it meant the experts and specialists who ran 
the empire were no longer drawn exclusively from those who showed early 
promise but also included dullards with rich and important parents. 
No one linked these stagnations to the fact that Suleiman had failed to 
conquer Vienna decades ago. How could they? The consequences were so 
distantly and so indirectly related to their causes that for the general pub-
lic they registered merely as some sort of indefinable social malaise that 
was hard to explain, the sort of thing that makes religious conservatives 
rail about the moral fabric of society and the importance of restoring old-
fashioned values like discipline and respect for elders. 
Then came the follow-up to Suleiman's failure. In 1683, the Ottomans 
tried again to take Vienna and they failed again, just as they had 154 years 
earlier, but this time they were routed by a coalition of European forces. 
Technically this second battle for Vienna was also merely a failure to score 
a victory, but the Ottoman elite knew they had been trounced and some-
thing had gone very wrong. 
It made them doggedly determined to pump up their military strength. 
Too easily did they assume that the might and vigor of their empire de-
pended on troops and weapons. Against the formless forces eroding the 
empire, they thought to fling up a military bulwark. Pouring resources 
into their military, however, only imposed more expenses on a government 
that was already overburdened. 
It was overburdened in part because European traders entering the 
economy had upset the delicate checks and balances in the Ottoman sys-
tem. Forget the battle of Lepanto. Forget the failed siege of Vienna. Ulti-
mately, it was traders, not soldiers, who took down the Ottoman Empire. 
Let me trace some of the details. In the Ottoman Empire, guilds (in-
tertwined with Sufi orders) controlled all manufacturing and they pro-
tected their members by locking out competition. One guild had a 
monopoly on producing soap, for example, while another had a monopoly 
on making shoes .... The guilds couldn't exploit their monopoly positions 

224 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
to jack up prices, because the state imposed limits on how much they 
could charge. The state protected the public and the guilds protected their 
members; everything balanced, everything worked. 
Then westerners came into the system. They didn't compete with the 
guilds by trying to sell soap or shoes-the state wouldn't let them. No, 
they came looking for stuff to buy, raw materials mainly, such as wool, 
meat, leather, wood, oil, metals, and the like-whatever they could get 
their hands on. Suppliers were happy to sell to them, and even the state 
smiled on this trade, because it brought gold into the empire, and how 
could that be a bad thing? Unfortunately, the Europeans were after the 
same materials the guilds needed to make their products. And the Euro-
peans could outbid the guilds because they had the gold of the Americas 
in their satchels, while the guilds had only their profits, which were lim-
ited by government price controls. They could not make up the difference 
with volume-by producing and selling more goods, that is-because 
they just couldn't get enough raw materials to increase production. With 
foreigners sucking those out of Ottoman territories and shipping them to 
Europe, artisans in the Ottoman world felt the pinch: domestic produc-
tion began to fall. 
Ottoman officials saw the problem and dealt with it by banning the ex-
port of strategic raw materials needed by domestic industries. But laws of 
this type only opened up contraband opportunities: when exporting wool 
is a crime, only criminals will export wool. A black market economy began 
to thrive; a whole class of nouveau riche black-market entrepreneurs 
emerged; and since they were breaking the law to make money, they had 
to bribe various officials to look the other way, which opened up opportu-
nities for corruption, which spawned another class of nouveau riche "en-
trepreneurs": bribe-battened bureaucrats. 
So now a lot of folks had illegal cash to spend that didn't come out of 
any increased productivity. It was cash funneled into the Ottoman econ-
omy by free-spending Europeans drawing down on the gold of the Amer-
icas. But what could the newly rich Ottoman citizens spend their money 
on? Investing in aboveboard industries was out: it would attract unwel-
come attention from the state. So they did what drug dealers do in mod-
ern American society. They spent freely on extravagant luxury items. In the 
Ottoman world, these included consumer goods from the West, which 

WEST COMES EAST 
225 
could be had for cash paid under the table. The very trends undermining 
Ottoman ability to manufacture goods were providing a market for Euro-
pean industry and incidentally draining the gold back to Europe. 
Outside cash coming into the Ottoman system just as production was 
falling generated inflation: that's what happens when you have more 
money chasing fewer goods. I've seen the same pattern in certain rural 
counties in northern California, where a few people are getting fabu-
lously rich from growing marijuana. In an area with no apparent econ-
omy, you see people driving BMWs, ordinary houses start selling for a 
million dollars, and even bread finally costs more in suddenly gentrified 
grocery stores. 
Whom does inflation hurt? It hurts people on fixed incomes. These 
days, we tend to equate "fixed income" with "small income"; we think of 
pensioners living on social security or welfare. In Ottoman society, there 
was no welfare system. Families and communities took care of their own 
elderly and sick. No, in Ottoman society, the people on "fixed incomes" 
were the salaried government bureaucrats and more particularly the 
salaried officials of the court-that bloated, wholly nonproductive upper 
class. Those "fixed income" folks were rich beyond the dreams of Croesus, 
but even the richest of the rich somehow feel threatened when their buy-
ing power goes down. In 1929, when the U.S. stock market crashed, 
some of those bankers who famously jumped out of high-rise windows 
were still worth a million dollars when they hit the sidewalk. How much 
they had didn't matter: it was how much less they had that got to them. 
Similarly, in Ottoman society, inflation made rich courtiers living on 
fixed salaries feel like they had to tighten their belts and this they didn't 
like. They began to supplement their incomes by wielding the only in-
strument they controlled. 
What do courtiers (and bureaucrats) control? Access to the administra-
tive and legal workings of the state. When people have no role except to 
provide access, however, they have no power except to deny access. 
Courtiers and bureaucrats in the Ottoman Empire began to prevent in-
stead of facilitate-unless they were given bribes. The Ottoman Empire 
became a paperwork nightmare. To negotiate one's way through it, a per-
son needed to bribe people who knew people who knew people who could 
bribe people who could bribe other people who knew people. 

226 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
To combat this gumming up of the works, the state raised salaries, so 
that courtiers and bureaucrats wouldn't feel the need to take bribes. But the 
state didn't have any source of extra funds based in real productivity, espe-
cially since, with the empire no longer expanding, the state did not have 
the revenue that traditionally flowed into its coffers from conquest. In 
order to raise salaries, pensions, and soldiers' wages, therefore, the empire 
had to simply print money. 
Printing money spurs inflation-which puts us back where we started! 
Everything the Ottoman government did to stem corruption and promote 
efficiency only aggravated the problem it was trying to solve. Eventually, 
government officials gave up and decided to hire some consultants to 
come in and help them set things in order. The advisers they hired were 
management consultants and technical experts from the continent that 
seemed to know how: western Europe. 
Perhaps some brilliant executive could have done something about the 
unraveling that led the Ottoman elite to this sorry state; but the very suc-
cess of the empire, and the very might of its ruling family, had transformed 
its imperial culture and the life of its royal family in ways that pretty much 
precluded any new Mehmet the Conquerors or Suleiman the Magnificents 
from emerging. Specifically, the court had grown ever bigger, heavier, and 
less productive until it was like some giant deformity that the whole soci-
ety was carrying on its back. 
The archetypal symbol of this deformity was, perhaps, the so-called 
Grand Seraglio, the Sultan's harem in Istanbul. Earlier dynasties around 
the Muslim world had harems, of course, but in Ottoman society, this 
grim institution grew to proportions never seen before, except perhaps in 
China under the Ming dynasty. 
Thousands of women from every conquered population lived in the 
labyrinthine Grand Seraglio. Although steeped in an overall atmosphere of 
wealth and luxury, most of these women lived in cubicles within the maze. 
The women of the harem were supplied with cosmetics and all other sup-
plies useful to enhancing their adornments and had no other occupation 
except for self-adornment: no useful work to do, no opportunity to study, 
no call to produce anything, nothing to rescue them from a life of mean-
ingless boredom. They were prisoners in gem-crusted cells. 

WEST COMES EAST 
227 
The sequestration of women had been hundreds of years in the making 
in the Islamic world, but even at this point, it didn't run through the 
whole society, only through the upper classes. In rural areas, the casual 
traveler might still see peasant women working in the fields or driving an-
imals along the roads. In urban areas, lower class women went about their 
business in the public bazaars, shopping for their households or hawking 
their handicrafts. Among the middle classes, some women owned prop-
erty, managed businesses, and directed employees. But the public visibility 
of these women denoted the humble status of their men. 
Privileged men showed off their status by keeping their womenfolk out 
of public life and hidden from view in the private quarters of their house-
holds. The psychology underlying this custom was (I think) the feeling that 
a man's honor-which really means his ability to hold his head high among 
his fellow men-depended on his ability to keep any women associated 
with him from becoming the objects of other men's sexual fantasies. In the 
end, this is what the sequestration of women boiled down to, and in such a 
cultural milieu, even men in the lower strata of society felt a pressure to 
keep their women out of sight, so they wouldn't look bad to other men. 
In the sultan's harem, this syndrome had magnified to a staggering 
level. In ordinary usage, especially among western Orientalists, the word 
harem has a lascivious connotation to it, as if everyday life in a harem con-
sisted of sexual frolicking from dawn to dusk; but how could this possibly 
have been the case? The sultan was just one man, and no other man ever 
even saw the women of the imperial harem except the guards, and the 
guards were all eunuchs. And the sultan, some may be surprised to learn, 
didn't spend his leisure hours hanging around the harem, playing around 
with the women. One of the eunuchs had the specific job of choosing one 
woman for the sultan to sleep with each night, and this eunuch would es-
cort the chosen woman secretively and properly bundled, under cover of 
night, to the sultan's chamber. Sexual license and sexual repression were 
weirdly intertwined in this institution.2 
Eunuchs could move freely between the harem and the world, and so 
acted as the women's eyes and ears and hands, their means of learning 
about the outside world, their instruments for effecting changes out there. 
The sultan's children, including his sons, grew up in the harem until they 

228 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
were twelve, never mingling with ordinary people or taking part in the 
rough-and-tumble of ordinary life until adolescence. By the time such a 
prince mounted the throne he was quite typically a socially dysfunctional 
creature whose main skill consisted of the ability to maneuver through the 
maze of harem intrigue. 
And very high-stakes, high-intensity intrigue it was, because even 
though one prince may have been the heir-designate, the mothers of the 
many other princes did not necessarily abandon hope that their own boy 
would somehow achieve the throne (which would make mother a power-
figure in the empire.} So the women and their progeny plotted and con-
spired and attempted (and sometimes succeeded at} assassinations of 
potential rivals until the reigning sultan died, whereupon the struggle for 
power moved from back-room intrigue to front-room fisticuffs. The 
prince who came out victorious won the throne not just for himself but for 
some whole faction of women and eunuchs within the harem. An Ot-
toman princeling growing up in this environment knew he had some small 
chance of ending up as the supreme master of the universe and a much 
larger chance of ending up dead before he reached maturity. 
This system ended up producing a long line of weak, idiotic, and ec-
centric sultans. But this fact in itself did not account for the decline and 
fall of the Ottoman Empire, because by the time the system ripened into 
its corrupt maturity, the sultan no longer ran the state. The executive 
powers of his position had begun to decay shortly after Suleiman the 
Magnificent died. In the Ottoman system, grand vizier became the 
power position. 
Yet the ungainly court with its enormous harem did hamper the Ot-
toman Empire, because it cost so much and produced so little-produced 
in fact nothing, not even decisions. The vizier and other officials had to 
run the empire while carrying this court on their shoulders and keeping 
the damn thing fed, which made the whole operation ungainly and slow. 
Between 1600 and 1800, Safavid Persia was unraveling too. The Euro-
peans were on hand to exploit what happened, but it was the kingdom's 
own internal contradictions that pulled it apart. First of all, the usual dy-
nastic rot set in. Princes raised in too much luxury were coming to the 
throne dissolute and lazy. Every time one of these flawed kings died, a 

WEST COMES EAST 
229 
power struggle erupted among his survivors; whoever won the throne took 
over a realm debilitated by war and was generally too idle or incompetent 
to repair the damage, so the golden age turned to silver, the silver to 
bronze, and the bronze to mud. 
When the Safavids first came to power they had created a distinctly 
Persian Islam by making Shi'ism the state religion. This was useful to 
the state at first, because it promoted a national coherence that made 
Persia strong for its size. But it alienated Sunnis within the borders, and 
as the throne weakened, these Sunnis turned rebellious and began to 
pull away. 
Making Shi'ism the official state religion had another downside, as 
well. It gave the Shi'i religious scholars a dangerous sense of self-importance, 
especially the mujtahids, a title that meant "scholars so learned they have a 
right to make original judgments" {later these worthies were called ayatol-
lahs). These Shi'i ulama began to claim that if Persia was really a Shi'i state, 
kings could rule only with their approval, because only they spoke for the 
Hidden Imam. Ominously, the ulama had strong links among peasants 
and among the merchants who made up the urban middle class. Safavid 
kings therefore found themselves facing a Hobson's choice. If they sought 
the approval of the ulama they would be conceding ultimate authority to 
the ayatollahs; if they asserted their own authority as supreme, they would 
have to forego the ulama's approval and in that case rule without popular 
legitimacy. 
They opted for the latter; but kings who lack legitimacy need some 
other source of power to give them authority, and what could the Safavids 
tap? They had nothing to turn to but their armies-and by this time their 
armies were armed and trained and "advised" by European military ex-
perts. In short, Persia ended up with European Christians helping Safavid 
kings clamp down on Muslim religious scholars who were closely tied to 
the masses: obviously a formula for trouble. 
As the eighteenth century waned, succession struggles over the throne 
grew ever more ferocious. Contending factions began recruiting more Eu-
ropean military consultants and importing more European arms to gain 
the edge on their rivals. A time came when the power struggles failed to 
produce single winners. Different contenders took possession of different 
areas. And as Persia came apart, Sunni provinces broke away from the 

230 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
kingdom, and Sunni neighbors such as the Uzbeks and the Afghans broke 
into the kingdom to wreak terrible havoc. 
When the smoke cleared the Safavids were gone. In their place, stood a 
new family monarchy. Nominally, this so-called Qajar dynasty ruled the 
shrinking country of Iran for the next 131 years. (It was still "Persia'' to Eu-
ropeans, but locals generally were calling the country Iran by this point, al-
though the name did not switch at any one moment: both names go back 
to ancient times.) Under the Qajar kings, the disturbing trends of Safavid 
times became the ordinary, accepted order of things. The national armies 
were riddled with European advisers and officers. The ulama were chroni-
cally at odds with the throne. Repelled by foreign influences at court, these 
ulama set themselves up as guardians of traditional Islamic culture, to 
which the lower and middle classes were still wedded. The kings were gen-
erally lazy, rapacious, shortsighted, and weak. Europeans pulled the strings 
that made these puppets jerk and squeak in a most lifelike manner. 
Europeans never invaded Persia, never made concerted war on it. They 
just came to sell, to buy, to work, to "help." But there they were when 
things came apart. And like opportunistic viruses that lurk in the body un-
noticed but flourish into illness when the immune system breaks down, 
the Europeans flowed into whatever cracks opened up in the fragmenting 
society, growing ever more powerful as the cracks grew wider, until at last 
they were in command. 
Europeans pretty much failed to notice they were taking over Persia; 
and that's partly because there was no "they." Westerners came to Persia 
from various European countries, and Persians were not the enemy to 
them but the backdrop. The enemy, for each group of Europeans, was an-
other group of Europeans. The British, the French, the Russians, the 
Dutch and others kept moving into power vacuums in Persia not so much 
to conquer Persia as to block other Europeans from conquering Persia. The 
rivalry eventually boiled down to Russia versus Great Britain, and to un-
derstand this competition, one must factor in the thunderous events hap-
pening further east, in the last of those three big Islamic Empires, the land 
of the Moghuls. 
In the Moghul empire the core contradiction had always been Hindus ver-
sus Muslims. Akbar the Great had worked out a sort of accommodation, 

WEST COMES EAST 
231 
but his great-grandson Aurangzeb reversed all his policies, enforcing or-
thodox Islam rigidly, restoring discrimination against Hindus, squashing 
smaller religious groups such as the Sikhs, and generally replacing toler-
ance with repression. And yet, say what you will about the man's narrow-
minded zealotry, Aurangzeb was a titanic talent, so he not only held his 
empire together but extended it. The whole time, however, he was sowing 
the discord and tension that would erupt to ruin the empire as soon as a 
less capable ruler took charge. 
This less capable ruler was the very next one after Aurangzeb-and the 
next one after him and the next one after that and so on down. In its first 
two hundred years, the Moghul empire had just six emperors; in its next 
fifty years it had eight. Of the first six, five were world historical geniuses; 
of the last eight, all were midgets. 
During the fifty-year era of those midgets, Hindu kings called the 
Marathas surged again in the south. The Sikhs became a militant force. 
Nawabs, Muslim provincial governors, began to ignore orders from the 
capital and rule as independent princes. In fact, India broke up into 
smaller states and each state dissolved into turmoil as clashes broke out be-
tween Hindus and Muslims and others, making life uncertain for all. 
Throughout this fragmentation, the Portuguese, the Dutch, the 
French, and the English were hovering on the edges, doing business from 
their trading posts along the coast. At first the Portuguese had domi-
nated this trade. Then the Dutch had outflanked them, planting forts 
and trading posts in both Southeast Asia and Persia, and beating the Por-
tuguese at sea with better ships and bigger guns. Then the French came 
in and held their own, and so did the English, who built a fort at Madras 
in 1639, acquired Bombay (now called Mumbai) a bit later when their 
king married a Portuguese princess (Bombay came with her as part of her 
dowry) and then planting a colony on the Bay of Bengal, which grew 
into Calcutta. 
The Europeans who came to East Asia in this era represented some-
thing new and unprecedented in world history. They weren't generals or 
soldiers, they didn't come as the envoys of kings, they didn't represent 
governments. They were employees of private companies, but companies 
of a new kind: joint stock-holding companies or, as we now call them, 
corporations. 

232 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
The first such company was born in 1553, when forty English mer-
chants ponied up twenty-five pounds apiece to finance a search for a sea 
route to India. The expedition they funded found Moscow instead of 
India (don't ask}, but it brought home a tidy profit and when this news 
spread, other people clamored to buy into "the Russia Company." Those 
who paid the subscription fee got slips of paper entitling them to a pro-
portional cut of any profits the company's future ventures earned, slips of 
paper they could sell to speculators if they wished (and thus the institution 
of the stock market was born}. 
Around 1600, three gigantic national versions of that first corporation 
were created in Europe: they were the English, the Dutch, and the French 
"East India Companies." Each was a limited liability corporation with 
private shareholders. Each was founded for the sole aim of turning a 
profit on trade in East Asia in order to enrich its shareholders. Each was 
run by a board of directors. Each was chartered by its national govern-
ment, and in each case the government in question gave its company a 
national monopoly on doing business in the Islamic east. The actual en-
tities jockeying for advantage in Persia, India, and Southeast Asia, then, 
were these corporations. 
Over the course of two centuries in India, these European corpora-
tions altered the texture of the Indian economy in ways reminiscent of 
what was happening in the Ottoman world. In Bengal, where the British 
elbowed out all other Europeans, the East India Company pretty much 
destroyed the Bengali crafts industry, but hardly noticed itself doing so. It 
was simply buying up lots of raw material at very good prices. People 
found more profit in selling raw material to the British than in using 
those materials to make their own goods. As the native economy went 
bust, indigenous Bengalis became ever more dependant on the British 
and finally subservient to them. 
When the corporations first arrived in India, they competed to earn 
the favor of the Moghul emperor, but as the empire broke down, the favor 
of the central government mattered less and less. The Europeans came to 
realize they had better align themselves with various local rulers rising up. 
But they had to pick the right ones of these, because some turned out to 
be losers and got churned under. Guessing wrong about the subcontinent's 
internal politics would cost the company money. It was tempting, there-

WEST COMES EAST 
233 
fore, to take the guesswork out of it and try to control the outcomes of 
local power struggles. To this end, the companies brought in private armies 
to help their allies. Here, as in Persia, the enemy, for each group of Euro-
peans, was not the local population but other Europeans. In supporting 
their Indian allies, the European corporations were actually fighting proxy 
wars against one another. The Portuguese lost out early, the Dutch were 
eliminated next {from India, anyway-they remained dominant in South-
east Asia) and the contest for India finally came down to the British versus 
the French. 
As it happened, the French and the British were also the finalists in the 
contest for North America, halfway around the world. There, a skirmish 
between a few dozen Europeans kicked off a chain of events that ended up 
making all of India a British colony. It started in the spring of 1754, when 
a British army major named George Washington was leading a surveying 
party up the Ohio River and stumbled across a French scouting party. 
Shots were fired, one Virginian and ten Frenchmen died, and a global con-
flict erupted between Great Britain and France, with most of the other Eu-
ropean powers jumping in quickly. In North America the conflict was 
called the French and Indian War, in Europe the Seven Years' War, and in 
India the Third Carnatic War. 3 
As the name implies, the European rivals in India had already fought 
two proxy wars in the Carnatic region north of modern-day Madras, try-
ing to seat their respective allies on minor thrones. The fighting, in each 
case, was conducted by the East India Companies of Britain and France. 
In 1756, the nawab of Bengal, Siraj al-Dawlah, overran the British fort at 
Calcutta. On a sweltering June night, someone {not the nawab; he knew 
nothing about it) locked up sixty-four British citizens in an airless under-
ground prison cell. "Someone" was supposed to process them out that 
night and send them home, but signals got crossed and the prisoners were 
left in the dungeon overnight. By morning, forty-three of them were dead. 
The report swiftly made its way to England. The press went crazy. 
They titled the nawab's dungeon "the black hole of Calcutta." In each 
retelling of the story, the dimensions of the cell shrank and the number of 
prisoners burgeoned, finally reaching 146, while the number of dead rose 
to 123. The story outraged the British public. In India, a one-time com-
pany clerk named Robert Clive, now a captain in the company's private 

234 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
army, marched to Calcutta to extract revenge. He deposed the nawab, and 
installed the nawab's uncle in his place. (The so-called battle of Plassey, 
which effected this change, consisted of Clive bribing the nawab's body-
guards to go home and then arresting and executing the abandoned 
nawab.) 
Even then, the British did not name themselves rulers, not even of 
this one provincial piece of India. Officially, Bengal remained a Moghul 
possession and its government remained Bengali. Clive appointed him-
self a mere employee of this provincial government, setting his own 
salary at thirty thousand pounds a year. The East India Company en-
shrined itself as the Bengali government's "advisers," nothing more. For 
the sake of efficiency, the company decided to go ahead and collect taxes 
on behalf of the Moghul government. And again, for efficiency's sake, 
they decided to go ahead and spend the money themselves, directly, locally: 
what was the point of sending it to the capital and having it come back 
again? Oh, and henceforth the company's private army would take care 
of security and maintain law and order. But the company insisted that it 
was not now governing Bengal: it was just providing needed services for 
a fee. 
The first few years of British rule worked out poorly for Bengalis. The 
company left day-to-day administration in local hands and focused only 
on matters relevant to its business interests. In practice, this meant the 
(powerless) "government" was responsible for solving all problems while 
the (powerful) company was entitled to reap all benefits but disavowed any 
responsibility for the welfare of the people; after all, it was not the govern-
ment. Rapacious company officials bled Bengal dry, but those who com-
plained were referred to "the government." The plundering of the province 
resulted in a famine that killed about a third of the population in just two 
years-we're talking about an estimated ten million people here.4 The 
famine damaged the company's interests too, however, just as a parasite 
suffers when the plant on which it is feeding wilts. 
At this point, the British government decided to step in. Parliament ap-
pointed a governor-general for India, brought the East India Company 
under control, and sent troops to the subcontinent. For the next hundred 
years, there were two British armies in India: so-called "John company" 
troops who worked for the corporation and "Queen's company" troops, 

WEST COMES EAST 
235 
who worked for the British crown. It should be noted, however, that only 
the officers were European. The grunts who carried the rifles and took the 
bullets were local recruits or draftees known as sepoys. 
In Bengal, Clive set a precedent that would soon be repeated in many 
other states. He established that Britain had the power and right to appoint 
and depose rulers in any part of India where the East India Company had 
business interests. After 1763, this was every part of India, because France 
lost the Seven Years' War and had to abandon the subcontinent. 
Britain soon decreed that whenever an Indian ruler died without a male 
heir, the British crown inherited his territory. In this way, Great Britain 
gradually took direct control of many states. In others, it installed a proxy 
who ruled in accordance with British wishes and interests. India became a 
patchwork of states ruled directly or indirectly by the British, the East 
India Company gradually emerging as the top power in the subcontinent 
and the true successor of the Moghuls. 
Great Britain lost its North American colonies at almost exactly the 
same time that it was gaining control of India. General Cornwallis, well 
known to American-history buffs as the man whom George Washington 
beat at Yorktown, was the second governor general of India and the one 
who really consolidated British control there. Seen only in the context of 
American history, Cornwallis was a loser, but the chances are that he died 
proud of his life's accomplishments, because India became "the jewel in the 
British crown," the country's most precious colonial possession, and the 
key to its dominance around the world. 
With the vast resources of the subcontinent on tap, Great Britain could 
finance further colonial adventures in Africa and elsewhere around the 
globe. Naturally, therefore, it was very touchy about any threats to its 
jewel. And just such a threat did begin to emerge as the eighteenth century 
gave way to the nineteenth: the threat posed by an expanding Russia. 
When the Turks conquered Constantinople, they plunged Orthodox 
Christianity into a crisis. Constantinople had been "the New Rome" and 
the heart of the (Orthodox) Christian world. Without a heart, how could 
the faith live on? The grand duke of Moscow stepped into the breach. This 
man, Ivan the Third, declared his capital "the Third Rome," the new heart 
of Orthodox Christianity. His grandson Ivan the Terrible took on the title 
of Caesar, thereby claiming the imperial tradition of ancient Rome. (In 

236 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Russian, of course, his title was pronounced "czar.") Between 1682 and 
1725, one of the czars, Peter the Great, built a formidable army and began 
carving out an empire east of Moscow. By 1762, when Catherine the Great 
of the Romanoff dynasty came to power, this empire extended way beyond 
the Caspian Sea, beyond the Ural Mountains even, deep into Siberia, 
stretching across all the lands north of India, Persia, Mesopotamia, and 
Asia Minor. 
Catherine soon gave notice that Russia would not only push east; it 
might push south as well. Catherine's armies engaged the Ottomans in a 
bid to take the Black Sea coast and drive the Turks out of Europe. Fight-
ing the Ottomans was all very well, but the British could not have the 
Russians coming south into Persia or worse, down into the mountains in-
habited by the Afghan tribes, for that would put the Russians within 
striking distance of the jewel in the British crown. For many centuries, in 
fact, the Hindu Kush mountains and the Persian highlands had served as 
a staging area for conquests of India. British leaders decided they must 
block Russian advances everywhere along this front. And so the Great 
Game began. 
"The Great Game" was the term invented by British novelist Rudyard 
Kipling for the struggle between Great Britain and Russia to control the 
territory stretching between the Russian Empire in the north and the 
British Empire in the south. Everything that had once been Safavid Persia, 
everything that is now Afghanistan, much of what is now Pakistan, and all 
the territories covered by the former Soviet republics of Turkmenistan, 
Uzbekistan, Kyrghizistan, and Tajikistan-all of this was the arena in 
which the Great Game was "played." 
It wasn't really a game, of course, and "play" is a misnomer. But it 
wasn't really a war, either. Occasional battles broke out, and a few mas-
sacres, an atrocity here and there, but the Great Game consisted mostly 
of plotting, pushing, conspiring, maneuvering, manipulating, politick-
ing, bribing, and corrupting people in the region mentioned. The adver-
saries were the two great European powers, and the people who lived in 
these lands, virtually all of them Muslims, were merely the chess pieces, 
the game tokens. 
In Iran, the Qajar kings entertained a hope of reempowering their 
country by importing European technology and know-how. But whom 

WEST COMES EAST 
' 
"THE GREAT GAME" 
"THE 
GREAT 
237 
should they get it from? They had such a choice of Europeans! Russian en-
voys were pressing in eagerly here, British envoys and businessmen were 
pressing there. The French, the Germans, the Swedes, and others were in 
there too. The Qajars had little power versus the Europeans, by whom they 
were wholly owned. They might have carved out some independence by 
playing one set of Europeans off against another but the kings of Iran saw 
different opportunities here, opportunities to enrich themselves by selling 
monopoly contracts to the Europeans and pocketing kickbacks. Essen-
tially, they auctioned off their economy to foreigners. 
One particularly audacious concession gave German-born British citi-
zen Baron Julius de Reuters the exclusive right to build streetcar lines and 
railroads in all of Iran, the exclusive right to mine its minerals and log its 
forests, and the right to build and operate the country's national bank. He 
got all this in exchange for a cash payment to the shah and the promise of 
some small future royalties paid to the national treasury. A storm of oppo-
sition erupted, which might have made no difference in itself except that 
Russia lined up with this opposition for reasons of its own. Under this 
pressure the shah buckled and canceled the deal. By the terms of the 

238 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
contract he had signed, however, Iran now had to pay Baron Reuters a 
forty-thousand-pound penalty. Fortunately {for the shah), this didn't come 
out of his pocket but out of the Iranian treasury. Thus, the country {and 
its taxpayers) had to pay a British lord an immense sum to build nothing-
and the deal did leave him with a controlling interest in the new Iranian 
national bank.5 
This sort of thing happened again and again, each deal putting cash in 
the pockets of a corrupt king and his relatives and giving a European com-
pany or government control over some aspect or other of the Iranian econ-
omy. If the deal was rescinded as it sometimes was, this always cost Iranian 
taxpayers some huge sum in penalties. Iranian citizens knew quite well 
what was happening, but could do nothing about it. Weak as they were, 
the Qajar kings had plenty of power over their own people: they could still 
put their subjects in prison, torture them, execute them. 
From the European point of view, however, the country being sliced 
and diced and consumed was only the spoils: the great question was which 
European country would get to do the consuming and which would end 
up with a strategic advantage for further exploitation. Since the two chief 
adversaries were pretty evenly matched, Britain and Russia eventually di-
vided Iran up into zones of influences, with Russia securing the right to 
dominate and plunder the north and Great Britain the right to do the 
same in the south. This agreement more or less solidified the country's 
northern and southern borders and marked a line east of which all bets 
were off, a line that became Iran's border with Afghanistan. 
Meanwhile, the Great Game was playing out in that wild territory to 
the east as well, the Hindu Kush mountains and the plains north of them. 
Here, in the early eighteenth century, a tribal chieftain named Ahmad 
Shah Baba had united the unruly Afghan tribes and carved out one of 
those sprawling empires that unfurled periodically into India. Ahmad 
Shah's empire was to be the last of these, however, because his successors 
had to deal with a new reality: the two mighty European imperial powers 
pressing in from north and south. The Russians kept sending spies and 
agents into Afghan territory to press for alliances with the king or with any 
of the rival chieftains who might overthrow him. The British did the same. 
Twice, Great Britain invaded and tried to occupy Afghanistan, in order 
to block out the Russians, but each time the Afghans drove the British 

WEST COMES EAST 
239 
back out. The first Anglo-Afghan war ended in 1841 with the Afghans 
massacring the entire British community and its army as it tried to flee the 
country. {A British army came back briefly, however, to set fire to the 
Grand Bazaar in Kabul and burn up everyone in it.) 
The British were still licking the wounds they had suffered from their 
first invasion of Afghanistan when a conflagration erupted in India. It 
began in 1857 with a revolt among the foot soldiers known as sepoys. 
British officers had ordered these men to grease their bullets with a mix-
ture of beef tallow and pig lard, and the order didn't sit well. The vast ma-
jority of sepoys were either Hindus or Muslims. To the Hindus, cows were 
sacred so greasing bullets with their tallow felt like sacrilege. To the Mus-
lims, pigs were ritually unclean beasts, and greasing bullets with their fat 
felt repulsive. 
One day a whole regiment of sepoys refused to load their guns. The of-
ficer in charge took decisive action: he put the whole lot of them in prison, 
whereupon riots exploded all over town. Apparently, it never occurred to 
the British that issuing bullet grease made of beef and pig fat might offend 
their sepoys. This duelessness reflected the cultural gulf between the 
British officers and their foot soldiers, a gulf that had not existed before 
Europeans arrived, even though Indian armies were frequently composed 
of many different ethnic and religious groups jammed together, Muslim 
Turks fighting alongside Muslim Persians fighting alongside Hindi-speaking 
Hindus and others. These groups quarreled and bristled at each other, but 
each knew who the others were: they interacted. In Moghul military 
camps, their languages blended into Urdu, a single new language derived 
from Hindi, Persian, and Turkish {Urdu literally means something like 
"soldier-camp lingo" in Turkish). In the British-led Indian army, no new 
language emerged. English didn't blend with any of the local languages be-
cause the British officers and their men moved in separate strata. 
With their bullet-grease gaffe, the British achieved the goal that had 
eluded Akbar the Great: they united the Muslims and Hindus. The sepoy 
rebellion expanded into the Great Indian Mutiny of 1857-1858, during 
which both Hindus and Muslims attacked British settlements all over 
India. Muslim activists called the mutiny a jihad, and their well-organized 
assaults suggested that the bullet-grease issue had merely been the spark: a 
great deal of preparation had gone into the mutiny. 

240 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
A great deal of preparation and yet not nearly enough, because British 
troops crushed the rebellion quickly and then went on a rampage of their 
own, plundering Indian cities for about a month, hauling frightened locals 
out of their homes and massacring them in the streets. In at least one case, 
they had native prisoners line up along a pit and shot them in groups of 
ten so that when they died they would fall conveniently into the hole, 
which made burying them easier.6 British historian Sir Charles Crosth-
waite depicted the victorious campaign as a British Iliad, calling it the 
"epic of the Race." 
Once the mutiny had been totally quelled, the British abandoned all 
pretense, sent the pitiful last Moghul monarch into exile, and relegated the 
East India Company to private status. The crown took charge oflndia di-
rectly. The ninety-year period of direct British rule that ensued was called 
"the Raj." 
British leaders regarded India as the "jewel in Queen Victoria's crown" 
and guarded it even more jealously than before. In 1878, detecting new 
Russian interest in Afghanistan, they tried to occupy Kabul again. Once 
again, however, they miscalculated the difficulties of occupying a moun-
tainous territory inhabited by so many hostile and mutually antagonistic 
tribes. It wasn't that the land was hard to "conquer," as Europeans under-
stood the term conquest. Great Britain easily marched into the capital, put 
its own compliant nominee on the throne, and appointed an "envoy" to 
direct him. In most contexts, this would have been conquest. But the 
British found that bending Afghan leaders to their will did them little 
good. The leaders they bent simply broke off in their hands and ended up 
as their dependents, not their tools, while the tribal people they were sup-
posedly the rulers of operated in the hills as leaderless guerillas. The second 
Anglo-Afghan War took a nasty turn when the British envoy Cavagnari 
was killed and ruinous urban battles broke out; in the end the British were 
forced to pull back to the subcontinent again. 
In the wake of this second Anglo-Afghan war, the Russians and British 
decided the territory ruled by the Afghan tribes cost too much to occupy 
and agreed to make the whole place a buffer zone between their empires: 
the Russians would not come south of the Oxus River, if the British would 
agree not to push north of an arbitrary line in the desert drawn by British 
diplomat Mortimer Durand. The territory between these lines became 

WEST COMES EAST 
241 
Afghanistan. Afghan kings, who might have conquered widely in the past, 
now focused on conquering deeply instead-conquering each tribe, each 
little valley, until this no-man's-land gradually came under the tenuous 
control of a central government headquartered in Kabul. 
But of course, the Russians never really abandoned their hope of push-
ing on down to a port on the warm waters of the Indian Ocean; and the 
British never dropped their suspicion of Russian intentions; so the "Great 
Game" went on. 
West of the Great Game, another drama unfolded throughout the nine-
teenth century, another extension of European politics playing out in the 
Muslim world. Here, the major players were Great Britain and France and 
the tokens they fought over were the provinces of the crumbling Ottoman 
Empire. To the Europeans, the core narrative was the struggle for power in 
Europe among the developed nation-states there. What happened in 
Mesopotamia, the Levant, Egypt, and the rest of North Africa was just the 
relatively unimportant eastern part of the greater drama-just ... "the 
Eastern question." 
The Eastern question gained particular urgency in the wake of the 
French Revolution, a revolution that frightened all the royal families of 
Europe, since its ideas denied the legitimacy of them all. The monarchies 
therefore united to crush the revolutionaries. They assumed this would be 
easy since the revolution had thrown France into such turmoil, but to the 
shock of all concerned, revolutionary France proved about as easy to con-
quer as a nest of angry hornets. 
To make matters worse, out of the revolution came Napoleon Bona-
parte, whose leadership instantly vaulted France to world-conquering 
might. Great Britain led the forces arrayed against Napoleon, and one 
episode of the struggle between these two sides took place in Egypt. 
Western histories report that Napoleon went to Egypt in 1798 with an 
army of thirty-four thousand, Lord Nelson followed him there, the French 
lost a naval battle to the British in the Nile, Napoleon abandoned his army 
and sneaked home to stage a coup d'etat that made him the sole ruler of 
France and stronger than ever; and the war went on. 
But what about the Egyptians? Who were they? What part did they 
play? Did they welcome Napoleon? Help him? Did he have to conquer 

242 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
them? Did they play any part in the battle between France and Britain? 
Who did they side with? What happened after the Europeans left? Western 
histories don't address these questions much, focusing mainly on the clash 
of Britain and France. It's almost as if the Egyptians weren't there. 
But of course they were there. When Napoleon arrived, Egypt was 
nominally still a province of the Ottoman Empire. Napoleon, however, 
engaged the main Egyptian armies in the shadow of the pyramids and de-
stroyed them in less than a day! All the rest was mop-up until the British 
arrived, whereupon the real battles began-and they were between Euro-
peans. The British fleet sank most of Napoleon's ships in the Nile. He held 
on as "ruler" of Egypt for a year, but the plague ravaged his troops and 
order dissolved in the country he ruled as rebels attacked not so much 
French troops as any local authority. The British sent in more expeditions 
and convinced the Turks to attack Egypt too. Napoleon responded by 
sweeping into Syria and massacring thousands of people in the city of 
Jaffa. Finally he went back to Europe, but Egypt was a shambles by then. 
An Ottoman army officer soon took advantage of the turmoil to seize 
power. This man Mohammed Ali, a Turk born in Albania, declared him-
self "governor" of Egypt, as if he were acting only on behalf of the sultan 
in Istanbul. Everyone knew, however, that he was no governor but an in-
dependent power, a new king whom no one could deny. 
Mohammed Ali saw how easily Napoleon cut his way into Egypt, and 
he was impressed. He decided he had better bring Egypt into line with 
whatever Europeans and especially the French were doing so that no new 
Napoleon and no new Lord Nelson could march in like a bunch of gang-
hangers and treat Egypt like a grade-school playground. 
But what was Napoleon's secret? Well, Ali knew that Napoleon had 
stripped the French clergy of power, shut down church schools, and built 
a secular school system to replace it. Mohammed Ali decided to do the 
same thing in Egypt. He cut state funding for the ulama. He cut funding 
for the charitable foundations, the religious schools, and the mosques. He 
ordered all religious foundations to produce titles for the lands they 
owned, and of course they couldn't do it, since their ownership went back 
to early medieval times, three or four empires ago. So Ali's state took their 
lands. Egypt still had a class of elite mamluks entrenched as the country's 
tax farmers, but Ali saw that in Europe the state collected taxes directly. So 

WEST COMES EAST 
243 
Mohammed Ali invited the leading tax-farming mamluks to dinner and 
had them massacred. Then he launched a crash program to build modern 
roads, modern schools, and the like. This was all a foretaste of a pattern 
that was to be repeated many times in the next century. 
All this sudden development bankrupted Egypt, and Mohammed Ali 
had to borrow money to keep his government afloat. He borrowed it 
from European bankers, of course, who insisted that European financial 
advisers be allowed to monitor the various agencies of Mohammed Ali's 
government, just to oversee the work and make sure the money was not 
being misused. 
Meanwhile, the Ottomans were getting nervous about Mohammed Ali, 
who was asserting some claims to Syria. They were already too weak to 
curb him on their own, so they asked the British for help. The British said 
they would lend a hand if the Ottomans would only sign a treaty allowing 
Europeans certain privileges on Turkish soil. They organized a consortium 
of European nations to come in on the treaty, a coalition of the willing, so 
to speak, and when the dust settled, Mohammed Ali was safely confined to 
Egypt, but Europeans were powerful players throughout the Levant. Now, 
only "the Eastern question" remained to resolve, the question being: which 
European nation would be responsible for "protecting" which part of the 
eastern Mediterranean? 
Egypt was the richest prize, so both France and Britain cozied up to 
rulers here. Mohammed Ali legally established his family as dynastic rulers 
of Egypt, power passing to his sons, grandsons, and so on down, and in 
the next few decades, these governor-kings of Egypt, these khedives as they 
were called, gave Britain a concession to build a railroad in Egypt; then 
mollified France with a rich contract to build the Suez canal; then pla-
cated the indignant British by giving them the right to build and own the 
Egyptian national bank, squeezing kickbacks out of each transaction for 
themselves-you see where this is going. 
Meanwhile, Mohammed Ali's descendants decided Egypt's future lay 
in cotton. Textile manufacturing was the first enterprise to be industrial-
ized in Europe, so the market for cotton became voracious, and the Nile 
Valley grew excellent cotton. Around 1860, the price of cotton on the 
world market suddenly soared. The khedive of that moment, a spend-
thrift playboy of the Eastern world named Ismail, got starry-eyed with 

244 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
dreams of wealth for himself and his country. He borrowed enormous 
sums of money from European bankers to industrialize Egypt's cotton in-
dustry overnight: he bought cotton gins and other such machinery at 
enormous expense, money he figured Egypt could easily repay since it 
would be selling cotton forever. 
But the rise in cotton prices was a mere blip caused by the outbreak 
of the U.S. Civil War, which choked off cotton exports from the south-
ern states there and forced English textile factories to look elsewhere for 
thread. As soon as the U.S. Civil War ended, the price of cotton dropped 
and Egypt was ruined. Now, the bankers and financial advisers flooded 
into the country in earnest. Every Egyptian government official ended 
up with a European adviser of his very own. The Eastern questions still 
remained-both France and Britain stood poised to achieve total domi-
nance in Egypt. 
Britain seemed to have the edge, however, which made France all the 
more determined not to lose the edge it had further west. In the period of 
France's revolutionary turmoil, two Algerian Jewish families had sold 8 
million francs' worth of grain to France to feed its armies. When 
Napoleon fell and France reverted to monarchy, France disavowed that 
debt. The Ottoman governor of this province met with the French con-
sul, Pierre Duval, to demand an explanation. Duval told him France did 
not discuss money with Arabs. The governor slapped Duval in the face 
with ... a fly swatter. What a blow to French honor! L'A.ffaire de Mouche-
Swatter {the "affair of the fly swatter") made it into the French press, and 
nobody laughed. More insults were exchanged and tensions went on ris-
ing. As it happened, there was a struggle under way in France just then 
between monarchists and liberals. The monarchists who held power saw 
domestic political advantage in a quick, successful military adventure. 
Napoleon had proven how easily Arabs could be defeated in Egypt, and 
so, in 1830, France invaded Algeria.? 
The venture proved as quick and successful as any Frenchman might 
have hoped. The governor fled to Naples, leaving his fortune behind and 
his country leaderless. France hauled about 100 million francs out of Al-
geria, about half of which made it to the French treasury. The rest disap-
peared into the pockets of the soldiers and officers who invaded the 
country. 

WEST COMES EAST 
245 
With its government gone, Algeria was a power vacuum, and you know 
how nature abhors those things. Instead of setting up a proxy or puppet, 
France decided to incorporate Algeria into its national structure as three 
new provinces. In other words, the French treated Algeria not as a colony 
but as part of France. A "joint stock" company was set up to sell land to 
French citizens who would immigrate to these new provinces and help 
"develop" them. 
Even here in Algeria, which France out and out invaded, the foreign-
ers flooding in as immigrants didn't fight a war with the natives. They just 
bought up 80 percent of the land, fair and square, and set up a whole new 
economy that didn't compete with the native economy so much as ignore 
it. Algerian Arabs remained free to plant what they wanted on whatever 
land they retained, ship what they grew to Algerian ports if they could 
afford the freight charges, and sell their products in world market if 
they could find any buyers, which they couldn't. Or if they preferred, they 
could leave the land and move to the cities and start businesses, if they 
had the capital-which they didn't-and if they could get a business li-
cense from French officials, which for various good and legal reasons, they 
often couldn't. 
So the Arabs of Algeria ended up buying and selling to each other in 
the old traditional ways while the bulk of the country, absorbed as it was 
into the European and world markets, did business in streamlined, super-
productive modern ways. 
If any Algerian had been asked whether he opposed or supported sell-
ing 80 percent of the country to French buyers, he would surely have said 
he opposed it. If anyone had been faced with that decision, he would al-
most certainly have decided no. But no one ever had a chance to decide 
whether to sell off 80 percent of the country. Each landowner who sold 
property to "the French'' was only deciding whether to sell his one piece of 
land to this one buyer. It was quite possible to oppose selling 80 percent of 
the country to foreigners while seeing persuasive reasons to sell one partic-
ular bit of it to one particular foreigner. 
Over the next century, the French community in Algeria grew to seven 
hundred thousand French citizens. They came to own most of the land and 
considered themselves native Algerians, since they were born on Algerian 
soil and most were the children of parents born there. Inconveniently, some 

246 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
5 million Arabs happened to be living there as well and no one could 
fathom where they had come from or what they were doing there. They 
didn't seem to have any function, and whatever they subsisted on, it was an 
almost completely separate economy from the one the French Algerians 
were involved in. 
By 1850, Europeans controlled every part of the world that had once 
called itself Dar al-Islam. They lived in these countries as an upper class, 
they ruled them directly or decided who would rule, they controlled there-
sources, they dictated the policies, and they circumscribed the daily lives of 
their people. In places such as Egypt, Iran, and India, there were dubs that 
the native people could not enter because they were Egyptian or Iranian or 
Indian. Europeans had achieved this dominance without any grand war or 
broadscale assault. The Europeans were scarcely even aware that there had 
been a struggle and that they had won. But Muslims noticed, because it's al-
ways harder to ignore a rock you're under than a rock you're on. 

13 
~ 
The Reform Movements 
1150-1336 AH 
1737-1918 CE 
AT THE SAME TIME as these political developments, a crucial story was 
1"\.. unfolding in the intellectual arena as well. This story began before 
1800 and continued long after, with consequences that shake the world to 
this very day: it consisted of revival and reform movements that surged up 
throughout the Muslim world at the same time that Europeans were over-
whelming these lands. 
The two stories are related, though not identical. Some sort of sweep-
ing challenge to the Muslim status quo was going to take place around this 
time with or without the Europeans. Why? Because in the Muslim world, 
by 1700 or so, religious institutions had bureaucratized spirituality in 
much the same way that the Catholic Church had bureaucratized Chris-
tianity in late medieval Europe. The whole system of Muslim law had been 
worked out so fully that there was no creative work left for any new en-
thusiast to do. The application of shari' a to every dot and detail of personal 
and social life was a done deal. The power of the ulama had grown en-
crusted. The Sufi orders had been institutionalized, and authorities at 
every level agreed that "the gates of ijtihad were closed." 
247 

248 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
ljtihad, remember, means "free and independent thinking based on rea-
son." It can't depart from scripture, but it consists of thinking through the 
implications of scripture creatively. Muslim scholars had once allowed that 
ijtihad might be exercised on issues not explicitly settled by Qur'an; then 
by Qur'an and hadith; then by Qur'an, hadith, and the work of previous 
authoritative scholars .... And so by the eighteenth century, important 
scholars generally agreed that no unsettled issues existed. Everything had 
been covered, everything worked out; ordinary people no longer needed to 
exercise free and independent thought. There was nothing left for them to 
do but follow the rules. 
Following the rules, however, does not provide the spiritual fulfillment 
people seek from religion. The bureaucratization of Islam created much 
the same stultifications and discontents that in Christendom had provoked 
the Protestant Reformation. And indeed, by the middle of the eighteenth 
century, reform movements were beginning to sprout throughout the 
Muslim world. 
But there never was a Muslim version of Europe's Protestant Reforma-
tion, and thus none of the consequences that followed from the Reforma-
tion: no doctrine of individualism emerged here, no coupling of religion to 
nationalism (except in a sense in Iran), no separation of church and state, 
no conceptual division of the world into secular and religious realms, no 
sudden development of enlightenment-sryle liberalism, and so no democ-
ratic, scientific, or industrial revolutions. 
Why not? 
Well, for one thing, some of the issues that fueled the Reformation 
could not arise in Islam. Protestant reformers rebelled against the Church; 
Islam had no church. Protestant reformers attacked the authoriry of the 
pope; Islam had no pope. Protestants said priests could not mediate be-
tween man and God; Islam never had a priesthood (the ulama were more 
like lawyers than priests.) The Protestant reformers insisted on a direct, 
personal interaction between the individual worshipper and God. The 
Muslim prayer ritual had always been just that. 
But the Europeans were certainly a factor too. Without them in the 
picture, the Muslim reform movements might well have taken a different 
course. European religious reform took shape in a purely European con-
text. That is, when Protestant reformers challenged Catholic practices and 

THE REFORM MOVEMENTS 
249 
doctrines, they were addressing issues internal to their own society, not 
steeling Christianity against some external cultural challenge. In 1517, few 
western Christians worried that Muslims might have a more convincing 
message to offer than Christianity or that Christian youth might start con-
verting to Islam. The Turks were at the gate, it's true, but they weren't in 
the living room, and they certainly weren't in the bedroom. The Turks 
posed a threat to the physical health of Christians, but not to the spiritual 
health of Christianity. 
Muslims were in a different boat. Almost from the start, as I've dis-
cussed, Islam had offered its political and military successes as an argu-
ment for its doctrines and a proof of its revelations. The process began 
with those iconic early battles at Badr and Uhud, when the outcome of 
battle was shown to have theological meaning. The miracle of expansion 
and the linkage of victory with truth continued for hundreds of years. 
Then came the Mongol holocaust, which forced Muslim theologians to 
reexamine their assumptions. That process spawned such reformers as Ibn 
Taymiyah. Vis-a-vis the Mongols, however, the weakness of Muslims was 
concrete and easy to understand. The Mongols had greater killing power, 
but they came without an ideology. When the bloodshed wound down 
and the human hunger for meaning bubbled up, as it always does, they 
had nothing to offer. In fact, they themselves converted. Islam won in the 
end, absorbing the Mongols as it had absorbed the Turks before them and 
the Persians before that. 
Conversion to Islam made the Mongols no less bloody {as Timur-i-lang 
proved), but at least, under the aegis of the converted rulers, the old quest 
could begin again, albeit starting over from the smoking rubble of a ruined 
world-the quest to build and universalize the community of Allah. 
The same could not be said for the new overlords. The Europeans came 
wrapped in certainty about their way of life and peddling their own ideas 
of ultimate truth. They didn't challenge Islam so much as ignore it, unless 
they were missionaries, in which case they simply tried to convert the 
Muslims. If they noticed Islam, they didn't bother to debate it {missionar-
ies are not in the debating business) but only smiled at it as one would at 
the toys of a child or the quaint relics of a more primitive people. How 
maddening for Muslim cognoscenti! And yet, what could Muslims do 
about it? 

250 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Even if Muslim and Christian scholars had found some forum in 
which to exchange views, it would have been irrelevant to the conundrum 
facing Muslims because by the nineteenth century, the challenge to Islam 
came not so much from Christianity as from a secular, humanistic world-
view that evolved out of the Reformation, the melange now often called 
"modernity." 
The source of Muslim weakness and European strength was not obvi-
ous. It wasn't strictly a question of military advantage. For the most part, 
the foreigners weren't torturing and killing. For the most part, the new 
overlords didn't even set themselves up as rulers, quite. Officially, most 
Muslims still had their own native monarchs, still had their own govern-
ment buildings where Muslim officials still stamped documents, and 
somewhere in every Muslim state was still a capital dating back to ancient 
days of bygone splendor, and in that capital was a palace and in that palace 
a throne and on that throne usually a shah, sultan, nawab, khan, khedive, 
or what you will, some native ruler whose wealth and pomp made him all 
but indistinguishable from the potentates of old. 
In Iran, the foreigners roamed the corridors of power merely as advi-
sers. In Turkey, there they were, collecting salaries as consultants. In Egypt 
and the Levant, they stood by as "protectors." Even in India, which had a 
governor-general appointed by the British parliament, the military and po-
lice forces that "kept order" consisted mostly of Muslims, Hindus, Sikhs, 
Parsees, and other locals. How could Muslims claim that they were not still 
ruling themselves? 
And yet by the end of the eighteenth century, Muslims looked around 
and saw with dawning horror that they had been conquered: from Bengal 
to Istanbul, they were subservient to foreigners in every aspect of their 
lives, in their own cities and towns and neighborhoods and in their very 
homes. And not just foreigners like the ones next door, but people who 
spoke a whole different set of languages, practiced different religious ritu-
als, wore different kinds of clothes and different kinds of headgear {or, 
shockingly, none at all!), built different kinds of houses, formed different 
kinds of groupings. These foreigners ate pork, they drank liquor, their 
women moved about in public with their faces showing, they laughed at 
jokes that weren't funny and failed to see the humor in things that were hi-
larious, ate weird-tasting food, listened to music that sounded more like 

THE REFORM MOVEMENTS 
251 
noise, and spent their leisure time in puzzling and pointless activities such 
as cricket and quadrilles. 
So the question arose now, as it had in the wake of the Mongol holo-
caust: if the triumphant expansion of the Muslim project proved the truth 
of the revelation, what did the impotence of Muslims in the face of these 
new foreigners signify about the faith? 
With this question looming over the Muslim world, movements to re-
vive Islam could not be extricated from the need to resurrect Muslim 
power. Reformers could not merely offer proposals for achieving more au-
thentic religious experiences. They had to expound how the authenticity 
they proposed would get history back on course, how their proposals 
would restore the dignity and splendor of the Umma, how they would get 
Muslims moving again toward the proper endpoint of history: perfecting 
the community of justice and compassion that flourished in Medina in the 
original golden moment and enlarging it until it included all the world. 
Many reformers emerged and many movements bubbled up, but all of 
them can be sorted into three general sorts of responses to the troubling 
question. 
One response was to say that what needed changing was not Islam but 
Muslims. Innovations, alterations, and accretions had corrupted the faith, 
so that no one was practicing true Islam anymore. What Muslims needed 
to do was to shut out Western influence and restore Islam to its pristine, 
original form. 
Another response was to say that the West was right. Muslims had got-
ten mired in obsolete religious ideas; they had ceded control oflslam to ig-
norant clerics who were out of touch with changing times; they needed to 
modernize their faith along Western lines by clearing out superstition, re-
nouncing magical thinking, and rethinking Islam as an ethical system com-
patible with science and secular activities. 
A third response was to declare Islam the true religion but concede that 
Muslims had certain things to learn from the West. In this view, Muslims 
needed to rediscover and strengthen the essence of their own faith, history, 
and traditions, but absorb Western learning in the fields of science and tech-
nology. According to this river of reform, Muslims needed to modernize but 
could do so in a distinctively Muslim way: science was compatible with the 
Muslim faith and modernization did not have to mean Westernization. 

252 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
These three answers to the challenge of modernity were well-embodied 
in three seminal reformers of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries: 
Abdul Wahhab of the Arabian peninsula, Sayyid Ahmad of Aligarh, India, 
and Sayyid Jamaluddin-i-Afghan, whose birthplace is disputed and whose 
presence was felt everywhere. By no means were they the only reformers. 
Their ideas were not always mutually exclusive. They sometimes straddled 
two different currents of reformism. Their contemporaries and students 
often borrowed from each other. But still, these three men represent three 
distinctively different approaches to reforming and reviving Islam. 
WAHHABISM 
Abdul Wahhab was born around 1703 in the Nejd, that desert of yellow 
sand dunes that many of us picture reflexively when we think of Arabia. He 
grew up in a small oasis town, the son of a judge. When he showed promise 
as a Qur'anic student, he was sent to Medina for further schooling. There, 
one of his teachers introduced him to the works oflbn Taymiyah, the aus-
tere Syrian theologian who, in the wake of the Mongol holocaust taught 
that God had abandoned Muslims and that Muslims must return to the 
exact ways of the First Community if they were ever to regain His favor. 
These teachings resonated for the young Wahhab. 
From Medina the youngster made his way to the cosmopolitan city of 
Basra on the Persian Gulf, and what this ultimate country boy saw in 
Basra-the clamorous diversity of opinion, the many schools of thought, 
the numerous interpretations of the Holy Word, the crowds, the lights, the 
noise-appalled him. This, he decided, was the sort of excrescence that 
was making Islam weak. 
He returned, then, to the stark simplicity of his hometown in the desert 
and began to preach religious revival through restoration oflslam to its orig-
inal form. There was only one God, he thundered, and everyone must wor-
ship the one God exactly as instructed in the Holy Book. Everyone must 
obey the laws laid down by the revelations. Everyone must live exactly as the 
Pure Originals of Medina in Mohammed's time, and anyone who blocked 
the restoration of the original and holy community must be eliminated. 
The Ottomans considered all of Arabia their possession, but they had 
no real authority among the small Bedouin tribes who inhabited this arid 

THE REFORM MOVEMENTS 
253 
landscape, living in scattered oases and eking out a thin survival as traders 
and herders. Wahhab attracted some followers among his fellow Bedouins, 
and he led his group around the countryside destroying shrines because 
they were objects of improper reverence, and Abdul Wahhab preached that 
reverence for anything or anyone except God was idolatry. Eventually, 
Wahhab achieved the position of judge and began to apply Han bali law as 
he saw it with uncompromising zeal. One day, he had a well-known 
woman of the town stoned to death as an adulteress. The locals had seen 
enough. A mob gathered to demand that Abdul Wahhab be ousted from 
his post; there was even talk oflynching. Wahhab fled that town and made 
his way to another oasis called Dariyah. 
There, the local ruler Mohammed ibn Saud welcomed him warmly. 
Ibn Saud was a minor tribal chieftain with very big ambitions: to "unite" 
the Arabian Peninsula. By "unite," of course, he meant "conquer." In the 
single-minded preacher Abdul Wahhab he saw just the ally he needed; 
Wahhab saw the same when he looked at Ibn Saud. The two men made a 
pact. The chieftain agreed to recognize Wahhab as the top religious au-
thority of the Muslim community and do all he could to implement his vi-
sion; the preacher, for his part, agreed to recognize Ibn Saud as the 
political head of the Muslim community, its amir, and to instruct his fol-
lowers to fight for him. 
The pact produced fruit. Over the next few decades, these two men 
"united" all the bedouin tribes of the Arabian Peninsula under Saudi-
Wahhabi rule. Each time they confronted another recalcitrant tribe, they 
began by called on them to convert. "Convert! Convert! Convett!" they yelled 
three times. If the warning was ignored three times (as it generally was) 
Wahhab told the soldiers they could go ahead and kill the people they were 
confronting; Allah permitted it, because these were infidels. 
The call to convert confused the tribes they were attacking at this 
point because all of these tribes considered themselves devout Muslims 
already. But when Abdul Wahhab said "Convert!" he meant to the vision 
of Islam he was preaching. He did not call it Wahhabism because, like 
Ibn Taymiyah before him, he maintained that he was simply calling 
Muslims back to pristine, original Islam, stripped of all accretions and 
washed of all corruptions. He was not an innovator; in fact, he was the 
anti-innovator. 

254 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
People unconvinced of his views, however, saw his vision as a particular 
interpretation of Islam, not Islam itself; and they had no trouble labeling 
his ideology Wahhabism, a term that came into use even among some who 
endorsed his views. 
In 1766, Ibn Saud was assassinated but his son Abdul Aziz took over 
and continued his father's campaign to unite Arabia under the banner of 
Abdul Wahhab's theology. Then in 1792, Wahhab himself died, leaving 
behind twenty widows and countless children. His life had spanned virtu-
ally the entire eighteenth century. While he was imposing his vision of 
pristine Islam in Arabia, England and Scotland melded into Great Britain, 
the United States of America was born, the French Revolution issued the 
Declaration of the Rights of Man, Mozart wrote his entire corpus of 
music, and James Watt invented the steam engine. 
Upon Wahhab's death, Aziz ibn Saud declared himself his successor. Al-
ready the amir, the new Ibn Saud now anointed himself the chief religious 
authority as well. In 1802, Aziz ibn Saud attacked the city of Karbala, 
where the Prophet's grandson Hussein had been martyred. This city was 
central to Shi'i devotions, and many of them had gathered just then to 
commemorate Hussein's martyrdom. But Shi'is ranked high on Wahhab's 
list of those who had altered and corrupted pristine original Islam, and so, 
upon conquering the city, Aziz ibn Saud had some two thousand of its 
Shi'i inhabitants put to death. 
In 1804, Aziz ibn Saud conquered Medina, where he had his army 
promptly destroy the tombs of Mohammed's companions. From Medina, 
the Saudi-Wahhabi armies went on to Mecca, where they wrecked a shrine 
that supposedly marked Prophet Mohammed's birthplace {so that no one 
would fall into idolatrous worship of Mohammed). As long as he was in 
the city, Ibn Saud took advantage of the opportunity to humbly perform 
the rites of pilgrimage in the Ka'ba. 
Then in 1811, the Saudi-Wahhabi alliance began to organize a new 
campaign, this time to Asia Minor, the heart of the Ottoman Empire. 
Now at last the sultan took notice of the Wahhabi movement. To grapple 
with these surging Bedouins, he called on Mohammed Ali, khedive of 
Egypt, to help him out. Mohammed Ali took his disciplined modern army 
into Arabia, and in 1815-the same year that Napoleon's career was end-
ing at Waterloo-he crushed Ibn Saud, restored Ottoman control over 

THE REFORM MOVEMENTS 
255 
Mecca and Medina, and opened the Holy City up again to Muslim pil-
grims of every stripe. Then he sent Aziz ibn Saud's son and successor to Is-
tanbul to be paraded before derisive crowds and then beheaded. 
Little more was heard of the Saudi-Wahhabi alliance for about a cen-
tury, but the alliance did not die. The executed chieftain had a son who 
took over the collapsed remnants of the Saudi confederacy. Now he was 
just a minor tribal chieftain again, but he was still a chieftain, and he was 
still a Wahhabi, and wherever he could still impose his authority, Wah-
habi ulama presided and prospered. Wahhab was dead, but Wahhabism 
lived on. 
What were its tenets? 
You can look long and hard through the actual writings of Abdul Wah-
hab and not find Wahhabism as it is defined today. That's largely because 
Abdul Wahhab didn't write political tracts; he wrote Qur'anic commentary 
and wrote it strictly in the vocabulary of his doctrine. His single-minded 
focus on details of Muslim doctrine, law, and practice might strike out-
siders as obsessive. His major work, Kitab-al-Tawhid (The Book of Unity) 
has sixty-six chapters, each of which presents one or more quotes from the 
Qur'an, unpacks each quote, lists lessons to be learned from the quote, and 
then explains how this quote relates to Wahhab's core creed. There is no 
talk here of East or West, nothing about Western influence or Muslim 
weakness, nothing recognizably political at all. To read Wahhab's words is 
to realize that he looked at the world through purely religious spectacles. 
In his own view, his entire theology boiled down to two tenets: first, the 
importance of tawhid, or "unity," that is, the singleness and unity of God; 
and second, the fallacy of shirk, the idea that anyone or anything shared in 
God's divinity to even the smallest degree. 
Marx once said "I am not a Marxist," and if Abdul Wahhab were alive 
today, he might well say, "I am not a Wahhabi," but nonetheless, Wah-
habism exists, and it now includes many further tenets that derive from 
Wahhab's preachings by implication or that developed historically from its 
application by Saudi chieftains. This expanded Wahhabism told Muslims 
that the Law was Islam and Islam was the Law: getting it right, knowing it 
fully, and following it exactly was the whole of the faith. 
The Law was all right there in the Qur'an, according to Wahhab and 
his followers. The sunna-the life of the Prophet as revealed through 

256 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
hadith-amounted to a commentary on the Law. The Qur'an did not pre-
scribe principles to guide human behavior but actual acts Muslims were to 
perform. It revealed not just the form but the content of human life. In the 
life of Prophet Mohammed, it gave a stencil for every Muslim to follow. 
Medina in the time of Mohammed and the first three khalifas was the 
ideal community, the one time and place when everybody knew the law, 
got the law and followed it fully. That was why the First Community was 
able to flourish and expand so miraculously. That Medina was the stencil 
for every Muslim community to recreate. 
The purpose of life was to follow the Law. The purpose of social and 
political life was to build the community in which the Law could be rei-
fied. All who hindered the great task of building that ideal community 
were enemies oflslam. The obligations of a Muslim included participation 
in jihad, the struggle to defeat the enemies of Islam. Jihad was right up 
there with prayer, fasting, alms, pilgrimage, and attesting to the unity of 
God as a religious obligation. 
And who were the enemies of Islam? 
According to Wahhab's doctrines, those who did not believe in Islam 
were, of course, potential enemies but not the most crucial offenders. If 
they agreed to live peacefully under Muslim rule, they could be toler-
ated. The enemies of real concern were slackards, apostates, hypocrites, 
and innovators. 
Slackards were Muslims who talked the talk but didn't really walk the 
walk. They espoused the creed, but when it was time to pray, you found 
them playing cards or taking naps. They had to be punished so they would 
not corrupt other Muslims. Apostates were those who were born into or 
had converted to Islam but had then renounced it. They were to be killed. 
Hypocrites were those who said they were Muslims but weren't really. They 
mouthed the words but in their hearts their allegiance went to some other 
faith. They were inherently a fifth column working against the community 
and could commit disastrous betrayal in a crisis. Hypocrites were to be 
killed as soon as they were unmasked. And finally, perhaps the worst of-
fenders of all were the innovators: Muslims who were corrupting Islam by 
adding to or altering any aspects of the pristine original Law. People who 
performed the rituals differently than the Pious Originals, or who per-
formed rituals the Prophet and his companions never practiced, or who 

THE REFORM MOVEMENTS 
257 
advocated ideas not found in the Qur'an were innovators. Both the Shi'i 
and the Sufis belonged to this group. Jihad against them was not only le-
gitimate but obligatory, according to Wahhabism as it developed in histor-
ical practice. 
Wahhabi attitudes and enthusiasms spread far beyond Arabia. Wah-
habism found particularly fertile ground at the other end of the Muslim 
world, in the subcontinent oflndia. In practice, various people who called 
themselves Wahhabis emphasized various aspects of the creed the Saudi 
tribe preached. In India, for example, some so-called Wahhabis rejected 
jihad as an obligation. Others said apostates should be engaged in debate 
not battle. Some thought slackards should be reeducated rather than pun-
ished or that hypocrites should be chastened rather than killed, or some 
other variation. But all who called themselves Wahhabis looked at the Law 
as the core oflslam, even the whole oflslam. All tended to look back to a 
golden era that provided a stencil for Muslim life and tended to believe 
that restoring the First Community of Mohammed's Medina would re-
store Muslims to favor in Allah's eyes, thereby restoring the vigor and 
power the Umma enjoyed under the first four khalifas. 
Outside the Islamic world, the Saudi-Wahhabi alliance may have 
seemed like some brief anomaly that flared and vanished; but in fact it went 
on smoldering in the deserts of Arabia, and the world was to hear a great 
deal more about the alliance in the twentieth century, after the British agent 
remembered as Lawrence of Arabia found his way to that desert. 
THE ALIGARH MOVEMENT: SECULAR MODERNISM 
Sayyid Ahmad, or Sir Sayyid Ahmad of Aligarh, as he liked to be called 
later in life, represents an attitude of thought that sprang up independently 
in many parts of the Muslim world in the nineteenth century. He and oth-
ers began exploring ways to rethink Islam as an ethical system that would 
stay true to its own traditions and spirit but make it compatible with a sec-
ular world dominated by Europeans. 
Sayyid Ahmad was born in 1817 to a prominent Muslim family in 
Delhi. His forebears had been important officials under the Moghuls, back 
when the Moghuls ruled this part of the world. Now, the British grip on 
the subcontinent had been deepening for many generations and Sayyid 

258 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Ahmed's family had adapted to the new order. His grandfather served the 
East India Company in positions of responsibility, once running a school 
for them and another time traveling to Iran as a British envoy. Twice he 
had worked for the Moghul emperor as his prime minister, but the "em-
peror" at this point was just another British pensioner and his prime min-
ister's chief duties were to fill out the appropriate forms to keep his pension 
flowing. Sayyid Ahmad's father worked for the company too, and his 
brother started one of India's first Urdu newspapers. In short, Sayyid 
Ahmad hailed from a high-status, modernist, Western-oriented family, and 
he knew something about British life. 
His mother, however, was a devout Muslim of legendary piety, re-
spected for her scholarship. She made the boy go to madrassa, and she 
equaled his grandfather as an influence on this life, so Sayyid Ahmad grew 
to manhood with these two dueling currents in his personality: a heartfelt 
allegiance to his own Muslim community and a high regard for British cul-
ture and a longing for the respect of those colonials. 
Unfortunately, his family sank into financial trouble after his father's 
untimely death. Sayyid Ahmad had to quit school and go to work. He 
hired on with the East India Company as a clerk and eventually earned 
promotion to subjudge, handling small claims, but this was a minor post 
in the company's judicial system: really not much more than a glorified 
clerk. He couldn't rise higher because he had never completed his formal 
education; he was largely self-taught. 
Still he read avidly, all the science and English-language literature he 
could get his hands on. He formed reading groups and discussion clubs 
with his Indian Muslim friends and organized lecture series on scientific 
topics. During the Indian Mutiny of 1857, he sided with the British; but 
afterwards he wrote a pamphlet called The Causes of the Indian Revolt in 
which he reproached the British administrators for their errors and over-
sights, a pamphlet he sent to government officials in Calcutta and London. 
He followed up with An Account of the Loyal Mohammedans of India, 
which was translated into English by a British colonel. In this little book, 
he tried to resurrect his coreligionists in British eyes by depicting Indian 
Muslims as the Queen's most loyal subjects. He also argued that Muslims 
could have no jihadist sentiments toward the British and ought not to 
have, quoting scholarly religious sources to prove that jihad against the 

THE REFORM MOVEMENTS 
259 
British was not permissible since the British did not restrict or interfere 
with Muslim devotions. 
Finally, in 1874, he decided to see England for himsel£ It was the first 
time Sayyid Ahmad had traveled beyond the confines oflndia. In London, 
where his writings had earned him some affection, he lived beyond his 
means, attending fashionable parties and hobnobbing with intellectuals, 
artists, and aristocrats. He cut a striking figure in this milieu, resolutely 
clad in Muslim robes, sporting a large beard, and wearing a small pillbox-
shaped religious cap, looking every inch the old-school Muslim gentleman 
of Moghul high society. The queen herself awarded him a ribbon, making 
him a "Companion of the Star oflndia," which led him ever afterward to 
call himself Sir Sayyid Ahmad Khan. 
Then one day, there in London, he ran across a derogatory biography 
of Prophet Mohammed written by some Englishman. He was devastated. 
He dropped all his other concerns and began writing his own biography of 
the Prophet to refute the one by the Englishman. He wrote in Urdu, be-
cause it was his mother tongue, but he was aiming his book at a European 
public, so he paid to have it translated, chapter by chapter, as he was writ-
ing it, into English, French, German, and Latin. The job proved too im-
mense; he had to scale down his ambitions, in the end going for a 
collection of essays about Mohammed. He ran out of money before he 
could finish even that, and seventeen months after leaving India he 
dragged himself home again, penniless and exhausted. 
England had impressed him deeply, however-too deeply, said his crit-
ics. In comparison to England, he found his homeland painfully back-
ward. "Without flattering the English," he wrote, "I can truly say that the 
natives oflndia, high and low, merchants and petty shopkeepers, educated 
and illiterate, when contrasted with the English in education, manners, 
and uprightness, are like a dirty animal is to an able and handsome man." 
But what made his fellow Muslims so backward? What could he do to 
elevate his community? Sayyid Ahmad decided that the problem lay partly 
in the way Muslims were interpreting Islam. They were mired in magical 
thinking, they were clinging to superstition and calling it Islam. Sir Sayyid 
Ahmed Khan began elaborating a doctrine that offended his contempo-
raries among the Indian ulama. Religion, he suggested, was a natural field 
of human inquiry and achievement. It was integral to human life. It 

260 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
evolved with the human community in the natural course of things-just 
like art, agriculture, and technology-growing ever more sophisticated as 
man grew more civilized. 
Early humans had a limited capacity to explore moral and ethical issues 
intellectually, Sayyid Ahmad speculated. They needed revealed religion to 
help them overcome their passions and guide them to moral judgments 
and conduct: rulings from a higher power, delivered by prophets with the 
charismatic authority to persuade without explanation. But the moral and 
ethical injunctions of all great, true religions are not fundamentally irra-
tional. They are reasonable, and reason can discover them, once people 
have developed the intellectual capacity to do so. 
That's why Mohammed announced that he was the last of the prophets-
he didn't mean that his rulings about issues in the Mecca and Medina of his 
day were to be the final word on human conduct throughout the ages. He 
meant that he had brought the last tools people needed to proceed on the 
quest for a moral community on their own, without unexplained rulings 
from God. Islam was the last of the revealed religions because it was the be-
ginning of the age of reason-based religions. Rational people could achieve 
moral excellence by reasoning correctly from sound fundamental principles. 
What Islam brought were sound fundamental principles. They were the same 
as those found in Christianity and all the other great revealed religions with 
the one caveat that Islam also enjoined rationality. It would have liberated hu-
manity from blind obedience to superstition and dogma had not Muslims 
misinterpreted the meaning of the Qur'anic revelations and gone off course. 
Sayyid Ahmad was suggesting implicitly that Muslims disconnect from 
obsessing about heaven and hell and miraculous interventions by God in his-
tory and rethink their faith as an ethical system. In this approach, good Mus-
lims would not necessarily be those who read the Qur'an in Arabic for many 
hours every day, or dressed a certain way, or prayed just so. Good Muslims 
would be defined as those who didn't lie, or cheat, or steal, or kill, those who 
developed their own best capacities assiduously and behaved fairly toward 
others, those who sought justice in society, behaved responsibly in their com-
munities, and exercised mercy, compassion, and charity as best they could. 
Before he went to England, Sayyid Ahmad had founded an organiza-
tion called the Scientific Society, in the northern Indian town of Aligarh. 
This organization produced lectures and made advanced European learn-

THE REFORM MOVEMENTS 
261 
ing accessible to Indian Muslims by translating and publishing the impor-
tant books ofWestern cultures into Urdu and Persian. After his return 
from England, Sir Sayyid Ahmad developed the Scientific Society into a 
university, which he hoped to make into the "Cambridge of the Muslim 
World." In addition to the "religious sciences" and other traditional sub-
jects of Islamic learning, the curriculum at Aligarh University offered 
courses in physics, chemistry, biology, and other "modern" subjects. 
Even though many of the Indian ulama attacked Sayyid Ahmad's views, 
the university prospered and attracted students. Aligarh University students 
and faculty formed the seeds of a secular movement which, in the twenti-
eth century, lobbied for Muslims to separate from India and build a nation-
state of their own, a movement that finally resulted in the birth of Pakistan. 
Sayyid Ahmad's specific ideas failed to create any widespread move-
ment associated with his name, but modernist intellectuals in other Mus-
lim lands were exploring similar ideas and coming up with similar 
conclusions. In Iran, a prime minister working for the Qajar Shahs estab-
lished a school called Dar al-Funun, which offered instruction in all the 
sciences and in the arts, literature, and philosophies of the West. Graduates 
of that school began to seed Iranian society with modernists who sought to 
reshape their society along European lines. 
Similar modernists were active at the heart of the Ottoman Empire. In 
the later nineteenth century, the modernist faction in the Ottoman gov-
ernment promoted policies called Tanzimat, or "reforms," which included 
setting up European-style schools, adopting European techniques of ad-
ministration in the government bureaucracies, reorganizing the army 
along European lines, dressing the soldiers in European style uniforms, en-
couraging European-style clothes for government officials, and so on. 
ISLAMIST MODERNISM 
We come now to the dominant Muslim reformer of the nineteenth century, 
a volcanic force named Sayyid Jamaluddin-i-Afghan. Afghans believe he was 
born in Afghanistan, in 1836, about fifty miles east ofKabul, in a town called 
Asadabad, the capital of Kunar province. His family was connected to 
Afghanistan's ruling clan through marriage but did something to offend the 
royal and had to move to Iran in a hurry when Jamaluddin was a little boy. 

262 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Confusingly enough, they settled dose to an Iranian town also called 
Asadabad, which has given rise to a long-standing dispute about where Ja-
maluddin-i-Afghan was actually born and which country, Afghanistan or 
Iran, can claim him as its native son. Afghans point out that he always called 
himself Jamaluddin-i-Aj-han-"Jamaluddin the Afghan" -and on this basis 
consider the matter dosed. Iranian historians say he only called himself "the 
Afghan" to hide the fact that he was Iranian and allude to documentary evi-
dence that they say settles the question quite definitively. On the other hand, 
when I was growing up in Afghanistan, lots of people in Kabul seemed to 
know his family and relatives, who still had land in Kunar at that time. To 
me, that seems to settle the matter, but maybe that's just because I'm Afghan. 
One thing is certain. Today, many Muslim governments see Sayyid Ja-
maluddin as a prize to claim. In his day, however, every Muslim govern-
ment eventually came to see this fellow as a troublemaking pest and threw 
him out. Let me present a brief outline of his amazing, peripatetic career. 
Wherever he may have grown up, no one disputes that he went to India 
when he was about eighteen years old. Anti-British sentiment was rising to a 
fever pitch in India just then, and Jamaluddin may have met some Muslims 
who were cooking up anti-British plots. He happened to be in Mecca on pil-
grimage when the Great Indian Mutiny broke out, but he was back in time 
to witness the British reprisals that shocked the Muslim east so deeply. It was 
during that first journey to India that Jamaluddin probably developed a life-
long hatred of the British and a lasting antipathy to European colonialism in 
general. In any case, from India, he went to ... 
• Afghanistan. There he gained the confidence of the king whom the 
British had tried unsuccessfully to unseat. The king hired Jamalud-
din to tutor his eldest son, Azam. Jamaluddin was already formulat-
ing ideas about the need to reform and modernize Islam as a way of 
restoring Muslim power and pride, and he saw the job of tutoring 
the country's heir apparent as an opportunity to shape a ruler who 
would implement his vision. He steeped Prince Azam Khan in his 
reformist ideas and trained him to lead Afghanistan into the modern 
age. Unfortunately, Azam succeeded his father only briefly. One of 
his cousins quickly overthrew him, with British backing. The British 
probably moved to unseat Azam in part because they didn't want any 

THE REFORM MOVEMENTS 
protege ofJamaluddin's on the Afghan throne. They sensed what he 
was up to. In any case, Azam moved to Iran, where he died in exile. 
Jamaluddin was forced to flee as well, so he made his way to ... 
• Asia Minor. There he began to deliver speeches at Constantino-
ple University. He declared that Muslims needed to learn all 
about modern science but at the same time ground their children 
more firmly in Islamic values, tradition, and history. Moderniza-
tion, he said, didn't have to mean Westernization: Muslims could 
perfectly well seek the ingredients of a distinctively Islamic mod-
ernization in Islam itself. This message proved popular with both 
the masses and the upper classes. Sayyid Jamaluddin was well sit-
uated now to claim a high position in Ottoman Turkey and live 
his life out as an honored and richly compensated spokesperson 
for Islam. Instead, he began to teach that people should have the 
freedom to interpret the Qur'an for themselves, without oppres-
sive "guidance" from the ulama, whom he blamed for the retarda-
tion of scientific learning in Islamic civilization. Naturally, this 
turned the powerful clerical establishment against him and they 
had the man expelled, so in 1871 he moved to ... 
• Egypt, where he started teaching classes and delivering lectures at 
the famous Al Azhar University. He continued to expound his vi-
sion of modernization on Islamic terms. (In this period, he also 
wrote a history of Afghanistan, perhaps just another sly ploy to 
make people think he was from Afghanistan and not Iran.) In 
Egypt, however, where the dynasty founded by Mehmet Ali had 
rotted into a despotic ruling class in bed with British and French 
interests, he began to criticize the corruption of the rich and pow-
erful. He said the country's rulers ought to adopt modest lifestyles 
and live among the people, just as leaders of the early Muslim 
community had done. He also started calling for parliamentary 
democracy. Again, however, he insisted that democratization didn't 
have to mean Westernization. He found a basis for an Islamic 
style of democracy in two Islamic concepts: shura and ijma. 
Shura means something like "advisory council." It was the 
mechanism through which early Muslim leaders sought the advice 
and consent of the community. The first shura was that small 
263 

264 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
group Khalifa Omar appointed to pick his successor. That shura 
had to present its nominee to the Muslims of Medina and get their 
approval. Of course that community numbered in the low thou-
sands and its leading members could all fit in the main mosque 
and its surrounding courtyard, so shura democracy was the direct 
democracy of the town hall meeting. How that model could be ap-
plied to a whole huge country such as Egypt was another question. 
Ijma means "consensus." This concept originated in a saying 
attributed to the Prophet: "My community will never agree on an 
error." The ulama used the saying as a justification for asserting 
that when they all agreed on a doctrinal point, the point lay be-
yond further questioning or dispute. In short, they co-opted ijma 
to mean consensus among themselves. Jamaluddin, however, rein-
terpreted the two concepts and expanded their application. From 
shura and ijma, he argued that in Islam, rulers had no legitimacy 
without the support of their people. 
His ideas about democracy made the king of Egypt nervous, 
and his harangues about the decadence of the upper classes of-
fended everyone above a certain income level. In 1879, Jamalud-
din was evicted from Egypt, at which point he backtracked to ... 
• India. There, the "liberal" Aligarh movement, founded and led by 
Sir Sayyid Ahmad, had evolved into a force to be reckoned with. But 
Jamaluddin saw Sir Sayyid Ahmad as a fawning British lapdog, and 
said so in his only full-scale book, Refutation of the Materialists. The 
British, however, liked Sayyid Ahmad's ideas. When a rebellion broke 
out in Egypt, British authorities claimed that Jamaluddin had incited 
the eruption through his followers and they put him in prison for a 
few months. When the rebellion died down, they released him but 
expelled him from India, and so, in 1882 he went to ... 
• Paris, where he wrote articles for various publications in English, 
Persian, Arabic, Urdu, and French {in all of which languages he 
was not merely fluent but articulate and even capable of elo-
quence). In his articles he developed the idea that Islam was at 
core a rational religion and that Islam had pioneered the scientific 
revolution. He went on insisting that Muslim ulama and despots 
had retarded scientific progress in the Muslim world but said cler-

THE REFORM MOVEMENTS 
265 
ics and despots had done the same in other religions too, includ-
ing Christianity. In France, at this time, a philosopher named 
Ernest Renan was writing that Muslims were inherently incapable 
of scientific thinking {Renan also said that the Chinese were a 
"race with wonderful manual dexterity but no sense of honor," 
that Jews were "incomplete," that "Negroes" were happiest tilling 
soil, that Europeans were natural masters and soldiers, and that if 
everyone would just do what they were "made for" all would be 
well with the world. 1) Jamaluddin engaged Renan in a famous de-
bate at the Sorbonne {famous among Muslims, at least) in which 
he argued that Islam only seemed less "scientific" than Christian-
ity because it was founded later and was therefore in a somewhat 
earlier stage of its development. 
Here in Paris, Jamaluddin and one of his Egyptian proteges, Mo-
hammed Abduh, started a seminal journal called The Firmest Bond. 
They published only eighteen issues before they ran out of money 
and into other difficulties and had to shut the journal down, but in 
those eighteen issues, Jamaluddin established the core of the credo 
now called pan-Islamism. He declared that all the apparently local 
struggles between diverse Muslim and European powers over vari-
ous specific issues-between the Iranians and Russia over Azerbai-
jan, between the Ottomans and Russia over Crimea, between the 
British and Egyptians over bank loans, between the French and Al-
gerians over grain sales, between the British and the people oflndia 
and Afghanistan over borders etc., etc. were not actually many dif-
ferent struggles over many different issues but one great struggle 
over one great issue between just two global entities: Islam and the 
West. He was the first to use these two words as coterminous and 
of course historically conflicting categories. Sometime during this 
period Jamaluddin also, it would seem, visited ... 
• the United States, but little is known about his activities there, 
and he certainly dipped in and out of ... 
• London a few times, where he argued with Randolph Churchill, 
the father of Winston Churchill, and with other British leaders 
about British policies in Egypt. He also traveled in Germany, as 
well as spending some time in Saint Petersburg, the capital of 

266 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Russia. Once his journal folded, he had nothing to keep him in 
Europe anymore, so he moved to ... 
• Uzbekistan. There, he talked czarist authorities into letting him 
publish and disseminate the Qur' an to Muslims under czarist 
rule, and to translate, publish, and disseminate other Islamic lit-
erature, which had been unavailable in Central Asia for decades. 
His efforts led to a revival of Islam throughout the region. Here, 
Jamaluddin also fleshed out an idea he had long been pushing, 
that Muslim countries needed to use the rivalry among European 
powers to carve out a zone of independence for themselves, by 
aligning with Russia against British power, with Germany against 
Russian power, with Britain and France against Russian power, 
and so on. These ideas would emerge as core strategies of the 
global "non-aligned movement" of the twentieth century. In 1884 
he moved to ... 
• Iran where he worked to reform the judiciary. This brought him 
head to head with the local ulama. Things got hot and he had to 
return to Central Asia in a hurry. In 1888, however, Iran's King 
Nasiruddin invited him back to the country as its prime minister. 
Nasiruddin was locked in a power struggle with his country's 
ulama, and he thought Jamaluddin's "modernism" would help his 
cause. Jamaluddin did move to Iran, not as its prime minister but 
as a special adviser to the king. This time, however, instead of at-
tacking the ulama, he attacked the king and his practice of selling 
economic "concessions" to colonialist powers. The most striking 
example of this during Jamaluddin's stay in Iran was the no-bid 
tobacco concession awarded to British companies, which gave 
British interests control over every aspect of tobacco production 
and sale in Iran.2 Jamaluddin called for a tobacco boycott, a strat-
egy later taken up in many lands by many other political activists, 
including the Indian anticolonialist leader Mahatma Gandhi 
(who famously called on Indians to boycott English cotton and 
instead spin their own). Jamaluddin's oratory filled the streets of 
Iran with demonstrators protesting against the Shah, who was 
probably sorry he had ever set eyes on the Afghan (Iranian?) re-
former. Jamaluddin even talked one of the grand ayatollahs into 

THE REFORM MOVEMENTS 
267 
declaring the tobacco concession un-Islamic. Well, that finally 
snapped the shah's patience. He sent troops to roust Jamaluddin 
out of his house and escort him to the border. Thus, in 1891, Ja-
maluddin the Afghan returned to ... 
• Istanbul, where the Ottoman emperor Sultan Hamid gave him a 
house and a stipend. The Sultan thought Jamaluddin's pan-Islamist 
ideas would somehow pay political dividends to him. Jamaluddin 
went on teaching, writing, and giving speeches. Intellectuals and 
activists came to visit him from every corner of the Muslim world. 
The great reformer told them that ijtihad, "free thinking," was a 
primary principle of Islam: but freethinking, he said, had to pro-
ceed from first principles rooted in Qur'an and hadith. Every 
Muslim had the right to his or her own interpretation of the 
scriptures and revelations, but Muslims as a community had to 
school themselves in those first principles embedded in the reve-
lations. The great error of Muslims, the reason for their weakness, 
said Jamaluddin, was that they had turned their backs on Western 
science while embracing Western education and social mores. 
They should have done exactly the opposite: they should have 
embraced western science but closed their gates to Western social 
mores and educational systems. 
In 1895, unfortunately, an Iranian student assassinated King Nasirud-
din. The Iranian government immediately blamed Jamaluddin for it and 
demanded that he be extradited to Iran for punishment. Sultan Hamid re-
fused the demand but he put the great reformer under house arrest. Later 
that year, Jamaluddin contracted cancer of the mouth and requested that 
he be allowed to travel to Vienna for medical treatment but the sultan 
turned him down. Instead, he sent his personal physician over to treat 
him. The court physician treated Jamaluddin's cancer by removing his 
lower jaw. Jamaluddin-i-Afghan died that year and was buried in Asia 
Minor. Later his body was transported to Afghanistan for reburial. Wher-
ever he had started out, he certainly ended up in Afghanistan: his grave is 
situated at the heart of the campus of Kabul University. 
It's interesting to remember that Sayyid Jamaluddin Afghan had no of-
ficial leadership title or position. He didn't run a country. He didn't have 

268 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
an army. He had no official position in any government. He never founded 
a political party or headed up a movement. He had no employees, no 
subordinates, no one to whom he gave orders. What's more he didn't leave 
behind some body of books or even one book encapsulating a coherent po-
litical philosophy, no Islamist Das Capital This man was purely a gadfly, 
rabble-rouser, and rebel-that's what he was. 
Yet he had a tremendous impact on the Muslim world. How? Through 
his "disciples." Sayyid Jamaluddin-i-Afghan operated like a prophet, in a 
way. His charismatic intensity lit sparks everywhere he went. His protege 
Mohammed Abduh became the head of Al Azhar University and the top 
religious scholar in Egypt. He did write books elaborating on and system-
atizing Jamaluddin's modernist ideas. 
Another of Jamaluddin's disciples, Zaghlul, did found a political party, 
the Wafd, which evolved into the nationalist movement for Egyptian in-
dependence. Yet another of his disciples was the religious leader in the 
Sudan who erupted against the British as "the Mahdi." In Iran, the To-
bacco Boycott that he inspired spawned the generation of activists who 
forged the constitutionalist movement in the twentieth century. 
Jamaluddin inspired an Afghan intellectual named Tarzi living in 
Turkey who returned to Afghanistan and, following in Jamaluddin's foot-
steps, tutored Prince Amanullah, Afghanistan's heir apparent. Tarzi shaped 
the prince into a modernist king who won full Afghan independence from 
the British and declared Afghanistan a sovereign nation just twenty-two 
years after the death of Jamaluddin. 
And his students had students. The credo and the message changed as 
it was handed down. Some strands of it grew more radically political, some 
grew more nationalist, some more developmentalist-that is, obsessed 
with developing industry and technology in Muslim countries by whatever 
means. Mohammed Abduh's student, the Syrian theologian Rashid Rida, 
elaborated ways for Islam to serve as the basis for a state. Another of Ja-
maluddin's intellectual descendants was Hassan al-Banna, who founded 
the Muslim Brotherhood; more about him later. In short, the influence of 
this intense, mercurial figure echoes in every corner of the Muslim world 
he roamed so restlessly. 

14 
~ 
Industry, Constitutions, 
and Nationalism 
1163-1336 AH 
1750-1918 CE 
ABDUL WAHHAB, Sayyid Jamaluddin-i-Afghan, and Sayyid Ahmed of 
1"\.. Aligarh-each of these men typified a different idea of what went 
wrong with the Islamic world and how to fix it. Throughout the nine-
teenth century, numerous permutations of these three currents evolved 
and spread. Of them all, it was secular modernism, the direction champi-
oned by Sayyid Ahmad of Aligarh, that acquired political power most 
overtly. This is not to say that Sayyid Ahmad fathered some mighty move-
ment himself. He was just one of many secular reformists across the Is-
lamic world who came up with roughly similar ideas. What made these 
ideas so persuasive was a trio of phenomena spilling into the Islamic 
heartland just then, from Europe: industrialization, constitutionalism, 
and nationalism. 
The most consequential of the three was probably industrialization, the 
seductions of which affected every part of the world. In Europe, the In-
dustrial Revolution came out of a great flurry of inventions straddling the 
269 

270 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
year 1800 CE, beginning with the steam engine. Often, we speak of great 
inventions as if they make their own case merely by existing, but in fact, 
people don't start building and using a device simply because it's clever. 
The technological breakthrough represented by an invention is only one 
ingredient in its success. The social context is what really determines 
whether it will "take." 
The steam engine provides a case in point. What could be more useful? 
What could be more obviously world-changing? Yet the steam engine was 
invented in the Muslim world over three centuries before it popped up in 
the West, and in the Muslim world it didn't change much of anything. The 
steam engine invented there was used to power a spit so that a whole sheep 
might be roasted efficiently at a rich man's banquet. (A description of this 
device appears in a 1551 book by the Turkish engineer Taqi al-Oin.) After 
the spit, however, no other application for the device occurred to anyone, 
so it was forgotten. 
Another case in point: the ancient Chinese had all the technology they 
needed by the tenth century to mechanize production and mass produce 
goods, but they didn't use it that way. They used geared machinery to 
make toys. They used a water-driven turbine to power a big clock. If they 
had used these technologies to build labor-saving machinery of the type 
that spawned factories in nineteenth-century Europe, the Industrial Revo-
lution would almost certainly have started in China. 
So why didn't it? Why did these inventions fail to "take" until they 
were invented in the West? The answer has less to do with the inventions 
themselves than it does with the social context into which the inventions 
were born. 
When the Chinese invented geared machinery, theirs was an efficient, 
highly centralized state in which an imperial bureacracy managed the 
entire society. The main function of this bureacracy aside from record-
keeping and defense was to organize public works. The genius of Chinese 
political culture was its ability to soak up surplus labor with massive con-
struction projects useful to the public good. The first emperor, for exam-
ple, put about a million people to work building the Great Wall. A later 
emperor employed even more workers to dig the Grand Canal, which con-
nected the country's two major river systems. Yes, China had the technol-
ogy to build labor-saving machinery, but who was going to build it? Only 

INDUSTRY, CONSTITUTIONS, AND NATIONALISM 
271 
the imperial bureacracy had the capacity, and why would it bother to save 
something it already had too much of? China was overpopulated and 
labor was cheap. If a lot of laborers were left at loose ends, whose job 
would it be to deal with the resulting social disruptions? The bureacracy. 
The one institution capable of industrializing China had no motive to un-
dertake it. 
Likewise, Muslim inventors didn't think of using steam power to make 
devices that would mass-produce consumer goods, because they lived in a 
society already overflowing with an abundance of consumer goods, hand-
crafted by millions of artisans and distributed by efficient trade networks. 
Besides, the inventors worked for an idle class of elite folks who had all the 
goods they could consume and whose lot in life did not call upon them to 
produce-much less mass-produce-anything. 
It wasn't some dysfunction in these societies that generated their indif-
ference to potentially world-changing technologies, quite the opposite. It 
was something working too well that led them into "a high-level equilib-
rium trap" (to borrow a phrase from historian Mark Elvin. 1) Necessity, it 
turns out, isn't really the mother of invention; it's the mother of the process 
that turns an invention into a product, and in late-eighteenth-century Eu-
rope, that mother was ready. 
Steam engines evolved out of steam-powered pumps used by private 
mine owners to keep their mine shafts free of water. These same mine 
owners had another business problem they urgently desired to solve: get-
ting their ore as quickly as possible from the mine to a river or seaport, so 
they could beat their competitors to market. Traditionally, they hauled the 
ore in horse-drawn carts that rolled along on parallel wooden tracks called 
tramways. One day, George Stephenson, an illiterate English mining man-
ager, figured out that a steam pump could be bolted to a cart and made to 
turn the wheels, with appropriate gearing. The locomotive was born. 
England at this point brimmed with private business owners competing 
to move products and materials to markets ahead of one another. Anyone 
with access to a railroad could get an edge on all the others, unless they too 
shipped by train; so everyone started using railroads, whereupon everyone 
who had the means to build a railroad, did so. 
Likewise, after James Watt perfected the steam engine in the late eigh-
teenth century, clever European inventors figured out how to mechanize 

272 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
textile looms. Anyone who possessed a power loom could now outproduce 
rival cloth makers and drive them out of business-unless the rivals ac-
quired power looms too; so they all did. 
But anyone who had the capital to acquire two power looms, ten 
looms, a hundred, could drive out many many many many competitors 
and grow rich, rich, rich! All the money to be made got clever tinkerers 
wondering what else could be manufactured by fuel-driven geared ma-
chinery. Shoes? Yes. Furniture? Yes. Spoons? Absolutely. In fact, once peo-
ple got started, they came to find that almost every item in common use 
could be made by some fuel-driven machine faster, cheaper, and in much 
greater quantities than by hand. And who wouldn't want to be a shoe ty-
coon? Or a spoon tycoon or any kind of tycoon? 
Of course, this process left countless artisans and craftspeople out of 
work, but this is where nineteenth-century Europe differed from tenth-
century China. In Europe, those who had the means to install industrial 
machinery had no particular responsibility for those whose livelihood 
would be destroyed by a sudden abundance of cheap, machine-made 
goods. Nor were the folks they affected downstream their kinfolk or fellow 
tribesmen, just strangers whom they had never met and would never know 
by name. What's more, it was somebody else's job to deal with the social 
disruptions caused by widespread unemployment, not theirs. Going ahead 
with industrialization didn't signify some moral flaw in them; it merely re-
flected the way this particular society was compartmentalized. 
The Industrial Revolution could take place only where certain social pre-
conditions existed, and in Europe at that time they happened to exist. The 
Industrial Revolution also had inevitable social consequences and in Europe, 
at that point, turning production over to machinery did change societies, 
daily life, and Europeans themselves. Let us count (some of) the ways: 
• Rural areas emptied into exploding new cities. 
• Animals vanished from daily life for most people. 
• Clock and calendar time became more important than natural 
time markers such as the sun and the moon. 
• Large family networks dissolved, and the nuclear family-one 
man, one woman, and their children-became the universally ac-
cepted default unit of the industrial age. 

INDUSTRY, CONSTITUTIONS, AND NATIONALISM 
273 
• The connection between people and place weakened as new eco-
nomic realities demanded mobility: people had to go where the 
work was, and suddenly the work could be anywhere. 
• The connection between generations weakened, as most individ-
uals no longer had any useful work skills to learn from their par-
ents and little of value to pass on to their kids. The best parents 
could do for their children was to make sure they had the basic 
skills needed to flex, learn, and adapt. Thus, more broadly than 
ever before, reading, writing, and arithmetic became the indis-
pensable skills of functional individuals. 
• And finally, psychological adaptability-an ability to constantly 
relinquish old values and ideas and embrace new ones-became a 
competitive asset. 
All these changes generated anxiety, but it was not catastrophic anxi-
ety, because Europeans (and Americans even more) had already evolved a 
complex of attitudes enabling them to cope, and the core of this complex 
was individualism, an orientation that had taken centuries to develop in 
the West. 
When Europeans came to the Islamic world, they brought along goods 
that were the end products of the Industrial Revolution, but not the evo-
lutionary processes that made those goods possible. Muslims wanted the 
products, of course, as who wouldn't: the cheap doth, the machine-made 
shoes, the packaged dried goods and whatnot, and saw no reason why they 
should not have them. They could buy and operate any machine the West 
could make. They could take the machines apart, study how they were 
built, and make similar machines themselves. Nothing in the manufactur-
ing process lay beyond their comprehension. 
But the social underpinnings were a different matter. The precondi-
tions of industrialization could not be instantly imported. The social con-
sequences could not be so easily absorbed in societies structured so 
differently from those of western Europe. 
In the Ottoman world, for example, manufacturing had long been in the 
hands of guilds, which were interwoven with Sufi orders, which were inter-
woven with the machinery of the Ottoman state and society, which was in-
terlinked with the fact that every person had numerous tribal affiliations, 

274 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
which was interwoven with a universal assumption that the public realm be-
longed exclusively to men and that women were properly kept sequestered in 
a private world, cut off from politics and production. 
And yet, all across the world, in Europe as much as in the Islamic 
world, before industrialization, a great deal of manufacturing was actually 
in the hands of women, since almost everything of value was produced in 
or near the home. Women wove the cloth and made the garments. Women 
had a big role in animal husbandry. Women transformed the raw products 
of flocks and fields into useful products, and they practiced many other 
handicrafts as well. When these processes were mechanized, "cottage in-
dustries" went under and left countless women out of work. 
In Europe, large numbers of these women then went to work in facto-
ries, shops, and eventually offices. Given the European social structure, 
they could do so: it caused some social and psychological disruption, to be 
sure, but women had already won access to the public realm, and so they 
could go to work outside the home, and they did, and out of this great 
movement, which was going to happen anyway, came the philosophical 
musings, political theorizing, and social activism known today as femi-
nism, a movement premised on the existence and sanctity of individual 
rights. (Only after a concept of "the individual" exists can one say, "Every 
individual has rights" and once that assertion is accepted, one can enter-
tain the notion that women might have the same rights as men, since both 
are individuals.) 
In the Islamic world, the pervasively embedded division of the world 
into a masculine public realm and a feminine private one made the move 
from cottage industries to industrial production much more problematic 
and produced social dislocations that were much more wrenching. It re-
quired, first of all, overturning that whole divided social system, which 
struck at the core of family life for every family and left unsettled ques-
tions of identity for both men and women at the deepest level of con-
scious and even subconscious life, as became most evident by the late 
twentieth century. 
But also, replacing guilds with factories meant severing the connection 
between manufacturing and Sufi orders, which at some level implied sev-
ering the connection between spirituality and work. What's more, moving 
production into factories required that people start living a life regulated 

INDUSTRY, CONSTITUTIONS, AND NATIONALISM 
275 
by docks; yet the fundamental core of Muslim life, the prayer ritual that 
must be performed five times daily, is situated in a framework of natural 
time markers: the position of the sun was what determined the times of 
prayer. Here, then, was another way in which industrialization pitted pro-
duction against spiritual practice. (Europe would have faced the same con-
tradiction had industrialization emerged in feudal times when events such 
as matins and vespers framed people's schedules.) 
Besides all this, industrialization required that a society organized uni-
versally as large networks of interconnected clans with tribal loyalties su-
perseding most other affiliations rethink itself overnight as a universe of 
atomized individuals, each one making independent economic decisions 
based on rational self-interest and responsible only to a nuclear family. It 
wasn't going to happen; not easily. And it couldn't happen suddenly. It as-
serted a crosscurrent against the whole river oflslamic civilization since the 
700s. Muslim societies needed time to let the social preconditions of in-
dustrialization evolve in their world. But that wasn't going to happen ei-
ther; even less so. For one thing, no one thought in terms of developing 
"social preconditions." They thought in terms of acquiring products, tech-
nologies and their underlying scientific principles. 
That is, no one looking at machine-made consumer goods said, "Gee, 
we, too, should have a Reformation and develop a cult of individualism 
and then undergo a long period of letting reason erode the authority of 
faith while developing political insitutions that encourage free inquiry so 
that we can happen onto the ideas of modern science while at the same 
time evolving an economic system built on competition among private 
businesses so that when our science spawns new technologies we can jump 
on them and thus, in a few hundred years, quite independently of Europe, 
make these same sorts of goods ourselves." No, people said, "Nice goods, 
where can we get some?" Because it's pointless to reinvent the wheel when 
the wheel is already sitting on the shelf, priced to move. 
Marx and Engels, among others, documented that industrialization had 
some undesirable side effects in the West, but it caused even greater social 
and psychological disruption in the Islamic world. Yet the mere existence of 
industrially produced consumer goods made an argument that no pam-
phlet could refute and no religious harangue undercut. "We're nice stuff; 
you should get some," they whispered, triggering a widespread sense that 

276 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
something had to change, that people living in Iran or Afghanistan or Asia 
Minor or Egypt or Morocco had to become in some way ... more West-
ern. Thus, as awareness of the Industrial Revolution seeped through the 
Muslim world, secular reform ideas gained ground in Islamic countries. 
In Iran, after the 1840s, an extremely energetic prime minister named 
Mirza Taqi, also called Amir Kabir, "the Great Leader," launched a crash pro-
gram to "modernize" the country. By "modernize," he meant "industrialize," 
but he understood this to be a complicated process. He knew Iran couldn't 
just acquire industrial goods. To really match up to the Western powers de-
vouring their country, Iranians had to acquire some aspects ofWestern cul-
ture. But what aspects? The key, Amir Kabir decided, was education. 
He built a network of secular public schools across the country. Just out-
side Tehran, he established the university mentioned earlier, Dar al-Funun 
or "house of wisdom," where students could study foreign languages, sci-
ence, technical subjects, and the history of Western cultures. Iran started 
sending students abroad, as well, to countries such as Germany and France. 
Not surprisingly, these students hailed largely from privileged urban fami-
lies assocated with the court and government bureacracy-not from rural 
peasant stock, merchant families, or high-status religious families. And so, 
the new educational program expanded social divisions that already existed 
in this society. 
Graduates pouring out of the secular education system were tapped to 
staff a "modernized" government bureacracy and army. (Modern in this 
context meant "more like you would see in Europe.") Thus, the Iranian re-
sponse to industrialism generated a new social class in Iran consisting of 
educated civil servants, army officers, university students, teachers, techni-
cians, professionals, anyone who had graduated from Dar al-Funun, any-
one who had studied in Europe .... This burgeoning class developed an 
ever more secular outlook and grew ever more receptive to thinking of 
Islam as a system of rational, ethical values rather than a revelation-based 
manual for getting into heaven. 
Constitutionalism, a second phenomenon born in Europe, now began to 
have an impact in Iran, largely because this new class was open to it. Con-
stitutionalism is not quite the same as democratic idealism, since even to-
talitarian dictatorships can have constitutions, but a constitution is 

INDUSTRY, CONSTITUTIONS, AND NATIONALISM 
277 
certainly a necessary precondition to democracy. It asserts that a society 
operates within a stable framework of stated laws binding ruler as well as 
ruled. Absolute monarchies, the system long in place throughout the Mus-
lim world, gave rulers de facto power to decide the rules as they pleased at 
any given moment. It's important to realize that in absolute monarchies 
this pattern doesn't apply just to the top ruler; it is reified throughout so-
ciety, each man having arbitary power over those below him and subject to 
the arbitrary whims of those above. (Similarly, democracy doesn't just 
mean top leaders gaining office through election; it means that some sort 
of interactive participatory process goes on at every level: elections are not 
equivalent to democracy; they are only a sign that democracy exists.) 
Constitutionalism made headway in Iran in part because, out of the ris-
ing class of educated secular modernists, a new intelligentsia emerged. 
They announced their modernity not just in their ideas but in the very 
language they used to express their ideas. New writers began to eschew the 
diction of classical Persian literature, which was so full of ornate rhetorical 
flourishes and devices, and developed instead a simple, muscular prose, 
which they used to write, not epic poems and mystical lyrics, but satirical 
novels, political plays, and the like. 
Literary scholar Hamid Dabashi notes the curious case of the English 
language novel The Adventures of Hajji Baba of Ispahan, written by a trav-
eler named James Marier, who pretended he had merely translated a Per-
sian original. Marier used a ridiculous diction in his novel to lampoon 
Persian speech and depicted Iranians as dishonest scoundrels and buffoons. 
Then, in the 1880s, an astounding thing happened. Iranian grammarian 
Mirza Habib translated Hajji Baba into Persian. Remarkably, what in Eng-
lish was offensive racist trash became, in translation, a literary masterpiece 
that laid the groundwork for a modernist Persian literary voice and "a sem-
inal text in the course of the constitutional movement." The ridicule that 
Marier directed against Iranians in an Orientalist manner, the translator 
redirected against clerical and courtly corruption in Iranian society, thereby 
transforming Hajji Baba into an incendiary political critique.2 
With the emergence of a secular modernist intelligentsia, the classics of 
Persian literature, poetry by the likes of Rumi and Sa'di and Hafez, began 
to gather dust while readers instead devoured, not just the new Iranian 
writing, but also books by European thinkers such as Charles Montesquieu 

278 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
and Auguste Comte, philosophers who theorized that societies evolved 
through successively higher stages. Montesquieu categorized and ranked 
political systems, declaring that republics were the next higher stage after 
monarchies and despotisms. Comte said that as people grew more civilized 
they evolved from religious to metaphysical to scientific consciousness.3 
Iranian modernist intellectuals decided their country needed to evolve. 
Their discontent focused on the Qajar monarchs, now into their second 
century of rule. These kings had pretty much been treating the country 
like a private possession. One Qajar after another had been selling off the 
national economy bit by bit to foreigners, to fund their own luxuries and 
amusements, including expensive excursions to Europe. 
Resentment among secular modernists came to a head with the Tobacco 
Boycott, the movement so passionately promoted by Jamaluddin-i-Afghan. 
As it happens, Jamaluddin also drew the Shi'i clerical establishment into the 
Tobacco Boycott, and it was this alliance that forced the shah to back down. 
But once the shah nullified the British monopoly on tobacco sales in Iran, 
the clerics felt they had won and retired from the field. 
The remaining activists held together, however, and crafted new de-
mands. They called for a constitution that would limit the powers of the 
king and give the people a voice in running the country. Cheered on from 
afar by Jamaluddin {deported to Asia Minor by this time), these secular 
modernists began to discuss building a parliamentary democracy. The cler-
ics totally opposed them. A constitution would be un-Islamic, they said, 
because Iran already had a constitution: it was called the Shari' a. They de-
rided the idea of democracy, too: only dynastic rule was permitted by 
Islam, they declared. By the early years of the twentieth century, the long 
struggle in Iran between clerics and crown had turned into a complicated 
three-way struggle among clerics, crown, and secular modernist intelli-
gentsia, a struggle in which any two factions might pair up against the 
third. In the matter of the constitution, clerics and crown stood united 
against the modernists. 
But the modernist tide was running high. In 1906, Qajar king Muzaf-
far al-din yielded, finally. He accepted a consitution that limited his pow-
ers severely and allowed a parliament to be formed, the Majlis, as it was 
called. The king died a week after the Majlis first convened, and his son 
Mohammad Ali Shah took over. It wasn't clear what powers the parliament 

INDUSTRY, CONSTITUTIONS, AND NATIONALISM 
279 
really had-it didn't have an army and didn't command a police force-yet 
within two years the Majlis had passed a host oflaws that laid the basis for 
free speech, a free press, and a full range of civil liberties in Iran. 
Before the third year was up, however, the king pointed cannons at the 
parliament building and blew it down, his way of saying: "Let's give the 
old ways another chance." The ulama and all the other traditional groups 
cheered him on; and this is where matters stood in Iran as World War I 
approached. 
Meanwhile, a third European phenomenon was seducing minds and hearts 
across the Islamic world: nationalism. Iran provided the least fertile soil for 
this ideology, perhaps because it was already pretty much a nation-state, or 
at least closer to one than any other part of the Islamic heartland. In India, 
nationalism began transforming Aligarh modernism into a movement that 
would finally give birth to Pakistan. But it was in the Ottoman Empire 
and in territories that had once been part of this empire that nationalism 
really caught on. 
When I say nationalism, I don't mean the nation-state per se. A nation-
state is a concrete geographical fact: a territory with definite borders, a sin-
gle central government, a single set of laws enforced by that single 
government, a single currency, an army, a police force, and so on. Nation-
states such as France and England developed spontaneously out of histori-
cal circumstances and not because nationalists conceived of them and then 
built them. 
The nationalism I'm speaking of was {is} an idea. It didn't develop 
where nation-states had formed, but where they hadn't. It didn't describe 
what was but what (supposedly) ought to be. The German-speaking peo-
ple came into the nineteenth century as a multitude of principalities and 
kingdoms. Italy was similarly divided, and so was the whole of Europe east 
of Germany. Nationalism sprouted in these areas. 
The seeds of the idea go back to the eighteenth-century German 
philosopher Johann Herder, who criticized "enlightenment" philosophers 
such as Immanuel Kant. The enlightenment philosophers taught that man 
is essentially a rational being and that moral values must ultimately be 
based on reason. Since the rules of reason are the same for everyone, at all 
times, in all places, civilized people who subdue their passions and let 

280 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
themselves be guided solely by reason must eventually progress toward a 
single universal set oflaws and value judgments. 
Herder, however, argued that there was no such thing as universal val-
ues, either moral or aesthetic: rather, he said, the world was composed of 
various cultural entities, which he called volks: or "people." Each of these 
entities had a volksgeist, a spiritual essence possessed in common by the 
given people. Shared language, traditions, customs, history-ties like these 
bound a group of people together as a volk. Although a true volk was a 
purely social entity, its "groupness" wasn't just a social contract or some 
sort of agreement among its members to team up, any more than a multi-
tude of cells agree to come together and be an organism. Nations had a 
unified singleness that made them as real as butterflies or mountains: that's 
the sort of thing Herder meant by volk. And when Herder spoke of volks-
geist, he meant something like what religious people mean by soul or what 
psychologists mean when they speak of"the self." Every nation, to Herder, 
had some such unified spiritual essence. 
Herder's argument implied that no moral or aesthetic judgment was 
universally valid or objectively true. If humanity was not reducible to a ca-
pacity for reason, then values were not the same at all times for all people. 
In aesthetics, for example, an Indian and a German might disagree about 
what was beautiful, but this didn't mean one side was right and the other 
wrong. Each judgment reflected a volksgeist and was true only insofar as it 
truly expressed the volksgeist. A value judgment could rise no higher than 
the level of the nation. 
Herder wasn't saying one nation was better than another, just that 
they were different, and that one nation couldn't be judged by the values 
of another. But a slightly younger philosopher, Johann Gottlieb Fichte, 
took Herder's ideas a step further and shifted their import. Fichte agreed 
that humanity clumped together as discrete nations, each one bound to-
gether by a common spirit; but he suggested that some volks might ac-
tually be superior to others. Specifically, he suggested that Germans had 
a great inherant capacity for liberty, theirs being a vigorous living lan-
guage as contrasted to the French language, which was dead. (The 
French no doubt disagreed.) 
Fichte died in 1814: his career, therefore, peaked in the period when 
Napoleon was conquering Europe and dominating the Germans, which is 

INDUSTRY, CONSTITUTIONS, AND NATIONALISM 
281 
probably one key to Fichte's influence. Many Germans chafing under 
French rule felt that, yes, they could tell: French and German really were 
two different spirits; and they liked hearing that even though the French 
might be dominant, the Germans might be somehow "higher" ... 
Fast-forward five decades from the fall of Napoleon Bonaparte to the 
year 1870. Prussian Chancellor Otto von Bismarck had just forged a sin-
gle nation out of the many little German states. France, as it happened, 
was now ruled by Napoleon's buffoonish great-nephew Napoleon III, who 
was twice as pompous and half as talented as Napoleon the First. Bismarck 
goaded this Napoleon into declaring war on him, then overwhelmed 
France with a lightning strike, conquered Paris within months, and im-
posed humiliating terms upon the French, as well as wresting two resource-
rich border provinces away from France. 
German nationalism, born out of defeat and resentment, now had vic-
tory to batten on. A triumphalist vision of a German nation with a mythic 
destiny took wing. Artists sought the sources of the German volksgeist in 
ancient Teutonic myths. Wagner expressed the German nationalist passion 
in bombastic operas. Historians began spinning a mythological narrative 
tracing German origins back to the primal Indo-Europeans, the Aryan 
tribes of the Caucasus mountains. 
German nationalism especially captivated professors at the Gymna-
sium, which was then Germany's most prestigious institution of higher ed-
ucation. Here, philosophers such as Heinrich von Treitschke began 
teaching that nations were the most authentic social entities in the world 
and the highest expression of human life. They rhapsodized about a pan-
German nation that would rule all territories in which German speakers 
lived. They spoke of the heroic destiny that justified "great" nations im-
posing their will on barbaric lands. (In other words, colonialism was 
noble.} Their pupils, laden with these passions, moved into society as en-
gineers, bankers, teachers, or whatnot, and infected the German masses 
with this virus of pan-German nationalism. 
In Italy, meanwhile, a revolutionary named Joseph Mazzini was adding 
further and perhaps the final pieces to nationalism as a political ideology. 
Mazzini was mainly interested in rescuing Italy from foreign rulers such as 
the Austrians and saw unificiation as the only means for achieving this 
goal. His politics led him to propound that individuals could act only as 

282 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
collective units, and should relinquish their individual personalities to 
their nation. "Say not /but we," he harangued his fellow revolutionaries 
in his pamphlet On the Duties of Man. '1.et each man among you strive 
to incarnate his country in himself."4 Mazzini went on to assert a theory 
of collective rights based on nationalism. Every nation had "a right" to a 
territory of its own, a "right" to leaders from amongst its own, a "right" 
to defined borders, a "right" to extend those borders as far as necessary to 
encompass all the people who comprised the nation, and a "right" to 
complete sovereignty within those borders. It was only right, natural, 
and noble, he said, for the people of a nation to live within one geo-
graphically continuous state, so that none of them would have to live 
among strangers. 
In the last half of the nineteenth century, movements fueled by na-
tionalism spawned first Germany and then Italy, but the virus spread be-
yond these countries, into eastern Europe, where a multitude of disparate 
communities speaking many languages, claiming different ethnic origins, 
and telling diverse stories about their origins rattled around as indigestible 
parts of two ramshackle empires, the Ottoman and the Austro-Hungarian. 
The government of both empires tried to squelch all nationalists within 
their borders, but succeeded only in driving them underground, where 
they went on seething in secrecy. European cartoonists imagined these 
revolutionaries as stout little bearded men carrying bombs shaped like 
bowling balls under bulky overcoats: an amusing image. The real anar-
chist and terrorist movements spawned by European nationalism were 
not so amusing. And it was from here that nationalism rolled east into the 
Islamic heartlands. 
Before leaving Europe, however, let me mention two other nationalist 
movements of consequence that matured in the West. One had immediate 
relevance for the Ottoman Empire; the other would signify later. The latter 
one took shape in North America where a new country formed. Techni-
cally, this country was born when thirteen small colonies of British settlers 
revolted against their home government and launched independent des-
tinies, but in many ways the confederation they put together didn't actually 
become a nation-state until the Civil War of 1861 to 1865. Before that war, 
people in the United States spoke of their country as "these united states." 
After the war, they called it "the United States."5 The issue of slavery trig-

INDUS TRY, CONSTITUTIONS, AND NAT! ON ALI S M 
283 
gered the war, but President Lincoln frankly put preserving the union at the 
center of his arguments for the justice and necessity of the war. In his Get-
tysburg Address, he said the war was being fought to test whether a nation 
"conceived in liberty" and a government of, by, and for the people could en-
dure. He and others who forged the United States-politicians, historians, 
philosophers, writers, thinkers, and citizens in general-asserted a national-
ist idea quite distinct from the ideologies spawned in Europe. Instead of 
seeking nationhood in a common religion, history, traditions, customs, 
race, or ethnic identity, they proposed that multitudes of individuals could 
become "a people" by virtue of shared principles and shared allegiance to a 
process. It was a nationalism based on ideas, a nationalism that anyone 
could embrace because, in theory, it was a nation any person could become 
a member of, not just those who worn born into it. 
During that same Civil War, the emerging country gave notice of its 
potential power. The American Civil War was the first in which a single 
man at one point commanded an army of a million, the first in which 
nearly a quarter of a million soldiers clashed on a single battlefield, and the 
first in which industrial technology from railroads to submarines to 
proto-machine guns, played a decisive role. It's true that in this war the 
(dis}united states were fighting each other and posed, therefore, no mili-
tary threat to anyone else, but anyone could imagine what a formidable 
power would emerge once the two sides melted back into a single state. 
The other European nationalist movement of world-historical conse-
quence and immediate relevance for the Muslim world was Zionism. This 
bundle of passion and ideas was just like all the other nineteenth-century 
European nationalisms in its arguments and appeals. It agreed with Herder 
that people who share a language, culture, and history were a nation. It 
agreed with Mazzini that a nation had a right to its own self-ruling state 
situated securely in a territory of its own. It agreed with the likes ofTre-
itschke that a nation-state had a right (even a destiny) to include all of its 
own people within its borders and a right to exclude all others if necessary. 
If the Germans were a nation and had such rights, said the founders of po-
litical Zionism, if the Italians were a nation, if the French were a nation, 
then by God the Jews were a nation too. 
There was, however, one key difference between Zionism and other 
nineteenth-century European nationalisms. The Italians, Germans, Serbians, 

284 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
and others claimed a nationalist right to the territory they inhabited. The 
Jewish people had no territory. They had been scattered around the globe 
for two millenia and were now living as landless minorities in other peo-
ple's states. Throughout their two thousand years in Diaspora, however, 
Jews had held together, maintaining a sense of peoplehood built around a 
Judaism that was as much cultural and historical as it was religious: in 
nineteenth-century Europe, it was perfectly possible to be Jewish without 
being a practicing or even a "believing" Jew. Still, a core element of the 
Jewish religious-historical narrative asserted that God had promised the 
land of Canaan to the original Hebrews-Abraham and his tribal descen-
dants-in exchange for their worshipping no other and obeying only His 
commandments. According to this narrative, the Jewish people had kept 
their side of the bargain and had thus earned the right to reclaim "their" 
land, the territory called Palestine, which was now inhabited by Arabs and 
ruled by the Ottoman Turks. Many nineteenth-century European Zionists 
were secular but this tenet about a Promised Land nonetheless made its 
way into the argument for a Jewish nation-state along the eastern Medit-
erannean coast. 
In 1897, an Austrian journalist, Theodor Herzl, founded the first offi-
cial organ of political Zionism, the World Zionist Congress, but Zionism 
already existed and its ideas went back to the early 1800s. It was amid 
all the other nationalist murmurings of that era that Jewish intellectuals 
in Europe began to speak of moving to Palestine. Some German proto-
nationalists agreed with these proto-Zionists, and not in a friendly way. 
Fichte, for example, held that Jews could never assimilate into German 
culture, even if they were German-speaking from birth. If they stayed in 
Germany, they would always be a state within a state, and therefore, he 
suggested, they should seek their national destiny in Palestine. 
Palestine had never been without an indigenous Jewish population, 
but in 1800 that population formed a miniscule fraction of the total-
about 2.5 percent as opposed to the more than 97 percent who were 
Arabs. By the 1880s, when Jewish immigration from Europe to Palestine 
began in earnest, the ratio of Jews to Arabs had climbed to roughly 6 per-
cent of the total. About thirty thousand moved to Palestine in the first 
aliyah, as waves of Jewish immigration to Palestine were called, and the 
ratio changed again. The first immigrants, however, were idealistic urban 

INDUSTRY, CONSTITUTIONS, AND NATIONALISM 
285 
intellectuals who pictured themselves as Palestinian farmers, even though 
they didn't know a shovel from a hoe. Most of them returned to Europe, 
and the first aliyah petered out. That is where matters stood as World 
War I approached. 
When these three phenomena from Europe-constitutionalism, national-
ism, and industrialism-seeped into the Ottoman world they had a par-
ticularly corrosive effect, in part because the Ottoman "world" was 
shrinking throughout the nineteenth century, which was engendering 
much restless anxiety. Algeria was absorbed into France. Great Britain took 
over Egypt in all but name. Technically, the Mediterranean coast north of 
Egypt belonged to the Ottoman empire, as did the whole Arabian penin-
sula and most of what is now Iraq, but even here the Ottomans gradually 
found themselves bowing to Europeans. Meanwhile, the Ottoman hold on 
its European territories kept weakening. The whole of this ancient empire, 
so recently the world's greatest, was like some colossal creature whose ex-
tremities had fallen away and whose body was rotting, but was somehow 
still breathing, still alive. 
It was alive, but Western business forces, backed by the power of their 
governments, operated freely here. Through the first half of the nineteenth 
century, their interaction with the Ottomans could be summed up in one 
word: capitulations. 
Capitulations: it sounds like another word for "humiliating conces-
sions." That, however, is not what the word meant at first. 
The capitulations began when the empire was at its height, and the 
term simply referred to permissions granted by mighty Ottoman sultans to 
petty petitioners from Europe pleading to do business in the empire. The 
capitulations merely listed what these folks were permitted to do in Ot-
toman territory. Anything not listed was forbidden. Why call them "capit-
ulations"? Because in Latin, the word simply means "categorize by 
headings." So the capitulations were lists of permitted business activities 
for Europeans, organized by category. 
Since no single great war reversed the balance of power between the Ot-
tomans and the Europeans, there was no single moment when capitulations 
stopped meaning "permissions doled out haughtily by mighty Ottoman 
lords" and started meaning "humiliating concessions wrung out triumphantly 

286 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
from Ottoman officials (by haughty European bosses)." But that's certainly 
what they meant by 1838, when the Ottomans signed the Treaty of Balta 
Liman with a consortium of European powers (to secure their aid against 
Mohammed Ali), a treaty establishing unequal terms between Ottomans and 
Europeans on Ottoman soil. The treaty placed low tariffs, for example, on 
European products coming into the empire but imposed high tariffs on Ot-
toman products flowing out. It forbade Ottoman subjects to establish mo-
nopolies but permitted and eased the way for Europeans to do exactly that. 
These capitulations had but one purpose: to ensure that Ottomans would be 
unable to compete with European businessmen on their own soil. 
In the few decades after the Treaty of Balta Liman, the Ottoman govern-
ment shook its aging limbs and promulgated a series of new rules to revamp 
Ottoman society so that it could match up to the Europeans-exactly the 
sort of thing that was going on in Iran around this same time. In the Ot-
toman Empire, these modernizing moves were called Tanzimat or "reorgani-
:zation measures." They began with an 1839 proclamation grandiosely titled 
"The Noble Edict of the Rose Chamber." In 1856 came another document, 
"The Imperial Edict." Then in 1860 came a third set of reform measures. 
Here are a few things the Tanzimat established: 
• a new national government bureaucracy modeled along French 
lines; 
• secular state courts superseding the traditional Shari' a courts; 
• a new code of criminal justice based on France's "Napoleonic" code; 
• new commercial rules favoring "free trade," which essentially gave 
Europeans a free hand to set business rules in the Ottoman empire; 
• a conscripted army modeled on the Prussian system, to replace 
the devshirme; 
• public schools with a secular curriculum similar to what was 
taught in British schools, bypassing the traditional school system 
run by Muslim clerics; 
• one single empire-wide state-run tax collection agency (rather like 
the IRS in today's United States), replacing the traditional Ot-
toman "tax farmers" (who were, essentially, freelance tax collectors 
working on commission); 

INDUS TRY, CONSTITUTIONS, AND NAT! ON ALI S M 
287 
• guarantees that the "honor, life, and property" of all Ottoman 
subjects were inviolable and would be secured, regardless of race 
or religion. 
On paper these reforms may look good, especially that one about guar-
anteeing the life and safety of all citizens, regardless of ethnic origin: who 
could be against ending discrimination? It's practically European. 
But put yourself in the shoes of an average Turkish Muslim citizen of 
the empire in the nineteenth century: the inherent merits of such reforms 
would be hard to separate from the fact that they were dictated to Ot-
toman officials by Europeans-literally, according to historian James L. 
Gelvin: apparently the Imperial Edict was written out verbatim by British 
ambassador Stratford Canning and handed to Ottoman officials with in-
structions to translate it and proclaim it publicly.6 Noble Edict of the Rose 
Chamber indeed! To many Ottoman Muslims, these smelled less like re-
forms and more like fresh evidence of alien power over their lives. 
Not all Ottoman Muslims felt this way. A growing movement of reformists 
in Asia Minor, a Turkish version of movements in India, Afghanistan, and 
Iran, embraced and promoted the Tanzimat. They thought the only way to 
defeat European imperialism was to beat the Europeans at their own game, 
which would necessitate, first of all, adopting whatever European ideas ac-
counted for European strength. 
But the ulama were still around. The Tanzimat worked directly 
against their interests. Taking education out of clerical hands ... replacing 
Shari'ah courts with secular courts ... substituting French laws for Islamic 
law-such reforms not only stripped the ulama of power but robbed them 
of a reason to exist. Of course they were going to resist; and the ulama still 
had a lot of moral authority among the ordinary people. They still wielded 
clout at court too. 
The sultan and his advisers, therefore, soon found themselves caught 
between the clamor of secular modernists and the yammer of an Islamic 
old guard. Tugged and yanked from both sides, the court tilted now this 
way, now that. As the secular modernists argued ever more stridently for 
European-style reforms, the traditionalists dug in ever more stubbornly to 
reactionary dicta. When the modernists called for mechanized state-run 

288 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
factories, the ulama railed against Ottoman officials using typewriters-
Prophet Mohammed never used one, they argued. 
For a moment, the modernists gained the upper hand. In 1876, they 
forced the sultan to adopt a constitution, a momentous victory widely cel-
ebrated as the "French Revolution of the East." For just a few years there, 
the crumbling empire was a constitutional monarchy like Great Britain (in 
form). In that brief period, modernizing activists of every ethnic and reli-
gious stripe interacted companionably in a heady atmosphere of progres-
sive enthusiasm: Turkish Muslims, Arab Muslims, Jews, Orthodox 
Christians, Armenians, all rubbed shoulders as members of a single broad 
movement to build a new world. 
But the old guard retrenched, outmaneuvered the modernists, and re-
built the sultan's power, until he was strong enough to abolish the consti-
tution and rule as an absolute monarch again. The pendulum swung back, 
in part, because the reforms were not working. Turkish Muslims of Asia 
Minor saw their standard of living sinking, their autonomy shrinking. 
They felt ever more powerless against the enormous forces of Europe 
pressing from outside. 
But they did have what they regarded as one fragment of that outside 
world within their borders and completely in their power. That fragment 
was the Armenian community. In reality, of course, the Armenians were no 
more European than the Turks. They lived right where they had been liv-
ing since time immemorial. They had their own non-European language, 
traditions, and history. They didn't come from anywhere else and were, in 
fact, more indigenous than the Turks. 
They were, however, a Christian minority surrounded by a Muslim ma-
jority, and what's more, in that period of ever more humiliating capitula-
tions, when business interests from western Europe acquired the power to 
march into the Ottoman Empire and establish profitable business opera-
tions at the expense of the locals, the Armenians found themselves in a 
paradoxical position. For Ottoman citizens, the only way to prosper at this 
point was to work for, do business with, or best of all form partnerships 
with European businesses. But when Europeans sought business partners 
in the empire, they gravitated quite naturally towards those with whom 
they felt kinship, and if they had a choice, they chose Armenian Christians 
over Muslim Turks, so the favorable terms extracted by foreigners seemed 

INDUS TRY, CONSTITUTIONS, AND NAT! ON ALI S M 
289 
to benefit the Armenian community within the empire, or such at least 
was the perception among resentful Muslims slipping into poverty. 
The Armenians had lived peacefully in the Ottoman world up to this 
time; as non-Turks, however, they had been shut out of the military-
aristocratic ruling caste. They had also been cut off, to some extent, from 
big-time land ownership and "tax farming." Many therefore, had turned to 
business and finance to make a living. 
Finance-that's what used to be called moneylending. It was frowned 
upon pretty widely in early times. Charging interest on a loan was explic-
itly forbidden in the Qur'an, just as it was in Medieval Christian Europe 
where the term usury in canon law didn't mean "charging exorbitant in-
terest" but "charging any interest." Why did moneylending have this 
odor? I suppose it's because ordinary folks saw the lending of money in 
the context of charity, not of business: it was something one did when a 
neighbor got into trouble and needed help. Seen in that framework, 
charging interest on a loan smacked of exploiting somebody's misery to 
get rich. Yet the need to borrow money came up constantly, even in the 
most primitive feudal economy, often in the wake of crisis: a blacksmith's 
workshop burned down; a famous cleric died unexpectedly leaving his 
family to host an expensive funeral; someone wanted to get married with-
out having saved up a dowry; someone fell catastrophically ill .... People 
went to moneylenders at moments when they felt particularly vulnerable 
and raw, yet they went with a culturally implanted feeling that any decent 
person would give them a loan for nothing. The desperation that forced 
them to accept a banker's terms only added a further dollop of resent-
ment. When the borrower and the moneylender belonged to the same 
community, other sentiments such as kinship or loyalty might temper the 
resentment, but when people went to moneylenders whom they already 
saw as the Other, the dynamics of the interaction tended to exacerbate 
any existing communal hostility. The worst possible case, then, was for 
moneylending to become the exclusive province of a distinct cultural mi-
nority surrounded by a vast majority. In Europe, this dynamic made vic-
tims of the Jews. In the Ottoman Empire, it was the Armenians who fell 
afoul of it. 
As tension built up, it was easy to forget that Turks and Armenians had 
lived together peacefully, not even three generations back; the hostility 

290 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
seemed like an age-old feature of the two communities' relationship. The 
Ottoman policy of dividing the population into self-governing communi-
ties was originally a way of conferring upon each a measure of cultural sov-
ereignty. It reflected tolerance. It functioned as an instrument of harmony. 
Now, this same policy became a deficiency, a liability, a crucial key to the 
coming troubles, because it worked to separate, isolate, and spotlight the 
unfortunate Armenians. In fact, the millet system became a mechanism for 
exacerbating existing fault lines in Ottoman society. 
Between 1894 and 1896, in eastern Anatolia, a series of anti-Armenian 
pogroms broke out. Turkish villagers began to massacre Armenians, much 
as Jews were being massacred in eastern Europe and Russia, but on an even 
larger scale. As many as three hundred thousand Armenians died before 
the madness subsided, and it subsided then only because Europeans put 
pressure on the Ottoman government to do something. Since the power of 
Europeans to dictate to Ottoman officials was a factor in the resentment 
vented upon the Armenians, this authority ending the violence only exac-
erbated the original psychosocial sources of the violence. It was like parents 
stepping in to protect a little boy from neighborhood bullies and then 
going off about their business: once the little boy is alone with the bullies 
again, he's in worse trouble than before. 
Meanwhile, even though the sultan had scuttled the constitution, 
power remained divided between old guard and new bucks. The political 
struggle kept raging on and the balance inexorably tipped back to the new 
guys, for here, as in Iran, the tide was with the modernists. By 1900, a 
whole new generation of activists were calling for the constitution to be re-
stored. They wanted their parents' French Revolution back. 
Politically it was an exhilarating but confusing time. It wasn't like one 
group of agitators were nationalists, another group secular modernists, 
some other one liberal constitutionalists. Many ideologies and movements 
were intertwined and interacting. Any single person might espouse a bit of 
this and a bit of that. There had not yet been time enough to sort out 
which ideas went together and which were incompatible. All who set 
themselves against the old guard thought themselves Ottoman citizens 
with a common stake in reshaping the empire. All felt like young people in 
the know aligned against clueless elders, comrades-in-arms merely because 
they all fiercely favored the "modern," whatever that was. 

INDUSTRY, CONSTITUTIONS, AND NATIONALISM 
291 
This new generation of activists called themselves the Young Turks. 
They used the name in part because they actually were young, in their 
twenties, mostly, but also in part as a way of thumbing their noses at the 
old guard, for among traditional Muslims, older was always regarded as 
better-respectful titles such as shiekh and pir literally meant "old man." 
What the fuddy-duddies derided as a shortcoming, the Young Turks 
flaunted with pride: they were young! 
Although they had many incipient disagreements, the Young Turks 
held together long enough to overwhelm the last Ottoman sultan, a weak 
and silly man named Abdul Hamid II. In 1908, they forced him to rein-
state the constitution, reducing himself to a figurehead. 
No sooner had they wrestled the sultan to the mat, however, then the 
Young Turks realized they were not one group but several. One faction, for 
example, favored decentralizing the empire, securing rights for minorities, 
and giving the people a bigger voice in the government. They were quickly 
squeezed out of the government altogether. Another faction embraced 
Turkish nationalism. Founded around 1902 by six medical students, it co-
alesced into a tightly organized, militaristic party called the Committee for 
Union and Progress. 
The CUP found ever-increasing support for its views. Many anti-
imperial Turks, many younger Turks, many educated civil servants, univer-
sity students, intelligentsia and children of the intelligentsia, many literati 
who had read the nationalist arguments of the European philosophers and 
knew all about the successful strivings of German and Italian national-
ists, began to see nationalism as their road to salvation from imperialism. 
Get rid of the cumbersome, old-fashioned, multicultural, Ottoman idea 
of empire and replace it with a lean, clean, mean, specifically Turkish state 
machine: this was the idea. The Arab provinces would have to be cut 
loose, of course, they no longer fit, but these new Turkish nationalists 
dreamed of linking up Anatolia with those central Asian territories that 
formed the ancestral homeland of the Turkish people. They dreamed of a 
Turkish nation-state that would stretch from the Bosporus to places like 
Kazakhstan. 
Turkish nationalist intellectuals began to argue that Christian minori-
ties, especially the Armenians, were a privileged aristocracy in Turkey, in-
herant internal enemies of the state, in league with the Russians, in league 

292 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
with the western Europeans, in league with the breakaway Slavic territories 
of Eastern Europe. 
This new generation ofTurkish nationalists said the nation superseded 
all smaller identities and suggested that the national "soul" might be vested 
in some single colossal personality, an idea that came straight from the 
German nationalist philosophers. The writer Ziya Gokalp declared that 
except for heroes and geniuses, individuals had no value. He urged his fel-
low Turks never to speak of "rights." There were no rights, he said, only 
duties: the duty to hear the voice of the nation and follow its demands.? 
Trouble for the empire tended to confer glamour upon such militaris-
tic nationalism. And trouble did keep coming. It had been coming for a 
long, long time. Bulgaria wrenched free. Bosnia and Herzegovina left the 
Ottoman fold to be annexed by the Habsurgs into their Austro-Hungarian 
empire. About a million Muslims, forced into exile by these changes, 
streamed into Anatolia looking for new homes in the dying, dysfunctional, 
and already-crowded empire. Then the Ottomans lost Crete. Nearly half 
the population of that island were Muslims, nearly all of whom migrated 
east. All this social dislocation generated a pervasive atmosphere of free-
floating anxiety. 
Amid the uproar, nationalism began heating up among other groups. 
Arab nationalism began to bubble, for one. And after all the horrors they 
had suffered at the hands of their fellow Turks, Armenian activists too de-
clared a need and right to carve out a sovereign nation-state of Armenia. 
These were exactly the same nationalist impulses stirring among so many 
self-identified nationalities in eastern Europe at this time. 
In 1912, a war in the Balkans stripped the empire of Albania, of Mace-
donia, of its last European holdings outside Istanbul, a military defeat that 
triggered a final spasm of anxiety, resentment, and confusion in Asia 
Minor. Turmoil like this favors the most tightly organized group, whatever 
its popular support may be; the Bolsheviks proved as much in Russia five 
years later. In Istanbul, the most tightly organized group just then was the 
ultranationalist Committee for Union and Progress. On January 23, 1913, 
the CUP seized control in a coup d'etat, assassinated the incumbent vizier, 
deposed the last Ottoman sultan, ousted all other leaders from the govern-
ment, declared all other parties illegal, and turned Ottoman Turkey into a 
one-party state. A triumverate of men emerged as spearheads of this single 

INDUSTRY, CONSTITUTIONS, AND NATIONALISM 
293 
party: Talaat Pasha, Enver Pasha, and Djemal Pasha, and it was these "three 
Pashas" who happened to be ruling the truncated remains of the Ottoman 
empire in 1914, when the long-anticipated European civil war broke out. 
In Europe, it was called the Great War; to the Middle World, however, it 
looked like a European civil war at first: Germany and Austria lined up 
against France, Britain, and Russia, and most other European countries 
soon jumped in or got dragged in unwillingly. 
Muslims had no dog in this fight, but CUP leaders thought that they 
might reap big benefits by joining the winning side before the fighting 
ended. Like most people, they assumed the war would last no more than a 
few months, because the great powers of Europe had been stockpiling "ad-
vanced" technological weapons for decades, fearsome firepower against 
which nobody and nothing could possibly stand for long, so it looked as if 
the war could only be a sudden bloody shootout from which the first to 
fire and the last to run out of ammo would emerge as winner. 
CUP strategists decided this winner would be Germany. After all, Ger-
many was the continent's mightiest industrial power, it had already 
squashed the French, and it held central Europe, which meant that it could 
move troops and war machines through its own territory on its superb rail 
network to every battlefront. Besides, by siding with Germany, the Turks 
would be fighting two of its enduring foes, Russia and Great Britain. 
Eight months into the war, with Russian troops already threatening the 
northern border of their empire, CUP leaders ordered the infamous De-
portation Act. Officially, this order was supposed to "relocate" the Arme-
nians living near Russia to sites deeper within the empire where they 
wouldn't be able to make common cause with the Russians. To this day, 
the Turkish government insists that the Deportation Act was purely a se-
curity measure necessitated by war. They admit that, yes, some killing did 
take place, but a civil war was raging, so what can you expect, and besides 
the violence went both ways-such is the official position from which no 
Turkish government has yet budged. 
And the fact is, there was a war on, the Russian were coming, some Ar-
menians were collaborating with the Russians, some Armenians did kill 
some Turks, and some of the violence of 1915 early on was, it seems, a 
continuation of that unstructured hatred that burst out in the 1890s as 

294 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
pogroms and ethnic cleansing. (The United Nations defines "ethnic 
cleansing" as the attempt to enforce ethnic homogeneity in a given terri-
tory by driving out or killing unwanted groups, often by committing 
atrocities that frighten them in into fleeing.) 
Outside ofTurkey, however, few scholars doubt that in 1915 something 
much worse than ethnic cleansing took place, reprehensible as that alone 
would have been. The Deportation Act was the beginning of an organized 
attempt by Talaat Pasha, and perhaps Enver Pasha, and possibly other 
nameless leaders in the anonymous secret core of the CUP, to exterminate 
the Armenians, as a people-not just &om Asia Minor or Turkish-designated 
areas but from the very Earth. Those who were being "relocated" were ac-
tually force-marched and brutalized to death; it was, in short, attempted 
genocide (defined by the United Nations as any attempt to erase a targeted 
ethnic group not just from a given area but altogether). The exact toll re-
mains a matter of dispute but it exceeded a million. Talaat Pasha presided 
over this horror as minister of the Interior and then prime minister of 
Ottoman Turkey, a post he held until the end ofWorld War I. 
Turkish revisionist historian Taner Aks:am quotes a doctor affiliated 
with the CUP at the time of the massacres explaining that, "Your nation-
ality comes before everything else .... The Armenians of the East were so 
excited against us that if they remained in their land, not a single Turk, 
not a single Muslim could stay alive .... Thus, I told myself: oh, Dr. 
Rechid, there are only two options. Either they will cleanse the Turks or 
they will be cleansed by the Turks. I could not remain undecided between 
these two alternatives. My Turkishness overcame my condition as a doc-
tor. I told myself: 'instead of being exterminated by them, we should ex-
terminate them."'8 
But the CUP had thoroughly miscalculated. For one thing, the war 
did not end quickly. Instead of one big blast of offensive destruction, the 
western-European theater ground down to a bizarre defensive struggle be-
tween armies of millions, lined up for hundreds of miles, in trenches sep-
arated by desolate killing fields that were littered with explosives and 
barbed wire. Battles kept breaking out along these lines, and sometimes 
they killed tens of thousands in the course of a few hours but the territory 
won or lost in these battles was often measurable in mere inches. This was 
the European theater. 

INDUSTRY, CONSTITUTIONS, AND NATIONALISM 
295 
To break the deadlock, the British decide to attack the Axis powers 
from behind, by coming at them through Asia Minor. Doing this required 
first crippling the Ottomans. The Allies landed troops on the peninsula of 
Gallipoli, from which they hoped to storm Istanbul, but this assault failed 
and Allied troops were massacred. 
Meanwhile, the British were already busy trying to exploit another Ot-
toman weakness: rebellion was percolating throughout the empire's Arab 
provinces, stemming from many sources. Nationalist movements sought 
Arab independence from Turks. Ancient tribal alignments chaffed at Ot-
toman administrative rules. Various powerful Arab families sought to es-
tablish themselves as sovereign local dynasties. In all this discontent, the 
British smelled an opportunity. 
Among the dynastic contenders, two families stood out: the house of 
Ibn Saud, which was still allied with Wahhabi clerics, and the Hashimite 
family, which ruled Mecca, the spiritual center oflslam. 
The Saudi-Wahhabi realm had shrunk down to a Bedouin tribal state in 
central Arabia but was still headed by a direct descendant of that ancestral 
eighteenth-century Saudi chieftain Mohammed Ibn Saud, the one who had 
struck a deal with the radically conservative cleric Ibn Wahhab. Over the 
decades, the two men's families had intermarried extensively; the Saudi sheikh 
was now the religious head of the Wahhabi establishment, and Ibn Wahhab's 
descendents still constituted the leading ulama of Saudi-ruled territories. 
British agents dispatched by the Anglo-Indian foreign office visited the Saudi 
chief, looking to cut a deal. They did what they could to excite his ambitions 
and offered him money and arms to attack the Ottomans. Ibn Saud re-
sponded cautiously but the interaction gave him good reason to believe that 
he would be rewarded after the war for any damage he could do to the Turks. 
The Hashimite patriarch was named Hussein Ibn Ali. He was caretaker 
of the Ka'ba, Islam's holiest shrine, and he was known by the title of Sharif, 
which meant he was descended from the Prophet's own clan, the Banu 
Hashim. Remember that the ninth-century revolutionaries who had 
brought the Abbasids to power called themselves the Hashimites: the 
name had an ancient and revered lineage and now a family by this name 
was ruling again in Mecca. 
But Mecca was not enough for Sharif Hussein. He dreamed of an Arab 
kingdom stretching from Mesopotamia to the Arabian Sea, and he thought 

296 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
WORLD WAR I AND THE ARAB REVOLT 
the British might help him forge it. The British gladly let him think they 
could and would. They sent a flamboyant military intelligence officer to 
work with him, a one-time archeologist named Colonel Thomas Edward 
Lawrence, who spoke Arabic and liked to dress in Bedouin tribal dress, a 
practice that eventually earned him the nickname "Lawrence of Arabia." 
Looking back, it's easy to see what a pot of trouble the British were 
mixing up here. The Hashimites and the Saudis were the two strongest 
tribal groups in the Arabian peninsula; both hoped to break the Ottoman 
hold on Arabia, and each saw the other as its deadly rival. The British were 
sending agents into both camps, making promises to both families, and 
leading both to believe that the British would help them establish their 
own kingdom in roughly the same territory, if only they would fight the 
Ottomans. The British didn't actually care which of the two ruled this re-
gion: they just wanted immediate help undermining Ottoman power, so 
they could beat the Germans back home. 
As it turned out, the Hashimites led the way in helping the British. 
They fomented the Arab Revolt. Two of Hussein's sons, working with 
Lawrence, drove the Turks out of the region, clearing the way for the 

INDUSTRY, CONSTITUTIONS, AND NATIONALISM 
297 
EGYPT 
-
French Rule 
-
Russian Rule 
D 
D 
D 
THE SYKES-PICOT AGREEMEN T 
D 
PERSIA 
British to take Damascus and Baghdad. From there, the British could put 
pressure on the Ottomans. 
At the very time that British agents were making promises to the two 
Arab families, however, two European diplomats, Mark Sykes and Francois 
George-Picot, were meeting secretly with a map and a pencil, over a civi-
lized cup of tea, to decide how the region should be carved up among the 
victorious European powers after the war. They agreed which part should 
go to Sykes's Britain, which part to Picot's France, and where a nod to 
Russian interests might be appropriate. Which part the Arabs should get 
went curiously unmentioned. 
All these ingredients portended trouble enough, but wait, as they say 
on late-night-TV infomercials, there was more! Arab nationalism was 
starting to bubble in Palestine and adjacent Arab-inhabited territories, in-
cluding Egypt, and this had nothing to do with the dynastic aspirations of 
the Hashimites and Saudis. It was the secular modernists who embraced 
this new nationalism, all those professionals, government workers, and 
emerging urban bourgeoisie for whom constitutionalism and industrialism 
also had great appeal. In Palestine and Syria, these Arab nationalists not 

298 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
only demanded independence from the Ottomans and Europeans but also 
from the Hashimites and Saudis. 
Then there was one last problematic ingredient, perhaps the most in-
tractable of them all: Jewish immigration from Europe to Palestine. Euro-
pean anti-Semitism, which had helped give rise to Zionism, had continued 
to intensify as the continent moved toward war, making life ever more un-
tenable for Jews throughout Europe. As a result, the Jewish population of 
Palestine swelled from 4 percent in 1883 to 8 percent by the start ofWorld 
War I to nearly 13 percent by the time the war ended. 
In 1917, the British foreign minister Arthur James Balfour wrote a let-
ter to Lord Lionel Rothschild, a British banker and a leading Zionist, a 
man who had supported Jewish immigration to the Levant generously out 
of his own private funds. Balfour told Rothschild that the British govern-
ment would "view with favor the establishment in Palestine of a national 
home for the Jewish people, and will use their best endeavors to facilitate 
the achievement of this object." 
Balfour also insisted that "nothing shall be done which may prejudice 
the civil and religious right of existing non-Jewish communities in Pales-
tine," but how Britain planned to accommodate both Jewish and Arab na-
tionalism in the same territory, Balfour didn't say. 
To recap-it's worth a recap: Britain essentially promised the same ter-
ritory to the Hashimites, the Saudis, and the Zionists of Europe, territory 
actually inhabited by still another Arab people with rapidly developing 
nationalist aspirations of their own-while in fact Britain and France had 
already secretly agreed to carve up the whole promised territory between 
themselves. Despite the many quibbles, qualifiers, and disclaimers offered 
over the years about who agreed to what and what was promised to 
whom, that's the gist of the situation, and it guaranteed an explosion in 
the future. 
But the good thing about the future was that it lay in the future. In the 
present a war was raging, and what the British and French cooked up for 
the short term worked wonderfully: the CUP lost everything the Ot-
tomans had ever owned outside of Asia Minor. They ceded Palestine, 
Greater Syria, and Mesopotamia to the British. And the war was going 
badly for their friends in Europe, as well. In 1918, Germany surrendered 

INDUSTRY, CONSTITUTIONS, AND NATIONALISM 
299 
unconditionally to the Allies, and the three Pashas knew they were in big 
trouble. All three of them, Talaat, Enver, and Djemal, fled Istanbul inches 
ahead of arrest warrants. Talaat went to Berlin, where an Armenian assas-
sinated him in 1921. Djemal went to Georgia, where an Armenian assas-
sinated him in 1922. Enver went to Central Asia to stir up rebellion 
against the Bolsheviks. A Red Army detachment commanded by an Ar-
menian Bolshevik killed him there in 1922. 
So ended the Committee for Union and Progress, a bad government to 
be sure, but with its demise, the carcass of the "Ottoman Empire" was left 
with no government at all. 


IS 
~ 
Rise of the 
Secular Modernists 
1336-1357 AH 
1918-1939 CE 
B
Y I9I9, ASIA MINOR was crawling with French and Italian troops. 
Greek armies led by Greek nationalists dreaming of a Greater Greece 
were forging deep into the Ottoman heartland. Istanbul itself was occu-
pied by British troops. Resistance movements bubbled up throughout 
Anatolia, coalescing around a hawk-faced general with piercing eyes. He 
was Mustafa Kemal, later known as Atatiirk-Father of the Turks. His 
forces drove out all the foreigners and in 1923 he declared the birth of a 
new nation-state: Turkey. 
Turkey was not to be the Ottoman Empire reinvented. Atatiirk repudi-
ated the Ottoman past; he repudiated empire. He claimed nothing outside 
Asia Minor because he sought a coherent territory that made sense as a 
country. Henceforth, Turkey was to be a state with dear and immutable 
borders within which the majority of people would be ethnic Turks and 
the language would be Turkish. In this new country, Islam would be ex-
cluded from any role in public policy and demoted to the private sphere 
301 

302 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
where it might go on thriving as a religion like any other, so long as its ad-
herents didn't bother the neighbors. 
Turkey was thus the first Muslim-majority country to declare itself sec-
ular and to make the separation of politics and religion an official policy. 
Having demoted Islam, however, Atatiirk needed some other principle to 
unify his new country, so he elaborated an ideology that sanctified six 
isms: nationalism, secularism, reformism, statism, populism, and republi-
canism. Turks still call this creed Kemalism, and some of version of it, usu-
ally emphasizing the first four isms, spread to or sprang up throughout the 
Islamic world after World War I. 
Atatiirk's nationalism was not to be confused with the hardcore mili-
tarism of the Committee for Union and Progress. The roots of both went 
back to the Young Turks, but "Young Turkism" was a broad movement 
spanning a gamut from liberal constitutionalism to fascism, and Atatiirk's 
was a flexible, cultural nationalism that grew out of the liberal end. 
It was cultural nationalism that led Atatiirk to discard the many lan-
guages spoken in the Ottoman Empire in favor of one national language, 
Turkish. The many dialects and variants ofTurkish spoken in the old em-
pire gave way to a single standard dialect, and not the literary Turkish of 
the old court but a purified form of the street Turkish spoken by the 
masses. Some enthusiasts then wanted to ban all words that had crept into 
Turkish from other languages, but Atatiirk disarmed this agitation with a 
simple narrative: Turkish, he said, was the mother of all the languages, so 
words borrowed from other languages were simply Turkish words coming 
home. The Arabic script, however, the one in which Turkish had long been 
written, was replaced by a new Latin alphabet. 
A modernist to the core, Atatiirk did not declare himself king or sultan. 
He had a new constitution written, set up a parliament, and established are-
publican form of government with himself as president. The parliamentary 
democracy he built endures to this day, but let's be frank: another leader 
could not have replaced Atatiirk through the ballot box in his lifetime-hey, 
he was Father of the Turks! One does not vote one's father out of office! And 
although he was no military dictator and his ruling circle was not a junta (he 
established and abided by the rule oflaw), Atatiirk did come up through the 
military and he valued discipline; so he herded his people toward his vision 
for the country with a military man's direct, iron-handed resolve. 

RISE OF THE SECULAR MODERNISTS 
303 
What was his vision? To break the authority of the ulama in Turkey, un-
seat Islam as the arbiter of social life, and authorize a secular approach to the 
management of society. In the Western context, this makes him a "moder-
ate." In the Islamic context, it made him a breathtakingly radical extremist. 
First up on his agenda: opening the public sphere to women. Toward 
this end, he promulgated new laws that gave women the right to vote, hold 
public office, and own property. He had polygamy outlawed, discouraged 
dowries, frowned on traditional marriage customs, and sponsored new 
rules for divorce based on the Swiss civil code, not the Qur' an and hadith. 
He also banned veils and head scarves, part of a new state-sanctioned 
dress code that applied to men as well as women-for example, the fez was 
banned too. Turbans and beards were strongly discouraged. Derby hats 
were okay, though, and so were bowlers, baseball caps, and berets. Atatiirk 
himself wore suits and ties and urged his fellow Turks to do the same. 
The religious establishment was shocked when ballroom dancing was 
introduced as official entertainment at state functions, but there was noth-
ing they could do about it. Atatiirk meant business, and he had the power 
and prestige to get it done. His parliament backed him to the hilt when he 
proposed a law requiring that public readings of the Qur'an henceforth be 
conducted in Turkish, not Arabic-blasphemy to the devout. Parliament 
backed him again when he moved the workers' day off from Friday to 
Sunday-to Sunday! Atatiirk's government went on to close religious 
schools, shut down the Sufi brotherhoods, and abolish the waqfs-those 
ancient religion-based charitable foundations-in favor of state-dispensed 
social services. In 1925, Atatiirk capped his secular modernist revolution 
with a truly jolting declaration: he declared the khalifate dead. 
This wasn't actually breaking news, of course. For all practical purposes, 
the khalifate had been dead for centuries, but in the world between Istan-
bul and the Indus, the khalifate held a special place in the public imagina-
tion roughly analogous to that of ancient Rome in the West: it embodied 
the lingering dream of a universal community. In the West, the ghost of 
Rome persisted right to the end ofWorld War I, visible in such traces as 
the Austro-Hungarian Empire, which was really just the final form of "the 
Holy Roman Empire," and in the titles of the last German and Russian 
rulers before World War !-kaiser and czar were both variations on Caesar. 
Rome had been dead for centuries, but the Roman ideal of a universal state 

304 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
did not fully wink out until the end ofWorld War I. The same was true of 
the khalifate. When Atatiirk abolished the khalifate, he was abolishing an 
idea, and that's what jolted the Muslim world. 
Or at least it jolted traditionalists, but who cared what they thought? 
They were no longer in power. In fact, Atatiirk would turn out to be the 
prototypical Muslim leader of the half-century to come. Iran generated its 
own version of the prototype. After the war, the last Qajar king faced the 
"Jungle Revolution," a guerilla insurgency launched by admirers ofSayyid 
Jamaluddin-i-Mghan. The king's forces consisted of two armies, one com-
manded by Swedish officers, one by Russian mercenaries. 1 Little did the 
king realize that the real threat to his rule lay not in the jungle but among 
the foreigners propping him up. When Bolsheviks began joining the jun-
gle revolutionaries, the British got nervous. Lenin had just seized power in 
Russia and they didn't want this sort of thing to spread. The British de-
cided the king wasn't tough enough to squelch Bolsheviks, so they helped 
an Iranian colonel overthrow him. 
This colonel, Reza Pahlavi, was a secular modernist in the Atatiirk mold, 
except that he had no use for democracy (few secular modernist leaders 
did). In 1925, the colonel declared himself king, becoming Reza Shah 
Pahlavi, founder of a new Iranian dynasty. From the throne, he launched 
the same sorts of reforms as Atatiirk, especially in the matter of a dress code. 
Head scarves, veils, turbans, beards-these were banned for ordinary citi-
zens. Registered clerics could still wear turbans in the new Iran, but they 
had to have a license certifying that they really were clerics (and how could 
they meet this irksome proviso, given that Islam never had a formal institu-
tion for "certifying" clerics?}. Still, anyone caught wearing a turban without 
a license could be beaten on the street and hauled off to prison. 
Much the same thing was happening in Mghanistan, where, an im-
petuous young man named Amanullah inherited the throne in 1919. An 
ardent admirer of the Young Turks, this moon-faced fellow with a Hercule 
Poirot moustache gave Mghanistan a liberal constitution, declared women 
liberated, funded a nascent secular school system lavishly, and, yes, de-
clared the usual dress code: no veils, no beards, no turbans, etc. 
What I find interesting about this dress-code policy is that radical ls-
lamists did exactly the same thing fifty years later when they came back 
into power in Iran and Mghanistan, except that their dress code was the 

RISE OF THE SECULAR MODERNISTS 
305 
opposite: suddenly, women were forced to wear head scarves and men were 
beaten for appearing in public without beards. But the principle of beating 
and imprisoning people for their clothes and grooming-this principle, 
both sides embraced. 
The three rulers between Istanbul and the Hindu Kush could use state 
power to push the secular modernist agenda. Other parts of Dar al-Islam 
still lived under imperial rule but had vigorous independence movements, 
which were also led by secular modernists. In India, for example, the most 
prominent Muslim leader was the suave, British-educated attorney named 
Mohammed Ali Jinnah. 
In short, secular modernism surged up throughout the Muslim world 
in the 1920s, one society after another falling under the sway of this new 
political creed. I will call it secular modernism, even though the term is in-
adequate, because secular-modernist-nationalist-statist-developmentalist is 
too cumbersome and even then doesn't cover the entire movement. Suffice 
to say, this was a broad river of attitude and opinion that drew upon ideas 
explored earlier by the likes of Sayyid Ahmad of Aligarh, Amir Kabir of 
Iran, the Young Turks of Istanbul, and countless other intellectuals, edu-
cated workers, professionals, writers, and activists from the middle classes 
that had been emerging in the Middle World for a century. Suddenly, 
Muslim societies knew where they were going: the same way as the West. 
They were behind, of course, they would have to play desperate catch-up, 
but that was all the more reason to hurry, all the more reason to steam-
roll over nuances and niceties like democracy and get the crash program 
underway-the core of which crash program was "development." 
In Mghanistan and Iran, the state damped down on citizens, but did so 
in pursuit of a "progressive" agenda. Monarchs in both countries set out to 
build roads, dams, power plants, factories, hospitals, and office buildings. 
Both established airline companies, set up state-run (and state-censored) 
newspapers, and built national radio stations. Both countries continued to 
grow their secular public schools. Iran already had a national university 
and Mghanistan founded one now. Both governments promulgated poli-
cies to liberate women and draw them into the public realm. Both were 
eager to make their countries more "Western" but saw no connection be-
tween this and expanding their subjects' freedom. What they promised was 
not freedom but prosperity and self-respect. 

306 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
It would be quite plausible to say that at this point, Islam as a world-
historical narrative came to an end. Wrong but plausible. The Western 
cross-current had disrupted Muslim societies, creating the deepest angst 
and the most agonizing doubts. The secular modernists proposed to settle 
the spiritual turmoil by realigning their societies with the Western current. 
Make no mistake, most of these leaders still thought of themselves as Mus-
lims; they just adopted a new idea of what "Muslim" meant. Most still 
worked to break the grip of specific Western powers over their specific peo-
ple; they just did so as revolutionary anticolonialists rather than as zealous 
Muslims committed to promoting Islam as one big community on a mis-
sion from God. These elites sought to make gains by holding the West to 
its own standards and ideals and in doing this they implicitly validated the 
Western framework of assumptions. 
They were not without popular support. Throughout the Middle 
World, traditional, religious Islam was quiescent now: beaten and sub-
dued. Educated people tended to see the old-fashioned scholars and clerics 
as quaint. The ulama, the scriptural literalists, the miracle merchants, the 
orthodox "believers"-all these had dominated Dar al-Islam for centuries, 
and what had they created? Threadbare societies that couldn't build a car 
or invent an airplane, much less stand up to Western might. Their failure 
discredited their outlook, and a sizable public was ready to give someone 
else a turn. The future belonged to the secular modernists. 
Or so it seemed. 
But secular modernism was not the only reformist current to come out 
of the nineteenth-century Muslim world. What of the other currents? 
What of the Wahhabis, for example? What of Sayyid Jamaluddin's disci-
ples? These movements should not be confused with orthodox Islam or 
old-fashioned religious conservatism. They were just as new-fangled as sec-
ular modernism, just as intent on smashing the status quo. 
Even the Wahhabis, by their very appeal to a mythic moment in the 
distant past, were rejecting the petrified present (and the twelve centuries 
that led up to it). And they still breathed in the Arabian Peninsula. In fact, 
they seized state power there, with the founding of Saudi Arabia, about 
which more later. Outside Arabia, the Wahhabis could not gain much pur-
chase among the educated elite or the new middle classes but they 
preached away in rural mosques to ill-educated and impoverished villagers. 

RISE OF THE SECULAR MODERNISTS 
307 
For that audience their message had resonance, especially in India. When 
they spoke of a glorious past, revivable only by a return to the ways of the 
First Community, the poor and dispossessed knew who they were talking 
about. They could see their own elites drifting away from the Muslim way 
of life, and boasting about it! They were to blame for Muslim weakness. In 
fact, if the Wahhabi narrative held water, the poverty of the rural poor was 
the fault of the urban rich. 
In 1867, a group of puritanical Indian Wahhabis had built a religious 
seminary in a town called Deoband. For fifty years, missionaries pouring 
out of this seminary had been spreading through the subcontinent preach-
ing Indian Wahhabism. In the late 1920s, these Deobandis gave a glimmer 
of their strength in Afghanistan. 
King Amanullah, upon coming to the throne, had dazzled his country 
by declaring full independence from the British and sending troops to the 
border. The battles were inconclusive but he won Afghanistan's indepen-
dence at the bargaining table, making him the first and only Muslim 
monarch to win a direct confrontation with a major European power. In-
dian Wahhabis exultantly proclaimed him the new khalifa; but Amanullah 
was not the kind of man to accept that mantle. In fact, he "betrayed" the 
Deobandis by launching the full array of Atatiirkist initiatives mentioned 
earlier. The Indian Wahhabis swore to bring the apostate down. 
And they did it, but not by themselves. They got help from Great 
Britain. This may seem odd, because Amanullah was culturally so much 
more in tune with British values than the Deobandis were. European 
ideals were his ideals. But perhaps the British recognized him as a threat 
for that very reason. They knew what an anti-imperialist revolutionary 
was; they had seen Lenin. They didn't know what a Deobandi was. 
Bearded preachers swathed in turbans no doubt struck them as picturesque 
primitives who might serve a purpose. Britain therefore fed funds and guns 
into the Deobandi campaign against Amanullah and soon, with further 
help from radical local clerics, the Deobandis set Afghanistan ablaze. In 
1929, they managed to drive Amanullah into tragic exile. 
Amid the uproar, a really primitive bandit, colorfully nicknamed the 
Water Carrier's Son, seized the Afghan capital. The bandit ruled for nine 
riotous months, during which time he not only imposed "pure" Islamic 
rule but undid all of Amanullah's reforms, wrecked the city, and drained 

308 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
the treasury. Anyone who knows what the Taliban did in Afghanistan at 
the end of the century will recognize an eerily precise preview of their car-
nage in the career of the Water Carrier's Son. By the time he was finished, 
Afghans were so sick of chaos, they were eager to accept a strongman. The 
British obliged them by helping a more compliant member of the old royal 
clan claim the Afghan throne, a grim despot named Nadir Shah. 
This new king was a secular modernist too, but a chastened one. He 
guided his country back toward the Atatiirkist road but very, very slowly, 
taking care not to offend the British, and placating his hometown De-
obandis by clamping down on Afghanistan socially and culturally. 
So much for Wahhabism. What of the reformist current embodied by 
Sayyid Jamaluddin? Was that one dead? Not at all. Intellectually, Jamalud-
din's work was carried forward by his chief disciple, Mohammed Abduh, 
who taught at Egypt's prestigious thousand-year-old Al Azhar University. 
Abduh pulled the Master's patchwork of ideas together into a coherent Is-
lamic modernist doctrine. Abduh's own disciple and friend Rashid Rida 
went on to explore how a modern state might actually be administered on 
Islamic principles. 
Then came Hassan al-Banna, perhaps the most important of Sayyid 
Jamaluddin's intellectual progeny. This Egyptian schoolteacher was more 
activist than philosopher. In 1928, he founded a club called the Muslim 
Brotherhood, originally something like a Muslim version of the Boy 
Scouts. This was a seminal event for Islamism, but one that went virtually 
unnoticed at the time. 
Banna lived and taught in the Suez Canal Zone, where he could feel the 
scrape of West against East every day. Virtually all trade between Europe 
and the eastern colonies passed through this canal, which was the most 
boomingly modern structure in Egypt, and every cargo ship had to pay a 
steep toll. A European firm owned by British and French interests operated 
the canal and took 93 percent of the rich revenue it generated. Foreign 
technicians therefore abounded in the Canal Zone, making this little strip 
ofland the starkest embodiment of two worlds intersecting. One whole in-
frastructure of shops, restaurants, cafes, dance halls, bars, and other ser-
vices catered to the European community. Another whole infrastructure 
consisted of markets, coffeehouses, and whatnot frequented by Egyptians 
of the humbler classes: two worlds interwoven but entirely distinct. 

RISE OF THE SECULAR MODERNISTS 
309 
Hassan Banna saw his fellow Egyptians earnestly struggling to learn Eu-
ropean languages and manners, trying slavishly to acquire enough West-
ernized polish to enter the Western world, even if only as workers of the 
lowest strata. The sight of all this Egyptian envy and subservience offended 
his pride. He founded the Muslim Brotherhood to help Muslim boys in-
teract healthily with one another, learn about their own culture, and ac-
quire some self respect. Boys dropped into the Brotherhood center after 
school to play sports, at which time they also received lessons in Islam and 
Muslim history from Banna and his instructors. 
Eventually the boys' fathers and older brothers started dropping in as 
well, so the Brotherhood began offering evening programs for adults, 
which were so popular that new centers were opened up. By the mid-
1930s, the brotherhood had outgrown its origins as a dub for boys and be-
come a fraternal organization for men. 
From this, it slowly morphed into a political movement, a movement that 
declared secular Islam and Egypt's own "Westernized" elite to be the country's 
chief enemies. The Muslim Brothers opposed nationalism, the impulse to se-
cure sovereignty for small separate states such as Syria, Libya, or Egypt. They 
called on Muslims to resurrect instead the one big transnational Umma, a 
new khalifate embodying the unity of all Muslims. Like Sayyid Jamaluddin, 
they preached pan-Islamic modernization without Westernization. 
The Muslim Brotherhood was taking shape around the same time the 
United States was struggling with the Great Depression. In this same pe-
riod, the Nazis were taking over Germany, and Stalin was consolidating his 
grip on the Soviet Union. Outside of Egypt, no one knew much about the 
brotherhood, not because it was secretive (at first) but because it had few 
adherents among the Egyptian elite and held little interest for foreign jour-
nalists. Even Egyptian newspapers published few stories about its activities 
and the Western press none at all. Why would they? This was mostly a 
movement of the urban working poor, and the foreigners who came and 
went through Egypt hardly noticed those hordes moving like shadows 
through the streets, doing the heavy lifting and loading, providing services, 
and begging for "baksheesh," as tips were called (prompting the writer 
S. J. Perlman to quip of Egypt, "It's not the heat, it's the cupidity"). 
As Westernization and industrialization proceeded, Egypt's urban working 
poor kept proliferating. With the expansion of this class, the brotherhood 

310 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
outgrew even its identity as a political movement and became more of a pan-
demic low-level insurgency-seething against secularism and Western influ-
ence, seething against its own modernist elite, against its own government, 
against all nationalist governments in Muslim countries, even against the ap-
paratus of democracy to the extent that this reflected Western values. 
By the late thirties, then, secular leaders throughout the Muslim world, 
whether they held state power or spearheaded independence movements, 
found themselves squeezed between two sets of forces: European imperial-
ists still pressed down on them from above; meanwhile, Islamist insurgents 
were pushing up from below. What was a leader to do? 
Under this kind of pressure, politicians typically try to associate them-
selves with some popular passion to shore up support; and often the pas-
sion they tap into for this purpose is religion. But religion was the one 
passion secular modernists could not appeal to, because it was the very 
thing they were trying to move their societies away from. So they waved 
two other banners instead. One was "development" and the material pros-
perity it would bring; and the other was nationalism, which they claimed 
to represent. In Iran, for example, the Pahlavi regime tried to invoke a con-
nection to pre-Islamic Persia. In Afghanistan, the Nadir Shah regime in-
sisted on declaring Pushto a national language, even though only a 
minority spoke it at home. Everywhere, the glories of the nation, the 
splendor of its culture, and the proud history of its people were trumpeted. 
Nationalist sentiment was not in short supply; lots of that was sloshing 
around in the Middle World at this time. The trouble was, most of the new 
nation-states were rather artificial. Afghanistan, for example, had been cre-
ated by Russia and Britain. Iran, until recently, had been a loose conglomer-
ation of disparate parts, an empire, not a country. Turkey was a nation-state 
because Atati.irk said so. As for India, where does one even begin? 
But the most problematic region for nationalism was the Arab heart-
land. Here's why. 
After World War I, the victors had met at Versailles, France, to reshape 
the world. As a prelude to that conference, U.S. president Woodrow Wilson 
had given a speech to the U.S. Congress laying out a "fourteen point" vision 
of a new world order that most colonized people found inspiring. To Arabs, 
the most thrilling ofWilson's Fourteen Points was his declaration that every 
people's right to self-rule must be respected and accommodated. Wilson had 

RISE OF THE SECULAR MODERNISTS 
311 
also suggested creating a neutral "League of Nations" to adjudicate interna-
tional issues, such as the fate of Arab-inhabited lands formerly ruled by the 
Ottomans. At Versailles, the "peacemakers" had set up just such a body. 
But stunningly enough, the United States refused to join this body! 
And once the League set to work, the European victors of World War I 
quickly turned it into an instrument of their will. In principle, for exam-
ple, the League endorsed the idea of self-rule in the Arab world, but in 
practice, it implemented the Sykes-Picot agreement, dividing the area into 
zones called "mandates," which were awarded to Britain and France. The 
document setting up these mandates called them territories "inhabited by 
peoples not yet able to stand by themselves under the strenuous conditions 
of the modern world" and said "the tutelage of such peoples should be en-
trusted to advanced nations who by reason of their ... experience ... can 
best undertake this responsibility." In short, it spoke of Arabs as children 
and of Europeans as grown-ups who would take care of them until they 
could do grown-up things like feed themselves-such was the language di-
rected at a people who, if the Muslim narrative were still in play, would 
have been honored as the progenitors of civilization itself-and who still 
retained some such sense of themselves.2 
France got Syria for its mandate, and Great Britain got pretty much 
everything else in the "Middle East." France divided its mandated territory 
into two countries, Syria and Lebanon, the latter an artificial state with 
borders gerrymandered to ensure a demographic majority for the Maronite 
Christians, whom France regarded as its special clients in the region. 
Great Britain had clients to satisfy as well, beginning with the 
Hashimites who had led that helpful Arab Revolt, so the British bundled 
together three former Ottoman provinces to create a new country called 
Iraq and made one of their Hashimite clients king of it. The lucky man 
was Faisal, second son of the sheikh of Mecca. 
Faisal, however, had an older brother named Abdullah, and it wasn't 
seemly for a younger brother to have a country while his older brother had 
none, so another country was carved out of the British mandate and given 
to Abdullah, and this was Jordan. 
Unfortunately, the boys' father ended up with nothing at all, because in 
1924 that other British client in the region, Aziz ibn Saud, attacked Mecca 
with a band of religious troops, took the holy city, and ousted the 

312 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
J 
:) 
''I.., 
IRAN 
DIVISION OF THE ARAB WORLD: THE MANDATES PLAN 
Hashemite patriarch. Ibn Saud went on to conquer 80 percent of the Ara-
bian Peninsula. Only Yemen, Oman, and a few sliver-sized coastal emirates 
remained outside his grasp. The European powers did nothing to stop him 
because he too held some IOUs. In 1932, Ibn Saud declared his holdings 
a sovereign new country called Saudi Arabia. 
In Egypt, meanwhile, Great Britain succumbed to its own pieties and 
declared the country independent, sovereign, and free-with a few caveats. 
First, Egyptians could not change their form of government; they must re-
main a monarchy. Second, Egyptians could not replace their actual rulers; 
they must retain their existing royal family. Third, the Egyptians must ac-
cept the continued presence of British military forces and bases on their 
soil. Fourth, the Egyptians must leave the Suez Canal in British hands 
without protest. Fifth, the private company controlled by Britain and 
France must continue to collect all fees from that busiest of sea channels 
and send the bulk of it back to Europe. 
Egypt would get an elected parliament, but this parliament's decisions 
must be approved by British authorities in Cairo. Beyond these few points, 
Egypt was to consider itself sovereign, independent, and free. Egypt 

RISE OF THE SECULAR MODERNISTS 
313 
quickly developed a full-fledged (secular modernist) independence move-
ment, of course, which offended the British, because why would an inde-
pendent country need an independence movement? Didn't they get the 
memo? Apparently not. 
The French faced a bit of resistance too, in Syria. There, a Sorbonne-
educated Christian Arab writer named Michel Aflaq was elaborating a 
pan-Arab nationalist ideology. He asserted the existence of a mystical Arab 
soul forged by a common language and a shared historical experience that 
gave a unified singleness to the vast body of Arabic-speaking people. Like 
all the other twentieth century nationalists inspired by nineteenth century 
European philosophers, Aflaq argued that the ''Arab nation" was entitled 
to a single contiguous state ruled by Arabs. 
Although he was Christian, Aflaq put Islam at the center of Arabism, 
but only as a historical relic. Islam, he said, had awakened the Arab soul at 
a certain moment in history and made it the spearhead of a global quest 
for justice and progress, so Arabs of every religion should honor Islam as a 
product of the Arab soul. What counted, however, was the Arab soul, and 
Arabs should therefore seek a rebirth of their spirit, not in Islam, but in 
"the Arab Nation." Aflaq was a hardcore secular modernist and in 1940 he 
and a friend founded a political party to pursue their vision. They called it 
the Ba'ath, or "rebirth" party. 
Four new countries were carved out of the European mandates, a fifth 
one emerged independently, and Egypt acquired pseudoindependence. 
But one question remained unresolved: what should be done with Pales-
tine? The principle of self-rule dictated that it too should become a coun-
try ruled by itself, but who was its "self?" Was the natural "nation" here the 
Arabs, who constituted nearly 90 percent of the population and had been 
living here for centuries? Or was it the Jews, most of whom had come here 
from Europe in the last two decades but whose ancestors had lived here 
two thousand years ago? Hmm: tough question. 
To the Arabs, the answer seemed obvious: this should be one more Arab 
country. To the Jewish immigrants from Europe, the answer also seemed ob-
vious: whatever the exact legal arrangements, this patch of territory should 
become a secure Jewish homeland, because Jews were endangered everywhere 
else in the world and only Palestine made sense as a place they could call their 
own. Besides Britain's Balfour had made them that memorable promise. 

314 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Britain decided to make no grand decision about Palestine at all, but to 
deal with events de facto as they came up and just see how things went. 
How on earth could secular modernist leaders use nationalism to 
bind together their dubious nations, especially since some of their own 
were calling for an Arab nation transcending existing boundaries-while 
at the same time Islamists and Wahhabis were saying to hell with na-
tions; to hell with ethnic identity politics; we're all Muslims; let's rebuild 
the khalifate? 
Ultimately, in this environment, the success of secular modernism 
hung on two things. First, since the secular modernists kept waving the 
banner of "development," they had to develop something and deliver the 
prosperity they evoked. Second, since they sought legitimacy through na-
tionalism, they had to gain actual independence for their nations. 
In the decades after World War I, however, they failed to achieve either 
goal. They failed because, despite the thrilling rhetoric ofWilson's Four-
teen Points, there was never any real chance of the Western powers loos-
ening their grip on the core of the Muslim world. 
No chance of it because at this point every Western power was racing 
to outindustrialize every other. The Western powers were moving toward 
an apocalyptic showdown fueled by ideologies, communism, fascism, 
nazism, democracy. The stakes were absolute. Victory depended on indus-
trial strength, industrialism now depended on petroleum, and most of the 
world's petroleum lay under Muslim-inhabited soil. 
The first big pools of petroleum oil had been discovered in the late 
nineteenth century in Pennsylvania and Canada but at the time these dis-
coveries had sparked little excitement because the only product really made 
from petroleum back then was kerosene, and kerosene was used only to 
light lamps, for which purpose most consumers preferred whale oil. 
In 1901, the first of the big Middle Eastern oil fields was detected in 
Iran by a British prospector named William Knox D'Arcy. He promptly 
bought exclusive rights to all oflran's petroleum from the Qajar king of the 
time, in exchange for a sum of cash stuffed immediately into that shah's 
pockets, and a 16 percent royalty payable to the Iranian treasury later, a roy-
alty to be calculated on "net profits" realized from Iran's petroleum, not on 
the gross, which means that D'Arcy's lease made no guarantees about how 
much money Iran ever stood to make from its oil. 

RISE OF THE SECULAR MODERNISTS 
315 
You might wonder what sort of king would sell his country's entire 
stock of any mineral known and unknown for cash to some vagabond 
wandering through and why the citizens of the country would not imme-
diately depose such a king. The answer is, first: tradition. The Qajar kings 
had been doing this sort of thing for a hundred years. Second, the coun-
try had just struggled mightily to scuttle the tobacco monopoly, which 
their king had sold to British interests, a struggle that had left the coun-
try's activists exhausted. Third, oil didn't seem very important; it wasn't 
tobacco, for God's sake (or even whale oil). Fourth, activists were girding 
for a struggle that did seem more important than oil and tobacco com-
bined: the struggle for a constitution and a parliament. The oil deal there-
fore went unnoticed. 
At the very time that Iran was giving away its oil, however, the impor-
tance of oil was about to skyrocket, due to a new invention: the internal 
combustion engine. External combustion engines such as steam engines 
ran on anything that burned, which in practice meant wood or coal; but 
internal combustion engines ran strictly on refined petroleum. 
In the 1880s, a German inventor had used this type of engine to power 
a big tricycle. That tricycle evolved into a car. By 1904, cars were becom-
ing just popular enough in Europe and the United States that some roads 
were being rebuilt to accommodate them. Soon after that, trains started to 
run on oil. Then in 1903 the airplane was invented. Next, ocean-going 
ships began switching over. 
World War I saw the first use of tanks, the first oil-powered navies, and 
the first airplanes that dropped bombs. By the time the war ended, anyone 
could tell that petroleum-powered war machinery would grow only more 
sophisticated and that whoever oWIIed the world's oil would end up own-
ing the world. 
For Iran, that realization came too late. William D'Arcy had already 
sold his Iranian oil concession to a company owned by the British govern-
ment (it still exists: it's now British Petroleum, or BP). By 1923, according 
to Winston Churchill, Great Britain had earned 40 million pounds from 
Iranian oil, while Iran had earned about 2 million from it.3 
Meanwhile, that British company had joined forces with Royal Dutch 
Shell and certain U.S. interests to form a supercompany ("the Turkish Pe-
troleum Company") that proposed to look for oil in the Ottoman provinces 

316 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
bordering the Persian Gulf. By the time the supercompany was ready to 
drill, the area in question was part of the British "mandate." It was then 
that the British created Iraq and put their Hashemite client in charge of it. 
The oil consortium immediately approached King Faisal for a monopoly 
on the country's oil resources, and he gladly accommodated them. Going 
into the negotiation, the Iraqis were hoping for a 20 percent equity share 
in the company, but they compromised at 0 percent, in exchange for a flat 
fee per ton of oil extracted, that sum not to be linked in any way to the price 
of oil or the company's profits, at least for the first twenty years of the 
agreement. Equity in the company was divided among the several Euro-
pean powers and the United States, and the only real wrangling was among 
them over who would get what percent. In 1927, after all these issues had 
been settled, the company found the first oflraq's enormous oil fields.4 
Nine years later, Aziz ibn Saud celebrated the discovery of oil in his 
realm as well. Saudi Arabia would, in fact, turn out to have the world's 
biggest reserves of the crucial mineral. The Saudis had barely started 
pumping their oil when World War II broke out and the strategic signifi-
cance of oil soared even higher. During that war, U. S. president Franklin 
Delano Roosevelt met with Ibn Saud, and the two men reached an under-
standing to which both sides have adhered faithfully ever since, even 
though it is not enshrined in any formal public treaty. The deal ensures the 
U.S. unfettered access to Saudi oil; in exchange, the Saudi royal family gets 
as much U.S. military equipment and technology as it needs to stay in 
power against all comers. Indirectly, this understanding partnered the 
United States with the Wahhabi clerical establishment and made American 
military prowess the guarantor of the Wahhabi reform movement. And by 
the time World War II broke out, the Wahhabis, and the Islamists 
throughout Dar al-Islam were gathering their strength for a full assault on 
the secular modernists. 

16 
~ 
The Crisis of 
Modernity 
1357-1385 AH 
1939-1966 CE 
T
HE BLOODIEST OUTBURST in the history of violence started in 1939 
and raged for six long years. Once again, Germany was battling France 
and Britain. Once again the United States came in late but decided the out-
come. Parts of the configuration had changed this time, to be sure: Russia 
was now the Soviet Union, the Ottomans were missing, Japan had grown 
mighty-but in the end, this bloodbath only finished what World War I 
had begun. The old colonial empires suffered death blows, and the old 
alignments of power became obsolete. Britain came out of the war starving, 
France in ruins, Germany destroyed and divided. With the gunfire fading, 
two new superpowers stood astride the globe, and both were soon armed 
with thermonuclear bombs capable of destroying the human race. The next 
chapter of world history would be dominated by their competition. 
Other narratives continued to play out, however, beneath the surface of 
the bipolar Cold War struggle, including the submerged narrative of Islam 
as a world-historical event. The hunger for independence, which had built 
317 

318 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
up during the war years among virtually all colonized people, both Mus-
lim and non-Muslim, now hit the breaking point. In Egypt, rebellion 
started brewing among army officers. In China, Mao's communist insur-
gency began to move against Chiang Kai-shek, widely seen as a Western 
puppet. In Vietnam, Ho Chi Minh, who had come back from thirty years 
of exile to organize the Viet Minh, attacked the French. In Indonesia, 
Sukarno declared his country independent from the Dutch. All over the 
world, national liberation movements were springing up like weeds, and 
the ones in Muslim countries were much like the ones in non-Muslim 
countries: whatever else might be happening, the Islamic narrative was 
now intertwined with a narrative Muslims shared with others. 
Geographically, many of the "nations" that the liberation movements 
strove to liberate were defined by borders the imperialist powers had drawn: 
so even in their struggle for liberation they were playing out a story set in 
motion by Europeans. In sub-Saharan Africa, what the king of Belgium had 
managed to conquer became Congo (later renamed Zaire). What the Ger-
mans had conquered became Cameroon, what the British had conquered in 
East Africa, Kenya. A label such as "Nigeria'' referred to an area inhabited by 
over two hundred ethnic groups speaking more than five hundred languages, 
many of them mutually unintelligible, but the world was now organized into 
countries, so this, too, became "a country," its shape and size reflecting the 
outcome of some long-ago competition among colonizing Europeans. 
In North Africa, national liberators accepted the reality of Algeria, 
Tunisia, and Libya as countries, each one spawning a national liberation 
movement of its own. All three movements eventually succeeded, but at 
great cost. Algeria's eight-year war of independence from France claimed 
over a million Algerian lives, out of a starting population of fewer than 9 
million, a staggering conflict. I 
Issues inherited from the days of Muslim hegemony continued to echo 
here and there. The persistence of the Muslim narrative manifested most 
dramatically in the subcontinent oflndia, the biggest full-fledged colony to 
gain independence. Even before the war, as this nascent country struggled 
to rid itself of the British, a subnational movement had developed within 
the grand national movement: a demand by the Muslim minority for a sep-
arate country. At the exact moment that India was born (August 15, 1947) 
so was the brand-new two-part country of Pakistan, hanging like saddlebags 

THE CRISIS OF MODERNITY 
319 
east and west oflndia. The partition of the subcontinent sent tidal waves of 
frightened refugees across new borders to the supposed shelter of their core-
ligionists. In the tumult, hundreds of thousands were slaughtered within 
weeks, and countless more rendered homeless, yet even this mayhem failed 
to settle the questions raised by "the partition." Kashmir, for example, re-
mained in play, for it had a Hindu monarch but a predominantly Muslim 
population. Which then should it be part of, India or Pakistan? The British 
decided to wait and see how things shook out. Kashmir is still shaking. 
It was not only decolonization that came to a head after World War II, 
but "nation-statism." It's easy to forget that the organization of the world 
into countries is less than a century old, but in fact this process was not 
fully completed until this period. Between 1945 and 1975, some one hun-
dred new countries were born, and every inch of earth finally belonged to 
some nation-state or other.2 
Unfortunately, the ideology of "nationalism" and the reality of "nation-
statism" matched up only approximately if at all. Many supposed countries 
contained stifled sub-countries within their borders, ethnic minorities who 
felt they ought to be separate and "self-governing." In many cases, people 
on two sides of a border felt like they ought to be part of the same nation. 
Where Syria, Iraq, and Turkey came together, for example, their borders tri-
sected a contiguous area inhabited by a people who spoke neither Arabic 
nor Turkish but Kurdish, a distant variant of Persian, and these Kurds nat-
urally felt like members of some single nation that was "none of the above." 
In some places, even the separate existence of given countries remained 
open to question. Iraq, Lebanon, Jordan-these were still congealing. 
Their borders existed, they had separate governments, but did their people 
really think of themselves as different nations? Not dear. 
In the Arab world, ever since Woodrow Wilson's Fourteen Points, the 
watchword had been self-rule, but this tricky concept presumed some de-
finition of a collective "self" accepted by all its supposed members. Na-
tionalists throughout Arab-inhabited lands were trying hard to consolidate 
discrete states: Libya, Tunisia, Syria, even Egypt ... but the question always 
came up: who was the bigger collective self? Was there "really" a Syrian na-
tion, given that the Syria seen on maps was created by Europeans? Could 
there be such a thing as Jordanian nationalism? Was it true that people liv-
ing in Iraq were ruling themselves so long as their ruler spoke Arabic? 

320 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
The most problematic single territory for the competing claims of na-
tionalism versus nation-statism was Palestine, soon to be known as Israel. Be-
fore and during World War II, the Nazis' genocidal attempt to exterminate 
the Jews of Europe confirmed the worst fears of Zionists and gave their ar-
gument for a sovereign Jewish homeland overwhelming moral weight, espe-
cially since the Nazis were not the only anti-Semites in Europe, only the most 
extreme. The fascists of Italy visited horrors upon Italian Jews, the French 
puppet government set up by the Germans hunted down French Jews for 
their Nazi masters, the Poles and other Eastern Europeans collaborated en-
thusiastically in operating death camps, Great Britain had its share of anti-
Semites, Spain, Belgium-no part of Europe could honestly claim innocence 
of the crime committed against the Jews in this period. Millions of Jews were 
trapped in Europe and perished there. All who could get away escaped in 
whatever direction lay open. Boatloads of Jewish refugees ended up drifting 
over the world's seas, looking for places to land. A few were able to make their 
way to the United States and resettle there, but even the United States im-
posed strict quotas on Jewish immigration, presumably because a single 
country could absorb only so many immigrants of any one group; but just 
perhaps some anti-Semitism was mixed into that policy as well. 
The one place where the refugees could land was Palestine. There, ear-
lier immigrants had bought land, planted settlements, and developed some 
infrastructure of support. Toward that slender hope of safety, therefore, the 
refugees headed, overcoming heroic hardships to begin building a new na-
tion in an ancient land inhabited by their ancestors. Such was the shape of 
the story from the Jewish side. 
From the Arab side, the story looked different. The Arabs had long been 
living under two layers of domination by outsiders, the first layer being the 
Turks, the next the Turks' European bosses. Then, in the wake of World 
War I, amidst all the rhetoric about "self-rule" and all the hope aroused by 
Wilson's Fourteen Points, their land was flooded by new settlers from Europe, 
whose slogan was said to be "a land without a people for a people without a 
land"3-an alarming slogan for people living in the "land without a people." 
The new European immigrants didn't seize land by force; they bought 
the land they settled; but they bought it mostly from absentee landlords, 
so they ended up living among landless peasants who felt doubly dispos-
sessed by the aliens crowding in among them. What happened just before 

THE CRISIS OF MODERNITY 
321 
and during World War II in Palestine resembled what happened earlier in 
Algeria when French immigrants bought up much of the land and planted 
a parallel economy there, rendering the original inhabitants irrelevant. By 
1945, the Jewish population of Palestine almost equaled the Arab popula-
tion. If one were to translate that influx of newcomers to the American 
context, it would be as if 150 million refugees flooded in within a decade. 
How could that not lead to turmoil? 
In the context of the European narrative, the Jews were victims. In the 
context of the Arab narrative, they were colonizers with much the same atti-
tudes toward the indigenous population as their fellow Europeans. As early 
as 1862, a German Zionist, Moses Hess, had drummed up support for po-
litical Zionism by proposing that "the state the Jews would establish in the 
heart of the Middle East would serve Western imperial interests and at the 
same time help bring Western civilization to the backward East."4 The sem-
inal Zionist Theodor Herzl wrote that a Jewish state in Palestine would 
"form a portion of the rampart of Europe against Asia, an outpost of civi-
lization as opposed to barbarism."5 In 1914, Chaim Weitzman wrote a letter 
to the Manchester Guardian stating that if a Jewish settlement could be es-
tablished in Palestine "we could have in twenty to thirty years a million Jews 
out there .... They would develop the country, bring back civilization to it 
and form a very effective guard for the Suez Canal."6 Arabs who saw the 
Zionist project as European colonialism in thin disguise were not inventing 
a fantasy out of whole doth: Zionists saw the project that way too, or at least 
represented it as such to the imperialist powers whose support they needed. 
In 1936, strikes and riots broke out among the Arabs of Palestine, serv-
ing notice that the situation was spiraling out of control. In a clumsy effort 
to placate the Arabs, Great Britain issued an order limiting further Jewish 
immigration to Palestine, but this order came in 1939, with World War II 
about to break out and the horrors of Nazism fully manifest to European 
Jews: there was no chance that Jewish refugees would comply with the 
British order; it would have been suicidal. Instead, militant organizations 
sprang up among the would-be Jewish settlers, and since they were a dispos-
sessed few fighting the world-straddling British Empire, some of these mili-
tant Jewish groups resorted to the archetypal strategy of the scattered weak 
against the well-organized mighty: hit and run raids, sabotage, random as-
sassinations, bombings of places frequented by civilians-in short, terrorism. 

322 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
In 1946, the underground Jewish militant group Haganah bombed the King 
David Hotel in Jerusalem, killing ninety-one ordinary civilians, the most de-
structive single act of terrorism until 1988, when Libyan terrorists brought 
down a civilian airliner, Pan Am Flight 103, over Scotland, killing 270. 
The horrors of Nazism proved the Jewish need for a secure place of refuge, 
but Jews did not come to Palestine pleading for refuge so much as claiming 
entitlement. They insisted they were not begging for a favor but coming home 
to land that was theirs by right. They based their claim on the fact that their 
ancestors had lived there until the year 135 CE and that even in diaspora they 
had never abandoned hope of returning. "Next year in Jerusalem" was part of 
the Passover service, a key cultural and religious rite in Judaism. According to 
Jewish doctrine, God had given the disputed land to the Hebrews and their 
descendants as part of His covenant with Abraham. Arabs, of course, were not 
persuaded by a religious doctrine that assigned the land they inhabited to an-
other people, especially since the religion was not theirs. 
In the aftermath ofWorld War II, the United States led efforts to create 
new political mechanisms for keeping the peace, one of which was the United 
Nations. Palestine was just the sort of issue the United Nations was designed 
to resolve. In 1947, therefore, the United Nations crafted a proposal to end 
the quarrel by dividing the disputed territory and creating two new nations. 
Each competing party would get three patches of curiously interlocking land, 
and Jerusalem would be a separate international city belonging to neither side. 
The total territories of the proposed new nations, Israel and Palestine, would 
be roughly equal. Essentially, the United Nations was saying, "It doesn't mat-
ter who's right or wrong; let's just divide the land and move on." This is the 
sort of solution that adults typically impose on quarreling children. 
But Arabs could not agree that both sides had a point and that the truth 
lay somewhere in the middle: they felt that a European solution was being 
imposed on them for a European problem, or more precisely that Arabs were 
being asked to sacrifice their land as compensation for a crime visited by Eu-
ropeans on Europeans. The Arabs of surrounding lands sympathized with 
their fellows in Palestine and saw their point; the world at large did not. 
When the matter was put to a vote in the General Assembly of the United 
Nations, the vast majority of non-Muslim countries voted yes to partition. 
Most Arabs had no personal stake in the actual issue: the birth oflsrael 
would not strip an Iraqi farmer of his land or keep some Moroccan shop-

THE CRISIS OF MODERNITY 
Mediterr·anean 
Sea 
ISRAEL AND PALESTINE 
Palesti ne: U.N. P;utitio n Plan ( 19 4 
-
Arab State 
-Jewish State 
-
lnternalional Zone 
Uerusalern and suburbs) 
Beirut 
SYR IA 
> .Damascus 
JORD AN 
SAUD I ARABIA 
323 
keeper from prospering in his business-yet most Arabs and indeed most 
Muslims could wax passionate about who got Palestine. Why? Because the 
emergence of Israel had emblematic meaning for them. It meant that 
Arabs (and Muslims generally) had no power, that imperialists could take 
any part of their territory, and that no one outside the Muslim world 
would side with them against a patent injustice. The existence oflsrael sig-
nified European dominance over Muslims, Arab and non-Arab, and over 
the people of Asia and Africa generally. That's how it looked from almost 
any point berween the Indus and Istanbul. 
On May 15, 1948, Israel declared itself born. Immediately, Arab armies 
attacked from three sides, determined to crush the new country before it 
could take its first breath. But instead, Israel did the crushing, routing the 

324 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
armies of its three Arab adversaries, Syria, Jordan, and Egypt, and so it was 
Palestine, not Israel, that became the stillborn child. When the war ended, 
a war that Israel remembers as their War of Independence but that Arabs 
called the Catastrophe, some seven hundred thousand Arabs found them-
selves homeless and stateless, living as refugees in the neighboring Arab 
countries. The lands that were supposed to become Palestine were annexed 
{mostly by Jordan). The bulk of the Arab refugees collected on the West 
Bank of the Jordan River, where they seethed and stewed and sometimes 
staged small raids into the land that had once been theirs. 
In the aftermath of the war of 1948, the Arabs lost the public relations 
battle even more drastically than they had lost their land. For one thing, 
some prominent Arabs publicly and constantly disputed Israel's "right to 
exist." They were speaking within the framework of the nationalist argu-
ment: Zionists wanted Israel to exist, the Arabs of Palestine wanted Pales-
tine to exist, and since they claimed the same territory, both could not 
exist: the assertion of each nation's "right to exist" was inherently a denial 
of the other nation's "right to exist." But in the shadow of the Nazis' at-
tempted genocide, asserting that Israel had no right to exist sounded like 
saying, "Jews have no right to exist." 
To make matters worse, at least one Arab notable made no bones about 
actually endorsing Nazi anti-Semitism. This was the Mufti of Jerusalem, 
who had lived in Nazi Germany during the war and now spouted racism 
from many pulpits including his radio broadcasts. The weight of world 
opinion, the tone of media reporting, and the rantings of Arabs such as this 
mufti subtly conflated the Arab cause with Nazism in the public mind, es-
pecially in the West. Arabs not only lost the argument about the land but in 
the process became the Bad Guys who deserved to lose their land. This com-
bination of feeling wronged and feeling vilified fed a spiraling resentment 
that rotted into the very anti-Semitism of which Muslims stood accused. 
One man who took part in the debacle of 1948 was Egyptian army officer 
Gamal Abdul Nasser. Nasser was born in southern Egypt, the son of a 
humble postman. Even as a boy, he felt keenly wounded by his country's 
subservience to Europeans. At an age when most boys were starting to ob-
sess about girls, Nasser was obsessing about his nation's "honor." His 
prospects for doing anything about it looked dim, however, until a sudden 

THE CRISIS OF MODERNITY 
325 
need for army officers opened up places for lower class boys in the coun-
try's elite military schools and Nasser rode this opportunity all the way to 
the rank of colonel. 
The Arab defeat in 1948 deepened his sense of grievance. He blamed the 
country's king for it, and so he conspired with some hundred other army of-
ficers {"the Free Officers Club") to overthrow the monarchy and set up a re-
public. One morning in the summer of 1952, the Free Officers struck hard 
and fast: a nearly bloodless coup-two casualties and the monarchy was gone. 
Getting rid of the king was the easy part, though. The big step was get-
ting the British out of Egypt. For this step, however, Nasser needed serious 
firepower. The Cold War being in full swing at this time, almost any emerg-
ing nation-state could get arms from one of the two superpowers, so Nasser 
approached the Americans; but they didn't see Egypt as a key to "contain-
ing" Communism and mistrusted what this Arab fellow would do with 
weapons, so they turned him down. Nasser then went to the Soviets and 
from them got mountains of weaponry-which made the Americans sit up 
and take notice. In typical Cold War fashion, they decided Egypt was im-
portant after all. In a bid to win Nasser back, they offered to build him the 
world's biggest dam, right across the Nile River at a place called Aswan, a 
dam that would multiply Egypt's farmland and produce enough electricity 
to vault the country into the ranks of industrialized nations instantly! A 
breathtaking vision-the fulfillment of the secular modernist dream! 
But when Nasser looked at the fine print, he saw that the aid agreement 
included U.S. military bases on Egyptian soil and U.S. oversight of Egypt's 
finances: here was the thin end of the imperialist wedge once again enter-
ing his country's heart. Nasser refused the aid, but could not stop dream-
ing of the Aswan Dam. But how could he finance the dam without selling 
his country to one of the superpowers? 
Then he saw the answer: the Suez Canal, of course. The canal was 
pulling in about $90 million a year, and Egypt was getting only $6.3 mil-
lion of it, roughly. Here was the money Egypt needed for its development, 
and it was mostly draining away to Europe! In 1956, Nasser suddenly 
poured troops into the Canal Zone and took over the canal. 
A furor broke out in Europe. British politicians called Nasser another 
Hitler, a madman with a grandiose scheme of world conquest. The French 
press said Egyptians were too primitive to run the canal; they would disrupt 

326 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
global trade and wreck the world economy. These two European countries 
colluded with Israel in a complicated scheme to bomb Cairo, kill Nasser, 
and recover the canal. 
Just in time, however, U.S. president Ike Eisenhower heard about the 
scheme and flew into a rage. Didn't the Europeans know there was a Cold 
War on? Didn't they know their little plot could deliver the whole Middle 
East to the Soviets? Eisenhower ordered the Europeans to give the canal 
back to Egypt and go home, and U.S. dominance was such that both 
countries (and Israel) had to obey. 
Arabs saw this as a great victory for Nasser. For the next eleven heady 
years, Nasser was the decolonizing hero, the prophet of Arab unity, and the 
avatar of "Islamic Socialism," by which he meant a classless society 
achieved not through class warfare, as in Marxism, but through class co-
operation regulated by the principles of Islam-a vigorous "socialist" re-
statement of the basic secular modernist Muslim creed. 
Nasser built his dam and electrified his nation. He also joined with 
India's Nehru, Indonesia's Sukarno, Sri Lanka's Bandaranaike, and several 
others to forge the Non-Aligned Movement, a bloc of neutral countries in-
tended to counterbalance the two Cold War superpowers. 
Nasser's big deeds and global stature won him countless new admirers 
at home, and not just in Egypt. Arabs of all classes and countries found 
him intoxicatingly charismatic. As a speaker, no one could touch him. 
When he spoke, Arabs (who heard him mostly on the radio) said they felt 
like he was in the room with them, addressing each person eye to eye, 
drawing each one into a conversation about what was to be done, as if all 
of them were in this thing together and every one of them mattered. 
Nasser's popularity got him to dreaming of something bigger than a 
sovereign Egypt-a pan-Arab nation! This was exactly what the Ba'ath 
Party had been preaching in Syria. In fact, in 1958, Egypt and Syria tried 
to form one big country, the United Arab Republic, but Syria seceded 
three years later-a blow to Nasser's prestige. 
Meanwhile, the Muslim Brotherhood was still alive. In 1952, they had 
helped overthrow the Egyptian king but as soon as Nasser's secular gov-
ernment commenced operations, they turned against him, even attempt-
ing to assassinate him. Nasser retaliated by putting the movements' leaders 
in prison, where he had them tortured. 

THE CRISIS OF MODERNITY 
327 
Hassan al-Banna, the founder of the Muslim Brotherhood, had been as-
sassinated before Nasser's day, but a nervous, brilliant, erratic, anxious intel-
lectual zealot named Sayyid Qutb had taken charge of the Brotherhood in 
his place. Qutb's outlook had been shaped by a curious two-year sojourn at 
a teacher's college in Greeley, Colorado, where the Egyptian government had 
sent him to study U.S. educational methods. The materialism Qutb saw in 
America repelled him, the individualism disturbed him, the social freedoms 
unnerved him, and the sexual mores shocked him-the sight, for example, 
of young men and women square dancing together at a church social! 
Qutb came home convinced that the United States was a Satanic force 
and had to be destroyed. He began publishing political tracts. He wrote that 
Islam offered a complete alternative, not just to other religions such as Chris-
tianity and Buddhism, but also to other political systems, such as commu-
nism and democracy, and he renewed the call for Muslims to rebuild one big 
universal Muslim community. And if that sounded like he was saying that 
the Muslim Brotherhood should seize power in Egypt, so be it. 
Nasser clapped this man in prison: big mistake, it turned out. There in 
prison, garbed in the glamour of victimhood, Qutb wrote his most incen-
diary work, a book called Milestones. Here, he proposed a radical reinter-
pretation of Sayyid Jamaluddin's pan-Islamist modernism. He revived the 
ancient theoretical schema of a world divided between Dar al-Islam and 
Dar al-Harb, the realms of (Muslim) peace and (infidel) violence. Qutb 
was no ranter. His prose was cool and measured; he picked his words pre-
cisely. And in this steady, lucid, unblinking language, he called on every 
Muslim to embrace and practice jihad, not just against non-Muslims but 
against Muslims who faltered in their allegiance to Islam or collaborated 
with the enemy.? Under Qutb's leadership, the Muslim Brotherhood basi-
cally declared war against the governments of Egypt, Syria, Iraq, Jordon, 
and Lebanon and against all the secular modernists who supported them. 
Egypt had no democratic process with which to co-opt the Brother-
hood's hold on the underclass. Nasser relied instead on police power to 
quell demonstrations and on secret police to nip conspiracies in the bud. 
Qutb and his brotherhood were all the more irritating to Nasser be-
cause he had plenty of other rivals assailing him, more daunting ones, he 
thought. The rulers of Syria, Jordan, and Iraq envied Nasser's popularity, 
and they were doing their best to discredit him. Ba'ath activists challenged 

328 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
his status among Arabs, claiming that they were the real pan-Arab nation-
alists. Then there were Egypt's communists. At the height of the Cold War, 
given their pipeline to Soviet support, they no doubt seemed more dan-
gerous than some cult organizing the Muslim rabble. And finally there 
were the frankly antirevolutionary monarchs and the tribal dynasts who 
still ruled some of the Arab states, and who disapproved of everything 
Nasser stood for. 
In 1963, Nasser blundered into a proxy war in Yemen. He sent troops 
in only as a gesture, to show support for a socialist party that had seized 
power there by ousting the tribal monarchy; but as soon as Egyptian 
troops arrived in Yemen, Saudi Arabia began pumping money and guns to 
the royalists. Suddenly Nasser found himself bogged down in a quagmire 
of a war that dragged on without result for years. 
Meanwhile, Sayyid Qutb went on preaching his doctrines from prison. 
Nasser decided that, frustrated though he was on other fronts, he didn't 
have to put up with this gadfly. In August 1966, he did what men with too 
much power and too few procedural restraints often do: he had Qutb 
hanged-only to see him hailed as a martyr by a frighteningly far-flung 
network of admirers. 
Just three months later, Syria and Israel got locked into a cycle of raids 
and counterraids back and forth across their border, which escalated for six 
months, growing ever more bloody. Ba'athists ruled Syria by this point. 
They were Nasser's main rivals in the secular modernist camp and by going 
toe-to-toe with Israel, they were gaining credibility at Nasser's expense, 
among Arabs generally and among the Palestinians in particular, those 
wretched refugees still mired in the camps. 
So there was Nasser, hero of the Arab world, besieged by his own Arab 
Muslim masses, eclipsed by his Arab secular modernist rivals, bogged 
down in an endless war-with other Arabs. Clearly he needed to do some-
thing! And dearly it could not be directed against any other Arab country, 
group, or movement. 
This is where matters stood in the spring of 1967, just before one of the 
most seminal events of modern history, at least as seen through Islamic 
eyes: Israel's Six Day War against her Arab neighbors. 

17 
~ 
The Tide Turns 
1369-1421 AH 
1950-2001 CE 
I
N MAY, 1967, Nasser began to spout martial rhetoric at Israel; to prove 
he meant business, he even blockaded Israel's access to the Red Sea. Ac-
tually, of course, with seventy thousand of his best troops bogged down in 
Yemen, Nasser could not possibly take any real military action; but a man 
can talk. Talk, if it's tough enough, will sometimes do the job. 
And sometimes not. On June 5, without warning, Israel attacked 
Egypt, Jordan, and Syria simultaneously. "Without warning" should be ut-
tered with an asterisk here: Arab-Israeli tension had been ratcheting up for 
months. Yet none of the Arab states were expecting a war on that June 
morning; and none of them were ready. 
In the first twenty-four hours, Israel destroyed virtually the entire 
Egyptian air force on the ground. In the next five days, Israel conquered all 
the territories penciled in by the United Nations as the state of Palestine. 
These became instead the Occupied Territories, ruled by Israel but popu-
lated mostly by Palestinians. By the seventh day, the war was over, and the 
world would never be the same. 
You might think there can be no such thing as a triumph too decisive. 
And maybe not, in a conflict between two monolithic sides. But in 1967, 
329 

330 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
when Israel won the most decisive victory in the history of modern war-
fare, it wasn't clashing with a monolith. The Arab side was a querulous 
scramble of contradictions locked in struggle with one another. 
The Six Day War humiliated Nasser, finished his career. Within four 
years the man was literally dead. If Nasser had really been the leader of a 
monolithic Arab bloc, his defeat might have forced "the Arabs" to come to 
terms with Israel and work out some basis for eventual peace. 
But there was no "the Arabs." Nasser was in fact just one contender 
among several for leadership of just one current among all who called 
themselves Arabs: secular modernism. When Israel attacked the Arabs, it 
really attacked only this current; and when it crushed Nasser, it damaged 
only this Westernizing, modernizing, secular, nationalist tendency, and not 
even every expression of that. With Nasser's fall, down went "Nasserism," 
that odd melange of secular modernism and Islamic socialism. Into the 
power vacuum left by its demise flowed other, more dangerous forces, 
some of them more primal, more irrational. 
In the wake of the war, the Arab refugees clumped along the borders of 
Israel gave up hope that any Arab state would save them and decided to 
rely only on themselves henceforth. These refugees, their numbers swelled 
to more than a million by the latest mayhem, could properly be called 
Palestinians at this point, because their intense shared historical experience 
had certainly given them a common identity and made them a "nation" in 
the classic sense. They were now the "people without a land" and among 
these Palestinians sprouted many groups dedicated to the restoration of 
Palestine by any means. The biggest of them drifted into a coalition called 
the Palestine Liberation Organization, which had been founded in 1964 as 
a mechanism by which Arab governments could "manage" the Palestini-
ans. After the Six Day War, Palestinians took control of this organization 
and made it their own. A part-time engineer and full-time revolutionary 
named Yasser Arafat emerged as its chairman 1, and with the PLO as their 
quasi-government, the Palestinians dug in for a protracted war with Israel. 
This was the first consequence of the Six Day War. 
Second, the fall of Nasser created an opening for the other secular 
Arab nationalist movement, the one founded by Michel Aflaq. His party 
had joined with the Syrian Socialist Party to form the Ba'ath Socialist Party, 
the ideology of which combined state-glorifying socialism with Arab-

THE TIDE TURNS 
331 
worshipping nationalism. After the Six Day War, disgruntled army offi-
cers flooded into this new Ba'ath, giving the already unhealthy nationalist-
socialist mixture a militaristic cast. What had started out as a fairly liberal, 
modernist movement, dedicated to women's rights, equality for religious 
minorities, freedom of speech, civil liberty, democracy, literacy, and other 
such progressive ideals, now skewed sharply toward nationalistic develop-
mentalism with totalitarian overtones. The Ba'ath credo boiled down to a 
shout of, "Our Nation! Our nation must develop factories, industry, 
bombs!" Even before the Six Day War, the Ba'ath Party had taken control 
of Syria; after the Six Day War, a second branch of the party seized power 
in Iraq and began to build a police state soon to be headed up by that 
take-no-prisoners dictator Saddam Hussein. Both Ba'ath parties had pop-
ular support at first, because the Arab citizens of their countries were 
frightened by Israel and wounded by the debacle of 1967; they were des-
perate for someone to restore their pride. But the glow faded as the middle-
class masses in Syria and Iraq tasted life under the boot of an ideology 
that had nothing at its core but power. And this was a second consequence 
of the Six Day War. 
The third consequence was the most ominous. The Six Day War 
marked a turning point in the general struggle between the secular mod-
ernists of the Islamic World and adherents of those other currents of Is-
lamic thought and action coming out of the nineteenth century: 
Wahhabism and the various strains of political Islamism. 
In Saudi Arabia, Wahhabis already had a state of their own. Though 
Egypt had a long claim to being the center of the Arab world, Saudi Ara-
bia could bid for that status too, in part because it controlled the holy 
cities of Mecca and Medina. Any weakening of Egypt added to Saudi Ara-
bia's power-and what power it was! Oil gave the Wahhabis wealth, and 
U.S. arms gave them military strength. With Egypt in disarray, Wahhabi 
clerics quietly began using their resources to fund missionary activity 
throughout the Muslim world, setting up religious schools, building 
mosques, appointing imams, and establishing charities that extended 
their reach into the lives of poor and rural Muslims everywhere, extended 
south into sub-Saharan Africa and east to the southern Pushtoons of 
Afghanistan, and on into Pakistan, where Wahhabi ideology already had 
millions of adherents. 

332 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Then there was the Muslim Brotherhood. When Nasser lost face in 
the Six Day War, the Egyptian masses simply abandoned him. They 
turned instead to the vast anti-Nasserite movement permeating their 
country. And now, the Muslim Brotherhood metastasized. The organiza-
tion itself thrust beyond the borders of Egypt, into Syria, into Jordan, 
into the Arab emirates and the rest of Arab heartland. What's more, the 
original movement began sprouting offshoots, each one more radical than 
the last. One such branch was Egypt's Islamic Jihad, founded by a man 
named al-Zawaheri, who in turn mentored the now-infamous Saudi ji-
hadist Osama bin Laden. 
Some ideologues inspired by Qutb began to teach that jihad was not 
only "an obligation" for devout Muslims but the "sixth pillar" oflslam, on 
a par with prayer, pilgrimage, fasting, charity, and the creed of monothe-
ism. A few extremists, such as Abdullah Azzam, a Palestinian who fought 
the Soviets in Afghanistan, went even further and declared that participa-
tion in jihad was the only way to distinguish a Muslim from a non-Muslim: 
according to his doctrine, anyone who held back from armed struggle was 
fair game.2 These hardcore revolutionaries should properly be called "ji-
hadists" rather than simply "Islamists." Their ideology was plainly off the 
charts for the vast majority of Muslims, hardly even recognizable as Islam 
to most: it was a sliver of Islamism, itself a sliver of political Islam, itself 
one branch of Islam as a whole. 
Overall then, what did the Six Day War accomplish? Israel gained the 
Occupied Territories. They were supposed to buffer the country against 
further attacks. Instead, within those same territories, Israeli authorities 
have faced ever-mounting insurgencies called intifadas, to which they have 
responded with ever more brutal measures. Year after year and decade after 
decade, this strike-and-counterstrike syndrome has drained the nation's 
energies and compromised its moral arguments in the world. 
On the other side of the ledger, the war radicalized and "Palestinian-
ized" the PLO, empowered the Ba'ath party, and energized the Muslim 
Brotherhood, which spawned Jihadist splinters as the years went by, ever 
more extremist zealots who mounted increasingly horrific attacks not just 
at innocent bystanders who got in the way-a tragic byproduct of virtually 
all wars-but against anyone who could be gotten and the more innocent 
the better, the distinctive genre of violence known today as terrorism. In 

THE TIDE TURNS 
333 
short, the Six Day war was a crushing setback for world peace, a disaster 
for the Muslim world, and not much good in the end even for Israel. 
Such was the narrative that unfolded in the Arab heartland after World 
War II. Let me go back now and follow another thread of narrative further 
east, in the Persian heartland. There too a seminal event took place, almost 
as world-changing as the Six Day War, because it established, in the Is-
lamic world, an image of the United States that has proved intractable. 
It was only after World War I that Muslims really started taking notice 
of the United States, and their first impression was highly favorable. Right 
through World War II, they admired America's sleek efficiency, its ability 
to pour out wonderful goods, its military strength, especially in light of the 
higher values the United States proclaimed-freedom, justice, democracy. 
They respected the American argument that its political system could save 
people of every nation from poverty and oppression. American idealists 
proffered democracy with something of the same ardor enjoyed by reli-
gious movements, making it a competitor to other world-organizing social 
ideas such as communism, fascism, and Islam. Religious Muslims may 
have rejected America's moral claims, but secular modernist Muslims saw 
great hope in it, and found no inherent contradiction between American 
ideals and Islam as they understood it. 
When Wilson's Fourteen Points came to nothing, Muslims didn't 
blame the United States; they blamed the European old guard. In the last 
days of World War II, American president Franklin Delano Roosevelt re-
newed America's moral leadership by issuing {with Winston Churchill) the 
Atlantic Charter, a document calling for the liberation and democratiza-
tion of all countries. Churchill later said he didn't mean it, but American 
leaders never repudiated the charter. In fact, just after the war, the United 
States took the lead in drafting the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights, which was issued by the United Nations, more proof, if any were 
needed, that America was committed to supporting political freedom and 
democracy everywhere. 
All this looked very good to Iranians. In the wake ofWorld War II they 
were ready to resume a project dear to the secular modernists among them: 
replacing dynastic despotism with homegrown democracy. Reza Shah 
Pahlavi had blocked this project for decades, but he was gone, finally: the 

334 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
Allies, the wonderful Allies, had removed him during the war for flirting 
with the Nazis. The stage was set for Iranians to restore their 1906 consti-
tution, resurrect their parliament, and hold real elections: at last they could 
build the secular democracy they had dreamed about for so long. 
With high hopes, then, Iranians went to the polls and voted a secular 
modernist named Mohammad Mosaddeq into power as their prime min-
ister. Mosaddeq had pledged to recover total control of the country's most 
precious resource, its oil, and accordingly upon taking office he canceled 
the lease with British Petroleum and announced that he was nationalizing 
the Iranian oil industry. 
Nice try. 
The U.S. Central Intelligence Agency immediately moved to stop "this 
madman Mosaddeq" {as U.S. secretary of state John Foster Dulles called 
him). In late August of 1953, a faction of the Iranian military carried out 
a bloody CIA-funded coup that left thousands dead in the streets and put 
Iran's most popular political figure under house arrest from which he never 
emerged. In his place, the CIA restored the son of Reza Shah Pahlavi {also 
called Reza Shah Pahlavi) as the country's king. The young shah signed a 
treaty with the United States giving an international consortium of oil cor-
porations the job of "managing" Iran's oil. 
It would be hard to overstate the feeling of betrayal this coup embed-
ded in Iran or the shudder of anger it sent through the Muslim world. Just 
three years later, Eisenhower's intervention secured the Suez Canal for 
Egypt, but the United States reaped no public relations benefit out of it 
among Muslims: Nasser got all the credit. Why? Because the damage done 
by the CIA coup in Iran was too deep. Across the Islamic heartland and in-
deed throughout the once-colonized world, the conviction took hold that 
the imperialist project was still alive, but with the United States at the 
helm now, in place of Great Britain. From the perspective of the Islamic 
narrative, the history unfolding in Iran still revolved around the struggle 
berween secular and religious impulses. How best to revive Islam, how to 
recover Muslim strength, how to cast off the weight of the West-these 
were the issues that drove events. But Iran was also part of the world nar-
rative now, and that narrative revolved around the superpower competi-
tion for control of the planet. From that perspective, what shaped events 
were Cold War strategic considerations and the politics of oil. The same 

THE TIDE TURNS 
335 
held true throughout the Middle World, and these two sets of issues con-
tinued to intertwine throughout Dar al-Islam to the end of the century. 
East oflran, the Cold War simply looked like the Great Game revisited. 
The differences were only cosmetic. What had been czarist Russia was now 
called the Soviet Union. The role once played by Great Britain now be-
longed to the United States. The dynamics, however, were the same: the 
intrigues, the pressures, the threat of violence, and the actual bloodshed. 
The scale was bigger, though. The Great Game had unfolded along the 
line where the Russian Empire butted against the British one. The Cold War 
was driven by U.S. determination to block Soviet expansion around the 
world; and since new nation-states were emerging everywhere, and most of 
them had the potential to end up as either Soviet or U.S. allies, the line of 
scrimmage in the Cold War could be anywhere on earth. Every potentially 
disputed country could receive money and guns from both superpowers, one 
funneling aid to the government, the other to some anti-government insur-
gency, depending on which way that country tilted. 
The core battlefield of the Great Game had been Iran, Afghanistan, and 
central Asia, and this region remained in play. The Russians of the nine-
teenth century had wanted to push south through Afghanistan to the Persian 
Gulf to secure a warm water port for their navies and shipping. The Soviets 
had the same interest, but with added stakes: geologists were now confirm-
ing that roughly 65 percent of the world's petroleum lay under and around 
the Persian Gulf and in a few other Muslim countries of North Africa (and 
much of the rest of it, geologists would later find, lay in the Muslim coun-
tries of Central Asia, north of Afghanistan.) With global industrialization es-
calating off the charts, the significance of oil was still soaring. 
Although oil had a huge political impact on the Muslim world, its so-
cial impact was probably even deeper. Ever since the 1930s, countries that 
had oil had been chipping away at the rapacious terms of those early leases. 
Every few years one or another of them had managed to renegotiate its 
agreements with foreign oil corporations and come away with incremen-
tally better terms. By 1950, the "oil exporting" countries were generally re-
ceiving as much as 50 percent of the revenues from their oil, and from that 
time on considerable wealth began flowing into the region. 
This sudden gush of wealth might have had a very different impact if 
only democratic institutions had emerged in the oil-rich nations before oil 

336 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
was discovered. With power distributed throughout society in these coun-
tries, with avenues of participation available to people of all classes, the 
wealth might have empowered the creative energies of millions and 
sparked a cultural renaissance. 
But time and circumstances had permitted no such institutions to 
arise. These Muslim societies were haunted by memories of greatness lost. 
Their ruling elites were obsessed with developing the modern infrastruc-
ture they deemed indispensable to recovering that grandeur. They were 
desperate to catch up to the West and believed that only centralized states 
with a monopoly on power could do what needed to be done. They didn't 
think they could wait for the necessary infrastructure to emerge organi-
cally nor could they afford to let their people find their way to modern-
ization at their own pace and in their own way. Islamic societies were 
falling behind by the minute, and they needed the full physical infra-
structure of modernity right now! 
With oil, they could have it just that quickly. They could sell the oil 
and use the money to drop the desired infrastructure into place, boom. 
The wealth accumulated by the ruling elite of oil-rich countries is the stuff 
of legends, and it's true that a tiny minority of Arabs and Iranians accu-
mulated obscene wealth and squandered it as jetsetters frolicking in the re-
sorts and casinos of the world, but the ruling elites of these countries did 
not merely pocket the money. They also directed vast sums of it into "de-
velopment," true to the secular modernists creed: that's really the bigger 
story. In country after country, governments installed national school sys-
tems, built power plants and skyscraping office towers, established na-
tional airline companies, set up national television stations, radio stations, 
and newspapers .... 
In one country after another, large scale development of this kind was 
carried out by the state and its functionaries, spawning a new class of edu-
cated technicians and bureaucrats to operate the machinery of the new 
modernism. This "technocracy," as some have called it, was a salaried em-
ployee class: its money came from the state, and the state got it from for-
eign corporations that were pumping and selling the country's oil. The 
state still collected taxes from farmers, herders, artisans, merchants, and 
others working in the traditional economy, but those revenues didn't 
amount to much. The traditional economy just wasn't that productive. 

THE TIDE TURNS 
337 
Certainly, governments could not depend on that tax base to fund their 
ambitious development programs. 
Once the ruling elite stopped depending on the traditional economy 
for tax revenues, they no longer needed allies in that world. Even in total-
itarian dictatorships, the power elite have to propitiate some domestic con-
stituency. But in these oil-rich Muslim states, they could diverge from the 
masses of their people culturally without consequence. The people they 
did need to get along with were the agents of the world economy coming 
and going from their countries. Thus did "modernization" divide these 
"developing" societies into a "governing club" and "everyone else." 
The governing club was not small. It included the technocracy, which 
was not a mere group but a whole social class. It also included the ruling 
elite who, in dynastic countries, were the royal family and its far-flung rel-
atives and in the "republics" the ruling party and its apparatchik. Still, in 
any of these countries the governing club was a minority of the population 
as a whole, and the border between the governing classes and the masses 
grew ever more distinct. 
People in the club were part of an exciting project, working to trans-
form their country. Those outside the club were passive beneficiaries of a 
modernization that was simply happening to them. Suddenly a hospital 
might go up nearby: good, now they could get better health care. Suddenly 
a paved highway might appear nearby: good, now they could get to the 
city quicker. But people outside the governing club had no role in mod-
ernization for good or ill, no share in decision making, no voice in how the 
new money flowing into the country would be spent, no political partici-
pation in their country's transformation. 
They also didn't get, as a by-product of modernization, enhanced 
power to realize their personal dreams and goals, whatever those might 
have been. In fact, even as oil-exporting nations got richer overall, those 
outside the "governing clubs" grew relatively poorer. 
For most people, the only hope of claiming a stake in their own coun-
try was to go to a government school, do well, go abroad (ideally), get a de-
gree, preferably in some technical field, and then break into the 
technocracy. Anyone who took this route probably ended up wearing a 
suit to work and living a life resembling that of people in the West. Their 
time was regulated by clocks, their family tended to be "nuclear," their 

338 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
entertainment tastes might run to alcohol, nightclubs, opera. Their chil-
dren might listen to rock and roll, date members of the opposite sex, and 
choose their own spouses. 
Anyone who didn't take this route probably ended up wearing the tra-
ditional garments of the society: pehran-u-tumban, shalwar kameez, sari,je-
labiyyah, keffiye~whatever was traditional in a given country. Their daily 
schedule was shaped by religious rituals, and when they spoke of their fam-
ily they would tend to mean a large network of relatives to whom they 
were bound by intricate obligations. Their spouses would probably be cho-
sen for them by others, possibly a committee of relatives from which they 
themselves might be excluded. 
Diplomats, businessmen, and other functionaries of the Western world 
would feel comfortable dealing with the folks who wore suits to work; they 
were culturally familiar. They might rarely interact with denizens of the 
other culture. 
Those who wore suits to work had a good chance of living in houses 
with modern kitchens and bathrooms equipped with electricity and 
plumbing. Those who didn't, ended up in houses with kitchen and bath-
rooms like those of their ancestors with informal plumbing and possibly 
no connection to a public sewage system. As an energy source, instead of 
electricity, they might use charcoal, wood, or some other fuel burned di-
rectly for heat and light. 
The people within the nation's governing club made money on a scale 
corresponding to that of the world economy. People in the left-behind, do-
mestic economy generally had much smaller incomes, adequate perhaps to 
their needs in a village or an urban slum, but not enough to let them move 
out of poverty. 
This whole dynamic was not limited to the oil-rich nations. A similar 
process was taking place in countries without oil, if they had strategic value 
as Cold War chips, and who didn't? Egypt, Afghanistan, Pakistan, and 
many other countries that fit this definition got torrents of money from 
the superpowers as "development aid" designed to tilt them toward 
whichever side was doing the giving. Roads and hospitals, schools and air-
ports, armaments and police equipment, whatever the ruling elite of a 
country needed, they could get the money for it in the forms of grants or 
loans from outside. It wasn't oil money, but compared to the revenues gen-

THE TIDE TURNS 
339 
erated by the traditional economies of these countries, it was lots of money. 
Aid like this relieved ever-more centralized states from depending on do-
mestic taxes and their elites from having to please or appease domestic 
constituencies. It was money enough to spawn technocracies and divide 
societies into separate worlds. 
The division into separate worlds was indeed so sharp that in many 
places it was visible to the naked eye. Every major metropolis from 
Casablanca to Kabul had in essence two downtowns: one was its Old City, 
perhaps dubbed its "casbah'' or its "medina," a downtown for citizens of 
the left-behind economy. Everybody there dressed quite differently from 
people in the other downtown, the modern one, where business was trans-
acted with the world at large. The two downtowns smelled different; they 
had different styles of architecture; there was a different feel to the social 
life. All countries once colonized by Europeans had some such division 
perhaps, but it may have been most palpable in Muslim countries. 
Of course it's true that in Europe, too, the sudden changes wrought by 
the industrial revolution had divided societies into sharply separate classes. 
London had its sleek business center and its Cheapside, its posh neighbor-
hoods and its slums, but there the division derived more strictly from the 
economic gulf: the rich ate better, dressed better, lived more comfortably, 
went to better schools, and used a more educated diction when they spoke, 
but they were just a richer version of the poor. 
In the Muslim world, the difference was not just economic but cul-
tural and therefore the gulf between the worlds fed alienation and pro-
duced a more anti-colonialist flavor of resentment, but against the 
nation's own elite. This resentment led to occasional civil unrest. Since 
these culturally divided countries had no democratic institutions to me-
diate disputes, governments casually resorted to force to suppress disor-
der. The native elites took over the role of the one-time foreign 
colonialists. From Morocco through Egypt to Pakistan and beyond, pris-
ons filled up with political dissenters and malcontents. Nowhere was the 
cultural and political tension more palpable than in Iran. Shah Reza 
Pahlavi, who had profited from Mosaddeq's ouster, was a secular mod-
ernist in the Atatiirk mold, but where Atatiirk had been a fundamentally 
democratic man with an autocratic streak, the Shah of Iran was a funda-
mentally autocratic man with a totalitarian streak. He built a secret police 

340 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
outfit called SAVAK to consolidate his grip on the country, and as if just 
to salt his countrymen's wounds, he signed a treaty with the United States 
giving American citizens in Iran complete immunity from Iranian laws-
an astounding giveaway of sovereignty. 
The shah's tyranny energized a resistance movement that harkened back 
to the spirit of Sayyid Jamaluddin. Its leading theoretician, Dr. Ali Shariati 
was a Sorbonne-educated Muslim socialist intellectual. He crafted a vision 
of Islamic modernism that rejected what he called "Westoxification" and 
sought a basis for progressive socialism in Islamic tradition. Shariati said, 
for example, that Islam's insistence on the unity of God expressed the need 
for human unity on Earth. In the modern era, the "polytheism" forbidden 
by Islam was embodied in the division of society into classes by wealth and 
race. According to Shariati, the three idols that Muslims pelted with stones 
during the Hajj pilgrimage represented capitalism, despotism, and reli-
gious hypocrisy. He tapped Islamic stories and traditions as fuel for revo-
lutionary fervor, pointing for example, to Hussein's uprising against 
Mu'awiya as a symbol of the human struggle for liberation, justice, and sal-
vation: if Hussein could inspire a group of seventy-plus against a massive 
state, then a small underground revolutionary group of just a few hundred 
members had no reason to hold back from declaring war on the shah of 
Iran and the superpower that supported him.3 
The Islamic socialist resistance incarnated as an underground group 
called the Mujahideen-e-Khalq. From the midfifties until the Iranian rev-
olution of 1978, this small group led the struggle against the Shah and 
fought a secret war against SAVAK. These Mujahideen-e-Khalq {some-
times called Islamic Marxists) bore the brunt of the executions, imprison-
ment and torture by which the shah hoped to crush resistance, and the 
cruelties these men and women endured beggar description. 
At the same time, however, a very different sort of religious resistance 
movement was gathering steam in Iran, one that came out of the ortho-
dox religious establishment as embodied by the grim cleric Ayatollah 
Khomeini. 
Like the Wahhabis of Sunnism, Khomeini claimed that Muslims had 
fallen away from "true" Islam as understood from a literal reading of the 
Qur'an and the traditions of the prophet and {because these were Shi'is) 
the imams who succeeded him. Khomeini attacked the Shah not for his 

THE TIDE TURNS 
341 
despotism but for his modernism-for promoting the western dress code, 
favoring women's rights, allowing nightclubs to be built in Iran, and so on. 
Khomeini also tapped Shi'i tradition to construct a novel political doc-
trine: that government power properly belonged in the hands of the 
world's single chosen representative of the Hidden Imam, a chosen one 
who could be recognized by his immense religious learning and the rever-
ence that other learned scholars had for him. Such a man was a foqih, a 
leader with authority to legislate, and in the modern world, Khomeini sug-
gested, he was that man. 
The Shah deported Khomeini in 1964, but the stern cleric ended up in 
neighboring Iraq, from which base he directed a growing army of Iranian 
religious zealots loyal to him. 
The Six Day War of 1967 had reinforced a Muslim belief that the United 
States headed a new imperialist assault on Muslim civilization with Israel 
as its beachhead. After all, Israel's strength depended on U.S. arms and 
support. This conclusion was underscored in 1973, when Nasser's succes-
sor, Anwar al-Sadat, started a fourth Arab-Israeli war by attacking Israel 
during Yom Kippur, a solemn religious holiday in Judaism. This time, 
Egyptian arms and troops scored sweeping early gains, but Israel received 
a sudden massive shipment of weapons from the United States and this 
turned the tide; so Israel triumphed again. 
As it happened, during this Arab-Israeli War, the Organization of Pe-
troleum Exporting Countries was meeting to conduct its routine busi-
ness of coordinating production and pricing policies. OPEC was 
founded in 1960, and of its twelve member nations, nine were Muslim 
countries. At the very moment that OPEC leaders were gathering to 
confabulate, the masses in their countries were marching and raging 
about the military humiliation Israel and the United States were dealing 
the Arabs. OPEC had not been particularly political up to this point, but 
at the 1973 meeting, its members decided to use oil as a weapon for 
striking back. They announced an embargo on shipments to countries 
that supported Israel. 
That move sent a shock through the industrialized world. In Oregon, 
where I lived at the time, gas was quasi-rationed: people could buy it only 
on alternate days, their turn determined by whether their license plate 

342 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
ended with an odd or even number. I remember getting up long before 
dawn every other day that winter to secure my place in line at a local gas 
station for a chance at the scarce commodity. Sometimes, the gas had run 
out by the time I got to the pump. I thought I was seeing the end of civi-
lization, and perhaps I was getting a foretaste of it; perhaps we all were. 
That OPEC embargo sent the price of oil skyrocketing from $3 a barrel to 
$12. As I write, oil is selling for about $130 a barrel. 
Media backlash soon began constructing the now-familiar stereotype of 
Arabs as rich, oily, evil men with long noses, conspiring to rule the world. 
That stereotype closely, even eerily, matches the one constructed a hun-
dred years early by European anti-Semites as a depiction of Jews, particu-
larly an imagined secret Jewish cult called the "elders of Zion," who were 
supposedly conspiring to, yes, rule the world. 
The oil embargo did give the OPEC nations an intimation of their po-
tential power. Although it lasted only a few months, it ended up increas-
ing the oil-producing nations' mastery of their own resource. Thereupon, 
the elites of these nations got even richer-which only exacerbated the di-
vision of Muslim societies into separate worlds, as described earlier. 
Throughout this time, secular forces in Dar al-Islam went on struggling 
to "modernize" their countries while coping with international forces. But 
the submerged, even suppressed "other" currents of Muslim revival-the 
political Islamists, the Salafis, the Wahhabis, the Deobandis, the jihadists, 
et al-continued to thrive among the excluded people of the left-behind 
economies. There, they went on preaching that the world was divided into 
two distinct, mutually exclusive parts, a realm of peace and a realm of war, 
a realm of Muslim brotherhood and one of violent pagan greed. 
The people they were preaching to could look about and see that, yes 
indeed, society was divided into whole separate worlds; it was palpable; 
you'd have to be blind not to notice. And when the jihadists went on to 
predict that an apocalyptic showdown was coming up between those who 
remained faithful to the letter of the revelations received by Mohammed in 
seventh century Arabia and those who had joined Satan in his quest to 
draw people away from God, people who lived in these blatantly divided 
societies knew what they meant: they woke up every day to the reality of 
their own growing impoverishment, even as their television screens showed 
them people just across town but living in a whole other world, rich be-

THE TIDE TURNS 
343 
yond all fantasies. They thrilled to the idea of an apocalypse coming that 
would give them Earth and Heaven while knocking the undeserving God-
less elite off their high horses. 
And yet, until the 1970s, few in the West paid much attention to this 
explosive underworld of growing rage. The dominant Western narrative of 
world history said these left-behind folks were vestigial elements of a by-
gone era that would gradually disappear as developing nations became de-
veloped nations, as despotisms realized the errors of their ways and became 
democracies, as that universal panacea called education eliminated super-
stition and replaced it with science, as parochial emotion gave way to dis-
passionate reason. According to prevailing doctrines, the problem plaguing 
the left-behinds of the Muslim world (and of other regions) was not the 
social conditions in which they lived, but the wrong ideas they had. And 
then-the secular modernists of the Islamic world began to fall. 
Zulfikar Ali Bhutto was the first to go. He was the urbane, Berkeley-
educated prime minister of Pakistan, leader of the left-flavored, secular so-
cialist People's Party. In 1977, an Islamist general named Zia al-Haq 
overthrew him and imprisoned him. Soon, Pakistan's Deobandis began 
howling for his head. A kangaroo court tried him for vague crimes, and 
sentenced him. Bhutto was hanged. Sayyid Qutb had suffered exactly the 
same fate in Egypt, thirteen years earlier. 
The next to fall was the shah oflran. In 1978, a coalition of secular left-
ists, Islamic socialists, and pro-Khomeini Shi'i revolutionaries drove him 
out of the country and for a moment it looked as if the Mujahideen-e-
Khalq and their modernist allies would construct a progressive govern-
ment in Iran based on their new ideology oflslamic socialism. 
But Khomeini craftily out-maneuvered all other factions of the Iranian 
revolution. On November 4, 1979, a band of his student followers overran 
the American embassy and took sixty-six Americans hostage. Khomeini 
exploited the year-long confrontation with America to weaken his rivals 
and consolidate his grip.4 Then again, perhaps Khomeini's success can't be 
explained entirely by his spiderlike strategizing and political gamesmanship. 
Perhaps he won because he did indeed speak for the deepest impulse of the 
Iranian masses at that moment. Maybe that impulse wasn't to correct the 
course of secular modernism but to kill all movement in that direction and 
give the Islamic Way another try. In any case, by 1980, Khomeini had 

344 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
transformed Iran into an "Islamic Republic" ruled by the most conserva-
tive clerics oflran's orthodox Shi'i ulama. 
Next to go were the secular modernists of Afghanistan. Their demise 
began with a seeming triumph for an extreme version of the secularist im-
pulse. A coup by a tiny group of Afghanistan communists smashed the dy-
nasty Nadir Shah had founded in the 1920s. Every member of that clan 
who could not escape was killed. Then the Soviet Union invaded and took 
direct control of the country. But the leftward swing of the pendulum was 
momentary and meaningless; it only triggered an overwhelmingly more 
massive tribal and religious insurgency. The eight-year, anti-Soviet guerilla 
war that followed totally empowered the country's Islamist ideologues. Not 
only that but the rural Afghan resistance attracted Islamist zealots from 
around the Muslim world, including jihadists from the Arab world and De-
obandis from Pakistan, all of them sponsored by Wahhabi money from the 
oil-rich Arab states of the Persian Gul£ Among the many who tasted first 
blood in these battlefields of Afghanistan was Osama bin Laden. 
In fact, in the last two decades of the twentieth century, Islam's secular 
modernists saw their power erode almost everywhere. In Algeria, the secu-
lar government came under siege by the Islamic Salvation Party. In Pales-
tine, the secular PLO gave way to the religious ideologues of Hamas. 
Islamic Jihad, another militant group rooted in religious ideology, gained a 
toehold in this region as well. In Lebanon, a series of devastating Israeli in-
vasions emptied the Palestinian refugee camps along the southern border, 
destroyed Beirut, and drove the PLO to new headquarters in Tunis, but 
this only spawned the radical Shi'i political party Hezbollah, which ended 
up as the de facto ruler of the country's southern half and proved itself just 
as committed to destroying Israel as the ousted PLO. 
In Syria and Iraq, the Muslim Brotherhood {and its offshoots) fought a 
grim war with the Ba'ath Party, a war that went largely unnoticed in the 
West. The Ba'ath governments could not eradicate these Islamist insur-
gents despite horrific measures such as Syrian president Hafez Assad's 
1982 massacre of nearly all the people of a good-sized town called Hama. 
Saddam Hussein, the ruler oflraq, was a Sunni secular modernist and a 
sworn enemy of radical religious Islamism. In 1980, directly after Khome-
ini took power, Hussein invaded Iran. Perhaps he considered the country 
ripe for the picking due to its internal turmoil; perhaps he had his eye on 

THE TIDE TURNS 
345 
Iran's oil; perhaps he felt threatened by Khomeini-as he had good reason 
to be: Khomeini blatantly announced his intention to export his revolution, 
and secular Iraq, with its large Shi'i population, was the obvious first mar-
ket for this export. Whatever Hussein's aims, his war proved catastrophic 
for both countries. Both lost nearly an entire generation of their young men 
and boys. Not since World War I had such vast armies met head to head 
nor had so many lives been squandered so casually for such trivial gains. 
And throughout this war, the United States funneled arms and funds to 
Iraq, bolstering its capacity to keep fighting to the last Iraqi, because the 
United States feared that the Soviets might gain ground in this strategic re-
gion, now that the United States had lost its foothold in Iran. Helping the 
Iraqis was a way to weaken Iran and possibly keep the Soviets at bay. Here 
again was a catastrophic intertwining of the Muslim and Western narra-
tives, the one narrative still about secular modernism versus back-to-the-
source Islamism, the other still about superpower rivalry and control of oil, 
though couched in rhetoric about democracy and totalitarianism. 
The Iran-Iraq war ended in 1988 with no winners, unless you count 
Iran's mere survival as a victory. Iraq certainly ended up in ruins, its trea-
sury exhausted by the pointless bloodshed. Saddam Hussein licked his 
wounds for two years, and then, in 1990, he made a bid to recoup his 
losses. A double-or-nothing risk-taker if ever there was one, Saddam in-
vaded and "annexed" neighboring Kuwait, hoping to add that country's oil 
to his own. Apparently, U.S. ambassador April Gillespie had given him 
reason to believe the United States would back him in this venture too. 
Instead, the United States led a coalition of thirty-four countries 
against its erstwhile ally in an assault code-named Desert Storm, a short 
war that destroyed much of Iraq's infrastructure and culminated in the 
firebombing of Saddam's pathetic draftees as they were dragging them-
selves back toward Basra on what came to be known as the Highway of 
Death. This time Iraq was absolutely, totally, and unambiguously defeated-
and yet the war ended with Saddam Hussein somehow still in power, 
somehow still in control of his core military outfit, the elite Republican 
Guard, and still able to crush-as he savagely did-the rebellions that 
erupted in the wake of his defeat by the West. 
After the war, the United Nations imposed sanctions that virtually severed 
Iraq from the world and reduced Iraqi citizens from a European standard of 

346 
DESTINY DISRUPTED 
living in 1990 to one that approached the most impoverished on Earth. In-
comes dropped about 95 percent. Disease spread, and there was no medicine 
to stem it. Over two hundred thousand children-and perhaps as many as 
half a million-died as a direct result of the sanctions. One U.N. official, 
Denis Halliday, resigned because of these sanctions, claiming that "Five thou-
sand children are dying every month .... I don't want to administer a pro-
gram that results in figures like these."5 Iraqis, who had suffered through so 
many years of deepening horror trapped in a war-mad police state, were now 
reduced to inconceivable squalor. The only sector of Iraqi society on whom 
the sanctions had little impact was the Ba'ath Party elite, Saddam Hussein 
and his cohorts, the very people the sanctions were intended to punish. 
And in the east, the Soviets, who had invaded Afghanistan less than a 
year before Iraq invaded Iran, pulled out of Afghanistan less than a year 
after Iraq finally left Iran. The Afghan communists clung to power for an-
other three years, but when they did at last go down, the entire Soviet 
Union was crumbling too, its empire unraveling in Eastern Europe, its 
constituent republics-even Russia-declaring independence until there 
was nothing left to declare independence from. 
In America, conservative historian Francis Fukuyama wrote that the 
collapse of the Soviet Union marked not just the end of the Cold War but 
the end of history: liberal capitalist democracy had won, no ideology could 
challenge it anymore, and nothing remained but a little cleanup work 
around the edges while all the world got on board the train headed for the 
only truth. In fact, he offered this thesis in a book tided The End of His-
tory and the Last Man. 
On the other side of the planet, however, jihadists and Wahhabis were 
drawing very different conclusions from all these thunderous events. In 
Iran, it seemed to them, Islam had brought down the Shah and driven out 
America. In Afghanistan, Muslims had not just beaten the Red Army but 
toppled the Soviet Union itsel£ Looking at all this, jihadists saw a pattern 
they thought they recognized. The First Community had defeated the two 
superpowers of its day, the Byzantine and Sassanid empires, simply by hav-
ing God on its side. Modern Muslims also confronted two superpowers, 
and they had now brought one of them down entirely. One down, one to 
go was how it looked to the jihadists and the Wahhabis. History coming to 
an end? Hardly! As these radicals saw it, history was just getting interesting. 

THE TIDE TURNS 
347 
For years, they had been describing a world bifurcated between Dar al-
Islam and Dar al-Harb. For years they had been predicting an apocalyptic 
showdown between good and evil, God and Satan, a great global battle to 
resolve all the contradictions and melt all factions into a single world, 
Medina universalized. 
For the West, the end of the Cold War meant Afghanistan could be 
abandoned. There was nothing left to do there. The United States and its 
western European allies had pumped billions of dollars worth of arms and 
money into the country, but now they disengaged entirely, rejecting propos-
als from several sources that they sponsor some sort of conference, broker 
some sort of peace, help cobble together some sort of political process to 
help the country find its way back to civil order. CIA station chief Milton 
Bearden explained the reason for this sudden disengagement succinctly: "No 
one gives a shit about Afghanistan." The tribal armies that had battled the 
Soviets fell to quarrelling over the country they had won with the arms they 
had scored. The Soviets had already destroyed the Afghan countryside. Now, 
the civil war among the various guerilla armies destroyed the cities. Foreign 
jihadists who had fought in Afghanistan during the 1980s swarmed back to 
make the rubble their base of operations for a war against the West. 
Step one was erecting in Afghanistan a pure version of the community 
they envisioned, one in which every man, woman, and child lived exactly 
according to the letter of God's law as they understood it or suffered the 
punishment. For this reason, jihadists, sponsored by Wahhabi money from 
Saudi sources, helped develop the Taliban, a party of primitive ideologues 
that emerged out of the refugee camps in that tribal belt that vaguely sep-
arates Afghanistan from Pakistan. 
And eventually, some subset of the militant Jihadists holed up in the 
carcass of Afghanistan crafted a scheme to fly hijacked airliners into the 
World Trade Center in New York and Pentagon headquarters in Washing-
ton, D.C. 
On that day, September 11, 2001, two world histories crashed to-
gether, and out of it came one certainty: Fukiyama was mistaken. History 
was not over. 


AFTERWORD 
Although history is not over, the period since 9/11 has not mulched down 
enough to enter history yet: it still belongs to journalists. It is not too soon, 
however, to reflect on this period as a manifestation of two great, out-of-
sync narratives intersecting. 
In the weeks immediately after the terrorist attacks in New York City 
and Washington, D.C., President Bush rallied the United States for mili-
tary action with rhetoric that evoked long-standing themes of American 
and Western history. He said the terrorists were out to destroy freedom 
and democracy and that these values must be defended with blood and 
treasure, the same rallying cry raised against Nazism in the thirties and 
communism in the fifties. Since then, the United States and a coalition of 
largely unwilling allies have poured a great many troops into Iraq to fight 
a war cast rhetorically in much the same terms as the Cold War, and the 
twentieth century world wars, and so on back into earlier chapters of the 
Western world historical narrative. 
But did the perpetrators of9/11 really see themselves as striking a blow 
against freedom and democracy? Is hatred of freedom the passion that 
drives militantly political Islamist extremists today? If so, you won't find it 
in jihadist discourse, which typically focuses, not on freedom and its op-
posite, nor on democracy and its opposite, but on discipline versus deca-
dence, on moral purity versus moral corruption, terms that come out of 
centuries ofWestern dominance in Islamic societies and the corresponding 
fragmentation of communities and families there, the erosion of Islamic 
social values, the proliferation of liquor, the replacement of religion with 
349 

350 
AFTERWORD 
entertainment, and the secularization of the rich elite along with the ever-
hardening gap between rich and poor. 
One side charges, "You are decadent." The other side retorts, "We are 
free." These are not opposing contentions; they're nonsequiturs. Each side 
identifies the other as a character in its own narrative. In the 1980s, 
Khomeini called America "the Great Satan," and other lslamist revolu-
tionaries have echoed his rhetoric. In 2008, Jeffrey Herf, a history profes-
sor at the University of Maryland, suggested that radical lslamists are the 
Nazis reborn, motivated at core by anti-Semitism and hatred of women. 
It's a common analysis. 
Herf and others see the lslamist doctrine as boiling down to a call for 
cutting off heads, cutting off hands, and clamping bags over women. 
There's no denying that radical lslamists have done these things. Yet radi-
cal lslamists themselves see the main conflict dividing the world today as a 
disagreement about whether there is one God, many gods, or no God at 
all. All the problems of humanity would be resolved, they contend, if the 
world would only recognize the singleness of God (and of Mohammed's 
special role as his spokesperson). 
Secular intellectuals in the West don't necessarily disagree about the 
number of gods. They just don't think that's the burning question. To 
them-to us-the basic human problem is finding ways to satisfy the needs 
and wants of all people in a manner that gives each one full participation in 
decision making about his or her own destiny. One God, two gods, three, 
none, many-whatever: people will have differing views, and it's not worth 
fighting about, because settling that question will not help solve hunger, 
poverty, war, crime, inequality, injustice, global warming, resource deple-
tion, or any of the other ills plaguing humanity. Such is the secular position. 
Yet secular and "Western are not synonymous, despite what lslamists may 
declare. A 2001 survey by the City University of New York showed that 81 
percent of Americans identified with an organized religion, 77 percent of 
them with Christianity. Of the rest, many called themselves "spiritual." 
Declared atheists were so few they didn't even register on the charts. What-
ever the conflict wracking today's world, it's not between those who are 
and those who aren't religious. 
In fact, the West has its own religious devotees who want to put God at 
the center of politics, most notably the Christian evangelicals who have 

AFTERWORD 
351 
wielded such clout in the United States since the 1970s. Tariq Ali wrote a 
book after 9/11 titled The Clash of Fundamentalisms, suggesting that this 
tension between Islam and the West boils down to a religious argument be-
tween fundamentalist extremists. If so, however, the two sides don't present 
opposing doctrines. Christian fundamentalists don't necessarily disagree 
about how many Gods there are; they just don't think that's the question. 
Their discourse revolves around accepting Jesus Christ as one's savior 
(whereas no Muslim would ever say "Mohammed is our savior"). So the ar-
gument between Christian and Muslim "fundamentalists" comes down to: 
Is there only one God or is Jesus Christ our savior? Again, that's not a point-
counterpoint; that's two people talking to themselves in separate rooms. 
The fact that the Muslim world and the West have come to the same 
events by different paths has had concrete consequences. After 2001, U.S. 
strategists acted on the premise that the climactic terrorist act of modern 
times somehow fit into the framework of power politics among nation-
states. After all, that's what European wars had been about for many cen-
turies. Even the Cold War came down to a confrontation between blocs of 
nations, the warring entities lined up along the ideological fault line ulti-
mately being governments. In the immediate aftermath of9/11, therefore, 
the Bush administration looked around, over, past, through, anywhere but 
directly at the specific terrorists of that day, in its quest to find the govern-
ment behind those men. Reflexively, U.S. strategists-and many analysts 
in the Western media-sought an adversary of the same genre, the same 
class, the same type the country had confronted in earlier wars. 
Thus it was that, after a brief initial incursion into Afghanistan and a 
transitory obsession with Osama bin Laden, the Bush team zeroed in Sad-
dam Hussein as the mastermind and Iraq as the core state responsible for 
terrorism against Western citizens, the state whose conquest and "democ-
ratization" would put an end to this plague. But after Saddam Hussein had 
been captured and hanged, after Iraq had been fully occupied, if not sub-
dued, terrorism showed no real sign of abating, whereupon U.S. govern-
ment strategists shifted focus to Iran. And depending on what happens 
there, Syria, Libya, Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, and a host of other nations 
await their turn as designated chief "state sponsor" of terrorism. 
With its policies deeply rooted in the Western narrative, the United 
States has prescribed democracy and sponsored elections to remedy local 

352 
AFTERWORD 
ills in Iraq and Afghanistan and other troubled regions. Upon the success-
ful completion of such elections, the countries in question are said to have 
become democracies or at least to have moved closer to that happy state. 
But I keep remembering the elections held in Afghanistan after the Tal-
i ban had fled the country. Across the nation, people chose delegates to rep-
resent them at a national meeting organized by the United States to forge 
a new democratic government, complete with parliament, constitution, 
president, and cabinet. That summer in Paghman, a town near Kabul, I 
met a man who said he had voted in the elections. I couldn't picture him 
in a voting booth, since he looked like the traditional rural villagers I had 
known in my youth, with the standard long shirt, baggy pants, turban, 
and beard, so I asked him to describe the voting process for me-what was 
the actual activity? 
"Well, sir," he said, "a couple of city men came around with slips of 
paper and went on and on about how we were supposed to make marks on 
them, and we listened politely, because they had come a long way and we 
didn't want to be rude, but we didn't need those city fellows to tell us who 
our man was. We made the marks they wanted, but we always knew who 
would be representing us-Agha-i-Sayyaf, of course." 
''And how did you settle on Sayyaf:>" I asked. 
"Settle on him? Sir! What do you mean? His family has lived here since 
the days of Dost Mohammed Khan and longer. Go over that ridge, you'll 
see his house across the valley-biggest one around! Every year at Eid, he 
comes by and gives candy to the children and inquires about our prob-
lems, and if someone needs help, why, he fetches money out of his pocket 
and hands it over then and there, whatever he has on him. That man is a 
Muslim! Did you know that my sister's husband has a cousin who is mar-
ried to Sayyaf's sister-in-law? He's one of our own." 
It struck me that what Western planners called "democracy" was an ex-
traneous apparatus this man shouldered because he had to, under which 
load he carried on with his real life as best he could. In him flowed two 
streams of history that were unrelated and interconnecting awkwardly. 
And if this was happening an hour outside Kabul, it was happening all 
over the country. 
From the Western side, it seems plausible (to some) to assert that fund-
ing and arming rulers amenable to Western ways in places like Pakistan, 

AFTERWORD 
353 
Jordan, Iraq, Afghanistan, and Egypt helps bring democracy to those soci-
eties, not to mention the blessings of a free market. It also seems plausible 
(to some) to assert that Islamic social values are backward and need cor-
rection by more progressive people, even if force must needs be applied to 
get it done. 
From the other side, however, the moral and military campaigns of re-
cent times look like the long-familiar program to enfeeble Muslims in their 
own countries. Western customs, legal systems, and democracy look like a 
project to atomize society down to the level of individual economic units 
making autonomous decisions based on rational self-interest. Ultimately, it 
seems, this would pit every man, woman, and child against every other, in 
a competition of all against all for material goods. 
What looks, from one side, like a campaign to secure greater rights for 
citizens irrespective of gender, looks from the other side, like powerful 
strangers inserting themselves into the private affairs of families and under-
cutting people's ability to maintain their communal selves as familial and 
tribal networks. In short, what looks from one side like empowering each in-
dividuallooks, from the other side, like disempowering whole communities. 
The conflict wracking the modern world is not, I think, best under-
stood as a "clash of civilizations," if that proposition means we're-different-
so-we-must-fight-until-there's-only-one-of-us. It's better understood as the 
friction generated by two mismatched world histories intersecting. Mus-
lims were a crowd of people going somewhere. Europeans and their off-
shoots were a crowd of people going somewhere. When the two crowds 
crossed paths, much bumping and crashing resulted, and the crashing is 
still going on. 
Unraveling the vectors of those two crowds is the minimum precondi-
tion for sorting out the doctrinal bases of today's disputes. The unraveling 
will not itself produce sweetness and light, because there are actual incom-
patibilities here, not just "misunderstandings." When I started working on 
this book, I read my proposal to a group of fellow writers, two of whom 
declared that the conflict between the Muslim world and the West was 
promoted by hidden powers because "people are really the same and we all 
want the same things"; the conflict would fade away if only people in the 
West understood that Islam was actually just like Christianity. "They be-
lieve in Abraham, too," one of them offered. 

354 
AFTERWORD 
This sort of well-meant simplification won't get us very far. 
On the other side, I often hear liberal Muslims in the United States say 
that ''jihad just means 'trying to be a good person,"' suggesting that only 
anti-Muslim bigots think the term has something to do with violence. But 
they ignore what jihad has meant to Muslims in the course of history dat-
ing back to the lifetime of Prophet Mohammed himself. Anyone who 
claims that jihad has nothing to do with violence must account for the 
warfare that the earliest Muslims called "jihad." Anyone who wants to say 
that early Muslims felt a certain way but we modern Muslims can create 
whole new definitions for jihad (and other aspects of Islam) must wrestle 
with the doctrine Muslims have fleshed out over time: that the Qur'an, 
Mohammed's prophetic career, and the lives, deeds, and words of his com-
panions in the first Muslim community were the will of God revealed on 
Earth and no mortal human can improve on the laws and customs of that 
time and place. This doctrine has forced all Muslim reformers to declare 
that they are proposing nothing new, only restoring what was originally 
meant. They must deny that they are forging forward, must insist that they 
are going back to the pristine original. That's a trap Muslim thinkers must 
break out o£ 
The modernist Egyptian theologian Sheikh Mohammed Abduh wrote 
famous books showing that the Qur'an actually prescribed science and cer-
tain (but not other) modern social values. He cites scriptural declarations 
to show that in marriage the Qur'an actually favors monogamy over 
polygamy. His case is convincing but he clearly came to his task intending 
to find support for monogamy in the Qur'an. It was a conclusion he had 
already reached. The question is, from what other source did he derive this 
conclusion? Was it not rational thought applied to the deepest principles 
of shared human life? 
The role of women in society is no doubt the starkest instance of the 
incompatibility between the Islamic world and the West, an issue much in 
need of intellectual unraveling and deconstruction. Every society in every 
era has understood the powerful potential of sexuality to disrupt social 
harmony and every society has developed social forms to check that 
power. On this point, the disagreement between Islamic and Western cul-
ture is not about whether women should be oppressed, as is often repre-
sented in the West. Well-meaning folk on both sides believe that no 

AFTERWORD 
355 
human beings should be oppressed. This is not to deny that women suffer 
grievously from oppressive laws in many Muslim countries. It is only to 
say that the principle on which Muslims stand is not the "right" to oppress 
women. Rather, what the Muslim world has reified over the course of his-
tory is the idea that society should be divided into a men's and a women's 
realm and that the point of connection between the two should only be in 
the private arena, so that sexuality can be eliminated as a factor in the 
public life of the community. 
And I must say, I don't see how a single society can be constructed in 
which some citizens think the whole world should be divided into a 
women's realm and a men's realm, and others think the genders should be 
blended into a single social realm wherein men and women walk the same 
streets, shop the same shops, eat at the same restaurants, sit together in the 
same classrooms, and do the same jobs. It can only be one or the other. It 
can't be both. From where I stand, I don't see how Muslims can live in the 
West, under the laws and customs ofWestern societies, if they embrace that 
divided-world view, nor how Westerners can live in the Muslim world as 
anything but visitors, if they embrace that genders-shuffied-together view. 
I don't offer one answer or another to the questions I am posing. I only 
say that Muslim intellectuals have to grapple with them. And they have 
been. Some of the most daring departures from orthodox Islamic doctrines 
emerged in Iran, during the two decades after that country expelled the 
United States and claimed its cultural sovereignty. There, anonymous writ-
ers proposed that every generation had the right to interpret the Shari'ah 
anew without reference to the accumulated code of the religious scholars. 
This idea and others like it were suppressed. The suppression made news 
in the West-it was more evidence that Iran was not a democracy. What 
struck me, however, was that such ideas were voiced at all in the Muslim 
world. I wondered if it could only happen in a place where Muslims were 
struggling with themselves and each other, not with the West. 
After 9/11 the Bush administration ratcheted up the pressure on Iran, 
and in the face of this external threat, ideas with a Western aroma lost 
credibility because they smelled of collaboration: they no longer needed to 
be suppressed; they could gain no purchase with a public that had turned 
conservative, a public that chose the ultranationalist Ahmadinejad to head 
up their nation. 

356 
AFTERWORD 
Many points for discussion, even argument, simmer between the Islamic 
world and the West. There can be no sensible argument, however, until both 
sides are using the same terms and mean the same things by those terms-
until, that is, both sides share the same framework or at least understand 
what framework the other is assuming. Following multiple narratives of 
world history can contribute at least to developing such a perspective. 
Everybody likes democracy, especially as it applies to themselves per-
sonally; but Islam is not the opposite of democracy; it's a whole other 
framework. Within that framework there can be democracy, there can 
tyranny, there can be many states in between. 
For that matter, Islam is not the opposite of Christianity, nor of]udaism. 
Taken strictly as a system of religious beliefs, it has more areas of agree-
ment than argument with Christianity and even more so with Judaism-
take a look sometime at the laws of diet, hygiene, and sexuality prescribed 
by orthodox religious Judaism, and you'll see almost exactly the same list 
as you find in orthodox, religious Islam. Indeed, as Pakistani writer Eqbal 
Ahmad once noted, until recent centuries, it made more sense to speak of 
Judeo-Muslim than of]udeo-Christian culture. 
It is, however, problematically misleading to think oflslam as one item 
in a class whose other items are Christianity, Judaism, Hinduism, Bud-
dhism, etc. Not inaccurate, of course: Islam is a religion, like those others, 
a distinct set of beliefs and practices related to ethics, morals, God, the cos-
mos, and mortality. But Islam might just as validly be considered as one 
item in a class whose other items include communism, parliamentary 
democracy, fascism, and the like, because Islam is a social project like those 
others, an idea for how politics and the economy ought to be managed, a 
complete system of civil and criminal law. 
Then again, Islam can quite validly be seen as one item in a class whose 
other items include Chinese civilization, Indian civilization, Western civi-
lization, and so on, because there is a universe of cultural artifacts from art 
to philosophy to architecture to handicrafts to virtually every other realm 
of human cultural endeavor that could properly be called Islamic. 
Or, as I have tried to demonstrate, Islam can be seen as one world his-
tory among many that are unfolding simultaneously, each in some way in-
corporating all the others. Considered in this light, Islam is a vast narrative 
moving through time, anchored by the birth of that community in Mecca 

AFTERWORD 
357 
and Medina fourteen centuries ago. The story includes many characters 
who are not Muslim and many events that are not religious. Jews and 
Christians and Hindus are part of this story. Industrialization is an element 
of the plot, and so is the steam engine and the discovery of oil. When you 
look at it this way, Islam is a vast complex of communal purposes moving 
through time, driven by its own internally coherent assumptions. 
And so is the West. 
So which is the real history of the world? The philosopher Leibniz once 
posited the idea that the universe consists of"monads," each monad being 
the whole universe understood from a particular point of view, and each 
monad containing all the others. World history is like that: the whole story 
of humankind from a particular point of view, each history containing all 
the others, with all actual events situated somewhere with respect to a cen-
tral narrative, even if that "somewhere" is in the background as part of the 
white noise against which the meaningful line stands out. They're all the 
real history of the world. The work lies in the never-ending task of com-
piling them in the quest to build a universal human community situated 
within a single shared history. 


APPENDIX 
The Structure of Islamic Doctrine 
Qur'an 
Isma'ili Shi'ism 
359 


NOTES 
INTRODUCTION 
1. With footnotes. 
CHAPTER I 
1. See Georges Roux, Ancient Iraq (New York: Penguin, 1980), p. 148. 
2. Conan Doyle, for example, uses "Parthian shot" to mean "parting shot" in his 
1886 novel A Study in Scarlet. 
3. The eleventh-century Persian poet Firdausi drew on this vast body of Persian leg-
ends to write the Shahnama {The Book of Kings), an epic poem in which Kay Khos-
row the Just figures largely. 
CHAPTER 2 
1. From a passage by Tabari, excerpted in The Inner journey: Views .from the Is!dmic 
Tradition, edited by William Chittick, {Sandpoint, Idaho: Morning Light Press, 
2007), p. xi. 
2. Akbar Ahmed's Is!dm Today (New York and London: I. B. Tauris, 1999), p. 21, 
for excerpts from Mohammed's last sermon. 
CHAPTER 3 
1. Reza Asian, No god but God {New York: Random House, 2006), p. 113. 
2. This is Tabari's description; an excerpt appears on page 12 of Is!dm: From the 
Prophet Mohammed to the Capture of Constantinople, a collection of documents edited 
and translated by Bernard Lewis. {New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1997). 
3. The core of a document purporting to be Omar's original declaration to 
Jerusalem appears in Hugh Kennedy's The Great Arab Conquests {New York: Da Capo 
Press, 2007), pp. 91-92. 
361 

362 
NOTES 
CHAPTER 5 
1. From Ibn Qutayba's ninth-century history Uyun al-Akhbar, excerpted in Islam: 
From the Prophet Muhammed to the Capture of Constantinople (New York and Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1987), p. 273. 
2. Nafasul Mahmum (chapter 14), Sheikh Abbas Qummi quoting from thirteenth-
century historian Sayyid Ibn Tawoos's book Lahoof(Qom, Iran: Ansariyan Publica-
tions, 2005). 
3. G. E. von Grunebaum, Classical Islam (Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company, 
1970), p. 70. 
CHAPTER 6 
1. Wiet, Baghdad: Metropolis of the Abbasid Caliphate, pp. 12-24. 
2. From Four Thousand Years of Urban Growth: An Historical Census by Tertius 
Chandler. (Lewiston, New York: St. David's University Press, 1987). 
CHAPTER 7 
1. My rendering of a poem that appears in Perfome of the Desert: Inspirations ftom 
Sufi Wisdom, edited by A. Harvey and E. Hanut, (Wheaton, Illinois: Quest Books, 
1999). 
2. From Muhammad Zubayr Siddiqi, "Women Scholars of Hadith," at 
http://www. jannah.orgl sisters/womenhadith.httnl. 
3. Maulana Muhammad Ali, The Early Caliphate (1932; Lahore, Pakistan: The Ah-
madiyya Anjuman Isha'at Islam, 1983), p. 119. 
4. Ghazali, "On the Etiquettes of Marriage," The Revival of the Religious Sciences 
book 12 at http:/ /www.ghazali.org/works/marriage.httn. 
CHAPTER 8 
1. Chaim Potok, History of the jews (New York: Ballantine Books, 1978), pp. 
346-347. 
2. Mohammed Ali, A Cultural History of Afghanistan, 120-123 (Kabul: Punjab Ed-
ucational Press, 1964). 
3. My cousin Farid Ansary quoted this line from a contemporary of Firdausi's; he 
couldn't recall the poet's name. However, similar (but more extensive) anti-Arab vitu-
perations can be found at the end ofFirdausi's Shahnama. 
CHAPTER 9 
1. Philip Daileader discusses the fragmentation process in medieval Europe in lec-
tures 17-20 of his audio series The Early Middle Ages (Chantilly, Virginia: The Teach-
ing Company, 2004). See also the Columbia Encyclopedia, 6'h edition, entry for 
"knight." 

NOTES 
363 
2. Amin Maalouf, The Crusades through Arab Eyes {New York: Schocken Books, 
1984), pp. 38-40. 
3. Ibid., p. 46. 
4. Quoted by Karen Armstrong in Holy ~r: The Crusades and Their Impact on 
Today's World {New York: Anchor Books, 2001), pp. 178-179. 
5. Ibid., p. 73. 
6. Ibid., p. 39. 
7. David Morgan, The Mongols {Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell, 2007), p. 17. 
8. Ibid., pp. 64-71. 
9. Sabbah's sect resurrected itself as the Nizari Isma'ilis, gained new converts, and 
rose again, but it morphed into a peaceful movement that is now one of the most pro-
gressive sects of Islam, devoted to science and education. Its leader is called the Agba 
Khan, and the Isma'ilis run the Agba Khan University in Pakistan, one of the bright-
est centers of learning in today's Islamic world: everything changes. 
10. An account of the sack ofBagbdad by Muslim historian Rashid al-Din Fazlul-
lah {1247-1318) appears in The Middle East and Islamic World Reader {New York: 
Grove Press, 2003), p. 49. 
11. The mamluk army was much bigger than Hulagu's, but the Mongol's terrible 
success made them the Goliath in every confrontation. 
12. Morgan, 146. 
CHAPTER 10 
1. Morgan, pp. 16-18. 
2. See Akbar Ahmed's interesting discussion of these differences between the two 
religions in Islam Today, pp. 21-22. 
3. Muhammed ibn-al-Husayn al-Sulami, The Book of Sufi Chivalry: Lessons to a Son 
of the Moment {New York: Inner Traditions International, 1983). These stories appear 
in the forward, pp. 9-14. The gbazis apparently borrowed the story about Omar from 
a traditional older story about a pre-Islamic king named Nu'man ibn Mundhir. 
4. Alexandra Marks, writing for the Christian Science Monitor on November 25, 
1997, said the Coleman Barks's translation ofRumi, The Essential Rumi {San Francisco: 
HarperCollins, 1995), had sold at that point, a quarter of a million copies worldwide. 
5. See Paul Wittek, The Rise of the Ottoman Empire {London: Royal Asiatic Society 
of Great Britain and Ireland, 1965) pp. 33-51. 
6. Details of Ottoman society come largely from Stanford Shaw's History of the Ot-
toman Empire and Modern Turkey {Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976), 
especially pp. 55-65, 113-138, and 150-161. 
7. Zahirud-din Muhammad Babur, Babur-nama, translated by Annette S. Bev-
eridge, {1922; Lahor: Sang-e-Meel Publications, reprinted 1987), p. 121. 
8. Waldemar Hansen, The Peacock Throne, The Drama of Mogul India (New York: 
Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1972) pp. 113-114, 493-494. 
9. Marshall Hodgson, Rethinking World History {Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1993) p. 97. 

364 
NOTES 
CHAPTER II 
I. See C. M. Woolger, "Food and Taste in Europe in the Middle Ages," pp. 
175-177 in Food: The History ofTaste, edited by Paul Freedman, (Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 2007). 
2. Peter Russel, Prince Henry the Navigator (London: Hispanic and Luso Brazilian 
Council, 1960). 
3. Daileader, Lecture 15, Early Middle Ages (Chantilly, Virginia: The Teaching 
Company, 2004). 
CHAPTER 12 
1. Great Britain was born after King James VI of Scotland inherited the crown of 
England. He and his successors held both crowns separately until the Act of Union in 
1707. Only after that date is it correct to speak of "the British." 
2. For a detailed inside picture of life in the Ottoman harem, see Alev Croutier's 
Harem: The World Behind the Veil (New York: Abbeville Press, 1989), especially pp. 
35-38, 103-105, 139-140. 
3. James Gelvin points out these global interconnections in The Modern Middle 
East. See pp. 55-60. 
4. Nick Robbins, "Loot: In Search of the East India Company," an article written 
for openDemocracy.net in 2003. Find it at http://www.opendemocracy.net/theme_ 
7 -corporations/ article_904.jsp. 
5. Gelvin, pp. 84-86. 
6. As reported by Frederick Cooper, deputy commissioner of Amritsar, in a dis-
patch excerpted by Reza Asian, No god but God (New York, Random House, 2006), 
pp. 220-222. 
7. Jamil Abun-Nasr, A History of the Maghrib in the Islamic Period. (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1988), pp. 249-257. 
CHAPTER 13 
I. Ernest Renan, "La Reforme intellectuelle et morale" (Paris: Calmann-Levy, 1929). 
2. Hamid Dabashi, Iran: A People Interrupted (New York: New Press, 2007), pp. 
58-59. 
CHAPTER 14 
1. Mark Elvin coins this phrase in Pattern of the Chinese Past (London: Eyre 
Methuen Ltd, 1973), which includes an analysis of why China failed to develop high-
level technology in the fourteenth to nineteenth centuries, when it had the prosperity 
to do so. 
2. Dabashi, pp. 60-61. 
3. Gelvin, p. 129. 

NOTES 
365 
4. Joseph Mazzini, On the Duties of Man. Included in its entirety in Franklin, Read-
ings in "Western Intellectual History (New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press, 
1978), p. 561. 
5. Garry Wills discusses this idea in Lincoln at Gettysburg: The Words That Remade 
America (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1993). Shelby Foote {in a radio interview I 
heard) quipped that "the Civil War made us from an are into an is." 
6. Gelvin, p. 82. 
7. Hamit Bozarslan, writing about the Ottoman Empire for the Online Encyclope-
dia of Mass Violence at http:/ /www.massviolence.org/_Bozarslan-Hamit, includes this 
quote from Ziya Gokalp's Yeni Hayat, Dogru Yol 
8. Quoted by Taner Akc;:am in Turk Ulusal Kimligi ve Ermeni Sorunu {Istanbul: 
Iletisim Yayinlari, 1992), pp. 175-176. 
CHAPTER 15 
1. Suroosh Irfani, Revolutionary Islam in Iran: Popular Liberation or Religious Dicta-
torship {London: Zed Books, 1983), p. 50. 
2. Article 22, Covenant of the League of Nations. 
3. Gelvin, p. 86. 
4. Benjamin Shwadran, The Middle East, Oil and the Great Powers (New York: Fred-
erick A. Praeger, 1955), pp. 244-265. 
CHAPTER 16 
1. See http://countrystudies.us/algerial48.htm. The statistics come from the Fed-
eral Research Division of the Library of Congress Country Studies/Area Handbook 
Series sponsored by the U.S. Department of the Army. 
2. Frank Thackery and John Findling, Events That Changed the World in the Twen-
tieth Century {Westport and London: Greenwood Press, 1995). {See Appendix D, 
"States Achieving Independence Since 1945. ") 
3. The phrase came from American Jewish playwright Israel Zangwill. What he ac-
tually wrote, however {in 1901), was "Palestine is a country without a people, the Jews 
are a people without a country." Whether anyone actively used the phrase as a basis 
for a "slogan" is a matter of dispute. 
4. Benny Morris, Righteous Victims: A History of the Zionist-Arab Conflict, 
1881-1999, {New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1999), pp. 14-17. 
5. Theodor Herzl, The jewish State: An Attempt at a Modern Solution to the jewish 
Question, 6th edition {New York: The Maccabean Publishing Company, 1904 ), p. 29. 
6. Nizar Sakhnini, writing for al-Awda at http://al-awda.org/zionists2.html in-
cludes this quote from Weizmann's Trial and Error (New York: Harper and Brothers, 
1949), pp. 93-208. 
7. Qutb's Milestones can be found online in its entirety at http://www.young 
muslimsonline.calonline_library/books/milestones/hold/index_2.asp. 

366 
NOTES 
CHAPTER 17 
I. For a concise Arafat bio, see http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/peace/laureates/ 
1994/ arafat-bio.httnl. 
2. David Cook, Understanding jihad, p. 130. 
3. Irfani, Revolutionary Islam in Iran, pp. 98-100, 121, 131. 
4. Dabashi, pp. 164-166. 
5. Quoted by Thabit Abdullah in Dictatorship, Imperialism, and Chaos: Iraq Since 
1989 (New York: Zed Books, 2006) p. 76. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Abdullah, Thabit. Dictatorship, Imperialism, and Chaos: Iraq Since 1989. New York: 
Zed Books, 2006. 
Abiva, Huseyin and Noura Durkee. A History of Muslim Civilization ftom Late Antiq-
uity to the Fall of the Umayyads. Skokie, IL: IQRA' International Educational Foun-
dation, 2003. 
Abu Khalil, As'ad. Bin Laden, Islam, and America's New "War on Terrorism. "New York: 
Seven Stories Press, 2002. 
Abun-Nasr, Jamil M. A History of the Maghrib in the Islamic Period. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1988. 
Ahmad, Eqbal. Confronting Empire: Interviews with David Barsamian. Cambridge, 
Massachusetts: South End Press, 2000. 
Ahmed, Akbar. Islam Today: A Short Introduction to the Muslim World. New York and 
London: I. B. Tauris, 1999. 
Alger, Neil. The Palestinians and the Disputed Territories. San Diego: Greenhaven Press, 
2004. 
Ali, ibn Abi Talib. Nahjul Balagha [Peak of Eloquence]. Translated by Sayed Ali Reza. 
Elmhurst, New York: Tahrike Tarsile Qur'an Inc., 1996. 
Ali, Maulana Muhammad. The Early Caliphate. Reprinted in Lahore, Pakistan: The 
Ahmadiyya Anjuman Isha'at Islam, 1983. 
Ali, Tariq. The Clash of Fundamentalisms: Crusades, jihads and Modernity. London: 
Verso, 2003. 
Arberry, A. J., translator. The Qur'an Interpreted. New York: Macmillan, 1955. 
Armstrong, Karen. Holy ~r: The Crusades and Their Impact on Today's World. New 
York: Anchor Books, 200 1. 
___ . Muhammad: A Biography of the Prophet. San Francisco: HarperCollins, 
1992. 
Asian, Reza. No god but God. New York: Random House, 2006. 
Catherwood, Christopher. A Brief History of the Middle East: From Abraham to Arafot. 
New York: Carroll and Graf, 2006. 
367 

368 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Chittick, William. The Inner journey: Views ftom the Islamic Tradition. Sandpoint, 
Idaho: Morning Light Press, 2007. 
Cook, David. Understanding jihad. Berkeley, California: University of California 
Press, 2005. 
Croutier, Alev Lytle. Harem: The World Behind the Veil New York: Abbeville Press, 
1989. 
Dabashi, Hamid. Iran: A People Interrupted. New York: The New Press, 2007. 
Diouf, Sylviane A. Servants of Allah: Aftican Muslims Enslaved in the Americas. New 
York: New York University Press, 1998. 
Dunn, Ross. The Adventures of Ibn Battuta. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of 
California Press, 1989. 
Farsoun, Samih and Naseer Aruri. Palestine and the Palestinians: A Social and Political 
History. Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press, 2006. 
Finkel, Caroline. Osman's Dream: The History of the Ottoman Empire. New York: Basic 
Books, 2006. 
Fischel, Walter J. Ibn Khaldun in Egypt. Berkeley, California: University of California 
Press, 1967. 
Fisher, William Bayne, et a! editors. The Cambridge History of/ran. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1993. 
Frank, Irene and David Brownstone. To the Ends of the Earth. New York: Facts on File, 
1984. 
Fromkin, David. A Peace to End All Peace. New York: Owl Books, 2001. First pub-
lished 1989 by Henry Holt. 
Gelvin, James L. The Modern Middle East: A History. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2005. 
Gerner, Deborah J. and Jillian Schwedler. Understanding the Contemporary Middle 
East. Boulder, Colorado: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 2004. 
Gettleman, Marvin and Stuart Schaar, editors. The Middle East and Islamic World 
Reader. New York: Grove Press, 2003. 
Goitein, S. D. jews and Arabs: A Concise History ofTheir Social and Cultural Relations. 
Mineola, New York: Dover Publication, 2005. 
Gordon, MatthewS. The Rise of/slam. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, 2005. 
Hansen, Waldemar. The Peacock Throne: The Drama ofMoghullndia. New York: Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston, 1970. 
Heikal, Mohammed. Iran: the Untold Story. New York: Pantheon, 1982. 
Hiro, Dilip. The Longest ~r: The Iran-Iraq Military Conflict. New York: Routledge, 
1991. 
__ . ~r Without End: The Rise of Islamist Terrorism and Global Response. Revised 
edition. London, England: Routledge, 2002. 
Hodgson, Marshall. Rethinking World History. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1993. 
Hourani, Albert. A History of the Arab Peoples. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard 
University Press, 1991. 
Howarth, Stephen. The Knights Templar. New York: Barnes and Noble, 1982. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
369 
Ibn Khaldun. The Muqaddimah: An Introduction to History. Translated by Franz 
Rosenthal. Edited by N.J. Dawood. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University 
Press, 1969. 
Imber, Colin. The Ottoman Empire. New York: Palgrave-Macmillan, 2002. 
Irfani, Suroosh. Revolutionary Islam in Iran; Popular Liberation or Religious Dictator-
ship. London: Zed Books, 1983. 
Kamrava, Mehran. The Modern Middle East: A Political History Since the First World 
War. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2005. 
Kennedy, Hugh. The Great Arab Conquests: How the Spread of Islam Changed the World 
we Live In. New York: Da Capo Press, 2007. 
__ . When Baghdad Ruled the Muslim World: The Rise and Fall of Islam's Greatest Dy-
nasty. New York: Da Capo Press, 2005. 
Kinross, Lord. The Ottoman Centuries: The Rise and Fall of the Turkish Empire. New 
York: William Morrow, 1977. 
Laiou, Angeliki E. and Roy Parviz Mottahedeh, editors. The Crusades ftom the Perspective 
of Byzantium and the Muslim World. Washington, D.C.: Dumbarton Oaks, 2001. 
Lewis, Archibald Ross, editor. The Islamic World and the "West, AD 622-1492. New 
York: John Wiley & Sons, 1970. 
Lewis, Bernard, editor and translator. Islam: From the Prophet Muhammad to the Cap-
ture of Constantinople. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987. 
Lewis, Bernard. The Middle East: A Brief History of the Last 2,000 Years. New York: 
Simon & Schuster, 1995. 
__ . What "Went Wrong? "Western Impact and Middle Eastern Response. New York: Ox-
ford University Press, 2002. 
Lings, Martin. Mohammed: His Lifo Based on the Earliest Sources. Rochester, Vermont: 
Inner Traditions International, 1987. 
Maalouf, Amin. The Crusades through Arab Eyes. New York: Schocken Books, 1984. 
Mattoudi, Abdul Hakim a!-. The Hanbali School of Law and Ibn Taymiyah. London 
and New York: Routledge, 2006. 
Mazzini, Joseph. On the Duties of Man. Reprinted in Main Currents in Western 
Thought: Readings in "Western European Intellectual History ftom the Middle Ages to 
the Present. Edited by Franklin LeVan Baumer. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale 
University Press, 1978. 
Morgan, David. The Mongols. Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell Publishing, 2007. 
Moussalli, Ahmad S. Moderate and Radical Islamic Fundamentalism: The Quest for 
Modernity, Legitimacy, and the Islamic State. Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 
1999. 
Muir, Sir William. Annals of the Early Caliphate. London: Smith, Elder & Co. 1883. 
Nasr, Kameel. Arab and Israeli Terrorism: The Causes and E./Jects of Political Violence, 
1936-1993. Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland & Co., 1997. 
Nasr, Seyyed Hossein. Ideals and Realities in Islam. Boston: Beacon Press, 1966. 
Nizam al-Mulk. The Book of Government: Or Rules for Kings: The Siyasatnama or Siyar 
al-Muluk. Translated from the Persian by Hubert Darke. London: Routledge & 
Paul, 1960. 

370 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Nutting, Anthony. Nasser. New York: Dutton, 1972. 
Ojeda, Auriana, editor. Islamic Fundamentalism. San Diego: Greenhaven, 2003. 
Potok, Chaim. Wanderings. New York: Ballantine Books, 1978. 
Qummi, Sheikh Abbas. Nafasul Mahmum [The Sigh of the Aggrieved}: Relating to the 
Heart Rending Tragedy of Karbala. Translated by Aejaz Ali Bhujwala. Qom, 
Iran: Ansariyan Publications, 2005. 
Rahman, Fazlur. Islam. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002. First published 
1979 by University of Chicago Press. 
Robinson, Frances, editor. The Cambridge Illustrated History of the Islamic World. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996. 
Rogerson, Barnaby. The Heirs of Muhammad: Islam's First Century and the Origins of 
the Sunni-Shia Split. Woodstock and New York: The Overlook Press, 2007. 
Roshan, Rau£ Remembrances of Doctor Tabibi. Fremont, California: Tabayatee Faizi 
International, 1998. 
Roux, Georges. Ancient Iraq. New York: Penguin Books (Pelican), 1966. 
Rumi. Divan-i-Shamsi- Tabriz: Forty-eight Ghazals. Edited and translated by lraj 
Anvar. Rome, Italy: Semar Publishing, 2002. 
Runciman, Stephen. A History of the Crusades. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 19 51. 
Said, Edward. The Question of Palestine. New York: Vintage Books, 1980. 
Salami, Ibn al-Husayn a!-. The Book of Sufi Chivalry: Lessons to a Son of the Moment. 
New York: Inner Traditions International, 1983. 
Shahan, M. A. Islamic History: A New Interpretation. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1971. 
Shaw, Stanford J. History of the Ottoman Empire and Modern Turkey. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1976. 
Sheikh, M. Saeed. Islamic Philosophy. London: Octagon Press, 1982. 
Shwadran, Benjamin. The Middle East, Oil and the Great Powers. New York: Frederick 
A. Praeger, 19 55. 
Smith, Wilfred Cantwell. Islam in Modern History. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton 
University Press, 1957. 
Stewart, P. J. Unfolding Islam. Reading, U.K.: Garnet, 1994. 
Tabari, a!-. Mohammed at Mecca. Translated by Montgomery Watt and M.V. Mc-
Donald. Albany, New York: SUNY Press, 1988. 
Trofunov, Yaroslav. The Siege of Mecca: The Forgotten Uprising in Islam's Holiest Shrine 
and the Birth of al-Qaeda. New York: Doubleday, 2007. 
von Grunebaum, G. E. Classical Islam: A History 600 AD to 1258 AD. Chicago: Al-
dine Publishing Company, 1970. 
Wiet, Gaston. Baghdad: Metropolis of the Abbasids. Translated by Seymour Feiler. Nor-
man, Oklahoma: University of Oklahoma Press, 1971. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I owe a debt of gratitude to Susan Hoffman, who as director of the Osher 
Lifelong Learning Institute at San Francisco State, convinced me to teach 
a class on Islam and the West in 2006. Those lectures were one of the seeds 
out of which grew this book-a growth spurred also by Neils Swinkel, 
who taped some of those lectures and Matt Martin, station manager at 
KALW radio, who aired the edited tapes as a weekly series. 
Next, let me thanks my agent, Carol Mann. When I told her I was 
vaguely thinking of writing something called "world history through Is-
lamic eyes," she cut in to say, "That's it! That's your next book! W't-st of 
Kabul was the ant's-eye view; this will be the bird's-eye view." And she was 
right-this is a bird's-eye view of my enduring preoccupation, the con-
junction and disjunction of East and West. 
And thank you, Lisa Kaufman, my insightful editor, whose notes and 
line edits have been like having not just a second set of eyes but a second 
and more exacting brain to apply to this project. 
Also, I received priceless feedback on this book while it was still a work 
in progress from my brother Riaz Ansary, who knows more about the doc-
trines and early history of Islam than I ever will, from my brilliant sister, 
Rebecca Pettys, and from my friends Joe Quirk and Paul Lobell. Layma 
Murtaza generously allowed me to study correspondence and magazines 
her family inherited from her grandfather Dr. Abdul Hakim Tabibi, a dis-
ciple of Sayyid Jamaluddin-i-Afghan. Farid Ansary has contributed with a 
lifetime of stories, anecdotes, poetry quotations, and wit. Wahid Ansary 
has done his best to clue me in to the fine points of our religion, and then 
371 

372 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
there is my friend Akbar Nowrouz: Akbar-jan, where would I be without 
all the Islamic-wisdom stories you send to my e-mail? 
But above all, thank you to my wife, Deborah Krant, my first reader, 
first critic, and indispensable partner; thank you to Elina Ansary, for help-
ing me so much with the maps; and thank you, Jessamyn Ansary, for being 
so endlessly supportive. 

INDEX 
Abbas ibn Abd al-Muttalib, 83, 84-86, 
118 
See also Saffah 
Abbas the Great, 188, 189, 219 
Abbasid age/khalifate 
Ali descendants and, 87 
Baghdad and, 87-89 
bodyguards (mamluks), 121-122, 
123, 124 
bureaucracy, 121 
description, 120-121, 121(fig.) 
economy/commerce, 86, 88 
orthodox Islam and, 87 
overview, 86-89 
Persian mini dynasties, 123, 125 
Persian viziers, 122-123 
philosophy and, 100, 105-106 
Shi'ism and, 86-87, 120 
Turk barbarians and, 122, 123-124 
Abbasid revolution, 82, 83, 84, 85(fig.) 
Abduh, Mohammed, 268, 308, 354 
Abdul Rahman/ the Third, 118, 120 
AbdulVVahhab,252-254,255,295 
Abdullah (Hashimite), 311 
Abdullah (Othman's foster brother), 
56, 58 
Abraham, prophet, 17, 20, 284, 322 
Abu al-Abbas, 83 
Abu Bakr 
Mohammed and, 21, 22, 31 
Othman (khalifa) and, 54 
as successor/beliefs, 33, 36, 38-40, 
41,43,49, 56,71 
Abu Muslim, 82-83, 84, 85, 85(fig.), 86 
Abu Sufyan, 54, 57 
Abu Talib, 18, 21 
Abyssinia and Mohammed's followers, 
54 
Adultery, 50 
Adventures of Hajji Baba of Ispahan, The 
(Morier), 277 
Mdal, al-, 139-140 
Mgbanistan 
373 
9/11 and aftermath, 347, 351-352 
abandonment by Europe/U.S., 347 
Anglo-Mghan wars, 239, 240 
"Great Game" (Russia/Britain), 236, 
237(fig.), 238-239, 240-241, 310, 
335 
independence,268, 307 
secular modernism, 304, 305, 307, 
308 
Soviet Union invasion, 344, 346 
Taliban, 11, 308, 347, 352 
VVahhabism, 306, 307 
VVater Carrier's Son, 307-308 

374 
INDEX 
Aflaq, Michel, 313, 330 
Age of Discovery, 202 
Age of Justice, 185 
Agha-i-Sayyaf, 352 
Ahmad Shah Baba, 238 
Ahmadinejad, 355 
Ahriman, 9 
Ahura Mazda, 9, 10 
Aims of the Philosophers, The ( Ghazali), 
Ill 
Akbar the Great, 191-193, 195, 
230-231 
Akc;am, Taner, 294 
Akkadians, 5-6 
AI Azhar University, 120, 263, 268, 308 
Alamut fortress, 129-130 
Alaudin Mohammed, 151-152 
Albert of Aix, 139 
Albigensians, 199 
Alchemy of Happiness, The (Ghazali}, 113 
Alexander the Great, 11 
Algeria 
France's takeover, 244-246, 285 
Islamic Salvation Party, 344 
Ali 
assassination, 65 
Ayesha and, 61-63 
as imam, 70, 71 
Mohammed and, 21, 22, 36-37 
Mu'awiya and, 60, 63-65, 72 
Omar and, 41, 42 
Othman and, 52, 58, 60 
Sabbah's beliefs on, 130 
Shi'i/Shi'ism and, 64, 70, 71, 82, 
184, 186 
succession conflict and, 36-39, 41, 
52, 59-60 
as successor/beliefs, 33, 59-65 
Sufism and, 168 
Ali, Mohammed, 242-243, 254-255 
Ali, Tariq, 351 
Ali Shah, Mohammad, 278-279 
Aligarh movement. See Sayyid Ahmad, 
Sir (of Aligarh} 
''Allah" meaning, 20 
Alp Arslan, 127 
Amanullah, 268, 304, 307 
Amir Kabir (Mirza Taqi}, 276, 305 
Amorites, 6 
Amr ibn al-A' as, 43, 56 
Amra bin Abdul Rahman, 114 
Ansar ("the Helpers"}, xv, 23 
Ansary, Tamim 
childhood/background, xiii-xiv, 
xv-xviii 
world history/Islamic world and, 
XlV-XXll 
Antony, Mark, 13 
Apostate Wars, 39-40 
Arab nationalism, 292, 297-298 
See also Pan-Arab nationalism 
Arab Revolt (World War I}, 296-297, 
296(fig.}, 311 
Arabian Nights, 88-89 
Arabic language, 77, 124 
Arabs 
early trade, 1, 2(fig.}, 3-4, 17 
as Semitic, 17 
violence and, 29-30 
Arafat, Yasser, 330 
Aramaic language, 80 
Aristotle, 100, 101, 111, 204 
Armenians 
assassination of three Pashas, 299 
massacre of, 290, 293-294 
in Ottoman Empire, 179, 288-290 
Arslan, Kilij, 137-138 
Asharite school, 110 
Asia Minor 
before/following Crusades, 168-169 
Sufism and, 168, 169-172 
See also Ottoman Empire 

INDEX 
375 
Assassins, Cult of, 129-131, 142-143, 
146, 155 
Assyrians, 6 
Aswan Dam, 325, 326 
Atatiirk, 30 1-304 
Atlantic Charter, 333 
Attila, 150 
Aurnn~b, 194-195,231 
Austro-Hungarian Empire, 282, 292, 
303 
Ayatollah definition, 229 
Ayesha, 31,61-63, 113-114 
Azam Khan, Prince, 262-263 
Azzam, Abdullah, 332 
Ba'ath party, 313, 326, 327-328, 331, 
332, 344, 346 
Ba'ath Socialist Party, 330-331 
Babur, 189-191, 219 
Babylon/Babylonian empires, 6, 7 
Bacon, Frnncis, 211 
Badr battle, 26, 27, 55 
Baghdad 
building, 87-88 
during Abbasid age, 88-89 
Mongols' destruction/killings, 
155-156, 172 
Baldwin, King of Edessa, 142 
Balfour, Arthur James, 298, 313 
Balshazzar, 6-7 
Banna, Hassan al-, 268, 308-309, 
327 
Banu Hashim clan, 18, 83, 295 
Banu Qurnyza, 27-28 
Barnka of Mohammed, 71 
Barbarossa, Frederick, 147 
Basilic cannon, 175 
Battle of the Camel, 61-63 
Battle of the Moat, 27-28, 55 
Bayazid I, 173-174, 179, 180 
Baybars, Zahir, 156, 157 
Bearden, Milton, 347 
Behistun, 8 
Bektash, 169 
Berke, 157 
Bhutto, Zulfikar Ali, 343 
Bin Laden, Osama, 332, 344, 351 
Bismarck, Otto von, 281 
Bolsheviks, 292, 299, 304 
Book ofKin[f, The (Shanama/Firdausi), 
124-125, 186, 188 
Book of Unity, The (Kitab-al-
Tawhid/Abdul Wahhab), 255 
Borsoki, al-, 143 
Boyle, Robert, 211 
British Petroleum (BP), 315 
Buddhism, 11, 12, 13, 23, 99, 117, 165 
Bukhari, 95-96 
Bush, George W., administrntion, 349, 
351 
Buyid family, 122-123 
Byzantine Empire/Byzantines, 14-15, 
15(fig.), 43, 47 
Caesar, Julius, 12, 13 
Calligrnphy, 114, 188, 197 
Camel, Battle of, 61-63 
Canning, Stratford, 287 
Capitulations to Europeans, 285-287 
Catherine the Great, 236 
Chaldeans, 6-7 
Chaldirnn battle, 187-188, 219 
Charlemagne, 124, 203 
Chemistry foundations, 102, 211 
Chengez Khan 
background/description, 150, 
151-152, 154 
invasions, 151, 152-153, 160, 185 
China 
before Islam, 3, 4, 12 
industrialization/labor and, 270-271 
Mongols and, 150, 151 

3n 
INDEX 
Christian fundamentalists, 350-351 
C6rdoba, 118-119 
Christianity 
Cornwallis, General, 235 
early expansion, 13 
monastic orders, 165-166 
Roman Empire split and, 14, 
205-206 
significant events of, 23 
See also Crusades; Orthodox 
Christianity; Roman Church 
Churchill, Winston, 315 
Civil War, U.S. (1860-1864}, 244, 
282-283 
"Clash of civilizations," 148, 218, 353 
Class divisions (1900s} 
cultural divisions, 339, 342-343 
description/effects, 336-339, 340, 
342-343,350 
Clive, Robert, 233-234, 235 
Cold War effects, 317, 325, 326, 328, 
334-335, 338-339, 346, 347, 351 
Collection of All Histories (Rashid al-
Din}, 149 
Columbus, Christopher, 177, 202, 
215 
Committee for Union and Progress 
(CUP}, 291, 292-293, 294, 
298-299, 302 
"Composite" bows, 152 
Comte, Auguste, 277-278 
Constantinople 
Byzantine fire, 176 
description, 14, 99, 176, 176(fig.) 
Ottomans' taking, 175-177 
symbolic significance, 17 4-175 
See also Istanbul 
Constitutionalism 
democracy and, 276-277 
Iran, 276, 277-279 
Ottoman Empire, 288, 290, 291 
Turkey, 302 
Copernicus, 210, 211 
"Cradle of civilization," 4 
Crassus, 13 
Crosthwaite, Sir Charles, 240 
Crusades 
alignments, 141-142 
Assassins and, 142-143 
Christian pilgrimages and, 135-136, 
137 
crusader states, 139, 141, 144, 148 
first contact, 137-138 
Fourth Crusade, 147 
"Franj" term, 137 
Jerusalem, 137, 140-141, 142, 
146-147 
jibad proponents, 142, 143, 144 
landless noblemen and, 136, 137 
Muslim disunity, 138-140, 142 
Muslim unity, 142, 143-148 
Nicaea fall, 137, 138 
Northern Crusade, 199 
overview/effects, 148-149, 200 
residues of, 199 
Second Crusade, 144 
slaughter/atrocities by Franj, 139, 
140 
theater of, 141 (fig.) 
Third Crusade, 147 
trade following, 149 
Curtin, Philip D., 3 
Da Vinci, Leonardo, 194, 203 
Dabashi, Hamid, 277 
Daniel, 7 
Daquq, 138 
Dar al-Funun, 261, 276 
Dar al-lslam 
Dar al-Harb vs., 44, 327, 347 
description, 29-30, 44 
D'Arcy, William Knox, 314, 315 

INDEX 
377 
Darius ("the Great"), 8-9, 10 
David and Goliath, 156 
Democracy 
Atlantic Charter, 333 
constitutionalism and, 276-277 
lrnn,278-279,333-334 
Islam-West relationship (today) and, 
349, 351-353, 355, 356 
Jamaluddin-i-Mghan, 263-264 
oil and, 335-336 
Turkey, 302 
Deobandis, 307, 308, 343, 344 
Dervishes, 169, 170 
Descartes, Rene, 211 
Desert Storm, 345 
Devshirme progrnm, 173, 180, 
222-223,286 
Diaz, Bartholomew, 215 
Din-i Illahi ("the God Religion"), 193 
Diocletian, 13 
Dress code, 197, 303, 304-305 
Dulles, John Foster, 334 
Duval, Pierre, 244 
East India Companies/Company, 
232-233,234-235,258 
Egypt 
cotton market and, 243-244 
defeat of Mongols, 156-157 
following World War I, 312-313 
French/British competition over, 243, 
244,285 
mamluk rule, 157, 242-243 
Mohammed Ali and, 242-243, 
254-255 
Napoleon and, 241-242 
status, 157 
See also Nasser, Gamal Abdul 
Eisenhower, Ike, 326, 334 
End of History and the Last Man, The 
(Fukuyama), 346 
Engels, Friedrich, 275 
English longbow, 213 
Ethnic cleansing, UN definition, 294 
Eunuchs, 227, 228 
Europe (1291-1600 CE) 
Americas and, 215, 216, 219 
books' significance, 203-205 
crusading spirit, 199-200 
kings' significance, 213, 214 
mercantilism, 215-216 
merchants' status, 203 
nation-state emergence, 212-214 
patrons of art, 203 
Protestant reformation/reformation, 
206-210,212,216,247, 
248-249 
science developments, 210-211,212, 
216 
seafaring prowess, 200-201, 
202-203,216 
trnde/route to Indies, 200-203, 
201(fig.), 214-215 
university beginnings, 204-205 
Europe (1500-1800 CE)/Islamic world 
European advisors, 219-220, 226, 
229,230 
European competition, 230, 
231-233 
European dominance summary, 246, 
249-251 
"Great Game," 236-239, 237(fig.), 
240-241 
India trnde, 218-219, 232-233 
internal politics and, 232-233 
military technology and, 219-220 
private European companies, 
231-233 
relationship complexity, 217-218 
sea routes, 218(fig.) 
trnde, 218-219, 218(fig.), 220, 
223-225,230,231-233 

378 
INDEX 
Europe at time of Crusades 
innovations/effects, 134-135 
land inheritance, 136 
Muslims' view of, 133, 148, 149 
subsistence living, 133-134 
See also Crusades 
Faisal, 311, 316 
Farabi, al-, 101 
Farangi Christians, 200 
Fatehpur Sikri, 193 
Fatima, 21, 37, 38, 87, 120, 184 
Fatimids/khalifate, 120-121, 121 (fig.), 
129, 140, 145 
Fatwas, 161 
Fedayeen, 131, 155 
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb, 280-281, 284 
Firdausi, 124-125, 186, 188 
Firmest Bond, The Qournal}, 265 
Fly swatter affair, 244 
Fourteen Points (Wilson}, 310, 314, 
319, 320, 333 
Franj Wars, 148 
See also Crusades 
French Revolution, 241, 254 
Fukuyama, Francis, 346, 347 
Gabriel, angel, 19 
Galen, 211 
Galileo, 102, 211 
Gama, Vasco da, 218-219 
Gandhi, Mahatma, 266 
Gelvin, James L., 287 
Genghis Khan. See Chengez Khan 
Genocide, 294 
George-Picot, Francois, 297, 297(fig.) 
Ghazali, 110-113, 114-115 
Ghazan, Mahmoud, 157-158 
Ghazi emirates/orders, 171-172 
Ghaznavid dynasty, 124-126, 150 
Gibbon, Edward, 140 
Gillespie, April, 345 
Ginsberg, Alan, 170 
Gokalp, Ziya, 292 
Gold from Americas, 215, 216, 219, 
224 
Golden Age of Islam, 87, 120 
See also Abbasid age; Umayyad 
khalifate, Andalusian 
"Great Game, The," 236-239, 
237(fig.}, 240-241, 310, 335 
Great Indian Mutiny (1857-1858}, 
239-240,258,262 
Great Wall of China, 150, 270 
Greco-Buddhist art, 11 
Greek language, 77 
Guilds, 168, 182, 223-224, 273-274 
Guns' first use, 15 7 
Hadith, 94-96 
Hafsa, 114 
Haganah, 322 
Hager, 17 
Hajj as Islamic pillar, 92 
Hallaj, al-, 109-110 
Halliday, Denis, 346 
Hamas, 344 
Hamid, Sultan, 267 
Hamid II, Sultan, 291 
Hamzah, 57 
Hanafi school, 98 
Hanbali school, 98, 105-106 
Hanging Gardens of Babylon, 6 
Hanifa, Abu, 98 
Harems, 226-228 
Haroun al-Rashid, 89 
Harvey, William, 211 
Hashimites 
description, 83, 84 
rebellion against Umayyads, 83, 84, 87 
World War I and, 295-297, 298, 
311-312, 316 

INDEX 
379 
Hassan (Ali's son), 65, 68, 7I 
Hassan Sabbah, I29-I31, I42 
Hebrew language, 80 
Henry the Navigator, Prince, 201-202 
Herder, Johann, 279, 280, 283 
Herf, Jeffrey, 350 
Herzl, Theodor, 284, 32I 
Hess, Moses, 32I 
Hezbollah, 344 
Hidden Imam, I84-I85, I86, 229, 
341 
Hijra, 22-24 
Hind, 57 
Hinduism/Hindus, 9, Il8, I25, I65, 
I93-I94 
Hisdai ibn Shaprut, I20 
History of the Prophets and Kin%! 
(Tabari), 34-35 
Hulagu, I55-I56, I61, I72 
Humanists, 205 
Hume, David, Ill 
Hundred Years' War (1337-I453), 2I2 
Huns, 150 
Huss, Johann, 207 
Hussein 
martyrdom, 68-70, 69(fig.), 71-72, 
340 
Shi'ism and, 70, ?I-72, 82, I87, 
254 
Hussein, Saddam, 331, 344-345, 346, 
351-352 
Ibn al-Athir, I61 
Ibn al-Haytham, 2Il 
Ibn al-Nafis, 2Il 
Ibn Hanbal, 98, I05-I06, I64 
Ibn Ishaq, 33-34 
Ibn Khaldun, 5 
Ibn Rushd (Averroes), Il2, 204 
Ibn Sina (Avicenna), 102, 204, 2Il 
Ibn Taymiyah, 16I-165, 249, 252 
Idolatry, 9-IO, 30, 253, 254 
ljma, 97, 263, 264 
ljtihad, 97, 247-248, 267 
11-Khan dynasty, 159 
Imam 
Hidden Imam, 184-185, 186, 229, 
341 
meaning, 70-71 
Shi'ism and, 70-71, 82, I29, 
I84-I85, I86, 340,341 
Incoherence of the Incoherence, The (Ibn 
Rushd), II2 
Incoherence of the Philosophers, The 
(Ghazali), Ill 
Independence movements overview, 
3I7-3I9 
India 
British rule, 233-235, 239-240, 
257-259,262 
bullet grease issue, 239 
fragmentation of, 117, 23I 
Great Indian Mutiny (1857-I858), 
239-240,258,262 
Hindu/Muslim relationship, 231, 
239 
independence, 3I8-3I9 
Moghul Empire and, I91, I92, 
I93-I94 
trade with Europeans, 200, 2I8-2I9, 
232-233 
Indulgences of the Church, 208 
Industrialization 
China and, 270-271 
Industrial Revolution/Europe, 
269-270,272-273,274,276 
Iran (after I840s), 276 
Islamic world and, 270, 27I, 
273-276 
social context and, 270-276 
women and, 274 
lntifadas, 332 

380 
INDEX 
Iran 
American hostages, 343 
Book of Kings, The (Firdausi) and, 
125, 186 
British/Russian zones of influence, 
238 
CIA coup/Shah, 334 
education, 261, 276 
European deals/control, 236-238 
industrialization, 276 
nationalism and, 187, 310, 334 
oil, 314-315, 334 
Qajar dynasty, 230, 236-238, 261, 
278-279, 304, 314-315 
revolution background/outcome, 
339-341,343-344,346 
secular modernism, 261, 276, 
277-279,304,305,333-334,355 
Shi'ism, 185, 186, 187 
views of U.S., 334-335 
war with Iraq, 344-345 
See also Safavids of Persia 
Iraq 
creation, 311, 316 
Kuwait annexation/effects, 345-346 
oil, 316 
Saddam Hussein, 331, 344-345, 
346, 351-352 
UN sanctions, 345-346 
U.S. war against, 351-352 
war with Iran/U.S. support, 344-345 
See also Mesopotamia 
Isfahan, 189 
Ishmael, 17, 20 
Islam 
broad meaning of, 356-357 
community vs. personal salvation, 
166,209,351 
description/lifestyle (seventeenth 
century), 195-198, 196(fig.) 
at end of Omar's kbalifate, 47, 48-49 
growth of, xvi(fig.) 
shared references, 197-198 
stories/lessons and, xxi-xxii 
as "the world," 117, 119, 133, 142, 
198 
three kbalifates, 118-119, 120-121, 
121(fig.), 128-129 
Islam beginnings 
battle success reasons, 47-49 
battles, 25-28, 37, 43-46, 55, 57, 74 
conversions to, 20, 22, 24, 25, 26, 
28,29-30 
documentation/stories, 33-35 
as political entity, 24-25 
religious freedom and, 22, 39, 
46-47,48,78 
See also specific individuals 
Islam in Modern History (Smith), xvii 
Islam-West relationship (today) 
democracy and, 349, 351-353, 355, 
356 
incompatibilities, 353-356 
religion and, 350-351, 356 
views of each other, 349-353 
women's role, 354-356 
Islamic doctrine/law 
after Mohammed's death, 93 
argument by analogy, 50, 96-97, 
105-106 
core creed and, 78 
during Mohammed's life, 92 
five pillars, 91-92 
Omar and, 49, 50-52 
shades of gray and, 103, 113 
structure, 359(fig.) 
See also Hadith; Qur'an; Scholars; 
Shari' a; Ulama 
Islamic Jihad, 332, 344 
Islamic Salvation Party, 344 
"Islamic Socialism," 326, 330 
Ismail (Egypt), 243-244 

Ismail (Safavid), 185-188 
lsma'ilis (Seveners), 129, 184 
Israel 
birth, 322-323, 323(fig.) 
U.S. support, 341 
See also Palestinian-Israeli conflict; 
Zionism 
Istanbul, 177, 178 
See also Constantinople 
Ivan the Terrible, 235-236 
Ivan the Third, 235 
Jahan, Shah Qust King), 194 
Jalaludin-i Rumi, 170-171 
Jamaluddin-i-Mghan 
background, 261-262 
career/beliefs, 252, 262-268, 278 
influence/disciples, xvii, 268, 308, 
340 
"non-aligned movement," 266 
pan-lslamism, xvii, 265, 267, 309, 
327 
tobacco concession/boycott, 
266-267,268,278 
Janissaries, 173, 177, 180,222-223 
Jawali, 141-142 
Jerusalem 
Crusades, 137, 140-141, 142, 
146-147 
Muslim conquest of, 46-47 
Jews 
discrimination of, 178-179, 289, 
320,321,324 
early history, 6, 17, 25, 27-28 
Nazis and, 320, 321, 324 
orthodox Judaism, 356 
See also Israel; Palestinian-Israeli 
conflict; Zionism 
Jihad 
Ali/Ayesha conflict and, 61-62 
Crusades and, 142, 143, 144 
INDEX 
Ibn Taymiyah views, 162-163 
meanings, 30, 44, 61-62, 73, 354 
Omar and, 44, 73 
Umayyad Empire and, 73 
Wahhabism, 256-257 
"Jihadists," 332, 342, 344, 346-347 
Jizya, 47, 178, 192, 195 
Junayd, al-, 107, 110 
Juzjani, 153 
Ka'ba temple, 20, 30, 295 
Kabir (poet), 193-194 
Kalendar/Kalendari brotherhoods, 
169 
Kant, Immanuel, 279-280 
381 
Karbala and Hussein, 69-70, 69(fig.), 
71-72, 82 
Kashmir, 319 
Kemal, Mustafa. See Atatiirk 
Kerouac, Jack, 170 
Khadija, 18, 20, 21, 36-37, 113 
Khaled bin al-Walid, 26, 43 
Khalifates 
Rightly Guided Khalifas, 33, 65-66, 
75 
three khalifates, 118-119, 120-121, 
121(fig.), 128-129 
See also specific khalifotes 
Kharijites, 65, 81-82 
Khomeini, Ayatollah, 340-341, 
343-344,345 
Khosrow, Kay, 13 
Khusrow, Anushervan, 13 
Khwarazm-Shahs kingdom, 151-152 
Kindi, a!-, 101, 175 
Kipling, Rudyard, 236 
Kitab-al-Tawhid (The Book of 
Unity! Abdul Wahhab), 255 
Knights Hospitaller, 199 
Kurds/Kurdish language, 319 
Kuwait and Iraq, 345-346 

382 
INDEX 
Language 
nation-states and, 213, 214 
See also specific languages 
Latin language, 203-204 
Lawrence, Thomas Edward ("Lawrence 
of Arabia"), 296 
League of Nations, 311 
Lebanon 
France and, 311 
Israeli invasions, 344 
Leibniz, Gottfried, 357 
Lenin, Vladimir, 304, 307 
Lepanto battle (1571), 221 
Levant, 49, 80, 144, 149 
Lewis, Bernard, 159 
Lincoln, Abraham, 283 
Luther, Martin, 207-208, 212 
Madrassas, 128, 258 
Mahdi ("expected one"), 175, 185, 268 
Maher, Bill, 164 
Mahmud, Sultan, 124-125, 126 
Malik, Ibn, 98 
Malik Shah, Sultan, 127-128, 132 
Maliki school, 98 
Malouf, Amin, 130 
Mamluk rule, Egypt, 157, 242-243 
Mamluks, 121-122, 123, 124, 157 
Mandates plan, 310-313, 312(fig.) 
Mansur as khalifa, 86, 87 
Manzikert battle (1071 CE), 127, 
136 
Marathas, 231 
Maronite Christians, 311 
Marwan, 58-59 
Marx, Karl, 275 
Masud, Sultan, 125-126 
Mathematics, 5, 6, 101 
Mathnawi Ma'nawi Qalaludin-i Rumi), 
170-171 
Mazzini, Joseph, 281-282, 283 
Mecca 
battles with Medina, 25-28 
Mohammed's birth/early life, 18-22 
pilgrimages, 21, 30-31, 68 
religion as business, 18, 21 
Medicine foundation/innovations, 6, 
102,211 
Medina 
Mohammed's work in, 22-23, 
24-25,28,48 
Pact of Medina, 22-23, 26 
See also Yathrib 
Mediterranean world 
before Islam, 1, 2(fig.), 3-4 
Middle World and, 3-4, 12 
Mehmet, Sultan/"the Conqueror," 
174-175, 177 
Mercantilism, 215-216 
Meritocracy, 157 
Mesopotamia, 4, 5-7, 8-9 
Michelangelo, 194, 203 
Middle World 
before Islam, 4-13, 14-15, 15(fig.) 
Mediterranean world and, 3-4, 12 
"Middle East" and, 1, 3 
overland routes, 2(fig.) 
Milestones (Qutb), 327 
Mirza Habib, 277 
Mirza Taqi (Amir Kabir), 276, 305 
Moat, Battle of the, 27-28, 55 
Modernity 
description, 250, 251 
See also Secular modernism 
Moghul Empire 
art! architecture, 19 3-194 
decline, 231-241 
Din-i Illahi ("the God Religion''), 
193 
guns/ gunpowder and, 191 
Hindus and, 192, 193, 195, 
230-231 

INDEX 
383 
India and, 191, 192, 193-194 
intolerance/restoration of Islam, 
194-195, 231 
overview/leaders, 189-195 
religious/universal tolerance, 
192-193,230-231 
territory, 189 
See also specific areas/countries 
Mohammed 
baraka of, 71 
birth/early life, 18-22 
death, 31 
miracles and, 7 4 
move to Yathrib (Medina), 21-22 
plots against, 21, 22, 25-26, 28, 72 
revelations, 19-20, 23 
sermons/beliefs, 20-21, 24-25, 27, 
29,30-31,48,54,57-58,81 
work in Medina, 22-23, 24-25, 28, 
48 
Monads, 357 
Moneylending, 289 
Mongols 
origins/lifestyle, 150, 152 
technology/strategy, 152, 160 
See also specific individuals 
Mongols/Islamic world 
Assassins and, 143, 155 
conversion to Islam, 157-158, 159, 
249 
defeat by Egypt, 156-157 
impacts, 154, 160-168, 249 
invasions/genocide, 27, 152-161, 
154(fig.) 
Montesquieu, Charles, 277-278 
Morier, James, 277 
Mosaddeq, Mohammad, 334, 339 
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus, 254 
Mu'awiya 
Aliand,60,63-64,64-65, 72 
Ayesha and, 61 
Othman and, 57, 58, 60 
selecting successor, 67 
Syria/Egypt rule by, 57, 64 
Umayyad Empire and, 65, 67, 
75-76,85 
Mufti of Jerusalem, 324 
Mujahideen-e-Khalq, 340 
Mumtaz Mahal, 194 
Murat I, 173 
Muslim Brotherhood 
description/expansion, 268, 
308-310,326-327,332,344 
"jihadist" offshoots, 332, 344 
Mu'tazilites, 103-106, 110 
Muzaffar al-din, 278 
Nadir Shah, 308, 310, 344 
Nanak, Guru, 193, 195 
Napoleon Bonaparte, 241-242, 244, 
254,280-281 
Napoleon III, 281 
Nasiruddin, 266, 267 
Nasser, Gamal Abdul 
background, 324-325 
as Egyptian leader, 325-329, 330, 334 
Nation-states 
artificial/imperialist borders and, 
310-314,318-319 
emergence, 212-214 
language and, 213, 214 
Nationalism 
Austro-Hungarian Empire, 282 
description, 279-280 
Germany, 280-281 
Italy, 281-282 
nation-state vs., 279 
nation-statism vs., 319, 320 
Ottoman Empire, 282, 291-292 
Pakistan's birth and, 261, 279, 
318-319 
politicians' use of, 310, 314 

384 
INDEX 
Nationalism (continued) 
Turkey, 302 
U.S. Civil War and, 282-283 
See also Arab nationalism; Pan-Arab 
nationalism; Zionism 
Nebuchadnezzar, 6 
Nelson, Lord, 241 
Newton, Isaac, 211 
Night of Power (Lailut al-Qadr), 23 
9/11 attacks/effects, xvii, 347, 349, 
351-352, 355 
Nineveh, 6 
Nizam al-Mulk, 127-129, 132 
Non-Aligned Movement, 266, 326 
Nuruddin, 144-145, 146 
Occultation, 184 
Occupied Territories, 329, 332 
Oil 
1973 embargo, 341-342 
democracy and, 335-336 
foreigners' control, 314-316 
nationalizing industry, 334 
politics of, 334-335 
social impacts, 335-338, 342 
technocracy vs. traditional economy, 
336-338 
uses, 315, 316, 335 
See also specific countries 
Old Man of the Mountains, 142 
Omar 
death, 47, 51-52 
description/background, 21, 31, 36, 
40-41, 81 
as successor/beliefs, 33, 40, 41-44, 
45-47,48,49,50-52,55,56,71, 
73, 94, 96, 114 
"The One," philosophical concept, 
99-100 
OPEC (Organization of Petroleum 
Exporting Countries), 341-342 
Orthodox Christianity, 14, 205, 235 
Othman (khalifa) 
assassination/ murderers, 59, 60, 61, 62 
background/description, 21, 53-55 
as successor/beliefs, 33, 52, 55-59, 
73, 75 
Othman (Ottoman), 172 
Ottoman Empire 
architecture, 180, 194 
Armenians, 179, 288-290 
beginnings, 172 
Constantinople and, 175-177 
devshirme program, 173, 180, 
222-223,286 
Eastern Orthodox community in, 179 
European friction, 220 
expansion of territory, 173-178, 183 
guilds/Sufis connection, 168, 182, 
223-224,273-274 
janissaries, 173, 177, 180, 222-223 
Jews move to, 178-179 
millet system, 178-179,290 
nationalism, 282, 291-292 
ruler as khalifa, 183 
Safavids of Persia and, 183, 187-188 
secular modernism, 261, 287-288, 
290-291,292-293 
social order, 178-182 
Sufism, 168, 169-172, 178, 
181-182,223,223-224,273-274 
tax system!" farms," 180-181, 
242-243,286-287,289 
Timur's victory, 173-17 4, 179 
See also specific areas/countries 
Ottoman Empire decline 
capitulations to Europeans, 285-287 
constitutionalism conflict, 288, 290, 
291 
corruption/bribes, 224-226 
Deportation Act, 293-294 
expansion cessation, 222-223 

INDEX 
385 
guild system, 223-224 
inflation, 225, 226 
losses of territory, 292-293 
massacre of Armenians, 290, 293-294 
princes/succession, 227-228 
revenue decline, 222 
speed of, 220-221 
Sultan's harem and, 226-228 
Tanzimat (reorganization measures), 
286-287 
trade/raw materials and, 223, 224 
Vienna and, 221-222, 223 
vizier's power, 228 
World War I and, 293-295, 
296(fig.), 297, 297(fig.), 298-299 
Pact of Medina, 22-23, 26 
Pahlavi. See Reza Shah Pahlavi 
Pakistan birth, 261, 279, 318-319 
Palestine Liberation Organization 
(PLO), 330, 332, 344 
Palestinian-Israeli conflict 
1948 war, 323-324 
Arab refugees (Palestinians), 324, 
330,344 
following World War II, 313-314, 
320 
fourth war (Yom Kippur), 341 
Jewish terrorism, 321-322 
Jews move to Palestine, 284-285, 
320-321 
otherArabsand,322-323,328 
partition, 322-323, 323(fig.) 
public relations, 324 
Six Day War/consequences, 328, 
329-333 
terrorism, 321-322, 332 
See also Israel; Zionism 
Pan-Arab nationalism, 313, 326, 
327-328 
See also Arab nationalism 
Pan-Islamism 
Jamaluddin, xvii, 265, 267, 309, 
327 
Muslim Brotherhood, 309 
Paper invention, 88 
Parthians, 11-13 
Pasha, Talaat!Enver/Djemal, 293, 294, 
299 
Pasteur, Louis, 211 
Peace of Augsburg (1555), 212 
Perlman, S. J., 309 
Persian Empire 
history, 7-13 
peak of, 188-189 
Persian language, 77, 124, 194 
Persian viziers, 122-123 
Persian Wars, 1 0 
Persians 
description, 80, 84 
qanats, 154 
Umayyad Empire and, 80, 81, 82, 
83, 84, 85(fig.) 
See also Safavids of Persia 
Peter the Great, 236 
Peter the Hermit, 138 
Phillip II, France, 147 
Philosophers of Islam 
overview, 99-1 06 
science vs. theology, 1 02-1 06, 
110-113, 114 
scientific foundations, 101-102, 
211-212 
studying other philosophies, 99-102, 
110-111 
universe schema, 100-101 
Plato, 100, 101, 204 
Plotinus, 99-100 
Polo, Marco, 130, 200 
Prayer (Muslims), 91, 92, 196, 275 
See also Salaat (namaz) 
Prostitution, 50 

386 
INDEX 
Protestant reformation/reformation, 
206-210,212,216,247,248-249 
Push to language, 31 0 
Qadisiya battle, 44-46 
Qajar dynasty, 230, 236-238, 261, 
278-279, 304, 314-315 
Qiyas, 50, 96-97, 105-106 
Q~ilb~h, 184,185-186,195-196,219 
Qur'an 
compiling, 49, 93, 94 
definitive edition preparation, 55-56, 
93 
interpretation and, 93-94, 354 
language of, 24-25 
Mu' awiya's use in battle, 64 
qira'ut, 29 
tawhid and, 103-104 
See also Hadith; Scholars 
Quraysh tribe/members, 18, 21, 
25-28,44,54 
Qutb, Sayyid, 327, 328, 332, 343 
Rabia al-Basri, 107-109, 110 
Radical Islamists (today) 
dress-code policy, 304-305 
past and, 148, 163 
secular modernism fall and, 346-347 
See also specific groups; specific 
individuals 
Radulph of Caen, 139 
Rajputs, 195 
Rashid al-Din Fazlullah, 149, 155 
Rida, Rashid, 268, 308 
Rashidun, 33 
Razi, Abu Bakr a!-, 104-105 
Reform movements (Islam) 
approaches overview, 251-252 
reasons for, 247-251 
See also Secular modernism; specific 
individuals; specific movements 
Refutation of the Materialists 
Oamaluddin), 264 
Renan, Ernest, 265 
Reuters, Baron Julius de, 237-238 
Revival of the Religious Sciences, The 
(Ghazali), 113, 114-115 
Reza Shah Pahlavi (father), 304, 310, 
333-334 
Reza Shah Pahlavi (son), 334, 339-340 
Richard I (Lionheart), England, 147 
Ridwan, 138 
Rightly Guided Khalif~, 33, 65--66, 75 
Roman Church 
Bible interpretation, 203, 206, 207, 
209 
heretics and, 205, 206 
hierarchy, 206 
individual salvation, 166, 207-208, 
209,351 
reform/Protestant Reformation, 
206-210,212,216,247,248-249 
Roman Empire 
bodyguards, 122 
decline/ division, 13-14, 119, 121 
legacy of, 303-304 
Parthians and, 12-13 
See also Byzantine Empire 
Romanus Diogenes, 127 
Roosevelt, Franklin Delano, 316, 333 
Rothschild, Lord Lionel, 298 
Rumi, Jalaludin-i, 170-171 
Ruqayya, 54 
Russia 
expansion/"Great Game," 235-239, 
237(fig.), 240-241, 335 
Orthodox Christianity and, 235 
Rustum, Sassanid commander, 44-45 
Sadat, Anwar a!-, 341 
Safavids of Persia 
art/architecture, 188-189, 194 

decline, 228-230 
Europeans and, 228, 229, 230 
guards (Qizilbash), 184, 185-186, 
195-196, 219 
leadership, 183-184, 228-229 
overview, 183-189 
Shi'ism and, 184-187, 229 
Sunnis and, 229-230 
Saffah, 86, 87 
See also Abbas ibn Abd al-Murralib 
Said, Edward, xx 
Salaat (namaz) as Islamic pillar, 91 
Saladin, 144-146 
Salafism, 163, 164-165 
Samanid dynasty, 124 
Sancho (the Fat), King, 120 
Sargon, 5-6 
Sassanid dynasty, 13, 14-15, 15(fig.), 
37,43-46,186 
Saud, Aziz ibn (1900s), 311-312 
Saud, Aziz ibn (early 1800s), 
254-255 
Saud, Mohammed ibn, 253-254, 
295 
Saudis/ Saudi Arabia 
beginnings, 311-312 
U.S. oil deal, 316 
Wahhabism, 295, 306, 316, 331 
World War I, 295, 296, 297, 298 
SAVAK, 340 
Sawm (roza) as Islamic pillar, 92 
Sayfi Heravi, 153 
Sayyid Ahmad, Sir (of Aligarh) 
background, 257-259 
secular modernism and, 252, 
259-261,264,269,305 
Scholars (Islamic) 
beginnings, 50, 94-99 
See also Hadith; Ulama 
Science 
Chaldeans, 6 
INDEX 
387 
Europe (1291-1600 CE), 210-211, 
212,216 
failure in Islamic world, 102-106, 
110-113,114,212,264-265 
Islamic philosophers and, 1 0 1-1 02, 
211-212 
Scientific method, 211 
Scientific Society, Aligarh, India, 
260-261 
Secular modernism 
in 1920s, 301-306 
Mghanistan, 304, 305, 307, 308 
Arab nationalism and, 297-298 
Atatiirk, 301-304 
dress-code policy and, 303, 304 
fall of, 343-347 
Iran, 261, 276, 277-279, 304, 305, 
333-334,355 
Jamaluddin-i-Mghan, 252, 
262-268 
Ottoman Empire, 261, 287-288, 
290-291,292-293 
Qajar Shahs oflran, 261 
Sayyid Ahmad, Sir (of Aligarh), 252, 
259-261,264,269,305 
Six Day War and, 331 
Turkey, 301-304 
women's role, 303, 304 
See also specific groups; specific 
individuals 
Sdim the Grim, Sultan, 187-188 
Sdjuks/Sdjuk era, 126-128, 128(fig.), 
131, 132, 135, 150, 151 
September 11 attacks/effects, xvii, 347, 
349,351-352,355 
Shafi'i, Imam a!-, 98 
Shafi'i school, 98 
Shahadah as Islamic pillar, 91 
Shahanshah, 186 
Shajar al-Durr, 156, 157 
Shams-i Tabrez, 170 

388 
INDEX 
Shanama (The Book ofKings/Firdausi), 
124-125, 186, 188 
Shari' a definition/description, 97 
Shariati, Ali, 340 
Sharif Hussein Ibn Ali, 295-296 
Sheikh al-Islam ("Old Man of Islam"), 
179 
Sherley, Robert/Anthony, 219-220 
Shi'i/Shi'ism 
Abbasids and, 86-87, 120 
Aliand,64, 70, 71, 82,184,186 
beginnings, 39, 70-71, 81 
beliefs/description, 39, 70, 71-72 
Hussein's martyrdom and, 70, 71-72, 
82,187,254 
11-Khan dynasty, 159 
imam significance, 70-71, 82, 129, 
184-185, 186, 340, 341 
lrnn, 185,340-341,343-344 
Persians and, 82, 83-84, 185 
Twelvers, 184, 185, 186 
Umayyad Empire and, 82 
Wahhabism and, 254, 257 
See also Fatimids/khalifate; Safavids of 
Persia 
Shirk, 255 
Shurn, 52,67,263-264 
Siddhartha Gautama, 23 
Siffin battle, 63-64 
Sikhs, 193, 195, 231, 250 
Sinon (Assassin), 146 
Sinon (Ottoman architect), 180 
Siraj ai-Dawlah, 233 
Six Day War/consequences (1967), 
328,329-333 
Slavery, 51,202,217,282-283 
Smith, Wilfred Cantwell, xvii 
Soviet Union fall, 346 
Spanish Inquisition, 178-179 
Spiritual Manuscript, The Qalaludin-i 
Rumi), 170-171 
Steam engines, 254, 270, 271, 315 
Stephenson, George, 271 
Suez Canal/Zone, 243, 308-309, 312, 
325-326,334 
Sufi brotherhoods, 165-166, 169, 171, 
182, 183-184 
Sufism 
Asia Minor, 168, 169-172 
dervishes, 169, 170 
description/spread, 106-110, 
165-168,193-194,196,202 
futuwwah ideals, 166-168, 171 
Ghazali, 112-113 
ghazi orders, 171-172 
Ottoman Empire, 168, 178, 
181-182,223-224,273-274 
Wahhabism and, 257 
Suleiman the Magnificent/the 
Lawgiver, 183, 221-222, 223 
Sumer/inventions, 5-6 
Sunnis, 39, 71, 97-98, 185, 186, 
187 
Sykes, Mark, 297, 297(fig.) 
Sykes-Picot Agreement, 297, 297(fig.), 
298,311 
Syria 
Frnnce and, 311, 313 
Napoleon and, 242 
Tabari, Ibn Jarir al-, 34-35 
Taj Mahal, 194 
Talha, 62 
Taliban, 11, 84, 308, 347, 352 
Tancred, King, 141, 142 
Tarzi, 268 
Tawhid, 103-104, 255 
Tazieh, 187 
Templars, 199 
Term limits, 192 
Terrorism 
Assassins, 130, 131, 132, 143 

INDEX 
Bush war against terrorism, 349, 
351-352 
Palestinian-Israeli conflict, 321-322, 
332 
See also specific events; specific groups 
Teutonic Knights, 199 
Thirty Years' War, 212 
Time oflgnorance, 133 
Timur-i-lang (Tamerlane), 160, 
173-174,179,185,249 
Tobacco concession/boycott, 266-267, 
268,278,315 
Tode Mongke, 157 
Toynbee, Arnold, xiii 
Treaty of Balta Liman (1838), 286 
Treitschke, Heinrich von, 281, 283 
Turkey 
becoming nation-state, 301, 310 
demotion of Islam/clergy, 301-302, 
303 
secular modernism, 301-304 
women's role, 303 
See also Atatiirk 
Turkish language, 301, 302, 303 
Turko-Mongol tribes, 150 
Turks 
Abbasid age and, 122, 123-124 
attacks on Ghaznavid area, 126 
Seljuks/Seljuk era, 126-128, 
128(fig.), 131, 132, 135, 150, 
151 
in seventeenth century Islamic world, 
195-196 
Uhud battle, 26-27, 37, 55, 57 
Ulama 
becoming member of, 98-99 
beginnings, 50, 94-99 
science and, 1 04-1 06 
social power of, 98, 105 
Urn Kulthum, 54 
Umayyad Empire 
Abbasid revolution, 82, 83, 84, 
85(fig.) 
Arabization by, 77, 80 
beginnings, 65, 72, 73 
expansion, 74, 75, 76(fig.), 78, 79 
inequalities/social gradients, 
80-81 
Islamification by, 77-78, 80 
Mu'awiya and, 65, 67, 75-76, 85 
overview, 72-86, 76(fig.) 
Persians and, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 
85(fig.) 
See also specific individuals 
Umayyad kbalifate, Andalusian, 
118-119, 120-121, 121(fig.) 
Umayyads 
description, 54, 60, 72-73 
Othman and, 54, 56-57 
slaughter of, 85-86, 118 
Umm al-Darda, 114 
Umm Hakim, 114 
Umma birth/definition, 23 
Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights (UN), 333 
University beginnings, 204-205 
Urban (engineer), 175 
Urban II, Pope, 137, 138 
Urdu language, 239, 258, 259 
Usamah ibn Munqidb, 148 
Vandals, 80 
Vesalius, Andreas, 211 
Vikings, 136, 200-201 
Volksgeist, 280, 281 
Wafd political parry, 268 
Wagner, Richard, 281 
Wahhabism 
beginnings, 252-255 
Deobandis, 307, 308, 343, 344 
389 

390 
INDEX 
Wahhabism (continued) 
enemies/jihad, 256-257 
Saudis/Saudi Arabia, 295, 306, 316, 
331 
spread, 306-307, 331 
tenets of, 255-257 
Waqfs, 77, 98 
Waqqas, Sa'd ibn Abi, 43, 44 
Washington, George, 233, 235 
Water Carrier's Son, 307-308 
Watt, James, 254, 271 
Watts, Alan, 111-112 
Weitzman, Chaim, 321 
Wilson, Woodrow, 310-311, 314, 319, 
320,333 
Women's role 
before 1000 CE, 18, 50-51, 
113-114 
change around 1000 CE, 
114-115 
dress code, 197, 305 
education, 51 
gender role separation, 114-115, 
197,274,354-355 
Islam-West incompatibilities on, 
354-356 
secular modernism, 303, 304 
seventeenth century, 196-197 
stability/instability and, 115 
Sultan's harem, Istanbul, 226-228 
Works ofShams-i Tabrez, The Qalaludin-i 
Rumi), 170 
World War I 
European theater, 294 
Hashimite family, 295-297, 298 
mandates plan, 310-313, 312(fig.) 
Ottoman Empire and, 293-295, 
296(fig.), 297, 297(fig.), 298-299 
Saudis and, 295, 296, 297, 298 
World War II, 317 
World Zionist Congress, 284 
Wycliffe, John, 206-207 
Xerxes, 10 
Ya'qubi, 88 
Yaqut al-Hamawi, 154 
Yarmuk battle, 114 
Yathrib 
Mohammed's move to, 21-22 
See also Medina 
Yazid, 67-70 
Young Turks, 290-291, 304, 305 
Zaghlul, 268 
Zaidi sect (Fivers), 129, 184 
Zakat as Islamic pillar, 92 
Zangi, 144 
Zawaheri, al-, 332 
Zia al-Haq, 343 
Zionism 
beginnings, 283-285, 298 
European anti-Semitism and, 298, 
320,324 
Jewish claim, 284, 322 
nationalism differences, 283-284 
See also Israel; Palestinian-Israeli 
conflict 
Ziyad, 75-76 
Zoroaster, 9-10 
Zoroastrianism, 9-10, 13, 49 
Zubayd, 62 

Tamim Ansary is the author of the memoir W't-st of Kabul, 
East of New York and coauthor with Afghan land mine vic-
tim Farah Ahmadi of the New York Times bestseller The 
Other Side of the Sky. He has been a major contributing 
writer to several secondary school history textbooks. He 
writes a monthly column for Encarta.com and has published 
essays and commentary in the San Francisco Chronicle, Salon, 
Alternet, TomPaine.com, Edutopia, Parade, L.A. Times, and 
elsewhere. Ansary, director of the San Francisco Writers 
Workshop, lives in San Francisco. 

PublicAffairs is a publishing house founded in 1997· It is a tribute 
to the standards, values, and flair of three persons who have 
served as mentors to countless reporters, writers, editors, and 
book people of all kinds, including me. 
I. F. SToNE, proprietor of I. R Stone's Weekly, combined a com-
mitment to the First Amendment with entrepreneurial zeal and 
reporting skill and became one of the great independent journal-
ists in American history. At the age of eighty, Izzy published The 
Trial of Socrates, which was a national bestseller. He wrote the 
book after he taught himself ancient Greek. 
BENJAMIN C. BRAD LEE was for nearly thirty years the charis-
matic editorial leader of The Washington Post. It was Ben who 
gave the Post the range and courage to pursue such historic 
issues as Watergate. He supported his reporters with a tenacity 
that made them fearless and it is no accident that so many 
became authors of influential, best-selling books. 
RoBERT L. BERNSTEIN, the chief executive of Random House 
for more than a quarter century, guided one of the nation's pre-
mier publishing houses. Bob was personally responsible for 
many books of political dissent and argument that challenged 
tyranny around the globe. He is also the founder and longtime 
chair of Human Rights Watch, one of the most respected human 
rights organizations in the world. 
For fifty years, the banner of Public Affairs Press was carried by its 
oWIIer Morris B. Schnapper, who published Gandhi, Nasser, Toyn-
bee, Truman, and about 1,5oo other authors. In 1983, Schnapper 
was described by The Washington Post as "a redoubtable gadfly." 
His legacy will endure in the books to come. 
Peter Osnos, Founder and Editor-at-Large 

HISTORY 
NATIONAL BESTSELLER 
WE IN THE WEST share a common narrative of world history. But our 
story largely omits a whole civilization whose citizens shared an entirely different 
narrative for a thousand years. 
In Destiny Disrupted, Tamim Ansary tells the rich story of world history as the 
Islamic world saw it, from the time of Mohammed to the fall of the Ottoman Empire 
and beyond. He clarifies why our civilizations grew up oblivious to each other, what 
happened when they intersected, and how the Islamic world was affected by its slow 
recognition that Europe-
a place it long perceived as primitive and disorganized-
had somehow hijacked destiny. 
"Vivid, often wrenching .... Meticulously researched and balanced .... A gripping 
drama that pulls the reader into great, seminal events of world history:' 
-
The Oregonian 
"A must-read for anyone who wants to learn more 
about the history of the Islamic world:' 
-
San Francisco Chronicle 
"An informative and thoroughly engaging look at the past, 
present, and future of Islam. A must-read .... " 
· 
-
KHALE·o HossEJNJ, 
author of The Kite Runner and A Thousand Splendid Suns 
www.mirtamimansary.com 

