Louisiana State University 
Louisiana State University 
LSU Scholarly Repository 
LSU Scholarly Repository 
LSU Master's Theses 
Graduate School 
November 2021 
Developing a Watershed-based Plan Evaluation Framework for 
Developing a Watershed-based Plan Evaluation Framework for 
Socio-ecological Network Analysis in the Upper Pontchartrain 
Socio-ecological Network Analysis in the Upper Pontchartrain 
Basin 
Basin 
Lindsey R. Lamana 
Louisiana State University and Agricultural and Mechanical College 
Follow this and additional works at: https://repository.lsu.edu/gradschool_theses 
 Part of the Natural Resources Management and Policy Commons, and the Water Resource 
Management Commons 
Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Lamana, Lindsey R., "Developing a Watershed-based Plan Evaluation Framework for Socio-ecological 
Network Analysis in the Upper Pontchartrain Basin" (2021). LSU Master's Theses. 5453. 
https://repository.lsu.edu/gradschool_theses/5453 
This Thesis is brought to you for free and open access by the Graduate School at LSU Scholarly Repository. It has 
been accepted for inclusion in LSU Master's Theses by an authorized graduate school editor of LSU Scholarly 
Repository. For more information, please contact gradetd@lsu.edu. 

 
 
DEVELOPING A WATERSHED-BASED PLAN EVALUATION 
FRAMEWORK FOR SOCIO-ECOLOGICAL NETWORK 
ANALYSIS IN THE UPPER PONTCHARTRAIN BASIN 
 
 
 
 
A Thesis 
Submitted to the Graduate Faculty of the 
 Louisiana State University and 
Agricultural and Mechanical College 
in partial fulfillment of the 
requirements for the degree of 
Master of Science 
in  
The Department of Environmental Sciences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
by  
Lindsey Rochelle Lamana 
B.S., Louisiana State University, 2019 
December 2021 
 

ii 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Abstract .......................................................................................................................................... iii 
1. 
Introduction ............................................................................................................................. 1 
2. 
Network Analysis and Plan Evaluation Framework ............................................................... 5 
2.1. 
Themes of Plan Evaluation .............................................................................................. 5 
2.2. 
Theoretical Framework or Questions ............................................................................... 9 
2.3. 
Network Units ................................................................................................................ 10 
2.4. 
Network Structures ......................................................................................................... 10 
2.5. 
Network Measures.......................................................................................................... 14 
3. 
Context for Demonstrating Nape Application ...................................................................... 16 
4. 
Implementing NAPE ............................................................................................................. 20 
5. 
Results ................................................................................................................................... 27 
5.1. 
Network Units ................................................................................................................ 28 
5.2. 
Network Structure .......................................................................................................... 33 
5.3. 
Centrality Measures by Organization Type ................................................................... 39 
5.4. 
Centrality Measures by Government Level ................................................................... 44 
6. 
Conclusions and Discussion ................................................................................................. 52 
Appendix A. The Plan Evaluation Coding Protocol ..................................................................... 55 
Appendix B. Protocol for Extracting Relational Data in NVivo 12 ............................................. 63 
Appendix C. Actor List with Centrality Measures ....................................................................... 66 
Works Cited .................................................................................................................................. 92 
Vita ……………………………………………………………………………………..………..95 
 
 
 

iii 
 
ABSTRACT 
Louisiana's efforts to create regional watershed planning under the Louisiana Watershed 
Initiative (LWI) suggest the need to evaluate existing governance systems such as the coordination, 
development, and implementation of plans. The Network Analysis and Plan Evaluation (NAPE) 
Framework developed in this study answers initial questions related to the LWI’s long-term 
resilience outcomes from the content analysis and extraction of relational data in plans of LWI 
Region 7 located in the Upper Pontchartrain Basin. Actor-Plan Coordination Networks reveal the 
coordination and collaboration of entities, and a Network of Plans presents the integration of 
planning documents in the Region. Local government organizations were disconnected from those 
outside of their jurisdiction. Higher government levels bridge gaps through hazard mitigation and 
transportation plans between local governments that would otherwise not be connected. Centrality 
measures quantify the relationships between organizations and plans. The organizations with the 
highest two-mode degree centrality value in the participated network were the Louisiana 
Department of Transportation (LADOTD), FEMA, the Stephenson Disaster Management Institute 
(SDMI), FEMA, and GOHSEP. The organizations with the highest betweenness centrality value 
in the participated network were SDMI, LADOTD, GOHSEP, FEMA, and the Center for Planning 
Excellence (CPEX). Closeness and eigenvector centrality measures were similar for all 
organizations. Government and educational institutions were more likely to participate in planning 
compared to other organization types. Educational institutions had the highest average 
betweenness centrality value and are a possible candidate to bridge the exchange of information 
and planning across the Region. ANOVA models resulted in government having a significant two-
mode and one-mode degree centrality compared to professional services. Educational institutions 

iv 
 
have a significant betweenness value compared to NGOs and professional services. Federal 
government had a significant two-mode degree centrality value compared to local government. 
In conclusion, Region 7 lacks integrated planning and coordination with other jurisdictions in the 
region and organization types that are not related to government.  The results of this study can 
guide other theoretical frameworks or questions that are explored using the NAPE framework. 
Overall, the NAPE framework can effectively identify the current organizational capacity and 
integration of plans in a planning network.

1 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Louisiana's efforts to create regional watershed planning under the Louisiana Watershed 
Initiative (LWI) suggest the need to evaluate existing governance systems such as planning, 
policies, ordinances, implementation, and collaboration at the watershed level that transcends 
political boundaries. Regional watershed management is needed to reduce flood risks as activities 
and projects can affect other jurisdictions downstream of the watershed or floodplain.  
The LWI has six strategic areas for long-term resilience outcomes intended to guide the state-wide 
program (Louisiana Watershed Initiative, 2020). These outcomes include the capability and 
capacity to effectively reduce flood risk and integrated planning between jurisdictions in each 
watershed and the state (Louisiana Watershed Initiative, 2018). Analyzing plans at the regional 
watershed level can help guide these outcomes by revealing the current coordination and 
integration of plans and policies between jurisdictions and their capacity to reduce flood risks 
effectively.  This study develops a plan content analysis methodology that can answer questions 
regarding multi-jurisdictional coordination that can help guide the governance structure of the LWI 
regions and other regional governance efforts.  
Research evaluating the integration of plans and content analysis often involves plan 
evaluation (PE) methodologies. Several studies evaluate regional planning of ecological factors, 
such as Brody's plan evaluation framework in Ecosystem Planning in Florida (2008), which 
develops a Plan Evaluation Coding Protocol that scores plans based on their content across several 
plan evaluation principles. Past studies have also evaluated state and local hazard mitigation plans 
and scored them based on the extent to which they address natural hazards and climate change 
(Berke, Smith, & Lyles, Planning for Resiliency: Evaluation of State Hazard Mitigation Plans 
under the Disaster Mitigation Act, 2012; Brody, Ecosystem Planning in Florida: Solving Regional 

2 
 
Problems through Local Decision-making, 2008). Each principle is made up of sub-principles with 
related items that are measured on either a binary (0-1) or an ordinal (0-2) scale (Brody, 2008). 0 
or 1 indicates the absence or presence of an item, and a 2 on an ordinal scale indicates the item is 
present and described in great detail. Other plan evaluation frameworks include the Plan 
Integration for Resilience Scorecard (PIRS) that evaluates the integration of plans in a network or 
network of plans and their physical and social vulnerability to hazards (Berke, Malecha, Yu, Lee, 
& Masterson, 2018). Plan Integration for Resilience Scorecards (PIRS) measure the vulnerability 
of a plan to hazards using a -1 or +1 to indicate policies that increase or decrease their vulnerability 
(Woodruff, et al., 2021). Scorecards obtain results by summing and averaging the overall score of 
each plan. The results from these studies can be used to improve future planning efforts by 
identifying policies and strategies and inconsistencies between other regional plans that increase 
vulnerability to hazards (Berke, Malecha, Yu, Lee, & Masterson, 2018; Malecha, Woodruff, & 
Berke, 2021). 
However, few plan evaluation research methods have incorporated tools or methodologies 
to extract relational data and quantify measures of multi-jurisdictional planning and coordination 
across watersheds from the content analysis of plans (Woodruff, et al., 2021). The scoring of plans 
based on their content alone does not measure consistency between plans and their effect on hazard 
mitigation and watershed planning. Relational data can provide a more accurate depiction of the 
integration of plans and policies in a region, the coordination of stakeholders, and a region's 
vulnerability to natural hazards. The data can be extracted through content analysis of plans or 
plan coding using qualitative analysis software such as NVivo (QSR International Pty Ltd., 2018). 
The study system and network components can be analyzed by the structure and measures of the 

3 
 
network, including descriptive statistics, network visualizations, and statistical approaches 
(Poplier, 2018). 
This study's first objective is to develop a Plan Evaluation Coding Protocol (herein referred 
to as the Protocol) from the integration of past ecological and hazard mitigation protocols, 
emphasizing regional watershed-based issues and flood hazards. The study's second objective 
develops a framework for the extraction of relational data from the Protocol and the process of 
measuring it using quantitative social-ecological network analysis (SENA) measures. SENA is an 
interdisciplinary methodology of social network analysis (SNA) that addresses social and 
transboundary environmental issues (Sayles, et al., 2019; Poplier, 2018). The framework 
distinguishes social and ecological actors or nodes, such as organizations and natural features, as 
discrete identities and includes all nodes' relationships while applying qualitative and quantitative 
approaches (Sayles, 2019). This includes network visualization, such as sociograms, that connect 
actors by their relationship to other actors and plans in the region (Poplier, 2018). This study's 
combination of plan evaluation and network analysis methods constitutes the Network Analysis 
and Plan Evaluation (NAPE) framework.  
The third objective of this study applies the NAPE framework to two LWI long-term 
resilience outcomes. NAPE analyzes and identifies key stakeholders and actor-coordination in 
plans across Region 7 (herein referred to as the Region) of the LWI. An Actor-Coordination or 
Actor-Plan Network and Network of Plans is created from the extraction of relational data based 
on organizations and plans mentioned and participating in several types of plans in the Region. 
The network is measured using centrality measures, a type of social network analysis, and 
compared across organization type and administrative or government level. Statistical analysis of 

4 
 
variance (ANOVA) compares the differences between centrality measures and, thus, determines 
which organizations are more involved in developing and coordinating plans in the Region. 

5 
 
2. NETWORK ANALYSIS AND PLAN EVALUATION FRAMEWORK 
This study adopts a network analysis and plan evaluation (NAPE) framework for extracting 
and analyzing relational data from plan evaluation (PE) and social-ecological network analysis 
(SENA) methods. Five steps make up the NAPE framework (Figure 1). The NAPE framework can 
be used to answer questions regarding multiple themes or issues, including multi-jurisdictional 
watershed governance, socio-ecological fit, and polycentric governance (Brody, Highfield, & 
Carrasco, 2004; Guerrero, McAllister, Corcoran, & Wilson, 2013; Boamah, 2018). 
2.1. Themes of Plan Evaluation 
The first part of the framework determines what Plan Evaluation principle, or principles, 
is appropriate for answering the study question. The themes or principles of the Protocol serve as 
the basis for the theoretical framing and components of NAPE. Plan evaluation methodologies 
were developed to measure the quality of plans for issues such as ecosystem and natural resource 
management, hazard mitigation, and climate adaptation (Brody, 2003; Berke, Smith, & Lyles, 
2012; Stevens & Senbel, 2017). These methodologies often involve plan evaluation frameworks 
that score plans based on the presence or absence of plan components. Past protocols are based on 
four to six different principles of plan quality (Berke & Godschalk, 2009; Brody, 2008; Lyles, 
Berke, & Smith, 2014). For example, in hazard mitigation and ecosystem management, plan 
components include a combination of direction-setting and action-oriented principles (Lyles, 
Berke, & Smith, 2014; Horney, et al., 2017).  

6 
 
 
Figure 1. The Network Analysis and Plan Evaluation (NAPE) Framework.

7 
 
  
Direction-setting principles include fact base, goals and objectives, and policies, tools, and 
strategies. Action-oriented principles include inter-organizational coordination and capabilities, 
implementation and monitoring, and participation (Lyles, Berke, & Smith, 2014). Early PE uses 
included only direction-setting principles, with later studies adding action-oriented principles 
(Brody, 2003). Other studies divide plan quality principles by internal and external dimensions, 
with fact base, goals, policies, and implementation being internal and coordination and 
participation being external (Berke, Smith, & Lyles, 2012). 
 
This study includes the following six principles: goals and objectives; fact base; policies, 
tools, and strategies; coordination, collaboration, and capabilities; implementation and monitoring; 
and participation (Table 1). The Protocol was adapted from existing literature plan evaluation 
protocols and frameworks to include watershed and flood-related hazards and multi-jurisdictional 
elements (Appendix A). 
The goals and objectives principle outlines a plan's reflected values and future desires 
(Berke, Smith, & Lyles, 2012).  Sub-principles include the overarching vision, coordination, and 
hazard loss (Berke, Smith, & Lyles, 2012; Lyles, Berke, & Smith, 2014). Creating a network of 
planning goals in a region can determine if jurisdictions share similar goals that align with each 
other and do not conflict (Bacău, Grădinaru, & Hersperger, 2020). For example, the consistency 
of plan goals can be measured using exponential random graph models (ERGMs). ERGMs are 
logistical regression models that can be used to analyze networks (Hunter, Goodreau, & Handcock, 
2008).  ERGMs can predict the probability of a tie being in a network while including node and 
edge variables (Hunter, Goodreau, & Handcock, 2008). The fact base principle provides empirical 
data and background information that serves as the plan's foundation and can identify consistency 
across jurisdictions (Berke, Smith, & Lyles, 2012; Lyles, Berke, & Smith, 2014). 

8 
 
Table 1. The Plan Evaluation Coding Protocol Principles. 
Principle 
Sub-Principle 
Goals & Objectives 
Coordination, hazard loss, overarching vision 
Fact Base 
Federal and state policies and programs, hazards identification and 
risk assessment, human ownership and problem identification, 
resource inventory, and vulnerability assessment 
Policies, 
Tools 
& 
Strategies 
Incentive tools, preventative land use policies, property protection 
policies, public information policies, and regulatory tools 
Coordination, 
Collaboration 
& 
Capabilities 
 
Implementation 
& 
Monitoring 
 
Participation 
Organizational involvement, public engagement 
Note. The coordination, collaboration, and capabilities, and implementation and monitoring principles do not have 
sub-principles because their nodes are not distinct enough to be categorized further (Appendix A).  
 
Sub-principles include resource inventory, human ownership, human impacts and problem 
identification, hazards assessment, vulnerability assessment, and infrastructure (Brody, 2008).The 
policies, tools, and strategies principle includes regulatory tools, incentive tools, preventative 
land-use policies, property protection policies, and public information policies that will be applied 
to achieve the goals in the plan (Brody, Highfield, & Carrasco, 2004). The coordination, 
collaboration, and capabilities principle involves the collaborative effort and conflict management 
between local, parish, and regional entities (Berke, Smith, & Lyles, 2012). Actor-coordination 
networks can reveal those most involved in plan development and which jurisdictions collaborate 
(Li, et al., 2020). The implementation and monitoring principle consists of who is responsible for 
enforcing and updating the plan and how it will be monitored (Brody, Highfield, & Carrasco, 2004; 
Lyles, Berke, & Smith, 2014). The participation principle identifies organizational involvement 
and public engagement in the plan's development (Berke, Smith, & Lyles, 2012; Lyles, Berke, & 
Smith, 2014). The coordination, collaboration and capabilities; implementation and monitoring; 
and participation principles can be measured using degree centrality measures, measures related 
to the position of a node or an actor in a network, and community detection techniques.  

9 
 
2.2. Theoretical Framework or Questions 
 
The second part of the framework identifies the study question and its theme or Plan 
Evaluation principle. For example, the mission of the LWI is to improve floodplain management 
and reduce flooding in the state by establishing multi-jurisdictional watershed planning across 
watershed regions (Louisiana Watershed Initiative, 2018). The LWI’s overall efforts would align 
with the multi-jurisdictional watershed governance theme. Any principle of the Protocol can 
answer questions related to this theme. Goals and objectives can identify consistencies between 
hazard loss and coordination goals. Coordination, collaboration, and capabilities can identify if 
jurisdictions have the resources and tools available to reduce flood risk and increase resiliency in 
the regions or if the jurisdiction is coordinating planning efforts with federal, state, regional, and 
other local government bodies.  
 
Other theoretical frameworks that can be examined using NAPE are polycentric 
governance, a governance system with multiple centers or bodies of decision-making, and socio-
ecological fit (Boamah, 2018; Sayles, et al., 2019). Coordination, collaboration, and capabilities 
can identify the interaction of different actors and which levels of government are more involved 
in the development of plans. In comparison, implementation and monitoring identify actors that 
will be involved in future updates to the plan. When plan objectives do not align with the ecological 
system it impacts, socio-ecological fit can have implications for natural resource governance and 
environmental management (Guerrero, McAllister, Corcoran, & Wilson, 2013). Fact base and 
policies, tools, and strategies can identify sensitive habitats and whether management policies can 
reduce human impacts on the environment or if future projects or policies could adversely impact 
habitats.  

10 
 
2.3. Network Units 
 
The third part of the framework identifies which nodes and ties are to be created from the 
Plan Evaluation principle. A node or vertex is the basic unit of a network (Borgatti, Everett, & 
Johnson, 2018). Nodes are discrete entities such as actors, organizations, plans, policies, projects, 
and natural features. Nodes are either social or ecological in socio-ecological network analysis 
(SENA), (Sayles, et al., 2019). Social nodes include actors, organizations, individuals, policies, 
laws, projects, and other non-ecological units. Ecological nodes include individuals or groups of 
species, ecosystems and habitats, and natural and geographic features. Nodes are connected by ties 
or edges that constitute relationships between nodes. Relationships can be one-way, symmetrical, 
or associative (QSR International Pty Ltd., 2018). Examples include direct and indirect mentions, 
plan participation or coordination, the flow or exchange of information or financial resources, and 
technical assistance and consulting of plan development. Nodes and the relationships between 
them form relational data.  
 
Relational data can be extracted from plan content analysis. Reading plans and manual 
coding is the simplest content analysis method, but extracting and storing data is time-consuming 
and ineffective.  A more practical option is using qualitative analysis software.  An example and 
the program used in this study is NVivo 12, a statistical and qualitative analysis software (QSR 
International Pty Ltd., 2018). Plans can be uploaded and coded in NVivo, creating relational data 
that can either be analyzed in the program or extracted into a tabulated form for statistical analysis 
in other programs such as R or SAS.  
2.4. Network Structures 
 
The fourth part of the framework determines the best network layout or structure to graph 
and visualize the network. Network visualizations are an initial way of understanding and 

11 
 
identifying patterns or gaps in a network according to their ties and node attributes or variables.  A 
sociogram is the direct visualization of the relationships in a network (Borgatti, Everett, & 
Johnson, 2018). Multiple programs can create sociograms, including NVivo, R, and KUMU (QSR 
International Pty Ltd., 2018; R Core Team, 2021; Kumu [Relationship mapping software], 2021). 
A one-mode network has only one node type, while a two-mode or affiliation network has two 
types of nodes (Borgatti, Everett, & Johnson, 2018). An example of a one-mode network is the 
Network of Plans that depicts a one-way relationship between plans that reference each other 
(Figure 2). 
Bipartite networks are two-mode networks that only consist of ties between groups, such 
as plans and organizations (Borgatti, Everett, & Johnson, 2018). The Actor-Plan Coordination 
Network is an example of a bipartite network that illustrates the relationship between plans and 
the organizations mentioned or participated in them (Figure 3).  
Egocentric sociograms consist of the relationships to the network’s ego and its ties or alters 
(Borgatti, Everett, & Johnson, 2018). Whole networks can be graphed and the ego network 
extracted, such as East Baton Rouge Parish’s direct, or one-step, relationships to other 
organizations and plans (Figure 4). 
Geo-spatial networks are mapped based on the geographic coordinates of the nodes (Kumu 
[Relationship mapping software], 2021). In an initial study, the LWI Region 7 comprehensive plan 
goals and objectives were mapped in KUMU based on parish latitude and longitude coordinates 
(Figure 5). 

12 
 
 
Figure 2. One-mode Network of Plans in LWI Region 7. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Two-mode Network of Actor-Plan Communities in LWI Region 7. 
Note. The community or sub-group the node belongs to is characterized by node color.  

13 
 
 
Figure 4. East Baton Rouge Parish Egocentric Network. 
  
 
Figure 5. Goals and Objectives Network of Comprehensive Plans in LWI Region 7. 
Note: St. Helena and Washington Parish do not have comprehensive plans. East Feliciana Parish does not have goals 
that are listed in the Protocol. 
 
 
Networks can also have more than one relationship type. Multiplex networks have multiple 
types of relations. Each network corresponds to a different relationship type, creating separate 
layers in a multiplex network (Magnani, Rossi, & Vega, 2021).  

14 
 
2.5. Network Measures 
 
The fifth part of the framework identifies measures to analyze the network quantitatively. 
Network measures used in SNA literature can be divided into five categories: centrality and 
prestige, basic network demographics, cohesion, antecedents, and similarity and structural 
equivalence (Poplier, 2018). Degree and betweenness centrality measures can quantify the 
interaction of actors in the network (Ingold, 2011). Degree centrality measures the number of ties 
each node has (Borgatti, Everett, & Johnson, 2018). Actors with a high degree of centrality have 
more significant ties and are thus more involved and known to other actors in the network (Ernston, 
Sörlin, & Elmqvist, 2008). Betweenness centrality measures the number of ties an actor has 
between two actors that are not connected themselves or the number of shortest paths each node 
is on (Ingold, 2011; Dong, et al., 2020). Thus, actors with high betweenness centrality can control 
or increase the flow of information between actors and organizations that would otherwise not be 
connected (Long, Cunningham, & Braithwaite, 2013). In other words, those actors, known as 
brokers or boundary spanners, bridge relationships and close gaps in governance and knowledge 
(Long, Cunningham, & Braithwaite, 2013).  Closeness centrality measures the distance between 
two nodes as the shortest path between them (Freeman, 1978). Closeness is the reciprocal of 
farness, the average distance from the node to all other nodes. This metric is not well-suited for 
directed networks (Borgatti, Everett, & Johnson, 2018). Eigenvector centrality measures the 
number of ties each node has, but it also considers the degree of those nodes it is tied to (Borgatti, 
Everett, & Johnson, 2018). In other words, the node will have a higher value if it is linked to nodes 
with a high degree of centrality compared to a low degree centrality value. 
Community detection techniques can reveal subgroups of actors in the network.  These 
subgroups consist of actors that share multiple ties (Borgatti, Everett, & Johnson, 2018). Cliques 

15 
 
are subgroups where every actor is adjacent (Borgatti, Everett, & Johnson, 2018). Subgroups can 
be further identified using the community detection technique, Speaker-listener Label Propagation 
Algorithm (SLPA) that identifies community clusters or overlapping actors in the network. (Xie, 
Szymanski, & Liu, 2013).  
Lastly, whole networks can be analyzed using cohesion and reciprocity measures (Borgatti, 
Everett, & Johnson, 2018). Density is a measure of cohesion equal to the proportion of ties present 
in the network to possible ties (Borgatti, Everett, & Johnson, 2018).  Reciprocity measures how 
often a tie is matched or the proportion of reciprocated ties to the total number of ties (Borgatti, 
Everett, & Johnson, 2018).  
The study presents an example of the NAPE framework by analyzing plans in Region 7 of 
the LWI based on the coordination, collaboration, and capabilities, and participation principle to 
answer questions related to multi-jurisdictional watershed governance. 
 

16 
 
3. CONTEXT FOR DEMONSTRATING NAPE APPLICATION  
The historical August 2016 floods in Louisiana caused widespread physical, economic, and 
emotional devastation across the central and southern parts of the state. The total cost amounted 
to over $8 billion in commercial, residential, and public damage (Terrell, 2016). In addition, this 
disaster exposed gaps in watershed governance and flood risk reduction, prompting Governor 
Edwards to direct state agencies towards creating the LWI (Louisiana Watershed Initiative, 2020). 
The LWI separates Louisiana's watersheds into eight regions (Louisiana Watershed Initiative, 
2020). Each region has a Regional Steering Committee (RSC) that must create its temporary 
governance structure based on planning and development, project implementation, data and 
modeling, outreach and engagement, and creating a representative body (Louisiana Watershed 
Initiative, 2018). Evaluating plans can identify which organization types and levels of government 
are more involved in the planning development and process and the key stakeholders and 
boundary-spanners in a region. These stakeholders may be better equipped to coordinate and 
collaborate and share knowledge and data across jurisdictions in the region.  
The plans in this study consisted of those produced by parishes and their corresponding 
municipalities within the boundaries of the Louisiana Watershed Initiative (LWI) Region 7 
watershed (Figure 6).  LWI Region 7 (the Region) includes the following parishes: Ascension, 
East Baton Rouge, East Feliciana, Iberville, Livingston, St. Charles, St. Helena, St. James, St. John 
the Baptist, St. Tammany, Tangipahoa, Washington, and West Feliciana. This area is located north 
of Lake Pontchartrain in the HUC 08-Lower Mississippi Region and Lower Mississippi-Lake 
Maurepas sub-region (USGS, 2020). Washington Parish is partially located in the HUC 03-South 
Atlantic-Gulf region and Pearl sub-region (USGS, 2020).  

17 
 
Plans collected included parish, municipal, and regional plans in LWI Region 7 published 
between 2000 and 2020. Regional plans were limited to those that included two or more parishes 
in the Region, such as the New Orleans Metro Transportation Plan and the LA SAFE Regional 
Adaptation Plan.  Seven types of plans were included: Comprehensive Master Plans (CMPs); 
Hazard Mitigation Plans (HMPs); Coastal Zone Management Plans (CZMPs); Stormwater 
Management or Master Plans (SWMPs); Recovery, Resiliency, or Adaptation Plans (herein 
collectively referred to as Recovery plans); Transportation Plans (TPs); and Economic 
Development Plans (EDPs).  
 
Figure 6. LWI Region 7 Boundaries.  
Source: (Louisiana Watershed Initiative, 2020).  
 
Comprehensive master plans must describe the future goals and objectives and define the 
parish's vision and contain three or more of the following themes or elements: economic 
development, transportation, housing, infrastructure, recreation, and environment. All but two 
parishes in the Region have a comprehensive master plan (Figure 7). Hazard mitigation plans 

18 
 
must be approved by GOHSEP and FEMA and include all natural hazards. Stormwater 
management plans must be comprehensive for reducing the effects of surface water run-off and 
not a stormwater manual or MS4 permit for stormwater management compliance and 
regulations. Overall, the Region had 68 plans collected. The government-level plans included 53 
parish, 19 municipal, and 6 regional. The plan types included 23 CMPs, 17 HMPs, 11 SWMPs, 8 
TPs, 5 CZMPs, 3 Recovery, and 1 EDP. 
 
Figure 7. Status of Comprehensive Plans in Louisiana Parishes. 
Source: (Douthat, 2020). 
 
Documents were collected by visiting official parish and municipal websites and contacting 
their planning and zoning departments. Local HMP's were available on the Stephenson Disaster 
Management Institute's (SDMI) Hazard Mitigation Plans website (LSU SDMI, 2021). Local 

19 
 
CZMP's were available on the Louisiana Department of Natural Resources (LDNR) Office of 
Coastal Management website (LDNR, 2021). 
 

20 
 
4. IMPLEMENTING NAPE 
 
The methods in this study establish a means of extracting and analyzing relational data 
based on PE and SNA methods and the NAPE framework (Figure 8). Relational data is based on 
ties or relationships between nodes that make up a network. Nodes are not limited to social and 
ecological nodes and can be any discrete unit or concept. The sub-principles and nodes of PE can 
themselves be nodes and have connections to each other by their relationships to plans. Plan 
content can be extracted and analyzed as relational data to answer theoretical questions based on 
geographic scales of governance.  
NVivo 12 was used as the primary data extraction software (QSR International Pty Ltd., 
2018). The software provides an effective means of content analysis, extracting, organizing, and 
storing qualitative and relational data, and exporting relational data in a suitable format for 
statistical analysis in other software. Another advantage of NVivo is the ability to create nodes and 
relationships from plans and store the plan's reference as text. References make it possible to 
review relationships and their explicit mention in plans. References can also be extracted as 
summaries and reports for reading. The steps below define the NVivo process used in this study. 
First, the Protocol was imported into NVivo as nodes and sub-nodes. The plans were also 
imported into NVivo and classified based on plan type and jurisdiction, and a case node was 
created for each plan (Figure 9). Case nodes or cases are nodes in NVivo representing discrete 
units (QSR International Pty Ltd., 2018). In this study, cases include organizations and plans. 
Second, the plans were coded by reading each document and identifying organizations 
mentioned in the plans. A case was created for each organization and classified based on 
organization type. Organization types include government, educational institution, NGO, 
professional service, and private business. The reference to each organization was coded to its 

21 
 
corresponding case node. Coding will create a reference to the text in the plan that is the node's 
source. A directed relationship was created between organizations and plans or plans and plans 
(Table 2; Figure 10). In order to make sure all relationships in the plans were accounted for, a 
second coder repeated the coding process.

22 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Study Methods.

23 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Comprehensive Plans as Case Nodes in NVivo 12. 
 
Table 2. Relationship Types. 
Network Type 
Relationship 
Actor-Plan 
 
Participated, 
sponsored, 
authored, technical assistance, 
mentioned, cited 
Plan-Plan 
Text reference, table reference 
 
Relationships were also flagged to determine whether the organization in the relationship was 
directly involved in plan development or related to a watershed-based or flood hazard issue. 
Flagging the relationships added a tie variable to each relationship. The first variable, Participated, 
indicated whether an organization explicitly participated in the plan development. Participants 
include authors or co-authors, sponsors or funders, technical assistance, or contributors to 
developing the plan or a section. 
 

24 
 
 
Figure 10. Participated Relationships Created in NVivo from Region 7 Plans. 
 
 
The second variable, Watershed, indicated whether an organization and its relationship to 
the plan are related to or assumed to be watershed-based issues. Watershed-based issues include 
those related to flood risk and hazards, vulnerability to hazards, watershed-level policies and 
project implementation, equitable actions and policies to increase resiliency to hazards, response 
to hazards, and climate change. Organizations included but their relationship did not explicitly 
mention a watershed issue were agencies or entities that govern or address watersheds or are 
included in a hazard mitigation, stormwater management, coastal zone management, or recovery 
plan.  
 
Third, case node attributes or variables were assigned to each node. Node attributes 
consisted of geographic, demographic, socio-economic, and capacity data (Table 3). Each 
jurisdiction's geographical coordinates in latitude and longitude were obtained online (Latitude 
and Longitude Finder, 2021). The reference coordinate system is the World Geodetic System 
(WGS84). Demographic and socio-economic data were obtained from the American Community 
Survey's 2019 census estimates and the 2010 U.S. Census Bureau (U.S. Census Bureau, 2019; 
Social Explorer, 2020). Local jurisdictional capacity was measured on a scale of 0-4 to indicate 

25 
 
the presence of a certified planner, certified floodplain manager, professional engineer, or 
landscape architect on staff. Capacity data was obtained by contacting government offices. 
Table 3. Node Attributes and Variables. 
Case Type 
Numeric Attributes 
Categorical Attributes 
Organization 
GEOID/FIPS 
code, 
total 
population, 
population 
density, land area (sq mi), 
median household 
income 
(USD), capacity 
Organization 
type, 
government 
level, 
parish, 
municipality, 
NGO 
type, 
NPO, professional services 
type, 
urban 
area, 
urban 
cluster, population urban and 
rural (%), land area urban and 
rural (% sq mi), geographic 
coordinates (lat long) 
Plan 
GEOID/FIPS 
code, 
total 
population, 
population 
density, land area (sq mi), 
median household 
income 
(USD), capacity 
Plan type, government level, 
parish, 
municipality, 
plan 
year, federal plan, state plan, 
regional 
plan, 
geographic 
coordinates (lat long) 
 
 
 
 
Fourth, the relational network was exported as Excel spreadsheets and separated into the 
Actor-Plan Coordination Network and the Network of Plans. Each spreadsheet has two sheets – 
nodes and ties. The nodes sheet contains each case in the network and its node attributes or 
variables. The ties sheet contains each relationship and any tie or edge attributes, such as whether 
or not the relationship is based on a watershed issue. The Actor-Plan Coordination Network is a 
two-mode network with several relationship types. It can be categorized by whether the 
organization participated in the plan development process or was only mentioned in the plan. The 
Network of Plans is a one-mode network with only two relationship types – direct or indirect 
reference (Bacău, Grădinaru, & Hersperger, 2020).  A direct reference is where the plan is 
explicitly mentioned in the text of the document. An indirect reference is where the plan is only 
mentioned in a table or similar format.  

26 
 
 
Next, the R software was used for social network analysis (R Core Team, 2021). Separate 
nodes and ties data frames were created from each network spreadsheet.  Three additional networks 
were created from the Actor-Plan Coordination Network from organizations that participated in 
plan development, were related to plans through watershed-based issues, and both. The R igraph 
package was then used to graph and measure the networks (Csardi & Nepusz, 2006). They were 
each converted into a one-mode network using the simple count of overlaps method that creates 
relationships between actors that had relationships to the same plan (Murphy & Knapp, 2018). The 
one-mode network was created as a graph for statistical analysis of actors. Degree centrality 
measures were then calculated for each organization and added as a node variable.  
 
A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) model with an effects parameterization was run 
for the effect of the categorical predictors organization type and government level on degree 
centrality and betweenness centrality. The ANOVA model was chosen to identify if there are any 
differences in values between different organization types using the model formula: 
yi = α + βj × xi + ϵi. 
Organization type has five levels or groups – educational institution, government, NGO, 
professional service, and private business. Government level has five levels – federal, state, 
regional, parish, and municipal. Tukey's Honest Significant Differences (HSD) multiple 
comparisons of means test was then run to quantify differences between groups. 
 

27 
 
5. RESULTS  
 
The overall hypothesis of the study asks whether the NAPE framework can be used to 
evaluate multi-jurisdictional watershed-based planning issues effectively. In order to answer 
questions related to multi-jurisdictional watershed governance, two of the strategic areas listed in 
the LWI’s long-term resilience outcomes, capability and capacity, and integrated planning, served 
as the basis for establishing what theme of plan evaluation will be followed. First, coordination, 
collaboration, and capabilities evaluates federal, state, regional, and local coordination in the 
Region (Figure 11). A plan that has greater coordination on different levels of government can 
achieve more excellent capability and capacity to address flood risks. Capacity includes access to 
additional staff, support, data, and financial resources. This study addresses the current capability 
and capacity of the Region by assessing which levels of government are most involved in planning.  
 
 
Figure 11. Using NAPE to Evaluate Multi-jurisdictional Watershed Governance under the 
Coordination, Collaboration, and Capabilities Principle.  
 
 
Second, participation evaluates the organizational involvement in the Region (Figure 12). 
Each LWI Region must create its temporary governance structure to support regional watershed-
based floodplain management (Louisiana Watershed Initiative, 2018). Regional planning efforts 

28 
 
can be best achieved by including various organizations and individuals to understand better the 
impacts of flooding and access more diverse information. This study addresses the current 
capability and capacity of the Region by also assessing which organization types are most involved 
in planning.  
 
Figure 12. Using NAPE to Evaluate Multi-jurisdictional Watershed Governance under the 
Participation Principle. 
 
5.1. Network Units 
 
The Actor-Plan Network included relationships between plans and government, 
educational institutions, NGOs, professional services, and private businesses; relationships 
between plans and organizations that address watershed-based and flood hazard issues, policies, 
and programs. Over 300 government organizations were identified in the Actor-Plan Network, 
followed by 138 non-governmental organizations (NGOs) (Figure 13). Professional services, 
private businesses, and educational institutions had 65, 30, and 27 identified organizations. 
Government organizations consisted of 170 parish, 119 municipal, 35 state, 34 federal, and 15 
regional. There were 110 main offices within the government organizations, 34 planning and 
development, 25 environmental, 25 public works, 20 public safety, 15 economic development, and 
15 transportation departments. NGOs consisted of 42 philanthropic and charity, 21 community-

29 
 
based, 15 environmental, 11 economic development, 9 religious and faith-based, 8 advocacy, 6 
professional, 6 healthcare and public health, 4 public policy, 3 trade organizations, 2 educational 
organizations, and 1 service organization. Professional service consisted of 30 planning and 
development, 17 engineering, 7 environmental, and 6 architecture consultants. Only one consultant 
was identified for law, landscape, and marketing each.  
 
 
Figure 13. Count of Actor Nodes by Organization Type in the Actor-Plan Network. 
 
  
The number of ties identified in the Actor-Plan Network was 1295, but only 589 of those 
ties participated in planning and development. Seven hundred eighty of the total number of ties 
were related to watershed issues. Most ties were between Parish organizations and parish plans, 
with the second greatest number being between NGOs and Parish plans, followed by 
municipalities and parish plans. Most local government organization ties between parishes and 
municipalities were with plans within the same jurisdiction with over 200 ties and about 100 ties 
outside of the plan jurisdiction (Figure 14).  
 

30 
 
 
Figure 14. Count of Local Government Actor-Plan Ties by Jurisdiction. 
 
 
The majority of ties in the Actor-Plan Network were between parish organizations and 
plans in the same jurisdiction, followed by parish organization and plan ties in different 
jurisdictions (Figure 15). There are fewer ties between municipal organizations and their plans 
than parish organizations and municipal plans in a different parish or extra-Parish. However, parish 
plans that were analyzed and parish organizations that were identified in the network far outnumber 
municipal plans and organizations.  
The number of ties in the Network of Plans was 182. One hundred twenty-three of these 
ties were direct text references, and 131 ties were related to watershed issues. The coded plans 
reference 48 CMPs, 34 HMPs, 24 SWMPs, 19 CZMPs, 23 TPs, 10 EDPs, 9 recovery plans, and 
15 uncategorized (other) plans altogether. Other plans include small area plans for communities 
within parishes or municipalities. The majority of ties were between parish plans followed by 
municipal and parish plans. All but one local government level tie between parishes and 
municipalities was within the same jurisdiction (Figure 16). 
 

31 
 
 
Figure 15. Count of Local Government Actor-Plan Ties by Jurisdiction and Parish or Municipality. 
Note. P and M refer to Parish and Municipal. Extra-parish refers to parishes in different jurisdictions. Extra-municipal 
refers to different municipalities in the same parish. There were no ties between organizations and plans in different 
parishes and municipalities.  
 
 
Figure 16. Count of Local Government Plan-Plan Ties by Jurisdiction. 
 
The majority of Plan Network ties were between plans in the same parish (Figure 17). Ties 
between parish plans outnumber those between parishes and municipalities and municipal plans 

32 
 
within the same municipality. There were no ties between municipal plans that are in a different 
municipality.  
 
 
Figure 17. Count of Local Government Plan-Plan Ties by Jurisdiction and Parish and Municipality. 
 
Additionally, 112 Region 7 jurisdictional plans were identified in the Plan Network whose 
documents were not found through the study's collection process. The parishes' hazard mitigation 
plan mainly identified these plans in a Planning and Regulatory Capability Assessment table. The 
existing plans were reviewed once more to determine if the unavailable plan was a section or 
element of one of these plans. A total of 21 plans were identified as a section or element in an 
analyzed plan. An additional nine were stated as being in development. The existing plan in the 
network replaced those plans that were a section in an existing plan. All other unavailable plans 
were listed as an indirect reference. An additional node variable was created to identify whether a 
plan was available or not.  

33 
 
5.2. Network Structure 
The Actor-Plan Coordination Network revealed a densely connected network between 
organizations and plans (Figure 18).  Federal, state, and regional entities are connected in the center 
of the network. Municipalities are mostly found at the outermost edges of the network. Parishes 
are spread throughout the entirety of the network. Organization types that are not government are 
also more likely on the network’s edge. Organizations closer to the center of the network may have 
more influence on the network, such as exchanging information and financial resources.  
Removing the higher administrative levels (federal, state, and regional) from the network 
shows a disconnect between parishes and municipalities in different jurisdictions and gaps in the 
network (Figure 19). Local government parishes and municipalities are only connected by those 
in the same jurisdiction except for some parishes within the same metro area. Examples include 
the Baton Rouge metro area, which connects East Baton Rouge and Ascension Parish, and the 
New Orleans metro area, which connects Orleans, St. Charles, St. John the Baptist, St. Bernard, 
St. Tammany Parish, and Tangipahoa Parish.  Some jurisdictions in the same metro area, such as 
East Baton Rouge and Ascension Parish, are connected locally. However, not all parishes in the 
same metro area or served by the same Metropolitan Planning Organization (MPO) are connected. 
Thus, the Region is poorly connected on a watershed level and needs greater collaboration between 
jurisdictions not in the same parish.

34 
 
 
Figure 18. The Actor-Plan Coordination Network. 
Note. The network does not include only mentioned organizations (i.e., did not explicitly participate) in a plan. 
 

35 
 
 
 
Figure 19. Actor-Plan Coordination Network at the Local Government Level. 
Note. The network does not include organizations only mentioned in a plan that did not participate.

36 
 
The Network of Plans revealed the Region 7 plans' numerous references and ties to state 
and regional plans. (Figure 20). Parish and municipal plans are more likely to reference federal, 
state, and regional plans than local government plans in different parishes or jurisdictions. 
References were also made to plans outside of Region 7, including the parishes of Jefferson, 
Plaquemines, and Orleans. However, these references were primarily made in transportation 
compared to other types of plans.  
Filtering hazard mitigation and transportation plans from the Plan Network revealed an 
even more significant gap in regional planning (Figure 21). Removing these plan types that are a 
primary effort between federal and state organizations and local jurisdictions shows a disconnect 
between local jurisdictional planning. Additionally, state plans are absent from the filtered Plan 
Network.

37 
 
 
Figure 20. Geo-spatial Network of Plans in LWI Region 7. 
Note. State, regional, and federal plans were placed in western Mississippi from east to west, respectively.   
 

38 
 
 
Figure 21. Geo-spatial Network of Plans in LWI Region 7 Excluding Hazard Mitigation and Transportation Plan.

39 
 
5.3. Centrality Measures by Organization Type 
Centrality measures can determine an organization’s level of involvement in the Region 
and are influenced by an organization’s position in the network (Borgatti, Everett, & Johnson, 
2018). All organizations that were identified in the Actor-Plan Coordination Network were 
measured, and centrality measures were compared by organization type and government level 
(Appendix C). The organizations with the highest two-mode degree centrality value in the 
participated network were the Louisiana Department of Transportation (LADOTD), FEMA, the 
Stephenson Disaster Management Institute (SDMI), United States Army Corps of Engineers 
(USACE), and the Governor’s Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Preparedness 
(GOHSEP).  The organizations with the highest betweenness centrality value in the participated 
network were SDMI, LADOTD, GOHSEP, FEMA, and the Center for Planning Excellence 
(CPEX). Closeness and eigenvector centrality measures were similar for all organizations. 
Government had the greatest average two-mode degree centrality value followed closely 
by educational institutions (Table 5). However, educational institutions had a higher average one-
mode degree centrality value. Two-mode degree centrality indicates that government had an 
average greater number of ties to plans than other organizations, and the average number of ties a 
government entity had to a plan was three. One-mode degree centrality indicates that educational 
institutions had a greater average number of ties to organizations with the same plan, and the 
average number of ties was 111. Thus, government and educational institutions were more likely 
to be involved or mentioned in planning documents than other organizations.  
Educational institutions had the greatest average betweenness and eigenvector centrality. 
Its average betweenness value of 759 means that, on average, an educational institution falls along 
the shortest path between two other nodes that many times (Table 5). Organizations with a high 

40 
 
betweenness centrality value are more likely to share information between two nodes that would 
otherwise not be connected (Borgatti, Everett, & Johnson, 2018). Eigenvector centrality is a 
variation of degree centrality in which more weight is given to nodes that are connected to other 
nodes with a high degree of centrality (Borgatti, Everett, & Johnson, 2018). Thus, educational 
institutions are more likely to bridge gaps between organizations or jurisdictions and are better 
connected to network nodes than other organization types. 
Table 5. Average Centrality Measures by Organization Type in the Actor-Plan Coordination 
Network. 
Organization Type 
Degree (2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
Educational Institution 
2.6923 
111.3077 
759.5952 
0.0009 
0.1429 
Government 
3.0066 
91.1016 
404.0914 
0.0009 
0.1385 
NGO 
1.2571 
78.8071 
59.3630 
0.0009 
0.0771 
Private Business 
1.0667 
65.9333 
39.3833 
0.0009 
0.0668 
Professional Services 
1.5385 
45.2769 
86.6481 
0.0008 
0.0599 
 
A plot of two-mode degree centrality by organization type shows possible differences 
between the groups (Figure 22). From ANOVA results, higher F-statistic values indicate higher 
means variability between groups or the between-group variance is much larger than the within-
group variance. An ANOVA model of the effect of organization type on two-mode degree 
centrality was used to test the following hypothesis: 
H0: The mean two-mode degree centrality values of organization types are equal. 
HA: The mean two-mode degree centrality values of organization types are not equal. 
The ANOVA model of the effect of organization type on two-mode degree centrality had 
an F-statistic value of 73.94 and a significant p-value of less than 0.05. Therefore, we can assume 
that at least one of the groups differs from another. The output from the Tukey HSD test resulted 
in no-confidence interval overlaps of 0 between pairwise comparisons. Based on a p-value less 

41 
 
than 0.05, three pairwise comparison groups differ from government – NGO, professional services, 
and private business.  
 
Figure 22. Two-mode Degree Centrality by Organization Type in the Actor-Plan Coordination 
Network. 
 
Government had the greatest overall one-mode degree centrality value or the highest 
number of ties in every Actor-Coordination Network compared to other organizations (Figure 23). 
NGOs followed with the second greatest overall value in every network, even though they did not 
have the second greatest average value (Table 5). NGO’s have more ties in the network compared 
to educational institutions, but there were significantly more NGOs identified than educational 
institutions.  
 
 

42 
 
 
Figure 23. Sum of One-mode Degree Centrality Measures by Organization Type in the Two-mode 
Actor Coordination Networks. 
 
A plot of one-mode degree centrality by organization type shows possible differences 
between the groups (Figure 24). An ANOVA model of the effect of organization type on one-
mode degree centrality was used to test the following hypothesis: 
H0: The mean one-mode degree centrality values of organization types are equal. 
HA: The mean one-mode degree centrality values of organization types are not equal.  
The ANOVA model of the effect of organization type on one-mode degree centrality had 
an F-statistic value of 118.6 and a significant p-value of less than 0.05. Therefore, we can assume 
that at least one of the groups differs from another. The output from the Tukey HSD test resulted 
in no-confidence interval overlaps of 0 between pairwise comparisons. Based on a p-value less 
than 0.05, government and professional services differ from one another. Therefore, government 

43 
 
has significant two-mode and one-mode degree centrality values compared to professional 
services. 
 
Figure 24. One-mode Degree Centrality by Organization Type. 
 
A plot of betweenness centrality by organization type shows possible differences between 
the groups (Figure 25). An ANOVA model of the effect of organization type on betweenness 
centrality was used to test the following hypothesis: 
H0: The mean betweenness centrality values of organization types are equal. 
HA: The mean betweenness centrality values of organization types are not equal.  
The ANOVA model of the effect of organization type on betweenness centrality had an F-
statistic value of 8.95 and a significant p-value of less than 0.05. Therefore, we can assume that at 
least one of the groups differs from another. The output from the Tukey HSD test resulted in no-
confidence interval overlaps of 0 between pairwise comparisons. Based on a p-value less than 
0.05, educational institution differs from NGO and professional services. 

44 
 
 
Figure 25. Betweenness Centrality by Organization Type in the Actor-Plan Coordination Network. 
 
5.4. Centrality Measures by Government Level  
Federal government had the greatest average degree centrality measures overall (Table 6). 
Regional and state government follows second or third in all other centrality measures. We can 
conclude that the federal government was mentioned more often in plans than other government 
levels, but this does not necessarily mean that they had a greater level of participation. Scientific 
data, maps, and figures obtained from federal documents and websites were often cited in plans, 
especially hazard mitigation plans.  
Table 6. Average Centrality Measures by Government Level in the Actor-Plan Coordination 
Network. 
Government Level 
Degree (2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
Federal 
5.1429 
172.9714 1139.7898 
0.0010 
0.2776 
Municipal 
2.2857 
73.1327 
218.0829 
0.0008 
0.1018 
Parish 
2.5391 
68.2109 
238.5800 
0.0008 
0.1039 
State 
4.2647 
134.7353 809.2840 
0.0009 
0.2110 
Regional 
5.1429 
133.4286 514.9056 
0.0009 
0.2305 

45 
 
Planning departments had the greatest average degree and eigenvector centrality, and 
public safety departments had the greatest average betweenness centrality (Figure 26). Closeness 
centrality values among organization types have slight variance due to the disconnect between 
organizations in the two-mode network. 
 
Figure 26. Mean Degree Centrality Measures by Government Level and Department in the Actor-
Plan Coordination Network. 
 
A plot of two-mode degree centrality by government level shows possible differences 
between the groups (Figure 27). An ANOVA model of the effect of government level on two-
mode degree centrality was used to test the following hypothesis: 
H0: The mean two-mode degree centrality values of government level are equal. 
HA: The mean two-mode degree centrality values of government level are not equal. 

46 
 
The ANOVA model of the effect of organization type on two-mode degree centrality had 
an F-statistic value of 41.84 and a significant p-value of less than 0.05. Therefore, we can assume 
that at least one of the groups differs from another. The output from the Tukey HSD test resulted 
in no-confidence interval overlaps of 0 between pairwise comparisons. Based on a p-value less 
than 0.05, federal differs from parish and municipal organizations. 
 
Figure 27. Two-mode Degree Centrality by Government Level in the Actor-Plan Coordination 
Network. 
 
A plot of one-mode degree centrality by government level shows possible differences 
between the groups (Figure 28). An ANOVA model of the effect of government level on one-
mode degree centrality was used to test the following hypothesis: 
H0: The mean one-mode degree centrality values of government level are equal. 
HA: The mean one-mode degree centrality values of government level are not equal. 

47 
 
The ANOVA model of the effect of organization type on two-mode degree centrality had 
an F-statistic value of 67.08 and a significant p-value of less than 0.05. Therefore, we can assume 
that at least one of the groups differs from another. The output from the Tukey HSD test resulted 
in no-confidence interval overlaps of 0 between pairwise comparisons. Based on a p-value less 
than 0.05, state and parish organizations differ from one another.  
 
Figure 28. One-mode Degree Centrality by Government Level in the Actor-Plan Coordination 
Network. 
 
A plot of betweenness centrality by government level shows possible differences between 
the groups (Figure 29). An ANOVA model of the effect of government level on betweenness 
centrality was used to test the following hypothesis: 
H0: The mean betweenness centrality values of government level are equal. 
HA: The mean betweenness centrality values of government level are not equal. 

48 
 
The ANOVA model of the effect of government level on betweenness centrality had an F-
statistic value of 13 and a significant p-value that is less than 0.05. Therefore, we can assume that 
at least one of the groups differs from another. The output from the Tukey HSD test resulted in 
no-confidence interval overlaps of 0 between pairwise comparisons. Based on a p-value less than 
0.05, state differs from parish and municipal organizations.  
 
Figure 29. Betweenness Centrality by Government Level in the Actor-Plan Coordination Network. 
 
In addition to government organizations, the LWI identified water management entities in 
each LWI Region that are stakeholders and authorities in the state’s watershed management. 
Entities include districts with statutory powers such as gravity drainage, levee, and planning 
districts (Figure 30). The Actor-Plan Network identified which of these districts were mentioned 
or involved in Region 7 plans.  

49 
 
 
Figure 30. LWI Region 7 Water Management Entities. 
Note. This figure is a composite of a table covering multiple pages in “Regional Watershed Management” a briefing 
book for LWI regional steering committees that describes roles and authorities of key watershed management bodies 
chartered under Louisiana law. Water management entities are the region's organizational stakeholders with statutory 
powers (Louisiana Watershed Initiative, 2020).  
However, only 23 of the nearly 40 entities listed in the guidebook were identified in the 
network (Table 7). The districts had low centrality values overall and rarely participated in a plan. 
Planning and Development districts were most involved compared to other types, followed by 
Levee districts. Gravity Drainage districts play an important role in localized project development 
and development permitting, yet our sample of 64 plans only documents their participation 
formally in one planning process, the Tangipahoa Parish Recovery Plan (2017), which also led to 
more unified drainage permitting in the parish. Comprehensive plans for Ascension Parish, 

50 
 
Livingston Parish, and St. Tammany Parish (3 out of 11) mention local drainage districts, and one 
hazard mitigation plan out of 13 mentions them.  
The Pontchartrain Levee District was the only levee district to participate in a plan. Its plan 
participation included the East Baton Rouge Parish Hazard Mitigation Plan and the St. James 
Parish Stormwater Management Plan. The St. Tammany Levee District was mentioned in the St. 
Tammany Parish Comprehensive, Hazard Mitigation, and Coastal Zone Management Plan (Table 
7).   
Besides the levee districts, there is only one body in Region 7 that could be classified as 
having a multi-jurisdictional watershed management mandate, the Amite River Basin 
Commission. They authored the Amite River Basin Floodplain Management Plan, and provided 
technical assistance to the Central City and East Baton Rouge Parish Stormwater Plans. Besides 
the La Safe Regional Adaption Plan, where they are mentioned, no other documents from 
jurisdictions within the Amite River Basin mention them. The ARBC Floodplain Management 
Plan mentions Hazard Mitigation Plans from Ascension Parish, EBR Parish, and Livingston 
Parish, but no other planning documents. However, they do make reference to the majority of 
jurisdictions within their watershed area, as well as several state agencies on the Watershed 
Council, and important federal partners such as and FEMA, EPA, USACE, and USGS. Notably, 
the ARBC plan does not mention gravity drainage districts in Ascension or Livingston Parish, 
following the trend for these bodies to appear sparsely in official planning documents in our 
sample.

51 
 
Table 7. LWI Region 7 Water Management Entities and their Centrality Measures. 
Node 
District Type 
Degree (2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
Washington Parish Communication Dist. 
Communication 
1.00 
25.00 
0.26 
0.00 
0.02 
East Feliciana Parish Development Dist. 
Economic Development 
1.00 
19.00 
2.86 
0.00 
0.02 
Livingston Parish Gravity Drainage Dist. No. 2 
Gravity Drainage 
2.00 
73.00 
240.85 
0.00 
0.08 
Tangipahoa Parish Consolidated Drainage Dist. 
Gravity Drainage 
2.00 
55.00 
352.77 
0.00 
0.03 
East Ascension Consolidated Gravity Drainage Dist. 
Gravity Drainage 
1.00 
37.00 
16.48 
0.00 
0.05 
West Ascension Consolidated Gravity Drainage Dist. 
Gravity Drainage 
1.00 
37.00 
16.48 
0.00 
0.05 
Livingston Parish Gravity Drainage Dist. No. 1 
Gravity Drainage 
1.00 
23.00 
2.18 
0.00 
0.02 
Livingston Parish Gravity Drainage Dist. No. 5 
Gravity Drainage 
1.00 
23.00 
2.18 
0.00 
0.02 
Livingston Parish Gravity Drainage Dist. No. 6 
Gravity Drainage 
1.00 
23.00 
2.18 
0.00 
0.02 
Livingston Parish Gravity Drainage Dist. No. 7 
Gravity Drainage 
1.00 
23.00 
2.18 
0.00 
0.02 
St. Tammany Parish, Gravity Drainage District No. 3 
Gravity Drainage 
1.00 
13.00 
5.20 
0.00 
0.01 
St. Tammany Parish, Gravity Drainage District No. 4 
Gravity Drainage 
1.00 
13.00 
5.20 
0.00 
0.01 
St. Tammany Parish, Gravity Drainage District No. 5 
Gravity Drainage 
1.00 
13.00 
5.20 
0.00 
0.01 
Tangipahoa Parish Gravity Drainage Dist. No. 4 
Gravity Drainage 
1.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
Tangipahoa Parish Gravity Drainage Dist. No. 5 
Gravity Drainage 
1.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
Pontchartrain Levee Dist. 
Levee 
5.00 
54.00 
283.86 
0.00 
0.11 
STLDCD 
Levee 
3.00 
31.00 
325.61 
0.00 
0.04 
Lafourche Basin Levee Dist. 
Levee 
1.00 
32.00 
9.02 
0.00 
0.04 
CRPC 
Planning and Development 
9.00 
312.00 
1930.65 
0.00 
0.54 
SCPDC 
Planning and Development 
7.00 
170.00 
377.07 
0.00 
0.28 
NORPC 
Planning and Development 
9.00 
116.00 
862.51 
0.00 
0.25 
ARBC 
Soil and Water Conservation 
4.00 
135.00 
115.92 
0.00 
0.27 
Tangipahoa Parish Water Dist. #1 
Water 
2.00 
55.00 
352.77 
0.00 
0.03 

52 
 
6. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION 
Following the NAPE framework to evaluate the content of plans in LWI Region 7 can 
reveal the current level of multi-jurisdiction coordination and collaboration in the Region that can 
be used to guide future watershed governance structures. The NAPE framework effectively-
identified planning issues in the Region by showing a lack of planning efforts between local 
jurisdictions. The Actor-Plan Coordination Network shows a densely connected region of 
organizations and plans that includes organizations and jurisdictions outside the Region. However, 
the Actor-Plan Coordination Network’s structure suggests the need for much greater coordination 
between jurisdictions outside of their parish. In addition, local plans are unlikely to reference plans 
in other jurisdictions. Federal, state, and regional organizations are also more likely to participate 
in the coordination and development of plans than other local government organizations. In 
conclusion, Region 7 lacks integrated planning and coordination with other jurisdictions in the 
region and organization types that are not related to government.  
The Region would benefit from a governance structure that increases organizational and 
public participation in the planning process and the integration of planning and coordination with 
other jurisdictions in the Region. Educational institutions are a possible candidate to bridge the 
exchange of information and planning across the Region because of their high betweenness 
centrality scores. SDMI, an educational institution, had one of the highest degree centrality values 
in the network and connected all but two of the HMPs in the Region to one another. A possible 
solution to the Region’s disconnectedness is to propose a similar entity that participates in regional 
planning or a watershed-governance plan requiring all jurisdictions' participation. The network is 
already well-connected by watershed-based issues as identified by the network visualizations.  

53 
 
Overall, NAPE can prove helpful by answering initial questions to help guide the efforts 
of the LWI and determine its overall capacity for regional watershed governance. Relational data 
from the planning documents can identify what organizations and plans are connected in the 
Region. However, the NAPE framework is subjective and limited to the content included in plans. 
Planning documents are not likely to present the complete network of coordination in a Region, 
but plans can give valuable insight into current capacity and understanding the structure of 
networks. Interviews and surveys can be used in conjunction with NAPE to fill gaps and review 
the accuracy of relational data. The NAPE process is also time-consuming, but NVivo increases 
the efficiency of plan content analysis compared to other qualitative analysis methods. 
Additionally, plan evaluation requires a team to review the reliability of each planning 
coder. Discrepancies can arise in what content should and should not be coded and which node 
content may fall into, but NVivo makes the coding process easily traceable. A study’s network 
measures must also be applied appropriately. Finally, not all network measures are suited or meant 
to analyze all types of networks. The results from network measures can also be interpreted in 
numerous ways.  
Further NAPE studies can go beyond organizational involvement by analyzing the 
consistency of the plans regarding their goals and objectives, policies and strategies, and available 
data. Inconsistences identified in plans can determine if regions are more vulnerable to natural 
hazards. The NAPE framework can also answer questions related to the other LWI strategic areas 
for long-term resilience outcomes and planning efforts. Furthermore, the NAPE framework can 
prove valuable for other planning efforts besides the LWI. Metropolitan planning organizations, 
planning and development departments, planning consultants and professionals, and 
administrative governments can utilize NAPE for various planning efforts on different scales. 

54 
 
Spatial plan evaluations can examine land-use policies in different areas of a jurisdiction that may 
conflict with each other or increase vulnerability to natural hazards (Malecha, Woodruff, & Berke, 
2021). The evaluation can help guide the integration of policies and coordination in a region to 
reduce flood risks. Longitudinal or temporal plan evaluations explore how a plan network changes 
over time (Woodruff, et al., 2021). NAPE can be used to compare how a network of plans or actor-
coordination changes over time or after significant events such as declared natural disasters. These 
evaluations can be applied at different administrative scales, and the NAPE process can be 
effectively used as a first step in improving planning efforts across regions and over time.

55 
 
APPENDIX A. THE PLAN EVALUATION CODING PROTOCOL 
Table 8. The Plan Evaluation Coding Protocol for Multi-jurisdictional Watershed Governance. 
Principle 
Sub-principle 
Node 
Goals and objectives 
Coordination 
Increase mitigation information availability 
Goals and objectives 
Coordination 
Increase local coordination 
Goals and objectives 
Coordination 
Increase regional coordination 
Goals and objectives 
Hazard loss 
Improve stormwater management and drainage 
Goals and objectives 
Hazard loss 
Protect public safety 
Goals and objectives 
Hazard loss 
Reduce damage to property 
Goals and objectives 
Hazard loss 
Reduce economic loss 
Goals and objectives 
Hazard loss 
Reduce impacts on environment and natural 
areas 
Goals and objectives 
Hazard loss 
Reduce social inequities 
Goals and objectives 
Overarching vision 
Increase resiliency to natural hazards 
Goals and objectives 
Overarching vision 
Promote sustainable development 
Fact base 
Federal 
and 
state 
policies and programs 
FEMA flood mitigation assistance program 
identified 
Fact base 
Federal 
and 
state 
policies and programs 
FEMA hazard mitigation assistance program 
identified 
Fact base 
Federal 
and 
state 
policies and programs 
FEMA hazard mitigation grant program 
identified 
Fact base 
Federal 
and 
state 
policies and programs 
FEMA 
pre-hazard 
mitigation 
program 
identified 
Fact base 
Federal 
and 
state 
policies and programs 
FEMA public assistance program identified 
Fact base 
Federal 
and 
state 
policies and programs 
Community development block grant program 
identified 
Fact base 
Federal 
and 
state 
policies and programs 
National 
Flood 
Insurance 
Program 
participation 
Fact base 
Federal 
and 
state 
policies and programs 
Community Rating System participation 
Fact base 
Federal 
and 
state 
policies and programs 
Certified floodplain manager identified 
Fact base 
Hazards identification 
and risk assessment 
Factors used in prioritizing hazards 
Fact base 
Hazards identification 
and risk assessment 
Classification system for prioritizing hazards 
Fact base 
Hazards identification 
and risk assessment 
Location and boundaries of hazardous areas for 
coastal storms 
Fact base 
Hazards identification 
and risk assessment 
Magnitude and severity of coastal storms 
(table cont'd.) 
 
 

56 
 
Principle 
Sub-principle 
Node 
Fact base 
Hazards identification 
and risk assessment 
 
Likelihood and frequency of flood events 
Fact base 
Hazards identification 
and risk assessment 
Location and boundaries of hazardous areas for 
flood hazards 
Fact base 
Hazards identification 
and risk assessment 
Location and boundaries of Special Flood 
Hazard Areas (SFHA) 
Fact base 
Hazards identification 
and risk assessment 
Separate characteristics of flood hazards 
Fact base 
Hazards identification 
and risk assessment 
Information of previous flood events 
Fact base 
Hazards identification 
and risk assessment 
Likelihood of coastal storms 
Fact base 
Hazards identification 
and risk assessment 
Separate characteristics of coastal storms 
Fact base 
Hazards identification 
and risk assessment 
Information of previous coastal storms 
Fact base 
Hazards identification 
and risk assessment 
Climate change impacts 
Fact base 
Hazards identification 
and risk assessment 
Coastal erosion impacts 
Fact base 
Hazards identification 
and risk assessment 
Repetitive loss properties/structures 
Fact base 
Hazards identification 
and risk assessment 
Repetitive 
loss 
properties/structures 
loss 
estimates 
Fact base 
Human 
ownership 
and 
problem 
identification 
Public ownership patterns for floodplain 
mapped 
Human 
ownership 
and 
problem 
identification 
Private ownership patterns for floodplain 
mapped 
Fact base 
Human 
ownership 
and 
problem 
identification 
Management status identified for floodplain 
Fact base 
Human 
ownership 
and 
problem 
identification 
Watershed network mapped 
Fact base 
Human 
ownership 
and 
problem 
identification 
Rate of wetlands development 
 
 
 
(table cont'd.) 
 
 

57 
 
Principle 
Sub-principle 
Node 
Fact base 
Human 
ownership 
and 
problem 
identification 
Nutrient loading 
Fact base 
Human 
ownership 
and 
problem 
identification 
Water pollution 
Fact base 
Resource inventory 
Watershed boundaries/edges mapped 
Fact base 
Resource inventory 
Watershed boundaries/edges described 
Fact base 
Resource inventory 
Floodplain boundaries/edges mapped 
Fact base 
Resource inventory 
Floodplain boundaries/edges described 
Fact base 
Resource inventory 
Wetlands and riparian habitat mapped 
Fact base 
Resource inventory 
Wetlands and riparian habitat described 
Fact base 
Resource inventory 
Water resources mapped 
Fact base 
Resource inventory 
Water resources described 
Fact base 
Resource inventory 
Natural vegetation cover mapped 
Fact base 
Resource inventory 
Climate described 
Fact base 
Resource inventory 
Surface hydrology described 
Fact base 
Resource inventory 
Subsurface hydrology described 
Fact base 
Vulnerability 
assessment 
Vulnerable populations exposed to hazards 
identified 
Fact base 
Vulnerability 
assessment 
State facilities exposed to hazards identified 
Fact base 
Vulnerability 
assessment 
Critical facilities exposed to hazards identified 
Fact base 
Vulnerability 
assessment 
Danger of hazardous facilities or hazardous 
materials identified 
Fact base 
Vulnerability 
assessment 
Environmental impacts of a disaster described 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Incentive tools 
Density bonuses in exchange for wetland and 
riparian habitat protection 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Incentive tools 
Clustering away from wetland and riparian 
habitat 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Incentive tools 
Transfer of Development Rights away from 
wetland and riparian habitat 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Incentive tools 
Preferential tax treatments to protect wetland 
and riparian habitat 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Incentive tools 
Mitigation banking 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Incentive tools 
Tax abatement  
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Incentive tools 
Land acquisition/buyout programs 
(table cont'd.) 
 
 

58 
 
Principle 
Sub-principle 
Node 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Preventative land use 
policies 
Density of land use 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Preventative land use 
policies 
Density transfer provision 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Preventative land use 
policies 
Hazards included in land suitability analysis 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Preventative land use 
policies 
Setbacks or buffer zones 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Preventative land use 
policies 
Permitted land use 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Preventative land use 
policies 
Permit for floodplain development 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Preventative land use 
policies 
Floodplain regulation ordinance 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Preventative land use 
policies 
Subdivision ordinance 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Preventative land use 
policies 
Zoning ordinance 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Preventative land use 
policies 
Development moratorium 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Preventative land use 
policies 
Natural hazard specific ordinance 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Property 
protection 
policies 
Elevation of structures 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Property 
protection 
policies 
Building standards 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Property 
protection 
policies 
Freeboard requirement 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Property 
protection 
policies 
Adjust public infrastructure 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Property 
protection 
policies 
Retrofit existing public facilities 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Property 
protection 
policies 
Post-disaster capital improvements adjustments 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Property 
protection 
policies 
Building design change/considerations for 
flooding 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Property 
protection 
policies 
Stormwater and drainage controls 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Property 
protection 
policies 
Retrofitting of private structures 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Property 
protection 
policies 
Flood control structures 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Public 
information 
policies 
Encourage insurance purchase 
(table cont'd.) 
  

59 
 
Principle 
Sub-principle 
Node 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Public 
information 
policies 
Post signs indicating hazardous areas 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Public 
information 
policies 
Tech assistance for developers\public 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Public 
information 
policies 
Voluntary real estate hazard disclosure 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Public 
information 
policies 
Mandatory real estate hazard disclosure 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Public 
information 
policies 
Special study\impact fees assessment 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Public 
information 
policies 
Site public facilities 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Public 
information 
policies 
Land use change identified 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Public 
information 
policies 
Emergency response capability 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Public 
information 
policies 
Emergency shelter identified 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Public 
information 
policies 
Evacuation route identified 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Public 
information 
policies 
Emergency plans identified 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Regulatory tools 
Restrictions on native vegetation removal 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Regulatory tools 
Controls on construction activities to protect 
wetland and riparian habitat 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Regulatory tools 
Conservation zones or overlay districts to 
protect wetland and riparian habitat 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Regulatory tools 
Creation of protected areas 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Regulatory tools 
Urban growth boundaries that do not include 
wetland and riparian habitat 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Regulatory tools 
Targeted growth areas away from wetland and 
riparian habitat 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Regulatory tools 
Capital Improvements Programming to protect 
wetland and riparian habitat 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Regulatory tools 
Site plan review to protect wetland and riparian 
habitat 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
Regulatory tools 
Wetland and riparian habitat restoration actions 
Policies tools and 
strategies 
 
Regulatory tools 
 
Actions to protect wetland and riparian habitat 
crossing into other jurisdictions 
 
(table cont'd.) 
 
 

60 
 
Principle 
Sub-principle 
Node 
Coordination, 
capabilities, 
and 
collaboration 
 
 
Coordination with federal organizations 
Coordination, 
capabilities, 
and 
collaboration 
 
 
Coordination with state organizations 
Coordination, 
capabilities, 
and 
collaboration 
 
 
Coordination within county/parish 
Coordination, 
capabilities, 
and 
collaboration 
 
 
Coordination with local governments within 
watershed 
Coordination, 
capabilities, 
and 
collaboration 
 
 
Coordination with organizations to protect 
wetland and riparian habitat 
Coordination, 
capabilities, 
and 
collaboration 
 
 
Coordination with private sector 
Coordination, 
capabilities, 
and 
collaboration 
 
 
Links between science and policy organizations 
Coordination, 
capabilities, 
and 
collaboration 
 
 
Joint database production specified 
Coordination, 
capabilities, 
and 
collaboration 
 
 
Position of the local jurisdiction within the 
watershed specified 
Coordination, 
capabilities, 
and 
collaboration 
 
 
Integration with other plans/policies in the 
region specified 
Coordination, 
capabilities, 
and 
collaboration 
 
 
Conflict management processes outlined 
(table cont'd.) 
 
 

61 
 
Principle 
Sub-principle 
Node 
Coordination, 
capabilities, 
and 
collaboration 
 
 
Commitment of financial resources specified 
Implementation and 
monitoring 
Clear 
designation 
of 
responsibility 
for 
implementation specified 
Implementation and 
monitoring 
Provision of technical assistance identified  
Implementation and 
monitoring 
Identification 
of 
costs 
or 
funding 
for 
implementation outlined 
Implementation and 
monitoring 
Clear timetable for implementation outlined 
Implementation and 
monitoring 
Regular updates and plan assessment specified 
Implementation and 
monitoring 
 
Enforcement of ordinances specified 
Implementation and 
monitoring 
Identification 
of 
obstacles 
faced 
in 
implementation 
Implementation and 
monitoring 
Monitoring specified for plan effectiveness 
Implementation and 
monitoring 
Monitoring specified for policy response to 
new scientific information  
Implementation and 
monitoring 
 
Tracking losses post-disaster events 
Implementation and 
monitoring 
Tracking use of post-disaster funds 
Implementation and 
monitoring 
Public involvement in updates/monitoring 
Implementation and 
monitoring 
 
Identifies parties to be involved in future 
updates/monitoring 
Implementation and 
monitoring 
Documents process to develop and update plan 
Participation 
Organizational 
involvement 
Identifies 
organizations 
and 
individuals 
involved in plan development 
Participation 
Organizational 
involvement 
Identifies why organizations and individuals 
were involved 
Participation 
Organizational 
involvement 
Identifies which agencies and organizations 
provide data incorporated in plan 
Participation 
Organizational 
involvement 
Identifies which agencies and organizations 
provide technical assistance in plan preparation 
 
 
 
(table cont'd.) 
 
 

62 
 
Principle 
Sub-principle 
Node 
Participation 
Public engagement 
Local 
citizens 
groups 
or 
non-profit 
organizations 
focused 
on 
 environmental 
protection, 
emergency 
preparedness, access and functional needs 
populations, etc. 
Participation 
Public engagement 
Natural disaster or safety related school 
program 
Participation 
Public engagement 
Ongoing public education or information 
program 
Participation 
Public engagement 
Public/private partnership initiatives addressing 
disaster-related issues 
Participation 
Public engagement 
Citizen advisory committee  
Participation 
Public engagement 
Information 
distribution 
(newsletter 
or 
brochures) 
Participation 
Public engagement 
Open meetings/workshops 
Participation 
Public engagement 
Public notice 
Participation 
Public engagement 
Targeted outreach (focus groups, surveys, or 
questionnaires) 
Participation 
Public engagement 
Website 
 
 

63 
 
APPENDIX B. PROTOCOL FOR EXTRACTING RELATIONAL DATA 
1. Data Coding and Analysis of Documents in NVivo 
i. Project Preparation 
1. A project is created in NVivo titled “Parish Assessment.” 
2. The documents collected are uploaded into NVivo. File 
classification is based on Parish/Municipality and type of planning 
document.  
3. Each document that is filed in NVivo will be coded in alphabetical 
order by Parish, followed by their municipalities in alphabetical 
order. 
ii. Plan Content Coding 
1. Identify text or data in the document that corresponds to a node in 
the Plan Evaluation Coding Protocol that was created in NVivo as 
a hierarchy of nodes.  
2. Code a sentence/paragraph/table/image/graph to the corresponding 
node listed in the Plan Evaluation Protocol. This will create a source 
to the reference of the node.  
3. Identify actors in the document and create a case node for each. 
Cases include social and ecological actors. (Note: The term “case” 
and “case node” can be used interchangeably.)  
4. Assign a case attribute to each case node.  
2. Text Search Query in NVivo 

64 
 
i. A text search query in NVivo finds all occurrences of a word, phrase, or 
concept in selected files that results in a coding summary of references. 
Words and phrases can be searched individually or combined using Boolean 
operators such as “OR”, “AND”, and “NOT”. To specify the proximity of 
words from one another, use the tilde “~” followed by the number of words 
from each other (e.g., “hazard flood”~10).   
ii. The results of the query can be created as a new code or case or merged into 
an existing code or case. This is especially useful for evaluation of plans 
using the Protocol. Words or phrases from each sub-principle in the 
Protocol can be searched for and merged to the corresponding code.  
iii. Plan Content Coding  
1. Choose node (sub-principle) from the Protocol that will be used in 
the text search query.  
2. For our process, each individual will choose one sub-principle at a 
time to work on independently. We will discuss those sub-principle 
results before continuing onto another (see step 4).  
3. Document trial-and-error process of determining the appropriate 
search criteria for the query.  
4. The process will be documented in a shared work log between each 
individual.  
5. Save the results to Query Results in NVivo. The query results will 
be named after the corresponding node.  

65 
 
6. Each individual will save their own results from the same query that 
corresponds to each node. For example, Individual 1 saves their 
results as “[node name] 1”, and Individual 2 saves their results as 
“[node name] 2”.  
7. Compare and discuss results with lab members to determine if and 
whose search criteria and results are acceptable.  
8. Once a search criteria is agreed upon, code references from the new 
code to the existing Protocol node.  
9. Not all references that are included in the query results will be 
coded. Lab members will agree upon which references to code.  
iv. Advantages and Limitations 
1. Overall, the text search query process was less time-consuming than 
coding each document individually. The preliminary results took an 
average of 30 minutes to decide on what was the most appropriate 
search criteria for the floodplain boundaries mapped node. 
Previously, we analyzed the Ascension Parish Comprehensive 
Master Plan but did not complete the process because it went over 
3-4 hours. However, there is a risk of not coding all references with 
the query process. A possible solution is still being discussed, but 
this process can be a more efficient alternative to the individual 
document analyzation.

66 
 
APPENDIX C. ACTOR LIST WITH CENTRALITY MEASURES 
Table 9. Organization Centrality Measures in the Actor-Plan Coordination Network. 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
LCTCS 
Educational Institution NA 
1.00 
69.00 
667.39 
0.00 
0.06 
LSU 
Educational Institution NA 
1.00 
207.00 
938.61 
0.00 
0.41 
LSU CSS 
Educational Institution NA 
1.00 
134.00 
505.93 
0.00 
0.16 
LSU PD 
Educational Institution NA 
3.00 
16.00 
1.12 
0.00 
0.02 
SDMI 
Educational Institution NA 
8.00 
169.00 
5286.51 
0.00 
0.24 
Southern Uni. PD 
Educational Institution NA 
9.00 
16.00 
1.12 
0.00 
0.02 
UNO 
Educational Institution NA 
3.00 
49.00 
32.70 
0.00 
0.07 
UNO-CHART 
Educational Institution NA 
1.00 
149.00 
236.01 
0.00 
0.21 
UNO-PLUS 
Educational Institution NA 
1.00 
115.00 
288.74 
0.00 
0.12 
Flanders Marine Inst. 
Educational Institution NA 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
Fletcher 
Technical 
CC 
Educational Institution NA 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
LSU AgCenter 
Educational Institution NA 
1.00 
375.00 
9312.84 
0.00 
0.52 
LSU G&A 
Educational Institution NA 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
LSU 
Landscape 
Architecture 
Educational Institution NA 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
Nicholls State Uni. 
Educational Institution NA 
1.00 
130.00 
157.27 
0.00 
0.15 
Northshore Technical 
CC 
Educational Institution NA 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
Southern Uni. 
Educational Institution NA 
1.00 
199.00 
579.09 
0.00 
0.30 
Tulane Uni. Water 
Inst. 
Educational Institution NA 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
ULL 
Educational Institution NA 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
Southeastern LA Uni. Educational Institution NA 
18.00 
105.00 
1351.06 
0.00 
0.10 
BRCC 
Educational Institution NA 
1.00 
47.00 
17.49 
0.00 
0.07 
(table cont’d.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

67 
 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LSU PBRC 
Educational Institution NA 
1.00 
47.00 
17.49 
0.00 
0.07 
River Parishes CC 
Educational Institution NA 
1.00 
22.00 
10.77 
0.00 
0.03 
TAMU-TTI 
Educational Institution NA 
1.00 
134.00 
162.56 
0.00 
0.22 
UNO 
Pontchartrain 
Inst. 
Educational Institution NA 
2.00 
57.00 
12.09 
0.00 
0.06 
UNOTI 
Educational Institution NA 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
FEMA 
Government 
Federal 
1.00 
424.00 
8184.38 
0.00 
0.91 
NOAA 
Government 
Federal 
1.00 
296.00 
4517.60 
0.00 
0.53 
NWS 
Government 
Federal 
2.00 
50.00 
62.69 
0.00 
0.10 
USACE 
Government 
Federal 
1.00 
389.00 
5116.40 
0.00 
0.88 
USDOC 
Government 
Federal 
1.00 
221.00 
1012.20 
0.00 
0.28 
USEPA 
Government 
Federal 
12.00 
263.00 
2520.53 
0.00 
0.55 
USGS 
Government 
Federal 
4.00 
332.00 
4582.30 
0.00 
0.71 
USHUD 
Government 
Federal 
4.00 
341.00 
2651.37 
0.00 
0.57 
LA Sea Grant 
Government 
Federal 
1.00 
145.00 
189.22 
0.00 
0.19 
CB 
Government 
Federal 
1.00 
334.00 
3897.60 
0.00 
0.71 
EIA 
Government 
Federal 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
SA 
Government 
Federal 
2.00 
62.00 
207.86 
0.00 
0.07 
NMFS 
Government 
Federal 
1.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
NWRC 
Government 
Federal 
2.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
USCG 
Government 
Federal 
1.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
USDA 
Government 
Federal 
2.00 
201.00 
1360.84 
0.00 
0.33 
USDHS 
Government 
Federal 
2.00 
109.00 
334.52 
0.00 
0.16 
USDOI 
Government 
Federal 
1.00 
155.00 
301.19 
0.00 
0.18 
USDOJ 
Government 
Federal 
1.00 
123.00 
58.75 
0.00 
0.18 
USDOT 
Government 
Federal 
1.00 
216.00 
485.59 
0.00 
0.39 
USEDA 
Government 
Federal 
1.00 
155.00 
301.19 
0.00 
0.18 
USFWS 
Government 
Federal 
2.00 
223.00 
1761.56 
0.00 
0.33 
(table cont’d.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

68 
 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
USNPS 
Government 
Federal 
2.00 
228.00 
991.12 
0.00 
0.30 
USNRCS 
Government 
Federal 
4.00 
124.00 
74.23 
0.00 
0.18 
FHA 
Government 
Federal 
1.00 
135.00 
73.65 
0.00 
0.24 
FTA 
Government 
Federal 
1.00 
156.00 
250.88 
0.00 
0.24 
CDC 
Government 
Federal 
1.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
DRA 
Government 
Federal 
1.00 
57.00 
12.09 
0.00 
0.06 
MARAD 
Government 
Federal 
1.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
NHTSA 
Government 
Federal 
1.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
USED 
Government 
Federal 
1.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
USHHS 
Government 
Federal 
1.00 
199.00 
586.17 
0.00 
0.24 
USNRC 
Government 
Federal 
1.00 
44.00 
16.99 
0.00 
0.06 
USSBA 
Government 
Federal 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
USVA 
Government 
Federal 
1.00 
118.00 
133.79 
0.00 
0.12 
Abita Springs Town 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
18.00 
1128.25 
0.00 
0.02 
Abita Springs Town 
P&Z 
Government 
Municipal 
3.00 
2.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
Abita Springs Town 
PW 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
2.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
Albany Town 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
31.00 
72.96 
0.00 
0.03 
Angie Village 
Government 
Municipal 
3.00 
25.00 
0.26 
0.00 
0.02 
Baker City 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
298.00 
1345.84 
0.00 
0.53 
Baker City SB 
Government 
Municipal 
3.00 
16.00 
1.12 
0.00 
0.02 
Bayou Sorrel 
Government 
Municipal 
2.00 
22.00 
1.67 
0.00 
0.01 
Bogalusa City 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
27.00 
103.80 
0.00 
0.02 
Bogalusa City FD 
Government 
Municipal 
18.00 
25.00 
0.26 
0.00 
0.02 
Bogalusa City P&Z 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
2.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
Bogalusa City PD 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
25.00 
0.26 
0.00 
0.02 
Bogalusa City SB 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
25.00 
0.26 
0.00 
0.02 
Central City 
Government 
Municipal 
23.00 
282.00 
1302.57 
0.00 
0.54 
(table cont’d.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

69 
 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
Clinton Town 
Government 
Municipal 
4.00 
50.00 
174.00 
0.00 
0.08 
Covington City 
Government 
Municipal 
4.00 
46.00 
452.24 
0.00 
0.08 
Denham Springs City 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
236.00 
1113.91 
0.00 
0.38 
Donaldsonville City 
Government 
Municipal 
2.00 
237.00 
982.94 
0.00 
0.37 
Folsom Village 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
20.00 
795.25 
0.00 
0.02 
Franklinton Town 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
25.00 
0.26 
0.00 
0.02 
Franklinton Town PD Government 
Municipal 
13.00 
25.00 
0.26 
0.00 
0.02 
French 
Settlement 
Village 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
217.00 
970.95 
0.00 
0.33 
Gonzales City 
Government 
Municipal 
2.00 
158.00 
523.35 
0.00 
0.33 
Gonzales City P&Z 
Government 
Municipal 
20.00 
22.00 
10.77 
0.00 
0.03 
Gonzales City PW 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
9.00 
0.47 
0.00 
0.02 
Gramercy Town 
Government 
Municipal 
8.00 
53.00 
191.25 
0.00 
0.08 
Greensburg Town 
Government 
Municipal 
3.00 
9.00 
0.07 
0.00 
0.00 
Grosse Tete Village 
Government 
Municipal 
4.00 
27.00 
87.31 
0.00 
0.02 
Hammond City 
Government 
Municipal 
2.00 
161.00 
1144.66 
0.00 
0.24 
Hammond City P&Z 
Government 
Municipal 
2.00 
20.00 
6.29 
0.00 
0.03 
Independence Town 
Government 
Municipal 
6.00 
46.00 
31.34 
0.00 
0.06 
Jackson Town 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
21.00 
22.48 
0.00 
0.02 
Kentwood Town 
Government 
Municipal 
2.00 
46.00 
31.34 
0.00 
0.06 
Killian Town 
Government 
Municipal 
13.00 
10.00 
0.58 
0.00 
0.01 
Livingston Town 
Government 
Municipal 
5.00 
111.00 
149.93 
0.00 
0.13 
Lutcher Town 
Government 
Municipal 
16.00 
66.00 
196.85 
0.00 
0.11 
Madisonville Town 
Government 
Municipal 
3.00 
126.00 
383.50 
0.00 
0.15 
Mandeville City 
Government 
Municipal 
9.00 
142.00 
1449.44 
0.00 
0.22 
Mandeville City P&Z Government 
Municipal 
4.00 
8.00 
0.11 
0.00 
0.00 
Maringouin Town 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
27.00 
87.31 
0.00 
0.02 
Montpelier Village 
Government 
Municipal 
2.00 
9.00 
0.07 
0.00 
0.00 
Norwood Village 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
21.00 
22.48 
0.00 
0.02 
(table cont’d.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

70 
 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
Pearl River Town PD 
Government 
Municipal 
2.00 
16.00 
2.25 
0.00 
0.02 
Plaquemine City 
Government 
Municipal 
2.00 
129.00 
1011.24 
0.00 
0.13 
Ponchatoula City 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
62.00 
312.99 
0.00 
0.09 
Port Vincent Village 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
202.00 
447.82 
0.00 
0.31 
Rosedale Village 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
10.00 
1.06 
0.00 
0.00 
Roseland Town 
Government 
Municipal 
2.00 
46.00 
31.34 
0.00 
0.06 
Slaughter Town 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
21.00 
22.48 
0.00 
0.02 
Sorrento Town 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
147.00 
288.87 
0.00 
0.27 
Springfield Town 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
10.00 
0.58 
0.00 
0.01 
St. Francisville Town 
Government 
Municipal 
8.00 
28.00 
127.26 
0.00 
0.04 
St. Gabriel City 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
142.00 
1117.80 
0.00 
0.17 
Sun Village 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
16.00 
2.25 
0.00 
0.02 
Tangipahoa Village 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
46.00 
31.34 
0.00 
0.06 
Tickfaw Village 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
46.00 
31.34 
0.00 
0.06 
Varnado Village 
Government 
Municipal 
2.00 
25.00 
0.26 
0.00 
0.02 
Walker Town 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
125.00 
239.69 
0.00 
0.20 
White Castle Town 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
129.00 
1011.24 
0.00 
0.13 
Wilson Village 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
21.00 
22.48 
0.00 
0.02 
Zachary City 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
299.00 
1353.52 
0.00 
0.55 
Belle Chasse CDP 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
Buras CDP 
Government 
Municipal 
2.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
Convent CDP 
Government 
Municipal 
2.00 
48.00 
31.39 
0.00 
0.06 
Edgard CDP 
Government 
Municipal 
2.00 
32.00 
9.02 
0.00 
0.04 
Garyville CDP 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
49.00 
25.72 
0.00 
0.08 
Golden 
Meadow 
Town 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
Gonzales City FD 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
9.00 
0.47 
0.00 
0.02 
Grand Isle Town 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
Hammond City PW 
Government 
Municipal 
2.00 
20.00 
6.29 
0.00 
0.03 
(table cont’d.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

71 
 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
Hester CDP 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
63.00 
73.75 
0.00 
0.10 
Houma City 
Government 
Municipal 
4.00 
208.00 
556.80 
0.00 
0.27 
Jean Lafitte Town 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
Killona CDP 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
44.00 
16.99 
0.00 
0.06 
LaPlace CDP 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
62.00 
97.28 
0.00 
0.10 
Lemannville CDP 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
37.00 
16.48 
0.00 
0.05 
Maurepas 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
50.00 
61.24 
0.00 
0.08 
Meraux CDP 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
Metairie CDP 
Government 
Municipal 
2.00 
141.00 
195.86 
0.00 
0.18 
Morgan City City 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
Paulina CDP 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
63.00 
73.75 
0.00 
0.10 
Prairieville CDP 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
48.00 
23.84 
0.00 
0.09 
Raceland CDP 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
Reserve CDP 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
44.00 
16.99 
0.00 
0.06 
Slidell City 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
199.00 
322.99 
0.00 
0.31 
Thibodaux City 
Government 
Municipal 
2.00 
208.00 
556.80 
0.00 
0.27 
Vacherie CDP 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
63.00 
73.75 
0.00 
0.10 
Venice CDP 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
Addis Town 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
Brusly Town 
Government 
Municipal 
3.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
Folsom Village P&Z 
Government 
Municipal 
7.00 
4.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
Port Allen City 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
123.00 
58.75 
0.00 
0.18 
Amite City Town 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
35.00 
7.87 
0.00 
0.03 
Burnside 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
22.00 
10.77 
0.00 
0.03 
Folsom Village PD 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
4.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
Folsom Village PW 
Government 
Municipal 
3.00 
4.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
Hammond 
City 
Industrial Board 
Government 
Municipal 
2.00 
35.00 
7.87 
0.00 
0.03 
Manchac 
Government 
Municipal 
1.00 
35.00 
7.87 
0.00 
0.03 
(table cont’d.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

72 
 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
CATS 
Government 
NA 
1.00 
148.00 
216.63 
0.00 
0.27 
RPTA 
Government 
NA 
16.00 
64.00 
83.59 
0.00 
0.09 
CRSC 
Government 
NA 
1.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
Ascension Parish 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
281.00 
1343.85 
0.00 
0.71 
Ascension 
Parish 
OHSEP 
Government 
Parish 
3.00 
7.00 
0.99 
0.00 
0.01 
Ascension 
Parish 
P&Z 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
48.00 
23.84 
0.00 
0.09 
Ascension Parish SB 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
30.00 
48.38 
0.00 
0.05 
Ascension Parish SO 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
50.00 
53.78 
0.00 
0.10 
East 
Baton 
Rouge 
Parish 
Government 
Parish 
5.00 
389.00 
4353.76 
0.00 
0.86 
BRFD 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
16.00 
1.12 
0.00 
0.02 
BRPD 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
16.00 
1.12 
0.00 
0.02 
East 
Baton 
Rouge 
Parish GIS 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
29.00 
9.42 
0.00 
0.05 
East 
Baton 
Rouge 
Parish P&Z 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
47.00 
17.49 
0.00 
0.07 
East 
Baton 
Rouge 
Parish SB 
Government 
Parish 
3.00 
16.00 
1.12 
0.00 
0.02 
East 
Baton 
Rouge 
Parish SO 
Government 
Parish 
3.00 
16.00 
1.12 
0.00 
0.02 
MOHSEP 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
98.00 
315.22 
0.00 
0.11 
East Feliciana Parish 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
200.00 
840.88 
0.00 
0.33 
East Feliciana Parish 
Development Dist. 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
19.00 
2.86 
0.00 
0.02 
East Feliciana Parish 
OHSEP 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
7.00 
1.19 
0.00 
0.00 
East Feliciana Parish 
P&Z 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
19.00 
2.86 
0.00 
0.02 
(table cont’d.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

73 
 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
Iberville Parish 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
231.00 
1698.87 
0.00 
0.38 
Iberville Parish GIS 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
22.00 
1.67 
0.00 
0.01 
Iberville 
Parish 
OHSEP 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
10.00 
1.06 
0.00 
0.00 
Iberville Parish PW 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
10.00 
1.06 
0.00 
0.00 
Iberville Parish SO 
Government 
Parish 
4.00 
10.00 
1.06 
0.00 
0.00 
Livingston Parish 
Government 
Parish 
3.00 
288.00 
1888.19 
0.00 
0.60 
Livingston 
Parish 
Gravity 
Drainage 
Dist. No. 2 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
73.00 
240.85 
0.00 
0.08 
Livingston 
Parish 
P&Z 
Government 
Parish 
6.00 
23.00 
2.18 
0.00 
0.02 
LOHSEP 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
64.00 
96.41 
0.00 
0.07 
Orleans Parish ORS 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
24.00 
7.06 
0.00 
0.03 
St. Charles Parish 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
207.00 
1252.97 
0.00 
0.46 
St. 
Charles 
Parish 
P&Z 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
4.00 
0.05 
0.00 
0.00 
St. Charles Parish PW Government 
Parish 
2.00 
4.00 
0.05 
0.00 
0.00 
St. Helena Parish 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
195.00 
1532.70 
0.00 
0.31 
St. Helena Parish ED 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
9.00 
0.07 
0.00 
0.00 
St. Helena Parish FD 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
9.00 
0.07 
0.00 
0.00 
St. 
Helena 
Parish 
OHSEP 
Government 
Parish 
3.00 
9.00 
0.07 
0.00 
0.00 
St. Helena Parish SB 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
9.00 
0.07 
0.00 
0.00 
St. James Parish 
Government 
Parish 
3.00 
196.00 
711.82 
0.00 
0.42 
St. James Parish HR 
Government 
Parish 
3.00 
27.00 
8.84 
0.00 
0.04 
St. 
James 
Parish 
OHSEP 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
27.00 
8.84 
0.00 
0.04 
St. James Parish SO 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
27.00 
8.84 
0.00 
0.04 
(table cont’d.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

74 
 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
St. John the Baptist 
Parish 
Government 
Parish 
4.00 
208.00 
648.58 
0.00 
0.51 
St. John the Baptist 
Parish GIS 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
58.00 
51.92 
0.00 
0.10 
St. John the Baptist 
Parish FD 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
25.00 
7.86 
0.00 
0.04 
St. John the Baptist 
Parish OHSEP 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
56.00 
49.37 
0.00 
0.09 
St. John the Baptist 
Parish P&Z 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
59.00 
64.62 
0.00 
0.10 
St. John the Baptist 
Parish PW 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
56.00 
49.37 
0.00 
0.09 
St. John the Baptist 
Parish SB 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
25.00 
7.86 
0.00 
0.04 
St. John the Baptist 
Parish SO 
Government 
Parish 
5.00 
25.00 
7.86 
0.00 
0.04 
St. John the Baptist 
Parish TD 
Government 
Parish 
5.00 
25.00 
7.86 
0.00 
0.04 
St. Tammany Parish 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
192.00 
4454.01 
0.00 
0.39 
St. Tammany Parish 
EVS 
Government 
Parish 
3.00 
17.00 
37.11 
0.00 
0.02 
St. Tammany Parish 
OHSEP 
Government 
Parish 
4.00 
27.00 
262.27 
0.00 
0.02 
St. Tammany Parish 
P&Z 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
17.00 
37.11 
0.00 
0.02 
St. Tammany Parish 
PD 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
16.00 
2.25 
0.00 
0.02 
Tangipahoa Parish 
Government 
Parish 
3.00 
158.00 
1661.22 
0.00 
0.33 
(table cont’d.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

75 
 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
Tangipahoa 
Parish 
Consolidated 
Drainage Dist. 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
55.00 
352.77 
0.00 
0.03 
Tangipahoa 
Parish 
FD 
Government 
Parish 
3.00 
55.00 
352.77 
0.00 
0.03 
Tangipahoa 
Parish 
GIS 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
55.00 
352.77 
0.00 
0.03 
Tangipahoa 
Parish 
OCD 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
24.00 
7.06 
0.00 
0.03 
Tangipahoa 
Parish 
OHSEP 
Government 
Parish 
4.00 
55.00 
352.77 
0.00 
0.03 
Tangipahoa 
Parish 
P&Z 
Government 
Parish 
3.00 
68.00 
298.10 
0.00 
0.04 
Tangipahoa 
Parish 
Water Dist. #1 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
55.00 
352.77 
0.00 
0.03 
Washington Parish 
Government 
Parish 
9.00 
48.00 
512.33 
0.00 
0.05 
Washington 
Parish 
COA 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
25.00 
0.26 
0.00 
0.02 
Washington 
Parish 
Communication Dist. 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
25.00 
0.26 
0.00 
0.02 
Washington 
Parish 
FD 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
25.00 
0.26 
0.00 
0.02 
Washington 
Parish 
OHSEP 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
25.00 
0.26 
0.00 
0.02 
Washington 
Parish 
PD 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
25.00 
0.26 
0.00 
0.02 
Washington 
Parish 
SB 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
25.00 
0.26 
0.00 
0.02 
Washington 
Parish 
SO 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
25.00 
0.26 
0.00 
0.02 
(table cont’d.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

76 
 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
West Feliciana Parish Government 
Parish 
3.00 
127.00 
262.76 
0.00 
0.20 
West Feliciana Parish 
OHSEP 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
8.00 
0.66 
0.00 
0.02 
West Feliciana Parish 
P&Z 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
3.00 
0.16 
0.00 
0.00 
Ascension 
Parish 
P&R 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
37.00 
16.48 
0.00 
0.05 
Ascension Parish TC 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
37.00 
16.48 
0.00 
0.05 
East 
Ascension 
Consolidated Gravity 
Drainage Dist. 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
37.00 
16.48 
0.00 
0.05 
West 
Ascension 
Consolidated Gravity 
Drainage Dist. 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
37.00 
16.48 
0.00 
0.05 
Assumption Parish 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
136.00 
186.81 
0.00 
0.18 
Avoyelles Parish 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
Concordia Parish 
Government 
Parish 
3.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
Build BR 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
East 
Baton 
Rouge 
Parish DTD 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
123.00 
58.75 
0.00 
0.18 
East 
Baton 
Rouge 
Parish DOD 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
47.00 
17.49 
0.00 
0.07 
Iberia Parish 
Government 
Parish 
3.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
Jefferson Parish 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
164.00 
372.38 
0.00 
0.33 
Lafayette Parish 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
Lafourche Parish 
Government 
Parish 
19.00 
136.00 
186.81 
0.00 
0.18 
Livingston 
Parish 
Gravity 
Drainage 
Dist. No. 1 
Government 
Parish 
4.00 
23.00 
2.18 
0.00 
0.02 
(table cont’d.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

77 
 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
Livingston 
Parish 
Gravity 
Drainage 
Dist. No. 5 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
23.00 
2.18 
0.00 
0.02 
Livingston 
Parish 
Gravity 
Drainage 
Dist. No. 6 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
23.00 
2.18 
0.00 
0.02 
Livingston 
Parish 
Gravity 
Drainage 
Dist. No. 7 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
23.00 
2.18 
0.00 
0.02 
Orleans Parish 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
308.00 
2213.16 
0.00 
0.74 
Plaquemines Parish 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
137.00 
146.96 
0.00 
0.24 
Pointe Coupee Parish 
Government 
Parish 
4.00 
206.00 
331.25 
0.00 
0.31 
St. Bernard Parish 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
156.00 
370.02 
0.00 
0.30 
St. John the Baptist 
Parish HA 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
44.00 
16.99 
0.00 
0.06 
St. Landry Parish 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
St. Martin Parish 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
St. Mary Parish 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
STLDCD 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
31.00 
325.61 
0.00 
0.04 
St. Tammany Parish, 
Gravity 
Drainage 
District No. 3 
Government 
Parish 
3.00 
13.00 
5.20 
0.00 
0.01 
St. Tammany Parish, 
Gravity 
Drainage 
District No. 4 
Government 
Parish 
6.00 
13.00 
5.20 
0.00 
0.01 
St. Tammany Parish, 
Gravity 
Drainage 
District No. 5 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
13.00 
5.20 
0.00 
0.01 
(table cont’d.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

78 
 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
Tangipahoa 
Parish 
Gravity 
Drainage 
Dist. No. 4 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
Tangipahoa 
Parish 
Gravity 
Drainage 
Dist. No. 5 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
Terrebonne Parish 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
136.00 
186.81 
0.00 
0.18 
West Baton Rouge 
Parish 
Government 
Parish 
6.00 
224.00 
486.88 
0.00 
0.41 
Ascension Parish PW 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
28.00 
17.84 
0.00 
0.04 
Ascension Parish TD 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
28.00 
17.84 
0.00 
0.04 
BREC 
Government 
Parish 
11.00 
185.00 
431.83 
0.00 
0.27 
Iberville Parish P&R 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
22.00 
1.67 
0.00 
0.01 
Iberville Parish TC 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
22.00 
1.67 
0.00 
0.01 
JeT 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
24.00 
7.06 
0.00 
0.03 
Orleans Parish DOT 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
24.00 
7.06 
0.00 
0.03 
St. James Parish SB 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
28.00 
7.60 
0.00 
0.03 
St. Tammany Parish 
SB 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
14.00 
5.91 
0.00 
0.02 
St. Tammany Parish 
TC 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
5.00 
0.17 
0.00 
0.00 
Tangipahoa 
Parish 
COA 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
Tangipahoa 
Parish 
PW 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
ACOA 
Government 
Parish 
6.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
EBRPLS 
Government 
Parish 
3.00 
47.00 
17.49 
0.00 
0.07 
EBRPSS 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
47.00 
17.49 
0.00 
0.07 
Iberville Parish COA 
Government 
Parish 
2.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
LCOA 
Government 
Parish 
6.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
(table cont’d.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

79 
 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
LA Swift 
Government 
Parish 
3.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
St. James Parish ED 
Government 
Parish 
1.00 
28.00 
7.60 
0.00 
0.03 
Tangipahoa Parish SB Government 
Parish 
1.00 
35.00 
7.87 
0.00 
0.03 
Tangipahoa 
Parish 
TC 
Government 
Parish 
7.00 
35.00 
7.87 
0.00 
0.03 
WBRCOA 
Government 
Parish 
3.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
ARBC 
Government 
Regional 
1.00 
135.00 
115.92 
0.00 
0.27 
CRPC 
Government 
Regional 
1.00 
312.00 
1930.65 
0.00 
0.54 
Pontchartrain Levee 
Dist. 
Government 
Regional 
1.00 
54.00 
283.86 
0.00 
0.11 
SCPDC 
Government 
Regional 
1.00 
170.00 
377.07 
0.00 
0.28 
Acadiana Watershed 
Commission 
Government 
Regional 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
Lafourche 
Basin 
Levee Dist. 
Government 
Regional 
1.00 
32.00 
9.02 
0.00 
0.04 
NORPC 
Government 
Regional 
1.00 
116.00 
862.51 
0.00 
0.25 
CPRA 
Government 
State 
1.00 
173.00 
918.93 
0.00 
0.37 
GOHSEP 
Government 
State 
1.00 
321.00 
4623.01 
0.00 
0.66 
LA SAFE 
Government 
State 
1.00 
127.00 
135.69 
0.00 
0.16 
LADOTD 
Government 
State 
1.00 
423.00 
7450.18 
0.00 
1.00 
LDAF 
Government 
State 
1.00 
76.00 
116.87 
0.00 
0.10 
LDEQ 
Government 
State 
1.00 
251.00 
2266.39 
0.00 
0.60 
LDNR 
Government 
State 
1.00 
185.00 
1631.93 
0.00 
0.27 
LDNR - OCM 
Government 
State 
1.00 
138.00 
252.17 
0.00 
0.17 
LDOH 
Government 
State 
1.00 
181.00 
3700.56 
0.00 
0.22 
LDOH - OPH 
Government 
State 
1.00 
81.00 
897.51 
0.00 
0.09 
LDPS 
Government 
State 
1.00 
25.00 
7.86 
0.00 
0.04 
Port of South LA 
Government 
State 
1.00 
169.00 
513.85 
0.00 
0.29 
(table cont’d.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

80 
 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
Atchafalaya 
Trace 
Commission 
Government 
State 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
LATax 
Government 
State 
1.00 
32.00 
9.02 
0.00 
0.04 
LAWorks 
Government 
State 
1.00 
48.00 
31.39 
0.00 
0.06 
LDCRT 
Government 
State 
1.00 
190.00 
588.36 
0.00 
0.24 
LDOA 
Government 
State 
8.00 
29.00 
9.42 
0.00 
0.05 
LDOE 
Government 
State 
1.00 
126.00 
171.27 
0.00 
0.17 
LDWF 
Government 
State 
1.00 
186.00 
1208.73 
0.00 
0.33 
LED 
Government 
State 
3.00 
137.00 
397.46 
0.00 
0.18 
LOCD 
Government 
State 
1.00 
293.00 
1555.88 
0.00 
0.43 
LOSCO 
Government 
State 
12.00 
32.00 
11.58 
0.00 
0.06 
LRA 
Government 
State 
1.00 
132.00 
247.79 
0.00 
0.18 
LSRRA 
Government 
State 
2.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
LWI 
Council 
on 
Watershed Mgmt. 
Government 
State 
1.00 
146.00 
283.72 
0.00 
0.23 
Port of Greater BR 
Government 
State 
1.00 
134.00 
162.56 
0.00 
0.22 
Port of NO 
Government 
State 
2.00 
119.00 
150.48 
0.00 
0.15 
LA Lt. Gov. Office 
Government 
State 
1.00 
22.00 
1.67 
0.00 
0.01 
LA Seafood 
Government 
State 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
LDOR 
Government 
State 
5.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
LHC 
Government 
State 
7.00 
57.00 
12.09 
0.00 
0.06 
LHSC 
Government 
State 
3.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
LSP 
Government 
State 
2.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
Restore LA 
Government 
State 
6.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
American Red Cross 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
25.00 
7.86 
0.00 
0.04 
Bayou 
Interfaith 
Shared 
Community 
Organizing 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
Capital RC&D 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
(table cont’d.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

81 
 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
CCC 
NGO 
NA 
9.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
CRCL 
NGO 
NA 
3.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
EDF 
NGO 
NA 
2.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
FMG 
NGO 
NA 
6.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
Fnd. for LA 
NGO 
NA 
7.00 
183.00 
597.67 
0.00 
0.19 
GNO, Inc. 
NGO 
NA 
6.00 
121.00 
67.41 
0.00 
0.15 
GRN 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
Lower 
9th 
Ward 
CSED 
NGO 
NA 
2.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
NOVAC 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
NWF 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
Pontchartrain 
Conservancy 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
166.00 
159.47 
0.00 
0.25 
Restore 
the 
Mississippi R. Delta 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
Rockefeller Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
ROR 
NGO 
NA 
5.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
SJPH 
NGO 
NA 
2.00 
27.00 
8.84 
0.00 
0.04 
STEDF 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
20.00 
307.26 
0.00 
0.02 
Walton Family Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
8.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
WEDF 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
25.00 
0.26 
0.00 
0.02 
ZTCC 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
AASHTO 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
American Assc. of 
Port Authorities 
NGO 
NA 
2.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
APA 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
199.00 
798.40 
0.00 
0.24 
Keep St. Tammany 
Beautiful 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
7.00 
5.48 
0.00 
0.01 
Living Cities 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
(table cont’d.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

82 
 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
MBECA 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
37.00 
16.48 
0.00 
0.05 
Natl. 
Assc. 
of 
Realtors 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
37.00 
16.48 
0.00 
0.05 
NOGS 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
NRPA 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
72.00 
148.86 
0.00 
0.11 
RWJF 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
277.00 
1109.88 
0.00 
0.36 
BRAC 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
199.00 
579.09 
0.00 
0.30 
Amite 
City 
Town 
COC 
NGO 
NA 
5.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
Hammond City COC 
NGO 
NA 
13.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
Ponchatoula 
City 
COC 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
AEDC 
NGO 
NA 
5.00 
40.00 
26.43 
0.00 
0.07 
AIA 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
86.00 
43.27 
0.00 
0.08 
BR Health District 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
BRAF 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
182.00 
698.90 
0.00 
0.27 
BRCAC 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
Catholic Charities 
NGO 
NA 
10.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
CHILP 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
23.00 
2.18 
0.00 
0.02 
Christ 
Anointed 
Ministries 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
Collinswood Museum NGO 
NA 
1.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
CRISIS 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
135.00 
177.65 
0.00 
0.22 
First 
Baptist 
Ponchatoula 
NGO 
NA 
14.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
LA Cattlemen's Assc. NGO 
NA 
3.00 
35.00 
7.87 
0.00 
0.03 
LA 
Treasures 
Museum 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
LACES 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
(table cont’d.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

83 
 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
LARF 
NGO 
NA 
2.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
LMA 
NGO 
NA 
3.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
Neighbors in Action 
NGO 
NA 
2.00 
23.00 
2.18 
0.00 
0.02 
Northlake Homeless 
Coalition 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
Northshore 
Community Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
48.00 
110.37 
0.00 
0.06 
Northshore 
Healthcare Alliance 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
Northshore 
Home 
Builders Assc. 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
43.00 
385.15 
0.00 
0.01 
Pennington Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
97.00 
298.01 
0.00 
0.08 
River Rock Church 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
St. Catherine Labouré 
Church Hall 
NGO 
NA 
17.00 
22.00 
1.67 
0.00 
0.01 
Tangilena LTRG 
NGO 
NA 
2.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
Tangipahoa 
Futures 
Network 
NGO 
NA 
2.00 
35.00 
7.87 
0.00 
0.03 
Tangipahoa 
Parish 
Forestry Assc. 
NGO 
NA 
2.00 
35.00 
7.87 
0.00 
0.03 
Tangipahoa 
Parish 
Home Builders Assc. 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
35.00 
7.87 
0.00 
0.03 
TEDF 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
68.00 
298.10 
0.00 
0.04 
Turner Chapel AME 
Church 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
United Way 
NGO 
NA 
3.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
Ascension 
Parish 
COC 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
40.00 
26.43 
0.00 
0.07 
Iberville Parish COC 
NGO 
NA 
2.00 
22.00 
1.67 
0.00 
0.01 
LEDC 
NGO 
NA 
2.00 
23.00 
2.18 
0.00 
0.02 
(table cont’d.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

84 
 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
Baker City COC 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
Aetna Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
57.00 
12.09 
0.00 
0.06 
Albertsons 
Companies Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
57.00 
12.09 
0.00 
0.06 
Arbor Day Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
57.00 
12.09 
0.00 
0.06 
Arts 
Council 
of 
Greater BR 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
116.00 
216.15 
0.00 
0.13 
ASCE 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
24.00 
7.06 
0.00 
0.03 
Assc. of Zoos & 
Aquariums 
NGO 
NA 
12.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
Babcock Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
2.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
BCBS of LA Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
57.00 
12.09 
0.00 
0.06 
Boo Grigsby Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
118.00 
133.79 
0.00 
0.12 
Booth-Bricker Fund 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
57.00 
12.09 
0.00 
0.06 
BR 
Advocates 
for 
Safe Streets 
NGO 
NA 
2.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
BR Bicycle Club 
NGO 
NA 
2.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
BREC Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
2.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
Brookings Inst. 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
Cisco Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
CNT 
NGO 
NA 
3.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
Coca Cola Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
3.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
Democracy 
Collaborative 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
Dreyfus Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
2.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
DSCEJ 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
ExxonMobil Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
FedEx Cares 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
(table cont’d.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

85 
 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
Fnd. for the Mid-
South 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
118.00 
133.79 
0.00 
0.12 
Franciscan PACE 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
Fuller 
Center 
for 
Housing 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
57.00 
12.09 
0.00 
0.06 
GCHP 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
GCTFS 
NGO 
NA 
5.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
Greater King David 
Baptist Church 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
Habitat for Humanity 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
57.00 
12.09 
0.00 
0.06 
Helis Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
HousingNOLA 
NGO 
NA 
3.00 
57.00 
12.09 
0.00 
0.06 
ICISF 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
57.00 
12.09 
0.00 
0.06 
IEDC 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
J.M. Kaplan Fund 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
Joyce Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
3.00 
57.00 
12.09 
0.00 
0.06 
JPMorgan Chase Fnd. NGO 
NA 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
Kresge Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
2.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
LISC 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
Livingston 
Activity 
Center 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
MAZON 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
57.00 
12.09 
0.00 
0.06 
McIlhenny Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
MDRC 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
28.00 
7.60 
0.00 
0.03 
Natl. Garden Clubs 
Inc. 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
Needmor Fund 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
NEEF 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
(table cont’d.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

86 
 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
NeighborWorks 
America 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
NewCorp, Inc. 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
NSRSC 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
20.00 
0.03 
0.00 
0.06 
Orton Family Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
57.00 
12.09 
0.00 
0.06 
Panera Bread Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
57.00 
12.09 
0.00 
0.06 
Partners for Places 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
PeopleForBikes 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
118.00 
133.79 
0.00 
0.12 
Porticus 
North 
America Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
3.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
PPS 
NGO 
NA 
2.00 
118.00 
133.79 
0.00 
0.12 
Praxair Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
118.00 
133.79 
0.00 
0.12 
Reconnecting 
America 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
118.00 
133.79 
0.00 
0.12 
SCORE Assc. 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
Smart 
Growth 
America 
NGO 
NA 
10.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
Stanley 
Smith 
Horticultural Trust 
NGO 
NA 
18.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
State 
Farm 
Companies Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
Surdna Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
2.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
SWBG Conservation 
Fund 
NGO 
NA 
2.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
The Arc 
NGO 
NA 
1.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
The Heart Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
26.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
The Home Depot Fnd. NGO 
NA 
1.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
Tony Hawk Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
2.00 
118.00 
133.79 
0.00 
0.12 
UPF 
NGO 
NA 
2.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
(table cont’d.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

87 
 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
Walmart Fnd. 
NGO 
NA 
3.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
YouthBuild USA 
NGO 
NA 
16.00 
82.00 
9.40 
0.00 
0.06 
BR General Medical 
Center 
Private Business 
NA 
1.00 
16.00 
1.12 
0.00 
0.02 
DR 
Horton 
Construction Co. 
Private Business 
NA 
1.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
ExxonMobil 
Private Business 
NA 
1.00 
118.00 
459.64 
0.00 
0.13 
Intl. Paper 
Private Business 
NA 
1.00 
25.00 
0.26 
0.00 
0.02 
Mosaic Co. 
Private Business 
NA 
1.00 
27.00 
8.84 
0.00 
0.04 
North Oaks Health 
System 
Private Business 
NA 
2.00 
55.00 
352.77 
0.00 
0.03 
OLOAH 
Private Business 
NA 
1.00 
25.00 
0.26 
0.00 
0.02 
RMC 
Private Business 
NA 
1.00 
25.00 
0.26 
0.00 
0.02 
David’s 
Country 
Cottages and Café 
Private Business 
NA 
1.00 
22.00 
1.67 
0.00 
0.01 
DOW Chemical Co. 
Private Business 
NA 
2.00 
22.00 
1.67 
0.00 
0.01 
Georgia Gulf Corp. 
Private Business 
NA 
3.00 
22.00 
1.67 
0.00 
0.01 
Marmillion 
Gray 
Media 
Private Business 
NA 
2.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
Natalbany Rentals 
Private Business 
NA 
1.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
The 
Island 
Golf 
Course 
and 
Clubhouse 
Private Business 
NA 
1.00 
22.00 
1.67 
0.00 
0.01 
Whitney Natl. Bank 
Private Business 
NA 
1.00 
5.00 
0.17 
0.00 
0.00 
The Oiler Group, Inc. 
Private Business 
NA 
1.00 
13.00 
5.20 
0.00 
0.01 
Rural 
Behavioral 
Health 
Private Business 
NA 
1.00 
57.00 
12.09 
0.00 
0.06 
Bayou Taxi & Airport 
Cab 
Private Business 
NA 
1.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
BCBS 
Private Business 
NA 
1.00 
57.00 
12.09 
0.00 
0.06 
(table cont’d.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

88 
 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
CB&I, Inc. 
Private Business 
NA 
6.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
Fighting Tiger Taxi 
Private Business 
NA 
1.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
Google LLC 
Private Business 
NA 
3.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
Greyhound 
Lines, 
Inc. 
Private Business 
NA 
1.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
Lyft, Inc. 
Private Business 
NA 
1.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
Megabus 
Private Business 
NA 
3.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
Mercedes-Benz 
Private Business 
NA 
1.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
OLOLRMC 
Private Business 
NA 
1.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
Tammy's Taxi 
Private Business 
NA 
4.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
Uber 
Technologies, 
Inc. 
Private Business 
NA 
9.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
ZipCar 
Private Business 
NA 
1.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
Alvin 
Fairburn 
& 
Assc., LLC 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
2.00 
0.01 
0.00 
0.00 
APTIM 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
Bowie 
Urban 
Planners 
Professional Services 
NA 
4.00 
8.00 
0.11 
0.00 
0.00 
Burk-Kleinpeter, Inc. 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
41.00 
121.57 
0.00 
0.06 
Concordia 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
CPEX 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
271.00 
1906.20 
0.00 
0.54 
CSRS 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
55.00 
66.29 
0.00 
0.10 
Dover, 
Kohl 
& 
Partners 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
20.00 
6.29 
0.00 
0.03 
DRW 
Planning 
Studio 
Professional Services 
NA 
4.00 
50.00 
50.47 
0.00 
0.08 
Elos Environmental, 
LLC 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
42.00 
196.33 
0.00 
0.01 
Fernandez Plans, LLC Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
13.00 
5.20 
0.00 
0.01 
(table cont’d.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

89 
 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
Ferris 
Engineering 
and Surveying, LLC 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
29.00 
9.42 
0.00 
0.05 
Fregonese Assc. 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
62.00 
116.68 
0.00 
0.11 
G.E.C., Inc. 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
32.00 
11.58 
0.00 
0.06 
Ground Rules Inc. 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
8.00 
0.11 
0.00 
0.00 
Hall 
Planning 
& 
Engineering 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
20.00 
6.29 
0.00 
0.03 
Harris 
& 
Varisco 
Consulting Engineers 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
32.00 
9.02 
0.00 
0.04 
HDR Inc. 
Professional Services 
NA 
3.00 
8.00 
0.11 
0.00 
0.00 
Hedrick - Community 
Planning & Design 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
13.00 
5.20 
0.00 
0.01 
HNTB 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
93.00 
155.33 
0.00 
0.22 
IBTS 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
29.00 
9.42 
0.00 
0.05 
JCW 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
Kendig Keast Collab. 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
35.00 
7.87 
0.00 
0.03 
Labarre Assc. 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
8.00 
1.09 
0.00 
0.01 
LSA Assc., Inc. 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
23.00 
8.69 
0.00 
0.03 
Moore 
Planning 
Group, LLC 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
30.00 
79.31 
0.00 
0.03 
N-Y Assc., Inc. 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
32.00 
9.02 
0.00 
0.04 
Pan 
American 
Engineers, LLC 
Professional Services 
NA 
2.00 
115.00 
25.31 
0.00 
0.13 
Planning and Design 
Studio 
Professional Services 
NA 
2.00 
8.00 
0.11 
0.00 
0.00 
Planning Works, LLC Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
8.00 
0.11 
0.00 
0.00 
Providence 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
28.00 
7.60 
0.00 
0.03 
T. Baker Smith, LLC 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
5.00 
0.42 
0.00 
0.00 
Taimerica Mgmt. Co. 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
5.00 
0.17 
0.00 
0.00 
(table cont’d.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

90 
 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
TischlerBise, Inc. 
Professional Services 
NA 
2.00 
2.00 
0.27 
0.00 
0.00 
TMG Consulting 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
24.00 
7.06 
0.00 
0.03 
Villavaso 
& 
Associates, LLC 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
25.00 
913.26 
0.00 
0.03 
Waggoner 
& 
Ball 
Architects 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
141.00 
195.86 
0.00 
0.18 
Wallace Roberts & 
Todd, LLC 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
23.00 
8.69 
0.00 
0.03 
Witt O'Brien's 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
7.00 
0.76 
0.00 
0.01 
Burk & Assc., Inc. 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
32.00 
9.02 
0.00 
0.04 
Coastal 
Environments, Inc. 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
32.00 
9.02 
0.00 
0.04 
Comite 
Resources, 
Inc. 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
44.00 
16.99 
0.00 
0.06 
USA Environmental 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
9.00 
0.47 
0.00 
0.02 
A. Wilbert’s Sons, 
LLC 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
22.00 
1.67 
0.00 
0.01 
ARCADIS 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
23.00 
2.18 
0.00 
0.02 
CH Fenstermaker & 
Assc., LLC 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
48.00 
216.18 
0.00 
0.06 
Charles M. Higgins 
Consultants, Inc. 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
13.00 
5.20 
0.00 
0.01 
Charlier Assc., Inc. 
Professional Services 
NA 
5.00 
23.00 
2.18 
0.00 
0.02 
Code Studio, Inc. 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
23.00 
2.18 
0.00 
0.02 
Dana Brown & Assc. 
Professional Services 
NA 
4.00 
14.00 
5.91 
0.00 
0.02 
Digital Engineering 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
14.00 
5.91 
0.00 
0.02 
ECONorthwest 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
39.00 
96.11 
0.00 
0.05 
Franklin Assc. 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
145.00 
598.43 
0.00 
0.18 
GCR & Assc., Inc. 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
118.00 
66.16 
0.00 
0.14 
Greg Cantrell, Inc. 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
44.00 
16.99 
0.00 
0.06 
(table cont’d.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

91 
 
Node 
Organization Type 
Government 
Level 
Degree 
(2-Mode) 
Degree 
Betweenness 
Closeness 
Eigenvector 
GTC, Inc. 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
44.00 
16.99 
0.00 
0.06 
Kimley-Horn 
& 
Assc., Inc. 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
136.00 
308.26 
0.00 
0.20 
Marionneaux 
& 
Marionneaux 
Law 
Firm 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
22.00 
1.67 
0.00 
0.01 
Meyer 
Engineers, 
Ltd. 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
68.00 
161.25 
0.00 
0.10 
MIG Consulting, LLC Professional Services 
NA 
2.00 
23.00 
2.18 
0.00 
0.02 
Neel-Schaffer, Inc. 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 
Sizeler Architects 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
44.00 
16.99 
0.00 
0.06 
Spangler Engineering 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
38.00 
0.84 
0.00 
0.01 
Tharp 
Planning 
Group 
Professional Services 
NA 
1.00 
19.00 
2.86 
0.00 
0.02 
Woods 
& 
Poole 
Economics, Inc. 
Professional Services 
NA 
9.00 
107.00 
24.65 
0.00 
0.12 

92 
 
WORKS CITED 
Bacău, S., Grădinaru, S. R., & Hersperger, A. M. (2020). Spatial plans as relational data: Using 
social network analysis to assess consistency among Bucharest's planning instruments. 
Land Use Policy, 92, 104484. 
Berke, P. R., Malecha, M. L., Yu, S., Lee, J., & Masterson, J. H. (2018). Plan integration for 
resilience scorecard: evaluating networks of plans in six US coastal cities. Journal of 
Environmental Planning and Management, 62(5), 901-920. 
Berke, P., & Godschalk, D. (2009). Searching for the Good Plan: A Meta-Analysis of Plan Quality 
Studies. Journal of Planning Literature, 23(3), 227-240. 
Berke, P., Smith, G., & Lyles, W. (2012). Planning for Resiliency: Evaluation of State Hazard 
Mitigation Plans under the Disaster Mitigation Act. Natural Hazards Review, 13(2), 139-
149. 
Boamah, E. F. (2018). Polycentricity of urban watershed governance: Towards a methodological 
approach. Urban Studies, 55(16), 3525-3544. 
Bodin, Ö., & Crona, B. I. (2009, August). The role of social networks in natural resource 
governance: What relational patterns make a difference? Global Environmental Change, 
19(3), 366-374. 
Borgatti, S. P., Everett, M. G., & Johnson, J. C. (2018). Analyzing Social Networks (2nd ed.). 
London: SAGE Publications Ltd. 
Brody, S. D. (2003). Measuring the Effects of Stakeholder Participation on the Quality of Local 
Plans Based on the Principles of Collaborative Ecosystem Management. Journal of 
Education Planning and Research, 22, 407-419. 
Brody, S. D. (2008). Ecosystem Planning in Florida: Solving Regional Problems through Local 
Decision-making. Aldershot, Hampshire, England: Ashgate Publishing Limited. 
Brody, S. D., Highfield, W., & Carrasco, V. (2004). Measuring the collective planning capabilities 
of local jurisdictions to manage ecological systems in southern Florida. Landscape and 
Urban Planning, 69, 33-50. 
Brody, S. D., Kang, J. E., & Bernhardt, S. (2010). Identifying factors influencing flood mitigation 
at the local level in Texas and Florida: the role of organizational capacity. Natural Hazards, 
52, 167-1884. 
Csardi, G., & Nepusz, T. (2006). The igraph software package for complex network research. 
InterJournal, Complex Systems(1695). Retrieved from https://igraph.org/ 
Dong, S., Li, Q., Farahmand, H., Mostafavi, A., Berke, P. R., & Vedlitz, A. (2020). Institutional 
Connectedness in Resilience Planning and Management of Interdependent Infrastructure 
Systems. Journal of Management in Engineering, 36(6). 
Douthat, T. (2020). Status of Comprehensive Plans in Louisiana. 

93 
 
Ernston, H., Sörlin, S., & Elmqvist, T. (2008). Social Movements and Ecosystem Services—the 
Role of Social Network Structure in Protecting and Managing Urban Green Areas in 
Stockholm. Ecology and Society, 13(2), 39. 
Freeman, L. C. (1978). Centrality in Social Networks: Conceptual Clarification. Social Networks, 
1, 215-239. 
Guerrero, A. M., McAllister, R. R., Corcoran, J., & Wilson, K. A. (2013). Scale Mismatches, 
Conservation Planning, and the Value of Social-Network Analyses. Conservation Biology, 
27(1), 35-44. 
Horney, J., Nguyen, M., Salvesen, D., Dwyer, C., Cooper, J., & Berke, P. (2017). Assessing the 
Quality of Rural Hazard Mitigation Plans in the Southeastern United States. Journal of 
Planning Education and Research, 37(1), 56-65. 
Hunter, D. R., Goodreau, S. M., & Handcock, M. S. (2008). Goodness of Fit of Social Network 
Models. Journal of American Statistical Association, 103(481), 248-258. 
Ingold, K. (2011). Network Structures within Policy Processes: Coalitions, Power, and Brokerage 
in Swiss Climate Policy. The Policy Studies Journal, 39(3), 435-459. 
Kumu [Relationship mapping software]. (2021). Retrieved from https://kumu.io 
Latitude and Longitude Finder. (2021). Retrieved from LatLong.net: https://www.latlong.net/ 
LDNR. (2021). Local Coastal Management Programs. Retrieved 2020, from State of Louisiana 
Department of Natural Resources: http://www.dnr.louisiana.gov/index.cfm/page/111 
Li, Q., Hannibal, B., Mostafavi, A., Berke, P., Woodruff, S., & Vedlitz, A. (2020). Examining of 
the actor collaboration networks around hazard mitigation: a hurricane harvey study. 
Natural Hazards, 103, 3541-3562. 
Long, J. C., Cunningham, F. C., & Braithwaite, J. (2013). Bridges, brokers, and boundary spanners 
in collaborative networks: a systematic review. BMC Health Services Research, 13. 
Louisiana Watershed Initiative. (2018). A Long-term Vision for Statewide Sustainability and 
Resilience. Retrieved from https://watershed.la.gov/assets/docs/LWI-Vision-White-Paper-
9-6-19.pdf 
Louisiana Watershed Initiative. (2020, April 13). About. Retrieved from watershed.la.gov: 
watershed.la.gov/about 
Louisiana Watershed Initiative. (2020, April 13). Our Watershed Regions. Retrieved from 
watershed.la.gov: watershed.la.gov/watershed-regions 
LSU SDMI. (2021). Hazard Mitigation Plans. Retrieved 2020, from LSU Stephenson Disaster 
Management Institute: https://hmplans.sdmi.lsu.edu/ 
Lyles, W., Berke, P., & Smith, G. (2014). A comparison of local hazard mitigation plan quality in 
six states, USA. Landscape and Urban Planning, 122, 89-99. 
Magnani, M., Rossi, L., & Vega, D. (2021). Analysis of Multiplex Social Networks with R. 
Journal of Statistical Software, 98(8). 

94 
 
Malecha, M. L., Woodruff, S. C., & Berke, P. R. (2021). Planning to Exacerbate Flooding: 
Evaluating a Houston, Texas, Network of Plans in Place during Hurricane Harvey Using a 
Plan Integration for Resilience Scorecard. Natural Hazards Review, 22(4). 
Murphy, P., & Knapp, B. (2018). Bipartite/Two-Mode Networks in igraph. Retrieved from RPubs: 
https://rpubs.com/pjmurphy/317838 
Poplier, L. (2018). A scoping review on the current and potential use of social network analysis 
for evaluation purposes. Evaluation, 24(3), 325-352. 
QSR 
International 
Pty 
Ltd. 
(2018). 
NVivo 
(Version 
12). 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.qsrinternational.com/nvivo-qualitative-data-analysis-software/home 
R Core Team. (2021). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for 
Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. Retrieved from https://www.R-project.org/: 
https://www.R-project.org/ 
Reed, M. S., Graves, A., Dandy, N., Posthumus, H., Hubacek, K., Morris, J., & Prell, C. (2009, 
February 20). Who’s in and why? A typology of stakeholder analysis methods for natural 
resource management. Journal of Environmental Management, 90, 1933-1949. 
Sayles, J. S., Mancilla Garcia, M., Hamilton, M., Alexander, S. M., Baggio, J. A., Fischer, A. P., . 
. . Pittman, J. (2019, August). Social-ecological network analysis for sustainability 
sciences: a systematic review and innovative research agenda for the future. Environmental 
Research Letters, 14(9), 093003. 
Social Explorer. (2020). www.socialexplorer.com. New York City, New York. Retrieved from 
www.socialexplorer.com: 
http://www.socialexplorer.com/pub/reportdata/HtmlResults.aspx?reportid=R12707846 
Stevens, M. R., & Senbel, M. (2017). Are municipal land use plans keeping pace with global 
climate change? Land Use Policy, 68, 1-14. 
Terrell, D. (2016). The Impact of the August 2016 Floods on the State of Louisiana. Louisiana 
Economic Development. 
U.S. Census Bureau. (2019). 2010 Census Urban and Rural Classification and Urban Area 
Criteria. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.census.gov/programs-
surveys/geography/guidance/geo-areas/urban-rural/2010-urban-rural.html 
USGS. (2020, August 25). Science in Your Watershed. Retrieved 2021, from USGS: 
https://water.usgs.gov/wsc/index.html 
Woodruff, S., Meerow, S., Gilbertson, P., Hannibal, B., Matos, M., Roy, M., . . . Berke, P. (2021). 
Is flood resilience planning improving? A longitudinal analysis of networks of plans in 
Boston and Fort Lauderdale. Climate Risk Management, 34. 
Xie, J., Szymanski, B. K., & Liu, X. (2013). SLPA: Uncovering Overlapping Communities in 
Social Networks via A Speaker-listener Interaction Dynamic Process. Proc. Data Mining 
Technologies for Computational Collective Intelligence Workshop, (pp. 344-349). 
Vancouver, CA. 

95 
 
VITA 
Lindsey Rochelle Lamana, born in Port Barre, Louisiana, received her bachelor’s degree in coastal 
environment science with a minor in environmental management systems from Louisiana State 
University in 2019. She served as the Chair of the Air & Waste Management Association Student 
Chapter at LSU for two years. Lindsey decided to enter the Department of Environmental Sciences 
at LSU to further her knowledge of environmental planning and regulations. She plans to receive 
her Master of Science this December 2021. Upon completion of her master’s degree, she will work 
as an Environmental Project Specialist at Waste Management.  

