 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PORTFOLIO OF ORIGINAL COMPOSITIONS 
 
 
 
 
A thesis submitted to the University of Manchester for the degree of  
Doctor of Philosophy  
in the Faculty of Humanities 
 
 
 
 
2009 
 
 
 
 
DIANA J. SALAZAR 
 
 
SCHOOL OF ARTS, HISTORIES AND CULTURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
2
Contents 
 
Written Commentary 
 
List of Diagrams, Tables and Figures ...........................................................................5 
 
Abstract............................................................................................................................6 
 
Technical Information (Surround Works) .....................................................................7 
 
Declaration.......................................................................................................................9 
 
Acknowledgements ......................................................................................................10 
 
An Introduction to Space in Electroacoustic Music ..................................................12 
 
I Compositional Strategies in the Creation of Spatial Music ....................................14 
 
1.1 A Brief Introduction to Stereo Sound Diffusion as an Enacted Mode of Delivery .14 
1.2 Proximal and Distal Transitions in Anima Machina...............................................15 
1.3 Interruption and Implications of Agency in Cipher ................................................22 
1.4 Spectral spaces and Manipulating Proximity in Topographia ...............................27 
1.5 Tactile spaces and Gestural Association in Papyrus............................................33 
 
II Multichannel Composition: 5.1 and 8-channel concert works ..............................37 
2.1 Approaches to the Composition of Spindlesong, for 8-channel audio ..................37 
2.2 Approaches to the Composition of Bosonica, for 5.1 audio..................................48 
 
III Non-concert Spaces: The Composition of a Site-specific Installation Work ......55 
3.1 The Application of Acousmatic Techniques in an Installation Context: The                      
Spindlesongs Installation ............................................................................................55 
3.2 Observations on the Reception and Flexibility of The Spindlesongs Installation..64 
 
 

 
3
IV Performed Space in Electroacoustic Music...........................................................66 
4.1 An Approach to Performed Space: Pavakoothu for Clarinet, Fixed Media and 
Electronics .................................................................................................................66 
 
Conclusions...................................................................................................................75 
 
Bibiography ...................................................................................................................77 
 
Discography ..................................................................................................................83 
 
Appendix A: List of Portfolio Works & Supplementary Composition Work............85 
 
Appendix B: Additional Information on the Portfolio Works ....................................87 
 
Appendix C: Post-Analysis 1: Context, Issues and Considerations for the 
Composer/Performer of Stereo Acousmatic Music...................................................96 
 
Appendix D: Post-Analysis 2: The Fixed Mode of Circumspace: Issues and 
Observations .................................................................................................................98 
 
Appendix E: Max/MSP Patch for Pavakoothu (See Data CD)..................................100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
                                                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
4
Portfolio of Musical Works 
 
Audio CD 1 
1. 
Anima Machina (2006) 
 
 
12’58 
2. 
Cipher (2007) 
 
 
 
11’42 
3. 
Topographia (2008)  
 
 
  9’31 
4. 
Papyrus (2008) 
 
 
 
  8’23 
5. 
Pavakoothu [recording] (2007) 
 
10’57 
 
Audio CD 2 
1. 
Spindlesong (2008) 
 
 
15’57 
2. 
Bosonica [stereo mix] (2009) 
 
24’41 
3. 
The Spindlesongs Installation (2008) 
25’52 
 
Data DVD 1: Stereo works 
(All audio files in aiff format, 24bit 44.1kHz) 
1. 
Anima Machina (2006)  
 
 
12’58 
2. 
Cipher (2007) 
 
 
 
11’42 
3. 
Papyrus (2008) 
 
 
   
  8’23 
4. 
Topographia (2008) 
 
 
  9’31 
5. 
Pavakoothu [recording] (2007) 
 
10’57 
(Clarinet: Anna Hashimoto) 
6. 
Pavakoothu [tape part] (2007) 
 
10’57 
 
Data DVD 2: Multi-channel Works 
 
1. 
Spindlesong [8-channel] (2008) 
 
15’57   8 mono aif files, 24bit, 96kHz 
2. 
Spindlesong [stereo mix] (2008) 
 
15’57   stereo aiff file, 24bit 96kHz 
3. 
Bosonica [5.1] (2009) 
 
 
24’41   6 mono aif files, 24bit 44.1kHz 
4. 
Bosonica [stereo mix] (2009) 
 
24’41   stereo aiff file, 24bit 44.1kHz  
 
Data DVD 3: Installation 
 
1. 
The Spindlesongs Installation [8-channel]  25’52   8 mono aif files, 24bit 48kHz 
2. 
The Spindlesongs Installation [stereo mix]  25’52   stereo aiff file 24bit, 48kHz 
 
Data CD: Max/MSP patch for Pavakoothu 
 
Score: Pavakoothu for clarinet, fixed media and electronics 
[Final Word Count: 15,911] 

 
5
List of Diagrams, Tables and Figures 
 
 
Diagram 1: Loudspeaker plan for playback of Bosonica...................................................7 
Diagram 2: Loudspeaker plan for playback of Spindlesong and The Spindlesongs          
Installation.........................................................................................................................8 
Diagram 3: Multiple stereo groupings in Spindlesong.....................................................41 
Diagram 4: Example one of sub-groupings for presentation on an 8-channel array.......42 
Diagram 5: Example two of sub-grouping for presentation on an 8-channel array.........43 
 
 
Table 1: Movements of The Spindlesongs Installation....................................................60 
Table 2: Additional Compositional Output 2006 – 2009..................................................86 
 
 
Figure 1: Sonogram, Anima Machina 0’27–1’08.............................................................18 
Figure 2: Sonogram, Anima Machina 1’36–2’06.............................................................19 
Figure 3: Sonogram, Anima Machina 9’21–10’14...........................................................20 
Figure 4: Sonogram, Anima Machina 9’18–10’16...........................................................21 
Figure 5: Sonogram of Cipher, 3’48–4’36 .......................................................................24 
Figure 6: Sonogram of Cipher, 8’02–8’15. ......................................................................25 
Figure 7: Sonogram of Topographia, 4’58–6’06..............................................................29 
Figure 8: Outline of Stucture in Papyrus. ........................................................................35 
Figure 9: The reality-abstraction continuum of materials in Spindlesong........................44 
Figure 10: Harmonic, rhythmic and referential continuums in Bosonica.........................51 
Figure 11: Circumspatial groupings in Bosonica.............................................................53 
Figure 12: Photograph of The Spindlesongs Installation at Quarry Bank Mill.................56 
Figure 13: Spatial implications of materials in The Spindlesongs Installation.................63 
Figure 14: Structural analysis of Pavakoothu..................................................................68 
Figure 15: Screenshot of Max/MSP processing patch for Pavakoothu...........................71 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
6
Abstract 
 
This PhD confronts and analyses the relationship between internal (compositional) 
spatial thinking and aspects of external (performance) space, with the intention of 
revealing new musical possibilities. 
 
Eight original electroacoustic compositions are presented in the portfolio. These are 
Anima Machina, Bosonica, Cipher, Papyrus, Pavakoothu, Spindlesong, Topographia 
and The Spindlesongs Installation. The works exhibit a variety of spatial characteristics, 
not only through the spatial implications of the sound material used, but also in their 
presentation formats. The portfolio comprises four stereo works, one 5.1 work, two 8-
channel works and a work for solo instrument (clarinet) and electronics. All but one of 
the compositions are acousmatic, and the mixed work is greatly informed by the 
acousmatic tradition. 
 
The main concern spanning the portfolio is the creation of spatial aspects on a number 
of levels, from source material through processing, layering and spatialisation to 
dissemination in performance. The commentary presents supplementary information on 
each work, with a view to providing the reader with an insight into the evolution of my 
compositional vocabulary. Those aspects considered spatially most significant are 
highlighted, with reference to the current musicological terminology of space-form 
(Smalley 2007) and other contextual writings in the field. The research findings are 
assembled according to the nature of spatial presentation: stereo, multichannel, 
installation, and instrumental performance. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
7
Technical Information (Surround Works) 
 
The works are supplied in their original, high-resolution formats, on 3 data DVDs. To aid 
the listening of materials, two audio CDs are also supplied, with all works presented in 
stereo aiff format at 16bit 44.1kHz resolution.  There is one score included, for 
Pavakoothu, which also includes technical notes on the performance of this work. The 
Max/MSP patch for this work is also provided on a Data CD. 
 
On DATA DVD 2 there are six discrete files for the original, 5.1 version of Bosonica. 
These are labelled as follows: 
 
Bosonica_L.aif 
Bosonica_C.aif 
Bosonica_R.aif 
Bosonica_LS.aif 
Bosonica_RS.aif 
Bosonica_LFE.aif 
 
and correspond to the following loudspeaker arrangement, a common 5.1 formation: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Diagram 1: Loudspeaker plan for playback of Bosonica 
 
 
The above diagram shows the relative loudspeaker positions for the files which are 
labelled as Left, Right, Centre, Left Surround, Right Surround and LFE. The relative 
positioning shown for the LFE loudspeaker is not obligatory. 
 
(A stereo mix is included on DVD 2 and Audio CD 2, for reference purposes.) 
 

 
8
 
The Spindlesong folder on DVD 2 contains eight mono aif files, labelled as follows: 
 
Spindlesong1.aif 
Spindlesong2.aif 
Spindlesong3.aif 
Spindlesong4.aif 
Spindlesong5.aif 
Spindlesong6.aif 
Spindlesong7.aif 
Spindlesong8.aif 
 
During playback, these correspond to the following loudspeaker arrangement:  
 
 
 
 
Diagram 2: Loudspeaker plan for playback of eight-channel works 
 
 
The files for The Spindlesongs Installation (installation1.aif, installation2.aif etc.), located 
on DVD 3, are arranged with the relative positioning as shown in Diagram 2, but with no 
prescribed orientation for the audience.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
9
Declaration 
 
I hereby declare that no portion of the work referred to in the thesis has been submitted 
in support of an application for another degree or qualification of this or any other 
university or any other institute of learning.  
 
COPYRIGHT STATEMENT  
  
i. The author of this thesis (including any appendices and/or schedules to this thesis) 
owns any copyright in it (the “Copyright”) and she has given The University of 
Manchester the right to use such Copyright for any administrative, promotional, 
educational and/or teaching purposes.  
 
ii. Copies of this thesis, either in full or in extracts, may be made only in accordance 
with the regulations of the John Rylands University Library of Manchester.  Details of 
these regulations may be obtained from the Librarian.  This page must form part of any 
such copies made.    
 
iii. The ownership of any patents, designs, trade marks and any and all other intellectual 
property rights except for the Copyright (the “Intellectual Property Rights”) and any 
reproductions of copyright works, for example graphs and tables (“Reproductions”), 
which may be described in this thesis, may not be owned by the author and may be 
owned by third parties.  Such Intellectual Property Rights and Reproductions cannot and 
must not be made available for use without the prior written permission of the owner(s) 
of the relevant Intellectual Property Rights and/or Reproductions.  
 
iv. Further information on the conditions under which disclosure, publication and 
exploitation of this thesis, the Copyright and any Intellectual Property Rights and/or 
Reproductions described in it may take place is available from the Head of School of 
Arts, Histories and Cultures (or the Vice-President). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
10 
Acknowledgements 
 
This submission presents the results of doctoral research conducted at the University of 
Manchester between 2006 and 2009. The research was funded by an Arts and 
Humanities Research Council Doctoral Award. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Although the majority of the compositional work in this portfolio has been undertaken at 
the University of Manchester Electroacoustic Music Studios, I am extremely grateful to 
the following institutions for their support given through composer residencies:  
 
• Atlantic Center for the Arts, Florida, USA. 
• CEMI (The Center for Experimental Music and Intermedia) at the University of 
North Texas, Texas, USA. 
• The Institute for Electroacoustic Music in Sweden (EMS), Stockholm, Sweden. 
• Orford Center for the Arts, Montreal, Canada.  
 
The aforementioned residencies would not have been possible without funding from the 
above organisations and also the generous support of a number of funding bodies:  
 
• The Bourges International Institute of Electroacoustic Music (IMEB) 
• Dewar Arts 
• The Holst Foundation 
• The Hope Scott Trust 
• The Kathleen and Margery Elliott Scholarship Trust 
• The Scottish International Education Trust 
 
I am also grateful to those vocalists and instrumentalists who have assisted me by 
contributing their time and expertise towards the recording of source material and 
advising me on their specialist areas. They include Sarah Alexander, Emilie Girard-
Charest, Thom Harrison, Anna Hashimoto, Camilo Salazar, and William Stafford.  
 
Two substantial works in the portfolio, Spindlesong and The Spindlesongs Installation, 
could not have been realised without the generous support of The National Trust at 
Quarry Bank Mill and also The North West Sound Archive. 
 

 
11 
I am particularly grateful for the support, advice and inspiration of my supervisor, Dr. 
David Berezan, and his colleague Dr. Ricardo Climent. In addition, the Manchester 
Theatre in Sound (MANTIS) composers have been a constant source of encouragement 
and motivation. 
 
Finally, I owe a great deal to Dr. Alistair MacDonald, without whom I would not be a 
composer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
12 
An Introduction to Space in Electroacoustic Music 
 
 
‘The immaterial nature of audio reproduction enables auditory spatial art to 
exploit the spatial schemata of everyday life’1 
 
Sound carries the potential to communicate a wide range of spatial information, from 
implied shapes, motions and trajectories, to complex environments.2 This presents a rich 
resource for the composer who works with recorded sound as their medium, and 
consequently space has been widely acknowledged as a key parameter in 
electroacoustic music. As testimony of this, in 2007 Denis Smalley3 proposed a musical 
analysis methodology called ‘space-form’4, based exclusively on considerations of 
space. Smalley proposed that space is the crucial parameter in acousmatic music:  
 
‘…space should now move to centre stage to become the focal point of 
analysis of, or commentary on, acousmatic music’5 
 
Strategies for the description of space and its functionality in electroacoustic music had 
already been proposed by Natasha Barrett6, Frank Ekeberg Henriksen7 and Jonty 
Harrison8 to name but a few. However, Smalley’s article builds on such writings by 
considering and categorising all manner of spatial angles, and crucially includes those 
which are shaped through perception. The comprehensive spatial taxonomy presented 
in the article is a valuable resource for any electroacoustic composer or listener, and 
several terms from the space-form framework have been applied within this thesis. 
Smalley’s taxonomy in itself, however, does not present specific strategies for the 
implementation of space-form on a practical level, more specifically, through 
composition. It is hoped that the application of space-form terminology within this 
commentary will offer examples of the construction of space-form in practice. 
                                            
1 Kendall & Ardila (2007), pp.131. 
2 Visual and physical analogies often aid the interpretation of spatial elements, frequently through 
our multi-modal understanding of the real world. Such synaesthesia can be essential in 
interpreting the dimensions and motions of spectromorphologies. (Smalley, in Austin (2000) pp.19,  
Barrett (2002), pp.316, Clarke (2005), pp.62.) and current scientific research reinforces this 
proposition (‘Synaesthetic crossmodal correspondences ...appear to play a crucial (if 
unacknowledged) role in the multisensory integration of auditory and visual information’, Parise 
and Spence (2009), pp.1.) 
3 Smalley, Denis, (2007) ‘Space-form and the acousmatic image’, Organised Sound, 12(1) 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.35-58. 
4 ‘Space-form in acousmatic music is an aesthetically created ’environment’ which structures 
transmodal perceptual contingencies through source-bondings and spectromorphological 
relations. Further, it integrates attributes particular to musical culture and tradition (like pitch and 
rhythm, for example).’ Smalley (2007), pp.40. Previously Smalley had used the term ‘spatio-
morphology’, for a similar concept, Smalley (1986), pp.91. 
5 Smalley (2007), pp.54. 
6 See ‘Approaches to ‘Space’ in Music’ in Barrett (2002), pp.313-320. 
7 See Fig. 6.1 ‘Overview of space in electroacoustic music’ in Henriksen (2002) pp.124. 
8 See ‘Fundamentals of Space’ in Harrison (1999). 

 
13 
The unique potential of electroacoustic music to explore space9 at an intrinsic level has 
in turn raised many issues concerning the appropriate performance practices for this 
music. Throughout the course of its evolution, the art-form has invited research into new 
modes of performance, where space has inevitably been a critical consideration. 
Research into aesthetic implications and technical developments of the spatialisation of 
electroacoustic music in performance includes Jonty Harrison’s work with BEAST10, 
Adrian Moore, David Moore and James Mooney’s development of the M2 diffusion 
system11, and countless other strategies and technologies. Much of my own interest in 
this field stems from extensive practical experience with the University of Manchester’s 
own sound diffusion system, MANTIS.12 While there has been a substantial level of 
documentation of such diffusion systems, there remains little contemporary research of 
how dissemination strategies might interact with and inform decisions at the initial, 
compositional level13. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
9 Smalley, in Austin (2000), pp.20. 
10 BEAST, Birmingham ElectroAcoustic Sound Theatre, described in Harrison (1998), pp.121-127.  
11 Moore, Moore & Mooney (2004). 
12 The MANTIS (Manchester Theatre in Sound) diffusion system consists of a custom-built 
ethernet console and Max/MSP software for playback on up to 48 loudspeakers, designed by Dr. 
David Berezan and based at the University of Manchester, UK. 
13 This view is supported by Landy (2007), pp.220. 

 
14 
I  Compositional Strategies in the Creation of Spatial Music 
 
 
1.1 A Brief Introduction to Stereo Sound Diffusion 
 
‘this final act becomes the most crucial of all’14 
 
Sound diffusion is one approach to the presentation of electroacoustic music in public 
listening situations. The practice, which involves live manipulation of the amplitudes of 
multiple instances of a stereo image over a number of loudspeakers, has been adopted 
by many as a preferred mode of performance for stereo acousmatic music. Examples of 
established sound diffusion systems include Birmingham ElectroAcoustic Sound 
Theatre, the Acousmonium of the GRM15, and the Cybernéphone (formerly the 
Gmebaphone) at IMEB16.  
 
Through sound diffusion the audience may be immersed inside sounds. There is the 
potential to exaggerate and articulate implied spaces within the music, and true physical 
implications of position, depth and motion can be created. Crucially, the music, the ‘fixed 
medium’, acts as a template for reinterpretation in the performance environment and 
hence ‘diffusion is an extension of the compositional approach’.17  The ‘diffuser’ relies on 
the composed space within the piece to effectively shape the sound in the performance 
space.  
 
‘it is our listening experience of the physical, sounding world which is key to 
our understanding of both the illusory objects and virtual space of 
electroacoustic music, and if the musical appears ‘unphysical’ it is often the 
fault of poor performance’18 
 
As such, the act of diffusion plays a crucial role in producing a physical experience of 
the work. However, the intrinsic qualities of a work, from the level of the individual 
sound-object to complex arrangements of these sounds, will inevitably contribute 
towards this ‘physical’ experience, and it is at this compositional level that space-form 
initially emerges.  
 
 
 
                                            
14 Smalley (1986), pp.92. 
15 Groupe de Recherche Musicales 
16 Institut International de Musique Electroacoustique de Bourges. See Clozier (2001). 
17 Harrison (1998), pp.125. 
18 MacDonald (1998), pp.21. 

 
15 
1.2 Proximal and Distal Transitions in Anima Machina  
(Composed 2006, Duration: 12’58) 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Anima Machina was the first work composed for the portfolio. Following from my 
compositions at Diploma and Masters levels19, I was keen to explore new methods of 
structuring and timbral development in my works.  
 
I am fascinated by the convincing communication of power and weight in Gilles Gobeil’s 
compositions, and they have consequently been very inspirational for my own practice. 
Le vertige inconnu and Point de passage in particular informed aspects of timbral 
development and structuring processes within Anima Machina. In these works Gobeil 
utilises sound with rich physical implications, exploiting their mechanical origins and 
frequently drawing on interruption as a structuring device. I wanted to explore similar 
techniques in order to create a greater sense of physicality and depth in my 
compositions. In addition, having discovered an enthusiasm for sound diffusion as a 
performance tool, I wanted to create a work directly influenced and informed by this 
practice, in effect producing a work specifically designed for diffused performance.  
 
 
Material 
 
The title refers to the concept of ‘living machines’ – complex machines with decision-
making and self-replicating abilities. This extra-musical idea created potential for allusion 
to a variety of scales and perspectives of mechanical structures. While the source 
material included recordings of clocks, metal tools, a bicycle chain and a ‘slinky’ spring, 
these materials were subject to varying degrees of processing which, for the most part, 
create an abstract framework in which recognisably ‘mechanical’ sounds exist. The 
persistent references to mechanical objects in the work, combined with a high degree of 
abstraction in the sonic landscape, presents a mechanised space with no audible 
signifiers of human intervention (i.e. agential space20). The work particularly focuses on 
the unpredictability inherent in nano-technology21 – machines on a microscopic scale.  
As a result the music is underpinned by a sense of organic mutation punctuated by 
unexpected and sometimes seemingly unprovoked and dramatic changes.  
                                            
19 In particular Broken Nerve (2005) and Kalimba (2006), both stereo acousmatic works. 
20 Agential space: ‘A space articulated by human (inter)action with objects, surfaces, substances, 
and built structures, etc.’ Smalley (2007), pp.57. 
21 The ability to self-replicate also presents the potential for mutation, and expansion beyond 
human control, a scenario described in Drexler (1986), pp. 171 – 190. 

 
16 
Although at the initial stage of composition the use of mechanical material was key to 
the piece, the focus shifted from the extrinsic (or extra-musical) links of this material to 
the internal behaviour and spectral characteristics of particular sound-events, and their 
function within the overall spatial structure.  This shift was directly influenced by an 
intention to create a dynamic and spatially rich sound environment with a sense of 
physical impact and possibly (as a result of this physicality) an element of drama. The 
gestures which punctuate changes in perspectival space22 (i.e. 1’32, 1’42, 1’58) are 
intentionally ‘punchy’ due to their spectral content, as well as their real-world 
associations.  Comparatively weaker gestures could not convincingly function to cause 
such significant structural changes in the music. 
 
Software-based transformation techniques were employed as a means of artificially 
expanding or exaggerating the implied presence and behaviour of the original sound 
material.  In many instances, I applied low shelf equalisation techniques in order to 
strengthen the low spectrum, giving the material a ‘grounded’ quality and implied 
‘weight’. A further example of processing was the use of reverberation to create 
implications of distance within the sonic landscape23. This acts to emphasise dramatic 
recession of the landscape, for example at 10’13, preceded by similar material, but in a 
far more proximate24 zone. What acts as a catalyst for the change between these 
contrasting spaces, is a single, but ultimately significant, clock-tick. The change-point, 
however, is also prepared in background landscape material, which expands25 and 
approaches the listener, creating an underlying sense of direction, and preparing, 
reinforcing and justifying the sudden shift in prospective distribution. The described 
techniques were utilised extensively within the work, to a degree where the structure is 
underpinned by how and when such points of spatial transitions occur, and by the 
contrasting spaces through which the listener journeys. 
 
It is acknowledged that the distance classification of sound-events (e.g. ‘distant’ or in 
‘close proximity’) by the listener is along a continuum defined by a multitude of 
perceptual cues, including spectral variations, sound amplitude, and reflections, 
including the ratio of direct to reverberant sound26. Such cues in the sound material were 
                                            
22 ‘the relations of position, movement and scale among spectromorphologies, viewed from the 
listener’s vantage point’, Smalley (2007), pp.48. 
23 However Denis Smalley, Natasha Barrett and Jonty Harrison all avoid such uses of 
reverberation in order to reduce the risk of conflicting reverberation information when the work is 
juxtaposed in performance with the acoustics of the venue. (Smalley in Austin (2000), pp.16 and 
Barrett (2002), pp. 321 – 322.) In later works I adopt reverberation to smear spectral 
characteristics of background material, creating a more subtle sense of distance without imposing 
a specific ‘acoustic space’. 
24 Proximate space: ‘the area of perspectival space closest to the listener’s vantage point in a 
particular listening context’, Smalley (2007), pp.58. In this chapter I apply the terms distal and 
proximate with regard to the composed space, although distal and proximate zones can also be 
found in listening (performance) spaces. 
25 In amplitude and spectral occupancy. 
26 Moore (2003), pp.265-267. 

 
17 
electronically manipulated in order to create material with a certain ‘distance’ 
characteristic. In addition, layering such materials resulted in the presentation of 
increasingly complex environments and perspectival variety to the listener. 
 
 
Sound-Events 
 
There are certain sound-events which perform unmistakable roles in the spatial 
transitions within the work. These sound-events (in some rare cases a conglomeration 
of many short sounds, but inaudibly so) are either: 
 
Catalytic sound objects which trigger the onset of new material, generally with the 
perceived effect of propelling the music forward with a sense of increased motion 
 
or 
 
Termination sound objects which halt the flow and intensity of previous material, if 
only temporarily.  On occasion these also carry a dual function, introducing new material 
that exhibits characteristics of slower pacing, sparseness of texture and reduced 
intensity27. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                      
 
27 Wishart discusses a similar concept of ‘spatial anacrusis and resolution’ in Wishart (1996), 
pp.223. 
 

 
18 
Spatial Transitions: Examples 
 
The following sonograms illustrate how the aforementioned techniques are employed:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Sonogram, Anima Machina 0’27–1’08, Spectrally rich sound events (A, B, C, D, E) act 
as strong articulations of the onset or termination of new material and altered pacing, contributing 
towards a sense of attack and punch. A spatial transition is created through the subsequent 
presentation of new spectral and perspectival spaces.  
 
 
Interruptions often direct the music from one spatial environment into another, 
contrasting spatial scene, frequently through the exposition of new material or the 
termination of previous material. One dramatic example of this occurs at 0’45 where 
increased depth of perspective in the soundfield is presented for the first time (C). 
Another attack follows at 0’53 (D), and reveals an even more distant and reverberant 
plane. At 1’05 a third attack (E) introduces for the first time a combination of 
perspectives and implied motion between them. The close and brittle mechanical 
winding action is contrasted with an approaching broad spectrum sound, which implies 
larger dimensions. This idea of using tiered approaches and recessions is crucial in the 
work.  
 
Exponential growth in amplitude also typifies many of the onsets found in Anima 
Machina. In each case these act as anacruses to weighty attacks via a dramatic 
sweeping action, apprehending the forthcoming change in space, for example at 8’35. 
Prior to this point there is an increase in tension brought about through accelerating 
A 
B 
C 
D 
E 

 
19 
motions. This leads to materials collectively approaching through the exponential 
crescendo which peaks at an attack with an extended decay. In this instance, the 
extended decay is in no way static. The downwards shift in pitch combined with spectral 
fill creates an arced trajectory, functioning additionally as an exponential onset for the 
subsequent, stronger attack/change point, at 8’48.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Sonogram, Anima Machina 1’36–2’06, Dense spectral layering and implied scattering of 
spatial trajectories, further emphasised through erratic stereo panning. Note the rupture of this 
dynamic environment at 1’59 (A), when material of minimal spectral distribution is exposed, 
presenting a dramatic distal vista. 
 
 
Although there are no direct implications of agential space in Anima Machina, there are 
suggestions of behavioural space, created through the organic activity of certain sound 
materials. A major development of animated textural material commences at 5’06 
(although it is previously introduced at 2’06 and 4’16). While its activity is at the forefront 
of our perception, it is placed within a wider sonic arena. At 5’44 a similar behaviour is 
set in motion, but on a more distal plane. This behaviour is introduced and increases its 
kinetic properties, while the boundaries of the spatial environment continue to be 
articulated through smeared continuants (Figure 3, A).  
 
 
 
 
A 

 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Sonogram, Anima Machina 6’12–7’24, Dramatic contrasts in spectral occupancy of 
material reinforce the spatial transition. 
 
At 6’37 a termination sound-object (Figure 3, B) halts the flow of this established 
landscape, leaving only metallic traces. An altogether new landscape is introduced 
dramatically at 6’41 (C). Here the expansion of spectral content creates a far broader 
panorama. The escalation of intensity alludes to an intense approach which immerses 
the listener before dramatically bursting at 7’00 via another terminating sound-object (D). 
A cessation of proximate activity leads to recession into an almost vacant, expansive 
space (a process which Smalley refers to as ‘ouverture’28).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
28 ‘…a process of ouverture, whether sudden or gradual, will be initiated by the total or partial 
erasure of elements within proximate space, permitting the view to expand into distal space…’ 
Smalley (2007), pp.49. 
A 
B 
C 
D 

 
21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4: Sonogram, Anima Machina 9’18–10’16, Overlapping motions and trajectories (A) are 
followed by associations of ascent and increased distal space (B). In diffusion, section B naturally 
implies elevation and retreat over the loudspeaker array.  
 
 
Conclusion 
 
The examples given in Figures 1 to 4 demonstrate the application of dramatic gestures 
to aid spatial juxtaposition in Anima Machina. This work particularly draws on techniques 
of recession and approach, as well as the related techniques of enclosure and 
ouverture. These aspects of space-form interact to create a range of landscapes 
intended to exploit the capabilities of a diffusion system by maximising the possibilities 
of physical placement (i.e. perspectival space) in diffused performance29. The work 
lends itself to dramatic expansion and contraction of the stereo image via the articulation 
points, which may act as gestural cues for the diffuser.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
29 Dramatic changes in composed space are very likely to prompt a change in the physical 
distribution of sound in a performance space. 
A 
B 

 
22 
1.3 Interruption and Implications of Agency in Cipher  
(Composed 2007, Duration: 11’42) 
 
 
Source Material and Motivation 
 
Cipher explores themes surrounding the electronic transmission of codes, and the 
possible interference with such transmissions. Ideas concerning misinformation, 
ambiguity of meaning, continuums of intelligibility, words, patterns and ordering all 
informed the work. In order to emphasise such themes, there are frequently direct 
references to the original source-material, which included a manual typewriter, Morse 
code and more abstract ‘fragmented’ sound taken from recordings of broken glass, a 
female voice and metallic objects. Many of these sounds were processed to the point of 
creating glitch-like material, which specifically implies interference in the transmission of 
codes30. Aside from ideas concerning semantics, a major aim was to create a rapidly 
moving work in terms of structural variation, and one which might consequently be more 
engaging in performance. During composition, fragments of material were juxtaposed, 
exported as a single unit, and then time-compressed in preparation for the same 
process of juxtaposition with other time-compressed material. As a result a major 
characteristic of the work is its rapid gestural interplay, coloured by artificially fast vocal 
utterances. Gestures are frequently crisp and clean, created through use of high, 
narrow-band material.  
 
 
Agential and Utterance Space 
 
The use of voice within the work at first implies agential space31; however the voice is 
used as much for its abstract sonic characteristics as well as for its human connotations. 
While there is a sense of presence, at no point is this presence completely revealed to 
the listener. The voice ultimately remains restrained from true communicative capability.  
It does, however, contribute aspects of utterance space32 to the work, and due to 
inherently strong referential properties of the voice, the piece becomes coloured by its 
use, even though it is certainly not the most extensively used source material.  
 
                                            
30 Use of this source-bonded material carries with it implications of ‘mediatic’ space, ‘a particular 
genre of performance space within which the transmission of gestural/ensemble space is 
mediated by technology’, Smalley (2007), pp.43.  
31 ‘A space articulated by human (inter)action with objects, surfaces, substances, and built 
structures etc.’ Smalley (2007), pp.57. In the context of Cipher such interaction can be found on 
an abstract level i.e. between sound-objects in the composed space, rather than as an actual 
performer on stage.  
32 ‘A space produced by vocal sound. This may be an intimate, personal, or social space, and in 
communicational contexts can also be regarded as a behavioural space.’ Smalley (2007), pp.58. 

 
23 
Vocal material is presented in many different guises. A voice first occurs in a very 
fragmentary form, barely perceptible within the dense sonic landscape: at 0’47 a breath 
acts as an anacrusis, but in concert with other sounds. A second, shorter, anacrusis 
occurs in a similar manner at 0’53.  At 1’55 the vocal fragments are more audible, and 
are presented within a cluster of gestures. Here the gestures do not merge organically to 
form a chain, and consequently a phrase, but instead individually they behave in the 
manner of interrupting their predecessor. This sets up stuttering phrases that often 
display a rhythmic quality (a clear illustration of this being between 8’02–8’13), and is an 
example of interruption on the micro-scale. The integration of vocal utterance amongst 
fragmented found-sound gestures and the resulting ambiguity of sound source act to 
heighten tension at these points33. In addition, there are occasionally unusual images 
and dramatic results created as a result of source-bonding34. Such moments include an 
unexpected cough at 1’56 and the voice seemingly spitting out fragments of glass at 
2’49.35 
 
The voice does not function solely as gestural material. It consistently reinforces ideas of 
communication and language through its use in a textural capacity, as heard in the 
collections of utterances at 2’59, 3’01 and 3’11. A more striking example occurs between 
9’12 and 9’30 where multiple voices are introduced over a variety of spatial planes. This 
extended presentation of almost exclusively vocal material at the climax of the work is a 
stark contrast to the individual intimate vocal utterances that previously dominated.  
 
Tension may be heightened more directly through vocal material than through other 
material due to its emotive connotations, an example of this being the repeated gasping 
of breath at 2’14. In addition, the voice in some respects leads the ear through the 
structure of the work. At 9’12 multiple voices move to the forefront, and at 11’01 the 
voice is presented as almost intelligible text, for the first time in the work. The listener 
comes close to hearing the message, but it remains indecipherable. The idea of nearing 
the successful transmission of the code is further emphasised by the extended 
presentation of ordered rhythmic structures (8’41) and pulse towards the conclusion of 
the work. While such material has occurred previously (e.g. 1’36–1’48 and 2’23–2’30), it 
appears in its most extended and ordered state at this point. 
 
At a more subtle level, vocal source recordings have been processed to create 
sustained material displaying veiled pitch and breath properties (2’32) which function to 
                                            
33 Through what John Young refers to as ‘remote surrogacy’, where ‘physical cause is uncertain 
and will tend to be deduced by a psychological interpretation’, Young (1994), pp. 23-24. A sense 
of abstraction is particularly dominant here due to the rapid juxtaposition of ‘polarised orders of 
surrogacy’, the voice as first order, and the found-sound material as remote.  
34 ‘the natural tendency to relate sounds to supposed sources and causes, and to relate sounds to 
each other because they appear to have shared or associated origins.’ Smalley (1997), pp.110. 
35 Although I acknowledge that not all listeners may perceive this image. 

 
24 
expand perspectival space by articulating a more distal plane against the crisp 
foreground material.  
 
 
Macro Interruption 
 
Cipher aims to explore the interruption of information and consequently sonic tension 
and sonic interruption (which can function to build tension, or release it completely) are 
crucial structuring devices. The work uses a number of techniques developed during the 
composition of Anima Machina, particularly in terms of spatial transitions.  In Figure 5 a 
distal space presented from 3’47 approaches through increasing clarity in the high 
spectrum (A). It fractures at 4’08 (B) when material articulating its most distal aspects 
terminates, and through a process of enclosure the listener is exposed to a very 
proximate space (C). Proximity is reinforced through the source-bonded spaces created 
by unmistakeable whispered vocal consonants and the closely-recorded typewriter.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Sonogram of Cipher, 3’48–4’36.  
 
Elements of the previous distal space re-emerge and the image extends to a broad 
panorama36 at 4’29 (D), where the decays of breathy syllables transform into a vast 
peripheral landscape. As in Anima Machina, each spatial displacement is clearly 
punctuated, however approaches and recessions are generally more graduated. 
                                            
36 An example of ‘ouverture’, Smalley (2007), pp.47. 
A 
B 
C 
D 

 
25 
Micro Interruption 
 
While change-points on the macro-level of structure do occur (as detailed above), they 
are arguably not as striking and clear-cut as those found on a micro-level, within phrase 
structure.    
 
 
 
Figure 6: Sonogram of Cipher, 8’02–8’15   
 
 
Figure 6 shows material commencing at 8’02 woven into complex, rhythmic phrases, 
creating stuttering interruptions. Similar phrasing occurs throughout the work, and was 
produced by layering and looping a variety of edited sounds of very short durations37, 
exporting them as one unit and applying time compression. The result is often the 
creation of stuttering micro rhythms, and the rapidly changing sound material within 
these acts to increase pacing. Often the component sounds of these phrases differ 
substantially in terms of their spectral characteristics and implied proximal space. 
However, temporal organisation and synchronicity imply source-cause relationships 
between the proximate and distal material. In Figure 6 the jagged phrases gravitate 
towards more consistent repetition and eventually pulse at 8’13, elements which by their 
nature imply a more stable plane.  
 
This approach to materials typifies that taken overall in the composition of Cipher.  
Equalisation to focus the high spectrum of materials, precision editing of sounds into 
short durations (often using individual voiced consonants), and time-compression were 
all applied extensively. Frequently these processes were taken to the extreme, where 
                                            
37 This technique was derived from those I was concurrently using in laptop improvisation using 
Max/MSP. 

 
26 
the sound’s links to its original source weakened and the material began to adopt glitch-
like properties, at times on the brink of distortion.  This material helped to convey further 
the programmatic link to electronic codes and interference.  
 
 
Vertical Shaping vs. Horizontal Organisation 
 
The precise and dense arrangement of sound on the horizontal (temporal) axis generally 
dominates over vertical concerns of spectral distribution in this work. However, there is 
exploration of evolving spectral space and wider landscapes between 7’21 and 8’01, a 
section intended as a respite to frequent density on the horizontal axis.  Outside this 
passage, spectral shaping generally occurs in the high frequency spectrum. This 
material is useful in creating a sense of clarity and intimacy, and the proximate space it 
implies is further developed through the intimacy of the voice and the close quality of 
recorded sound material. This approach to spectral content, however, has proved to be 
vulnerable in especially reverberant venues, where clarity, and consequently impact of 
the material, may be compromised. In reverberant acoustics rapidly articulated material 
suffers by sounding ‘smudged’ and high-frequency detailing is obscured. As a result, the 
work is best heard in a dry performance space where the clarity of gesture and 
interruption is more likely to be retained for the audience.  
 
 
Conclusion  
 
Proximate perspectival space dominates in Cipher. Although distal planes are present, 
they are often overshadowed by ‘close’ material, which frequently draws on source-
bonded and agential space. Stuttering rhythms and patterns characterise the work, and 
these add to a sense of forward momentum and tension. Despite the integration of vocal 
material, the work does not draw heavily on behavioural space. Individual gestures, 
whether vocal or otherwise, are frequently short and fleeting moments which do not 
necessarily allow for the establishment of behaviour, trajectories and hence true spatial 
collaboration as an ensemble. Instead, mechanical organisation in the temporal 
domain38 is favoured over organic evolution, and this precise temporal organisation of 
materials recalls the extra-musical stimulation for this work.   
 
 
 
                                            
38 Perhaps displaying elements of what Harrison refers to as an ‘architectonic’ structuring, which 
‘is built on the quantifiable distances between musical events (in all parameters) whereas organic 
structure explores the qualitative evolution, the spectro-morphology of the events themselves.’ 
Harrison (2008), pp.127. 

 
27 
 
1.4 Spectral spaces and manipulating proximity in Topographia  
(Composed 2008, Duration: 9’31) 
 
 
Background 
 
Topographia aims to explore a number of sonic landscapes and topologies through 
variations in implied proximities, densities and kinetic behaviour of sound materials. The 
composition of Topographia arose from a project in which seven composers created a 
work using the same source material, this being a collection of twelve short samples 
from Denis Smalley’s Wind Chimes, released for use by the composer himself. Bearing 
in mind Smalley’s interest in the spatial attributes of electroacoustic music, it seemed 
appropriate to explore this particular area through the sonic material. In many respects 
Topographia is particularly influenced by Smalley’s Valley Flow, a work which greatly 
influenced my early compositions, most notably Soliloquy (2003) and Stratus (2004). I 
have long admired Smalley’s spectral shaping in Valley Flow in the creation of exquisite 
evolving landscapes. 
 
 
Pitch-Centred Materials and Spectral Manipulation 
 
In undertaking a work with very specific limitations on sound material (I was limited 
exclusively to the twelve samples, some of which were simply multiple transformations 
of the same material), I was required to reconsider and adapt my musical language. The 
majority of the original samples were heavily resonant and most displayed specific pitch-
centres. Inevitably the resulting work has been coloured by this and the structure is 
underpinned by shifts in tonal pitch space39. While tonality is sometimes dismissed by 
the acousmatic composer, perhaps due to its ties to classical musical structures, pitch 
relationships can undoubtedly contribute towards the construction of space-form, as 
Hermann Helmholtz describes: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
39 ‘The subdivision of spectral space into incremental steps that are deployed in intervallic 
combinations’ Smalley (2007), pp.58. 

 
28 
‘Such a close analogy consequently exists in all essential relations between 
the musical scale and space, that even alteration of pitch has a readily 
recognised and unmistakeable resemblance to motion in space, and is often 
metaphorically termed the ascending or descending motion or progression of 
a part. Hence, again, it becomes possible for motion in music to imitate the 
peculiar characteristics of motive forces which lie at the root of motion.’40  
 
In addition, Smalley suggests another possible application of pitch-centred material, in 
the form of resonance: 
 
‘We can stretch out new, imagined resonances creating structure whose 
textural coherence retains the internal logic of resonance instigation, but 
may expand into fantasy’41  
 
Resonances in Topographia are indeed artificially lengthened to lead the ear to new 
material, frequently through a bending of pitch. (However, this technique is developed to 
a greater extent in Bosonica.42) 
 
The obligation to work with predominantly pitch-centred material created an opportunity 
for me to explore these parameters further. I was encouraged to move away from my 
favoured noise-based gestures and metallic textures and, following the composition of 
Topographia, tonal pitch-space has featured more prominently in my practice. 
  
Pitch-space can be regarded as a sub-category of spectral space, which in itself 
became a major concern in this work. Due to the dominance of pitch-centred sound 
materials it was necessary for me to investigate new and alternative techniques of 
transformation to create a sufficiently varied palette of sound. I frequently utilised 
graphic equalisers to isolate narrow bands of a sound’s spectrum, which I then layered 
with a number of other narrow bands to create material with complex spectral 
occupancy. Generally such material is used to articulate planes in distal space. I also 
utilised graphic equalisation to highlight pitch-centres and reveal hidden harmonies. By 
performing this technique multiple times with subtle variations and pitch shifting, I was 
able to create from very little starting material a catalogue of spectrally similar sounds, 
each displaying a slightly different ‘colour’. Dynamic control of equalisation allowed me 
to transform the spectral content of sounds over time, in order to imply gradual shifts in 
its mass and behaviour. The more drastic technique of varispeed led to the creation of 
glissandi, imprinting a more defined form of direction on sounds. 
                                            
40 Helmholtz (1954) in Windsor (1995), pp.370. 
41 Smalley (1986), pp.90. 
42 Bosonica sets out to exploit the source-bonds with instrumental music, hence the specific 
application of resonance to which Smalley refers was a particularly appropriate tool.  

 
29 
Structural Reinforcement Through Pitch-Space  
 
Harmonic progression is employed as a structural tool, often to reinforce aspects such 
as ‘progression’ and ‘arrival’. While the climax of the work, occurring at 5’32, is 
perpetuated by a broadening of spectral occupancy, harmonic preparation and 
escalation of pitch reaffirm its position as a climax.  In a similar manner, pitch-centred 
glissandi frequently function to create trajectories leading the ear between implied 
spaces, reinforcing smaller scale impressions of ascent/descent, approach and retreat. 
This is particularly prominent at 8’30 where the diagonal forces created through 
glissandi dissipate to stabilise at 9’00. Such gravitational pulls are crucial in creating the 
organic ebb and flow of the work. While gestural interplay and shifting harmonies create 
instability, they frequently gravitate towards stable forms, for example the plateau heard 
at 5’05 and 5’48 (Figure 7, A and B), only for them to destabilise once again. 
 
 
Figure 7: Sonogram of Topographia, 4’58–6’06 displaying stable planes at A (5’05) and B (5’48). 
Such extended passages of semi-stasis are not regularly found in Anima Machina or Cipher.  
 
 
Gesture and Ensemble Space 
 
While sustained textures emerged naturally from the source material, I found that I 
encountered more difficultly creating gestural material. Where I would usually have 
recorded additional source material which displayed inherent gestural characteristics, I 
was unable to do so in this case. Instead I continued to process the sounds further and 
further, eventually adopting extensive granulation techniques to manipulate the 
A 
B 

 
30 
resonant, sustained material into more dynamic entities. The resulting gestures 
generally exhibit a fluid water-like quality in the work, and form a layer which consistently 
represents the most proximate behaviour in the work. These bubbling gestures were 
often pitch-shifted to imprint upon them similar, albeit accelerated, dynamic trajectories 
to those found in the extended glissandi.  
 
Once multiple gestures are layered they form chains of gestures which exhibit organic 
behaviours and implications of physical motion43, for example at 7’22. Here the motion 
of the sound-objects implies that they are dynamically bouncing off one another, and 
there is a very clear sense of causality and interaction between them, key components 
of ensemble space44. Barrett calls attention to the ability of such gestures to define the 
arena, or larger environmental space, which they occupy:  
 
‘the size of space perceived from the combination of a rapidly moving 
gesture and a stationary point will be the product of the spatial extremes 
defined by each sound’45 
 
In Topographia the juxtaposition of dynamic gestural activity on a proximal plane against 
distal elements reinforces relative dimensions of landscape, and when motion behaviour 
occurs in distal as well as proximal space an increased impression of spatial flux is 
produced.  
 
The relationships between gestures may also help to define the state of their ensemble 
space by leaning towards either self-motion, or conversely an active environment. 
Clarke describes how, due to relativity, sound moving in the same manner will imply 
‘self-motion’, whereas sounds with distinct motion attributes will imply the movements of 
external objects in relation to each other46.  The latter technique dominates in the 
gestural content of this work. Compound gestures create micro-trajectories, which at 
times interact with and influence the behaviours of sustained material (macro-
trajectories). Such interaction between spatial planes can be effective in creating an 
active, yet coherent, environment. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
43 Specific motion typologies are detailed in Smalley (1986), pp.74. 
44 Here I refer to ensemble space in its ‘virtual’ form, inside the composed space. A further type of 
ensemble space would be that experienced in the listening space, for example an ensemble of 
instrumentalists.  
45 Barrett (2002), pp. 320. 
46 Clarke (2005), pp.76. 

 
31 
The Construction of an Organic Environment 
 
A variety of different motions are explored in this environment in terms of implied 
masses, velocities and trajectories. 5’04–6’07 represents a short section which is 
arguably most similar to the approach taken by Smalley in Valley Flow. A vast 
landscape is presented, with events taking place within the sonic framework at different 
proximities to the listener. Each of the sound-objects within this landscape exhibits 
individual motion behaviour and the combined result is a dynamic, yet organic, shifting 
landscape.  This develops into a harmonic climax which, through spectral broadening, 
immerses the listener. There follows recession to the most distant landscape in the 
work, at 6’00. However, the landscape here continues to convey a degree of instability 
through subtle spectral fluctuations, which prepare the listener for an approach of 
material at 6’06 to reach the most proximate space in the work at 6’15. Even at this 
point, a more distal space continues to be defined, articulated through a receding and 
descending glissando on a more distal plane47.  
 
Such a section is in marked contrast to the style of writing explored in Anima Machina 
and Cipher. In Topographia I have made a conscious effort to elongate phrases and 
transitions, and to temper my propensity towards faster pacing (a notable example of 
this being in Cipher). There is slower and more subtle evolution of elements, exploiting 
static or semi-static planes48 to their full potential, frequently as spectral grounds or 
canopies. This sustained material reinforces an overall slower pacing, even when 
proximal gestural interplay is at the forefront.  
 
 
Conclusion 
 
A major aim in the composition of Topographia was to focus on the creation of more 
varied perspectival frameworks within composed space, particularly the construction of 
landscape and impressions of distal space. However, spectral manipulation becomes 
crucial in achieving this. Attention to spectral aspects may assist in creating impressions 
of near and far, and fluctuations in spectral content may imply navigation between these 
established spaces.  
 
Topographia is dependent on the interaction of elements of space-form, more so than 
Anima Machina and Cipher. At any given point in the work, the identity of space is 
defined through interactions between gestural space, perspectival space, spectral 
                                            
47 Even the most subtle of changes will contribute towards motion, and consequently an active 
space. The ability of ‘change’ to imply motion is discussed by Clarke (2005), pp.75. 
48 A static plane may not necessarily be a sustained sound, but could be a continuant 
characterised by internal pulse. While pulse is traditionally associated with motion in music, such 
intrinsic consistency may create an impression of grounding.  

 
32 
space, and pitch-space. It is often challenging to define the contribution of each of these 
elements due to overlapping characteristics and a tendency towards constant evolution.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
33 
1.5 Tactile spaces and gestural association in Papyrus 
(Composed 2008, Duration: 8’23) 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Papyrus is a short work developed from material used in the composition of a 
soundtrack for a site-specific theatre production49 of The Yellow Wallpaper, based on 
the novel by Charlotte Perkins Gilman.  During the production there were a number of 
set pieces where the actors performed movement choreographed to mimic the action of 
ripping paper. For these sections I found it particularly intriguing to compose music. I 
became very aware of the physical implications which could be conveyed through the 
sound of paper, a seemingly simple and mundane material. By utilising very close 
microphone techniques it was possible to detect in the recordings the speed, direction, 
mass, weight of paper, and ultimately the intention behind the interaction. (The quality of 
the original material is crucial, as the microphone space50 inherent in the recordings 
emphasises intimacy and magnifies the intricate timbral details usually lost in 
conventional acoustic situations.) After seeing what powerful physical images the 
recordings could convey in the theatre production, I was eager to experiment with their 
potential in an acousmatic work.  
 
While Papyrus uses the same source material (recordings of all kinds of paper 
manipulation, including the ripping of large sheets of wallpaper) as in the theatre 
soundtrack, it stands independently. There are no quotations of the theatre soundtrack, 
and no direct references to the narrative of The Yellow Wallpaper. Instead the idea of 
ripping wallpaper to reveal new layers was employed metaphorically as a general 
structuring tool. There are four sections (see Diagram 4), preceded by a short 
introduction. 
 
 
Tactile Source-bonds 
 
Through numerous tactile references to unprocessed, closely-recorded paper, Papyrus 
invites a transmodal51 interpretation of sound. Isolated quotations of paper ripping (e.g. 
0’38–0’47) refer to a human agent behind the act, but also more specifically to 
implications of the movement of the physical act and the intention of the act. This 
                                            
49 Performed at The Herbarium, Manchester Museum, 27th-29th May 2008. Adapted by Sarah 
Stewart, directed by Rob Drummer. 
50 ‘A performed gestural or utterance space where intimacy of the image is magnified.’ Smalley 
(2007), pp.57. 
51 ‘The interaction and interdependence of various sense modalities’ Smalley (2007), pp.58. 

 
34 
reliance on extrinsic source-bonding underpins the work, unlike in Anima Machina and 
Topographia where more abstract qualities dominate. Although there are source-bonded 
associations implied through a multitude of gestures and textures in the work, key 
moments when this material is heard in isolation occur at 0’34, 2’15 and 3’39, as 
introductory material to three of the four sections in the work. At these points there is 
direct allusion to the peeling of wallpaper to reveal a new surface; the final ‘rip’ from 
each of the ‘real’ (unprocessed) sections acts as an anacrusis into a new, imaginary 
sound-world.  
 
 
Agential Relationships as Structural Devices 
 
The initial twenty seconds can be interpreted as an accelerated journey through the 
intrinsic perspectival dimensions of the work. An intimate flicker of paper is interrupted to 
reveal a mounting tension which bursts to reveal an expansive landscape at 0’17. At 
0’36 the listener is transported from this fictional landscape back to a real space, created 
through the isolated presentation of an original raw recording, clearly source-bonded 
with the turning of pages in a book. The human agency implied through this sets up 
gestural space with powerful potential. Frequently the action of ripping paper, rooted in 
this gestural space, develops and accumulates to take the listener to a new, fictional 
space, for example at 0’47 and 2’35. As a result a dichotomy is set up between the 
presentation of the raw paper material and, in stark contrast, the development of 
complex layered landscapes. The gestural impetus of the paper acts as a link from one 
world to the other, propelling the music to new spaces constructed from processed 
material and appearing heavily abstract. At 3’39 the trajectory set-up by the slow and 
tense paper ripping is continued by the new sonic materials it metaphorically reveals. In 
turn, new types of motion emerge and a complex set of interacting gestural behaviours 
are introduced.  
 
Section Three, between 3’53 and 6’51, explores a similar mode of working with material 
to that found in Cipher. Individual gestures are organised to present rhythmic fragments, 
and occasionally there is a sense of pulse and meter (most prominently from 4’53). 
However, while such organisation of sound (rhythm and pulse) presents a powerful hold 
for the ear to follow, it can also possibly distract from richer spatial concerns and may 
tend towards a one-dimensional plane, even when very rich gestures are included. Yet, 
this section does act as a strong contrast to the organic abstract landscapes explored 
until 2’23.  Section Two (2’36 – 3’37) acts as a transition from this environment into the 
more rhythmical material through the exploration of more dynamic gestural behaviours 
and intimations of rhythmic constructions. The final section, commencing 6’51, explores 
the most distal elements of the work, but with far more subtle gestural contributions. 

 
35 
Introduction (0’00–0’34): Rapid presentation of the 
spatial dimensions of work. 
Paper Interlude (0’34–0’47)  
Section 1 (0’47–2’15): Landscape is presented and a 
number of planes are articulated within this 
environment. This disperses into the interlude. 
Paper Interlude (2’15–2’36)  
Section 2 (2’36–3’37): Development of more dynamic 
gestural material leading to Section 3  
Section 3 (3’53–6’51): Rhythmic organisation of 
proximate material. Pulse and meter dominate. 
Energy disperses as a transition into Section 4.   
Paper Interlude (3’37–3’53)  
(displaying more abstraction 
than previously)   
Section 4 (6’51–8’40): Exploration of distal material, 
interspersed with gestures echoing the previously 
active environment 
Here spectral space dominates and constructs the dimensions of a broad panorama. 
Within this, the gestural space of a number of sound-objects articulate a variety of 
perspectival planes, one after another. The work concludes with a final quotation of 
proximal, intimate paper. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8: Outline of Structure in Papyrus 
  

 
36 
 
It is in the tangible surface detail of the recorded material, which is manipulated and 
almost ‘performed’ through human agency, that gesture and corresponding trajectories 
are embedded. At 2’51 this is demonstrated through a particularly strong set of short 
trajectories, which when placed together direct the listener through a clear ‘chain’ of 
motion/direction information, or ‘journey’. Although the context here distracts from a 
sense of direct human agency, the materials retain an organic quality of ensemble 
space through their collaborative identity.  
 
 
Conclusion 
 
Papyrus is a work drawing on a number of methods of constructing space. The work 
explores the relationships between unprocessed recorded sound and its source-bonded 
associations, and highly constructed abstract landscapes. A device which is common to 
both of these sound-worlds is the use of paper rips to communicate clear motion 
trajectories which in turn provide forward momentum. The idea of grouped gestural 
behaviour (i.e. ensemble space) which was first introduced in Topographia, is developed 
further, by constructing strings of overlapping gestures which display complex motions. 
 
The source material naturally evokes tactile qualities and through a process of source-
bonding, draws attention to an elusive human agency. This dominates in passages 
where unprocessed paper is presented in isolation. The structure is underpinned by 
dichotomies between the mundane and the imagined; the unprocessed and the heavily 
transformed; the natural and the constructed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
37 
II Multichannel Composition: 5.1 and 8-channel concert works 
 
2.1 Approaches to the Composition of Spindlesong, for 8-channel 
audio  
(Composed 2008, Duration: 15’57) 
 
 
Background to Spindlesong 
 
Quarry Bank Mill is an 18th Century cotton mill in Styal, to the south of Manchester. The 
cotton industry was crucial to the growth of the economy in the North West of England, 
and many families found themselves in some way dependent on the industry during the 
19th and early 20th Centuries. Quarry Bank Mill is now a museum of the cotton industry, 
owned by the National Trust. Inside remain many working examples of the machinery 
used in the manufacture of cotton, including looms (both manual and automatic) 
carders, spinners, and steam engines, all of which were originally powered by an iron 
water wheel, one of the largest examples of its kind in the UK. These sounds combine to 
create a rich sonic environment and exciting possibilities for the acousmatic composer. 
Two works emerged from the sound material I gathered at the Mill, Spindlesong, an 8-
channel concert work, and an 8-channel installation, which will be discussed in further 
detail in Chapter 3. 
 
 
Associated Repertoire 
 
The Mill itself is no stranger to artistic collaborations. Its history, architecture, sights, 
smells and sounds have informed a number of cultural projects, including theatre, dance 
and video works by Manchester-based artists. In 2004 David Berezan utilised recordings 
made at the Mill to create his stereo acousmatic work, Styal. To my knowledge, this is 
the only other sound work inspired specifically by Quarry Bank Mill, although Annie 
Mahtani’s Past Links, Peter Stollery’s Vox Magna and Nye Parry’s Boomtown52 and 
Living Steam53 are all examples of the Industrial Revolution as a composer’s principal 
inspiration. 
 
                                            
52 An installation work commissioned (1998/99) for Oldham borough’s 150th anniversary 
celebrations. The work references the sonic elements of the industrial revolution, including the 
cotton industry which underpins much of the social history of the region. This work uses material 
from the North West Sound Archive, as does The Spindlesongs Installation. Parry (2003). 
53 A site-specific installation work (1998/99) for eight-channel tape and steam engines, described 
in Parry (2003). 
 

 
38 
The constituent elements of Spindlesong and David Berezan’s Styal are essentially very 
similar54, but the two works exhibit very different approaches to the use of sound 
materials. When composing Spindlesong I refrained from listening to Styal until 
completion, to avoid being subconsciously led in a particular compositional direction. 
 
Materials in Berezan’s work are more ambiguous in terms of identifiable source. The 
work appears to be structured around dramatic contrasts in perceived mass and density. 
It is extremely effective at conveying the immense power and scale of machinery 
alongside detailed mechanisms through a wide range of spectral layering. The majority 
of the sound material references industrial machinery and its power in a general sense. 
It has been processed to reveal intrinsic properties which aid the creation of rich, 
dynamic textures and amplified physicality and motion. However there are a number of 
distinctive sound quotations taken from Quarry Bank Mill. These include looms (5’29, 
8’45 and 12’48), the carder (2’37), a steam engine (6’39) and resonating cogs at 11’32. 
Although a few of these sounds (most notably the looms) are unmistakably recognisable 
for their link to the cotton industry, whether these quotations serve to identify the original 
environmental location is questionable. While I immediately recognise and link these 
sounds through source-bonding to the cotton industry and Quarry Bank Mill, I am unsure 
whether someone with reduced knowledge of this specific sonic context would.  My 
personal listening experience of Styal exemplifies the power of source-bonding in the 
interpretation of a work. Having formed a close relationship to the Mill sounds, my 
interpretation of Styal is now radically different to that which I first experienced a number 
of years ago55.  
 
 
Initial Compositional Approaches in 8-channel Composition 
 
The concert work Spindlesong represents my first experience of composing in an 8-
channel format, utilising what Smalley terms the fixed mode56 of circumspace57. Prior to 
this, my one experience with surround formats was in the composition of a work for 
dance, which utilised quadraphonic sound58.  
 
                                            
54 Both works utilise recordings of almost exactly the same machinery found in the Mill.  Like me, 
Berezan choose to utilise additional, studio-recorded material. While I made recordings of metallic 
objects, he draws on the sounds of textiles. Berezan’s work is composed in stereo. 
55 ‘the listener’s knowledge of context, together with associations and connotations, play a vital 
role in the reception of the work’, Truax (2001), pp.124. 
56 ‘Where the delivery of perspectival space is integrated into the format of the composition and is 
not further diffused via the enacted mode of delivery’, Smalley (2007), pp.57. However, the 
potential for enacted delivery of a fixed mode work is discussed in Appendix D. 
57 ‘In perspectival space – the extension of prospective and panoramic space so that sound can 
move around the listener and through or across egocentric space [The personal space 
surrounding the listener]’, Smalley (2007), pp.57. 
58 66˚33’07”S…and all was white (2006). A collaboration with Sari Lievonen, choreographer. 

 
39 
Barrett suggests that the inability to ‘spatialise sound streams simultaneously’59 can be a 
significant limitation in sound diffusion. Surround sound composition releases the 
potential to explore this tool. She highlights that the capacity to ‘reproduce a spatial-
gestural counterpoint featuring multiple independent motion trajectories’60 in surround 
sound is a desirable tool, as does Trevor Wishart61.  However, one risk of utilising this 
technique in its most extreme state, mono placement, is that it may draw attention to a 
fixed point, reiterating the loudspeaker’s state as an inanimate and visual source. In 
addition, such use of mono placement can stifle any impressions of ‘transcended’ space, 
a space implied as existing beyond the ring of loudspeakers.  
 
Perhaps for this reason, I initially decided to fully embrace the 8-channel format by 
creating solely 8-channel material. Having made all of the source recordings in stereo, I 
utilised a number of tools, including BEAST tools (in beta version)62, panners in 
Max/MSP63, Peter Batchelor’s Orbit and Clatter64 and MPSP65 by Flo Menezes to 
generate 8-channel sound-files. However, I found that 8-channel sound proved unwieldy 
to control in a sequencing session, particularly when my previous experience had been 
almost exclusively in the manipulation of stereo material. The use of many different 
software applications to process, spatialise and then mix resulted in substantially less 
control over compositional decision-making than I was accustomed to in stereo 
composition.  
 
As a result, the final version of the work reaches a compromise and uses a combination 
of mono, stereo and 8-channel sound files, mixed in Nuendo 466. My experience 
questions the impact that software tools may have on compositional outcome. During 
the composition of Spindlesong I was very aware of software limitations which might 
hinder the realisation of creative goals. Certain tools seem to favour certain techniques, 
and this is particularly evident when composing in the non-commercial format of 8-
channel sound. While Nuendo 4 was the software which best met my needs at the time, 
                                            
59 Barrett in Otondo (2007), pp.12. 
60 Barrett (2002), pp.318. 
61 Wishart (1996), pp.231. 
62 A set of Max/MSP based spatialisation tools, built by a number of BEAST (Birmingham 
ElectroAcoustic Sound Theatre) composers, with most modules intended for 8-channel processing 
and sound management. http://www.beast.bham.ac.uk/research/tools.shtml  
63 Timothy A. Place’s ‘8 Channel MSP Spatializer’. Available at 
http://www.cycling74.com/twiki/bin/view/Share/TimPlace. 
64 Available for download at http://www.peterbatchelor.com/maxOrbit.html. Orbit allows for the 
translation of mono or stereo sounds into multi-channel formats, with flexibility over the distribution 
of sound across the array. The functionality of allowing sound to rotate around a fixed point is 
particularly useful. Clatter2to8 allows the user to ‘draw’ sonic gestures, created using a sample 
engine. This 8-channel version facilitates the creation of very effective spatial counterpoint.  
65 MusicPanSPace allows for the positioning of multiple sounds across a loudspeaker array. Other 
features include automation of sound trajectories, EQ and various presets. Available for download 
at http://www.flomenezes.mus.br/flomenezes/index_flomenezes.html. 
66 An audio production environment built by Steinberg Software. For me, this application offered 
substantial benefits over sequencing in other audio environments, including the ability to layer 
mono, stereo and 8-channel sounds, as well as automate the spatialisation of mono and stereo 
sounds over the 8-channel array using in-built panners. 

 
40 
there were some major frustrations; the in-built panners are in fixed orientation which 
prescribes a central loudspeaker, and there is minimal flexibility in the placement of 
stereo images across specific pairs of speakers in the array.  
 
 
Sound Placement in Circumspace 
 
Mono files are at times used to dramatic effect, often being panned across a number of 
loudspeakers. This is most frequently the case with the sounds of extended releases of 
steam (i.e. 2’44), which present spectromophologies that ‘accept’ the spatialisation 
attributes of panning across an area of the 8-ring. However, this manner of spatialisation 
may sound forced or imposed on certain other sounds. Smalley reinforces that ‘the 
motion must be implicit in the sound itself, or the texture itself, or the context itself’ and I 
have endeavoured to adhere to this principle.67  
 
On occasion, mono and summed stereo files are allocated to individual loudspeakers for 
their duration, usually only when there are clusters of gestures spread across the array 
(i.e. 4’47 – 4’54). In these instances, the stark positioning in one loudspeaker is a 
fleeting moment, and not immediately noticeable in the context of a composed ensemble 
space.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
67 Smalley, in Austin (2001), pp.17. Although Smalley here refers to sound diffusion (the enacted 
mode of circumspace), it is logical to suggest a similar relationship between sound and the 
composition of fixed circumspace. 

 
41 
For this particular work I frequently considered the concentric circle of eight 
loudspeakers as four pairs from front to rear68, in the style of a compact diffusion system 
(see Diagram 3). This idea of approaching 8-channel composition from a stereo 
perspective has also been also proposed by Barry Truax69. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Diagram 3: Multiple stereo groupings in Spindlesong 
 
 
This approach was directly influenced by my experience in stereo sound diffusion, and I 
frequently applied quasi-diffusion techniques to the arrangement of sound. For example, 
to create a sudden immersion in sound for the audience, I could place a stereo image on 
the ‘front’ pair of loudspeakers then rapidly add duplications of this stereo image over 
the ‘wide’, ‘side’ and finally ‘rear’ pairs of loudspeakers. As is often the case with 
diffusion, the work is generally frontal dominant, with loudspeakers one and two (at 
times in conjunction with three and four) more often used to present a stereo image in 
isolation than any other pair. It is true that localisation blur increases as a sound moves 
to the side of the listener, and furthermore to the rear70. However, despite such 
deterioration, a benefit of the layered stereo approach is the retention of symmetry, and 
to a certain degree, the stereo image. The method proved particularly useful for creating 
very substantial changes in circumspatial distribution by implementing techniques 
modelled on diffusion practice.  
                                            
68 Although the ‘double diamond’ formation in 8-channel composition is equally popular and other 
arrangements just as valid. 
69 ‘I would like to suggest that the multiple-channel system can be understood as an extension of 
stereo practice. Eight-channel tape, for instance, can be thought of as four contrapuntal stereo 
layers...’ Truax (1999), pp.145. However Truax follows this with reinforcement of point-source 
placement as a crucial tool in multi-channel composition. 
70 Blauert (2001), pp.40. 

 
42 
 
However, in order to expand my spatial palette beyond the permutations available with 
four sets of stereo sources, I also utilised other sub-groupings71 of the 8-channel array 
(Diagram 4 and 5). Stereo sounds could be distributed laterally and also scattered 
across the array using panning tools within Nuendo 4. While the sounds then lost their 
‘stereo’ characteristics (often due to the overly wide and asymmetric angle of ‘left’ and 
‘right’ channels in relation to the listener, Diagram 5), this technique of sound placement 
resulted in variety across the 8-channel array. Much of the time, the sounds used in this 
manner were not high in the musical hierarchy. They were almost certainly not the focus 
of attention, and consequently clarity of stereo image reproduction was not vital. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Diagram 4: Example one of sub-groupings for 
presentation on an 8-channel array72 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
71 James Mooney applies the term ‘coherent loudspeaker sets’ (CLS) to such groupings of 
loudspeakers. Mooney (2004), pp.163. 
72 Diagram 4 shows four possible stereo groups. However, this exact simultaneous formation with 
four individual stereo sounds would result in very audible subdivision of the circle. Instead, multiple 
sub-groupings are generally overlapped.  However, there is no reason why the formation given 
could not be utilised for a particular aural result. 

 
43 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Diagram 5: Example two of sub-grouping for  
presentation on an 8-channel array73 
 
 
8-channel sounds were employed to create more subtle distribution of sound over the 
eight loudspeakers (as opposed to simply duplicating the stereo image four times) and 
at times they demonstrate audibly automated techniques of spatialisation. This is not 
heavily utilised in this work, but does occur in the form of cyclical motion, and random 
panning of sounds (i.e. 10’39).  
 
 
Material 
 
I had no particular aspiration to create a soundscape work. While the raw recordings 
were rich with sonic information, I was keen to place my own compositional stamp on 
the material, to remould it as my own.  In terms of the composed space of this work, the 
integration of environmental-based material and clean, processed sound was a major 
difficulty. The source materials were a mixture of recordings from Quarry Bank Mill, and 
also found sounds, (a variety of metallic objects which were recorded in the studio). The 
recordings from the Mill presented rich soundscapes with environmental depth74, which 
conjured vivid images in the imagination. However, they proved to be challenging as 
musical material. Due to the combination of multiple sound objects (including unwanted 
‘background’ sound) within each recorded image and a very characteristic spatial 
fingerprint of the Mill acoustics, processing created mixed results and in general, there 
                                            
73 This wide stereo formation is generally used dynamically around the array for particularly 
animated textures. For the chosen sound material, perceiving an accurate stereo image was not 
vital. 
74 ‘Environmental sounds are not only source material that is rich in acoustic complexity, but also 
rich in a variety of levels of meaning, both personal and cultural, and possibly even cross-cultural.’ 
Truax (1996), pp.52. 

 
44 
was stark spatial disparity75 when they were juxtaposed with ‘clean’ sounds from the 
studio.  
 
However, quotation is employed as a device to echo directly the acoustics and sonic 
qualities of the Mill which cannot be synthesised. Ironically, I used the studio-recorded 
materials to reinforce motion aspects that could not be fully conveyed through the 
acoustic recordings. There is a deliberate exploration of materials associated with the 
construction of the mill. Clearly identifiable materials including water (also in the form of 
steam), metal and wood are major elements and while some of the materials were not 
recorded in the mill at all, they are still firmly rooted in the identity of the milling industry. 
Figure 9 presents the layers of material abstraction within the work: 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9: The reality-abstraction continuum of materials in Spindlesong 
 
 
                                            
75 Barrett discusses spatial consonance and conflict in Barrett (2002), pp.319-320. 
Unprocessed Machinery is used as a direct reference to the Mill, 
presenting a rich environment which could not be synthesised i.e. 10’58.  
Water is used in a textural capacity. Its recognisability and strong 
referential capabilities emphasise a real location i.e. 1’27–1’32.  
Steam is used to colour passages. As a malleable sound material it is 
used to create trajectories and forward motion, but is also used for 
extreme panning across the 8-ring i.e. 2’43–3’06. 
Wood and Metal. Small fragments of studio recorded sounds are 
combined to create gestural counterpoint. The abstract temporal 
arrangement and spatialisation of materials contributes to an imaginary 
soundworld which is timbrally linked to the Mill i.e. 3’36, 3’39, 3’49.  
Processed Machinery most commonly through equalisation and looping 
alludes to the relentless pulse of the Mill. Overlapping pulses create 
tension and complex textures i.e. 12’57–13’37. 
Resonant drones are found in the Mill itself, however in the work they 
behave as abstract material, drawing together passages which would 
otherwise sound fragmented (i.e. disjunct bursts of gestures from 3’40). 
Low frequency resonances open up perspectival space and allude to the 
large-scale structures in the Mill.  
Increasing abstraction 

 
45 
Traces of the Mill are common; quotations of the original recordings are masked and 
unveiled amidst even the most abstract of sound-worlds. The relentless pulse of the 
machinery is found throughout in one form or another, whether real, or alluded to 
through pitched iterations and internal sound movement.  
 
 
Structuring  
 
The structure of the work is based heavily on traversing the reality-abstraction 
continuum detailed in Figure 9 (and its associated spaces), in conjunction with variations 
in pacing. 
 
The introduction (0’00–3’21) commences with water sounds, a reference to the origins 
of the Mill’s power. An imaginary landscape is presented, with references to small-scale 
machinery through intimate pulses and loops. There are occasional references to 
greater power, through the sweeps of sound at 0’38, and 2’58. Machinery increasingly 
takes centre stage and this introductory section concludes with a tense ‘winding up’ 
towards a dramatic release at 3’21.  
 
Gestural Development (3’24–6’11): Stillness is initially presented (3’30), but is 
interrupted by clusters of gestural material. Harmonic stability is provided through 
extended pitched material, (which is later replaced by pitched pulses from 4’30). At 4’30 
increased pacing is established through presentation of a diversity of materials, A 
contrasting, more expansive perspectival space is revealed twice, at 4’54, and 5’38, 
which acts as a release from ‘close’ gestural material. Gestural interplay and 
counterpoint accumulates and the soundworld becomes increasingly dissociated from 
the Mill’s origins.  
 
A transition (6’11–7’55) initially explores distal environments through veiled pitches.  
The presentation of a ticking mechanism from 7’11 signifies the renewed energy of 
mechanical materials. Tension is created through overlapping (and seemingly endless) 
ascending glissandi in the background.  
 
Gestural Development II (7’55–11’23): Gestural counterpoint is recalled at 7’55, again 
in conjunction with tonal pitch space in the backdrop. Faster pacing is established 
through greater layering and diversity in sound materials, and more perceptible 
implications of ‘weight’ and ‘attack’. Rhythmic pulses are more apparent and now 
overlap. 9’25–10’40 represents the climax of the work, with the phrasing characterised 
by dense, frantic textures, presented through interruptions and juxtapositions of material 
and space (a technique first explored in Anima Machina). This section is brought to a 

 
46 
close with exploration from 10’36 of almost exclusively ‘real’ material.  However, there is 
a dramatic shift to abstraction at 11’08. 
 
A further transition (11’23–12’56) presents smaller-scale abstract gestures, seemingly 
unrelated to the Mill’s true sounds. Echoes of previous material occur within a mystical 
and meditative landscape. 
 
Coda (12’55–15’50) Rhythms and pulses are introduced and layered from across the 
reality/abstraction continuum, although unified pulse is presented from 14’54. This final 
escalation of energy leads to a release at 15’16, and the machinery ‘winds down’ as it 
would in reality.  
 
 
 
Circumspatial Consonance and Dissonance 
   
The difficulties encountered when attempting to integrate the different materials in 
composed space were also echoed when considering the domain of circumspace. 
Barrett (2002) and Smalley (1991) have both discussed the topic of spatial consonance 
and dissonance. While spatial dissonance might be most readily perceived in a 
performance venue, when, for example, a reverberation implied in a sound conflicts with 
the acoustic of the space in which it is transmitted, the terms consonance and 
dissonance are arguably just as appropriate for use in the composed space and fixed 
circumspace.    
 
The projection of the environmental images from Quarry Bank could itself be regarded 
as spatial dissonance. The original environmental landscape is condensed to a stereo 
image, then spatialised over eight channels. The convincing reproduction of the original 
spatial qualities of the sound after its compression to stereo is an extremely difficult 
task76. However, I was not aiming for precision reality-equivalence77 but a new world of 
spatial imagery informed by my experience and interpretation of the original context.  
 
 
Conclusion 
 
Overall, the circumspatial vocabulary over the eight loudspeakers is extremely varied in 
Spindlesong. While one sound may appear in the foreground and its associated 
spatialisation is consequently highlighted, there may be multiple types of circumspace 
                                            
76 Malham (2001) pp.31-32. 
77 Had this been an intention, I would have utilised surround recording techniques at the outset, for 
example using  Soundfield’s DFS-2 microphone. 

 
47 
occurring simultaneously in the background. In practice the work reflects the great 
number of tools applied through the research of a novice multi-channel composer. The 
work was very much a learning process for me, and post-composition this is reflected in 
some loss of clarity in the resulting spatial image. One theory which might explain this is 
that by prioritising the composition of fixed circumspace from the outset, other 
compositional parameters were to a certain degree overlooked. Later I addressed this 
concern by composing the basic framework of The Spindlesongs Installation (also for 8-
channels) in stereo before tackling circumspatial possibilities. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
48 
2.2 Approaches to the Composition of Bosonica, for 5.1 Audio  
 
(Composed 2008, Duration: 24’41) 
 
 
Introduction 
 
This work was informed by three starting points; a desire to explore instrumental sounds 
as material, an interest in exploring the 5.1 format and a general interest in physics. The 
decision to use 5.1 spatialisation arose for various reasons, the major one being that it is 
a commercial format (unlike 8-channel) and is currently the industry standard for 
‘surround sound’. In addition, the 5.1 medium provides a sufficiently different surround 
format to compare and contrast this work with the 8-channel and stereo works in the 
portfolio. 
 
In theoretical physics, Bosonic refers to the original version of ‘string theory’, developed 
in the 1960s. Although the initial hypotheses behind Bosonic String Theory have since 
been expanded and modified, the underlying principle remains intact; that the various 
properties of matter and force can be thought of as a reflection of the ways in which a 
string vibrates. The oscillating properties of these hypothetical strings determine the 
properties of particles and all forms of energy. As such, the theory proposes that the 
entire world may be composed of these infinitely small vibrating ‘strings’. 
 
 
Material 
  
Bosonica is a sonic exploration of the concepts behind this theory. Taking a somewhat 
literal interpretation of ‘string theory’, the sound material which underpins the piece is 
predominantly sourced from stringed instruments, in particular piano (conventional and 
prepared), guitar (acoustic and electric) and cello (conventional and extended 
techniques). Prior to this, I had not used instrumental material as a starting point for any 
fixed media works. (Pavakoothu and Chemistries, both involving live instrumentalists, 
are the exception.) As a result, Bosonica might be perceived as a work that stands out in 
the portfolio with its substantially different ‘sound-world’. Much of the instrumental 
material features in a ‘semi-raw’ state, with minimal processing, and this is intended to 
create a sense of clarity, detailing and presence. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
49 
The Construction of Gestural ‘Chains’  
 
The material is not utilised deliberately for any agential reference, although to some 
listeners the instrumental material may present ideas of performance and the human 
involvement in sound creation. Instead I was interested in exploiting and extending the 
intrinsic physical implications found in the material. In order to do so, I adopted a slightly 
different style of working with gesture. Gestures do not merely function as articulation 
devices in the initiation or termination of material (a common purpose in previous works 
like Anima Machina and Cipher), but instead compound gestures contribute towards 
counterpoint and forwards momentum. This technique was directly influenced by being 
introduced to the music of Randall Smith, notably Elastic Rebound. While Elastic 
Rebound, too, utilises stringed instrumental material, I was particularly drawn to Smith’s 
creation of dynamic sequences of gestures. To me, the work projected a vibrant range 
of physical motions which I had been striving towards in my music, but had not yet 
mastered. I was confident that a similar spatially active approach to materials would 
translate well into the 5.1 format, as I had already heard convincing spatial distribution of 
this kind of material in Thomas Bjelkeborn’s Unplucked (for 5.1 audio). 
 
As a result in Bosonica there is deliberate manipulation of internal sound trajectories 
(often through simple techniques like varispeed). These sounds are then woven 
together, overlapping to create dynamic counterpoint, which is later magnified through 
dynamic distribution over the 5.1 array. From 17’40 to 17’52, for example, an entire 
phrase is built from overlapping trajectories. The result is a dynamic structure which 
explores not just a single perspectival plane, but navigates through and around that 
plane. Within this phrase alone is a complex network of accelerations, ascents and 
descents, approaches and recessions that interact to present what is essentially the 
focal point, the two pitch centres at a distance of a semitone.   
 
 
Instrumental Source-Bonding vs. Abstraction 
 
At times the original properties of the vibrating strings used in the work are very present 
and recognisable. However the work explores increasing blurring and abstraction, 
presenting new constructions from the original material, and introducing to the listener 
dense and abstract dimensions (14’53) alongside the dynamic gestural behaviour.  
Despite this, the untreated instrumental material consistently returns (6’10 and 16’55) as 
a reminder that it serves as the building block from which all other sound-worlds are 
derived.  
 
To balance the aforementioned crisp and close material, abstract landscape material is 

 
50 
also present which is intended to ‘transcend’ beyond the 5.1 array. This material is often 
characterised by its sustained and reverberant qualities as well as its pitch-centres. It 
performs a number of functions; it expands the perspectival space of the work through 
emphasis of distal elements and provides a contrasting spectral palette to that found in 
gestural materials. It also allows for development of underlying harmonic sequences that 
contribute towards the structuring of the work (a technique which was first explored in 
Topographia).  
 
 
Structure 
 
In this large-scale composition, I was keen to avoid composing discrete movements (as 
heard in The Spindlesongs Installation) in order to create a through-composed work 
more appropriate for concert performance as a complete unit. However, retaining the 
audience’s engagement over the course of a through-composed work of lengthy 
duration becomes a concern. In order to tackle this, Bosonica displays measured 
variations in pacing and density. The climax of the work can be heard as the build-up 
towards 21’30, with the least dense section at 16’35, a simple sine tone, which in 
contrast to the majority of the work, presents a stark and empty void. 
 
The two major aims behind this work were to extend my palette of intrinsic spatial 
gestures, and to develop further my compositional technique in multi-channel formats. In 
the musical language here I attempt to exploit fully the intrinsic physical properties and 
energy of gestures. The work presents several characteristic compositional approaches. 
These contrasts in harmony, rhythm and extra-musical references also contribute 
towards the creation of variations of pacing and density in the work (Figure 10). 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
51 
 
 
 
Figure 10: Harmonic, rhythmic and referential continuums in Bosonica 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Circumspatial Decisions 
 
The use of 5.1 spatialisation magnifies the perceived kinetic energy of material; small 
gestural fragments are scattered over the 5.1 array to form accumulative trajectories of 
sound, and the listener becomes immersed in dark and abstract landscapes generated 
by the sounds of strings.   
 
The majority of the work was composed in stereo, with 5.1 spatialisation taking place 
once the structure was in place. Although this stereo-led approach perhaps limited the 
spatial techniques available (there are no computer-directed techniques employed in the 
creation of sound, for example dispersion of sound over five loudspeakers, cyclical 
motion etc.), it allowed me initially to concentrate fully on sound materials and 
structuring, which might otherwise have been obscured if directing my attention 
immediately to spatialisation. From a technical standpoint this working method did 
create some phasing issues when spatialising to 5.1, and additional textural fill was 
required. However, I felt that the development of material and structure was ultimately 
more secure than it would otherwise have been. 
 
HARMONY 
At the micro-level, pitched 
fragments are presented, 
at times creating miniature 
melodic counterpoint. 
i.e. 8’12–8’26 
On the macro-level, 
extended harmonic 
sequences underpin 
structural development. 
i.e. 14’21–15’40 
RHYTHM 
At the micro-level, 
asymmetric presentations 
of gestures generate 
bursts of spontaneity. 
i.e. 7’08–7’23 
The use of ordered, 
measured pulse and 
rhythms contribute to 
structural coherence. 
i.e. 14’07–14’33 
REFERENTIAL 
The presentation of man-
made, instrumental sound 
carries implications of 
human-agency & 
conventional musical 
discourse. 
i.e. 3’21–3’26 
 
Transformations of 
instrumental sounds allude 
to organic materials: 
water, wood, and stone. 
i.e. 15’10–15’32  

 
52 
Kendall and Ardila propose that:  
 
‘in electroacoustic music the interrelationship of spatial attributes and spatial 
schemata is often engaged in a play of perceptual grouping that blurs and 
confounds distinctions like source and ensemble’78.  
 
This idea relates to auditory scene analysis – the relations of sonic properties on the 
basis of Gestalt principles of perceptual grouping79. It seems logical to apply similar 
grouping criteria in the spatialisation of sound, with the result being what Kendall and 
Ardila term a ‘nested organisation of spatial relationships’.80 Following the composition 
of Spindlesong I was more aware of how confusing contradictions in spatial 
information81 could be.  For this reason I adopted a clearer strategy to circumspace in 
Bosonica. By analysing the function of materials within the work, 5.1 spatial attributes 
were assigned to the stereo material (Figure 11). By layering materials a spatial 
hierarchy was created. At any given point certain sound motion/s dominate over others, 
although this hierarchy is in constant flux as materials emerge and develop, blend and 
recede. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
78 Kendall and Ardila (2007), pp.125. 
79 Bregman (1994), pp. 196-203 in Henriksen (2002) pp.26. The grouping of sounds according to 
the pereception of similar attributes. 
80 Kendal and Ardilla (2007), pp. 130. 
81 Leider (2007), pp.130. 
 

 
53 
SOUND OBJECT 
 
CIRCUMSPATIAL FUNCTION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11: Circumspatial groupings in Bosonica  
 
 
Whilst the spatialisation techniques presented above are all relatively straightforward, 
certain ‘soloistic’ materials stand out amongst the textures, and the listener’s attention is 
directed towards these. As a result it seems logical to limit the spatialisation of slowly 
evolving materials not in the forefront of the sonic image. This will direct further attention 
to those sounds at the top of the hierarchy, and avoid muddiness in the overall 
perceived spatial image.   
 
The audience may be deceived into hearing complex shapes and movement not solely 
as a result of dramatic mono panning, but also through the simple layering of multiple 
versions of sounds across loudspeakers and, as is the case in sound diffusion, through 
the careful balancing and shifting of amplitude. What seems to be spatially more 
convincing is the presentation of rich intrinsic spatial information rather than the artificial 
imprinting of motion upon ‘one-dimensional’ sounds through circumspatial variations. 
 
Gesture clusters (formed from 
conglomerations of micro-
gestures) 
Extreme mono point panning 
of individual components to 
create phantom sound 
trajectories i.e. 18’03 – 18’10 
 
Medium duration sounds with 
intrinsic motion trajectories 
Mono panning across 2/3 
loudspeakers. This is used 
sparingly due to its stark effect 
i.e. 2’46 – 2’51 
Landscape materials 
displaying slow evolution 
Static stereo placement over 2 
or 4 speakers/slow evolution 
across pairs of speakers i.e. 
16’38 – 16’55  
Scattered stereo panning over 
all five speakers. Flipping of 
stereo image. Generally 
multiple layers of such 
material are used 
simultaneously i.e. 8’40 – 8’54 
 
High energy textures, 
exhibiting internal kinetic 
activity 
 

 
54 
5.1 Specific Issues 
 
In a sense, I have predominantly used the 5.1 array as a quadraphonic setup (front and 
rear stereo pairs) with the central channel and the LFE used for accentuation. There is 
more extensive placement of stereo images across the front and rear pairs of 
loudspeakers than lateral (side) placement, and priority is given to the frontal stereo pair, 
which is a legacy from my experience in stereo composition and concert diffusion.  
 
I am apprehensive that in the concert hall context the unity of the work over the 5.1 array 
may be lost as the distance between loudspeakers increases. This is particularly a risk 
when dramatic point source placement is utilised, as in this work. However, it is common 
for side reinforcement to be utilised as a solution to this.82  Harrison and Barrett83 have 
also expressed some reservations about the concert hall performance of 5.1 works, but 
have suggested that in concert dissemination the work could be blended with diffusion 
techniques, including the duplication of the 5.1 image, and rebalancing of outputs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
82 Stavropoulos (2006), pp.3 and Otondo (2008), pp.79. 
83 ‘...the use of five loudspeakers in a public space does not offer a large variety of spatial pictures’ 
Barrett (2002), pp.322.  

 
55 
III Non-concert Spaces: The Composition of a Site-specific 
Installation Work 
 
 
3.1 The Application of Acousmatic Techniques in the Installation 
Context: The Spindlesongs Installation  
 
(Composed 2008, Duration: 25’52) 
 
 
Introduction 
 
‘A genre often (but not always) has a primary focus, or a primary location for 
its definition. But this is flexible and often permeates into subsidiary locations 
that might gain in importance and focus, eventually gaining precedence’84 
 
Quarry Bank Mill has already been introduced as a source of material and stimulation for 
the concert work Spindlesong. This material was also used in the creation of a large-
scale 8-channel installation, presented to the public in the Mill during September 2008. 
The two works are not ‘versions’ of each other, but instead stand independently as two 
works stemming from the same source material. 
 
This site-specific sound installation was an experiment in the dissemination of 
acousmatic music to a broader audience, in particular non-composers and those who 
might not have previously experienced electroacoustic music. Quarry Bank Mill is a non-
conventional performance space, in fact one which is not in any way intended to be an 
artistic venue. For this reason the composition of the installation presented very different 
challenges to the composition of a concert work. I was keen to trace how a performance 
space radically different to the concert hall might inform and interact with the composed 
space. In addition, I wanted to examine how territoriality85 could mediate engagement 
and reception. 
 
 
Material 
 
The fixed media 8-channel work was composed using recordings of the machinery in the 
Mill (that were also utilised in the Spindlesong concert work). However, in addition I used 
recorded interviews with the staff and also recordings of mill workers’ recollections, 
                                            
84 Emmerson (2007), pp.4. 
85 Henriksen (2002) pp.114. 

 
56 
which were sourced from the North West Sound Archive86 in Clitheroe. The intention 
was to immerse the listener in a meditative and reflective environment which traced an 
abstract sonic journey through the sounds of the Mill. For the installation a concentric 
circle of eight Genelec 1020 loudspeakers was installed (on stands) in a room mid-way 
through the visitor route through the Mill. Visitors were able to navigate in and around 
the eight loudspeakers, and had the opportunity to sit within the circle. The audio was 
played from a laptop running a Max/MSP patch, connected to a MOTU Ultralite mk3 
audio interface. As much of the wiring and playback system was hidden as was 
logistically possible, with cables run against pillars and across the ceiling. 
 
 
 
Figure 12: Photograph of The Spindlesongs Installation at Quarry Bank Mill  
(courtesy of Dr. David Berezan). 
 
 
The Voice as Persona 
 
The employment of vocal material is a crucial difference between this particular work 
and the concert work based on sounds of Quarry Bank Mill. The installation is also one 
of two works in the portfolio utilising vocal material. However, in the Spindlesongs 
                                            
86 The North West Sound Archive: An archive of over 150,000 sound recordings relevant to life in 
the North West of England. Located at Clitheroe Castle in Clitheroe, Lancashire. 
http://www.gmcro.co.uk/other/NWSA/nwsa.htm 

 
57 
Installation the listener experiences a very different presentation of the voice to that 
which is found in Cipher. The voices in this installation are presented as people, 
conveying information intelligibly to the listener (although in some instances the voice is 
also used as more abstract musical material, for example the muttering texture which 
builds between 9’36 and 9’58). The voices contribute utterance space and agential 
space to the work and serve to create enacted space within a work that is, technically 
speaking, ‘fixed’. In this way, ironically, the disembodied voice functions as embodying 
the space and encourages a more emotional response to this sound-world87. In the style 
of a radiophonic work88 I hoped that this would draw in the listener and create a degree 
of dramaturgy.  
 
However, some degree of ambiguity is retained due to the fact that the voices are 
presented independently, and often in short phrases. They do not appear to speak to 
one another, nor do they directly acknowledge or address the listener, and while there 
are implications of narrative89 (as indeed one could find in a work with no spoken word), 
narrative does not exist in the conventional sense.  In this way the voices act as a guide 
for audiences who might have otherwise felt alienated by extensive abstract sound. 
Indeed, Smalley suggests that the application of predominantly remote surrogate spaces 
carries the danger of alienating the listener through a ‘loss of tangibility’90. Arguably this 
is a greater risk when presenting such relationships to a listener untrained in acousmatic 
listening. For this reason, The Spindlesongs Installation presents overall a palette of 
sound material which is less abstract91 than that found in its counterpart concert work92. 
 
 
Spatial Signatures: Dissonance and Conflict 
 
Several issues arose through the inclusion of the vocal material, particularly in the use of 
archive recordings. The grain of the archive recordings contributed an unusual 
perspective, by providing a clue as to the age of the recording, and further emphasising 
the dominance of social history within the work. However, when such recordings are 
                                            
87 What Smalley terms a ‘reflexive relationship’ with sound, Smalley (1992), pp.521. 
88 In many respects this work displays a similar approach as that found in Pippa Murphy’s 
Pathfinder (2008), a radiophonic composition which explores the musical communities in rural and 
isolated areas of Aberdeenshire. 
89 Results from the Intention/Reception research project conducted at De Montfort University 
suggest that narrative can act as important element in the inexperienced listener’s appreciation of 
a work. Weale (2006), pp.195.  
90 Smalley (2007), pp.83. 
91 John Young’s definition of abstraction is that it is ‘measure of the psychological distance 
between a sound which displays source-cause ambiguity and a surmised source-cause model’, 
Young (1994), pp.26.  
92 In addition, abstraction of material is reduced significantly by the performance locality being the 
source of the sound material. 

 
58 
mediated by ‘older’ (analogue) recording technology93, they carry a specific ‘spatial 
signature’94. This resulted in some difficulty when trying to integrate this material with 
other sounds with very different spatial signatures, whether ‘clean’ processed studio 
sounds or the environmental recordings of the mill. I was very aware that a result of 
overlaying these spatial signatures inappropriately can be confusing spatial dissonance. 
However, these spatial signatures can provide valuable clues in establishing location 
information, and in an installation context I was willing to sacrifice a limited degree of 
sound quality in order to exploit this information. Arguably this approach reinforces the 
radiophonic aspect of the work, with a level of sound quality ‘secondary to conceptual 
originality’.95 
 
 
The Voice as Spatial Signifier 
 
The vocal material is not of the usual ‘polished’ sound quality which I would strive for in 
an acousmatic concert work. Small mistakes, including hesitancy and stutters, were 
retained in the recordings to communicate the ‘raw’ and ‘real’ nature of the people 
behind the memories. The dialects heard in the recordings contribute towards 
establishing a sense of geographical place and sociological context, aspects that can be 
difficult to recreate through solely abstract sound.  
 
On occasion, subtle processing techniques are applied to imply a different nature of 
space through the voice. Processing is used to create imaginary or psychological 
distance from the voices and simultaneously assists in their integration into more 
abstract sonic contexts. Techniques involving reverberation, filtering, freezing and 
overlaying to create delays are all used. Such techniques are particularly prominent in 
two movements; during the introduction, the voices seemingly emerge from the water 
and their temporal displacement from the present is emphasised (0’53 – 1’48). In 
addition, at 8’32–842 and 10’18–10’33 voices are artificially ‘distanced’, this time to 
reinforce the semantic theme of deafness caused by the intense noise levels of the mill 
machinery.   
 
It is interesting to observe that the use of intelligible text is more commonly found in 
electroacoustic works intended for presentation outside the concert hall. Commonly the 
voice will be utilised for its sonic properties as opposed to its ability to personify96. 
                                            
93 Recordings from the North West Sound Archive were obtained from vinyl record, cassette tape, 
¼ inch tape and Betamax formats. 
94 Dow (2003), pp.3.  
95 From the definition of radiophonics on EARS: Electroacoustic Resource Site. 
96 One might argue that any use of the voice will create an element of human personification, 
although abstract applications of spoken word will do so less than utilising complete and intelligible 
texts. 

 
59 
Arguably text is often considered problematic in concert works due to its literal qualities 
in a context where ambiguous sound-shapes and imagery tend to dominate. However, 
in the context of this installation, literal qualities were welcomed. 
 
 
Spatialisation 
 
In some respects, spatialisation was also used as an accessibility tool97. The installation 
used a concentric circle of 8 loudspeakers, the same as used in the Spindlesong concert 
work. This allowed for the creation of an immersive environment within the space, 
created using spatial techniques which included, like Spindlesong, a combination of 
point sources, movement of stereo axes, and general ‘washes’ of sound. The 
composition of fixed circumspace significantly differed from approaches taken in 
Spindlesong. Like Bosonica, I composed the majority of the work in stereo, with 
spatialisation taking place in the later stages of the compositional process. Due to the 
nature of the presentation of the work (with no fixed vantage point for the audience), I 
did not draw so heavily on spatialisation techniques informed by stereo sound diffusion 
(Diagram 3). 
 
Applied spatialisation techniques include circular motion (18’49), rapid random panning 
(creating a scuttling effect i.e. 14’41), very clean sweeps of sound (12’40) and very 
obvious mono point placement (particularly for voice placement). At certain points, I 
attempt to amplify the motions of the machinery found in the mill into exaggerated 
spatial gestures, for example the loom side-to-side action was translated into dramatic 
panning across the circle of loudspeakers (6’22) and amidst spoken references to the 
water wheel, circular motions are heard (7’31).  
 
From a technical standpoint, the variable vantage point of the audience led me to avoid 
prioritising any particular set of loudspeakers in the circumspace. Such a simple 
difference in performance can have a radical impact on compositional decisions98.  
There is far more ‘equality’ in stereo image placement in this work than in the frontal-
biased multi-channel concert works.  
 
 
Structure 
 
Many sound installations present open forms, where the articulation of time becomes 
secondary to an experience of place, as Claudia Tittel discusses:  
                                            
97 In the intention/reception project based at De Montfort University, UK, it has been found that 
there is a ‘positive response to spatial modulation’ (Landy 2007, 40) 
98 As is discussed in Emmerson (2007), pp.155. 

 
60 
 
‘Sound installations are, unlike concerts, temporally unlimited. They are 
open sound works, open to acoustical ephemeral reception...the musical 
material does not follow a process or development but exists in time and 
space. The ‘open artwork’ is durable and ephemeral at the same time. The 
composer does not determine the beginning and end of the piece; it is the 
listener who defines it.’ 99 
 
This is true of the 8-channel sound installations Memory Like Water by Matt Rogalsky, 
Fly With Me (2002) by Suk-Jun Kim and Christina Kubisch’s Memory Room (2008). On 
the contrary, The Spindlesongs Installation retains strong links to the composition 
tradition by utilising structures audibly ‘constructed’ and articulated by time. However, 
the work is intended to be a flexible form allowing for free exploration of any duration by 
the audience. 
 
The work is structured as a series of short (one to five minute) movements. It is possible 
that this form presents increased variation to engage listeners who might feel 
uncomfortable encountering a large-scale through-composed work. Should an audience 
member wish to stay for a short duration, they may return at a later time, at which point 
they are likely to experience a different one of the ten movements, which are as follows:  
 
 
Time Code 
Movement 
0’00 
Voices from the Water 
4’04 
Living Memory 
5’50 
Pulsations  
7’06 
The Waterwheel; A Meditation on Deafness 
11’28 
The Carder Starts Up 
15’25 
Dangerous Mechanisms 
18’18 
The Musical Pulse of Weaving 
19’44 
Looms and Words  
20’18 
Steam Power 
23’31 
Woven Words 
                     Table 1: Movements of The Spindlesongs Installation 
 
 
While in some respects Voices from the Water does act as an opening by introducing 
the site of the Mill, the origins of its power (water), and by gradually unveiling voices, it is 
not essential that the listener identify this as the beginning. There is intentionally no 
                                            
99 Tittel (2009), pp.60. 

 
61 
beginning or end to the macro structure, although within the discrete movements there is 
a sense of progression from start to finish. Each movement explores either a semantic 
‘theme’ (frequently established through the text) or a type of mechanical movement and 
power found in the Mill. In certain movements spoken word dominates (particularly 
Woven Words); in others sonic imagery is more present, for example The Musical Pulse 
of Weaving.  
 
 
Transcontextuality 
  
Due to the integration of spoken word, environmental material, and its positioning in an 
evocative site, this work draws more extensively on transcontextuality100 than any other 
in the portfolio. This is developed further through source-bonding, which adds to the 
transmodal nature of the work by linking the sonic to the visual and haptic. Hence the 
work is not only sonic, but embraces via sound connections to the mill the geographical, 
social, cultural and historical implications of that space. Truax has discussed this 
process in relation to soundscape composition101 and, accordingly, there is indeed a 
similarity between this work and the soundscape composition genre: 
 
‘environmental sound recordings form both the source material and also 
inform the work at all its structural levels in the sense that the original context 
and associations of the material play a significant role in its creation and 
perception.’102  
 
However, a major characteristic which differentiates The Spindlesongs Installation from 
the soundscape genre is that listener recognisability of the source material is not 
maintained. The work does, at times, explore very abstract sound-worlds (9’39–9’58 and 
16’25–16’55), which in performance are only ‘context embedded’103 through the physical 
placement of the work in the mill. Therefore, while the work draws on spatial imagery in 
a similar way as soundscape compositions, it does not fulfil the criteria to be classified 
as one. 
 
 
 
 
                                            
100 Where ‘meaning is closely allied to recognising the sources, identifying with them, knowing 
which context they have been drawn from and reinterpreting their meaning in their new musical 
context’. Smalley (1997), pp.110. 
101 ‘Environmental sound acquires its meaning both in terms of its own properties and in terms of 
its relation to context.’ Truax (1996), pp.52. 
102 Truax (2000), pp.124. 
103 ibid. 

 
62 
Conclusion: Spatial Implications and Layering 
 
The Spindlesongs Installation stands out in the portfolio not simply because it is 
presented in an alternative performance environment, but because it interacts with this 
environment using a wide range of spatially rich elements in its composed space, as 
shown in Figure 11. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
63 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13: Spatial implications of materials in The Spindlesongs Installation 
Spoken Word 
Abstract Sound and 
Abstract Sound 
Arrangement 
Quotation (or perceived 
quotation) of 
environmental sound 
Geographical location is 
implied through dialect. 
Location in time, whether past or 
present day is confirmed by verbal 
content, and the spatial signature 
of the recording. 
Moderate processing shifts the 
voice to a different acoustic 
(perspectival) space and/or 
implies psychological distance.  
Verbal content provides 
information to establish a socio-
historical context and offers a 
human angle in an otherwise 
mechanised sound-world.   
Source-bonding with the 
immediate surroundings 
facilitates perceived 
transcendence far beyond the 
bounds of the speaker ring.  
Source-bonding may recall 
visual, physical and olfactory 
sense experiences from the Mill 
surroundings. 
Arrangement of sound in fixed 
circumspace may reflect 
physical motions in the mill, even 
if the sound material is 
abstracted. 
Spectral occupancy at times 
reinforces the power of 
machinery.  

 
64 
3.2 Observations on the reception and flexibility of The 
Spindlesongs Installation 
 
It became clear during the installation that in using such a non-conventional space there 
needs to be some anticipation of practicalities which may be introduced by such a space 
and its associated audience. Questions include; why will people be in the space? What 
preconceptions may they bring? How long are people likely to stay? The experience of 
creating a work for such an environment has highlighted how complex the negotiations 
can be between the craft and grammar of acousmatic ‘concert’ composition, personal 
aesthetic decisions, and new spaces/audiences. This particular type of composition 
could be considered a kind of architectural task for the composer – combining 
considerations of physical space, people and function, and in a sense moving away from 
the dominance of sound-orientated decisions and shifting towards increased 
consideration of extra-musical factors, and hence extrinsic spaces. Many issues arose 
which were unique to this work as an installation:  
 
• 
Frequently there was noise leakage from surrounding exhibits. While this could 
be interpreted as an intrusion, conversely it could be welcomed as a sonic 
reference which aided in transcendence of the installation not only beyond the 
loudspeaker array, but beyond the room boundaries. 
 
• 
While the sounds of the mill are arguably more vibrant when experienced in 
reality, due to increased visual and physical information, the source bonds in the 
installation create a valuable link between the sound and the visitor’s experience 
of the sound producers. As a result, the experience of the installation may 
become transmodal. 
 
• 
Variations in volume levels could dramatically alter the experience of the work. 
The technical set-up allowed for overall volume levels to be set appropriately in 
relation to the background sound level.  As a result the installation could sound 
ambient, or very ‘present’ depending on the amplitude. The result was a work 
either blending with the surrounding soundscape in the Mill, or demanding 
attention from the visitor. 
 
• 
Without a subwoofer, much of the richness of the spectrum was lost, as a 
substantial portion of the source material displays rich low frequency content. A 
subwoofer might have emphasised further the tactile and physical experience of 
sound akin to that experienced with the machinery in reality.  
 

 
65 
• 
The increasing demands of a multi-media (and visually-dominated) society were 
reflected through such questions from visitors as ‘what else does it do?’ 
 
• 
Unusual sounds carried the risk of sounding ‘wrong’ to the untrained listener.  
For example, white noise, glitch, or extreme abstraction may drive listeners 
away.  
 
• 
The visual ‘spectacle’104 of the loudspeakers was undesirable as it drew 
attention to the technological mediation behind the work. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
104 As discussed in Emmerson (2007), pp.147. Unfortunately it was impossible to conceal the 
loudspeakers in the Mill. 

 
66 
IV Performed Space in Electroacoustic Music 
 
4.1 Approaches to Performed Space: Pavakoothu for Clarinet, Fixed 
Media and Electronics.  
 
(Composed 2007, Duration: 10’57) 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Pavakoothu is a work for amplified B flat clarinet and electronics. By its very nature the 
work explores the relationship between enacted space (created through the presence of 
the clarinettist on stage), the composed space of the tape part and the bridge between 
the two created by live processing in Max/MSP.  
 
The work draws on a programmatic idea of puppetry. The word pavakoothu (puppet 
dance) is used in relation to many types of Indian puppetry. In Nool Pavakoothu the 
string puppets are often large, up to two feet tall, made of wood and often intricately 
carved105, while Thol Pavakoothu refers to a variation utilising shadow puppetry106. 
Although the construction of the puppets may differ from region to region, the 
performances are almost always based on tales and legends. In addition, I found the 
word pavakoothu particularly appropriate for the title of a work for clarinet due to its 
onomatopoetic references to articulation (‘kʊ’ and ‘tʊ’).  
 
In the work, the clarinet acts as the puppeteer, initially presented alone in a mystical 
landscape. Gradually the sound-world evolves to become darker and more dynamic. At 
this point, the clarinet directs the evolution of the ‘puppets’, created virtually through a 
combination of gestural interplay in the tape part and live processing of the clarinet. 
Following a section of energetic ‘dances’, the puppets disperse and the work concludes 
with echoes of their presence in the landscape alongside the solo puppet master. 
 
 
Material 
 
All material in this work is derived exclusively from the B flat clarinet.  I had initially 
anticipated that additional non-instrumental found-sounds would be required to create 
the ethereal backdrop for events, and imply the dance movements of the wooden 
puppets, however the clarinet proved to be a rich source of material. By manipulating 
                                            
105 Ghosh and Banerjee (2006), pp. 97-98. 
106 Ghosh and Banerjee (2006), pp. 71. 

 
67 
the recordings of extended clarinet techniques, this source-material was transformed to 
create percussive materials and airy and otherworldly qualities of sound. The tape part 
is very much influenced by my compositional approaches to acousmatic music. 
The clarinet part was written recognising the fact that extended techniques formed the 
basis of much of the tape part. As a result, extended techniques107 are utilised heavily in 
the clarinet writing. Nevertheless pitch and tonality are equally important, and give the 
clarinet a distinctive voice in the sonic landscape. Often pitch is coloured by specified 
breathy tone colour, variations in speed and depth of vibrato, flutter tonguing and 
accelerating or decelerating trills. In addition, there are some elements of improvisation 
created by the undetermined pitching of certain gestures, for example at 2’03. 
 
The part calls for extremes in register and dynamic range, alongside very animated 
playing to create the ‘character’ of the puppeteer and seemingly invoke the puppet 
dances. Wide crescendi and diminuendi are utilised extensively to create the impression 
of emergence and disappearance of the clarinet into the sonic landscape. Short bursts 
of gestural material (such as those at 2’02 and 2’20) intersperse these and allude to 
more lively activity which follows.  
 
Frequently the instrumental writing is intended to display two characters simultaneously, 
almost schizophrenically, through the presentation of two sets of material concurrently. 
This can be heard at 3’35, where a murmuring sotto voce texture is contrasted with full-
tone utterances. A similar approach is found between 4’30 and 5’12. Here, stark high 
register gestures which stand out against the middle-register melody are sampled and 
layered to create a phantom clarinet voice. This quasi-polyphonic approach occurs a 
third time, albeit in a less extreme form, between 6’45 and 7’25. A more subtle idea of 
duality is created through harmonisation and pitch shifting in the electronics (i.e. 2’05, 
where a descending glissando emerges below the performer’s actual sustained pitch.)  
 
While the clarinet is essentially a monophonic instrument108, such writing serves to 
contribute multiple layers to an acousmatic environment already exhibiting numerous 
motion behaviours. The overall intention is to create sonic allusion to awkward scattered 
movements of the puppet dance. 
 
The first moment of true stillness occurs at 9’33. Prior to this, there is constantly an 
underlying tension, even in sustained notes. Through these, internal movement has 
consistently been generated through the techniques of flutter tonguing, variations in 
vibrato and note-bending.  
 
                                            
107 Exaggerated articulation, note-bending, key-clicks 
108 Although the clarinet’s limited polyphonic capabilities are exploited towards the conclusion of 
the work through the use of multiphonics. 

 
68 
The opening ‘scene’ (0’00–3’33) introduces an abstract and 
mysterious sound-world. While the clarinet initially blends with 
these surroundings, by 2’20 it has established itself as a soloist in 
this arena. 
Transition (3’33–4’33): New material in the clarinet displays 
greater motion behaviour and heightened tension. 
Dance 1 (4’33–5’12): Increasingly percussive material is heard in 
the tape part. Animated writing in the clarinet reaches a dramatic 
climax at 5’07. 
Dance 2 (5’13–7’18): In this second dance, the origins of the 
puppets from the clarinet puppet-master are explored.  A 
percussive and twisted sound-world emerges through live buffering 
and layering of the clarinet. 
Dance 1B (7’10–8’06): Material from Dance 1 is recalled. However 
there is a gradual reduction in pacing and energy. 
Transition (8’06–9’52): The clarinet adopts a textural rather than 
soloistic role as the landscape materials from the opening re-
emerge in the tape part. 
Coda (9’52–10’50): A closing theme in the clarinet (again based on 
material from Dance 1) is followed by recession of material in the 
tape part to a conclusion.  
Structure 
 
The overall arc of the work, peaking with the dance of the puppets, has already been 
described. However, more specifically the work can be regarded as a number of 
sections: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 14: Structural analysis of Pavakoothu 
 
 

 
69 
The Score 
 
The score uses proportional notation, which allows for notation of events to correspond 
with the tape part in a way not possible within a conventional metrical framework. It was 
felt that this would create greater unity between the clarinet and the inherently organic 
materials found in the tape part. The clarinet stave is notated above a graphic 
interpretation of the tape part, which serves to guide the performer through its 
progression, and aids synchronisation between the two at certain points. In 
performance, the performer may be given a time-code display to confirm their position in 
the score.  
 
Although in theory the performer could perform the work with only this time-code (and no 
graphic representation), I felt it was important for the performer to be aware of the 
acousmatic part and be able to follow its progression, development and relationship to 
their role. A familiarity and understanding of the sound organisation is far more 
beneficial than a stopwatch at points like 6’32–6’40, where synchronicity can only truly 
be achieved through acquaintance with the organic timing of events. 
 
 
Lines of Intersection between Clarinet and Fixed Media  
 
The tape part is a through-composed stereo track. Ultimately, due to its fixed nature, this 
track dictates the temporal progression of the work, and the clarinet ‘follows’ its timeline.  
However, synchronisation points between the clarinet and the tape part are intended to 
create a sense of spontaneity by articulating causal relationships.  
 
A number of techniques were utilised to blend the acousmatic tape part and the clarinet 
including: 
 
Pitch Correspondences: Tonal pitch space dominates in the ‘landscape’ sections of 
this work. A pitch relationship is established at the outset, when the clarinet’s initial note 
is mirrored in a pitch-centre found in the tape part. Further correspondences occur 
throughout the work, including 0’40, 1’59, and 4’41. In addition, the acousmatic part 
often provides pedal points (e.g. 7’10–7’50) and subtle harmonic progression (e.g. 1’49–
2’03) created by resonant pitch-centred material.  These provide further opportunities for 
the clarinet and tape part to blend through tonal pitch-space.  
 
Synchronisation of the Live and Fixed: Similar materials in the clarinet and tape part 
are aligned to create the illusion of connectivity. This technique is most prominent 
between 6’29 and 6’40, where the rhythms of both parts are intended to match directly, 

 
70 
and again between 5’04 and 5’12 where both the behaviours and a dramatic termination 
align.   
 
Causal109 Relationships: Frequently wide crescendi are scored for the clarinet, 
followed by a dynamic burst of sound in the tape part. It is intended that these bursts 
seem generated by the preceding progression of the clarinet. Examples of such 
causality are found at 2’35–2’42 and 2’57–3’06.  
 
In some cases such perceived (but essentially ‘constructed’) ‘interactivity’ between the 
clarinet and the virtual sound-world could not be pre-prepared, as because of some 
flexibility in the live part (i.e. improvisatory elements or flexible timing) it would be either 
impossible to anticipate a suitable ‘interaction’ in advance for integration in the tape part, 
or to coordinate timing with the required precision. In addition, the sound produced by 
each clarinettist may be specific to their instrument and playing technique. For a causal 
relationship to function effectively it may be useful to use exactly the same clarinet 
sound. Again, such subtleties cannot always be pre-composed into the tape part. In 
these instances, live electronics are used for their ability to create what cannot be 
created in advance.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
109 Causality ‘is more concerned with one sound's acting upon another, either causing the second 
event to occur or instigating change in an ongoing sound’. Smalley (1996), pp.88. 

 
71 
The Electronics 
 
The work uses a modular processing patch built in Max/MSP, which applies certain 
types of processing throughout the work. (The patch is included on a Data CD.) 
 
 
Figure 15: Screenshot of Max/MSP processing patch for Pavakoothu 
 
 
The processing performs a number of functions: 
 
• 
To mask the dry and present quality of the live instrumentalist, as a means of 
blending the clarinet and the tape part. 
 
• 
To create immediate causal relationships, reinforcing ‘interactivity’ between 
the sound-worlds. 
 
• 
To ‘extend’ the clarinet. For example, a texture initiated by the clarinet may be 
developed through processing into a denser and more dynamic texture 
impossible to produce acoustically. 
 
 
 

 
72 
There are also some practical aspects integrated into the patch: 
 
• 
Up to four microphone inputs. (In performance, three have generally been used; 
two condenser microphones on either side of the clarinet, and a third compact 
‘clip-on’ microphone attached to the performer, to capture the sounds of key-
clicks.)  
 
• 
The ability to alter the mix of dry clarinet110, processed clarinet and tape part. 
 
• 
The ability to ‘jump’ to certain cues or points in the tape. 
 
 
The presets are stored using the pattr object, and recalled at the cue points in the score 
by pressing the space bar. A number of processing techniques are utilised. (Most of 
these are concealed in the inner workings of the patch and are therefore not visible on 
the user interface, as shown in Figure 15.) 
 
• 
Buffering: This is used in the middle ‘dance’ section to extend textures 
established by the clarinet into more dynamic and irregular textures. Used 
multiple times, this builds up a dense sound-world which clearly originates from 
the clarinettist on stage (5’13–6’40). 
 
• 
Delay Lines: Depending on the delay times, these either exaggerate short 
gestures through rapid and irregular repetition (6’46–7’03) or, conversely, longer 
delay lines assist in the build-up of textures. Filter taps behave in a similar way, 
but spectral filtering creates less obvious delay (0’05–0’45) and a resonant 
quality of sound. 
 
• 
Freezing: Used in ‘landscape’ sections, this facilitates harmonic layering based 
on the clarinet’s note being artificially ‘held’ once it has moved to another.  
Between 4’38 and 5’00 it is used to ‘capture’, loop and layer short gestures, 
creating a stuttering echo of the clarinet.  
 
• 
Granulation: This is frequently used to add fluctuating textures to sustained 
notes (1’19–1’55). Parameters are controlled via amplitude tracking (i.e. a 
louder sound will have a smaller grain size and greater grain variation).  Pitch 
shifting is occasionally added. 
 
                                            
110 Amplification is crucial in performance, as it ‘reveals’ sounds which might not otherwise project, 
for example multiphonics and key-clicks. 

 
73 
The real-time processing does not adopt such a large role in this work as is found in the 
repertoire of other composers, particularly those who specialise in live electronics (e.g. 
Andrew May, Russell Pinkston, or Michael Edwards). This reflects my reservations 
regarding sound quality when working with real-time processing. Having composed 
acousmatic music for a number of years, I am now accustomed to the control and 
precision of sound which is offered when working with fixed media. I was aware that 
extensive utilisation of live processing would result in some aural disparity between this 
and the sculpted acousmatic identity of the tape-part. 
 
 
Mixed-Music Approaches 
 
Convincing integration of all elements in this work is complicated by spatial disparities 
between the artificial (and stylistically acousmatic) nature of the tape part and the 
acoustically coloured111 instrument with its amplified partner112. It is inescapable that the 
‘ambiguous stationary’113 nature of the clarinet will result in some spatial dissonance 
when superimposed with the vast fluctuating perspectival spaces in the tape part. Simon 
Emmerson suggests that: 
 
‘The degree to which spatial dislocation is used can become part of the 
composer’s range of options but care must be taken to understand the 
consequences to the perceiver of any time delay between visual and aural 
cues’ (Emmerson 2007, 124). 
 
So while spatial dislocation could in theory be used creatively it seems that 
synchronicity, or illusions of synchronicity can be a crucial element in ‘tying’ spaces 
together. Attention can be diverted away from spatial dissonance and towards 
causality114 (a powerful tool for the acousmatic composer, but perhaps even more so for 
the mixed composer). In Pavakoothu such synchronisation points do exist (as detailed 
above), but due to the reliance on time-code or the player’s knowledge of the tape part, 
there is the potential for such synchronisation points to be obscured and lose their 
impact. 
 
In a work composed later in the same year (2007), I opted to explore the idea of 
constructed causality further. Chemistries for flute, violin, cello, accordion and 
electronics draws on causal relationships perceived as interactive, but which are in 
reality generated through careful synchronisation of the tape part, which is subdivided 
                                            
111 Through the acoustics of the performance space  
112 Emmerson (2007), pp.105. 
113 Emmerson (2000), pp.207.  
114 Smalley (1992), pp.526. 

 
74 
into a number of short sections. By using triggered causal relationships and gestural 
interplay115 as an alternative to live processing, the acousmatic material became far 
more strongly linked to the live instruments, even through both display independently 
very different aspects of space-form. Due to my ongoing reservations with sound quality 
when using real-time processing, I was more comfortable with this approach. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
115 These devices are employed extensively by João Pedro Oliveira in his instrumental 
compositions, including Labirinto and Time Spell.  

 
75 
Conclusions 
 
‘Space is social, for each society produces its own space, space 
simultaneously mental and physical. Space is always produced, in the sense 
that it is always a set of relationships, never a given, never inert or 
transparent, never in a state of nature untouched by culture. There is no 
such thing as an empty space’116 
 
Space remains an elusive parameter in music, because of its links to perception and a 
reliance on modes of listening. Indeed Smalley’s article on space-form has highlighted 
how wide-ranging space is as well as its ability to be created at all levels of composition 
and performance. While terminology may assist in discussions on the construction and 
interactions of space in acousmatic work, due to the vast array of implied and real 
spaces from the micro level of a sound-object to the macro level of complex landscapes, 
coupled with perceptual hierarchies and contextual source-bonding, words are often 
inadequate in ‘defining’ the spatial experience for the listener.  
 
However by adopting an analytical approach to my compositions, I have formed a 
greater understanding of spatial layering in my works. I have endeavoured to create 
increased complexity, evolution and interaction between layers in composed space in 
order to produce works which almost ‘spatialise themselves’. I have begun to establish a 
scheme of translation of these composed elements into circumspace.  Here this ‘final act 
becomes the most crucial of all’117 given that all internal space relies on aspects of the 
performance site, which is anything but neutral, for clarity of transmission.  
 
Clarke comments that: 
 
‘the recognition that a listener’s sense of meaning in music is powerfully 
bound up with his or her experience of being subjectively engaged (or 
alienated) by the music, and with the varieties of subjective states that music 
can afford. An important component of that subjective engagement with 
music is its corporeal, proprioceptive and motional quality, which may on 
occasion provide listeners with experience of “impossible worlds” that have 
some of the same attractions as do other forms of virtual reality’.118  
 
A major reason that I compose acousmatic music is the exciting opportunity to engage 
the listener through the communication of virtual spaces. A key aim of this research has 
                                            
116 Wiles (2003), pp.10. 
117 Smalley (1986), pp.92. 
118 Clarke (2005), pp.90. In footnotes, Clarke refers specifically to electroacoustic music as an 
example of this in practice.  

 
76 
been to establish a compositional vocabulary which allows me to create and explore the 
composed space and circumspace. Some of these techniques have included: 
 
 
• 
Spectral Space: I have developed the technique of spectral layering to create 
‘planes’ which articulate proximity and distance. Masking and revealing planes 
can reinforce approach and recession, while gradual transformation of a 
spectral layer may create gravitational ‘forces’ towards a plane. I have 
increasingly looked to using pitch-centred sound, a subcategory of spectral 
space, to create harmonic progression, and used glissandi to reinforce 
gravitational pulls. 
   
• 
Rhythm: I have increasingly employed looping and patterning as a means of 
creating stability, while utilising their potential as structuring devices. 
 
• 
Gesture/Ensemble Space: A major development in my recent work has been 
the linking and overlapping of gestures with clear motion trajectories in order to 
create dynamic ‘strings’ which may traverse spatial planes.  
 
• 
Source-bonded space: I have discovered the potential offered by exploiting the 
spatial inferences of source recognition and drawing on transcontextual 
associations. 
 
• 
Agential Space: Certain works in the portfolio have drawn on agential 
affordances, either directly, through the integration of ‘human’ produced 
elements, or more abstractly, through gestures exhibiting inherently organic 
behaviours.  
 
• 
Fixed circumspace: I have devised spatial hierarchies in my multichannel 
compositions which serve to lead the listener through composed spaces with a 
greater degree of clarity. 
 
 
However, as a composer my primary aim was to produce original new music, which 
concurrently challenged my personal understanding of space, not only at an internal 
musical level, but also taking into account the performance environment. In doing so, my 
music has been taken in new directions. I have established a vocabulary of techniques 
in stereo and multi-channel composition which acts as a platform for me to continue 
research in this area.  
 
 

 
77 
Bibliography 
 
 
Austin, Larry (2000), ‘Sound Diffusion in Composition and Performance Practice: An 
Interview with Denis Smalley, Computer Music Journal 24(2), Massachusetts: MIT 
Press, pp.10-21. 
 
Austin, Larry (2001), ‘Sound Diffusion in Composition and Performance Practice II: An 
Interview with Ambrose Field’, Computer Music Journal 25(4), Massachusetts: MIT 
Press, pp.21-30. 
 
Bahn, Curtis; Hahn, Tomie and Trueman, Dan (2001), Physicality and Feedback: A 
Focus on the Body in the Performance of Electronic Music in Proceedings of the 2001 
International Computer Music Conference – Havana, Cuba, San Francisco: ICMA, 
pp.44-51. 
 
Bandt, Ros (2006), ‘Sound Installation: Blurring the Boundaries of the Eye, the Ear, 
Space and Time’, Contemporary Music Review, 25(4), London: Routledge, pp.353-365. 
 
Barbour, Jim (2002) ‘Applying Aural Research: the aesthetics of 5.1 surround’, Form 
Space Time: Music Architecture and Design: Proceedings of the Australasian Computer 
Music Conference, Melbourne: ACMA, pp.17-24. 
 
Barrett, Natasha (2002), ‘Spatio-musical Composition Strategies’, Organised Sound 
7(3), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.313-323. 
 
Bass, Sarah (2009), Introduction to a PhD research project on Sound Diffusion 
(Unpublished research), Belfast: Queens University.   
 
Bayle, François (2007), ‘Space, and more’, Organised Sound 12(3), Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, pp.241-249. 
 
Blauert, Jens (2001), Spatial hearing: the psychophysics of human sound localization, 
Massachusetts: MIT Press. 
 
Clarke, Eric F. (2005), Ways of Listening: An Ecological Approach to the Perception of 
Musical Meaning, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 
Clozier, Christian (2001), ‘The Gmebaphone Concept and the Cybernéphone 
Instrument’ in Computer Music Journal, 25(4) (trans. Justice Olsson), Massachusetts: 
MIT Press pp. 81-90. 

 
78 
 
Dack, John (2003), ‘Sound, Installations and Music’, in MAXIS II Conference 
Proceedings, Leeds: University of Leeds, pp. 35-39. 
 
Dow, Robert (2003), ‘Sound Diffusion and the Sonic Image’, Diffusion, London: Sonic 
Arts Network, pp.2-6. 
 
Dow, Robert (2004), ‘Multi-channel sound in spatially rich acousmatic composition’, 
Proceedings of the 4th Conference on Understanding and Creating Music, Caserta, Italy: 
Seconda University de Napoli, pp. 23-26. 
 
Drexler, K. Eric (1986), Engines of Creation: The Coming Era of Nanotechnology, New 
York: Anchor Books. 
 
EARS Electroacoustic Resource Site, http://www.ears.dmu.ac.uk (accessed 9 
September 2009). 
 
Emmerson, Simon (1998), ‘Aural Landscape, Musical Space’, Organised Sound, 3(2), 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.135-140. 
 
Emmerson, Simon (2007), Living Electronic Music, Aldershot: Ashgate. 
 
Emmerson, Simon (2007), ‘Where next? New music, new musicology’, Proceedings of 
the Electroacoustic Music Studies Network Conference, Leicester: EMS, pp.1-6. 
 
Ghosh, Sampa and Banerjee, Utpal K. (2006), Indian Puppets, New Delhi: Abhinav 
Publications. 
 
Harrison, Jonty (1998), ‘Sound, space, sculpture: some thoughts on the ‘what’, ‘how’, 
and ‘why’ of sound diffusion’, Organised Sound, 3(2), Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, pp. 117-127.  
 
Harrison, Jonty (1999), ‘Imaginary Space – Spaces in the Imagination’, Imaginary 
Space: Proceedings of the Australasian Computer Music Conference, Wellington: 
Victoria University of Wellington, pp.7-15. 
 
Henriksen, Frank Ekeberg (2002), Space in Electroacoustic Music: Composition, 
Performance and Perception of Musical Space, PhD Thesis, London: City University. 
 

 
79 
Justel, Elsa (2002), Space As Structural Function In Electroacoustic Music, Form, 
Space, Time: music architecture and design (Proceedings of the Australasian Computer 
Music Conference), Melbourne: ACMC, pp.153-164.  
 
Kendall, Gary S. and Ardila, Mauricio (2007) ‘ The Artistic Play of Spatial Organization: 
Spatial Attributes, Scene Analysis and Auditory Spatial Schemata in Proceedings of the 
2007 International Computer Music Conference, Copenhagen, Denmark: ICMC, pp.63-
68. 
 
Iosafat, Dani (2009), ‘On Sonification of Place: Psychosonography and Urban Portrait’, 
Organised Sound, 14(1), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.47-55. 
 
LaBelle, Brandon (2006), Background Noise: Perspectives on Sound Art, London: 
Continuum. 
 
Landy, Leigh (2007), Understanding the Art of Sound Organization, Massachusetts: MIT 
Press. 
 
Leider, Colby (2007), ‘Multichannel Audio in Electroacoustic Music: an Aesthetic and 
Technical Research Agenda, 2007 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and 
Expo, Beijing: ICME, pp.1890-1893. 
 
MacDonald, Alistair (1998), ‘Performance Practice in the Presentation of ElectroAcoustic 
Music’, Sonic Arts Network Journal of Electroacoustic Music 11, London: Sonic Arts 
Network, pp.21-24. 
 
Malham, David G. (2001), ‘Toward Reality Equivalence in Spatial Sound Diffusion’, 
Computer Music Journal, 25(4), Massachusetts: MIT Press, pp. 31-38. 
 
Mooney, James (2005), Sound Diffusion Systems for the Live Performance of 
Electroacoustic Music, PhD Thesis: University of Sheffield. 
 
Moore, Adrian, Moore, Dave and Mooney, James (2004) ‘M2 Diffusion – The live 
diffusion of sound in space’ in Proceedings of the 2004 International Computer Music 
Conference, San Francisco, CA: ICMA, pp.316-320. 
 
Moore, Adrian (2007), ‘Making choices in electroacoustic music: bringing a sense of play 
back into fixed media works’, 
http://www.shef.ac.uk/content/1/c6/04/14/88/ajmICMCfinalfracture.pdf (accessed 9 
September 2009). 

 
80 
 
Moore, Brian C. J. (2003), An Introduction to the Psychology of Hearing, San Diego: 
Academic Press. 
 
Myatt, Tony (1998), ‘Sound in Space’, Organised Sound, 3(2), Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, pp.91-92. 
 
Otondo, Felipe (2005), ‘Some Considerations for Spatial Design and Concert Projection 
with Surround 5.1’, Organised Sound, 13(1), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
pp.77-81. 
 
Otondo, Felipe (2007), ‘Creating Sonic Spaces: an interview with Natasha Barrett’ 
Computer Music Journal, 31(2), Massachussets: MIT Press, pp.10-19. 
 
Otondo, Felipe (2007), ‘Recent spatialisation trends in electroacoustic music’, 
Proceedings of the Electroacoustic Music Studies Conference, Leicester: EMS. 
 
Parise, Cesare and Spence, Charles (2009) ‘When birds of a feather flock together: 
synesthetic correspondences modulate audiovisual integration in non-synesthetes’, 
PLoS ONE , 4(5), e5664. 
 
Parry, Nye (2003), ‘The Relocation of Concrete Music in the Environment Boomtown 
and Living Steam: Two Site Specific Music Installations’, Global Village-Global Brain-
Global Music (Proceedings of the KlangArt-Kongress 2003), Universität Osnabrück, 
pp.370-381. 
 
Prior, David (2007), ‘A Space for Sound: the Rise, Fall and Fallout of the Concert as a 
Primary Space for Listening’ in In the Place of Sound: Architecture, Music, Acoustics 
(ed. Colin Ripley), Cambridge: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, pp.125-133.  
 
Rebelo, Pedro (2003), ‘Performing Space’, Organised Sound, 8(2), Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, pp.181-186. 
 
Sazdov, Robert; Paine, Garth and Stevens, Kate (2007), ‘Perceptual Investigation into 
Envelopment, Spatial Clarity and Engulfment in Reproduced Multi-Channel Audio’, 
Proceedings of the Audio Engineering Society 31st International Conference, London: 
AES, (CD-ROM). 
 

 
81 
Smalley, Denis (1986), ‘Spectro-morphology and Structuring Processes’ in The 
Language of Electroacoustic Music (ed. Simon Emmerson), London: Macmillan, pp.61-
96. 
 
Smalley, Denis (1991), ‘Spatial Experience in Electro-Acoustic Music’, L’Espace du son 
II (Special edition of Lien, revue d'esthetique musicale) (ed. Francis Dhomont), Brussels: 
Musiques et Recherches, pp.121-124. 
 
Smalley, Denis (1996), ‘The Listening Imagination: Listening in the electracoustic era’, 
Contemporary Music Review, 13(2), London: Routledge, pp.77-107. 
 
Smalley, Denis (1997), ‘Spectromorphology: explaining sound-shapes’, Organised 
Sound, 2(2), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.107-126. 
 
Smalley, Denis (2007), ‘Space-form and the acousmatic image’ Organised Sound 12(1), 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 19-20. 
 
Stavropoulos, Nikos (2006), ‘Multi-Channel Formats in Electroacoustic Composition: 
Acoustic Space as A Carrier of Musical Structure’, Proceedings of the Digital Music 
Research Network Conference 2006, London: Goldsmiths College, University of 
London. 
 
Tittel, Claudia (2009), ‘Sound Art as Sonification, and the Artistic Treatment of Features 
in our Surroundings’, Organised Sound, 14(1), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
pp.57-64. 
 
Toole, Floyd E. (2008), Sound Reproduction: Loudspeakers and Rooms, Oxford: Focal 
Press. 
 
Truax, Barry (1996), ‘Soundscape, Acoustic Communication and Environmental Sound 
Composition’, Contemporary Music Review, 15(1), London: Routledge, pp.49-65. 
 
Truax, Barry (1999), ‘Composition and diffusion: space in sound in space’, Organised 
Sound, 3(2), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.141-146. 
 
Truax, Barry (2001), ‘The aesthetics of computer music: a questionable concept 
reconsidered’, Organised Sound, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.119-126. 
 

 
82 
Tutschku, Hans (2002), ‘On the Interpretation of Multi-Channel Electroacosutic Works 
on Loudspeaker Orchestra: Some Thoughts on the GRM-Acousmonium and BEAST’, 
Journal of Electroacoustic Music, Vol.14, London: Sonic Arts Network, pp.14-16. 
 
Wiles, David (2003), A Short History of Western Performance Space, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 
Windsor, William Luke (2000), ‘Through and around the acousmatic: the interpretation of 
electroacoustic sounds’ in Music, Electronic Media and Culture (ed. Simon Emmerson), 
Aldershot: Ashgate, pp.7-35. 
 
Windsor, William Luke (1995), ‘A Perceptual Approach to the Description and Analysis 
of Acousmatic Music’, PhD Thesis, City University, London.  
 
Wishart, Trevor (1996), On Sonic Art (ed. Simon Emmerson), Amsterdam: Harwood. 
 
Young, John (1994), ‘The Extended Environment’, Proceedings of the International 
Computer Music Conference 1994, San Francisco: ICMA, pp.23-26. 
 
Young, John (2004), ‘Sound Morphology and the Articulation of Structure in 
Electroacoustic Music’, Organised Sound, 9(1), Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, pp. 7-14. 
 
Young, John (2007), ‘Reflections on Sound Image Design in Electroacoustic Music’, 
Organised Sound 12(1), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.25-33. 
 
Zvonar, Richard (2004), ‘A History of Spatial Music’, eContact! 7(4) 
http://cec.concordia.ca/econtact/Multichannel/index.html (accessed 9 September 2009). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
83 
Discography 
 
Batchelor, Peter (2005), ‘Kalaidescope Arcade’ (stereo mix) on Reflections, C3R, C3R 
014. (8-channel version provided by composer). 
 
Berezan, David (2004), ‘Styal’ on La face cachée, empreintes DIGITALes, IMED 0896. 
 
Bjelkeborn, Thomas (2008), ‘Unplucked’ (5.1, unpublished, provided by the composer). 
 
Gobeil, Gilles (1993-94), ‘La Vertige Inconnu’, on La mécanique des ruptures, 
Empreintes DIGITALes, IMED 9421. 
 
Gobeil, Gilles (1995), ‘Nuit Cendre’, on ...dans le silence de la nuit…, Empreintes 
DIGITALes, IMED 0155. 
 
Gobeil, Gilles (1997), ‘Point de passage’, on …dans le silence de la nuit…, Empreintes 
DIGITALes, IMED 0155. 
 
Harrison, Jonty (1999 - 2006), ‘ReCycle’ (5.1 version) on Environs, empreintes 
DIGITALes, IMED 0788. 
 
Mahtani, Annie (2008), ‘Past Links’ (8-channel, unpublished, provided by the composer). 
 
Murphy, Pippa (2008), ‘Pathfinder’ (unpublished, provided by the composer). 
 
Oliveira, João Pedro (2001), ‘Labirinto’ for string quartet and tape, on Cultures 
électroniques 16: Prix Magisterium et Prix Trivium, 29e Concours international de 
musique et d'art sonore électroacoustiques, Bourges 2002, LDC 278 076/77. 
 
Oliveira, João Pedro (2004), ‘Time Spell’ for clarinet and tape, on Música Maximalista 
Vol. 12: VI CIMESP 2005, PANaroma, SPAN 199020737. 
 
Smith, Randall (1995), ‘Elastic Rebound’ on Sondes, Empreintes DIGITALes, IMED 
9948. 
 
Smalley, Denis (1987), ‘Wind Chimes’, on Impacts intérieurs, empreintes DIGITALes, 
IMED 0409. 
 
Smalley, Denis (1991 - 92), ‘Valley Flow’, on Impacts intérieurs, empreintes DIGITALes, 
IMED 0409. 

 
84 
 
Stavropoulos, Nikos (2004), ‘Atropos’ (5.1, unpublished, provided by the composer). 
 
Stavropoulos, Nikos (2007), ‘Polychoron’ (5.1, unpublished, provided by the composer). 
 
Peter Stollery (2003), ‘Vox Magna’ on Un son peut en cacher un autre, empreintes 
DIGITALes, IMED 0678.  
 
Tutschku, Hans (2008), ‘Zwei Räume’ (24-channel, unpublished, provided by the 
composer). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
85 
Appendix A: List of Portfolio Works & Supplementary Compositional 
Work 
 
 
Portfolio Works 
  
Anima Machina (2006), stereo fixed media 
12’58 
Cipher (2007), stereo fixed media 
 
11’42 
Pavakoothu (2007) for clarinet and electronics 
10’57 
Topographia (2008), stereo fixed media  
  9’31 
Papyrus (2008), stereo fixed media 
 
  8’23 
Spindlesong (2008), 8-channel fixed media 
15’57 
The Spindlesongs Installation (2008) 
 
25’52 
Bosonica (2009) 
 
 
 
24’41 
 
 
Supplementary Compositional Work 
 
For the purposes of this commentary I have focussed on the composition and 
performance tradition of acousmatic music. However, throughout the course of the three 
year research period I have also undertaken a variety of cross-disciplinary and 
collaborative projects, the details of which can be found in Table 2. These other works, 
which span video, dance, theatre, laptop performance, soundscape and installation art 
forms, have greatly informed my compositional outlook. They have provided platforms 
for the implementation of new ideas and allowed me to present my work in alternative 
forms to new audiences. To give one example, I have frequently utilised the Max/MSP 
tools which I designed for laptop performance to improvise and create material for fixed-
media works.  In addition, the fixed media work Papyrus stemmed directly from the 
composition of a substantial soundtrack for a site-specific theatre production. Arguably 
most importantly of all, the process of working with practitioners from a range of artistic 
backgrounds has broadened my understanding of how acousmatic music is situated in 
the larger framework of the arts.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
86 
 
 
Title 
Nature of project 
Collaborators 
(if appropriate) 
Date 
Laptop improvisations 
Live laptop 
performances in venues 
across the U.K. 
Manuella Blackburn, 
Sam Salem, Mauricio 
Pauly. 
2006 
– 
2009 
Performances with 
Kairos ensemble 
Involvement in 
improvisational 
ensemble, performing 
flute & laptop 
Kairos ensemble 
2006 
–
2008 
Flourish  
 
Film soundtrack 
Commissioned by 
Universities Scotland 
2006 
dans la mémoire de 
mon corps  
Live video processing 
(Jitter) for Music Theatre  
Kairos ensemble 
2007 
A Walk in the Park 
Soundscape work for 
children 
Commissioned by 
Bookstart Scotland 
2007 
Chemistries  
Large-scale (30’) work 
for flute, violin, 
accordion, cello and 
electronics 
Commissioned by 
Symposia Ensemble 
2007 
David 
Soundtrack for art video 
Commissioned by Dani 
Marti, visual artist 
2008 
The Yellow Wallpaper 
Original electroacoustic 
score for a play 
TwoTwenty Theatre 
(directed by Rob 
Drummer) 
2008 
3 Meditations (Glass, 
Water and Steel) 
3 one minute miniatures 
for the Canções 
Submersas installation 
Installation conceived 
by Vivian Caccuri 
2008 
Australia 
Soundtrack for art video 
Commissioned by Dani 
Marti 
2008 
One Flew Over the 
Cuckoo’s Nest  
Music for Theatre 
University of 
Manchester Drama 
Society, directed by 
Timmy Jones. 
2008 
A Theory of Everything 
Installation work (part of 
devised theatre work).  
TwoTwenty Theatre 
(directed by Rob 
Drummer) 
2009 
Three Dance Studies 
Music for Dance 
Sari Lievonen, work 
developed during a 
Dance House Scotland 
residency 
2009 
Table 2: Additional Compositional Output 2006 – 09 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
87 
Appendix B: 
 
Additional Information on the Portfolio Works 
 
 
 
Anima Machina (2006) 
 
Awarded the Prix SCRIME (Studio de Création et de Recherches en Informatique et 
Musique Electroacoustique), Bordeaux, France, 2007 
 
Programme Notes 
 
In a technological age, our lives are becoming more dependent on machines, and those 
machines are becoming increasingly smaller and more intelligent.  This work is heavily 
influenced by the concept of tiny machines at the atomic level, and their ability to 
become capable of decision-making and self-replication.   
 
The work is underpinned by a changing flux between control, restraint and disorder. 
There are references to metal and machinery, although the original source material is 
likely to be very far removed from this perceived scale of material.  Most source 
recordings were closely amplified small materials, (various gardening tools, parts of a 
bicycle mechanism, clocks, and a 'slinky' spring), now given a magnified energy and 
greater mechanical status through processing.  There is a mirroring of the potential 
qualities of machines at the atomic level, with key ideas being the implications of friction, 
surface tension and a dark instability and unpredictability. 
 
Performances 
 
• 
MANTIS weekend, Martin Harris Centre for Music and Drama, Manchester, 26th 
November 2006. 
• 
BULO, Bristol University Loudspeaker Orchestra, RMA Students’ Conference, 
Bristol, 4th January 2007. 
• 
Sonorities Festival of Contemporary Music, Sonic Arts Research Centre, 
Belfast, 23rd April 2007. 
• 
University of Costa Rica, 6th Annual Conference on Musical Composition, 25th 
April 2007. 
• 
SCRIME Finalists’ Concert, University of Bordeaux, 22nd May 2007. 
• 
RMA ‘Surrounded’ Study Day, Keele University, 24th May 2007. 
• 
SCRIME, Halle des Chartrons de Bordeaux, 31st May 2007. 
• 
EMS Conference, De Montfort University, Leicester, 14th June 2007. 

 
88 
• 
ZKM, Center for Art and Media, Karlsruhe, 7th July 2007. 
• 
DMRN Conference, Leeds Metropolitan University, 8th July 2007. 
• 
Urban Ampitheatre, Atlantic Center for the Arts, Florida, 3rd August 2007. 
• 
Futura Festival 2007, Paris, 17th August 2007. 
• 
BBC Radio 3 ‘Hear and Now’, 25th August 2007. 
• 
Ecole Nationale Supérieure d’Electronique, Informatique et 
Radiocommunications de Bordeaux, Talence, 12th September 2007. 
• 
Technische Universität Berlin, Concert curated by Kaho Cheung, 18th October 
2007. 
• 
‘Sonic Voyages’, Bristol University Victoria Rooms, 24th October 2007. 
• 
‘MiniBEAST’, University of Birmingham, 31st October 2007. 
• 
Radio France, ‘Electrain de nuit’, 17th December 2007. 
• 
The Great Hall, City University, London, 29th April 2008. 
• 
5th Season of the Los Angeles Sonic Odyssey, USA, April 23rd, 2009 
• 
Festival di interpretazione della musica acusmatica, Cagliari, Italy, 12th July 
2009 
• 
Tweak Festival, Limerick, Ireland, 24th September 2009. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
89 
Bosonica (2009) 
 
Programme Notes 
 
In theoretical physics, Bosonic refers to the original version of ‘string theory’, developed 
in the 1960s. Although the initial hypotheses behind Bosonic String Theory have since 
been expanded and modified, the underlying principle remains intact; that the various 
properties of matter and force can be thought of as a reflection of the ways in which a 
string vibrates. The oscillating properties of these hypothetical strings determine the 
properties of particles and all forms of energy. As such, the theory proposes that the 
entire world may be comprised of these infinitely small vibrating ‘strings’.  
 
Bosonica is a sonic exploration of the concepts behind this theory. Taking a somewhat 
literal interpretation of ‘string theory’, the sound material which underpins the piece is 
predominantly sourced from stringed instruments, in particular piano (conventional and 
prepared), guitar (acoustic and electric) and cello (conventional and extended 
techniques). At times the original properties of these vibrating strings are very present 
and recognisable, however the work explores increasing blurring and abstraction, 
presenting new constructions from the original material, and introducing to the listener 
dense and abstract dimensions. Despite this, the untreated instrumental material 
consistently returns as a reminder that it serves as the building block from which all 
other sound-worlds are derived. The use of 5.1 spatialisation magnifies the perceived 
kinetic energy of material; small gestural fragments are scattered over the 5.1 array to 
form accumulative trajectories of sound, and the listener becomes immersed in dark 
abstract landscapes generated by the sounds of strings.  
 
Performances 
 
• 
MANTIS weekend, Martin Harris Centre for Music and Drama, Manchester, 31st 
October 2009. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
90 
Cipher (2007) 
 
Honourable Mention in CIMESP 2007 (International Electroacoustic Music Contest of 
São Paulo), Brazil, 2007 
 
Programme Note 
 
‘…I have come to believe that the whole world is an enigma, a harmless enigma that is 
made terrible by our own mad attempt to interpret it as though it had an underlying truth.’ 
Umberto Eco119 
                                           
Cipher explores a range of sound material associated with cryptography. Through the 
use of Morse code rhythms, mechanisms and electrical sparks, there are references to 
early mechanical devices built for code making and breaking purposes, in particular the 
Enigma encryption machine used during World War II.  These elements are continually 
being revealed, obscured, repeated or interrupted, as is possible in the transmission of 
any code.  Over the course of the piece, broken elements gradually merge to reveal 
voices, often very fragmented, and rarely intelligible. 
 
The original sound material was gathered from a variety of sources and includes Morse 
code, a typewriter, small mechanical parts and glass fragments.  In addition, much of 
what might initially seem mechanical or ‘glitch’ to the listener may be derived from 
recordings of extended vocal techniques, performed by Sarah Alexander.  
 
Performances to date 
 
• 
MANTIS weekend, Martin Harris Centre for Music and Drama, Manchester, 11th 
February 2007. 
• 
‘Sound Junction’, University of Sheffield, 10th May 2007. 
• 
CIMESP 2007 Finalists’ Concert, Theater of SESC-Ipiranga in São Paulo, 
Brazil, 28th August 2007. 
• 
‘Soundings’, University of Edinburgh, Reid Hall, 3rd November 2007. 
• 
'Soundings', Reid Hall, Edinburgh, 1st February 2008. 
• 
Petit Théâtre Mercelis, Brussels, 8th February 2008. 
• 
Australasian Computer Music Conference, Sydney, 10th July 2008. 
• 
BIMESP, SESC Vila Mariana, São Paulo, Brazil, 16th August 2008. 
• 
Fylkingen, Stockholm, Sweden, 13th September 2008. 
• 
National University of Ireland, Maynooth, 24th October 2008. 
 
                                            
119 From Eco, Umberto (1988), Faucault’s Pendulum, New York: Ballantine Books, pp.95. 

 
91 
Papyrus (2008) 
 
Honourable Mention in the Pauline Oliveros Prize for Electroacoustic Music, USA, 2009 
Awarded the Prix Destellos 2009 
Prizewinning work, 10th Electroacoustic Composition Competition Música Viva 2009 
 
Programme Note 
 
Almost all source material in Papyrus is derived from recordings of a variety of paper, 
from notepaper to large sheets of wallpaper.  Much of this material was recorded for the 
creation of a soundtrack for a theatre production of The Yellow Wallpaper, based on the 
novel by Charlotte Perkins Gilman. A site-specific production of the theatre adaptation 
was directed by Rob Drummer and performed at the Manchester Museum in May 2008. 
While composing the soundtrack I was fascinated by the intricate sonic details present in 
the closely recorded paper and was keen to explore their potential further in a 
standalone acousmatic concert work.  
 
As a result, Papyrus explores the wide variety of spatial motions, trajectories and 
perspectives which can be created through the manipulation of this seemingly simple 
and lifeless material. Through the course of the work the sounds of paper gather energy 
and they form increasingly animated behaviours within a changing abstract landscape. 
There are four sections, each one seemingly revealed through a metaphorical ‘tearing’ 
of the wallpaper.  
 
This work exists independently of the theatre soundtrack. However, the transformations 
in this piece reflect the behaviour of the woman behind the wallpaper in the novel: a 
development from hypnotic creeping in the shadows to ‘mechanical and ugly 
movements’ in a ‘twisting and twisted dance.’ 
 
Performances  
 
• 
MANTIS Festival, University of Manchester, 31st October 2008. 
• 
International Women’s Electroacoustic Listening Room Project, Cal State 
Fullerton, USA, 21st March 2009. 
• 
Pixel Palace’s ‘Step Sequence’ Installation, Tyneside Cinema, Newcastle, 2nd –
27th March 2009. 
• 
SSSP Conference at De Montfort University in Leicester, 7th May 2009. 
• 
International Computer Music Conference, Montreal, 19th August 2009. 
• 
Tweak Festival, Limerick, Ireland, 24th September 2009. 
 

 
92 
Pavakoothu (2007) 
For B flat Clarinet, Fixed Media and Electronics 
 
Programme Note 
 
The word pavakoothu (puppet dance) is often used in references to Indian puppetry, 
particularly the practice of shadow puppetry. Consequently this piece is an exploration 
the act of puppetry through sound. The clarinet acts as a metaphorical 'puppeteer' within 
a sonic landscape which alludes to enchanted and ethereal elements. The dance of the 
puppets themselves is characterised by percussive sounds, and increased gestural 
energy towards the middle of the work At this point much of the sonic activity stems from 
the clarinet itself through live processing. Ultimately, all of the sound material stems from 
the clarinet, although this is not always apparent. The piece is characterised by the 
changing status of the puppeteer, the puppets, and the sonic landscape in which they 
exist. Traces of narrative or 'story' remain deliberately ambiguous throughout. With 
thanks to the clarinettists William Stafford and Thom Harrison for their assistance during 
the composition of this work, and to Esther Lamneck for premiering it. 
 
Performances 
 
• 
Premiered by Esther Lamneck (NYU) at Manchester University Novars Launch 
Festival, 4th Nov 2007. 
• 
Performed by Michiko Chiba at New York University, USA, 24th February 2008 & 
4th April 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
93 
Spindlesong (Concert Work, 2008) 
 
Programme Note 
 
This 8-channel work is inspired by the Industrial Revolution, and more specifically the 
textiles industry, which saw massive expansion in the Manchester area in the 19th 
Century. The energy and kinetic movements inherent in this industry are explored 
through various techniques of spatialisation.   
 
Thanks are due to the National Trust for allowing me to record at Quarry Bank Mill in 
Styal, close to Manchester. Most of the sound material used for the work is sourced from 
this site – from the river which powers the water wheel, to the working spinning 
machines, the demonstrations of hand-spinning, to the steam engines. The sounds are 
presented as both unprocessed and abstracted forms which take the listener on a 
journey into the innermost workings of the machinery itself. 
 
This work was composed during a residency at the Institute of Electroacoustic Music in 
Sweden (EMS), Stockholm, funded by the Scottish International Education Trust and the 
Holst Foundation.  
 
Performances 
 
• 
LICA-MANTIS Festival, Lancaster University, 1st March 2008. 
• 
Digital Media 1.0 Festival, Valencia, Spain, 19th April 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
94 
The Spindlesongs Installation (2008) 
 
Programme Note  
 
Spindlesongs is a sound installation which uses almost exclusively recordings gathered 
at Quarry Bank Mill alongside archive recordings from the North West Sound Archive. 
These sounds have been edited, manipulated and layered using a computer to create 
sonic journeys through the sounds and stories of the cotton industry in the North West of 
England. In this particular installation, surround sound, here 8-channel sound, is used to 
simulate spatial movement, referencing the motions of the machines found in the Mill. 
 
The voices heard in the work are taken from interviews with Quarry Bank Mill staff and a 
number of recordings of the recollections of Mill workers, archived at the North West 
Sound Archive, which describe first-hand experiences of the cotton industry in the North 
West of England. 
 
The work comprises a number of short movements, each focusing on a certain sonic 
aspect of the Mill, the most recognizable being water, steam and specific machinery, like 
the looms and the carder.  
 
With thanks to The National Trust and the North West Sound Archive. 
 
 
Performances 
 
• 
Installed at Quarry Bank Mill, Styal between 19th and 25th September 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
95 
Topographia (2008) 
 
Programme Note 
This work aims to explore various sonic landscapes and topologies through variations in 
implied proximities, densities and the kinetic behaviour of the sound materials. 
Topographia emerged from a project in which seven composers created a work using 
the same source material, this being a collection of 12 short samples from Denis 
Smalley’s Wind Chimes, released for use by the composer himself. Bearing in mind 
Smalley’s interest in spatial attributes in electroacoustic music, it seemed appropriate to 
explore this particular area through the sonic material. In many respects Topographia is 
particularly influenced by Smalley’s Valley Flow, a work which greatly influenced my 
early compositions. 
 
• 
Premiered at the MANTIS Spring Festival, Manchester, 7th March 2009. 
• 
ICMSN (Sixth Biennial International Conference on Music Since 1900), Keele 
University, 4th July 2009. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
96 
Appendix C 
 
Post-Analysis 1: Context, issues and considerations for the 
composer/performer  
 
All four of the stereo works presented in this portfolio have been composed with the 
performance practice of sound diffusion in mind. I have endeavoured to explore a range 
of spatial techniques which, when applied in acousmatic works, will be particularly 
suitable for this practice. It is hoped that by exploring a rich palette of spatial activity in 
composed space, the potential for a wider variation in sound image manipulation is 
available when in the listening space. This is not to say that a work that is spatially more 
‘active’ or ‘varied’ is more ‘suitable’ for diffusion or more ‘challenging’ to diffuse, but only 
that such a work may be more likely to exploit a greater range of spatial permutations in 
performance.  
 
In hindsight, I have found that more interesting spaces and more successful phrase-
structuring may be constructed not merely by articulating extremes of space, but by 
navigating ‘between’ spectral layers and planes and by exploiting dynamic spatial 
change within individual sound objects, as well as that constructed on a larger temporal 
scale. This more fluid use of superimposing sounds exhibiting individual motion 
behaviours can be heard in the later works of Papyrus and Topographia, where spaces 
tend towards evolution and flux, and are characterised by particular motion identities. 
Contrastingly, Anima Machina presents a high degree of spatial variation overall, but 
less dynamic shaping and evolution within each environment. 
 
The majority of sound diffusion systems, even those comprising only eight channels, will 
present the capacity for shifting an image from near to far, expanding and contracting, 
enveloping the audience and directing the sound to a focal point. (More extensive 
diffusion systems will allow for more complex, subtle configurations within this.) Such 
techniques seem to work particularly well in tandem with their counterparts in the 
composed space. However there are some aspects of space-form where the great 
majority of perceptual information is uniquely defined in the composed space.  In these 
instances while spatial positioning in diffusion may alter our understanding of the sound, 
its core identity is predominantly defined by composed space. Particular examples of 
this include utterance space and source-bonded space, where the physicality of sound 
experienced in the listening space will be heavily reliant on intrinsic sonic properties.  
 
Naturally the translation of the composed space into the listening context is not 
prescribed120 for any of the works discussed. However, considerations when 
                                            
120 Nor could it be, given the great diversity of diffusion systems and performance venue 
acoustics. 

 
97 
manipulating the physical placement of sound around the audience (i.e. circumspace121) 
were discussed in Chapter 2, where I asserted that decisions regarding the ‘fixing’ of 
circumspace at a compositional stage are, for me, based on similar decision-making 
processes as I might apply during diffusion preparation and performance (enacted 
circumspace).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                            
121 Smalley (2007), pp.53 

 
98 
Appendix D 
 
Post-Analysis 2: The Fixed Mode of Circumspace: Issues and 
observations  
 
One aspect which I have yet to research is the potential to introduce elevated sound into 
the multi-channel work. Similarly, discrete sound streams could be introduced on varied 
levels of proximity and distance at the compositional stage (as opposed to through the 
means of diffusion).  Hans Tutschku explores this technique in his 24-channel work Zwei 
Räume, in which ‘the encapsulating space expands over the boundaries of the physical 
concert hall; the inner space develops a strong presence for individual sound objects’122 
The loudspeakers are arranged in three rings of eight around the audience, in increasing 
distance, the inner rings at a higher elevation to simulate a dome-like structure. Such an 
array carries great potential to create envelopment, or engulfment123, but also a great 
variety of motion trajectories. 
 
In exploring such options, the composer must ask at what point does the work’s 
meaning become dominated by a quasi-architectural construction of circumspace? Peter 
Batchelor’s Kalaidescope Arcade for twelve channels, prescribes a very specific seating 
arrangement124 for the ideal performance of the work, however like most composers who 
explore such an unusual configuation, he offers a reduced, more conventional 
alternative. The composer is faced with a dilemma – whether to compose for more 
challenging formats, or to utilise more conventional formats with increased opportunities 
for dissemination.  
 
Composing in multi-channel has reaffirmed that for me the most critical spatial 
construction happens in the composed space. I have found that my most successful 
outcome in multi-channel composition has been by initially dealing with stereo sound for 
the majority of the compositional process125, a working method which stems from my 
personal familiarity with stereo composition and diffusion. In this way I am able to 
articulate spatial clarity within the music and form a purpose-built template for the 
chosen surround-format.  
 
                                            
122 From Tutchku’s programme note for Zwei Räume, available at 
http://www.tutschku.com/content/works-zwei-raeume.en.php 
123 Sazdov, Paine and Stevens (2007), pp.3, where the authors suggest that engulfment is specific 
to 3D compositional practice. 
124 http://www.peterbatchelor.com/kainfo.html 
125 This is not to say that I would ignore the final spatial goal, as I would consider circumspatial 
possibilities from a theoretical standpoint from the outset, e.g. by sketching out a spatialisation 
plan. In this way, the work would not be composed ‘as’ a stereo work, but ‘in’ stereo ‘for’ a multi-
channel format.  

 
99 
It is understandable that some composers may strongly advocate the consideration of 
fixed circumspace concurrently with considerations of individual sound-objects and 
sound layering. This approach seems more appropriate for the creation of a 
homogenous, unified surround sound work. However, from a personal standpoint I have 
found that internal spatial thinking may become compromised by conceptual ideas of 
fixed circumspace, particularly when dealing with larger numbers of loudspeakers.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
100 
Appendix E 
 
Max/MSP Patch for Pavakoothu  
(See Data CD) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

