



Diffusion Weighted and Diffusion Tensor Imaging
A Clinical Guide
Claudia da Costa Leite, MD, PhD
Associate Professor
Department of Radiology
University of São Paulo
São Paulo, Brazil
Associate Professor
Department of Radiology
School of Medicine
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Mauricio Castillo, MD, FACR
Professor of Radiology
Chief, Division of Neuroradiology
School of Medicine
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Thieme
New York • Stuttgart • Delhi • Rio de Janeiro

Executive Editor: William Lamsback
Managing Editor: Elizabeth Palumbo
Director, Editorial Services: Mary Jo Casey
Editorial Assistant: Haley Paskalides
Production Editor: Sean Woznicki
International Production Director: Andreas Schabert
Vice President, Editorial and E-Product Development: Vera
Spillner
International Marketing Director: Fiona Henderson
International Sales Director: Louisa Turrell
Director of Sales, North America: Mike Roseman
Senior Vice President and Chief Operating Ofﬁcer: Sarah
Vanderbilt
President: Brian D. Scanlan
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Diffusion weighted and diffusion tensor imaging : a clinical
guide / [edited by] Claudia da Costa Leite, Mauricio Castillo. –
First edition.
p. ; cm.
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 978-1-62623-021-7 – ISBN 978-1-62623-020-0
(electronic)
I. Leite, Claudia da Costa, editor. II. Castillo, Mauricio, editor.
[DNLM: 1. Diffusion Magnetic Resonance Imaging. 2. Brain
Diseases–radiography. 3. Central Nervous System Diseases–
radiography. WN 185]
RC386.6.M34
616.07'548–dc23
2015010815
© 2016 Thieme Medical Publishers, Inc.
Thieme Publishers New York
333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001 USA
+1 800 782 3488, customerservice@thieme.com
Thieme Publishers Stuttgart
Rüdigerstrasse 14, 70469 Stuttgart, Germany
+49 [0]711 8931 421, customerservice@thieme.de
Thieme Publishers Delhi
A-12, Second Floor, Sector-2, Noida-201301
Uttar Pradesh, India
+91 120 45 566 00, customerservice@thieme.in
Thieme Publishers Rio de Janeiro, Thieme Publicações Ltda.
Edifício Rodolpho de Paoli, 25º andar
Av. Nilo Peçanha, 50 – Sala 2508
Rio de Janeiro 20020-906 Brasil
+55 21 3172-2297 / +55 21 3172-1896
Cover design: Thieme Publishing Group
Typesetting by DiTech Process Solutions
Printed in China by Everbest Printing Co, Ltd
5 4 3 2 1
ISBN 978-1-62623-021-7
Also available as an e-book:
eISBN 978-1-62623-020-0
Important note: Medicine is an ever-changing science
undergoing continual development. Research and clinical
experience are continually expanding our knowledge, in
particular our knowledge of proper treatment and drug
therapy. Insofar as this book mentions any dosage or appli-
cation, readers may rest assured that the authors, editors,
and publishers have made every effort to ensure that such
references are in accordance with the state of knowledge at
the time of production of the book.
Nevertheless, this does not involve, imply, or express any
guarantee or responsibility on the part of the publishers in
respect to any dosage instructions and forms of applications
stated in the book. Every user is requested to examine
carefully the manufacturers’ leaﬂets accompanying each
drug and to check, if necessary in consultation with a phy-
sician or specialist, whether the dosage schedules mentioned
therein or the contraindications stated by the manufacturers
differ from the statements made in the present book. Such
examination is particularly important with drugs that are
either rarely used or havebeen newly released on the market.
Every dosage schedule or every form of application used is
entirely at the user’s own risk and responsibility. The authors
and publishers request every user to report to the publishers
any discrepancies or inaccuracies noticed. If errors in this
work are found after publication, errata will be posted at
www.thieme.com on the product description page.
Some of the product names, patents, and registered
designs referred to in this book are in fact registered trade-
marks or proprietary names even though speciﬁc reference
to this fact is not always made in the text. Therefore, the
appearance of a name without designation as proprietary is
not to be construed as a representation by the publisher that
it is in the public domain.
This book, including all parts thereof, is legally protected by
copyright. Any use, exploitation, or commercialization out-
sidethe narrowlimitssetbycopyrightlegislationwithout the
publisher’s consent is illegal and liable to prosecution. This
applies in particular to photostat reproduction, copying,
mimeographing or duplication of any kind, translating,
preparation of microﬁlms, and electronic data processing
and storage.

For my mother, my daughter Ana Beatriz, my son Gabriel, and my husband Ricardo
CCL
To Hortensia
MC


Contents
Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix
Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xi
Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
xiii
1
Physics of Diﬀusion Weighted and Diﬀusion Tensor Imaging. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
Maria Concepción Garcia Otaduy
2
Brain Edema: Pathophysiology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
Falgun H. Chokshi and Amit M. Saindane
3
Supratentorial White Matter Tracts and Their Organization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
Christopher P. Hess and Jason M. Johnson
4
Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging and Diﬀusion Tensor Imaging of the Brain
during Early Brain Development: The First Two Years of Life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
50
Wei Gao, John H Gilmore, and Weili Lin
5
Diﬀusion Weighted and Diﬀusion Tensor Imaging in Aging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Andrew Joseph Degnan and Lucien M. Levy
6
Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging in Vascular Pathology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
79
Sangam Kanekar and Chandan Misra
7
Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging in the Evaluation of Brain Tumors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
Fernanda C. Rueda-Lopes, Celso Hygino da Cruz Jr., and Emerson Leandro Gasparetto
8
Diﬀusion Weighted and Diﬀusion Tensor Imaging in Infectious Diseases . . . . . .
112
Claudia da Costa Leite, Maria da Graça Morais Martin and Mauricio Castillo
9
Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging and Diﬀusion Tensor Imaging in Demyelination
and Toxic Diseases. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
132
Celi Santos Andrade, Carolina de Medeiros Rimkus, Claudia da Costa Leite, Alexander M. McKinney,
and Leandro T. Lucato
10
Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging and Diﬀusion Tensor Imaging of White Matter
Diseases In Children. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
154
Julie H. Harreld and Zoltan Patay
11
Diﬀusion Imaging for the Assessment of Traumatic Brain Injury. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
170
Michael L. Lipton
12
Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging in Hemorrhage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
189
Joana Ramalho and Mauricio Castillo
vii

13
Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging and Diﬀusion Tensor Imaging in Spine and
Spinal Cord Diseases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
203
Majda M. Thurnher
14
Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging and Diﬀusion Tensor Imaging in Head and Neck
Diseases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
215
Eloisa M Santiago Gebrim, Regina Lucia Elia Gomes, Flavia K. Issa Cevasco, and Marcio Ricardo Taveira Garcia
15
Future Applications of Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging: Diﬀusional Kurtosis and
Other Nongaussian Diﬀusion Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
239
Maria Gisele Matheus
Index. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
248
viii
Contents

Foreword
Diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) has become an
integral part of routine neuroimaging. It is virtually
obtained in every brain magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) protocol and in a growing number of head and
neck and spine protocols. It is fast and provides
clinically relevant information for a variety of path-
ological conditions, including stroke, infection, and
neoplastic processes.
Its counterpart, diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), is a
powerful technique that has multiple potential appli-
cations, including neurosurgical guidance and the
diagnosis of mild traumatic brain injury and psychi-
atric disorders. However, it is still under development
and has yet to be fully translated from expert aca-
demic centers to the routine clinical practice.
This book, Diffusion Weighted and Diffusion Tensor
Imaging: A Clinical Guide, edited by Drs. Claudia da
Costa Leite and Mauricio Castillo, is a step in that
direction. Its 15 chapters provide readers with all the
information they will need to implement and inter-
pret DWI and DTI studies. The chapters cover normal
development, aging, and the most relevant patholo-
gies,
including
trauma,
white
matter
diseases,
tumors, cerebrovasculardisorders, and head and neck
and spine disorders. The information is concisely
presented, with key points and summaries for each
chapter. The text is very easy to read, and the accom-
panying illustrations are of very high quality.
There is no doubt that radiologists interpreting
neuroimaging studies should read this book and have
itattheready, notonlyfor referencebutalsotorefresh
their memory about DWI and to learn ways to incor-
porate DTI in the care of their patients.
Max Wintermark, MD, MAS, MBA
Stanford University
Palo Alto, California
ix


Preface
Diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) and diffusion ten-
sor imaging (DTI) are magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) technologies that havebeen applied to research
for some time. The translation of this research into
clinical practice has increased in recent years to the
point where the use of DWI is now routine in most if
not all patients. Understanding the concepts and
applications of DWI and DTI is necessary for their
correct use and interpretation.
The introduction of MRI enabled easier diagnosis
of white matter disease, and such capability was
further improved with the advent of DWI and DTI.
An increasing need to understand the organization
and maturation of white matter, as well as to better
characterize many diseases that affect it, has been in
part successfully fulﬁlled with the use of DTI.
This book, Diffusion weighted and Diffusion Tensor
Imaging: A Clinical Guide, comprises 15 chapters pro-
viding an overview of DWI and DTI focused on the
practical clinical applications of these techniques for
evaluations of the central nervous system and the
head and neck.
The ﬁrst chapter reviews the physics of DWI and
DTI so readers can better understand the chapters
that follow. Chapter 2 discusses the pathophysiology
of brain edema, given that the ﬁrst and most impor-
tant use of DWI is to differentiate cytotoxic from
vasogenic edema.
Chapter 3 describes the white matter tracts and
their organizations, demonstrating DTI’s capability to
elegantly depict these structures. Understanding
white matter tracts and their connections is the ﬁrst
step
toward
the
development
of
the
human
connectome.
Considering that the characteristics of white mat-
ter differ throughout life, chapters 4 and 5 describe
DWI and DTI features of white matter in different
phases: during development and during aging.
Knowledge of these differences is essential to differ-
entiate normal from pathological states.
The chapters that follow focus on central nervous
system pathologies for which DWI and DTI clearly
have improved our ability to diagnose vascular dis-
eases, tumors, infectious diseases, demyelinating and
toxic diseases, white matter diseases in children,
trauma, and hemorrhage. The goal is to present the
main clinical applications of thesetechniques in these
situations.
Besides the overview of the main applications of
DWI and DTI in the brain, the book also reviews their
applications in the spine and spinal cord and in the
head and neck.
Ultimately this book discusses, albeit brieﬂy,
future applications of DWI and DTI, giving readers
a glimpse of what is in store. We hope that you will
enjoy this practical approach to DWI and DTI and ﬁnd
it useful for your day-to-day clinical practice. We are
grateful to our contributors for sharing their knowl-
edge with all of us.
Claudia da Costa Leite
Mauricio Castillo
xi


Contributors
Celi Santos Andrade, MD, PhD
Post-doctoral Researcher
Department of Radiology
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade de São Paulo
Centro de Diagnósticos Brasil
São Paulo, Brazil
Mauricio Castillo, MD, FACR
Professor of Radiology
Chief, Division of Neuroradiology
School of Medicine
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Flavia K. Issa Cevasco, MD
Departament of Radiology
Universidade de São Paulo
São Paulo, Brazil
Falgun H. Chokshi, MD, MS
Director of Neuroradiology Services
Emory University Hospital Midtown
Assistant Professor
Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences
Emory School of Medicine
Atlanta, Georgia
Celso Hygino da Cruz, Jr, MD
Department of Radiology,
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
CDPI Clínica de Diagnóstico Por Imagem
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Andrew Joseph Degnan, MD, MPhil
Resident in Radiology
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Wei Gao, PhD
Assistant Professor
Department of Radiology
Biomedical Research Imaging Center
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Marcio Ricardo Taveira Garcia, MD
Departament of Radiology
Universidade de São Paulo
São Paulo, Brazil
Emerson Leandro Gasparetto, MD, PhD
Department of Radiology
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Eloisa M. Santiago Gebrim, MD
Department of Radiology
Universidade de São Paulo
São Paulo, Brazil
John H. Gilmore, MD
Thad and Alice Eure Distinguished Professor
Vice Chair for Research and Scientiﬁc Affairs
Director, Center for Excellence in Community Mental
Health
Department of Psychiatry
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Regina Lucia Elia Gomes, MD
Departament of Radiology
Universidade de São Paulo
São Paulo, Brazil
Julie H. Harreld, MD
Assistant Member
Department of Diagnostic Imaging
St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital
Memphis, Tennessee
Christopher P. Hess, MD, PhD
Associate Professor of Radiology and Neurology
UCSF Department of Radiology and Neurology
University of California
San Francisco, California
Jason M. Johnson, MD
Assistant Professor
Diagonstic Radiology- Neuro Imaging
The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center
Houston, Texas
xiii

Sangam Kanekar, MD
Associate Professor
Division of Neuroradiology
Department of Radiology
Penn State Milton S Hershey Medical Center and
College of Medicine
Hershey, Pennsylvania
Claudia da Costa Leite, MD, PhD
Associate Professor
Department of Radiology
University of São Paulo
São Paulo, Brazil
Associate Professor
Department of Radiology
School of Medicine
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Lucien M. Levy, MD, PhD
Deceased
Professor of Radiology
Chief of Neuroradiology
The George Washington University School of
Medicine
Washington DC
Weili Lin, PhD
Dixie Lee Boney Soo Distinguished Professor of
Neurological Medicine and Director
Department of Radiology
Biomedical Research Imaging Center
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Michael L. Lipton, MD, PhD, FACR
Professor of Radiology
Department of Radiology, Psychiatry and Behavioral
Sciences
TheDominickP.Purpura DepartmentofNeuroscience
Albert Einstein College of Medicine
The Gruss Magnetic Resonance Research Center
Department of Radiology
Monteﬁore Medical Center
Bronx, New York
Leandro T. Lucato, MD, PhD
Section Chief, Diagnostic Neuroradiology
Medical Director, Magnetic Resonance Center
Department of Radiology
Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade de São Paulo
Centro de Diagnósticos Brasil
São Paulo, Brazil
Maria da Graça Morais Martin MD, PhD
Neuroradiologist
Instituto de Radiologia
Clinics Hospital, School of Medicine
University of São Paula
Hospital Sirio Libanês
São Paulo, Brazil
Maria Gisele Matheus, MD
Assistant Professor of Neuroradiology
Department of Radiology and Radiological Science
Medical University of South Carolina
Charleston, South Carolina
Alexander M. Mckinney, MD
Associate Professor
Vice Chair, Research
Neuroradiology Division Director
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, Minnesota
Chandan Misra, MD
PGY-3 Resident
Penn State Hershey Radiology
Hershey, Pennsylvania
Maria Concepción Garcia Otaduy, PhD
Department of Radiology
Medical School of the University of São Paulo
Medical Physicist
Magnetic Resonance Department
Clinics Hospital of the University of São Paulo
São Paulo, Brazil
Zolton Patay, MD, PhD
Chief, Neuroradiology
Department of Diagnostic Imaging
St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital
Memphis, Tennessee
xiv
Contributors

Joana Ramalho, MD
Department of Neuroradiology
Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Central
Lisboa, Portugal
Division of Neuroradiology
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, North Carolina
Carolina de Medeiros Rimkus, MD, PhD
Post-doctoral Researcher
Department of Radiology
Vrije University Medical Center
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina da
Universidade de São Paulo
São Paulo, Brazil
Fernanda C. Rueda-Lopes, MD
Department of Radiology
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
CDPI Clínica de Diagnóstico Por Imagem
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
Amit M. Saindane, MD
Associate Professor
Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences
Division of Neuroradiology
Director, Division of Neuroradiology
Radiology and Imaging Sciences
Emory University School of Medicine
Atlanta, Georgia
Majda M. Thurnher, MD
Professor of Radiology
Department of Biomedical Imaging and
Image-guided Therapy
University Hospital Vienna
Medical University Vienna
Vienna, Austria
xv
Contributors


1 Physics of Diﬀusion Weighted and Diﬀusion Tensor
Imaging
Maria Concepción Garcia Otaduy
Key Points
●Diﬀusion is a powerful diagnostic tool that
measures water molecule displacement of the
size order of cell structures (a few micro-
meters). Hence it is sensitive to microstructural
changes in brain tissue, even before these
changes can be detected by other types of
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
●Water diﬀusion in the brain is relatively
restricted, and, depending on the parameters
of the diﬀusion pulse sequence, one can
observe more or less of this restriction. The
measured water diﬀusion coeﬃcient depends
on the (b values); thus the term apparent diﬀu-
sion coeﬃcient (ADC) is used.
●Water diﬀusion in the brain is anisotropic,
meaning that it is facilitated parallel to myelin
fibers and axons and restricted perpendicular
to them. The tensor model is adopted to
describe this diﬀusion anisotropy, and it allows
one to quantify anisotropy parameters (related
to white matter integrity) and to reconstruct
the trajectory of white matter fibers (diﬀusion
tractography).
1.1 Introduction
Diﬀusion weighted images (DWIs) provide tissue
contrast related to the thermally driven random
motion (Brownian motion) of water molecules in
brain tissue. Water diﬀusion is heavily restricted
by the brain tissue microstructure, and this restric-
tion is higher when it occurs perpendicular to the
white matter fibers (diﬀusion anisotropy). This
restriction to water diﬀusion has two important
consequences: First, any changes at the cytoarchi-
tecture level will be reflected in the DWI, making
this method extremely sensitive to pathological
changes; and second, based on the orientation of
the faster diﬀusion in a voxel, white matter trajec-
tories can be reproduced. This is the principle
behind diﬀusion tractography.
1.2 Diﬀusion Weighted
Imaging
1.2.1 Brownian Motion
Due to thermal energy, water molecules in a liquid
state are in constant motion, following a random
pathway
where
the
direction
of
the
motion
changes with the collisions of water molecules.
This type of motion is called brownian motion,
named after the botanist Robert Brown, who first
described it in 1827 after observing the motion of
pollen suspended in water. In 1906 Albert Einstein
described this motion mathematically, introducing
the idea of random walk and the self-diﬀusion
coeﬃcient D. In this random walk (▶Fig. 1.1) it is
impossible to predict the distance that a given
water molecule will diﬀuse in a given time, but it
is possible to obtain a statistical value on how a
whole group of water molecules will diﬀuse. This
value is
the mean square displacement < r2 > ,
which reflects the mean of the gaussian distribu-
tion of displacements that water molecules accom-
plish in a given time period (see ▶Fig. 1.1). As
stated by the Einstein equation of diﬀusion in one
dimension, < r2 > increases with the diﬀusion time
t (the observation time in the measurement), and
the diﬀusion coeﬃcient D is the proportionality
constant, with a physical unit of mm2/s:
hr2i ¼ 2  D  t
ð1:1Þ
1.2.2 Stejskal and Tanner
In 1965 Stejskal and Tanner introduced the idea of
measuring the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of liquids by
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) using pulsed
gradients before and after the application of the
180-degree pulse in the spin-echo (SE) sequence
(▶Fig. 1.2). The first pulsed gradient causes a fast
and controlled dephasing of the spins, afterward a
180-degree pulse is applied, which inverts all
spins and initiates the process of spins rephasing
for later formation of the echo. But, for the
Physics of DWI and DTI
1

complete rephasing of the spins to occur, it is nec-
essary to apply again exactly the same pulsed field
gradient (with the same amplitude G and duration
δ) that was applied before the 180-degree pulse, in
order to compensate for the dephasing caused
by the first pulsed gradient. If the spins do not
change position relative to the applied field gra-
dient
during
the
time
interval
Δ,
the
time
between the two pulsed field gradients, all spins
will be correctly rephased and will contribute to
the echo signal. However, most of the echo signal
comes from water, which is in constant motion,
and from the Einstein equation we know that,
after a given time Δ the < r2 > will be nonzero.
Hence the location of the water molecules rela-
tive to the applied pulsed gradient will change,
and as a consequence water diﬀusing spins will
not be correctly rephased and will not contribute
to the signal of the echo. By measuring the signal
intensity of the SE with (S) and without (S0) the
application of the pulsed field gradients the dif-
fusion coeﬃcient D can be calculated from the
Stejskal and Tanner equation:
S
S0
¼ exp bD
ð1:2Þ
where b is known as the b factor of the diﬀusion
acquisition and depends on the pulse sequence
parameters as shown in the next equation,
b ¼ 2G22    
3


ð1:3Þ
with γ being the gyromagnetic ratio.
By increasing the b factor in the diﬀusion acquis-
ition, more diﬀusion weight will be introduced in
the images. When b = 0 (zero of diﬀusion weight)
is applied, the result is basically a T2-weighted
image,
with
high
signal
intensity
for
liquids
(▶Fig. 1.3a). When b = 1,000 s/mm2 is applied we
obtain a DWI, where higher diﬀusion is denoted by
hypointensity
(strong
signal
attenuation),
and
slower
diﬀusion
(restriction
to
diﬀusion)
is
denoted by high signal intensity (▶Fig. 1.3b).
Fig. 1.1
(a) Example of random water molecule
trajectories (“random walk”) during diffusion (brownian
motion) and (b) gaussian distribution of water molecule
displacements characterized by the root mean square
displacement as a function of time.
Fig. 1.2 Stejskal and Tanner pulse sequence for the measurement of diffusion. G, gradient amplitude; δ duration of the
gradient pulse; Δ, interval between gradient pulses; TE, echo time. S0, signal without applying gradient pulses; S(b),
signal after applying gradient pulses.
Physics of DWI and DTI
2

1.2.3 T2 Shine-through Eﬀect and
Apparent Diﬀusion Coeﬃccient
Map
The interpretation of signal intensity in the DWI is
not always straightforward. Sometimes the signal
intensity may be high in both the non-DWI (b = 0)
and the DWI (b > 0), independent of restriction to
diﬀusion (▶Fig. 1.3d,e). This is because DWIs are
inherently also T2-weighted images because they
are acquired with relatively long echo times (TEs)
and long repetition times. In this case, the high sig-
nal intensity in the DWI may be due only to the T2
shine-through eﬀect. To elucidate this question it
is suggested to calculate the actual D for each voxel
in the image as follows:
D ¼ ADC ¼  ln
Sb2
Sb1
b2   b1
ð
Þ ¼  ln Sb
S0
b
ð1:4Þ
where
Sb1
and
Sb2
are
the signal
intensities
obtained with two diﬀerent b values and b1 < b2. If
we solve this equation for each voxel in the image,
we obtain the so-called apparent diﬀusion coeﬃ-
cient (ADC) map (▶Fig. 1.3c,f). In the ADC map,
signal intensity directly reflects the ADC value,
which is highest where there is free diﬀusion, like
in the ventricular cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) with an
ADC ≈3.2 × 10-3 mm2/s, and lowest in regions of
restricted diﬀusion, i.e. in the white matter with
an ADC ≈0.7 × 10-3 mm2/s. It is important to
observe that, as indicated by the name of apparent
diﬀusion coeﬃcient, the calculated ADC in brain
tissues depends on the choice of b1 and b2. Con-
ventionally, in the brain the two b values chosen
are 0 and 1,000 s/mm2, but diﬀerent values can
also be used. It is also possible to acquire images
with more than two b values to obtain a better
approximation of
the ADC. In this case, the
Fig. 1.3
(a) Non–diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) (b = 0 s/mm2) of a stroke patient presenting two thalamic lesions.
(b) DWI (b = 1,000 s/mm2) with high signal intensity in both lesions. (c) Corresponding apparent diffusion coefficient
(ADC) map confirming the restriction to diffusion in the lesions with a decrease in ADC. (d) Non-DWI (b = 0 s/mm2) of
another stroke patient with a left subacute lesion. (e) DWI (b = 1,000 s/mm2) presenting high signal intensity in the
lesion (T2 shine-through effect). (f) Corresponding ADC map showing that there is no restriction of diffusion, but rather
an ADC increase in the lesion.
Physics of DWI and DTI
3

obtained signal intensity is fitted to an exponential
function of b, derived from Equation (1.2):
S b
ð Þ ¼ S0e b  ADC
ð1:5Þ
However, it has been shown that, for calculation of
the ADC, it is not eﬃcient in terms of signal to
noise ratio (SNR) to use more than two b values.
Two b values are enough, and, ideally, for in vivo
brain measurements the diﬀerence between them
should be approximately 1,000 to 1,500 s/mm2.1
1.2.4 Restriction of Water
Diﬀusion in Brain Tissue
ADC as a Marker of Tissue
Microstructure
Diﬀusion of water in biological tissues and in the
brain is strongly restricted; water molecules con-
stantly encounter barriers (e.g., cell membranes,
myelin fibers, and axonal projections), which pre-
vent the water from diﬀusing freely, such as it
would in a glass of water. The water root mean
square displacements that occur in the brain with-
in the diﬀusion times used in conventional DWI
are on the order of a few micrometers, which cor-
responds to the order of the size of cell structures.
Hence the ADC measured in brain tissues reflects
water motion restricted by these cell structures
and is thus an extremely sensitive marker of tissue
microstructure. For instance, it is possible to detect
restriction in diﬀusion (decreased ADC) when
there is an increase in cellular density caused by
tumor growth or with cellular swelling in cyto-
toxic edema. On the other hand, the increase of
extracellular space caused by vasogenic edema,
demyelination,
or
axonal
loss,
results
in
an
increase of the observed ADC. Any biological or
pathological change that causes changes in the tis-
sue microstructure will be in principle detected by
changes in the ADC, which renders the DWI tech-
nique very powerful.
Size of Tissue Compartments
The size of the tissue compartments where water
can diﬀuse plays an important role in the resulting
ADC. Within one compartment water may diﬀuse
freely, but if the diﬀusion time Δ of the experiment
is long enough for the water molecules to reach
the limits of the compartment, the chance that the
water molecules will bounce back to the center of
the
compartment
is
greatly
increased.
As
Δ
increases, more water molecules will hit “the
walls” of the compartment, and the observed
< r2 > will be smaller than that expected for free
diﬀusion as illustrated in (▶Fig. 1.4). Because of
this eﬀect it is advisable to keep a constant Δ value
unless the intention is to determine the size of tis-
sue compartments.2
Influence of the b Factor on the ADC
As described in Equation (1.3) the b factor depends
on the characteristics of the applied pulsed field
gradients and on the diﬀusion time Δ. For the rea-
sons already explained it is recommended to
maintain Δ as a fixed value and to increase the b
Fig. 1.4 Mean square displacement as
a function of diffusion time showing
the effect of restriction.
Physics of DWI and DTI
4

value only by increasing the diﬀusion gradient
field strength (G). The stronger the applied pulsed
field gradients, the higher the capacity of the gra-
dients to cause dephasing, and signal attenuation
will be measured even in the presence of very slow
diﬀusion. This means that the higher the b value,
the higher the contribution of the slow diﬀusing
compartments will be in the final DWI. As the b
value increases (> 1,000 s/mm2) the resulting ADC
becomes smaller.3 This is because the obtained
ADC in brain tissues is the average of the diﬀusion
of several tissue compartments in the voxel, and as
the b value increases and diﬀusion rate decreases,
the contribution of slow diﬀusion compartments
becomes higher. If signal intensity is plotted on a
logarithmic scale as a function of b, the signal
intensity decreases almost linearly until a value
of 1,000 s/mm2 is reached, but above 1,000 s/
mm2, the slope of the signal attenuation begins
to change (▶Fig. 1.5). For this reason, when
using high b values (> 1,000 s/mm2) the signal
attenuation is better described with a biexpo-
nential model.3 This biexponential behavior will
be encountered only for voxels where compart-
ments with diﬀerent diﬀusions coexist, as in the
white matter, whereas in the CSF within the ven-
tricles signal attenuation will be monoexponen-
tial. By measuring the DWI signal as a function
of diﬀerent b values up to 4,000 to 6,000 s/mm2
Clark and Le Bihan3 estimated the fast diﬀusing
fraction in brain tissue to be ~ 0.7, too large to
be reflecting only the diﬀusion in the extracellu-
lar space, as discussed in their study.
Choice of the b Value
The question now arises as to how high the chosen
b value should be. The slower the diﬀusion in the
tissue, the higher the b value needs to be; on the
other hand, if the b value is too high, the resulting
DWI is very noisy. A b value of ~ 1/ADC of the tis-
sue of interest is suggested to be optimal, but giv-
en that the TE needs to be increased with higher b
values (due to the use of stronger gradients), and
that a longer TE leads to a lower SNR, the optimal
b becomes ~ 0.9/ADC.4,5 For brain studies a b value
of 1,000 s/mm2 is commonly used and results in an
eﬀective compromise between diﬀusion sensitiv-
ity and SNR. Nevertheless, for lesions with a stron-
ger restriction to diﬀusion than that in normal
white matter (i.e., in tumors), it is interesting to
use higher b values (i.e. b = 2,000 s/mm2) to
increase the sensitivity of the method.6,7,8 Hence
the ability to obtain a valuable DWI will be
strongly related to the strength of the gradient
coils and the maximum b values that can be
achieved.
Fig. 1.5 Nonlinearity of diffusion in
white matter at high b values.
Physics of DWI and DTI
5

1.2.5 Anisotropy of Water
Diﬀusion in the Brain
Isotropic and Anisotropic Diﬀusion
Sometimes the barriers that restrict water diﬀu-
sion in brain tissues are isotropically distributed
(▶Fig. 1.6a), which means that diﬀusion will be
restricted equally in all directions. At other times
these barriers will be distributed anisotropically,
resulting in stronger diﬀusion restrictions perpen-
dicular to the barriers (▶Fig. 1.6b). In white matter
water, diﬀusion is facilitated parallel to axonal pro-
jections and myelin fibers, and it is restricted per-
pendicular to them. Thus the measured ADC
depends on the direction of the applied pulsed
field
gradient.
This
is
clearly
illustrated
in
▶Fig. 1.7a–c, where one can observe the DWI with
the
diﬀusion
gradients
applied
in
the
three
orthogonal directions. When these images are
compared important diﬀerences are visible, in par-
ticular in the region of the splenium of the corpus
callosum, where there is high signal intensity for
the
image
acquired
with
diﬀusion
gradients
applied in the z direction, indicating restriction to
diﬀusion in the inferior–superior orientation, and
very low signal intensity when the diﬀusion gra-
dient is applied in the x direction, indicating
unhindered diﬀusion in the right-to-left orienta-
tion, parallel to the corpus callosum fibers. This re-
gion in the brain is known to have the highest
values of diﬀusion anisotropy. The term anisotropy
indicates that water diﬀusion in brain tissue
depends on orientation. To obtain DWI results that
are independent on orientation, one needs to cal-
culate the average of the three DWIs obtained with
the pulsed diﬀusion gradients applied in the three
orthogonal directions (▶Fig. 1.7a–c). This average
image is known as the isotropic DWI and is used to
calculate the ADC (▶Fig. 1.7d).
The Tensor Model
The tensor model was proposed to describe and
quantify diﬀusion anisotropy.9 In the tensor mod-
el, ADC is measured in the three perpendicular
directions x, y, and z, and in all combinations of
these directions, and instead of referring to a sin-
gle ADC, we refer to the diﬀusion tensor1:
ADC ¼
ADCxx
ADCxy
ADCxz
ADCyx
ADCyy
ADCyz
ADCzx
ADCzy
ADCzz
2
64
3
75
ð1:6Þ
Because the tensor is symmetric (i.e., ADCxy =
ADCyx, ADCxz = ADCzx, and ADCyz = ADCzy) diﬀusion
needs to be measured only in six diﬀerent gradient
directions to fill the nine diﬀusion elements in the
matrix. Such a matrix is determined for each voxel
of the image. Afterward the matrix is diagonalized,
a mathematical process by which all oﬀ-diagonal
elements become zero, and the diagonal elements
are transformed to coincide with the principal axis
of diﬀusion in the voxel. The new diagonal ele-
ments correspond to the three eigenvectors (ε1, ε2,
and ε3) with their eigenvalues (λ1, λ2, and λ3), rep-
resenting the main directions of diﬀusion and
their
associated
diﬀusivities,
respectively.
The
eigenvalues are arranged according to their magni-
tudes so that λ1 ≥λ2 ≥λ3.
A graphical representation of this tensor can be
obtained with the ellipsoid model (▶Fig. 1.8a),
where the axes of the ellipsoid correspond to the
Fig. 1.6 (a) Isotropic and (b) anisotropic display of the
barriers to diffusion.
Physics of DWI and DTI
6

eigenvectors, with the longest axis in the direction
of the ε1. The more stretched the ellipsoid is, the
higher the anisotropy in the voxel. On the other
hand, in cases of isotropic diﬀusion, all eigenvec-
tors have the same size, resulting in a sphere
(▶Fig. 1.8b).
The first eigenvalue λ1 is also known as the axial
diﬀusion because it represents the diﬀusion paral-
lel to the fiber bundle. ▶Fig. 1.9a shows the map
of axial diﬀusion and ▶Fig. 1.9b is its color-coded
map indicating the orientation of ε1. The two other
eigenvalues represent the magnitude of diﬀusion
perpendicular to ε1, and the term radial diﬀusion is
introduced to refer to the diﬀusion perpendicular
to the fiber, calculated as (λ2 + λ3)/2. Experimental
studies suggest that axial diﬀusion can be used to
evaluate axon integrity and that radial diﬀusion is
more sensitive to myelin integrity.10,11 However,
care should be taken because this interpretation is
not always straightforward. When comparing dif-
ferent individuals, pathology, and partial volume
eﬀects, noise or crossing fibers may change the
direction of the calculated ε1 in a particular voxel
with respect to the underlying structure. As a con-
sequence, the direction and size of λ2 and λ3
change as well, and the obtained diﬀerences in
radial diﬀusivity do not necessarily reflect changes
in myelin integrity.12 Ideally, when comparing axial
and radial diﬀusivities between subjects, the direc-
tion of the ε1 should be taken into account, and
voxels with very diﬀerent directions of ε1 for both
groups should be excluded from the analysis.12
Other parameters that aim to quantify the ani-
sotropy in brain tissue are fractional anisotropy
(FA), relative anisotropy (RA), and volume ratio
(VR) (▶Fig. 1.10a–c), described by the following:
FA ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
3
1   hi
ð
Þ2 þ 2   hi
ð
Þ2 þ 3   hi
ð
Þ2
h
i
r
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2 2
1 þ 2
2 þ 2
3
 
q
ð1:7Þ
where
hi ¼ Tr ADC
ð
Þ
3
¼ 1 þ 2 þ 3
3
ð1:8Þ
RA ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
1   hi
ð
Þ2 þ 2   hi
ð
Þ2 þ 3   hi
ð
Þ2
q
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
3hi
p
ð1:9Þ
Fig. 1.7
Diffusion weighted images
(DWIs) (b = 1,000 s/mm2) acquired
with diffusion gradients applied in the
three orthogonal directions: (a) right–
left, (b) anterior–posterior, and (c)
inferior–superior. Note the marked
differences in signal intensity at the
splenium of the corpus callosum (ar-
rows) due to the strong orientation of
the fibers in this region. (d) Isotropic
DWI or trace image.
Physics of DWI and DTI
7

VR ¼ 123
hi3
ð1:10Þ
Tr(ADC) is the trace of the tensor (the sum of the
three eigenvalues), and h λ i represents the mean
diﬀusivity in the voxel (the average of the three
eigenvalues). VR represents the ratio of the volume
of the ellipsoid describing the anisotropy in the
voxel to the volume of a sphere whose radius is
the mean diﬀusivity.13 Because the volume of the
ellipsoid decreases as anisotropy increases, VR = 0
indicates a maximum of anisotropy, and VR = 1
indicates that diﬀusion is completely isotropic. RA
represents the normalized standard deviation of
the eigenvalues from h λ i. In case of isotropic diﬀu-
sion (no deviation) RA = 0, and the higher the RA
the higher the anisotropy. FA measures the fraction
of the mean diﬀusion that can be ascribed to ani-
sotropic diﬀusion, so that FA can range from 0
(fully isotropic diﬀusion) to 1 (fully anisotropic dif-
fusion).1 RA and FA present similar parametric
Fig. 1.8 (a) Anisotropic diffusion rep-
resented by an ellipsoid and (b) iso-
tropic diffusion represented by a
sphere.
Physics of DWI and DTI
8

maps, but it has been shown that FA is less aﬀected
by noise than RA, and that FA provides a better
contrast-to-noise ratio between grey and white
matter.14 In the healthy brain FA is low in cortical
gray matter (≈0.2), variable in the deep gray mat-
ter (0.2–0.4), and higher in the white matter
(> 0.4). Regions of very high FA are the corpus
callosum (≈0.8).
1.2.6 Tractography
Tractography is a method for identifying white
matter pathways in the brain. It is based on the
assumption that the first eigenvector ε1 derived
from the DTI analysis will be parallel to the fiber
bundle in the voxel, and diﬀerent types of algo-
rithms can be applied to reconstruct three-dimen-
sionally
these
fiber
pathways
based
on
the
Fig. 1.9 (a) Map of axial diffusion and (b) standard color-coded principal direction map. Red indicates left–right, green
indicates anterior–posterior, and blue indicates superior–inferior orientations.
Fig. 1.10
(a) Map of fractional anisotropy, (b) relative anisotropy, and (c) volume ratio.
Physics of DWI and DTI
9

information on each voxel. A basic distinction in
the algorithm to be applied is whether it is based
on deterministic or probabilistic tractography.15
The deterministic tractography, most commonly
used in clinical applications, is based on the
streamline principle, so that, starting from a given
region of interest (seed location), adjacent voxels
will be integrated to the same streamline as long
as their principal eigenvectors are parallel to each
other or at least do not deviate too much from the
given direction. The limit for this deviation is
established by the curvature threshold (commonly
30–60 degrees), so that, if the next voxel has an
angle greater than this threshold, it will not be
included to the streamline and the tract will stop
at that point. Another limit imposed on the growth
of this streamline is the value of the fractional ani-
sotropy in the voxel because in voxels with low FA
the determination of the eigenvector is associated
with large errors. If the next voxel is below an
established FA threshold (commonly 0.2–0.3) the
tract will stop. Deterministic tractography is often
combined with some prior anatomical knowledge
that the user can select more than one region of
interest through which a white matter tract should
pass, and streamlines that do not pass through
these selected regions of interests will be excluded
from the graphical representation of the white
matter tracts. ▶Fig. 1.11 shows an example of how
the white matter tracts of the corpus callosum can
be reconstructed based on the anisotropy informa-
tion of individual voxels.
An important limitation of tractography is that
its resolution (~ 2 mm) is too low to identify the
orientation of individual white matter fibers (with
a diameter on the order of 1 μm). Even if these
white matter tracts are largely coherently organ-
ized in fiber bundles containing hundreds of thou-
sands of axons, in many of the DTI voxels fiber
bundles will cross, split, or merge. The eﬀect of
these “crossing fibers” is that the obtained ε1 will
not represent the correct fiber orientation in the
voxel because it contains more than one fiber ori-
entation. The coexistence of more than one fiber
orientation results in low FA for the voxel, below
the established threshold for streamline tractogra-
phy, which causes interruption of the fiber track-
ing. As opposed to deterministic tractography,
probabilistic tractography is better able to handle
the problem of crossing fibers given that, instead
of stopping the fiber tracking, the uncertainty for a
given fiber orientation is calculated for every vox-
el, so that afterward the most likely white matter
pathways that connect two diﬀerent regions can
be reconstructed. Many new acquisition methods
and processing algorithms have been proposed to
deal more eﬀectively with crossing fibers, such as,
q-space imaging (QSI), diﬀusion spectrum imaging
(DSI), q-ball imaging (QBI), composite hindered
and restricted model of diﬀusion (CHARMED), and
Fig. 1.11 (a) Graphical representation of the diffusion ellipsoids for each voxel and (b) the resulting tractography in the
corpus callosum.
Physics of DWI and DTI
10

high angular resolution diﬀusion imaging (HARDI).
More detailed descriptions of these methods can
be found elsewhere.15
1.3 Diﬀusion Imaging
Techniques
1.3.1 DWI with Spin-Echo-Echo-
Planar Imaging
Up until now we have spoken about the diﬀusion
technique as just the modified SE version of Stej-
skal and Tanner, a technique used in vitro to meas-
ure the self-diﬀusion coeﬃcient of liquids. The
first attempts by Le Bihan to adapt this technique
to in vivo MRI measurements of diﬀusion were dis-
couraging and suﬀered from gradient strength
limitations and motion artifacts,16 but in 1986 he
managed to publish the first application of MRI
diﬀusion in the brain.17 Clinical applications of
DWI became feasible after overcoming motion
artifacts by combining DWI with echo-planar
imaging (EPI), a strategy of rapidly filling the k-
space.18 In the single-shot SE-EPI acquisition all
echoes required to build the image derive from the
same excitation pulse, and just by switching the
polarity of the frequency-encoding gradients a
train of gradient-echoes is rapidly formed, capable
of filling the whole k-space of a single image
(▶Fig. 1.12a) in about 50 to 100 ms.
1.3.2 DWI with Periodically
Rotated Overlapping Parallel Lines
with Enhanced Reconstruction
(PROPELLER)
A great disadvantage of the SE-EPI acquisition is
that this type of sequence is prone to strong sus-
ceptibility artifacts. The next section discusses
how EPI parameters need to be chosen to mini-
mize this type of artifact, but even after parameter
optimization, the regions close to the temporal
bones, ears, and sinuses will suﬀer from distor-
tions, precluding the diagnostic evaluation of these
regions. This problem was overcome by combining
the periodically rotated overlapping parallel lines
with enhanced reconstruction (PROPELLER) tech-
nique,19 insensitive to motion artifacts, with DWI.
In the PROPELLER technique (called also Blade or
MultiVane) the k-space is filled in blades as shown
in ▶Fig. 1.12b so that the center of the k-space is
sampled with every echo, which turns the acquisi-
tion-insensitive
to
in-plane
motion
artifacts.
Because motion artifacts are not a problem with
the PROPELLER technique, this strategy can be
combined with pulse sequences, such as fast SE
(FSE) or multishot EPI techniques, which require
longer acquisition times resulting in less suscepti-
bility artifacts.20,21 ▶Fig. 1.13 shows improvement
of the image in areas of low field homogeneity by
using the DWI-FSE PROPELLER technique.
1.3.3 DWI with Fluid-Attenuated
Inversion Recovery
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) has a much higher ADC
than brain parenchyma, so any contamination
with CSF might influence drastically the measured
ADC. CSF signal can be suppressed from the DWI
by adding an inversion pulse at the beginning of
the pulse sequence and applying the 90-degree
excitation pulse at exactly the moment when CSF
longitudinal magnetization is passing through the
null point, a technique known as fluid attenuated
inversion recovery (FLAIR). The result is a DWI
with CSF signal suppression (▶Fig. 1.14), which
can be of utility when analyzing regions close to
the ventricles or sulci. The disadvantage of this
technique is that, due to the long inversion time
required to suppress CSF, the acquisition time also
becomes long.
1.3.4 DWI Parameters
In addition to the b value, which has already been
discussed other
parameters
also
aﬀect
DWI
quality. Susceptibility eﬀects lead to errors in
phase encoding and consequently image distor-
tion in the phase-encoding direction of EPI. For
this
reason
the
phase-encoding
direction
should always lie along the axis of less suscept-
ibility gradients, which, on an axial slice in the
brain, is the anterior–posterior axis. ▶Fig. 1.15
shows the eﬀect of the phase-encoding direc-
tion on the EPI. Reducing the slice thickness
also
helps
to
minimize
the
eﬀect
of
field
inhomogeneity.
Phase-encoding errors are propagated in time
from echo to echo in the EPI echo train. Hence it
is possible to minimize these artifacts by reducing
the echo train length, either by reducing the
number of echoes or by speeding up the acquisi-
tion (i.e., reducing echo spacing). Reducing the
Physics of DWI and DTI
11

acquisition
matrix
(spatial
resolution)
in
the
phase-encoding direction and using a parallel
imaging technique will reduce the number of ech-
oes in the train. Increasing the receiver bandwidth
and reducing the matrix (spatial resolution) in the
frequency-encoding direction will reduce echo
spacing. The optimum acceleration factor R in par-
allel acquisition will depend on the coil configura-
tion
(g-factor
of
the
coil),
and
usually
an
acceleration factor of 2 to 3 will provide a good
compromise between susceptibility artifact reduc-
tion and SNR. To maximize SNR and to reduce
Fig. 1.12 (a) The k-space filling of all
lines in a single shot using an echo-
planar imaging (EPI) sequence and (b)
k-space filling of blades using a PRO-
PELLER sequence.
Physics of DWI and DTI
12

susceptibility artifacts the TE should also be as
short as possible, although a limitation to short TE
is the b value: the higher the b value the longer the
TE becomes. In summary, for optimizing image
quality in the DWI-EPI acquisition a smaller matrix
(i.e., 128 × 128), maximum gradient strength and
speed, maximum receiver bandwidth, minimum
TE, and parallel imaging should be used. The
choice of these parameters diﬀers according to the
application of the diﬀusion study, whether we are
interested in obtaining only DWI or DTI, or if we
are interested in tractography. For the latter appli-
cation, it is very important to have high and iso-
tropic spatial resolution (1–2 mm3) and to apply a
large number of diﬀerent gradient directions,
ideally about at least 30 unique orientations.15
1.4 Diﬀusion Pitfalls
1.4.1 Perfusion Eﬀects
DWI is also sensitive to the motion of water
spins in the vascular space caused by blood per-
fusion. It is even possible to quantify this perfu-
sion contribution by the intravoxel incoherent
motion (IVIM) method, where DWI is acquired
as
a
function
of
several
diﬀerent
b
values,
increasing it in small steps from 0 to about
1,000 s/mm2 (i.e., 0, 10, 20, 40, 80, 110, 140, 170,
200, 300, 400, 500, 600, 700, 800, and 900 s/
mm2), so it is possible to observe that the signal
decays biexponentially, with a rapid decay at the
beginning (up to a b value of 200 s/mm2) and a
Fig. 1.13 (a) Echo-planar image showing distortion in the regions of low field homogeneity. (b) A small improvement is
gained by using parallel acquisition (R = 2). (c) There is no susceptibility artifact with the PROPELLER diffusion weighted
imaging sequence.
Fig. 1.14
An example of fluid-attenuated inversion recovery diffusion weighted imaging (FLAIR-DWI). (a) Non-DWI
(b = 0 s/mm2) with suppression of cerebrospinal fluid, (b) DWI (b = 1,000 s/mm2). (c) Corresponding apparent diffusion
coefficient map.
Physics of DWI and DTI
13

slower decay for higher b values (▶Fig. 1.16). In
the IVIM method this biexponential behavior is
ascribed to a two-compartment diﬀusion model,
with
a
microvascular
(f)
and
a
nonvascular
compartment (1 −f), characterized, respectively,
by a pseudo diﬀusion coeﬃcient D* (faster decay)
and an apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient D (slower
decay)22:
Fig. 1.15 (a) Echo-planar imaging acquired with phase encoding in the x (right–left) direction. (b) Reduction of image
distortion by swapping the phase encoding to the y (anterior–posterior) direction.
Fig. 1.16 Biexponential behavior of
signal attenuation when the effect of
perfusion is considered. Perfusion
contribution is accounted for by
introducing a pseudo diffusion
coefficient.
Physics of DWI and DTI
14

S b
ð Þ
S0
¼ f  e bD þ 1   f
ð
Þ  e bD
ð1:11Þ
In an IVIM study of brain gliomas it was found that
the perfusion fraction f was significantly higher in
high-grade gliomas when compared to low-grade
gliomas.22
From ▶Fig. 1.16 it can be concluded that the
contribution of blood perfusion to the ADC meas-
urement can be suppressed by using a b value > 200
s/mm2 as the low b value, instead of the standard
b = 0 s/mm2,23 resulting in “flow compensated”
ADC. Because the vascular fraction in healthy brain
is low (5–8%), this perfusion eﬀect is usually negli-
gible. However, when ADC is used to monitor brain
tumor growth any changes in tumor perfusion can
represent an important confounding factor and the
use of flow compensated ADC is preferable.23
1.4.2 Motion Artifacts
Head motion should be minimized as much as
possible by placing pads around it within the coil.
Residual head motion can be corrected for by
including in the postprocessing a registration step
of DWI to the non-DWI (b = 0), allowing correction
of rotation and translation in three directions (a
total of six degrees of freedom). Most DTI software
packages include this postprocessing step; how-
ever, not all of them correct for the eﬀect of head
motion on the direction of the applied diﬀusion
gradients. The list of applied gradient directions
used to calculate the diﬀusion tensor is valid only
if there is no head motion during the entire
acquisition. If head motion occurs, the gradient
directions for each acquired image should be cor-
rected for the motion occurring in the image.
1.4.3 Cerebrospinal Fluid
Pulsation Eﬀects
The motion eﬀect of CSF cannot be corrected for
and is most prominent during the systolic phase of
the cardiac cycle. It has been shown that CSF pul-
sation aﬀects measured diﬀusion in brain regions
contaminated by CSF, with the eﬀect being stron-
ger in the periventricular regions. This eﬀect can
be minimized by obtaining FLAIR-DWI acquisi-
tions, by choosing a minimum b value > b = 0 s/
mm2 to minimize the contribution of the fast-dif-
fusing water of CSF in the measurement, or by tim-
ing the DWI acquisition with the cardiac cycle.
This last option can lead to longer acquisition
times depending on the heart rate.15
1.4.4 Nyquist Ghosts
EPI acquisitions are characterized by a unique way
of filling the k-space, whereby one line is fre-
quency encoded with a positive gradient (from left
to right), and the next one is encoded with a nega-
tive gradient in the opposite direction (from right
to left) (see ▶Fig. 1.12a). Timing errors between
sampling and gradient application, eddy currents,
and frequency oﬀsets can cause asymmetries
between odd and even echoes that result in a
ghost image after Fourier transformation. This
ghost image, known as a Nyquist ghost, is dis-
placed by half the field of view (FOV) in the phase-
encoding direction, as illustrated in ▶Fig. 1.17. If
the Nyquist ghost overlaps with actual regions of
interest it may be diﬃcult to make a correct esti-
mation of the ADC and other DTI parameters.24
Visual inspection of the non-DWI (b = 0), the
image of a higher SNR, will allow one to see if the
Nyquist ghost is obscuring the real signal or region
of interest. In that case it is advisable to repeat the
acquisition with a larger FOV so that the Nyquist
ghost does not overlap with the region of interest.
1.4.5 Eddy Current Artifacts
The gradients applied in DWI are very high in
amplitude and need to be switched on and oﬀ
Fig. 1.17 Characteristic Nyquist ghost in echo-planar
imaging. The artifactual image is displaced by half the
field of view in the phase encoding (PE) direction.
Physics of DWI and DTI
15

rapidly, which causes eddy currents that introduce
errors in the spatial encoding process. The result is
that the obtained image can be shifted, com-
pressed, stretched, or sheared depending on the
diﬀusion encoding direction. If this problem is not
corrected a false high-anisotropy rim can be seen
at the edge of the images (▶Fig. 1.18a). This eﬀect
can be corrected by coregistering the DWI to the
non-DWI (b = 0) (▶Fig. 1.18b).
1.4.6 Spike Artifacts
As
mentioned
previously, DWI leads to high
demands on gradient performance, which can lead
to spike noise artifacts. Spike noise represents a
sporadic and erroneous signal intensity change
during data collection that is registered as a spot
in k-space (▶Fig. 1.19a), and after Fourier transfor-
mation it causes a ripple artifact over the entire
Fig. 1.18 (a) Effect of eddy currents in the diffusion weighted imaging. (b) Same image after correction of eddy
currents.
Fig. 1.19 (a) Spike noise in the k-space (arrows). (b) Resulting image spike artifact.
Physics of DWI and DTI
16

image (▶Fig. 1.19b). Images with such spike noise
artifacts should be excluded from the DWI or DTI
analysis or the erroneous data points in k-space
should be corrected before Fourier transformation.
Chavez et al proposed outlier detection-based de-
spiking (ODD), an automatic correction method
that
detects,
localizes,
and
corrects
diﬀusion
weighted data sets corrupted by spike noise.25 If
this artifact occurs often, it is advisable to contact
the scanner service engineers to elucidate the
source of the spike noise.
1.4.7 Sense Artifact
As
previously
discussed,
parallel
acquisition
schemes (i.e., SENSE= SENSitivity Encoding; iPA-
T=integrated
Parallel
Acquisition
Techniques;
ASSET=Array coil Spatial Sensitivity Encoding) con-
siderably reduce geometric distortions observed in
EPI. When using multichannel head coils parallel
acquisition improves image quality in DWI; how-
ever, one must be aware that the special recon-
struction algorithms used with this technique lead
to a very unique and nonhomogeneous noise dis-
tribution in the image, which may result in arti-
facts known as SENSE artifacts (▶Fig. 1.20). These
artifacts can be minimized by reducing the accel-
eration factor R of the parallel acquisition or by
improving the SNR of the image.
1.5 Summary
DWI is a powerful technique to detect and quan-
tify pathological changes in brain tissues. ADC
reflects the amount of water diﬀusion in the
brain and by measuring the diﬀusion tensor it is
possible to quantify diﬀusion anisotropy and
identify the principal fiber orientation in voxels.
Care must be taken with the details of the pulse
sequence used to measure diﬀusion because it
can change the obtained quantitative values and
result in artifacts.
References
[1] Le Bihan D, Mangin JF, Poupon C, et al. Diﬀusion tensor
imaging: concepts and applications. J Magn Reson Imaging
2001; 13(4): 534–546
[2] Moonen CTW, van Zijl PCM, Le Bihan D, DesPres D. In vivo
NMR diﬀusion spectroscopy: 31 P application to phosphorus
metabolites in muscle. Magn Reson Med 1990; 13(3): 467–
477
[3] Clark CA, Le Bihan D. Water diﬀusion compartmentation
and anisotropy at high b values in the human brain. Magn
Reson Med 2000; 44(6): 852–859
[4] Jones DK. Fundamentals of diﬀusion MR imaging. In: Gillard
JH, Waldman AD, Barker PB, eds. Clinical MR Neuroimaging.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2005:54–85
[5] Wheeler-Kingshott CAM, Barker GJ, Steens SCA, van Buchem
MA. D: the diﬀusion of water. In: Tofts P, ed. Quantitative
MRI of the Brain: Measuring Changes Caused by Disease.
West Sussex: John Wiley & Sons; 2003:203–256
Fig. 1.20 SENSE artifact in the phase encoding (PE) direction resulting from parallel acquisition (a) in a phantom and (b)
in a patient.
Physics of DWI and DTI
17

[6] Bano S, Waraich MM, Khan MA, Buzdar SA, Manzur S. Diag-
nostic value of apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient for the accu-
rate
assessment
and
diﬀerentiation
of
intracranial
meningiomas.
Acta
Radiol
Short
Rep
2013;
2(7):
2047981613512484
[7] Hui ES, Cheung MM, Chan KC, Wu EX. B-value dependence
of DTI quantitation and sensitivity in detecting neural tissue
changes. Neuroimage 2010; 49(3): 2366–2374
[8] Ronen I, Ugurbil K, Kim DS. How does DWI correlate with
white matter structures? Magn Reson Med 2005; 54(2):
317–323
[9] Basser PJ, Mattiello J, LeBihan D. MR diﬀusion tensor spec-
troscopy and imaging. Biophys J 1994; 66(1): 259–267
[10] Song SK, Sun SW, Ramsbottom MJ, Chang C, Russell J, Cross
AH. Dysmyelination revealed through MRI as increased radi-
al (but unchanged axial) diﬀusion of water. Neuroimage
2002; 17(3): 1429–1436
[11] Song SK, Sun SW, Ju WK, Lin SJ, Cross AH, Neufeld AH. Diﬀu-
sion tensor imaging detects and diﬀerentiates axon and
myelin degeneration in mouse optic nerve after retinal
ischemia. Neuroimage 2003; 20(3): 1714–1722
[12] Wheeler-Kingshott CAM, Cercignani M. About “axial” and
“radial” diﬀusivities. Magn Reson Med 2009; 61(5): 1255–
1260
[13] Pierpaoli C, Basser PJ. Toward a quantitative assessment of
diﬀusion anisotropy. Magn Reson Med 1996; 36(6): 893–
906
[14] Hasan KM, Alexander AL, Narayana PA. Does fractional ani-
sotropy have better noise immunity characteristics than rel-
ative anisotropy in diﬀusion tensor MRI? An analytical
approach. Magn Reson Med 2004; 51(2): 413–417
[15] Johansen-Berg H, Behrens TEJ, eds. Diﬀusion MRI: From
Quantitative Measurement to In Vivo Neuroanatomy. Lon-
don: Academic Press (Elsevier); 2009
[16] Le Bihan D. Diﬀusion MRI: what water tells us about the
brain. EMBO Mol Med 2014; 6(5): 569–573
[17] Le Bihan D, Breton E, Lallemand D, Grenier P, Cabanis E, Lav-
al-Jeantet M. MR imaging of intravoxel incoherent motions:
application to diﬀusion and perfusion in neurologic disor-
ders. Radiology 1986; 161(2): 401–407
[18] Turner R, Le Bihan D, Maier J, Vavrek R, Hedges LK, Pekar J.
Echo-planar imaging of intravoxel incoherent motion. Radi-
ology 1990; 177(2): 407–414
[19] Pipe JG. Motion correction with PROPELLER MRI: applica-
tion to head motion and free-breathing cardiac imaging.
Magn Reson Med 1999; 42(5): 963–969
[20] Pipe
JG,
Farthing
VG,
Forbes
KP.
Multishot
diﬀusion
weighted FSE using PROPELLER MRI. Magn Reson Med
2002; 47(1): 42–52
[21] Wang FN, Huang TY, Lin FH, et al. PROPELLER EPI: an MRI
technique suitable for diﬀusion tensor imaging at high field
strength with reduced geometric distortions. Magn Reson
Med 2005; 54(5): 1232–1240
[22] Federau C, Meuli R, O’Brien K, Maeder P, Hagmann P. Perfu-
sion measurement in brain gliomas with intravoxel incoher-
ent motion MRI. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2014; 35(2): 256–
262
[23] Cohen AD, LaViolette PS, Prah M, et al. Eﬀects of perfusion
on diﬀusion changes in human brain tumors. J Magn Reson
Imaging 2013; 38(4): 868–875
[24] Porter DA, Calamante F, Gadian DG, Connelly A. The eﬀect of
residual Nyquist ghost in quantitative echo-planar diﬀusion
imaging. Magn Reson Med 1999; 42(2): 385–392
[25] Chavez S, Storey P, Graham SJ. Robust correction of spike
noise: application to diﬀusion tensor imaging. Magn Reson
Med 2009; 62(2): 510–519
Physics of DWI and DTI
18

2 Brain Edema: Pathophysiology
Falgun H. Chokshi and Amit M. Saindane
Key Points
●Vasogenic edema results from leakage of fluid
through a disrupted blood–brain barrier (BBB).
●Excitotoxic brain injury (EBI) includes tempo-
rary or permanent dysfunction of excitatory
amino acid homeostasis.
●Aquaporin-4 (AQP-4) channels are found in the
brain and allow massive free water transport
across the astroglial endfeet membranes.
●Vasogenic edema is bright on apparent diﬀu-
sion coeﬃcient (ADC) maps, whereas cytotoxic
edema is dark.
●An understanding of the pathophysiology of
water diﬀusion in vasogenic and cytotoxic ede-
ma is fundamental in understanding diﬀusion
weighted imaging/diﬀusion tensor imaging
(DWI/DTI) characteristics.
2.1 Introduction
Several forms of edema have been identified under
the larger rubric of “brain edema.” These generally
fall into the cellular or extracellular forms. Cellular
edema denotes cytotoxic edema (CE). Extracellular
edema refers to vasogenic edema (VE) and “spe-
cial” forms of osmotic edema and hyperemic ede-
ma.1,2 The pathophysiology of these forms of brain
edema were characterized and defined more than
50 years ago.1
This chapter defines the two most common
forms of brain edema (VE and CE), discusses their
imaging characteristics, and presents representa-
tive disease processes that can be readily investi-
gated using diﬀusion weighted imaging (DWI) and
diﬀusion tensor imaging (DTI). The text incorpo-
rates causes of excitotoxic brain injury (EBI), which
ultimately leads to cytotoxic edema. VE and CE can
present separately or in combination. This chapter
demonstrates a wide variety of representative and
commonly seen adult-specific conditions that have
DWI and DTI findings, spanning multiple catego-
ries of diseases, including vascular, infectious,
inflammatory,
neoplastic,
and
demyelinating
diseases. Subsequent chapters provide in-depth
discussions of additional diseases and their DWI
and DTI findings.
2.2 Pathophysiology
2.2.1 Vasogenic Edema
VE results from leakage of fluid through a dis-
rupted
blood–brain
barrier
(BBB).
Although
extracellular protein breakdown has been shown
to attenuate fluid clearance, no evidence to date
suggests that the protein breakdown products
result in fluid exiting the vascular space.3 Through
a combination of bulk flow and diﬀusion of water,
fluid accumulates preferentially in the usually
tightly bundled white matter. If the BBB is recon-
stituted early in the process, the VE can be
reversed.4
2.2.2 Cytotoxic Edema and
Excitotoxic Brain Injury
Excitotoxic Brain Injury
EBI includes temporary or permanent dysfunction
of excitatory amino acid homeostasis. Among the
excitatory amino acids glutamate, aspartate, and
glycine, glutamate is the most important. It is
involved in numerous functions, such as cognition,
memory, movement, and sensation.5 Abnormal
levels of glutamate can cause neuronal injury and
Brain Edema: Pathophysiology
19

demise related to activation of the N-methyl-d-
aspartate (NMDA) receptor subtype of the gluta-
mate receptor.6
In the
acute phase, three mechanisms are
known to cause excessive extracellular glutamate:
(1) glutamate leakage from disrupted axonal mem-
branes, (2) abnormal neuronal membrane depola-
rization causing further glutamate release, and (3)
dysfunctional reuptake of extracellular glutamate.
These mechanisms can self-propagate in a trans-
axonal or transynaptic manner along white matter
tracts.5,6,7
Cytotoxic Edema
Abnormal increases in intracellular water content
cause CE. On the molecular level, the sodium–
potassium (Na + -K +) adenosine triphosphatase
(ATPase) and calcium ion pumps become dysfunc-
tional, resulting in net diﬀusion of water into the
cell. The BBB remains intact initially, yielding sta-
ble extracellular water content. Continuous insults
cause BBB breakdown and subsequent VE. Apop-
totic pathways are activated as well.7
The discovery of various subtypes of aquaporin
(AQP) channel proteins has shed light on another
mechanism of CE.8 Specifically, AQP-4 channels are
found in the brain and allow massive free water
transport across the astroglial endfeet membranes.9
These findings are supported by numerous mouse
model
studies10,11;
however,
the
relationship
between these water channels and cerebral edema
in humans remains to be demonstrated.
2.3 Diseases Associated With
Cerebral Edema
2.3.1 Vasogenic Edema
On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), VE is T1
hypointense and T2 hyperintense, predominantly
within the white matter. VE is bright on both DWI
and ADC maps. Decreased fractional anisotropy
(FA) is seen on DTI sequences.4
Neoplasm-Related Vasogenic Edema
Both benign and malignant neoplasms can cause
VE due to tumor angiogenesis and BBB breakdown
and show increased diﬀusivity on DWI and ADC
maps. Type-1 peritumoral VE is associated with
low-grade (▶Fig. 2.1) and nonglial tumors, such as
metastases and meningiomas. Parenchymal com-
pression causes ischemia and necrosis, which can
persist after the tumor is removed.
Type-2 peritumoral edema is associated with
high-grade glial neoplasms, which show highly
infiltrative behavior and significant destruction of
the BBB. VE extension beyond the vicinity of
enhancing tumor is characteristic and represents
tumor microinvasion (▶Fig. 2.2). Partial to com-
plete resolution of VE can occur after removal of
the tumor. Relative to type-1 VE, type-2 edema
shows more increased ADC signal and further
diminishment of FA on DTI, likely related to greater
tissue destruction by malignant neoplasms.
2.3.2 Cytotoxic Edema/Excitotoxic
Brain Injury
Computed tomography shows a loss of gray–white
matter diﬀerentiation early in CE/EBI. In subacute
phases, BBB breakdown can show white matter
hypoattenuation of VE, presenting a mixed edema
picture. MRI reveals swelling of the gray matter
and loss of gray–white matter diﬀerentiation. ADC
dark and DWI bright areas are present in CE/EBI;
FA is decreased on DTI.4
Arterial Infarction
Hypoxia caused by acute arterial infarction leads
to rapid depletion of adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
and resultant CE.4 Excitotoxicity causes sodium–
potassium pump failure and rapid influx of water
into the cell. Intracellular calcium increases caus-
ing release of lipase and protease, ultimately lead-
ing to cell death.5 Experimental studies on NMDA-
type glutamate receptor antagonists (MK-801)
Brain Edema: Pathophysiology
20

Fig. 2.1
A 42-year-old man with a supratentorial pilocytic astrocytoma with surrounding edema displacing adjacent
white matter tracts. (a) T2-fluid=attenuated inversion recovery image showing a well-defined tumor in the right parietal
lobe with internal cystic components and layering debris, along with surrounding vasogenic edema (arrow). (b)
Diffusion weighted imaging shows slight hyperintensity in the surrounding edema. (c) Apparent diffusion coefficient
map confirms that this surrounding area is T2 shine-through. (d) Color fractional anisotropy map shows displacement of
deep white matter tracts (arrow) without evidence of disruption or destruction.
Brain Edema: Pathophysiology
21

have shown a reduced volume of ischemic injury
after occlusion of the middle cerebral artery
(MCA).12 Accordingly, excitotoxic injury related to
glutamate is associated with the pathophysiologi-
cal findings of ischemic penumbra.5,12
Within 30 minutes CE develops, often peaking
between 24 and 72 hours, and can persist for up to
24 hours after reperfusion. Detection of hyper-
acute infarction (< 30 min from onset of neurologi-
cal deficit) is most sensitive on DWI4 (▶Fig. 2.3a–
c). As the infarction evolves, the CE (DWI bright,
ADC dark) will be surrounded by VE (DWI bright,
ADC bright) and associated mass eﬀect. ADC can
show pseudonormalization between 10 and 15
days, with persistent DWI hyperintensity due to T2
shine-through
of
VE13
(▶Fig.
2.3d–f).
Chronic
infarction shows ADC bright signal due to encepha-
lomalacia and gliosis.14
Cerebral Venous Infarction
Venous infarction is caused by thrombus in the
dural venous sinuses, cortical veins, or deep
cerebral veins. The area of infarction does not cor-
respond to an arterial distribution and has a pro-
pensity to undergo hemorrhagic transformation.
Risk factors include chronic inflammation, infec-
tion,
thrombophilic
states
(e.g.,
dehydration,
hypercoagulation disorders, cancer), and cranial
surgery.15 CE surrounded by VE and mass eﬀect is
typically seen (▶Fig. 2.4). CT or magnetic reso-
nance venography can identify thrombus.
Multiple Sclerosis
CE in multiple sclerosis (MS) plaques is rarely cap-
tured on MRI. As seen in the early (hyperacute and
acute) phases of MS, these lesions are profoundly
Fig. 2.2
A 27-year-old woman with left frontal anaplastic astrocytoma with infiltration of regional fiber tracts. (a) T2-
fluid-attenuated inversion recovery image showing a relatively well defined left frontal T2 hyperintense mass extending
to the anterior body of the corpus callosum. (b) Axial diffusion tensor imaging color fractional anisotropy map shows
destruction of fiber tracts in the region of the mass and infiltration of fiber tracts at the medial margin as shown by loss
of the normal white matter tracts (compare to right hemisphere for reference).
Brain Edema: Pathophysiology
22

hypointense on ADC maps and bright on DWI5
(▶Fig. 2.5).
Glutamate
excitotoxicity
damages
oligoden-
drocytes, myelin sheaths, and axons in these
patients,16 with glutamate and aspartate levels
being elevated in cerebrospinal fluid analysis
of
patients
with
acute
MS.17
Histologically,
intramyelinic edema is found within the cyto-
toxic plaques.5
Creutzfeldt–Jakob Disease
Clinical manifestations of Creutzfeldt–Jakob Dis-
ease (CJD) include rapidly progressive dementia,
Fig. 2.3 A 45-year-old man with human immunodeficiency virus and staphylococcal bacteremia with endocarditis and
multiple septic emboli of various ages. (a) Diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) showing multiple watershed distribution
infarctions. (b) DWI showing additional areas of infarction, including left medial and parietal cortical infarctions. (c)
Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) shows that watershed infarctions are dark and therefore acute. (d) ADC shows that
medial left parietal infarction is dark and therefore acute (arrow), whereas the lateral parietal infarction is
pseudonormalized and therefore subacute (small arrow). (e) T2-weighted image with high T2 signal in the areas of
watershed infarction. (f) T2-weighted image with high signal in both the medial and lateral parietal infarctions, but also
showing gyral swelling in the subacute infarction laterally.
Brain Edema: Pathophysiology
23

myoclonus, and ataxia. A characteristic pattern of
diﬀusion restriction occurs in CJD explained by the
spatially
variable,
yet
functionally
profound,
abnormalities in glutamate receptors.18 The cere-
bral cortex and bilateral basal ganglia show T2-
hyperintense lesions (▶Fig. 2.6). In variant CJD, the
pulvinar of both thalami and the periaqueductal
gray matter are aﬀected,19 although sporadic CJD
is associated with such lesions as well.20 These
lesions are DWI bright and ADC dark.21 Decreased
ADC is attributed to focal swelling (vacuolization)
of both axonal and dendritic processes on electron
microscopy.22
Hypoxic Ischemic Encephalopathy
Hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy (HIE) results
from diminishment of oxygen delivery caused by a
host of etiologies, such as hypoxia (e.g., respiratory
failure, strangulation, and altitude sickness), hypo-
xemia (e.g., carbon monoxide poisoning), and
ischemia (e.g., shock, cardiac arrest, acute intracra-
nial pressure increases). The resultant depletion of
energy is due to mitochondrial dysfunction and
impedes glutamate reabsorption. Thus increased
extracellular glutamate results in neuronal and
glial toxicity.5
Fig. 2.4 A 58-year-old man with right frontal anaplastic oligoastrocytoma status post–prior resection, radiation therapy,
and recent repeat resection. (a) Diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) shows high signal along the right frontal surgical
cavity indicative of devitalized tissue (arrow). (b) Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map confirms reduced diffusion at
the margin of the surgical cavity. (c) More superiorly and distant from the surgical cavity is a large area of high signal on
DWI (arrow). (d) On ADC this area is bright, indicating T2 shine-through. (e) On T2-weighted images this was a new area
of edema and local mass effect due to a cortical venous injury and venous infarction during the surgery. (f) T2-fluid-
attenuated inversion recovery image also demonstrates the area of postoperative venous infarction in the right frontal
lobe
Brain Edema: Pathophysiology
24

In adults, the basal ganglia (especially the globus
pallidus), thalamus, hippocampus, corpus callos-
um, and perirolandic cortex are disproportionally
aﬀected due to their high metabolic demand and
arterial watershed territories of the basal ganglia.4,
5 DWI shows a pattern of relatively symmetric
cytotoxic edema in these regions with bright DWI
and dark ADC signal, even though conventional
T1- and T2-weighted sequences may appear nor-
mal to near normal4 (▶Fig. 2.7 and ▶Fig. 2.8).
Herpes Encephalitis
Excitotoxic injury in herpes encephalitis is attrib-
uted to abnormally increased concentrations of
glutamate and glycine in the cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF).23 Free radical release during immune system
response to the infections causes the excitotoxic-
ity-instigating release of glutamate.5 In adults, her-
pes encephalitis is due to Herpes simplex type 1
and usually aﬀects the insula, inferior frontal lobes,
and medial temporal lobes. On DWI, CE is present
Fig. 2.5
A 26-year-old woman with acute demyelinating lesion from multiple sclerosis (MS). (a) Diffusion weighted
image shows a peripherally bright ring lesion in the right centrum semiovale (arrow). (b) Apparent diffusion coefficient
map confirms that periphery of this lesion is dark (arrow) representing reduced diffusion. (c) T2-weighted image shows
a centrally hyperintense and peripherally gray matter isointense signal to the lesion (arrow). Additional other T2
hyperintense white matter lesions are noted (small arrows). (d) T2-fluid-attenuated inversion recovery image shows to
better advantage the ringlike lesion (arrow) and additional lesions (small arrows). (e) T1-weighted image demonstrates
gray matter isointense to slightly hyperintense signal to the periphery of the ring lesion (arrow). (f) Postcontrast T1-
weighted image shows central enhancement of the lesion (arrow).
Brain Edema: Pathophysiology
25

in these areas, variably associated with hemor-
rhage and necrosis5 (▶Fig. 2.9).
Limbic Encephalitis
Limbic encephalitis is the most common inflam-
matory disease that aﬀects the hippocampus.
Three subtypes have been identified: paraneoplas-
tic, nonparaneoplastic, and infectious.24,25 In con-
tradistinction
to
herpes
encephalitis,
limbic
encephalitis does not show diﬀusion restriction on
DWI unless there is also seizure-associated postic-
tal CE. In general, intermediate to high ADC values
are present, with DWI hyperintensity usually
representing T2 shine-through as confirmed by
hyperintense signal on ADC images24 (▶Fig. 2.10).
Osmotic Myelinolysis
Both central pontine and extrapontine forms of
osmotic myelinolysis are caused by destruction of
myelin sheaths in the cerebrum and brainstem.
Rapid correction of severe hyponatremia causes
the release of a host of excitotoxins, including
betamine, glutamate, and taurine.26 Early in the
disease, DWI is bright and ADC is dark, signifying
CE5 (▶Fig. 2.11).
Fig. 2.6 A 56-year-old woman with Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (CJD). (a) Diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) shows high
signal in the caudate head (*), putamen (**), medial thalamus (***), and areas of cortex (small arrows). (b) Apparent
diffusion coefficient (ADC) map confirms that these areas are dark and represent reduced diffusion. (c) T2-fluid-
attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) image shows high signal in these deep gray matter structures and cortex. (d) DWI
more cranially shows extensive cortical high signal (small arrows). (e) ADC map confirms that these areas are dark and
represent reduced diffusion. (f) T2-FLAIR image shows slight high signal in these areas of cortex.
Brain Edema: Pathophysiology
26

Status Epilepticus
In status epilepticus, excitotoxic edema results
from excessive release of glutamate, which binds
to both NMDA and non-NMDA receptors.27 Both
neurons and glial cells are aﬀected. Transient CE
from this glutamate release subsides once the
astrocytes detoxify the excess extracellular gluta-
mate.28 The encephalopathy associated with status
epilepticus aﬀects NMDA receptor–rich regions,
such as the hippocampus, limbic system compo-
nents, thalamus, and cerebellum.29 Cerebral hemi-
spheres and insular cortices can also be involved
(▶Fig. 2.12). DWI and ADC images show restricted
diﬀusion in these regions, often decreasing or
resolving on subsequent MRI scans.28
Focal Lesion in the Splenium of the
Corpus Callosum in Epilepsy
In the immediate postictal state, focal, transient CE
can be present in the splenium of the corpus cal-
losum. Medications, seizures, or both can cause
the lesions.30 Fibers decussating in the splenium
of the corpus callosum serve as a conduit for trans-
hemispheric propagation of the seizure activity.5
Additionally,
abrupt
stoppage
of
antiseizure
Fig. 2.7
A 66-year-old woman with respiratory failure following sepsis and meningitis. Hypoxic Injury. (a) Diffusion
weighted imaging (DWI) showing high signal in both globus pallidi (arrows). (b) Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC)
map confirms that areas are dark and represent reduced diffusion (arrows). (c) DWI showing high signal in both
hippocampi (arrows). (d) ADC map confirms that areas are dark and represent reduced diffusion (arrows). (e) T2-
weighted image showing high signal in both globus pallidi (arrows). (f) T2-weighted image showing high signal in both
hippocampi (arrows).
Brain Edema: Pathophysiology
27

medications (e.g. phenytoin, carbamazepine) can
result in this lesion due to transient excitotoxicity
causing
CE via
imbalance
of
both
glutamate
homeostasis and imbalance of the arginine–vaso-
pressin system. DWI shows a DWI bright, ADC dark
lesion in the splenium of the corpus callosum5
(▶Fig. 2.13).
Diﬀuse Axonal Injury
Excitotoxicity
involving
glutamate
and
NMDA
receptors underlies diﬀuse axonal injury. Damage
to the axon occurs at the node of Ranvier, allowing
glutamate leakage into the extracellular space.
Lesions are characteristically located in the brain-
stem, cerebellar peduncles, corpus callosum, for-
nix, and gray–white matter junction (▶Fig. 2.14).
2.4 Summary
DWI has revolutionized neuroimaging, oﬀering a
powerful tool in the arsenal of MRI sequences. The
pathophysiology
of
cytotoxic,
excitotoxic,
and
vasogenic edema dictates the DWI characteristics
in a plethora of pathological conditions. Recall of
these principles can enrich the interpretation by
the radiologist.
Fig. 2.8 A 75-year-old man with end stage renal disease with hypoxic ischemic injury from a severe hypotensive episode
during hemodialysis. (a) Diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) showing high signal within the bilateral frontal and parietal
lobes at the anterior and middle cerebral artery (ACA-MCA) border zones. (b) Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map
confirms that these areas are dark and represent reduced diffusion. (c) DWI showing high signal within the bilateral
posterior temporal lobes. (d) ADC map confirms that areas are dark and represent reduced diffusion. (e) T2-weighted
image showing high signal in the areas of reduced diffusion at the ACA-MCA border zones. (f) T2-weighted image
showing high signal in the areas of reduced diffusion in the posterior temporal lobes.
Brain Edema: Pathophysiology
28

Fig. 2.9 A 27-year-old man with acute onset of abnormal behavior with herpes simplex virus encephalitis. (a) Diffusion
weighted imaging showing high signal within the bilateral hippocampi and lateral left temporal lobe. (b) Apparent
diffusion coefficient map confirms that portions of the hippocampi and left lateral temporal lobe are dark and represent
reduced diffusion. (c) T2-fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) image shows swelling and high signal in these areas
as well as the inferior left frontal lobe. (d) T2-FLAIR image shows additional swelling and high signal in the left insula and
left retrosplenial region. (e) Postcontrast T1-weighted image shows faint enhancement in the inferior left frontal and
temporal lobe. (f) Post-contrast T1-weighted image shows faint enhancement in the left insula and retrosplenial region.
Brain Edema: Pathophysiology
29

Fig. 2.10
A 36-year-old woman with ovarian cancer and seizures with imaging consistent with paraneoplastic limbic
encephalitis. (a) Diffusion weighted imaging shows slight high signal in both anteromedial temporal lobes. (b) Apparent
diffusion coefficient map shows slight high signal indicating T2 shine-through effect. (c) T2-weighted image
demonstrating high T2 signal in the anteromedial temporal lobes. (d) T2-fluid-attenuated inversion recovery image
shows better conspicuity of the findings of abnormal increased signal. (e) Coronal T2-weighted image again shows high
T2 signal in the amygdala and hippocampus. (f) Postcontrast T1-weighted image shows no abnormal enhancement.
Brain Edema: Pathophysiology
30

Fig. 2.11 A 47-year-old man with multiple medical problems and acute mental decline secondary to rapid correction of
hyponatremia resulting in osmotic demyelination. (a) Diffusion weighted imaging shows high signal in the pons with
relative sparing of the descending corticospinal tracts. (b) Apparent diffusion coefficient map confirms that areas are
dark and represent reduced diffusion. (c) T2-weighted image shows high signal of the areas of reduced diffusion. (d)
Corresponding T1-weighted image does not demonstrate any abnormality.
Brain Edema: Pathophysiology
31

Fig. 2.12 A 55-year-old man with status epilepticus and unusual areas of diffusion reduction in the bilateral insula and
thalami. (a) Diffusion weighted imaging shows high signal in the bilateral thalami (large arrow) and insula (small arrow)
that was new from a prior magnetic resonance imaging scan (not shown). (b) Apparent diffusion coefficient map
confirms that areas are dark and represent reduced diffusion. (c) T2-fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) image
shows these areas are T2 bright, as well as extensive additional areas of T2-FLAIR abnormality in the cerebral white
matter. (d) Coronal T2-FLAIR image also shows these areas are T2 bright, as well as extensive additional areas of T2-
FLAIR abnormality in the cerebral white matter.
Brain Edema: Pathophysiology
32

Fig. 2.13 A 42-year-old woman with chronic epilepsy taking multiple antiepileptic medications. This finding was found
incidentally on a magnetic resonance imaging scan for evaluation of epilepsy. (a) Diffusion weigthed imaging shows a
triangular bright lesion in the splenium of corpus callosum. (b) Apparent diffusion coefficient map confirms this area is
dark and represents reduced diffusion. (c) T2-weighted image shows high signal in this triangular lesion. (d) Coronal T2-
weighted image also shows high signal in this lesion.
Brain Edema: Pathophysiology
33

Fig. 2.14
A 20-year-old woman found unresponsive with external signs of trauma and magnetic resonance imaging
findings of diffuse axonal injury. (a) Diffusion weighed imaging (DWI) shows high signal in the splenium of the corpus
callosum. (b) Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map confirms that this area is dark and represents reduced diffusion.
(c) DWI shows additional areas of reduced diffusion in the subcortical frontal lobes (areas were dark on corresponding
ADC map). (d) DWI shows small additional areas of reduced diffusion in the body of the corpus callosum (areas were
dark on corresponding ADC map). (e) T2*-weighted image shows area of susceptibility artifact associated with one of
the left frontal subcortical lesions indicative of hemorrhage. (f) T2*-weighted image shows additional areas of
susceptibility artifact associated with the corpus callosum lesions indicative of hemorrhage.
Brain Edema: Pathophysiology
34

References
[1] Klatzo I. Presidental address. Neuropathological aspects of
brain edema. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 1967; 26(1): 1–14
[2] Vajda Z, Nielsen S, Sulyok E, Dóczi T. Aquaporins in cerebral
volume regulation and edema formation [in Hungarian].
Orv Hetil 2001; 142(5): 223–225
[3] Gröger U, Marmarou A. Importance of protein content in
the edema fluid for the resolution of brain edema. Adv Neu-
rol 1990; 52: 215–218
[4] Ho ML, Rojas R, Eisenberg RL. Cerebral edema. AJR Am J
Roentgenol 2012; 199(3): W258–73
[5] Moritani T, Smoker WR, Sato Y, Numaguchi Y, Westesson PL.
Diﬀusion weighted imaging of acute excitotoxic brain injury.
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2005; 26(2): 216–228
[6] Lipton SA, Rosenberg PA. Excitatory amino acids as a final
common pathway for neurologic disorders. N Engl J Med
1994; 330(9): 613–622
[7] Nag S, Manias JL, Stewart DJ. Pathology and new players in
the pathogenesis of brain edema. Acta Neuropathol 2009;
118(2): 197–217
[8] Venero JL, Vizuete ML, Machado A, Cano J. Aquaporins in the
central nervous system. Prog Neurobiol 2001; 63(3): 321–
336
[9] Nielsen S, Nagelhus EA, Amiry-Moghaddam M, Bourque C,
Agre P, Ottersen OP. Specialized membrane domains for
water transport in glial cells: high-resolution immunogold
cytochemistry of aquaporin-4 in rat brain. J Neurosci 1997;
17(1): 171–180
[10] Vespa PM. Slow rewarming: a cool model of posttraumatic
hypothermia. Crit Care Med 2001; 29(11): 2224–2225
[11] Manley GT, Fujimura M, Ma T, et al. Aquaporin-4 deletion in
mice reduces brain edema after acute water intoxication
and ischemic stroke. Nat Med 2000; 6(2): 159–163
[12] Buchan AM, Slivka A, Xue D. The eﬀect of the NMDA recep-
tor antagonist MK-801 on cerebral blood flow and infarct
volume in experimental focal stroke. Brain Res 1992; 574
(1–2): 171–177
[13] Copen WA, Schwamm LH, González RG, et al. Ischemic
stroke: eﬀects of etiology and patient age on the time course
of the core apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient. Radiology 2001;
221(1): 27–34
[14] Allen LM, Hasso AN, Handwerker J, Farid H. Sequence-specif-
ic MR imaging findings that are useful in dating ischemic
stroke. Radiographics 2012; 32(5): 1285–1297, discussion
1297–1299
[15] Star M, Flaster M. Advances and controversies in the ma-
nagement of cerebral venous thrombosis. Neurol Clin 2013;
31(3): 765–783
[16] Matute C, Alberdi E, Domercq M, Pérez-Cerdá F, Pérez-
Samartín A, Sánchez-Gómez MV. The link between excito-
toxic oligodendroglial death and demyelinating diseases.
Trends Neurosci 2001; 24(4): 224–230
[17] Stover JF, Pleines UE, Morganti-Kossmann MC, Kossmann T,
Lowitzsch K, Kempski OS. Neurotransmitters in cerebrospi-
nal fluid reflect pathological activity. Eur J Clin Invest 1997;
27(12): 1038–1043
[18] Ferrer I, Puig B. GluR2/3, NMDAepsilon1 and GABAA recep-
tors in Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Acta Neuropathol 2003;
106(4): 311–318
[19] Molloy S, O’Laoide R, Brett F, Farrell M. The “Pulvinar” sign
in variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. AJR Am J Roentgenol
2000; 175(2): 555–556
[20] Haïk S, Brandel JP, Oppenheim C, et al. Sporadic CJD clini-
cally mimicking variant CJD with bilateral increased signal
in the pulvinar. Neurology 2002; 58(1): 148–149
[21] Murata T, Shiga Y, Higano S, Takahashi S, Mugikura S. Con-
spicuity and evolution of lesions in Creutzfeldt-Jakob dis-
ease at diﬀusion weighted imaging. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
2002; 23(7): 1164–1172
[22] Matoba M, Tonami H, Miyaji H, Yokota H, Yamamoto I.
Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease:
serial
changes
on
diﬀusion
weighted MRI. J Comput Assist Tomogr 2001; 25(2): 274–
277
[23] Launes J, Sirén J, Viinikka L, Hokkanen L, Lindsberg PJ. Does
glutamate mediate brain damage in acute encephalitis?
Neuroreport 1998; 9(4): 577–581
[24] Förster A, Griebe M, Gass A, Kern R, Hennerici MG, Szabo K.
Diﬀusion weighted imaging for the diﬀerential diagnosis of
disorders aﬀecting the hippocampus. Cerebrovasc Dis 2012;
33(2): 104–115
[25] Sureka J, Jakkani RK. Clinico-radiological spectrum of bilat-
eral temporal lobe hyperintensity: a retrospective review.
Br J Radiol 2012; 85(1017): e782–e792
[26] Lien YH. Role of organic osmolytes in myelinolysis. A topo-
graphic study in rats after rapid correction of hyponatremia.
J Clin Invest 1995; 95(4): 1579–1586
[27] Fountain NB. Status epilepticus: risk factors and complica-
tions. Epilepsia 2000; 41 Suppl 2: S23–S30
[28] Kim JA, Chung JI, Yoon PH, et al. Transient MR signal changes
in patients with generalized tonicoclonic seizure or status
epilepticus: periictal diﬀusion weighted imaging. AJNR Am J
Neuroradiol 2001; 22(6): 1149–1160
[29] Mark LP, Prost RW, Ulmer JL, et al. Pictorial review of gluta-
mate excitotoxicity: fundamental concepts for neuroimag-
ing. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2001; 22(10): 1813–1824
[30] Kim SS, Chang KH, Kim ST, et al. Focal lesion in the splenium
of the corpus callosum in epileptic patients: antiepileptic
drug toxicity? AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 1999; 20(1): 125–129
Brain Edema: Pathophysiology
35

3 Supratentorial White Matter Tracts and Their
Organization
Christopher P. Hess and Jason M. Johnson
Key Points
●Eloquent brain function emerges from the
coordinated activity of multiple cortical and
subcortical brain regions; the white matter
defines a supporting network for the eﬃcient
transfer of information of these regions within
and between cerebral hemispheres.
●Although the organization of white matter is
complex, diﬀusion magnetic resonance imag-
ing (MRI) consistently visualizes a relatively
small group of association (intrahemispheric),
commissural (interhemispheric), and projection
(aﬀerents or eﬀerents from the periphery to
the brain) pathways.
●Precise delineation of white matter tracts
requires diﬀusion data of high technical quality,
reconstruction algorithms capable of repre-
senting complex white matter architecture,
and familiarity with normal connectional
anatomy.
●Color fractional anisotropy (FA) images and
fiber tractography can be used to understand
the location of normal white matter tracts,
infiltration and distortion of tracts, and the
relationship between lesions and surrounding
pathways.
3.1 Introduction
Beneath the convolutions of the gray matter of the
cerebral hemispheres lies the white matter, a
woven mass of brain tissue composed of myeli-
nated axons and supporting glial cells. The uni-
form signal intensity of the white matter on
conventional anatomical imaging belies a highly
complex network of pathways interconnecting dif-
ferent brain regions and exchanging information
with the peripheral nervous system through the
spinal cord and cranial nerves. This intricate archi-
tecture serves as the scaﬀolding for higher brain
function and as the target of many neurological
disorders. An understanding of basic connectional
neuroanatomy is essential for the radiologist to
relate symptoms
to lesion
location,
to guide
neurosurgical interventions in the brain, and to
recognize tumors and other diseases that spread
along white matter tracts.
This chapter is written for the reader interested
in developing a practical understanding of white
matter anatomy. The chapter begins by briefly out-
lining technical aspects of diﬀusion imaging rele-
vant to the accurate depiction of fiber tracts. The
location and function of the supratentorial white
matter
pathways
that
are
most
consistently
visualized with modern 3 tesla clinical diﬀusion
protocols are then summarized. Given space con-
straints, the discussion necessarily omits cerebellar
and brainstem tracts. The reader specifically inter-
ested in brainstem tractography is referred to a
number of excellent papers on the subject.1,2,3
3.2 Technical Considerations
As discussed elsewhere in this text, the addition of
a diﬀusion gradient to a magnetic resonance imag-
ing (MRI) pulse sequence renders acquired images
sensitive to the random motion of water molecules
along directions parallel to the orientation of the
diﬀusion gradient.4,5 Early experiments revealed
that brain images vary significantly with changes
in the direction of the applied diﬀusion gradient;
diﬀusion is highly anisotropic in white matter. In
addition to this orientational variability, varying
the strength of the gradient (the diﬀusion weight-
ing, or b value) sensitizes the image to water dif-
fusing over diﬀerent distances; stronger gradients
encode motion over smaller distances (tens or
hundreds of micrometers), and weaker gradients
are sensitive only to bulk shifts in water occurring
over larger distances (millimeters). By systemati-
cally varying the magnitude and direction of the
applied diﬀusion gradients, it is possible to charac-
terize the probability of water movement over var-
ious spatial scales along each direction in space.
Restricted by microscopic cellular barriers, espe-
cially neuronal and myelin membranes, diﬀusion
preferentially occurs along directions parallel to
axons. Within each voxel, the relationship between
the diﬀusion sensitized image data and the three-
dimensional white matter architecture depends
on the technique that is used to represent the
Supratentorial White Matter Tracts and Their Organization
36

underlying diﬀusion probability. Diﬀusion tensor
imaging (DTI), high angular resolution diﬀusion
imaging (HARDI), and diﬀusion spectrum imaging
(DSI) are three diﬀerent classes of diﬀusion acquis-
ition and reconstruction strategies.6 From a data
acquisition standpoint, DTI can be performed with
a relatively small number of measured directions
and low b values, making the technique fast and
easy to achieve using lower-specification gradient
coils than are used with HARDI and DSI. These
advantages come with the important shortcoming
that DTI is unable to represent more than one fiber
population within each voxel, a significant draw-
back in light of the fact that 90% or more of the
white matter contains more than a single fiber
population.7
By acquiring a larger number of diﬀusion direc-
tions with stronger diﬀusion weighting, HARDI
can overcome this limitation and reveals multiple
crossing fibers (at the expense of longer imaging
times and a requirement for high-performance
gradient coils). DSI, which probes diﬀusion over
multiple b values and diﬀusion directions, permits
an even more complete characterization of intra-
voxel diﬀusion. However, long imaging times and
low signal-to-noise ratios preclude DSI in patients
on clinical scanners at the present time. At the
time of this writing, white matter mapping at our
institution is accomplished in clinical patients
within a 7 minute scan time at isotropic 2.2 mm
spatial resolution (55 diﬀusion directions with
b = 2,000 or 3,000 s/mm2) using a 3 tesla MRI scan-
ner equipped with an eight-channel coil. With
continued improvements in technology, such as
multiband
and
multichannel
parallel
imaging
acquisition, it is likely that DSI too will soon find
its way into clinical practice.
Diﬀusion data are used to generate an estimate
of water diﬀusion probability in three dimensions
within each voxel in space (a six-dimensional
function!). This complex function is conveniently
visualized in DTI using color-encoded maps of
fractional anisotropy (FA). With these images, the
intensity of each voxel represents the directional
coherence of diﬀusion, and the color encodes the
dominant direction of diﬀusion. The standard color
scheme is to use red for left–right diﬀusion orien-
tation, green for posterior–anterior, and blue for
inferior–superior (note that diﬀusion is not able to
distinguish polarity, however, and that right–left
diﬀusion appears the same as left–right diﬀusion,
etc.). ▶Fig. 3.1 and ▶Fig. 3.2 show how color FA
maps can be useful to localize lesions within spe-
cific white matter tracts.
Fiber-tracking algorithms further exploit the
estimated diﬀusion probabilities to follow axonal
bundles through space from voxel to voxel and
thereby identify specific tracts. These algorithms
can be divided into deterministic and probabilistic
techniques; the former following “streamlines”
from individually placed “seed regions” and the
latter exploiting uncertainty in the measurements
in order to define a probability of connectivity of
each voxel with adjacent voxels.8,9 Probabilistic
techniques are more robust in that they more
accurately estimate tract extent, but they are less
specific because they are more likely to result in
spurious estimates of connectivity. Most clinical
diﬀusion applications to date use deterministic
tractography methods such as fiber assignment by
continuous tracking (FACT), a technique initially
introduced more than a decade ago.10
Most current tractography algorithms perform
“whole brain” tractography, in which connectivity
throughout the brain is precomputed. This results
in a set of “streamlines” throughout the brain, each
corresponding to a single putative connection
between two specific brain regions. Using anatom-
ical landmarks and familiarity with connectional
anatomy, regions of interest (ROIs) are then placed
by the operator to cull specific tracts in a process
that has been referred to as virtual dissection. The
resulting pathways can then be assessed visually
for distortion from locally destructive lesions, infil-
trative disease, or other abnormalities. In many
centers, they can also be incorporated directly into
neurosurgical navigation systems to display white
matter tracts of interest in relation to lesions
undergoing open surgical intervention.
Streamlines, whittled by the expert into recog-
nizable tracts, do not represent true neuronal
fibers. But together the streamlines provide an
estimate as to the spatial extent of a tract of inter-
est in the individual patient. Tractography is
powerful but biased in this regard, however, and it
is important to remember several caveats when
interpreting streamlines and the results of tractog-
raphy.11 First, tracts represent the final product of
a multistep reconstruction process and are thus
prone to accumulation of errors. The radiologist
should always review the original data for acquisi-
tion artifacts and patient motion. ROIs used to
delineate tracts must be carefully defined. Second,
tractography is highly dependent on the spatial
resolution
and
signal-to-noise
quality
of
the
acquired diﬀusion data. The extent of tracts may
be under- or overestimated with low spatial reso-
lution, and spurious tracts should be anticipated
Supratentorial White Matter Tracts and Their Organization
37

with noisy data. Third, the results of tractography
vary with multiple other technical factors, includ-
ing the b value and the number of acquired diﬀu-
sion directions. It is thus recommended that
radiologists performing tractography settle on a
single acquisition and reconstruction protocol and
become familiar with the appearance of tracts that
are achieved with this technique. Finally, it is
important to emphasize that streamlines in trac-
tography are mathematical entities, not actual
fibers, and as such their distribution does not
directly correlate with the properties of the under-
lying axons. For example, the density of the
streamlines visualized within a pathway is not
directly proportional to the packing density of the
neurons within that tract. Subject to these provi-
sos, tractography is a powerful tool for radiologists
to use to understand white matter organization in
the individual patient.
3.3 White Matter Tract
Categorization
Current knowledge of white matter organization
derives from both invasive tract tracing and tract
dissection studies in specimens and primate mod-
els, and from diﬀusion fiber tractography in nor-
mal volunteers.12,13,14 Based on the nature of the
information that they carry, supratentorial fiber
tracts can be assigned into one of three categories:
1. Association pathways are intrahemispheric
tracts that interconnect diﬀerent cortical areas
within the same hemisphere. Short “subcortical
U” fibers that link adjacent gyri are short associ-
ation tracts; bundles in the deep white matter
have a much greater physical length. Because
longer association tracts are frequently oriented
from anterior to posterior, association fibers
often appear green on color FA images.
Fig. 3.1 Axial color fractional anisotro-
py maps at four levels through a
normal brain, (a) from the level of the
corona radiata through (b) the anterior
commissure with white matter struc-
tures labeled. ac, anterior commissure;
alic, anterior limb internal capsule; c-g,
genu of the corpus callosum; cc-b,
body of the corpus callosum; cc-s,
splenium of the corpus callosum; cg,
cingulum bundle; cr, corona radiata;
fmaj, forceps major; fmin, forceps
minor; fx, fornix; ifof, inferior fronto-
occipital fasciculus; ilf, inferior longi-
tudinal fasciculus; or, optic radiation;
plic, posterior limb internal capsule;
sfof, superior fronto-occipital fascicu-
lus; slf, superior longitudinal fasciculus;
and uf, uncinate fasciculus.
Supratentorial White Matter Tracts and Their Organization
38

2. Commissural pathways are interhemispheric
tracts that link cortical or subcortical areas
across hemispheres. These are described as
either homotopic, connected to homologous
regions in either hemisphere, or heterotopic,
spanning diﬀerent areas within each hemi-
sphere. Commissural tracts are often red (right–
left oriented) on color FA maps.
3. Projection tracts originate (motor) or terminate
(sensory) in the cortex and connect the cortex
to subcortical structures such as the basal gan-
glia, cerebellum, or spinal cord. Many of these
tracts are blue (craniocaudally oriented) on col-
or FA images. Aﬀerent and eﬀerent nerve bun-
dles conveying information through cranial
nerves, such as the optic radiations, are also
considered to be projection fibers. In what fol-
lows, the most commonly described white mat-
ter tracts are organized into three categories:
association tracts, commissural pathways, and
projection tracts.
3.3.1 Association Tracts
The association tracts include the cingulum bun-
dle, superior longitudinal fasciculus, arcuate fasci-
culus, inferior longitudinal fasciculus, uncinate
fasciculus, and fronto-occipital fasciculi.
Cingulum Bundle
The cingulum (Latin for “band” or “belt”) bundle
(CB) is a belt-shaped tract with an inferior seg-
ment that lies within the temporal lobe and a
superior frontoparietal portion that encircles the
corpus callosum (▶Fig. 3.3). Part of the limbic cir-
cuit of Papez, the CB is a bidirectional conduit for
information transfer between diﬀerent elements
of the limbic system and between the limbic sys-
tem and the hemispheres. Fibers within this tract
travel within the cingulate gyrus superiorly and
within the parahippocampal gyrus of the temporal
lobe inferiorly, making these bundles easy to
Fig. 3.2 (a) Coronal and (b) sagittal
color fractional anisotropy maps at
four levels through a normal brain.
From the top row down, coronal
images are from anterior to posterior
and sagittal images are from the mid-
line to the lateral aspect of the brain.
ac, anterior commissure; alic, anterior
limb internal capsule; c-g, genu of the
corpus callosum; cc-b, body of the
corpus callosum; cc-s, splenium of the
corpus callosum; cg, cingulum bundle;
cr, corona radiata; fmaj, forceps major;
fmin, forceps minor; fx, fornix; ifof,
inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus; ilf,
inferior longitudinal fasciculus; or, op-
tic radiation; plic, posterior limb inter-
nal capsule; sfof, superior fronto-
occipital fasciculus; slf, superior longi-
tudinal fasciculus; and uf, uncinate
fasciculus.
Supratentorial White Matter Tracts and Their Organization
39

visualize as paired green structures surrounding
the corpus callosum on color FA maps (▶Fig. 3.1
and ▶Fig. 3.2). The CB contains both short- and
long-association fibers; the proportion of long
fibers connecting the frontal and temporal lobes is
small compared to the number of short fibers join-
ing and leaving the bundle along its length. The
anterior component of the CB has been tied closely
to emotion and behavior, whereas the more poste-
rior (“retrosplenial cingulum”) and inferior (“para-
hippocampal cingulum”) portions are important
for cognitive functions, including attention, spatial
orientation, and memory.15 Abnormalities within
the CB have been linked to a variety of disorders,
including traumatic brain injury, depression, and
schizophrenia. Declining FA within the parahippo-
campal cingulum may be useful for discrimination
of mild cognitive impairment from normal aging
in the setting of hippocampal atrophy.16 The CB
also
serves
as
a
major
pathway
for
seizure
propagation.
Superior Longitudinal Fasciculus
The largest associative bundle in the brain, the
superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF) is a major
bidirectional pathway for the widespread distribu-
tion of information between the frontal, parietal,
occipital, and temporal lobes within each hemi-
sphere. The tract lies above the insula and lateral
to the centrum semiovale (▶Fig. 3.4). The SLF can
be divided into three distinct components based
on their anatomical location: SLF I superomedially,
SLF III inferolaterally, and a larger central SLF II
portion between SLF I and SLF III.17 The arcuate
fasciculus (see below) is also considered by most
authors to be part of the SLF. The SLF is important
for the initiation and regulation of motor behavior
(SLF I), perception of visual space (SLF II), and the
transfer of somatosensory information and work-
ing memory for language articulation
Arcuate Fasciculus
The arcuate (Latin for “curved”) fasciculus (AF) is a
c-shaped pathway that connects the temporal and
parietal lobes with the ipsilateral frontal cortex
(▶Fig. 3.5). Among the diﬀerent regions linked
together by the AF are the Broca area within the
inferior frontal gyrus and the Wernicke area with-
in the superior temporal gyrus, cortical regions
critical to language comprehension and produc-
tion. Lesions within the AF frequently result in
conduction aphasia, in which patients exhibit
intact auditory comprehension but have diﬃculty
with speech production. The pathway is also at
risk of injury during the resection of insular glio-
mas, especially tumors located in the left hemi-
sphere. Inferiorly within the superior temporal
gyrus, the AF curves dorsally around the sylvian
Fig. 3.3 (a) Sagittal and (b) oblique images showing tractography of the cingulum bundle (CB), depicting the anterior
arm (1) of the tract extending posteriorly around the corpus callosum (the retrosplenial cingulum) to enter the
ipsilateral temporal lobe (2) as the parahippocampal cingulum. Note the dense contributions to this tract from the
anterior frontal and parietal white matter.
Supratentorial White Matter Tracts and Their Organization
40

fissure and passes below the SLF into the frontal
lobe. Portions of the tract ramify along its course
into the surrounding perisylvian frontal, parietal,
and temporal lobes. The tract is larger on the left
in the majority of people. Interestingly, the degree
of asymmetry in volume and anisotropy observed
between the hemispheres varies throughout the
population, with marked left lateralization in 60%
of subjects, bilateral representation but predomi-
nantly left lateralization in 20%, and bilateral sym-
metrical representation in 20%.18
Inferior Longitudinal Fasciculus
The inferior longitudinal fasciculus (ILF) extends
from the anterior temporal lobe to the ipsilateral
occipital lobe and is critical to visual memory and
object recognition, including face recognition.19
The ILF lies laterally within the temporal lobe and
passes below the optic radiations and lateral to the
ventricular atria as it enters the occipital lobes
(▶Fig. 3.6). Patients with lesions to the ILF suﬀer
from visual neglect, prosopagnosia, visual amnesia,
Fig. 3.4 (a) Axial and (b) sagittal depictions of the large superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF), which connects the
anterior hemisphere to the posterior hemisphere through the centrum semiovale and frontal operculum.
Fig. 3.5 (a) Axial and (b) sagittal illustrations of the left arcuate fasciculus (AF), a major pathway for normal language
function that connects the superior temporal gyrus (arrows) to the ipsilateral frontal lobe.
Supratentorial White Matter Tracts and Their Organization
41

and, sometimes, visual hallucinations. It has also
been suggested that this tract is disrupted in autis-
tic spectrum disorder.
Uncinate Fasciculus
Like the cingulum, the uncinate fasciculus (UF)
(▶Fig. 3.7) is considered part of the limbic system.
This tract contributes to the processing of informa-
tion related to memory (especially episodic mem-
ory), visual learning, and emotion.20 It can serve as
an important pathway for seizure propagation
from the temporal into the frontal lobe in patients
with temporal lobe epilepsy and is disrupted in
patients with Alzheimer disease. The pathway has
a curved trajectory that connects the anterior
Fig. 3.6 Reconstructions of the inferior longitudinal fasciculus (ILF), projected onto (a) axial and (b) sagittal T1-weighted
images and running laterally and inferiorly to the optic radiations along the temporal horn and atrium of the lateral left
ventricle to connect the ipsilateral temporal and occipital lobes.
Fig. 3.7 The right uncinate fasciculus (UF), which links the orbitofrontal cortex (1) to structures within the limbic and
extralimbic temporal lobe (2), shown as (a) coronal and (b) oblique sagittal projections.
Supratentorial White Matter Tracts and Their Organization
42

temporal lobe with the ipsilateral medial and lat-
eral orbitofrontal cortices. Originating within the
anterior temporal lobe lateral to the amygdala, the
UF curves posteriorly and superiorly through the
temporal stem and passes behind and above the
middle cerebral artery en route to the orbitofrontal
cortex.
Fronto-occipital Fasciculus
Whereas the SLF is the largest associative tract, the
inferior
fronto-occipital
fasciculus
(IFOF)
(▶Fig. 3.8) is the longest associative tract and
probably the only direct connection between occi-
pital and frontal lobes. Its function remains poorly
understood but is thought to be related to seman-
tic processing for reading and writing. The tract
runs slightly superior and medial to the ILF and lat-
eral to the optic radiation, passing just above and
possibly intermingling with fibers from the unci-
nate fasciculus at the level of the external capsu-
le.21,22
The superior fronto-occipital fasciculus (SFOF) is
a much smaller pathway that transmits informa-
tion regarding spatial awareness and visual per-
ception between the frontal lobe and ipsilateral
parietal lobe (making the name of the tract mis-
leading). The tract is controversial, but some
authors describe it as passing immediately lateral
to the superior margin of the caudate and medial
to the fibers of the SLF (▶Fig. 3.9). This tract is fre-
quently diﬃcult to distinguish from the medial SLF
and thalamocortical radiations passing through
the anterior limb of the internal capsule.
3.3.2 Commissural Pathways
The commissural pathways include the corpus cal-
losum and anterior commissure.
Corpus Callosum
Above the lateral ventricles, the prominent corpus
callosum (CC) is the largest commissural tract in
the brain and connects homologous regions of
cortex
across
the
midline.
This
structure
is
responsible for the coordinated exchange of sen-
sory and other information across the hemi-
spheres. Fibers are transversely oriented in the
body of the callosum but arch anteriorly and pos-
teriorly to reach the poles of either convexity.
Axons within the CC are topographically arranged,
with fibers passing through the genu, body, and
splenium of the callosum linking the orbitofrontal
lobes and the frontoparietal and occipital cortices,
respectively (▶Fig. 3.10). Posteriorly within the
splenium, the anterior–posterior arrangement of
fibers also corresponds to the peripheral-foveal
organization of the medial and lateral visual
cortex.
Fig. 3.8 (a) Axial and (b) sagittal images depicting the large right inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus (IFOF), which
connects the occipital and frontal lobes. As this bundle runs through the external capsule, it passes above the uncinate
fasciculus.
Supratentorial White Matter Tracts and Their Organization
43

Although the tract is very easily identified in the
midline on color FA images as a large red bundle,
the tract becomes more diﬃcult to resolve later-
ally, where its fibers intermingle with the corona
radiata and large associative pathways, such as the
SLF. Anteriorly and posteriorly, densely packed
fibers passing through the genu and splenium of
the callosum fan out within the adjacent frontal
and occipital white matter in regions referred to as
forceps minor and major, respectively. Here, fibers
fan out peripherally and intercalate with multiple
other pathways. Injuries to the CC may be associ-
ated with deficits from the failure of coordinated
function across the cerebral hemispheres. These
Fig. 3.10 (a) Sagittal and (b) coronal projections of the massive corpus callosum (CC) show how branches of this bundle
follow a topographic arrangement from anterior to posterior, connecting many homologous areas of the cortex across
the hemispheres.
Fig. 3.9 The superior fronto-occipital fasciculus (SFOF) in (a) axial and (b) sagittal projections, this tract passes lateral to
the caudate and medial to the corona radiata.
Supratentorial White Matter Tracts and Their Organization
44

disconnection: syndromes also follow a topologi-
cal arrangement, with anterior callosal disrup-
tion resulting in disorders such as “alien hand
syndrome”
and
more
posterior
interruption
resulting
in
hemispatial
neglect,
visual,
and
amnestic disorders23.
Anterior Commissure
The anterior commissure connects portions of the
temporal, occipital, and orbitofrontal cortex are
thought to allow interhemispheric transfer of visu-
al, auditory, and olfactory information.24 This
moustache-shaped pathway is seen well in the
midline with color-encoded FA maps as a rounded
red bundle anterior to the third ventricle and
between the anterior and posterior columns of the
fornices. The larger posterior limb of these com-
missural fibers extends laterally, posteriorly, and
inferior to the striatum (▶Fig. 3.11), medial to and
paralleling the uncinate fasciculus, then traveling
into the temporal stem to branch into the white
matter of the inferior temporal and occipital lobes.
These more posterior aspects of the branches of
the tract are diﬃcult to visualize with convention-
al diﬀusion MRI because these fibers mingle with
those of the UF and ILF. The smaller anterior limb
extends toward the region of the olfactory bulbs,
olfactory tracts, and amygdala, but these are
frequently not well resolved in clinical diﬀusion
MRI examinations.
3.3.3 Projection Tracts
The third category, projection tracts, includes pyr-
amidal tracts and optic radiation.
Pyramidal Tracts
The corticospinal tract (CST) and corticobulbar
tract (CBT) contain the upper motor neurons that
together constitute the primary descending motor
tracts responsible for voluntary movement of the
face, arms, trunk, and legs. About a third of the
fibers from these tracts actually arise from the
motor cortex of the precentral gyrus, the remainder
connecting to the adjacent premotor, supplementa-
ry motor, and parietal cortices. As known from le-
sion studies and tract dissection, both exhibit a
somatotopic arrangement of fibers from the cortex,
through the corona radiata, posterior internal cap-
sule, cerebral peduncle, and brainstem, where
axons in the CBT synapse with motor brainstem
nuclei, and the CST fibers continue inferiorly into
the spinal cord. Lesions of the CST and CBT result in
contralateral upper motor neuron weakness.
Due to its prominent craniocaudal orientation,
the CST is easily identified within the subcortical
Fig. 3.11 Dominant anterior (1) and posterior (2) branches of the anterior commissure (AC) extending to the olfactory
region of the right frontal cortex and temporal lobes and communicating in the midline, as shown on (a) oblique sagittal
and (b) axial images.
Supratentorial White Matter Tracts and Their Organization
45

white matter of the precentral gyrus, corona radia-
ta, internal capsule, and brainstem as blue voxels
in these regions on color FA images (▶Fig. 3.12).
The medial extent of this fiber bundle is consis-
tently depicted well with tractography. However, a
well-known limitation of conventional determinis-
tic DTI tractography is its inability to consistently
track corticobulbar fibers to the lateral motor cor-
tex. This shortcoming arises from the inability of
DTI to distinguish these lateral projections as they
intersect with crossing fibers from the corpus cal-
losum and SLF within the centrum semiovale.
Because depiction of the entire extent of this path-
way is highly desirable in order to preserve elo-
quent motor function during neurosurgical brain
tumor resection, many institutions prefer to use
diﬀusion techniques, such as HARDI, that are capa-
ble of characterizing crossing fibers.
Optic Radiation
The optic radiation, also referred to as the genicu-
localcarine tract, carries input from the contrala-
teral visual field via the lateral geniculate nucleus
(LGN).
Fibers
from
the
LGN
pass
posteriorly
through the retrolenticular internal capsule, along
the lateral margin of the posterior lateral ventricle
into the occipital lobes (▶Fig. 3.13). Although clas-
sically divided into upper and lower divisions,
three distinct bundles within this pathway can be
identified using diﬀusion tractography.25 The larg-
est dorsal bundle carries information regarding the
inferior visual field directly to the ipsilateral supe-
rior calcarine cortex. A smaller ventral bundle sup-
plying the superior visual field projects to the
inferior calcarine cortex. Finally, between these
two bundles, a very small central bundle repre-
senting macular vision projects to both sides of
the medial calcarine cortex. The ventral bundle is
also referred to as the Meyer loop, a bundle of
fibers notable for a characteristic “knee” of fibers
that pass anteriorly into the temporal lobe prior to
coursing posteriorly. From the LGN, the Meyer loop
extends anteriorly over the roof of the temporal
horn then loops posteriorly to pass along the later-
al aspect of the temporal horn and through the
temporal stem en route to the occipital cortex.
Superior quadrantanopia is relatively common
after anterior temporal lobectomy, occurring in
varying degrees of severity in 50 to 90% of
patients. This postoperative result occurs due to
transection of fibers within the Meyer loop, the
anterior extent of which varies by 1.5 to 1.7 cm
among diﬀerent subjects. Although there is no
Fig. 3.12 Best seen on (a) coronal images, the lateral branches of the pyramidal tract (1) project to the lateral precentral
gyrus, and are more difficult to identify than the dominant medial branches (white arrow). These branches are not
depicted well with diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) tractography, and require high angular resolution diffusion imaging
(HARDI) or diffusion spectrum imaging (DSI) to be visualized. (b) Note on sagittal projection that the pyramidal tract
extends not only to the precentral gyrus (3), but also to the parietal lobe (2) and the supplementary motor area (4). CST,
corticospinal tract; CBT, corticobulbar tract.
Supratentorial White Matter Tracts and Their Organization
46

direct relationship between the size of the resec-
tion and the severity of the visual field deficit, the
magnitude of the resulting quadrantanopia can be
more accurately predicted by the extent of resec-
tion within the Meyer loop characterized using dif-
fusion tensor tractography.26
3.4 Clinical Application:
Neurosurgical Planning
Armed with an understanding of the foregoing
white matter tracts, the radiologist is equipped to
describe the location and significance of lesions
within the white matter in patients undergoing
biopsy or resection. Because preservation of elo-
quent function remains a major goal of neurosur-
gery, tractography of the corticospinal, visual, and
language pathways is now routinely performed at
many centers. Consider the example in ▶Fig. 3.14,
which shows images from a surgical planning MRI
in a patient presenting with mild right hemipare-
sis. Color FA images illustrate how the ipsilesional
CST is compressed but maintained within the
corona radiata, whereas the normally green por-
tions of the SLF are not visualized and are likely
infiltrated with tumor. The degree of mass eﬀect
on the CST is appreciated using fiber tractography.
With modern neurosurgical navigation systems in
the operating room, this information from tractog-
raphy can decrease operative time because it
provides the surgeon with an initial map of
where resection might result in postoperative
hemiparesis.
3.5 Summary
DTI of high technical quality allows consistent vis-
ualization of a relatively small group of association,
commissural, and projection pathways. Color FA
images and fiber tractography can display the
location of normal white matter tracts, infiltration
and distortion of tracts by lesions, and the rela-
tionship
between
them
and
the
surrounding
pathways.
3.5.1 Acknowledgment
Data used for ▶Fig. 3.1 through ▶Fig. 3.13 were
provided by the Human Connectome Project,
WU-Minn
Consortium
(Principal
Investigators:
David
Van
Essen
and
Kamil
Ugurbil;
1U54MH091657) funded by the 16 NIH Institutes
and Centers that support the NIH Blueprint for
Neuroscience Research; and by the McDonnell
Center for Systems Neuroscience at Washington
University.
Fig. 3.13 (a) Axial and (b) sagittal images of the left optic tract (1) and optic radiation (OR) (3), carrying topographically
organized information from the right visual field to the occipital cortex. From the lateral geniculate nucleus, anterior
fibers from this pathway extend a variable length into the ipsilateral temporal lobe (2) before sweeping back into the
occipital lobe within the sagittal striatum. Disruption of this segment, the Meyer loop of the optic radiations, gives rise
to superior quadrantanopia.
Supratentorial White Matter Tracts and Their Organization
47

References
[1] Nagae-Poetscher LM, Jiang H, Wakana S, Golay X, van Zijl PC,
Mori S. High-resolution diﬀusion tensor imaging of the
brain stem at 3 T. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2004; 25(8):
1325–1330
[2] Habas C, Cabanis EA. Anatomical parcellation of the brain-
stem and cerebellar white matter: a preliminary probabilis-
tic tractography study at 3 T. Neuroradiology 2007; 49(10):
849–863
[3] Ford AA, Colon-Perez L, Triplett WT, Gullett JM, Mareci TH,
Fitzgerald DB. Imaging white matter in human brainstem.
Front Hum Neurosci 2013; 7: 400
[4] Basser PJ, Jones DK. Diﬀusion tensor MRI: theory, experi-
mental design and data analysis - a technical review. NMR
Biomed 2002; 15(7–8): 456–467
[5] Mukherjee P, Berman JI, Chung SW, Hess CP, Henry RG. Dif-
fusion tensor MR imaging and fiber tractography: theoretic
underpinnings. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2008; 29(4): 632–
641
Fig. 3.14 (a) Axial and (b) sagittal color fractional anisotropy (FA) maps, and (c) axial and (d) coronal projections of the
left corticospinal tract (CST) in a patient with a left frontal opercular grade 2 anaplastic astrocytoma. The posterior
margin of the tumor closely approximates the anterior aspect of the CST, which appears splayed posteriorly around the
mass. Color FA images show that the corona radiata (CR) (blue) is largely preserved, the cingulum bundle (CB) is
displaced medially by mass effect, and the uncinate fasciculus (UF) and inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus (IFOF) are
displaced inferiorly within the external capsule. In contrast to the normal right superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF), the
left SLF is not well seen and is likely involved.
Supratentorial White Matter Tracts and Their Organization
48

[6] Hagmann P, Jonasson L, Maeder P, Thiran JP, Wedeen VJ,
Meuli R. Understanding diﬀusion MR imaging techniques:
from scalar diﬀusion weighted imaging to diﬀusion tensor
imaging and beyond. Radiographics 2006; 26 Suppl 1:
S205–S223
[7] Jeurissen B, Leemans A, Tournier JD, Jones DK, Sijbers J.
Investigating the prevalence of complex fiber configurations
in white matter tissue with diﬀusion magnetic resonance
imaging. Hum Brain Mapp 2013; 34(11): 2747–2766
[8] Mori S, van Zijl PC. Fiber tracking: principles and strategies -
a technical review. NMR Biomed 2002; 15(7–8): 468–480
[9] Mukherjee P, Chung SW, Berman JI, Hess CP, Henry RG. Dif-
fusion tensor MR imaging and fiber tractography: technical
considerations. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2008; 29(5): 843–
852
[10] Mori S, Crain BJ, Chacko VP, van Zijl PCM. Three-dimensional
tracking of axonal projections in the brain by magnetic reso-
nance imaging. Ann Neurol 1999; 45(2): 265–269
[11] Jones DK, Cercignani M. Twenty-five pitfalls in the analysis
of diﬀusion MRI data. NMR Biomed 2010; 23(7): 803–820
[12] Wakana S, Jiang H, Nagae-Poetscher LM, van Zijl PC, Mori S.
Fiber tract-based atlas of human white matter anatomy.
Radiology 2004; 230(1): 77–87
[13] Catani M, Thiebaut de Schotten M. A diﬀusion tensor imag-
ing tractography atlas for virtual in vivo dissections. Cortex
2008; 44(8): 1105–1132
[14] Hess CP, Mukherjee P. Visualizing white matter pathways in
the living human brain: diﬀusion tensor imaging and
beyond. Neuroimaging Clin N Am 2007; 17(4): 407–426, vii
[15] Jones DK, Christiansen KF, Chapman RJ, Aggleton JP. Distinct
subdivisions of the cingulum bundle revealed by diﬀusion
MRI fibre tracking: implications for neuropsychological
investigations. Neuropsychologia 2013; 51(1): 67–78
[16] Jhoo JH, Lee DY, Choo IH, et al. Discrimination of normal
aging, MCI and AD with multimodal imaging measures on
the medial temporal lobe. Psychiatry Res 2010; 183(3):
237–243
[17] Makris N, Kennedy DN, McInerney S, et al. Segmentation of
subcomponents within the superior longitudinal fascicle in
humans: a quantitative, in vivo, DT-MRI study. Cereb Cortex
2005; 15(6): 854–869
[18] Catani M, Allin MPG, Husain M, et al. Symmetries in human
brain language pathways correlate with verbal recall. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007; 104(43): 17163–17168
[19] Catani M, Jones DK, Donato R, Ffytche DH. Occipito-tempo-
ral connections in the human brain. Brain 2003; 126(Pt 9):
2093–2107
[20] Von Der Heide RJ, Skipper LM, Klobusicky E, Olson IR. Dis-
secting the uncinate fasciculus: disorders, controversies and
a hypothesis. Brain 2013; 136(Pt 6): 1692–1707
[21] Forkel SJ, Thiebaut de Schotten M, Kawadler JM, Dell’Acqua
F, Danek A, Catani M. The anatomy of fronto-occipital con-
nections from early blunt dissections to contemporary trac-
tography. Cortex 2014; 56: 73–84
[22] Caverzasi E, Papinutto N, Amirbekian B, Berger MS, Henry
RG. Q-ball of inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus and beyond.
PLoS ONE 2014; 9(6): e100274
[23] DORON K, GAZZANIGA M (2008). Neuroimaging techniques
oﬀer new perspectives on callosal transfer and interhemi-
spheric communication. Cortex, 44(8), 1023-1029. http://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2008.03.007
[24] Peltier J, Verclytte S, Delmaire C, Pruvo JP, Havet E, Le Gars D.
Microsurgical anatomy of the anterior commissure: correla-
tions with diﬀusion tensor imaging fiber tracking and clini-
cal relevance. Neurosurgery 2011; 69(2) Suppl Operative:
ons241–ons246, discussion ons246–ons247
[25] Hofer S, Karaus A, Frahm J. Reconstruction and dissection of
the entire human visual pathway using diﬀusion tensor
MRI. Front Neuroanat 2010; 4: 15
[26] Yogarajah M, Focke NK, Bonelli S, et al. Defining Meyer’s
loop-temporal lobe resections, visual field deficits and diﬀu-
sion tensor tractography. Brain 2009; 132(Pt 6): 1656–1668
Supratentorial White Matter Tracts and Their Organization
49

4 Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging and Diﬀusion Tensor
Imaging of the Brain during Early Brain Development:
The First Two Years of Life
Wei Gao, John H Gilmore, and Weili Lin
Key Points
●Temporal maturation of the major white matter
tracts follows a nonlinear pattern, with the most
significant growth during the first year of life, fol-
lowed by a slower pace in the second year of life.
●Spatial maturation of the major white matter
tracts follows a central-to-peripheral, caudal-
to-rostral trend during early brain
development.
●Significant genetic eﬀects on the development
of both global and local white matter diﬀusion
properties are present, whereas common envi-
ronmental eﬀects are restricted to specific
tracts during the first 2 years of life.
●Lateralization of white matter is observed in
the fiber bundles associated with language and
sensorimotor functions, whereas gender
eﬀects are subtle during infancy.
●Significant diﬀusion cognition correlations have
been observed in infancy, and abnormal devel-
opment of white matter has been associated
with diﬀerent brain diseases/disorders.
4.1 Introduction
An understanding of early brain development is of
great clinical importance because many neurologi-
cal
and
neurobehavioral
disorders
have
their
developmental origins during this period.1,2 Con-
ventional T1-/T2-weighted magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) has been routinely used for the clin-
ical assessment of brain maturation processes,
including gray/white matter growth, water con-
tent changes, and myelination.3,4 Although ana-
tomical/morphological developments are readily
apparent in conventional MRI, insights into the
development of white matter (WM), particularly
the myelination status of WM with age, have been
more challenging to obtain until the introduction
of diﬀusion tensor imaging (DTI).5,6 The underlying
physical mechanism of DTI is that the relative
angle between the directions of the applied diﬀu-
sion gradients and water diﬀusion determines the
extent to which magnetic resonance signal inten-
sity is altered in the presence of diﬀusion gra-
dients; the maximum signal-intensity reduction
occurs at a 0-degree angle (i.e., parallel), whereas,
theoretically, no signal-intensity change is antici-
pated at 90 degrees (i.e., perpendicular). Therefore,
applying diﬀusion gradients along noncollinear
directions, a tensor matrix can be employed to
characterize the directions of water diﬀusion. Sub-
sequently,
the
three
eigenvalues/eigenvectors
obtained through matrix diagonalization of the
tensor matrix can be used not only to measure
rotation-invariant water diﬀusion properties, such
as mean diﬀusivity and fractional anisotropy (FA),
but also to provide the preferred direction of water
diﬀusion in a given voxel.
Major WM growth occurs prenatally. After the
completion of neuronal migration during the last
trimester of gestation, interneuron connections
are built at two ends: neurons develop dendritic
trees to make synaptic connections with other
neurons within the gray matter and extend long
axons running through the WM to establish long-
distance connections. Although almost all promi-
nent WM tracts can be identified using DTI after
term birth despite low anisotropy values,7 contin-
ued growth
of
WM
tracts
occur
postnatally,
including increases of axon diameter, improve-
ments of tract organization, developments of mis-
cellaneous
axonal
cell
organs,
and,
most
importantly, development of myelin sheaths for
insulating major fiber bundles.8 Life span examina-
tions of the WM growth consistently show nonlin-
ear developmental patterns featuring the most
dramatic development of all major diﬀusion prop-
erties during the first 2 years of life,9,10 a critical
period for WM development. This chapter reviews
the recent literature on the use of DTI to study
WM development during the first 2 years of life.
The chapter discusses the temporal/spatial pattern
of WM maturation and the issues related to later-
alization and gender eﬀects. Recent evidence is
reviewed on the genetic control of early brain WM
maturation and its behavioral correlations. Finally,
the chapter summarizes recent progress on the
clinical findings of DTI in early brain development.
DWI and DTI during Early Brain Development
50

4.2 Temporal Growth Pattern
of Major White Matter Tracts
Measurements of intracranial gray matter, and
WM volumes have consistently shown nonlinear
brain growth, featuring dramatic growth during
the first year, followed by more refined and slow
growth during the second year of life.3 Total brain
volume increases 105% during the first but only
15% during the second year of life.3 These temporal
brain volume increases have been attributed to
reflect diﬀerent structural events, including syn-
aptogenesis,11,12 dendrite elaboration,13 myelina-
tion,14,15 and continued subplate developmental
changes,16 which have all been documented to
undergo the fastest development during the first
year. With these microstructural developments, it
is highly plausible that water diﬀusion will be
modified owing to the alteration of the biological
microenvironment (barriers) such that a similar
temporal pattern could be observed with DTI.
Indeed, regardless of diﬀerent diﬀusion parame-
ters, results reported in the literature have gener-
ally converged on a nonlinear developmental
trend.9,17 Specifically, using a region of interest
(ROI)-based approach, Gao et al18 examined the
spatial temporal development of eight ROIs located
at the genu/splenium/body of the corpus callosum
(CC), the internal capsule, the cortical spinal tract,
the
optic
radiation,
and
the
frontal/posterior
peripheral white matter regions. All eight ROIs
exhibit highly significant increases of FA in neo-
nates
to
1-year-olds,
followed
by
a
modest
increase during the second year of life (▶Fig. 4.1).
Although FA represents a highly informative met-
ric capable of characterizing the degree of aniso-
tropy of the underlying water diﬀusion within a
given voxel, it does not separately evaluate water
diﬀusion parallel or perpendicular to the long axis
of axonal bundles. In contrast, axial diﬀusivity
Fig. 4.1 Statistical comparison results of the development of fractional anisotropy (FA), axial diffusivity (AD), and radial
diffusivity (RD) across the first 2 years of life. Red/yellow/green regions of interest are shown for illustration of the
relative significance in age-dependent development (red: p < 0.001; yellow: p < 0.05; green: p > 0.05). GCC, genu of the
corpus callosum; SCC, splenium of the corpus callosum; BCC, body of the corpus callosum; IC, internal capsule; CST,
cortical spinal tract; OR, optic radiation; FPW, frontal peripheral white matter; PPW, posterior peripheral white matter.
(Reproduced from Gao et al, with permission,15 original Fig. 3.)
DWI and DTI during Early Brain Development
51

(AD) and radial diﬀusivity (RD) separately quantify
water diﬀusivity parallel and perpendicular to the
main axis of water diﬀusion, respectively, poten-
tially oﬀering additional insights into the micro-
architecture of axonal bundles. Using these two
metrics, Gao et al further demonstrated that,
although a temporal developmental pattern simi-
lar to that seen with FA was observed for axial and
radial diﬀusivities during the first 2 years of life
(see ▶Fig. 4.1), a more rapid reduction of radial
diﬀusivity to 44% to 69% of that at birth is observed
during the second year of life, whereas the axial
diﬀusivity decreases to only ~ 75 to 95% of the
neonatal value (▶Fig. 4.2). These findings suggest
a more rapid development of radial constraints (e.
g., myelination) than the growth of axonal struc-
tures during the first year of life. Consistent with
these DTI findings, Haynes et al8 conducted a his-
tological study with growth-associated phospho-
protein (GAP-43) staining, a marker of axonal
growth and elongation. They showed a high level
of GAP43 staining from 24 to 64 postconceptional
(PC) weeks, implying rapid axonal development
spanned from pre- to postnatal periods. Subse-
quently, a slower, adult-like level of axonal devel-
opment
was
observed
beyond
17
postnatal
months (1.5 postnatal year). In contrast, myelina-
tion begins from 54 PC weeks (2.5 postnatal
months) and develops at a high speed until 72 to
92 PC weeks (6.5 postnatal months to 11.5 postna-
tal months), spanning approximately the entire
first year after birth. Together, these results sug-
gest that the onset of axonal growth is earlier (pre-
natal) and fastest during the first 5 postnatal
months, whereas myelin maturation begins about
2.5 months postnatally and continues at a fast
growth pace throughout the first year of life.
Therefore, these histological results by Haynes et
al8 suggest the potential physiological underpin-
nings of the observed relatively faster decrease of
radial diﬀusivity than axial diﬀusivity by Gao et
al15 because the maturation of myelin is likely the
dominant process during this period of life.
More information could be revealed by consid-
ering the relationship between axial/radial diﬀu-
sivity
and
FA
changes.
For
example,
when
Fig. 4.2 Development pattern of axial diffusivity, radial diffusivity, and FA across the first 2 years of life. The
experimentally measured Life values of the 1- and 2-year-old groups are normalized to those of the neonates. GCC,
genu of the corpus callosum; SCC, splenium of the corpus callosum; BCC, body of the corpus callosum; IC, internal
capsule; CST, cortical spinal tract; OR, optic radiation; FPW, frontal peripheral white matter; PPW, posterior peripheral
white matter. (Reproduced from Gao et al, with permission,15 original Fig. 4.)
DWI and DTI during Early Brain Development
52

examining FA alone, three of the eight ROIs eval-
uated by Gao et al showed no changes in FA (i.e.,
splenium of the corpus callosum, internal capsule,
and frontal peripheral WM) implying nonsignifi-
cant growth during the second year of life. How-
ever, further inspection of the radial and axial
diﬀusivity revealed completely diﬀerent pictures
(see ▶Fig. 4.1). Specifically, consistent with the
finding of FA, the splenium of the corpus callosum
exhibited no changes in both axial and radial diﬀu-
sivities. In contrast, significant changes of both
axial and radial diﬀusivities were observed in fron-
tal WM, indicating continuing myelination and
axonal growth. However, the extent to which axial
and radial diﬀusivities were altered appeared to
cancel their contributions in the formulation of FA
calculation, leading to a stable FA. Finally, a signifi-
cant reduction of radial diﬀusivity in the internal
capsule was observed, suggesting continuing mye-
lination. Furthermore, although a significant eleva-
tion of FA was observed in the genu/splenium/
body of the corpus callosum, the cortical spinal
tract, and peripheral WM between 1 and 2 years
of age, these regions exhibited significant changes
only in radial and not in axial diﬀusivity, suggest-
ing that their growth is dominated by continued
myelination rather than axonal growth. Together,
these results underscore the importance of com-
bined examination of both FA and axial/radial dif-
fusivity measures for a better depiction of the
complex underlying microstructural changes dur-
ing the first 2 years of life.
In contrast, to examine regional maturation pat-
terns of WM, Geng et al19 exploited a tract-based
approach where several major WM tracts were
evaluated. The findings observed were similar to
those
reported
using
ROI-based
approaches
regarding the temporal developmental trend of
WM fiber tracts during the first 2 years of life. Spe-
cifically, they examined the growth of FA, axial dif-
fusivity (AD), and radial diﬀusivity (RD) for 10
major WM fiber tracts: commissural bundles of
the genu, body, and splenium of the corpus callos-
um; projection fiber tracts of the bilateral anteri-
or/posterior limb of the internal capsule, motor,
and sensory tracts; and association tracts of the
bilateral uncinate fasciculus tracts, inferior longi-
tudinal fasciculus, and arcuate fasciculus tracts. All
fiber tracts showed increasing FA (16.1–55%) and
decreasing RD (24.4– 46.4%) and AD (13.3–28.2%)
in the first 2 years of life (▶Fig. 4.3), featuring fast-
er development in the first year than the second
year. Consistently, RD showed larger changes than
AD, in line with the ROI-based findings.
4.3 Spatial Growth Pattern of
Major White Matter Tracts
As previously described, extensive myelination
processes of major WM tracts occur during the
first year of life are likely the dominant factor
attributes to the observed changes of WM diﬀusiv-
ities during infancy. Spatial maturation of WM
tracts has been documented following a central-
to-peripheral and caudal-to-rostral pattern. Spe-
cifically, myelination increases from the splenium
of the corpus callosum and optic radiation (at 3–4
months), the occipital and parietal lobes (at 4–6
months), and, finally, to the genu of the corpus cal-
losum and frontal and temporal lobes (at 6–8
months).20 Consistent with histological studies,
DTI findings also show a similar pattern. Zhai et
al17 demonstrated that the central WM areas con-
sistently exhibit higher FA and lower mean diﬀu-
sivity
(MD)
values
when
compared
to
the
peripheral WM regions in neonates. Gao et al15
further showed that the general maturation pat-
tern begins centrally (genu/splenium/body of the
corpus collosum), followed by the cortical spinal
tract, internal capsule, optic radiation, and periph-
eral WM. Moreover, the occipital matures earlier
than
the
frontal
peripheral
WM
regions
(▶Fig. 4.4). Additionally, Chen et al21 inspected lin-
ear (Cl) and planar (Cp) anisotropy. The linear ani-
sotropy
is
defined
as
the
trace
normalized
diﬀerence between the primary and second eigen-
values, quantifying percentages of the shape of a
diﬀusion tensor matrix attributable to a cylindrical
object. In contrast, planar anisotropy quantifies
percentages of the shape of a diﬀusion tensor
matrix attributable to a planar object. Their results
showed that the central WM had a significantly
higher Cl and lower Cp when compared to the
peripheral WM during infancy, suggesting that
highly
organized
fiber
bundles
have
already
formed at birth in the central major WM regions.
In addition, the observed rapid growth velocity of
Cl during the first 2 years further enhances the
cylindrical shapes of diﬀusion tensors in these
major WM regions, likely driven by the rapid mye-
lination process. Similar findings were observed
using tract-based analysis19; callosal bundles show
larger FA changing rates in central than in periph-
eral regions. Motor and sensory tracts show a
higher rate of changes of FA and RD in anatomical
locations close to the cortical regions when com-
pared to those close to the cerebral peduncle. The
splenium of the CC is one of the tracts that has the
DWI and DTI during Early Brain Development
53

Fig. 4.3 Scatter plots of average frac-
tional anisotropy (FA), axial diffusivity
(AD), and radial diffusivity (RD) along
seven representative tracts versus
postnatal age. Horizontal lines repre-
sent the overall mean of the average
values in one age group. Different
tracts are visualized in different colors.
UF, uncinate fasciculus; ILF, inferior
longitudinal fasciculus; ALIC, anterior
limb of internal capsule; PLIC, posterior
limb of internal capsule. (Reproduced
from Geng et al., with permission19)
DWI and DTI during Early Brain Development
54

largest FA and smallest RD in the first year, and
maintains this high level of maturation in the sec-
ond year. The genu of the CC has a relatively small
RD until the second year of life. Overall, DTI meas-
ures reveal a central-to-peripheral and caudal-to-
rostral pattern. These findings have profound func-
tional implications and are consistent with the
notion that brain functional development starts
from basic brain functions, such as motor, sensory,
and visual functions and proceeds to higher-order
brain function.22 Maturation of the primary sen-
sory functions requires either rapid up-down in-
formation
relaying
through
center
projection
fibers (e.g., the cortical spinal tract) or interhemi-
spheric communication through midbrain callosal
fibers, consistent with the early maturation of cen-
tral WM. In contrast, higher-order brain functions
likely require the maturation of peripheral and
anterior WM tracts,22 which undergo continuing
maturation through adolescence and young adult
life.
4.4 Genetic Control and
Environmental Eﬀects
Genes play a significant role in the variability of
global and local brain gray/white matter volumes,
cortical thickness, and surface area.23,24,25,26 Brain
functions and functional brain networks are also
genetically modulated.27,28 Therefore, quantitative
measures of diﬀusion properties of the major WM
tracts during early brain development should also
reflect the modulation of genetic factors. Geng et
al29 studied the genetic and environmental eﬀects
on the spatiotemporal growth of diﬀerent major
WM fiber tracts using a model of additive genetic
and common and specific environmental variance
components. Genetic and environmental contribu-
tions to both global and local diﬀusion parameters
were estimated, including FA, RD, and AD. Their
results indicate that the individual diﬀerences in
the global WM microstructure characterized by all
three metrics (i.e., FA, RD, and AD) are heritable
Fig. 4.4 Spatial development pattern of axial diffusivity (upper left), radial diffusivity (upper right), and fractional
anisotropy (bottom) across regions of interest during the first 2 years of life. GCC, genu of the corpus callosum; SCC,
splenium of the corpus callosum; BCC, body of the corpus callosum; IC, internal capsule; CST, cortical spinal tract; OR,
optic radiation; FPW, frontal peripheral white matter; PPW, posterior peripheral white matter. (Reproduced from Gao et
al, 15 with permission, original Fig. 5.)
DWI and DTI during Early Brain Development
55

(▶Fig. 4.5). Specifically, global FA had the highest
heritability of 60%, followed by AD (57%), and RD
(53%). There was significant heritability in both
hemispheres of FA and RD, but AD heritability
appeared to be lateralized to the right hemisphere
only. There is a significant positive correlation
between RD heritability and mean RD, and simi-
larly between AD heritability and mean AD. Com-
bined with the decreasing trend of both RD and
AD during development, these findings seem to
suggest that the more mature the region is, the
less genetic variation it shows. This conclusion is
also consistent with the lower heritability esti-
mates reported in adults than in pediatric subjects.
For the environmental eﬀects, the bilateral ante-
rior/posterior limb of internal capsule, external
capsule, uncinate fasciculus, and left middle cere-
bellar peduncle show high shared environmental
eﬀects in RD (57–82%). Similarly, the bilateral
external capsule, middle cerebellar peduncle, and
inferior frontal occipital fasciculus also have a large
proportion of shared environmental eﬀects in AD
(47–71%).
Particularly,
shared
environmental
eﬀects are substantial for the RD of the bilateral
external capsule (left/right: 73%/82%). Together
with the anterior–posterior limb of the internal
capsule, the external capsule may have started
myelination
earlier
prenatally
than
other
Fig. 4.5 Heritability of white matter diffusivity in the neonatal brain. Heritability values of fractional anisotropy (FA),
radial diffusivity (RD) and axial diffusivity (AD) over each region of interest (top row) and their corresponding p-values
(bottom row, normalized using −log(p), – log(0.05) = 1.3, and – log(0.0001) = 4). (Reproduced from Geng et al., with
permission29)
DWI and DTI during Early Brain Development
56

association fibers30 and demonstrated a lower RD.
The authors postulated that prenatal neurohormo-
nal and uterine environment may aﬀect the matu-
ration process of the external capsule, which
might lead to the observed shared environmental
variation. In general, the authors observed sub-
stantial heritability of diﬀusion properties during
infancy, which is higher than that reported in
adults. However, genetic eﬀects are heterogeneous
over diﬀerent WM regions (see ▶Fig. 4.5). The sig-
nificant positive correlation between heritability
and diﬀusion measures suggests that regional
genetic eﬀects may be modulated by maturation
status—the more mature the region, the less herit-
able its variation. Common environmental eﬀects
are present in fewer regions that tend to be char-
acterized by a low RD.
4.5 Cognitive Correlations
There are numerous reports on the correlations of
DTI measures between diﬀerent WM fiber tracts
and cognitive performance in adults.31,32,33 How-
ever, such investigations are extremely scarce dur-
ing early brain development, likely due to the lack
of robust cognitive assessment strategies for such
young ages. Krishnan et al34 hypothesized that
higher WM apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient values at
term-equivalent age in preterm infants without
overt lesions are associated with poorer develop-
mental performance in later childhood. Mean
apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient values at the level of
the centrum semiovale were determined at term-
equivalent age. The children were assessed using
the Griﬃths Mental Development Scales to obtain
a developmental quotient (DQ) at 2 years’ cor-
rected
age.
Significant
negative
correlations
between apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient values at
term-equivalent age and Griﬃths Mental Develop-
ment
Scales
at
2
years’
corrected
age
were
observed, indicating that WM abnormality may
represent cerebral damage that gives rise to lower
DQ scores, which might be mediated through the
associated cortical and deep gray matter deficits.
Short et al35 measured FA, AD, and RD in WM fiber
bundles and hypothesized a relation between WM
maturation
and
the
development
of
working
memory in 12-month-old infants (n = 73). They
showed
robust
associations
between
infants’
visuospatial working memory performance and
microstructural characteristics of widespread WM
that connect brain regions known to support
working memory in older children and adults
(genu, anterior and superior thalamic radiations,
anterior cingulum, arcuate fasciculus, temporal–
parietal segment) (▶Fig. 4.6). These studies under-
score the potential utility of DTI measures in
understanding cognitive development in early
infancy.
4.6 Lateralization and Gender
Eﬀects
In the adult brain, language and handedness are
among the most well recognized brain functional
lateralization. Consistently, functional and ana-
tomical lateralization in the speech perception–
production
network and
in
the sensorimotor
system has been reported.36 However, only studies
in early life can inform how such functional later-
alization arises in relation to lateralization. Aiming
to address this question, Dubios et al37 examined
the whole brain diﬀusion properties in infants
from 1 to 4 months of age. DTI measures reveal
asymmetry in the arcuate fasciculus and cortical
spinal tract, thought to be related to language and
sensorimotor
functions,
respectively,
providing
convincing evidence on the lateralization of diﬀu-
sion property early in life that might be critical to
the later lateralization of corresponding functions.
Specifically, they reported that the temporal lobe
part of the arcuate fasciculus is larger on the left;
the left parietal part of the arcuate fasciculus has a
higher FA than the right; and the cortical spinal
tract between the cerebral peduncles and the pos-
terior limb of the internal capsule has a higher FA
in the left hemisphere than in the right. More
recently, the finding of arcuate fasciculus asymme-
try was replicated by Geng et al,19 showing that
the left arcuate-superior tract possesses > 20% larg-
er FA values than the right in the first year.
Sexual dimorphism in brain volumetric meas-
ures is present at birth, with males having larger
total brain cortical gray and white matter volumes
than
females.4
However,
only
subtle
gender
DWI and DTI during Early Brain Development
57

diﬀerences in the brain diﬀusion measures were
reported during infancy. Geng et al19 found minor
diﬀerences in several localized fiber tracts in the
right brain: males show a smaller FA in the right
sensory tract, a larger AD in the right arcuate supe-
rior and motor tracts, and a smaller AD in the right
uncinate fasciculus. Several studies focusing on the
development of WM from late childhood to ado-
lescence38,39,40 also failed to detect significant sex
eﬀects. Therefore, more studies are needed to
delineate
the
potential
mechanisms
of
the
observed sex diﬀerences in diﬀusion in adults.41
4.7 Clinical Applications
The use of DTI to characterize brain developmental
disorders has also been extensively reported. Yuan
et al42 retrospectively analyzed DTI in children
with hydrocephalus during early infancy to quan-
tify abnormal WM regions. Their results revealed
significantly lower FA, higher MD, and higher RD
values within the corpus callosum in infants with
hydrocephalus.
Moreover,
the
age-dependent
increase of FA of the corpus callosum that is typi-
cally observed in normal developing infants was
absent in their study cohort. In the case of a more
devastating genetic disease, Krabbe disease, unre-
lated umbilical cord transplantation, the only
available treatment for this fatal neurodegenera-
tive condition, is only eﬀective if administered
before clinical symptoms appear. Escolar et al43
evaluated the use of DTI in identifying early
changes of the major motor tracts of asympto-
matic neonates with infantile Krabbe disease.
Fig. 4.6 Association between working memory and white matter tracts diffusivity properties at 1 year of age. Scatter
plots highlight examples of significant associations between infants’ working memory and key white matter tracts:
genu, arcuate, and anterior cingulum. Plots show the positive association of working memory with fractional anisotropy
(FA) and the negative association with radial diffusivity (RD). Only the left (L) arcuate and left cingulum are shown above;
however, scatter plots for these tracts in the right hemisphere are very similar. (Reproduced from Short et al., with
permission35)
DWI and DTI during Early Brain Development
58

Their results showed that patients with Krabbe
disease had significantly lower FA values than the
controls after adjusting for gestational age, gesta-
tional age at birth, birth weight, sex, and race
(▶Fig. 4.7). Quantitative tractography results also
showed significant diﬀerences in the corticospinal
tracts of asymptomatic neonates who had the
early-onset form of Krabbe disease. Therefore, DTI
could potentially serve as an important biomarker
of disease progression in neonates diagnosed with
Krabbe through statewide neonate screening pro-
grams. DTI could also play a critical role in autism
spectrum disorders (ASDs). Specifically, Wolﬀet
al44 showed that the FA trajectories of 12 of 15
major
WM
fiber
tracts
diﬀered
significantly
between the infants who developed ASDs and
those who did not, which is characterized by high-
er FA values at 6 months followed by a slower
change over time relative to infants without ASDs
(▶Fig. 4.8). Overall, studies based on DTI measure-
ments of the early brain’s wiring structures have
great potential to derive quantitative biomarkers
for
disease-onset
prediction,
monitoring,
and
treatment, and more studies using the longitudinal
design are desired to push this field forward.
4.8 Summary
Numerous studies have demonstrated dramatic
development of the brain diﬀusion properties in
WM during the first 2 years of life. Temporally, dif-
ferent
diﬀusion
properties
follow
nonlinear
growth featuring the most significant changes dur-
ing the first year of life. Spatially, the WM matura-
tion
generally
follows
a
central-to-peripheral,
caudal-to-rostral trend. During this time period,
significant genetic eﬀects on the development of
both global and local WM diﬀusion properties
were observed, whereas common environmental
eﬀects were restricted to specific tracts. Lateral-
ized development of WM diﬀusion was mostly
concentrated on the fiber bundles linked to lan-
guage and sensorimotor functions. Sex eﬀects on
WM development during infancy were subtle and
local. There are significant diﬀusion cognition cor-
relations observed in infancy, and abnormal devel-
opment of WM has been associated with diﬀerent
brain
diseases/disorders,
supporting
the
great
potential of this noninvasive neuroimaging techni-
que in clinical use.
Fig. 4.7 Raw mean fractional anisotropy (FA) values for patients with infantile Krabbe disease and controls. Each point
represents a child’s mean FA across the central portion of the corticospinal tract. The red triangles represent the six
patients with Krabbe disease, whereas the blue diamonds show the typical controls. The red and blue lines represent the
linear trend related to the corrected age at the time of the magnetic resonance imaging. (Reproduced from Escolar et
al. with permission43)
DWI and DTI during Early Brain Development
59

Fig. 4.8 Trajectories of fractional anisotropy in limbic and association white matter fiber tracts in 92 high-risk Infants
with (red curves) and without (blue curves) evidence of autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) at 24 months of age.
(Reproduced from Wolff et al. with permission44)
DWI and DTI during Early Brain Development
60

References
[1] Owen MJ, O’Donovan MC, Thapar A, Craddock N. Neurode-
velopmental hypothesis of schizophrenia. Br J Psychiatry
2011; 198(3): 173–175
[2] Paloyelis Y, Mehta MA, Kuntsi J, Asherson P. Functional MRI
in ADHD: a systematic literature review. Expert Rev Neuro-
ther 2007; 7(10): 1337–1356
[3] Knickmeyer RC, Gouttard S, Kang C, et al. A structural MRI
study of human brain development from birth to 2 years. J
Neurosci 2008; 28(47): 12176–12182
[4] Gilmore JH, Lin W, Prastawa MW, et al. Regional gray matter
growth, sexual dimorphism, and cerebral asymmetry in the
neonatal brain. J Neurosci 2007; 27(6): 1255–1260
[5] Basser PJ, Mattiello J, LeBihan D. Estimation of the eﬀective
self-diﬀusion tensor from the NMR spin echo. J Magn Reson
B 1994; 103(3): 247–254
[6] Basser PJ, Pierpaoli C. Microstructural and physiological fea-
tures of tissues elucidated by quantitative-diﬀusion tensor
MRI. J Magn Reson B 1996; 111(3): 209–219
[7] Huang H, Zhang J, Wakana S, et al. White and gray matter
development in human fetal, newborn and pediatric brains.
Neuroimage 2006; 33(1): 27–38
[8] Haynes RL, Borenstein NS, Desilva TM, et al. Axonal develop-
ment in the cerebral white matter of the human fetus and
infant. J Comp Neurol 2005; 484(2): 156–167
[9] Hüppi PS, Warfield S, Kikinis R, et al. Quantitative mag-
netic resonance imaging of brain development in prema-
ture and mature newborns. Ann Neurol 1998; 43(2):
224–235
[10] Mukherjee P, Miller JH, Shimony JS, et al. Diﬀusion tensor
MR imaging of gray and white matter development during
normal human brain maturation. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
2002; 23(9): 1445–1456
[11] Elston GN, Oga T, Fujita I. Spinogenesis and pruning scales
across functional hierarchies. J Neurosci 2009; 29(10):
3271–3275
[12] Rakic P, Bourgeois JP, EckenhoﬀMF, Zecevic N, Goldman-
Rakic PS. Concurrent overproduction of synapses in diverse
regions of the primate cerebral cortex. Science 1986; 232
(4747): 232–235
[13] Petanjek Z, Judas M, Kostović I, Uylings HB. Lifespan altera-
tions of basal dendritic trees of pyramidal neurons in the
human prefrontal cortex: a layer-specific pattern. Cereb
Cortex 2008; 18(4): 915–929
[14] Flechsig P. Developmental (myelogenetic) localisation of the
cerebral cortex in the human. Lancet 1901; 158 (4077):
1027–1030
[15] Gao W, Lin W, Chen Y, et al. Temporal and spatial develop-
ment of axonal maturation and myelination of white matter
in the developing brain. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2009; 30(2):
290–296
[16] Kostović I, Jovanov-Milošević N, Radoš M, et al. Perinatal
and early postnatal reorganization of the subplate and
related cellular compartments in the human cerebral wall as
revealed by histological and MRI approaches. Brain Struct
Funct 2014; 219(1): 231–253
[17] Zhai G, Lin W, Wilber KP, Gerig G, Gilmore JH. Comparisons
of regional white matter diﬀusion in healthy neonates and
adults performed with a 3.0-T head-only MR imaging unit.
Radiology 2003; 229(3): 673–681
[18] Gao W, Gilmore JH, Giovanello KS, et al. Temporal and spa-
tial evolution of brain network topology during the first two
years of life. PLoS ONE 2011; 6(9): e25278
[19] Geng X, Gouttard S, Sharma A, et al. Quantitative tract-based
white matter development from birth to age 2years. Neuro-
image 2012; 61(3): 542–557
[20] Deoni SC, Mercure E, Blasi A, et al. Mapping infant brain
myelination with magnetic resonance imaging. J Neurosci
2011; 31(2): 784–791
[21] Chen Y, An H, Zhu H, et al. Longitudinal regression analy-
sis of spatial-temporal growth patterns of geometrical
diﬀusion measures in early postnatal brain development
with diﬀusion tensor imaging. Neuroimage 2011; 58(4):
993–1005
[22] Tau GZ, Peterson BS. Normal development of brain circuits.
Neuropsychopharmacology 2010; 35(1): 147–168
[23] Peper JS, Brouwer RM, Boomsma DI, Kahn RS, HulshoﬀPol
HE. Genetic influences on human brain structure: a review
of brain imaging studies in twins. Hum Brain Mapp 2007;
28(6): 464–473
[24] Posthuma D, De Geus EJ, Baaré WF, HulshoﬀPol HE, Kahn
RS, Boomsma DI. The association between brain volume and
intelligence is of genetic origin. Nat Neurosci 2002; 5(2):
83–84
[25] Thompson PM, Cannon TD, Narr KL, et al. Genetic influences
on brain structure. Nat Neurosci 2001; 4(12): 1253–1258
[26] Panizzon MS, Fennema-Notestine C, Eyler LT, et al. Distinct
genetic influences on cortical surface area and cortical
thickness. Cereb Cortex 2009; 19(11): 2728–2735
[27] Glahn DC, Winkler AM, Kochunov P, et al. Genetic control
over the resting brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010; 107
(3): 1223–1228
[28] Gao W, Elton A, Zhu H, et al. Intersubject variability of and
genetic eﬀects on the brain’s functional connectivity during
infancy. J Neurosci 2014; 34(34): 11288–11296
[29] Geng X, Prom-Wormley EC, Perez J, et al. White matter her-
itability using diﬀusion tensor imaging in neonatal brains.
Twin Res Hum Genet 2012; 15(3): 336–350
[30] Kinney HC, Brody BA, Kloman AS, Gilles FH. Sequence of
central nervous system myelination in human infancy. II.
Patterns of myelination in autopsied infants. J Neuropathol
Exp Neurol 1988; 47(3): 217–234
[31] Madden DJ, Bennett IJ, Burzynska A, Potter GG, Chen NK,
Song AW. Diﬀusion tensor imaging of cerebral white matter
integrity in cognitive aging. Biochim Biophys Acta 2012;
1822(3): 386–400
[32] Charlton RA, Barrick TR, McIntyre DJ, et al. White matter
damage on diﬀusion tensor imaging correlates with age-
related cognitive decline. Neurology 2006; 66(2): 217–222
[33] Tsujimoto M, Senda J, Ishihara T, et al. Behavioral changes in
early ALS correlate with voxel-based morphometry and dif-
fusion tensor imaging. J Neurol Sci 2011; 307(1–2): 34–40
[34] Krishnan ML, Dyet LE, Boardman JP, et al. Relationship
between white matter apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcients in
preterm infants at term-equivalent age and developmental
outcome at 2 years. Pediatrics 2007; 120(3): e604–e609
[35] Short SJ, Elison JT, Goldman BD, et al. Associations between
white matter microstructure and infants’ working memory.
Neuroimage 2013; 64: 156–166
[36] Toga AW, Thompson PM. Mapping brain asymmetry. Nat
Rev Neurosci 2003; 4(1): 37–48
[37] Dubois J, Hertz-Pannier L, Cachia A, Mangin JF, Le Bihan D,
Dehaene-Lambertz G. Structural asymmetries in the infant
language and sensori-motor networks. Cereb Cortex 2009;
19(2): 414–423
[38] Bava S, Thayer R, Jacobus J, Ward M, Jernigan TL, Tapert SF.
Longitudinal characterization of white matter maturation
during adolescence. Brain Res 2010; 1327: 38–46
DWI and DTI during Early Brain Development
61

[39] Lebel C, Beaulieu C. Longitudinal development of human
brain wiring continues from childhood into adulthood. J
Neurosci 2011; 31(30): 10937–10947
[40] Giorgio A, Watkins KE, Douaud G, et al. Changes in white
matter
microstructure during adolescence. Neuroimage
2008; 39(1): 52–61
[41] Inano S, Takao H, Hayashi N, Abe O, Ohtomo K. Eﬀects of age
and gender on white matter integrity. AJNR Am J Neurora-
diol 2011; 32(11): 2103–2109
[42] Yuan W, Mangano FT, Air EL, et al. Anisotropic diﬀusion
properties in infants with hydrocephalus: a diﬀusion tensor
imaging study. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2009; 30(9): 1792–
1798
[43] Escolar ML, Poe MD, Smith JK, et al. Diﬀusion tensor imaging
detects abnormalities in the corticospinal tracts of neonates
with infantile Krabbe disease. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2009;
30(5): 1017–1021
[44] WolﬀJJ, Gu H, Gerig G, et al. IBIS Network. Diﬀerences in
white matter fiber tract development present from 6 to 24
months in infants with autism. Am J Psychiatry 2012; 169
(6): 589–600
DWI and DTI during Early Brain Development
62

5 Diﬀusion Weighted and Diﬀusion Tensor Imaging in
Aging
Andrew Joseph Degnan and Lucien M. Levy
Key Points
●The aging population presents an increasingly
substantial challenge worldwide, with greater
numbers of individuals living to older age and
vulnerable to cognitive decline and dementia,
thus requiring higher levels of personal care.
●Diﬀusion based imaging strategies is sensitive to
more subtle age-related changes in white mat-
ter integrity, and these methods may enable the
diﬀerentiation of normal adult aging from mild
cognitive impairment and Alzheimer dementia.
●White matter indices are more sensitive to subtle
changes than anatomical volumetric analyses
examining atrophy in a variety of dementias.
●Cognitive performance in specific domains,
such as memory and executive function, corre-
sponds with many diﬀusion tensor imaging
(DTI)-based indicators within specific function-
alized regions of the brain during aging.
●Specific patterns of white matter degeneration
may be discerned on DTI to distinguish
between dementias.
5.1 Physics and Techniques
Both diﬀusion weighted imaging (DWI) and its
related diﬀusion tensor imaging (DTI) rely on the
premise of water diﬀusion changes as an indirect
indicator of underlying brain parenchyma. Under-
standing the basis of diﬀusion methods and their
limitations as assessments of surrogate measures
of white matter tract and axonal integrity is crit-
ical
for
applying
diﬀusion
imaging
methods
clinically to the aging brain. These techniques are
summarized in (▶Table 5.1).
5.1.1 Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging
DWI uses a magnetic resonance sequence using
two b values (based on magnetic gradient strength
and pulse timing) to observe the motion of water
molecules. If water molecules migrate during the
interval between these gradients, then signal loss
will occur. Such signal loss represents uninhibited
random diﬀusion of water molecules representing
isotropic diﬀusion. Diﬀusion restriction represents
constriction of water molecules preventing ran-
dom motion between gradient pulses and present-
ing as hyperintense signal on DWI. The apparent
diﬀusion coeﬃcient (ADC) is the quantitative index
that separates the T2 shine-through eﬀect from
diﬀusion weighted images.
5.1.2 Diﬀusion Tensor Imaging
Because molecular water mobility may not be the
same in all directions, DTI employs gradients in
multiple noncollinear directions in order to quan-
tify diﬀusion measurements in creating a three-
dimensional ellipsoid representing the diﬀusion
vector within a given voxel. In white matter tracts,
water is observed to preferentially (nonrandomly)
migrate in the direction of axonal fibers in an ani-
sotropic manner. The extent to which white matter
tracts are maintained indirectly influences water
diﬀusion and therefore the measurement of ADC
along
various
axes.
DTI
selectively
highlights
densely packed fibers with a highly ordered orien-
tation parallel to each other.
Table 5.1 Fundamental principles of diﬀusion tensor imaging
Imaging modality
Properties
Diffusion weighted imaging (DWI)
Examines the ability of water to diffuse freely within tissues
Diffusion restriction may indicate gross pathology within tissue
Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI)
Examines the orientation of water diffusion by measuring diffusion in multiple
directions, forming a vector
sensitive to changes in brain microstructure
Surrogate marker of white matter integrity
Fiber tractography methods can reconstruct white matter tracts
DWI and DTI in Aging
63

The methods used to analyze DTI data are
shown in (▶Fig. 5.1) and are explored in greater
technical detail in Chapter 1. Approaches range
from region-of-interest methods that examine
specific areas of the brain independently to whole
brain voxel-based analyses. Tract-based spatial sta-
tistics (TBSS) is one means of delineating individual
white matter tracts. Deterministic tractography
methods are common techniques that examine the
most likely white matter structure originating from
a selected seed point, whereas probabilistic trac-
tography estimates white matter trajectories for
each voxel. These and other newer analytic techni-
ques are being applied to the study of the aging
brain. One newer approach, fiber density mapping
(FDM), mitigates a key limitation of the aforemen-
tioned diﬀusion analyses, which only examine ani-
sotropy measures for each voxel on an individual
basis without the context of surrounding fiber pat-
terns. FDM enhances analysis by examining the
surrounding white matter fibers within the axonal
bundle passing through a selected voxel.1
DTI-Based Measurements
No single characteristic of white matter integrity is
directly measured by an individual DTI measure;
therefore, multiple DTI-based variables oﬀer insight
into multifactorial aspects of white matter physi-
ology.
These
quantitative
calculations
provide
orientation-independent
information
on
brain
architecture and white matter integrity on the basis
of a diﬀusion tensor mathematical matrix construct.
The following values (summarized in ▶Table 5.2)
arise from calculations of the three eigenvectors
that constitute the ellipsoid diﬀusion tensor.
●Radial diﬀusivity (RD) or perpendicular diﬀusivity
(λ|) calculated from the diﬀusivity perpendicular
to the first eigenvector is thought to represent a
proxy for myelin integrity because water diﬀu-
sion across axons would be easier with break-
down of normal myelin structures. RD is
generally thought to represent a greater contrib-
utor to FA changes.
●Fractional anisotropy (FA) is an index measuring
intravoxel coherence (essentially, the normalized
standard deviation of the three diﬀusivities)
where the value ranges from isotropic (0), a
spherical vector, to anisotropic (1), an ellipsoid
vector. The FA reflects microstructure integrity.
●Mean diﬀusivity (MD) provides information of
the overall diﬀusion as the average of all three
axes of the tensor (eigenvalues) within a selected
volume.
●Axial diﬀusivity (AD) or parallel diﬀusivity (λ//)
measured from the diﬀusivity parallel to the first
eigenvector, on the other hand, is inferred to
indicate axonal integrity as a measure of fiber
diameter and organization.
Of note, ADC can be viewed as an average of these
two diﬀusivity values, RD and AD.
5.2 Clinical Applications
DTI
provides
detailed
anatomical
information
about the status and directionality of white matter
tracts. Because integrated coordination of neural
Fig. 5.1 Representations of diffusion tensor imaging data. Multiple methods are available for examining the
multidirectional data acquired by diffusion tensor imaging. A region of interest (ROI) analysis method examines
individual selected regions. Voxel-based morphometry (VBM) uses group-normalized data to quantitatively analyze
white matter properties across the brain. Tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS) employs DTI information to generate
putative representations of white matter tracts. Fiber tractography elucidates white matter pathways. (Reproduced with
permission from Madden et al, 12 copyright Elsevier 2009.)
DWI and DTI in Aging
64

activity across distant brain regions is essential to
cognition, ascertaining axonal integrity could pro-
vide insight into the mechanisms by which cogni-
tive functions are disrupted. Elucidating the basis
of cognitive decline is an important problem in the
clinical assessment of elderly individuals, which is
becoming of pressing concern in most developed
countries
where
aging
demographics
are
generating large burdens on health care and the
economy. Determining whether worsening reac-
tion time or memory is related to mild cognitive
impairment or “old age” versus a more debilitating
dementia, such as Alzheimer disease, provides
important information for patients and their fami-
lies and can guide appropriate treatment strat-
egies. Presently, the clinical definitions of cognitive
Table 5.3 Spectrum of aging, cognitive impairment and dementia
Clinical manifestation
Cognitively normal aging
Optimal aging without manifestations of memory loss or cognitive
impairment on neuropsychological testing
Normal aging
Generally thought to include self-perceived memory loss without
cognitive deficits relative to peers, but may include poorer
performance relative to younger cohorts
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI)
An ambiguous definition that includes individuals thought to
perform between normal aging and dementia; generally regarded
as a transitional period prior to dementia
Amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI)
Subclassification of MCI where individuals demonstrate prominent
memory impairment symptoms; these individuals are at greatest
risk of Alzheimer disease out of the general MCI population
Dementia
Generic classification for cognitive impairment that interferes with
daily functioning; includes cognitive impairments in addition to
memory deficits
Alzheimer disease
Most common form of dementia with hallmark neurodegenerative
changes definitively diagnosed on autopsy, although frequently
diagnosed clinically; targeted amyloid positron emission tomo-
graphic imaging is presently available for presumptive diagnosis
Source: Adapted from Small GW, Bookheimer SY, Thompson PM, et al. Current and future uses of neuroimaging for
cognitively impaired patients. Lancet neurology. 2008;7(2):161-172. doi:10.1016/S1474-4422(08)70019-X.
Table 5.2 Commonly used diﬀusion tensor imaging metrics and their correlates
Diffusion tensor imaging
measure
Quantification
Details
Fractional anisotropy (FA)
ﬃﬃ
1
2
q
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ð1 2Þ2þð2 3Þ2þð3 1Þ2
p
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2
1þ2
2þ2
3
p
- Calculation involving the diffusivity differences
- Values of 0 represent a spherical tensor and 1, an
ellipsoid tensor
- Provides information on microstructure integrity
- Regarded as most robust DTI statistic
Mean diffusivity (MD)
(λ1 + λ2 + λ3) / 3
- Average of eigenvector diffusivities
- Provides information on microstructure integrity
Radial diffusivity (RD)
- Perpendicular diffusivity
ðλ2 þ λ3Þ
2
- Diffusivity perpendicular to the primary eigenvector
- Primary contributor to FA
- Reflects myelin integrity
Axial diffusivity (AD)
- Parallel diffusivity
- Longitudinal diffusivity
λ1
- Diffusion parallel to the primary eigenvector
- Influenced by axonal diameter and number
DWI and DTI in Aging
65

aging and impairment are varied (▶Fig. 5.3) and
may not correspond well with objective measures.
DTI may better assess the degree of neurodegener-
ation as a surrogate measure of white matter
architectural integrity that correlates with pathol-
ogy. Although not a functional imaging modality,
the white matter pathways described by DTI serve
as the conduits by which activity in brain net-
works occurs and may provide some information
on functional pathways.2 Therefore, changes in DTI
mirror alterations in functional networks that may
be responsible for cognitive decline in aging and
dementia.
The application of DTI clinically to the aging pa-
tient with cognitive decline or symptoms of demen-
tia remains diﬃcult. Nevertheless, there have been
significant advances in the past decade that facili-
tate the use of DTI to answer clinical questions of
diﬀerentiating between types of dementia. Most of
the earlier studies that provide the fundamental
basis for what is known about DTI changes in spe-
cific dementia types are based on the comparison of
multiple individuals with dementia versus controls
using groupwise analysis methods. More recent
studies oﬀer evidence to support the use of single-
subject DTI studies to diagnose individual patients
with neurodegenerative dementias.3
5.2.1 Normal Aging
Because white matter volume does not appear to
decrease as much as gray matter volumes with
aging, volumetric magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) analyses of white matter loss are inadequate
to assess the aging brain.4 Likewise, white matter
hyperintense lesion burden does not appear to
consistently account for cognitive decline. DTI
addresses this limitation by ascertaining the finer
detail of subtle changes within axonal structures.
As discussed in Chapter 4, normal white matter
development
leads
to
MD
reduction
and
FA
increase over normal development to middle age,
which corresponds to axonal development and
myelination with greater time spent maturing
frontal–temporal connections.5 In later age, these
developmental changes reverse, with decreasing
anisotropy and increasing diﬀusivity values glob-
ally. Both abnormal and normal adult aging may
lead to significant decline in white matter organi-
zation.6 While aging changes appear global and
symmetric, some have shown the greatest FA
decline within the corpus callosum, frontal, limbic,
and temporal lobes, although these same regions
have
the
highest
anisotropy
initially.1,6
More
specifically, most literature supports an anterior-
predominant gradient of FA decline and diﬀusiv-
ity
increase
(MD,
AD,
and
RD)
with
age.7
▶Fig. 5.2 demonstrates the normal patterns of
aging-related FA and MD changes across several
brain regions. Furthermore, application of Fiber
density mapping (FDM) to the aging brain rein-
forces these findings, which were observed to
occur globally within white matter to a greater
extent
within
anterior
versus
posterior
regions.1 Thus it appears that frontal regions
are both the latest to develop in maturation and
likewise
the
most
susceptible
to
functional
decline in the later years of life, which also con-
curs with clinical findings of executive (frontal)
dysfunction.8
Pathophysiology of DTI Changes in
Aging
With aging, myelin layers continue to be added
with redundant myelin, and this myelin may be
formed by oligodendrocytes in a manner making it
vulnerable to healthy myelin formed by oligoden-
drocytes earlier in life. Myelin loss with both
declining number and length of myelinated axonal
fibers and demyelination are implicated in FA loss
and increased diﬀusivity with increased extracel-
lular space (▶Fig. 5.3). Another mechanism by
which increased diﬀusion may occur with aging is
via splitting of myelin and cavitation within myelin
sheaths, thereby also producing increased extrac-
ellular space encouraging free diﬀusion.8
5.2.2 Mild Cognitive Impairment
Over the last decade, many studies have demon-
strated white matter integrity correlates for neuro-
cognitive deficits seen with aging as described in
the preceding section. Defining the distinction
between mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and
normal aging and discerning at what point MCI
progresses into Alzheimer disease are challenging
tasks that are not amenable to clear, objective
stages. This heterogeneity therefore poses a seri-
ous obstacle to integration of DTI studies of MCI
because individual studies include participants at
varying stages on the aging–cognitive decline–
dementia spectrum (the definitions of which diﬀer
among investigators). DTI studies of MCI demon-
strate widespread changes in diﬀusion metrics
throughout much of the white matter (▶Fig. 5.4).9
Therefore, DTI may not enhance our understand-
ing of MCI if analyzed generally without delving
DWI and DTI in Aging
66

further into the specific deficits and white matter
structures involved.
Association between Specific
Cognitive Functions and Diﬀusion
Changes
One of the fundamental clinical concerns regard-
ing aging is the eﬀect of white matter disorganiza-
tion
on
cognitive
performance.
A
study
of
cognitively normal adults observed a statistically
significant correlation between increasing reaction
time and decreasing FA (particularly, the corpus
callosum, superior longitudinal fasciculus, and
inferior
fronto-occipital
fasciculus).10
These
particular regions correlate with executive func-
tion, language tasks, association pathways, and
memory. Other variables, including white matter
volume or hyperintense lesions, did not explain
this relationship.10 Another study examining typi-
cally aging adults using DTI noted that processing
speed is more closely associated with cerebral FA
than are other cognitive measures, even account-
ing for age.11 In this study, global cerebral MD, AD,
and RD are associated with cognitive flexibility,
and reasoning is associated with prefrontal AD.11
White
matter
integrity
influences
age-related
deterioration of cognitive functions by decreasing
the speed and eﬃciency of axonal pathways. In
addition, these findings are robust for the specific
cognitive domain involved—they are independent
Fig. 5.2
Plots of fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity changes with age. (a) The corpus callosum is a vital
component of white matter architecture for cognitive function and degeneration is implicated in worsening cognitive
measures including reaction time. FA peaks in adulthood and decreases with aging, to a greater extent within the
anterior portions. (continued)
DWI and DTI in Aging
67

(continued) (b) Association fibers are
integral to the organization of neural
activity, and white matter integrity
within these fibers preserves higher-
order cognition. As in the corpus
callosum, FA peaks and mean diffusiv-
ity (MD) troughs occur in early adult-
hood. FA decreases and MD increases
with age are slightly greater within the
frontal association fibers. (Reproduced
with permission from Lebel et al,5
copyright Elsevier Ltd, 2012.)
DWI and DTI in Aging
68

of the aging process, arguing for individual clinical
significance in the elderly patient with a cognitive
deficit.12
Across aging, FA corresponds to performance on
examinations of balance and gait, suggesting a
close relationship between white matter integrity
and functional measures that are important indi-
cators of function in the elderly.13 White matter
changes related to aging are diverse and may be
aﬀected by many factors. Alcoholic individuals, for
example, show FA reductions in key white matter
tracts (▶Fig. 5.5) that inversely correspond to
memory dysfunction scores.14
Just as these changes may be accelerated by
health factors, these alterations are not inexorable,
and they may even be ameliorated by health status
and cognitive training. One study of elderly master
athletes demonstrates increased FA in several
regions (right corona radiata and longitudinal fas-
ciculus)
compared
to
sedentary,
age-matched
counterparts.15 This and other studies suggest that
physical fitness could encourage preservation of
regions critical to motor control and visuospatial
functions. In a study of memory training, research-
ers observed alterations in the rate of change of
anterior FA with memory improvement compared
to controls over an 8 week period, thereby sug-
gesting that neurocognitive training can encourage
white matter microstructural conservation.16
5.2.3 Alzheimer Disease
As a neurodegenerative disease, Alzheimer disease
entails several pathophysiological changes aﬀect-
ing neurons and axons, with the deposition of
beta-amyloid and tau representing two major
components. Inevitably, axonal loss and injury are
the result of these degenerative changes that ulti-
mately culminate with cognitive dysfunction and
severe dementia. The ability of imaging indices to
detect Alzheimer disease at earlier stages may, in
the future, allow for interventions that could alter
the trajectory of functional impairment. Even
though targeted imaging methods such as florbe-
tapir (18F) are now available to image amyloid
eﬀectively, the presence of amyloid alone does not
definitively diagnose Alzheimer disease, and the
addition of DTI could improve sensitivity of amy-
loid imaging methods.17,18 Moreover, neurodege-
nerative
changes
and
clinical
symptoms
of
dementia may proceed independent of amyloid
accumulation.19
One diﬃculty in ascertaining DTI changes in
dementias
is
the
concomitant
aging-related
changes that may be superimposed on pathophysi-
ology. Changes in white matter cytoarchitecture
in dementia should not be regarded as simply
progression
or
exaggeration
of
normal
aging
phenomena.12
Fig. 5.3 Comparison of normal axons and aging axons. Normal axon integrity exhibits a dense, rich microstructure with
normal myelination and little extracellular space. In comparison, the aging brain demonstrates axonal loss and
dysmyelination that results in thinning of the myelin sheath and increased extracellular space. The increase in
extracellular space and the decreased hindrance of diffusion presented by decreased axonal size and number results in
increased diffusivity with age.
DWI and DTI in Aging
69

The white matter deterioration seen in Alz-
heimer disease and perhaps its prodromal mani-
festations is thought to reflect axonal fiber loss
and Wallerian degeneration mostly, as suggested
by greater increases in RD than AD. The theory of
Wallerian degeneration assumes the loss of gray
matter prior to white matter changes, a finding
that is subject to much debate but is supported by
a large meta-analysis of DTI studies in Alzheimer
disease and MCI.20 Still others suggest that eﬀects
Fig. 5.4 Diffusion imaging metrics in mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Differences in white matter microstructure
detected by diffusion tensor imaging in patients with MCI. Different diffusion metrics can be used to differentiate
patients with MCI from healthy controls. Effects are often especially strong for mean diffusivity and radial diffusivity.
(Reproduced with permission from Amlien and Fjell,9 copyright Elsevier 2014.)
DWI and DTI in Aging
70

on the white matter microstructure occur early on
in Alzheimer disease and that gray matter atrophy
with subsequent Wallerian degeneration of white
matter does not adequately account for white mat-
ter changes seen on DTI.9
Even despite the presence of multiple studies
confirming significant changes in diﬀusion proper-
ties in Alzheimer disease, the clinical application
of these findings to individual patients remains
diﬃcult. Changes in Alzheimer disease in a single-
subject study were greatest within the posterior
cingulate and posterior parietotemporal region,
but were relatively minor, pointing to the chal-
lenges of detecting subtle changes using DTI on an
individual basis.3 Nevertheless, in many cases the
findings of white matter atrophy can be striking,
even on an individual patient level ▶Fig. 5.6.
Prominent corpus callosal thinning was seen in a
patient with Alzheimer disease when compared
with an age-matched healthy individual.21 How-
ever, others have identified significant association
of Mini-Mental State Examination scores with pre-
cuneal FA changes suggesting that the observed
white matter degeneration observed in Alzheimer
disease has a direct clinical impact on cognitive
function.22
Increased diﬀusivity, specifically MD, within
the hippocampus has been proposed as a marker
of worsening memory performance and perhaps
an indicator of early Alzheimer disease, because
tau accumulation occurs first within the hippo-
campus23; MD appears to perform slightly better
than FA in classifying individuals with Alzheimer
disease versus normal aging, and adding MD to
hippocampal atrophy accurately predicts mild Alz-
heimer disease versus aging.11,12 These microstruc-
tural white matter changes may also occur in aging
within
the
parahippocampal
white
matter
(▶Fig. 5.7), which may explain memory deficits in
aging, and this overlap slightly complicates solitary
application of white matter indices of the hippo-
campus in diagnosing Alzheimer disease.24 Never-
theless, others argue white matter deterioration
marked by increased diﬀusivity alone is suﬃcient
and manifests to a greater extent within the hip-
pocampal region in prodromal and mild Alz-
heimer disease than aging. A study of patients
with amnestic MCI suggested that FA reduction or
MD increase in the cingulum bundle in particular
as an indicator of severe amnestic MCI (aMCI)
that will likely progress to Alzheimer disease.25
Quantitative
tractography
of
apolipoprotein
E
(ApoE4) carriers at greater risk of developing Alz-
heimer disease reveals shorter fiber tract lengths
in the uncinate fasciculus where other studies
previously identified increased MD in the cingu-
lum
bundle
and
corpus
callosum
in
healthy
carriers.26
Taken together, these studies all suggest that a
combination of gray matter atrophy and white
matter disruption within parahippocampal and
other white matter tracts are implicated in the
progression of MCI to Alzheimer disease. These
imaging
findings
could
influence
the
clinical
Fig. 5.5 Diffusion tensor imaging abnormalities in alcoholism. Projections of the right inferior longitudinal fasciculus
(magenta), cingulum (yellow), and uncinate fasciculus (green) in (a) a patient with alcoholism compared with a (b)
control participant. These regions are decreased in size and fractional anisotropy values, which are associated with
memory dysfunction score. (Reproduced with permission from Trivedi et al, 14 copyright Elsevier Ltd, 2013.)
DWI and DTI in Aging
71

diagnosis of individuals presenting with aMCI or
carrying known genetic risk factors for Alzheimer
disease. Although no such eﬀective interventions
have come to fruition as of yet, imaging with
DTI will inevitably also serve a role in assessing
treatment response and even perhaps provide in-
formation vital to the development of targeted
therapeutics for Alzheimer disease.
5.2.4 Other Dementias
Diﬀerentiating between specific dementias may
influence clinical decision making regarding prog-
nosis and therapy. Although fewer resources have
been dedicated to the investigation of less com-
mon dementias compared to Alzheimer disease,
there have
still
been
significant
advances
in
Fig. 5.6
Individual subject comparison of diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) maps in Alzheimer disease (AD). Color-coded
map in an 83-year-old with AD (a) demonstrates prominent atrophy of the corpus callosum (solid arrow), compared
with an 86-year-old normal volunteer (b) (open arrow). DTI has allowed greater understanding of the effects of AD in
the commissural and association white matter tracts. (Reproduced with permission from Huston and Field, 21 copyright
Elsevier 2013.)
Fig. 5.7 Targeted use of parahippo-
campal white matter in Alzheimer
disease. This figure exemplifies diffu-
sion tensor imaging–based delineation
of white matter fiber tracts extending
from the parahippocampal white
matter. White matter integrity
changes may occur as a product of
aging, although they can potentially be
affected to a greater extent in Alz-
heimer disease. (Reproduced with
permission from Rogalski et al, 24
copyright Elsevier 2012.)
DWI and DTI in Aging
72

appreciating white matter disruption in a variety
of dementia conditions.
Frontotemporal Dementia
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is a major constit-
uent of early dementias and may be confused with
early-onset Alzheimer disease. A comparison of
FTD
with
Alzheimer
disease
not
surprisingly
revealed a greater reduction of FA within frontal
regions in FTD (▶Fig. 5.8)27; unlike Alzheimer dis-
ease, FTD entails more prominent white matter
degeneration. More generally, increased diﬀusivity
(MD) was seen throughout much of the frontal
and temporal lobes in behavioral variant FTD com-
pared to controls.28 Selective FA reduction has
been demonstrated within the superior longitudi-
nal fasciculus in frontal variant FTD, whereas this
decrease occurred in the inferior longitudinal fas-
ciculus for temporal variant FTD.29
Dementia with Lewy Bodies
Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is another form
of neurodegenerative dementia closely related to
Alzheimer disease and may overlap clinically with
Fig. 5.8 Comparison of frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and Alzheimer disease (AD). Significance maps of systematic
brain abnormalities in FTD and AD patients relative to control subjects (CN) (AD < CN and FTD < CN), and direct
comparisons between AD and FTD (AD < FTD and FTD < AD). Reduced white matter (WM) fractional anisotropy (FA)
(blue color) in AD or FTD overlaid on an axial brain template. FTD patients had widespread FA reductions in frontal and
temporal lobes, anterior corpus callosum, and anterior cingulum. Compared to AD, FTD patients had significantly
decreased FA values bilaterally in frontal deep WM, anterior corpus callosum, and anterior cingulum. (Reproduced with
permission from, open access copyright Zhang et al.27)
DWI and DTI in Aging
73

other dementias. DTI is particularly well-suited to
DLB because atrophy is not a leading component
as in other dementias, and white matter indices
may be more helpful than volumetric assessments
of atrophy. DTI demonstrates preliminary utility in
identifying diﬀerences between DLB and Alz-
heimer disease where DLB selectively involves
substantially reduced FA in the precuneus and
parieto-occipital tracts involved in visual associa-
tion
in
comparison
to
more
diﬀuse
changes
observed in Alzheimer disease (▶Fig. 5.9).22,30 Dif-
fusivity within the amygdala in DLB also corre-
sponds
well
with
a
common
measure
of
parkinsonism motor symptoms.22 There is a signif-
icant decrease in FA within the parahippocampal
gyri in Alzheimer disease compared to DLB that
aids in distinguishing between these two similar
forms
of dementia.30
Although
bearing
much
overlap, early research suggests DTI is capable of
diﬀerentiating
between
the
neurodegenerative
dementias.
Vascular Dementia
Another common cause of cognitive decline is vas-
cular dementia. Because cerebrovascular disease is
common in the elderly (including individuals with
Alzheimer
disease)
diﬀerentiating
vascular
dementia from other dementias is an important
dilemma. The use of diﬀusion imaging in vascular
disease is an important topic in itself and will be
explored in greater detail in the next chapter.
Patients with vascular dementia and Alzheimer
dementia have regional diﬀerences of white mat-
ter integrity, with selective reduction of FA in
the forceps minor (transcallosal fibers through
the genu of the corpus callosum in vascular
dementia).31
Progressive Supranuclear Palsy
Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), although
generally manifesting with distinct clinical symp-
toms, may be confused for Parkinson disease and
other conditions, particularly early in the disease
process. Therefore, DTI may be helpful in making
the diagnosis. In PSP, FA is reduced and MD is
increased within the body of the corpus callosum,
cingulum, and frontal white matter.32 In another
study of PSP, a selected pattern of decreased FA
and increased ADC within the inferior fronto-occi-
pital fasciculus corresponded to severity of frontal
cognitive symptoms and personality change in one
study.33 Similarly, a single subject–based DTI study
demonstrated that individuals with either cortico-
basal degeneration (another Parkinson plus syndro-
me
with
prominent
motor
symptoms)
or
progressive supranuclear palsy demonstrated wide-
spread FA reductions with an anterior predomi-
nance, but did not identify any diﬀerence between
these two conditions.3 More recent work showed
PSP to have a more symmetric and infratentorial
pattern of FA reduction when compared to cortico-
basal
degeneration,
despite
much
overlap
(▶Fig. 5.10).32 These findings, if validated, could
potentially be helpful in distinguishing the two syn-
dromes clinically. One particularly useful conclusion
of this study was progression of individuals with
nonfluent aphasia to corticobasal degeneration or
progressive supranuclear palsy could be predicted
by the presence of widespread increased RD and
decreased FA on initial DTI examination.3
Other Dementias
Although the majority of dementia cases are of
Alzheimer etiology, there are a few less common
dementia
syndromes
that
may
present
with
unusual symptoms and may be diﬃcult to diag-
nose. DTI could potentially aid in diagnosing these
conditions in order to optimize treatment and
prognostication. Posterior cortical atrophy is yet
another neurodegenerative disease and is charac-
terized by complex visual functions abnormalities,
including acalculia, agnosia, and visual field defi-
cits. This condition appears to occur with atrophy,
particularly within the occipital lobe that pro-
gresses. DTI has been used to ascertain FA reduc-
tions within the occipital lobe and document later
involvement of both occipital and parietal lobes
within an individual patient—a finding that is dis-
tinct from Alzheimer disease, thereby allowing
clinical evidence to support a clinical diagnosis of
posterior cortical atrophy (▶Fig. 5.11).34 Other
dementias may be amenable to analysis with DTI,
and future research may unveil subtle subtypes
within more common neurodegenerative demen-
tias that may have prognostic and pharmacological
implications. Much more research is needed to
address both the specificity of diﬀusion imaging
findings in dementia types as well as their ramifi-
cations for clinical management.
5.3 Summary
●Alterations in the quality of axonal connections
in the brain aﬀects neural connectivity and
thereby influences cognitive performance.
DWI and DTI in Aging
74

Fig. 5.9
Fractional anisotropy (FA) changes between Alzheimer disease (AD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB).
Tract-based spatial statistics maps indicating areas of reduced FA (blue) in DLB and AD (blue), overlaid onto the Montreal
Neurological Institute template image and mean FA skeleton (green). (a) DLB versus controls: change was identified
mainly in the parieto-occipital areas (precuneal and cingulate gyri). Reduced FA in the temporal lobes was in a region of
the posterior thalamic radiation that included the optic radiation (p < 0.05, corrected). (b) AD versus controls: change
was more widespread than in DLB and included clusters in the temporal, parieto-occipital, and frontal lobes (p < 0.05,
corrected). (c) DLB versus AD: reduced FA in the pons and left thalamus (p < 0.05). (d) AD versus DLB: small clusters of
reduced FA in the parahippocampal gyri, frontal lobes, and fornix (p < 0.05). (Reproduced with permission from Watson
et al, 30 copyright Wolters Kluwer Health, 2012.)
DWI and DTI in Aging
75

●Aging in late adulthood demonstrates deterio-
ration in white matter cytoarchitecture, which
is measured noninvasively as declining aniso-
tropy and increasing diﬀusivity on DTI stud-
ies. These changes demonstrate a frontal–
posterior gradient in normal aging and may
be mitigated by physical and cognitive
training.
●DTI can discern diﬀerences in white matter
integrity in normal aging compared to mild
cognitive impairment and Alzheimer
disease.
●Alzheimer disease may be suggested by the com-
bination of hippocampal atrophy and disruption
of the neighboring parahippocampal white
matter tracts.
●Research into DTI-based correlates of white mat-
ter integrity in normal aging and dementia may
provide improved prognostication and could
oﬀer targets for therapeutic intervention in the
future.
●The diagnosis of less common and unusual
dementia presentations may be aided by the
presence of specific sites of involvement on DTI.
Fig. 5.10 Diffusion tensor imaging differences between corticobasal degeneration and progressive supranuclear palsy.
Three-dimensional brain renderings showing regions of overlap and difference between corticobasal degeneration
syndrome (CBS) and progressive supranuclear palsy syndrome (PSPS) with much overlap in corpus callosum and frontal
white matter changes. Generally, PSPS demonstrated a more infratentorial predominance and was more symmetric
than CBS. Results are shown on transparent brain renderings showing front, top, left, and right views, and medial
surface renderings (bottom row). Inclusive masking was used to identify regions common to CBS and PSPS (red), and
direct comparisons were used to identify regions with greater degeneration in CBS compared to PSPS (yellow), and
regions with greater degeneration in PSPS compared to CBS (blue). Results are shown separately for fractional
anisotropy and mean diffusivity. L, left/more involved hemisphere; R, right/less involved hemisphere. (Reproduced with
permission from Whitwell et al, 32 copyright Elsevier Ltd, 2014.)
DWI and DTI in Aging
76

References
[1] Stadlbauer A, Ganslandt O, Salomonowitz E, et al. Magnetic
resonance fiber density mapping of age-related white mat-
ter changes. Eur J Radiol 2012; 81(12): 4005–4012
[2] Greicius MD, Supekar K, Menon V, Dougherty RF. Resting-state
functional connectivity reflects structural connectivity in the
default mode network. Cereb Cortex 2009; 19(1): 72–78
[3] Sajjadi SA, Acosta-Cabronero J, Patterson K, Diaz-de-Grenu
LZ, Williams GB, Nestor PJ. Diﬀusion tensor magnetic reso-
nance imaging for single subject diagnosis in neurodegener-
ative diseases. Brain 2013; 136(Pt 7): 2253–2261
[4] Pfeﬀerbaum A, Mathalon DH, Sullivan EV, Rawles JM, Zipur-
sky RB, Lim KO. A quantitative magnetic resonance imaging
study of changes in brain morphology from infancy to late
adulthood. Arch Neurol 1994; 51(9): 874–887
Fig. 5.11
Diffusion tensor imaging in posterior cortical atrophy (PCA) compared to Alzheimer disease (AD). Magnetic
resonance images of the patient with posterior cortical atrophy (PCA) showing a global atrophy with occipitoparietal
predominance; (a) sagittal and (b) axial T1-weighted three-dimensional two-field echo sequence, (c) axial T2-weighted
sequence, and (d) coronal T1-inversion recovery image. (e) fractional anisotropy (FA) maps of a healthy control, (f) a
representative patient with AD, (g) and early PCA, and (h) a later PCA, fiber directions (red: left–right, green: anterior–
posterior, blue: inferior–superior). (i–l) FA in pseudocolors. Compared with the AD patient and controls, PCA showed a
substantial FA reduction in bilateral occipital lobes (white arrows). Whereas the FA reduction in the occipital white
matter in the patient with PCA remained stable over a period of 15 months, the overall FA values further decreased,
particularly within parietal regions. (Reproduced with permission from Duning et al, 34 copyright BMJ Publishing Group,
Inc. 2009.)
DWI and DTI in Aging
77

[5] Lebel C, Gee M, Camicioli R, Wieler M, Martin W, Beaulieu C.
Diﬀusion tensor imaging of white matter tract evolution
over the lifespan. Neuroimage 2012; 60(1): 340–352
[6] Moseley M. Diﬀusion tensor imaging and aging—a review.
NMR Biomed 2002; 15(7–8): 553–560
[7] Sullivan EV, Pfeﬀerbaum A. Diﬀusion tensor imaging and
aging. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2006; 30(6): 749–761
[8] Sullivan EV, Pfeﬀerbaum A. Neuroradiological characteriza-
tion of normal adult ageing. Br J Radiol 2007; 80(Spec No 2):
S99–S108
[9] Amlien IK, Fjell AM. Diﬀusion tensor imaging of white mat-
ter degeneration in Alzheimer’s disease and mild cognitive
impairment. Neuroscience 2014; 276: 206–215
[10] Kerchner GA, Racine CA, Hale S, et al. Cognitive processing
speed in older adults: relationship with white matter integ-
rity. PLoS ONE 2012; 7(11): e50425
[11] Borghesani PR, Madhyastha TM, Aylward EH, et al. The asso-
ciation between higher order abilities, processing speed,
and age are variably mediated by white matter integrity
during typical aging. Neuropsychologia 2013; 51(8): 1435–
1444
[12] Madden DJ, Bennett IJ, Song AW. Cerebral white matter
integrity and cognitive aging: contributions from diﬀusion
tensor imaging. Neuropsychol Rev 2009; 19(4): 415–435
[13] Sullivan EV, Adalsteinsson E, Hedehus M, et al. Equivalent
disruption of regional white matter microstructure in age-
ing healthy men and women. Neuroreport 2001; 12(1): 99–
104
[14] Trivedi R, Bagga D, Bhattacharya D, et al. White matter dam-
age is associated with memory decline in chronic alcoholics:
a quantitative diﬀusion tensor tractography study. Behav
Brain Res 2013; 250: 192–198
[15] Tseng BY, Gundapuneedi T, Khan MA, et al. White matter
integrity in physically fit older adults. Neuroimage 2013;
82: 510–516
[16] Engvig A, Fjell AM, Westlye LT, et al. Memory training
impacts short-term changes in aging white matter: a longi-
tudinal diﬀusion tensor imaging study. Hum Brain Mapp
2012; 33(10): 2390–2406
[17] Witte MM, Trzepacz P, Case M, et al. Association between
clinical measures and florbetapir F18 PET neuroimaging in
mild or moderate Alzheimer’s disease dementia. J Neuro-
psychiatry Clin Neurosci 2014; 26(3): 214–220
[18] Clark CM, Pontecorvo MJ, Beach TG, et al. AV-45-A16 Study
Group. Cerebral PET with florbetapir compared with neuro-
pathology at autopsy for detection of neuritic amyloid-β
plaques: a prospective cohort study. Lancet Neurol 2012; 11
(8): 669–678
[19] Rabinovici GD, Jagust WJ. Amyloid imaging in aging and
dementia: testing the amyloid hypothesis in vivo. Behav
Neurol 2009; 21(1): 117–128
[20] Sexton CE, Kalu UG, Filippini N, Mackay CE, Ebmeier KP. A
meta-analysis of diﬀusion tensor imaging in mild cognitive
impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 2011;
32(12): 2322.e5–2322.e18
[21] Huston JM, Field AS. Clinical applications of diﬀusion tensor
imaging. Magn Reson Imaging Clin N Am 2013; 21(2): 279–
298
[22] O’Donovan J, Watson R, Colloby SJ, Blamire AM, O’Brien JT.
Assessment of regional MR diﬀusion changes in dementia
with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer’s disease. Int Psychogeriatr
2014; 26(4): 627–635
[23] den Heijer T, der Lijn Fv, Vernooij MW, et al. Structural and
diﬀusion MRI measures of the hippocampus and memory
performance. Neuroimage 2012; 63(4): 1782–1789
[24] Rogalski E, Stebbins GT, Barnes CA, et al. Age-related
changes in parahippocampal white matter integrity: a diﬀu-
sion tensor imaging study. Neuropsychologia 2012; 50(8):
1759–1765
[25] Liu J, Yin C, Xia S, et al. White matter changes in patients
with amnestic mild cognitive impairment detected by diﬀu-
sion tensor imaging. PLoS ONE 2013; 8(3): e59440
[26] Salminen LE, Schofield PR, Lane EM, et al. Neuronal fiber
bundle lengths in healthy adult carriers of the ApoE4 allele:
a quantitative tractography DTI study. Brain Imaging Behav
2013; 7(3): 274–281
[27] Zhang Y, SchuﬀN, Ching C, et al. Joint Assessment of Struc-
tural, Perfusion, and Diﬀusion MRI in Alzheimer’s Disease
and Frontotemporal Dementia. International Journal of Alz-
heimer’s Disease 2011: Article ID 546871, 11 pages
[28] Whitwell JL, Avula R, Senjem ML, et al. Gray and white mat-
ter water diﬀusion in the syndromic variants of frontotem-
poral dementia. Neurology 2010; 74(16): 1279–1287
[29] Borroni B, Brambati SM, Agosti C, et al. Evidence of white
matter changes on diﬀusion tensor imaging in frontotempo-
ral dementia. Arch Neurol 2007; 64(2): 246–251
[30] Watson R, Blamire AM, Colloby SJ, et al. Characterizing
dementia with Lewy bodies by means of diﬀusion tensor
imaging. Neurology 2012; 79(9): 906–914
[31] Zarei M, Damoiseaux JS, Morgese C, et al. Regional white
matter integrity diﬀerentiates between vascular dementia
and Alzheimer disease. Stroke 2009; 40(3): 773–779
[32] Whitwell JL, Schwarz CG, Reid RI, Kantarci K, Jack CR, Jr,
Josephs KA. Diﬀusion tensor imaging comparison of pro-
gressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal syndromes.
Parkinsonism Relat Disord 2014; 20(5): 493–498
[33] Kvickström P, Eriksson B, van Westen D, Lätt J, Elfgren C,
Nilsson C. Selective frontal neurodegeneration of the inferi-
or fronto-occipital fasciculus in progressive supranuclear
palsy (PSP) demonstrated by diﬀusion tensor tractography.
BMC Neurol 2011; 11: 13
[34] Duning T, Warnecke T, Mohammadi S, et al. Pattern and
progression of white-matter changes in a case of posterior
cortical atrophy using diﬀusion tensor imaging. J Neurol
Neurosurg Psychiatry 2009; 80(4): 432–436
[35] Small GW, Bookheimer SY, Thompson PM, et al. Current and
future
uses
of
neuroimaging
for
cognitively
impaired
patients.
Lancet
neurology
2008;
7(2):
161–172.
doi:10.1016/S1474-4422(08)70019-X
DWI and DTI in Aging
78

6 Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging in Vascular Pathology
Sangam Kanekar and Chandan Misra
Key Points
●Cytotoxic edema is seen within minutes to
hours on diﬀusion weighted images (DWI) with
sensitivity and specificity of 88 to 100% and 86
to 100%, respectively.
●Cortical watershed infarcts are thought to be
the result of microembolization, either from
carotid artery atherosclerosis vulnerable plaque
or from artery-to-artery emboli precipitated by
an episode of systemic arterial hypotension.
Internal watershed infarcts are caused by a
combination of hypoperfusion of the internal
border zone, severe carotid disease, and a
hemodynamic event.
●The sensitivity and specificity of DWI for the
diagnosis of acute lacunar infarction are 94.9%
and 94.1%, respectively.
●It is important to diagnose transient ischemic
attack (TIA) because the short-term risk of
stroke following TIA is greatest within the first
48 hours (5.3%).
●Cytotoxic edema in cerebral venous thrombosis
(CVT) is thought to be due to reduced cerebral
blood flow (CBF) below the penumbra level,
which in turn leads to failure of the sodium-
potassium-adenosine triphosphate–dependent
pump.
6.1 Introduction
Diﬀusion weighted imaging (DWI) is an advanced
imaging technique that allows noninvasive evalua-
tion of water diﬀusibility in the brain tissue. It is
sensitive to the random translational motion of
water molecules due to brownian motion. This
property of DWI has revolutionized the imaging of
vascular pathologies, stroke in particular.
Diﬀusion weighted images (DWIs) are generated
by adding an opposing pair (first tagging and then
second untagging) of diﬀusion gradients to spin-
echo or echo planar sequences. For stationary mol-
ecules (e.g., stroke), the eﬀects of the tagging and
the untagging gradient pulses cancel each other
out. This “restricted diﬀusion” appears hyperin-
tense to normal tissue on DWI. In normal brain
tissue, where the molecules are mobile, there is
incomplete rephrasing resulting in a net phase
shift, which leads to a signal loss. The degree of
signal loss is proportional to the exponent of the
diﬀusion coeﬃcient and to the duration, distance,
and strength of the applied diﬀusion gradients
(the so-called b value). The diﬀusion coeﬃcient
measured by DWI is referred to as the apparent
diﬀusion coeﬃcient (ADC) rather than the true dif-
fusion coeﬃcient.
With the advent of intravenous and intra-arteri-
al thrombolytic therapy, the definition of hyper-
acute stroke has gained significant popularity. As
per various trials across the globe, a therapeutic
window (4–6 h) has been identified for the treat-
ment of stroke, emphasizing the importance of
early diagnosis. The concept of “time is brain”
forced us to look at the avenues that can diagnose
the early changes in the brain following stroke.
DWI has revolutionized the imaging of stroke by
identifying cytotoxic edema within minutes of the
onset of a stroke. As such, DWI has become the
driving force for the diagnosis of the vascular path-
ologies. Besides diagnosing large territorial strokes,
DWI allows for the diﬀerentiation of acute stroke
from chronic stroke and from nonspecific white
matter lesions. DWI also facilitates the detection of
very small ischemic lesions, small lacunar infarcts,
punctate cortical infarcts, and even small lesions
in patients with transient ischemic attacks (TIAs),
which are diﬃcult to diagnose on computed tomo-
graphic (CT) scans and the T2 and fluid-attenuated
inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequences of magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI). Multiplicity distribution
and other ancillary findings on MRI might help in
identifying the underlying etiology of the stroke.
This chapter discusses the application of DWI in
the diagnosis of various vascular pathologies and
their mimics.
6.2 Acute Stroke and
Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging
6.2.1 Introduction
Diagnosing hyperacute stroke or diﬀerentiating
stroke from its mimics is of vital importance for
the appropriate therapy. Two main imaging techni-
ques employed in evaluation of hyperacute stroke
include CT-CT perfusion and MR-MR perfusion.
DWI in Vascular Pathology
79

Both techniques have their own advantages and
disadvantages. CT perfusion is faster and quantita-
tive but has limitations in the diagnosis of small
stroke or lacunar infarctions. A limited MR stroke
protocol with DWI and FLAIR sequences can diag-
nose territorial and lacunar infarcts and their
mimics and thus provide the vital information
needed for the clinicians.
Pathophysiology of Stroke
Brain damage after infarction is caused by a ple-
thora of complex mechanisms that lead to the
accumulation of toxic metabolites causing cellular
and architectural damage of brain parenchyma.
Within minutes of vascular occlusion, an ischemic
cascade begins that includes energy and sodium-
potassium pump failure, an increase in intracellu-
lar calcium, depolarization, spreading depression,
generation of free radicals, disruption of the
blood–brain
barrier
(BBB),
inflammation,
and
apoptosis.1 These events may not occur strictly in
order and can show overlap.
Pump Failures and Metabolic
Changes
Cerebral blood flow (CBF) of < 10 mL/100 g of brain
tissue causes severe depletion of oxygen and glu-
cose, leading to a severe decrease in adenosine tri-
phosphate (ATP) at the cellular level. This decrease
in ATP leads to the failure of the sodium-potassium
pump. This failure causes passive diﬀusion of Na+
ions inside the cells along with large amounts of
fluid. This causes a decrease in the extracellular
fluid volume and a decrease in the brownian
motion, which is the underlying principle behind
DWI imaging in stroke2,3 (▶Fig. 6.1).
Depolarization of the cells leads to a large
release of excitotoxic amino acids, especially gluta-
mate, into the extracellular compartment. In addi-
tion to having primary neurotoxicity, glutamate
also causes activation of glutamate receptors, such
as
N-methyl-d-aspartate
(NMDA),
α-amino-3-
hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole
propionate
acid
receptor (AMPA), metabotropic glutamate, recep-
tor-operated
channels,
voltage-gated
calcium
Fig. 6.1 Schematic illustration of sodium-potassium (Na-K) pump failure. The white dotted box shows normal Na-K
pump function across the cell membrane. Decrease in adenosine triphosphate (ATP) at the cellular level causes failure of
the sodium-potassium-ATP pump, which causes passive diffusion of Na and H2O inside the cell, leading to intracellular
(cytotoxic) edema. A higher level of extracellular K causes depolarization. ADP adenosine diphosphate.
DWI in Vascular Pathology
80

channels, and store-operated channels, leading to
a large influx of Ca2 + into the cells2,3 (▶Fig. 6.2). A
high concentration of intracellular Ca2 + is toxic
and leads to irreversible mitochondrial damage,
inflammation, necrosis, and apoptosis. Oxygen
radicals
(superoxide
[O2–],
hydrogen
peroxide
[H2O2], and hydroxyl radicals [−OH]) produced
during the process lead to lipid peroxidation mem-
brane damage, dysregulation of cellular processes,
promotion of tissue injury, and disruption of the
cellular powerhouse (mitochondrial membranes),
leading to mitochondrial burst and cell death.4,5
The combination of hypoxic damage to the vascu-
lar endothelium, toxic damage of inflammatory
molecules and free radicals, and destruction of the
basal lamina by mitochondrial membrane permea-
bilization (MMP) damages the BBB. Proteolysis of
the neurovascular matrix leading to disruption of
the BBB is mainly seen after reperfusion. This
destruction of the BBB leads to vasogenic edema,
inflammation, and hemorrhagic transformation.4,6
Cell Death
Three fundamental mechanisms6 leading to cell
death during ischemic brain injury include excito-
toxicity and ionic imbalance, oxidative and nitro-
sative stresses, and apoptotic-like cell death. These
mechanisms have some overlap. Excitotoxicity and
ionic imbalance and oxidative and nitrosative
stresses lead to the loss of membrane integrity;
organelle
failure;
and,
eventually,
coagulation
necrosis, the most prominent mechanism of cell
death in the central core.6,7 Selective cell death is a
well-identified phenomenon after cerebral infarc-
tion. Neurons and oligodendrocytes are more vul-
nerable to cell death than astroglial or endothelial
cells.4,6 Capillary endothelium is quite resistant
compared with other central nervous system
(CNS) cells, and damage to capillary endothelium
begins 4 to 6 hours after infarction. Disruption of
the capillary endothelium leads to a break in the
BBB.
Fig. 6.2 Schematic illustration of calcium pump failure. The white dotted box shows normal calcium–magnesium (Ca-
Mg) pump function across the cell membrane. Depolarization of the cell after infarction leads to a release of glutamate,
which, in turn, leads to the opening of Ca channels and thus a large influx of Ca inside the cell. Higher levels of
intracellular Ca cause mitochondrial damage and cellular rupture. ATP, adenosine triphosphate; ADP, adenosine
diphosphate.
DWI in Vascular Pathology
81

6.2.2 Large Vessel Acute Stroke
and Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging
Evolutionary Changes
Hyperacute Stage: Less Than 12
Hours
With the advent of intravenous and intra-arterial
thrombolytic therapy for stroke, the definition of
hyperacute stroke has gained significant impor-
tance. As described under pathogenesis, multiple
events take place within the infarcted and sur-
rounding parenchyma at the cellular level. Imaging
findings in this stage are mainly due to diagnoses
of cytotoxic edema by DWI–ADC and of thrombus
within the vessels. DWI has revolutionized the
imaging of stroke by identifying cytotoxic edema
within minutes of stroke.8,9 Normally there is free
motion of molecules within the extracellular space
(brownian motion)8,9 (▶Fig. 6.3a). A decrease in
ATP, failure of the sodium-potassium-ATPase, and
anoxic depolarization lead to an intracellular shift
of fluid, causing cell swelling (cytotoxic edema)
and
contraction
of
the
extracellular
space
(▶Fig. 6.3b). These changes cause a decrease in
brownian motion, which is seen on the DWI
sequence as restricted diﬀusion. Cytotoxic edema
is seen within minutes to hours on DWI with sen-
sitivity and specificity of 88 to 100% and 86 to
100%, respectively.9,10 The regional decrease of
diﬀusion is visible as hyperintensity on DWI
images and as hypointensity on quantitative maps
of the ADC (▶Fig. 6.3c).
The term operationally defined penumbra is used
to describe the volume of tissue contained within
the region of cerebral blood flow-cerebral blood
volume (CBF-CBV) mismatch on perfusion CT
maps and of CBF–DWI mismatch on perfusion MRI
maps. The region of CT–CBV or MR–DWI abnor-
mality represents the core of infarcted tissue, and
the CBF–CBV mismatch on CT and CBF–DWI mis-
match on MRI represents the surrounding region
of tissue that is hypoperfused but salvageable (pe-
numbra) (▶Fig. 6.4).
Acute Stage: 12 to 24 Hours
During the acute stage, there are further increases
in cytotoxic edema and intracellular Ca2 +. Activa-
tion of a wide range of enzyme systems (proteases,
lipases, and nucleases) and production of oxygen-
free radicals leads to damage of cell membranes,
DNA, and structural neuronal proteins, ultimately
leading to cell death. Increased tissue water results
in prolongation of T1 and T2 relaxation times on
MRI. During this stage there is a combination of
cytotoxic and vasogenic edema, with dominance
of cytotoxic edema. T2 changes due to vasogenic
edema are seen around 6 to 8 hours and are more
sensitive than those on T1.
Fig. 6.3 Schematic illustrations of diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) basics. (a)
Arrows show normal brownian motion in extracellular space with normal-sized cells. (b) Failure of sodium-potassium-
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) pump leads to intracellular edema, swelling of cells (cytotoxic edema), decreased
extracellular fluid, and hence a decrease in brownian motion. (c) A large influx of Ca2 + inside the cells leads to
mitochondrial damage and cellular wall disruption, which, in turn, leads to cell rupture and increase in extracellular fluid
(vasogenic edema).
DWI in Vascular Pathology
82

Subacute Stage: 2 Days to 2 Weeks
Because of a breakdown in the BBB and rupture of
swollen cells, there is an increase in extracellular
fluid (i.e., vasogenic edema) (▶Fig. 6.5). This takes
about 18 to 24 hours to develop and reaches a
maximum by 48 to 72 hours. In this phase, imag-
ing shows increased edema, mass eﬀect, and pos-
sible
herniation,
depending
on
the
size
and
location of the infarct. Gyral and parenchymal en-
hancement may be seen on contrast-enhanced T1-
weighted imaging and is maximal at the end of the
first
week. Note that signal intensity in the
infarcted area remains increased on DWI for
almost 1 week and decreases thereafter, whereas
reduced ADC values peak around 3 to 5 days,
increase thereafter, and return to normal by 1 to 4
weeks.8,9
Chronic Stage: 2 Weeks to 2 Months
The chronic stage begins with restoration of the
BBB, resolution of vasogenic edema, and the clear-
ing up of necrotic tissue. Pathologically and on
imaging, this phase is characterized by local brain
atrophy, gliosis, cavity formation, and ex vacuo
dilatation of the adjacent ventricle.9 DWI can show
changes of encephalomalacia with hypointensity
in the infarcted area. ADC shows increased signal
intensity and prominence of convexity sulci due to
loss of parenchyma. Calcification and deposition of
blood products (hemosiderin) may be seen on T2
and gradient-recalled echo (GRE) sequences.
6.2.3 Time Course of Diﬀusion
Changes in Acute Stroke
Decreased diﬀusion in ischemic brain tissue is
observed as early as 30 minutes after vascular
occlusion10 (▶Fig. 6.6 and ▶Fig. 6.7). This decrease
in diﬀusion is markedly hyperintense on DWI and
hypointense on ADC images. The ADC continues to
decrease with peak signal reduction at 1 to 4 days
(▶Fig. 6.8a,b). The ADC returns to baseline at 1 to
2 weeks. As the vasogenic edema peaks up, the
infarcted area remains mildly hyperintense on the
DWI images, due to the T2 component, and isoin-
tense on
the
ADC
images (▶Fig.
6.8c,d
and
▶Fig. 6.9). The ADC is elevated secondary to
increased extracellular water, tissue cavitation,
and gliosis.
Fig. 6.4 Diffusion perfusion mismatch in a hyperacute stroke in a 56-year-old man. Axial diffusion weighted image (a)
shows an area of restricted diffusion in the left frontal lobe (curved arrow). Cerebral blood flow (CBF) image (b) from
perfusion magnetic resonance imaging shows an area of decreased perfusion in the corresponding region (arrow),
which is smaller than the diffusion defect, suggestive of penumbra. Penumbra = diffusion weighted imaging defect –
CBF. There is viable tissue, and the patient will benefit from thrombolytic therapy.
DWI in Vascular Pathology
83

The time course is influenced by a number of
factors, including size of the infarct, infarct type,
therapy administered, and patient age. Minimum
ADC is reached more slowly and the transition
from decreasing to increasing ADC is later in lacu-
nar infarctions as compared to large strokes. Early
reperfusion causes pseudonormalization as early
as 1 to 2 days in humans who receive intravenous
recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rtPA)
within 3 hours after stroke onset.
6.2.4 Hemorrhagic
Transformation Prediction and
Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging
Hemorrhagic transformation (HT) refers to hemor-
rhage in an infarcted area. The incidence of HT
varies greatly between 10 and 43% (mean 18%)11
and is highest during the subacute stage. The
severity of hemorrhage may range from a few
petechiae to a large hematoma with mass eﬀect.
Predisposing factors include stroke etiology (HT is
more frequent with embolic strokes), reperfusion,
good collateral circulation, hypertension, anticoa-
gulant therapy, and thrombolytic therapy. HT is
thought to be due to a combination of vascular
injury,
reperfusion,
and
altered
permeability.
There is alteration in the integrins and disruption
of basal lamina, collagen IV, and laminin by free
radicals and matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs).6,
12,13 Exposure of this disrupted endothelium to
the normal vascular pressure after clot lysis leads
to reperfusion injury and extravasation of blood.
HT is two to three times more likely in patients
treated with thrombolysis. Although CT is com-
monly used for follow-up of stroke, MRI, espe-
cially susceptibility-weighted images (SWI) and
GRE imaging, is very sensitive in the diagnosis of
early HT (▶Fig. 6.10).
Because ADC values can mark the severity and
extent of ischemia, they may be useful in predict-
ing HT. Selim et al14 documented that the absolute
number of voxels with ADC value ≤550 × 10–6
mm2/s correlated with HT of infarctions treated
with intravenous tissue plasminogen activator
(tPA). Oppenheim et al15 demonstrated 100%
sensitivity and 71% specificity for predicting
hemorrhagic transformation when they divided
infarcts into those where the mean ADC value of
the infarct core was < 300 × 10-6 mm2/s versus
those where the mean ADC value of the infarct
core
was
300 × 10–6
mm2/s.
Other
imaging
parameters predictive of HT include hypodensity
in greater than one-third of the middle cerebral
artery (MCA) territory on CT, early parenchymal
enhancement on gadolinium-enhanced MRI, CBF
ratio < 0.18 on MR perfusion imaging, and micro-
bleeds detected on T2* gradient echo on initial
study.
6.2.5 Reliability of Diﬀusion
Weighted Imaging in Imaging of
Stroke
It is an undisputed fact that DWI has revolution-
ized the imaging of stroke. For routine CT and
conventional MRI (without diﬀusion imaging),
sensitivity would largely depend on the time of
imaging. For infarctions imaged within 6 hours
after stroke onset, reported sensitivities are 38 to
45% for CT and 18 to 46% for MRI.10,16 This would
be significantly higher, 58% for CT and 82% for MRI,
when imaged within 6 to 24 hours. DWI is highly
sensitive and specific in the detection of hyper-
acute
and
acute
infarctions,
with
sensitivity
Fig. 6.5 Vasogenic edema in subacute infarction in a
71-year-old woman. An unenhanced computed tomo-
graphic scan of the brain shows a large hypodensity in
the right middle cerebral artery (MCA) territory with
loss of gray matter–white matter differentiation and
effacement of convexity sulci with mass effect on
surrounding brain parenchyma and the ipsilateral lateral
ventricle.
DWI in Vascular Pathology
84

ranging from 88 to 100% and specificity between
86 and 100%.17
Most false-negative DWI images are seen with
punctate lacunar brainstem or deep gray nuclei
infarctions, especially under the background of
chronic microangiopathic changes. False-positive
DWI is seen mostly due to the T2 shine-through
eﬀect in subacute or chronic infarction. However,
interpreting DWIs along with ADC maps can
avoid this pitfall. False-positive DWI may also be
seen with other pathologies with restricted dif-
fusion, such as cerebritis/abscess, highly cellular
neoplasms,
venous
infarctions,
demyelinating
lesions, hemorrhage, herpes encephalitis, and
diﬀuse axonal injury. These lesions are discussed
in detail in the Vascular Lesion Mimics section of
this chapter. When these lesions are reviewed in
combination with routine T1, FLAIR, T2, and
gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted images, they
are
usually readily diﬀerentiated from
acute
infarctions.
6.2.6 Watershed Infarction
Watershed infarctions are seen at the junction of
the distal fields of the two major vascular territo-
ries.11 Watershed infarctions may be cortical/
external or subcortical/internal infarcts.18 Anterior
cortical watershed infarcts are between the anteri-
or cerebral artery (ACA) and MCA territories,
whereas posterior watershed infarctions develop
between the ACA, MCA, and posterior cerebral
artery junctional zones (▶Fig. 6.11). On the basis
of imaging, internal watershed infarcts can be fur-
ther classified into confluent internal watershed
infarction or partial internal watershed infarction.
Confluent internal watershed infarctions are con-
fluent lesions running parallel to the lateral ven-
tricle
(▶Fig.
6.12).
These lesions
are
usually
unilateral, are due to extensive involvement of
white matter, and typically present with stepwise
onset of contralateral hemiplegia with poor recov-
ery. Partial internal watershed infarction appears
Fig. 6.6 Time course of diffusion evolution in acute stroke. The graph shows signal intensity changes in the diffusion
and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) in respect to time in an infarcted area. Changes in diffusion weighted imaging
(DWI) and ADC appear within 30 minutes of infarction. Decreased ADC values peak up between 2 and 4 days, become
isointense between 9 and 11 days, and then become hyperintense by 12 to 14 days. Hyperintensity in the DWI is seen at
maximum between 2 and 6 days. This hyperintensity remains for 8 to 10 days and then becomes iso- to hypointense by
12 to 14 days.
DWI in Vascular Pathology
85

Fig. 6.7 A 47-year-old man with acute neurological deficit. (a) Unenhanced computed tomography performed within 4
hours of onset of symptoms does not show any abnormality. Magnetic resonance imaging performed within 5 hours of
deficit shows an area of restricted diffusion in the left hippocampus on (b) axial diffusion weighted imaging and (c)
apparent diffusion coefficient map. There was no corresponding abnormality seen on (d) axial T2-weighted image.
DWI in Vascular Pathology
86

Fig. 6.8
Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) time course of stroke evolution in four different patients as seen in ADC
maps. (a) At 24 hours, hypointensity (arrow) in the right deep gray matter nuclei due to hyperacute stroke. (b) At 3
days, pronounced ADC hypointensity (arrow) secondary to increased cytotoxic edema. (c) In a 10-day-old left Posterior
Cerebral Artery (PCA) infarction (arrow), ADC is almost isointense secondary to a decrease in the cytotoxic edema, cell
lysis, and development of vasogenic edema. (d) At 12 months, ADC shows hyperintensity in the left stroke (arrow)
secondary to the development of gliosis and tissue cavitation.
DWI in Vascular Pathology
87

as a single or multiple discrete rounded lesions in
the same distribution as a confluent internal
watershed infarction and usually presents as epi-
sodes of brachiofacial sensory and motor deficit
with good recovery.18 Although rare, watershed
infarctions can also be seen in the posterior fossa
between the superior cerebellar artery and the
posteroinferior cerebellar artery (PICA) or between
Fig. 6.9 Time course of types of edema in acute stroke. The graph shows the appearance of the cytotoxic edema in a
hyperacute stroke within 30 minutes, which peaks within 2 to 3 hours. Vasogenic edema (interstitial) may appear by 2 to
3 hours but peaks at 6 to 10 days.
Fig. 6.10
Hemorrhagic transformation of acute right middle cerebral artery (MCA) stroke. Axial (a) diffusion weighted
imaging and (b) apparent diffusion coefficient map show a large acute stroke in the right MCA territory. (c)
Susceptibility-weighted imaging shows hypointensities (arrow) within the infarcted area due to hemorrhagic
transformation.
DWI in Vascular Pathology
88

PICA, superior cerebellar artery, and anteroinferior
cerebellar artery territories.
The
pathogenesis
of
watershed
infarction
remains debatable and is thought to be multifacto-
rial. Cortical watershed infarcts are thought to be
the result of microembolization, either from caro-
tid artery atherosclerosis or vulnerable plaque or
from artery-to-artery emboli precipitated by an
episode of systemic arterial hypotension. Internal
watershed infarcts are caused by a combination of
hypoperfusion of the internal border zone, severe
carotid disease, and a hemodynamic event. It
occurs at junctions between the white matter per-
forating arteries (e.g., lenticulostriate) and the
major cerebral arteries.
In acute events, DWI is very sensitive for the
diagnosis of both cortical watershed infarct and
internal
watershed
infarct.
Classically
cortical
watershed infarcts appear as fan- or wedge-
shaped hyperintensities extending from the lateral
margins of the lateral ventricle toward the cortex
(see ▶Fig. 6.11). Complete internal border zone
infarcts produce confluent, elongated, deep white
matter lesions (see ▶Fig. 6.12), whereas partial
infarction is characterized by a “string of beads”
appearance.
6.2.7 Lacunar Infarct
Lacunae are small-vessel deep infarcts < 1.5cm,11
which represent 20 to 25% of all strokes. Initially
they were thought to be due to intrinsic disease of
the small vessels, called lipohyalinosis, resulting
from hypertension and diabetes. However, now they
are thought to be the result of focal ischemic infarcts
caused by thrombi or emboli composed of platelets
or fibrin (often with incorporated red blood cells),
in a background of diﬀuse atherosclerotic narrowing
of small vessels.19 Ipsilateral high-grade carotid
stenosis and aortic arch atheroma have been shown
to be risk factors for lacunar stroke.
Asymptomatic (“silent”) lacunar infarcts are at
least five times more common than symptomatic
infarcts.19 When symptomatic, lacunar infarcts
may present with classic lacunar syndromes: pure
motor stroke, pure sensory stroke, sensorimotor
stroke, ataxic hemiparesis, and dysarthria. It is
important to diagnose lacunae because many
Fig. 6.11 Cortical watershed infarcts. (a) Axial diffusion weighted imaging and (b) apparent diffusion coefficient map
show wedge-shaped lesions that restrict diffusion in regions between major arterial vascular territories. Note the
characteristic appearance and distribution of infarcts in the anterior cerebral artery–middle cerebral artery watershed
(top arrows) and in the middle cerebral artery–posterior cerebral artery watershed (bottom arrows).
DWI in Vascular Pathology
89

neurologists believe that patients with lacunar
infarcts need further workup to evaluate for the
source of thrombi. Conventional MRI does not reli-
ably identify the acute lacunar infarction related to
the clinical symptoms because many patients with
lacunar infarctions have preexisting chronic white
matter lesions with signal characteristics that do
not diﬀer from those of acute lesions. DWI is more
sensitive than CT and T2-weighted MRI for the
diagnosis of acute lacunar infarctions.11,19 The sen-
sitivity and specificity of DWI for the diagnosis of
acute lacunar infarction are 94.9% and 94.1%,
respectively. Acute lacunae show focal areas of
restricted diﬀusion on DWI (▶Fig. 6.13), most
commonly in the deep white matter, whereas
chronic lacunae are hyperintense on T2-weighted
and FLAIR images. A common diﬀerential diagnosis
includes prominent Virchow–Robin spaces, which
follow cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) signal on all MRI
sequences.
6.2.8 Isolated Punctate Cortical
Infarctions
Small cortical infarctions may cause monoparesis
and other symptoms limited to a single limb. They
may occur in the motor or sensory strips but may
also involve any part of the cortex, leading to vari-
ous clinical syndromes. T2-weighted images are
limited by their inability to outline lesions neigh-
boring the CSF. Even when they are identified on
conventional images, such as T2 or FLAIR sequen-
ces, linkage of these small dots to the clinical
syndrome is diﬃcult because successful diﬀeren-
tiation between acute and chronic lesions cannot
be made reliably. Bright cortical dots on DWI indi-
cate
isolated
punctate
cortical
infarctions
(▶Fig. 6.14). From the clinical point of view,
monoparesis and other symptoms limited to a sin-
gle limb are the best, perhaps the only, indicator of
isolated cortical infarctions.
6.2.9 Transient Ischemic Attack
TIA is defined as a sudden, focal neurological defi-
cit due to focal brain or retinal ischemia that com-
pletely resolves within 24 hours. This time limit is
somewhat arbitrary, and in actual clinical practice
the usual duration is < 2 to 3 hours and often only
5 to 10 minutes. It is important to diagnose TIAs
because the short-term risk of stroke following
TIAs is greatest within the first 48 hours (5.3%).20,
Fig. 6.12
Internal watershed zone infarcts. (a) Axial diffusion weighted imaging and (b) apparent diffusion coefficient
maps showing elongated deep white matter lesions which restrict diffusion, consistent with internal border zone
infarcts. Note the difference in appearance between internal watershed infarcts (straight arrows) and the wedge-shaped
appearance of cortical watershed infarcts (curved arrows).
DWI in Vascular Pathology
90

Fig. 6.13
Lacunar infarct. (a) Axial T2-weighted imaging, (b) diffusion weighted imaging (DWI), and (c) apparent
diffusion coefficient (ADC) map. Periventricular white matter hyperintensities on (a) T2-weighted imaging (white
arrowheads) may be mistaken for chronic microvascular changes or Virchow–Robin spaces. DWI (b) and ADC map (c)
show acute lesions (arrow) that may be obscured by chronic changes, especially in locations where benign findings are
typical. DWI thus increases sensitivity and specificity of the diagnosis of lacunar infarcts.
Fig. 6.14
Isolated punctate cortical infarction. (a) Axial T2-weighted imaging (arrow) and (b) diffusion weighted
imaging (DWI) (arrowhead) show a focal region of restricted diffusion in the postcentral gyrus. This lesion is very
difficult to appreciate on T2-weighted imaging and may be mistaken for prominent sulci. The etiology is difficult to
pinpoint in the absence of the DWI sequence. Restricted diffusion, together with the clinical picture, can help solidify
the diagnosis.
DWI in Vascular Pathology
91

21 Up to 20% of TIA patients may suﬀer stroke
within 3 months.20,21 TIA patients with DWI
lesions have a higher stroke risk than DWI-nega-
tive TIA patients, thus underscoring the impor-
tance of DWI–ADC imaging in evaluation of TIA
patients.
Imaging plays an important role because 45 to
62% of referrals to TIA clinics are nonvascular
mimics.22 Because of its sensitivity for tiny ische-
mic lesions, DWI remains the sequence of choice
for diagnosis of TIA. The demonstration of these
punctate lesions on DWI supports the ischemic
pathophysiology of TIA. DWI helps improve diag-
nosis of TIA and predict short-term stroke risk.
Hyperintense lesions, consistent with small infarc-
tions, usually < 15 mm in size, in the clinically
appropriate vascular territory, are seen in 21 to
48% of patients with TIAs.23 Twenty percent of
these lesions may not be seen at follow-up. This
could be either due to reversibility or to lesions
being too small to see on follow-up conventional
MRI due to atrophy. The positivity of the DWI find-
ings largely depends on the clinical presentation.
The incidence of having DWI-positive lesions is
higher in patients with symptoms lasting between
12 and 24 hours. Also, symptoms such as dyspha-
sia, dysarthria, or motor weakness in the context
of atrial fibrillation or carotid stenosis are associ-
ated with a higher likelihood of DWI lesions.
6.2.10 Capillary Leak Syndromes
Due to its role in diﬀerentiating vasogenic from
cytotoxic edema, DWI plays an important role in
the evaluation of capillary leak syndrome. Con-
trary to cytotoxic edema, vasogenic edema is
hyperintense on ADC maps and shows iso- to
hypointensity on DWI.
Posterior Reversible Encephalopathy
Syndrome
Clinically,
posterior
reversible
encephalopathy
syndrome (PRES) typically presents with head-
aches, decreased alertness, altered mental status,
seizures, and visual loss, including cortical blind-
ness. Symptoms may develop over several days or
may present as an acute encephalopathy.
The exact cause of PRES is not yet understood.
Hypertension with loss of cerebral autoregulation
and capillary leakage remains a popular theory for
the development of cerebral edema. Alternatively,
endothelial dysfunction/injury, hypoperfusion, and
vasoconstriction may lead to altered integrity of
the BBB, leading to extravasation of fluid and the
development of vasogenic edema. In 70 to 80% of
patients,
moderate-to-severe
hypertension
is
observed, whereas blood pressure may be normal
to mildly elevated in 20 to 30% of patients.24 PRES
may be seen in a variety of other clinical entities,
such
as
treatment
with
immunosuppressive
agents (e.g., cyclosporin and tacrolimus), treat-
ment with chemotherapeutic agents (e.g., intra-
thecal
methotrexate,
cisplatin,
and
interferon
alpha), and hematologic disorders (e.g., hemolytic
uremic syndrome, thrombotic thrombocytopenic
purpura,
acute
intermittent
porphyria,
and
cryoglobulinemia).
The
posterior
circulation
predominance
is
thought to be more prone to PRES due to less pro-
tective (vasoconstrictive) sympathetic innervation
compared to the anterior circulation. Imaging with
CT and MR may show either focal or holohemi-
spheric edema. T2- and FLAIR-weighted sequences
typically demonstrate bilateral symmetric hyper-
intensity and swelling in subcortical white matter
and overlying cortex in the occipital, parietal, and
posterior temporal lobes as well as the posterior
fossa. Patchy areas of vasogenic edema may also be
seen in the basal ganglia, brainstem, and deep
white matter. Cytotoxic edema may be seen in 11
to 26% and may be associated with adverse out-
comes25 (▶Fig. 6.15). Types of edema in PRES can
be diﬀerentiated using DWI and FLAIR sequences.
Vasogenic edema is thought to be due to excessive
hypertension, leading to hyperperfusion and sub-
sequent vasogenic edema in susceptible vessels.
Cytotoxic edema is thought to be due to systemic
proinflammatory processes (elevated cytokines
such as interleukin [IL]-1, IL-6, interferon-α, and
tumor necrosis factor), vasospasm, and microin-
farctions. Hemorrhage (focal hematoma, or subar-
achnoid hemorrhage) is seen in approximately
15% of patients.
Hyperperfusion Syndrome following
Carotid Endarterectomy
Hyperperfusion syndrome is thought to be similar
to PRES, due to increased pressure leading to dam-
age of endothelial tight junctions, capillary leak,
and development of vasogenic edema. Following
carotid endarterectomy, patients may present with
seizures with or without focal neurological deficits
mimicking a stroke.26,27 On MRI, T2-weighted
images demonstrate hyperintensity in the frontal
and parietal cortex and subcortical white matter
that may mimic arterial infarction. However, DWI
DWI in Vascular Pathology
92

does not show any areas of restricted diﬀusion.
There may be peripheral cytotoxic edema due to
mass eﬀect and capillary compression.26,27 Rarely
there may be cytotoxic edema in the whole lesion.
However, perfusion studies show increased rather
than diminished flow-related enhancement in the
ipsilateral MCA.
6.2.11 Venous Infarction
Cerebral venous thrombosis (CVT) accounts for
0.5% of all strokes.28 Clinical presentation of CVT is
nonspecific (headache, seizures, vomiting, focal
deficit, and papilledema). Predisposing factors for
CVT include protein C and S deficiencies; malig-
nancies; pregnancy; medications such as oral con-
traceptives, steroids, and hormone replacement
therapy;
collagen
vascular
diseases;
infection;
trauma; surgery; and immobilization. For early
diagnosis of CVT, a high index of clinical suspicion
with the use of appropriate imaging (MRI, MR
venography, and CT venography) is a must.
The pathophysiology of venous infarction is
multifactorial. It is mainly caused by pressure
changes within the vascular tree.28,29,30 Venous
flow obstruction causes back pressure leading to a
decrease in CBF. This decrease in CBF causes
reduced cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) that, in
turn, causes venous congestion, disruption of the
BBB, and an increase in net capillary filtration
leading to vasogenic edema. Areas of restricted dif-
fusion (cytotoxic edema) are frequently seen with-
in the infarcted region.28,30 Cytotoxic edema in
CVT is thought to be due to reduced CBF below the
penumbral level, which in turn leads to failure of
the sodium-potassium-ATP-dependent pump.
A wide spectrum of parenchymal changes may
be seen on imaging. On CT, venous infarction is
seen as diﬀuse low-attenuating subcortical lesions
adjacent to white matter with edematous overly-
ing gyri in a nonarterial distribution. On CT these
changes may mimic other pathologies, such as
encephalitis. MRI is more sensitive and more spe-
cific than CT for the diagnosis of venous infarction.
MRI shows a combination of vasogenic and cyto-
toxic edematous changes in the cortical and sub-
cortical parenchyma with areas of hemorrhage
(▶Fig. 6.16). In contrast to arterial stroke, changes
of cytotoxic edema in venous infarction are shown
to be reversible on follow-up imaging. This resolu-
tion of lesions with decreased diﬀusion has been
related to better drainage of blood through collat-
eral pathways.
Direct signs of sinus thrombosis may be identi-
fied on CT or MRI. On CT, an acute blood clot may
be seen within the dual sinus (delta sign in the
Fig. 6.15
Posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES). (a) Axial diffusion weighted imaging (arrow) and (b)
apparent diffusion coefficient map (arrows) show areas of restricted diffusion located in the gyral and subcortical white
matter due to cytotoxic edema in a patient with PRES.
DWI in Vascular Pathology
93

superior sagittal sinus), cortical veins (cord sign),
or both. The appearance of signal suggestive of
sinus thrombosis on MRI is variable and time
dependent.30 A thrombosed sinus appears isoin-
tense on T1 and hypointense on T2 during the first
3 to 5 days (due to the presence of deoxyhemoglo-
bin). Sinus thrombosis shows hyperintensity in the
subacute stage on T1 and T2 images. During the
acute
stage,
hypointense
thrombus
on
T2-
weighted images may be mistaken for normal
flow. An SWI/GRE sequence is more sensitive and
shows hypointensity within the thrombosed sinus
in the acute stage.
6.2.12 Septic Infarction
Septic infarctions are caused by infected emboli
that are most commonly due to an infected cardiac
valve, septicemia, or intravenous drug abuse. The
source is usually bacterial; however, in immuno-
compromised patients, the source can be fungal
(e.g., aspergillosis).11 Septic emboli can lead to cer-
ebrovascular occlusion causing septic infarction,
abscess, or septic aneurysm. Clinically patients
with septic infarction present with focal cerebral
or cerebellar signs that do not resolve.
Brain damage is caused by the release of inflam-
matory mediators, such as lipopolysaccharide and
endotoxin, resulting in reduced CBF and reduced
oxygen extraction, cerebral edema, disruption of
the BBB, impaired astrocyte function, and neuronal
death.31 On imaging, hyperacute or acute septic
infarctions cannot be distinguished from bland
infarct. The late subacute stage may show increas-
ing vasogenic edema with parenchymal and lepto-
meningeal enhancement.11 There may be changes
of cerebritis
or
abscess formation
that show
restricted diﬀusion on DWI. Enhancing mycotic
aneurysms may be seen within the infarcted bed.
6.3 Vascular Lesion Mimics on
Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging
A number of nonvascular conditions may show
decreased diﬀusion, which may mimic infarctions
or vascular pathologies. The most common clini-
cally encountered entities include acute demyeli-
nating lesions with decreased diﬀusion due to
myelin vacuolization; some products of hemor-
rhage (oxyhemoglobin and extracellular methe-
moglobin); herpes encephalitis with decreased
diﬀusion
due
to
cytotoxic
edema
from
cell
necrosis; diﬀuse axonal injury with decreased dif-
fusion due to cytotoxic edema or axotomy with
retraction ball formation; abscess with decreased
diﬀusion due to the high viscosity of pus; tumors,
such as lymphoma and small round cell tumors,
with decreased diﬀusion due to dense cell pack-
ing; and Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease with decreased
Fig. 6.16
Venous infarction. (a) Apparent diffusion coefficient map shows hypointensity (arrow), due to restricted
diffusion, in the left frontal lobe due to venous infarction. (b) Magnetic resonance venography shows a loss of flow
signal in the superior sagittal sinus (arrowheads).
DWI in Vascular Pathology
94

diﬀusion from myelin vacuolization. When these
lesions are reviewed in combination with routine
T1-, FLAIR-, T2-, and gadolinium-enhanced T1-
weighted images, they are usually readily diﬀeren-
tiated from acute infarctions. However, occasional-
ly diﬀusion and conventional imaging cannot
distinguish between the mimics and stroke, and in
such cases molecular imaging techniques, such as
MR spectroscopy, perfusion, and DTI, and further
follow-up studies are useful.
6.3.1 Infection: Herpes
Encephalitis
Herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE) is one of the
most common cerebral viral infections. The clinical
presentation of acute encephalitis is nonspecific.
Typical T2 hyperintensity in the temporal and
frontal localization with petechial hemorrhage are
characteristic MR findings.32 In the acute stage of
HSE due to marked perivascular cuﬃng with
inflammatory cells, part of the lesion may show
restricted diﬀusion due to cytotoxic edema. The
DWI appearance may mimic a subacute infarct
(▶Fig. 6.17). DWI sequences are found to be signif-
icantly better for lesion conspicuity in comparison
to T2-weighted sequences and are slightly better
than FLAIR sequences. Areas of cytotoxic edema
correspond to a worse outcome compared to areas
of vasogenic edema. In the chronic stages there is
neuronal death and necrosis, and lesions are less
conspicuous on DWI than T2-weighted images or
FLAIR.
6.3.2 Metabolic Hypoglycemia
Hypoglycemia can present with diverse neurologi-
cal manifestations ranging from focal neurological
deficits to permanent dysfunction. Pathological
changes are mainly seen in the cerebral cortex,
hippocampus, and basal ganglia.33,34 In the acute
phase these areas may show restricted diﬀusion,
which is thought to be due to energy failure, exci-
totoxic edema, and asymmetric CBF. DWI changes
are usually transitory, and abnormalities normal-
ize with time or following removal of the causative
pathological factors. Unlike with hypoxic damage,
the occipital cortex, dorsofrontal cortex, and hip-
pocampus are less frequently involved.
6.3.3 Tumor: Lymphoma
Cerebral lymphomas are hypercellular tumors con-
sisting of large lymphoid cells. On T2-weighted
images, lesions are slightly hyperintense compared
to normal brain tissue with ring-shaped or diﬀuse
enhancement. Tightly packed cells change the
composition and microarchitecture of cerebral tis-
sue leading to a decrease in extracellular water
and resultant restriction in diﬀusion. The ADC val-
ues of the primary CNS lymphomas may be lower
than the surrounding brain parenchyma, mimick-
ing acute infarct (▶Fig. 6.18). The key imaging
findings to diﬀerentiate CNS lymphomas include
the
hypercellularity
sign
(low
signal
on
T2-
weighted images), large perifocal edema, contrast
enhancement, and often close contact with the
leptomeningeal and/or ependymal space.
Fig. 6.17
Restricted diffusion in herpes encephalitis. (a) Axial fluid-attenuated inversion recovery image shows
hyperintensities in a classic bilateral temporal and left frontal lobe distribution (arrows). (b) Axial diffusion weighted
imaging and (c) apparent diffusion coefficient sequences show patchy areas of restricted diffusion in the left temporal
lobe (right arrow in (b) and (c)) and right insular cortex (left arrow in (b)) due to cytotoxic edema from perivascular
cuffing and inflammation.
DWI in Vascular Pathology
95

6.3.4 Multiple Sclerosis
Multiple sclerosis is an inflammatory demyelinat-
ing disorder that may clinically mimic stroke. In
the acute phase, patients may present with sud-
den-onset aphasia, dysarthria, hemiplegia, or hem-
isensory deficits. Diagnosis is easy when the
typical MRI findings of multiple periventricular,
deep, and juxtacortical hyperintensities are seen
on T2-weighted or FLAIR images. Many of these
patients can be accurately diagnosed by consider-
ing the patient history, clinical findings, associated
MRI findings, and CSF examination for oligoclonal
bands. However, acute demyelinating lesions may
show prominent restricted diﬀusion that could be
confused with acute ischemia/lacunar infarction35
(▶Fig. 6.19). In such cases, a combination of clini-
cal features and short-term follow-up imaging
allows accurate diagnosis.
6.3.5 Transient Global Amnesia
Transient global amnesia (TGA) is a clinical syndro-
me characterized by the sudden onset of profound
memory impairment resulting in both retrograde
and anterograde amnesia, without other neurolog-
ical deficits.36,37 The symptoms typically resolve in
3 to 4 hours. Clinically, TGA needs to be diﬀerenti-
ated from stroke or TIA. The majority of these
patients are negative on imaging. However, num-
bers of studies have reported punctate or diﬀuse
lesions with decreased diﬀusion in the medial
hippocampus, the parahippocampal gyrus, and the
splenium of the corpus callosum that resolved on
follow-up imaging.36,37 Lesions measure 1 to 3 mm
in size and are most often unilateral. It is currently
unclear whether the TGA patients with DWI
abnormalities have a diﬀerent prognosis or a dif-
ferent
etiologic
mechanism,
or
whether
they
should be managed diﬀerently compared to TGA
patients without DWI abnormalities.
6.4 Summary
DWI uses the principle of brownian motion to
evaluate dynamic microstructural tissue proper-
ties in an eﬀort to help characterize vascular path-
ology. DWI is useful in the diagnosis of hyperacute
stroke
because
it
can
reflect
the
immediate
changes that begin upon failure of cellular mecha-
nisms to regulate intra- and extracellular fluid vol-
umes and result in subtle biochemical changes not
readily apparent on other MRI sequences. This in
turn can facilitate more rapid treatment decisions
with greater certainty in the setting of acute
stroke. The information obtained from DWI and
ADC sequences can also help predict various other
vascular pathologies, such as watershed and lacu-
nar infarcts, cerebral hyperperfusion, and venous
infarction, with increased accuracy and precision.
DWI and ADC must be used in the context of the
clinical picture and other available imaging; how-
ever, vascular mimics, such as infection, tumor,
Fig. 6.18
Primary central nervous system (CNS) lymphoma mimicking acute infarct. (a) Axial diffusion weighted
imaging and (b) apparent diffusion coefficient map in a patient with primary CNS lymphoma show a region of restricted
diffusion in the right periventricular white matter due to hypercellularity of the tumor. (arrow in (a) and (b)) (c)
Contrast-enhanced T1-weighted image shows intense enhancement of the periventricular mass (arrow) with
surrounding hypointense vasogenic edema (curved arrow).
DWI in Vascular Pathology
96

demyelinating lesions, and metabolic abnormal-
ities, can be confused for vascular infarcts if appro-
priate context is not taken into account. The
addition of DWI and ADC provides a valuable tool
in the expeditious diagnosis of cerebral vascular
infarcts and helps complement previous technol-
ogy
in
the
management
of
various
cerebral
pathologies.
References
[1] Durukan A, Tatlisumak T. Acute ischemic stroke: overview
of major experimental rodent models, pathophysiology, and
therapy of focal cerebral ischemia. Pharmacol Biochem
Behav 2007; 87(1): 179–197
[2] Mergenthaler P, Dirnagl U, Meisel A. Pathophysiology of
stroke: lessons from animal models. Metab Brain Dis 2004;
19(3–4): 151–167
[3] Dirnagl U, Iadecola C, Moskowitz MA. Pathobiology of
ischaemic stroke: an integrated view. Trends Neurosci 1999;
22(9): 391–397
[4] Chan PH. Reactive oxygen radicals in signaling and damage
in the ischemic brain. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 2001; 21
(1): 2–14
[5] Fiskum G. Mitochondrial participation in ischemic and trau-
matic neural cell death. J Neurotrauma 2000; 17(10): 843–
855
[6] Lo EH, Dalkara T, Moskowitz MA. Mechanisms, challenges
and opportunities in stroke. Nat Rev Neurosci 2003; 4(5):
399–415
[7] Nicotera P, Leist M, Fava E, Berliocchi L, Volbracht C. Energy
requirement for caspase activation and neuronal cell death.
Brain Pathol 2000; 10(2): 276–282
[8] Provenzale JM, Jahan R, Naidich TP, Fox AJ. Assessment of
the patient with hyperacute stroke: imaging and therapy.
Radiology 2003; 229(2): 347–359
[9] Schaefer PW, Grant PE, Gonzalez RG. Diﬀusion weighted MR
imaging of the brain. Radiology 2000; 217(2): 331–345
[10] González RG, Schaefer PW, Buonanno FS, et al. Diﬀusion
weighted MR imaging: diagnostic accuracy in patients
imaged within 6 hours of stroke symptom onset. Radiology
1999; 210(1): 155–162
[11] Marks MP. Cerebral ischemia and infarction. In: Atlas SW,
ed. Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Brain and Spine. Vol
1. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Williams & Wilkins; 2009:772–
825
[12] Montaner J, Alvarez-Sabín J, Molina C, et al. Matrix metallo-
proteinase expression after human cardioembolic stroke:
temporal profile and relation to neurological impairment.
Stroke 2001; 32(8): 1759–1766
[13] Slivka A, Pulsinelli W. Hemorrhagic complications of throm-
bolytic therapy in experimental stroke. Stroke 1987; 18(6):
1148–1156
[14] Selim M, Fink JN, Kumar S, et al. Predictors of hemorrhagic
transformation after intravenous recombinant tissue plas-
minogen activator: prognostic value of the initial apparent
diﬀusion coeﬃcient and diﬀusion weighted lesion volume.
Stroke 2002; 33(8): 2047–2052
[15] Oppenheim C, Samson Y, Dormont D, et al. DWI prediction
of symptomatic hemorrhagic transformation in acute MCA
infarct. J Neuroradiol 2002; 29(1): 6–13
[16] Mohr JP, Biller J, Hilal SK, et al. Magnetic resonance versus
computed tomographic imaging in acute stroke. Stroke
1995; 26(5): 807–812
[17] Bryan RN, Levy LM, Whitlow WD, Killian JM, Preziosi TJ,
Rosario JA. Diagnosis of acute cerebral infarction: compari-
son of CT and MR imaging. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 1991; 12
(4): 611–620
[18] Momjian-Mayor
I,
Baron
JC.
The
pathophysiology
of
watershed infarction in internal carotid artery disease:
review of cerebral perfusion studies. Stroke 2005; 36(3):
567–577
[19] Ay H, Oliveira-Filho J, Buonanno FS, et al. Diﬀusion weighted
imaging identifies a subset of lacunar infarction associated
with embolic source. Stroke 1999; 30(12): 2644–2650
[20] Eliasziw M, Kennedy J, Hill MD, Buchan AM, Barnett HJ
North American Symptomatic Carotid Endarterectomy Trial
Group. Early risk of stroke after a transient ischemic attack
Fig. 6.19 Acute demyelinating lesions mimicking acute vascular pathology. (a) Axial fluid-attenuated inversion recovery
(FLAIR) image shows classical multiple periventricular and deep white matter demyelinating plaques (arrowheads). (b)
Diffusion weighted imaging and (c) apparent diffusion coefficient map show area of restricted diffusion in an active
plaque (arrow). This lesion may be confused for a lacunar infarct. The classical distribution of lesions on FLAIR/T2-
weighted images, CSF examination, and follow-up imaging can help in clinching the diagnosis.
DWI in Vascular Pathology
97

in patients with internal carotid artery disease. CMAJ 2004;
170(7): 1105–1109
[21] Daﬀertshofer M, Mielke O, Pullwitt A, Felsenstein M, Hen-
nerici M. Transient ischemic attacks are more than “minis-
trokes”. Stroke 2004; 35(11): 2453–2458
[22] Giles MF, Rothwell PM. Substantial underestimation of the
need for outpatient services for TIA and minor stroke. Age
Ageing 2007; 36(6): 676–680
[23] Purroy F, Montaner J, Rovira A, Delgado P, Quintana M,
Alvarez-Sabín J. Higher risk of further vascular events
among transient ischemic attack patients with diﬀusion
weighted imaging acute ischemic lesions. Stroke 2004; 35
(10): 2313–2319
[24] McKinney AM, Short J, Truwit CL, et al. McKinneyAM. Poste-
rior reversible encephalopathy syndrome: incidence of
atypical regions of involvement and imaging findings. AJR
Am J Roentgenol 2007; 189(4): 904–912
[25] Donmez FY, Basaran C, Kayahan Ulu EM, Yildirim M, Coskun
M. MRI features of posterior reversible encephalopathy syn-
drome in 33 patients. J Neuroimaging 2010; 20(1): 22–28
[26] Kuroda H, Ogasawara K, Hirooka R, et al. Prediction of cere-
bral hyperperfusion after carotid endarterectomy using
middle cerebral artery signal intensity in preoperative sin-
gle-slab 3-dimensional time-of-flight magnetic resonance
angiography. Neurosurgery 2009; 64(6): 1065–1071, dis-
cussion 1071–1072
[27] Cho A-H, Suh D-C, Kim GE, et al. MRI evidence of reperfu-
sion injury associated with neurological deficits after carotid
revascularization procedures. Eur J Neurol 2009; 16(9):
1066–1069
[28] Bousser MG, Ferro JM. Cerebral venous thrombosis: an
update. Lancet Neurol 2007; 6(2): 162–170
[29] Stam J. Thrombosis of the cerebral veins and sinuses. N Engl
J Med 2005; 352(17): 1791–1798
[30] van den Bergh WM, van der Schaaf I, van Gijn J. The spec-
trum of presentations of venous infarction caused by deep
cerebral vein thrombosis. Neurology 2005; 65(2): 192–196
[31] Finelli PF, UphoﬀDF. Magnetic resonance imaging abnor-
malities with septic encephalopathy. J Neurol Neurosurg
Psychiatry 2004; 75(8): 1189–1191
[32] Bulakbasi N, Kocaoglu M. Central nervous system infections
of herpesvirus family. Neuroimaging Clin N Am 2008; 18(1):
53–84, viii
[33] Lo L, Tan ACH, Umapathi T, Lim CC. Diﬀusion weighted MR
imaging in early diagnosis and prognosis of hypoglycemia.
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2006; 27(6): 1222–1224
[34] Ma J-H, Kim Y-J, Yoo W-J, et al. MR imaging of hypoglycemic
encephalopathy: lesion distribution and prognosis predic-
tion by diﬀusion weighted imaging. Neuroradiology 2009;
51(10): 641–649
[35] Rosso C, Remy P, Creange A, Brugieres P, Cesaro P, Hosseini
H. Diﬀusion weighted MR imaging characteristics of an
acute strokelike form of multiple sclerosis. AJNR Am J Neu-
roradiol 2006; 27(5): 1006–1008
[36] Enzinger C, Thimary F, Kapeller P, et al. Transient global
amnesia: diﬀusion weighted imaging lesions and cerebro-
vascular disease. Stroke 2008; 39(8): 2219–2225
[37] Sedlaczek O, Hirsch JG, Grips E, et al. Detection of delayed
focal MR changes in the lateral hippocampus in transient
global amnesia. Neurology 2004; 62(12): 2165–2170
DWI in Vascular Pathology
98

7 Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging in the Evaluation of
Brain Tumors
Fernanda C. Rueda-Lopes, Celso Hygino da Cruz Jr., and Emerson Leandro Gasparetto
Key Points
●Diﬀusion weighted imaging is an important
tool for evaluating brain tumors and can be
used for diagnosis, follow-up, and determining
the prognosis.
●Apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcients (ADCs) are
inversely correlated with high cellularity.
●A reduced extracellular to intracellular space
ratio and a high nuclear to cytoplasm ratio are
correlated to reduced ADC.
●In atypical meningiomas there is an inverse
correlation between ADC (lower ADCs are
markers of high cellularity) and Ki-67 expres-
sion (high Ki-67 expression is a marker of high
cell proliferation).
●Primary central nervous system lymphoma
usually demonstrates restricted diﬀusion due
to its histology: the high degree of cellularity
and the high nuclear to cytoplasm ratio.
●Diﬀusion imaging sequences can be used to
assess posttreatment changes and may serve
as an early biomarker tool for predicting treat-
ment outcomes, monitoring treatment res-
ponse, and detecting recurrent cancer.
7.1 Introduction
Conventional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
has some limitations when used to evaluate brain
tumors.
Diﬀerential
diagnoses
between
cystic
lesions, primary or secondary (metastasis) brain
tumors, and glioma grading usually demand the
use of advanced MRI techniques.1,2,3,4 Diﬀusion
weighted imaging (DWI) is an important tool for
the evaluation of brain tumors. It can be used for
diagnosis, follow-up, and determining the progno-
sis. Diﬀusion tensor imaging (DTI) parameters such
as fractional anisotropy (FA), radial diﬀusivity (RD)
and axial diﬀusivity (AD) are also used for brain
tumor evaluation.2
Tumor cell density increases with tumor grade
and impedes membranes, thereby causing the
apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient (ADC) values to
decrease. Thus an inverse correlation has been
proposed between tumor cellularity and ADC
values that can be helpful to noninvasively distin-
guish low- and high-grade gliomas.3,4 Moreover,
some specific neoplasms, such as lymphoma and
medulloblastoma, have higher nucleus to cyto-
plasm ratios and are characterized by low ADC val-
ues.5,6 The location of the restricted diﬀusion (in
the central core or in the peripheral tissue) helps
to diﬀerentiate tumors from cystic lesions.1,2 ADC
may serve as a prognostic tool for patients with
neoplasm. Low ADC values before treatment corre-
late with poor survival in malignant astrocyto-
mas.3 Alternatively, low ADC values along the
surgical cavity may indicate good prognoses.7,8 In
posttreatment evaluation, diﬀerentiating between
pseudoresponse, pseudoprogression, and tumor
recurrence is critical for follow-up.8 DWI and DTI
parameters are based on water diﬀusion within
the microstructure of brain tissue and can be of
great clinical importance in the posttreatment fol-
low-up.
7.2 Clinical Applications
7.2.1 Diﬀerentiation between
Cystic Brain Lesions
Glioblastoma multiforme, cystic/necrotic metasta-
sis, and abscesses may appear quite similar on con-
ventional
MRI.
They
appear
mostly
as
peripherically enhancing expansive lesions sur-
rounded by a perilesional hyperintensity on T2-
WI. DWI can be helpful to diﬀerentiate tumors
from abscesses because fluid-filled abscesses have
high signal intensity on DWI with reduced ADC
values in their centers (▶Fig. 7.1). The restricted
diﬀusivity in abscesses is due to the high viscosity
of the fluid inside the cavity, which leads to
reduced water diﬀusion,2 whereas the enhancing
ring is a fibrous capsule formed by organized colla-
gen fibres.1 On the other hand, the cavity of a
tumor is necrotic and usually not associated with
restricted diﬀusion. Likewise, the enhancing por-
tion of a tumor is due to viable tumor cells,1 which
may demonstrate restricted diﬀusion secondary to
high cell density. Nevertheless, DTI can help to dif-
ferentiate brain
abscesses from
necrotic
neo-
plasms.1,2 Depending on the organization of viable
inflammatory cells inside abscesses, the FA values
DWI in the Evaluation of Brain Tumors
99

can be higher in abscesses than in the cystic/
necrotic cavities of tumors. Higher FA values in
abscess walls are due to the presence of concentric
layers of collagen fibers rather than neoplastic cells
in the tumor wall.1
7.2.2 Tumor Grading and
Infiltration
Tumor grading is essential for treatment decisions
and prognosis. Conventional MRI sequences ena-
ble exact anatomical localization, treatment plan-
ning, and follow-up, but do not provide substantial
information
regarding
cellular
composition
of
tumors, grade, or tumor infiltration, which are
better addressed by advanced MRI techniques.4
Identifying the boundaries between tumors, infil-
trating cells, peritumoral edema, and normal brain
parenchyma is crucial for preoperative planning.
DWI and DTI are widely used techniques for these
purposes due to their capabilities to image the
brain microstructures.2,4,9 Generally, tumor cell
proliferation increases tumor cellularity, whereas
apoptosis reduces tumor cellularity. Both aﬀect the
extracellular space surrounding tumors.9 Some
local factors, such as high cellularity, the shape of
the extracellular space characterized by reduced
ratios of extracellular to intracellular space,9 as
well as high nuclear to cytoplasmic ratios, aﬀect
diﬀusion.2 ADC is inversely correlated with high
cellularity, and the changes in the intra- and
extracellular spaces already mentioned restrict dif-
fusion of water molecules.2,3
The meta-analysis conducted by Chen et al9 to
evaluate correlations between ADC and cellularity
in all cancer types suggested that DWI can be used
as a biomarker for tumor cellularity. Malignant
tumors have larger nuclei, richer stroma, and high-
er cell numbers. These features restrict diﬀusion
and reduce ADC values compared with benign
tumors. DWI can also diﬀerentiate between high-
and low-grade gliomas in most cases. Lower ADC
values are measured in high-grade gliomas (World
Health Organization [WHO] grades III and IV) due
to their higher cellularity compared with low-
grade gliomas (WHO grade II).2,4,10 Nevertheless,
some overlap can happen and is probably due to
the high histopathological heterogeneity in glio-
mas (▶Fig. 7.2).2,10
Fig. 7.1 (a) T2-weighted image (T2-WI), (b) enhanced T1-weighted image (T1-WI), (c) diffusion weighted image (DWI),
and (d) relative cerebral blood volume (CBVr) map in a case of pyogenic abscess, which has restricted diffusion on the
center of the lesion due to the pus. In another case (e) T2-WI, (f) enhanced T1-WI, (g) DWI, and (h) CBVr map show a
glioblastoma multiforme with similar signal characteristics on conventional sequences, showing restricted diffusion at
the periphery of the lesion on DWI and areas of high perfusion in the tumor wall on the CBVr map.
DWI in the Evaluation of Brain Tumors
100

DTI parameters have also been used to diﬀeren-
tiate high- and low-grade gliomas. The most con-
troversial findings regarding this diﬀerentiation
are for fractional anisotropy (FA). No diﬀerences in
FA values have been observed in some studies,
which is consistent with disorganization of fiber
tracts in the tumor center. However, some studies
have made the unlikely observation of increased
FA values in high-grade gliomas compared to low-
grade gliomas. The possible mechanisms remain
controversial, including diﬀerent methodologies
employed by these studies and the potential for
hypercellularity to reduce the extracellular space
and thus increase the directionality of water diﬀu-
sion, leading to increased FA values.10,11 Although
FA is not yet a reliable tool for grading gliomas,
other DTI parameters may be more useful.10 Radial
Diﬀusivity (RD) and Axial Diﬀusivity (AD) are high-
er in low-grade gliomas than in high-grade glio-
mas, reflecting an inverse relationship between
AD and RD, and glial tumors of WHO grades II
through IV.10
Diﬀerentiating a solitary metastasis from a pri-
mary brain tumor may be challenging in some
clinical scenarios. ADC values in metastases are
lower than in low-grade gliomas, but ADC values
measured at the peritumoral hyperintensity area
are higher in metastases. The higher ADC in the
periphery of metastases is likely explained by
increased vasogenic edema,4 increased extracellu-
lar space, which has a linear correlation with diﬀu-
sivity.12 The intratumoral FA values are greater in
low-grade
gliomas
compared
to
metastases,
explained by less cellular proliferation and vascu-
larization in low-grade tumors.
On the other hand, the evaluation of peritumor-
al brain tissue reveals higher ADC values in meta-
stases due to vasogenic
edema
compared
to
peritumoral cell infiltration described in high-
grade gliomas.4,11,13 A previous study suggested a
cutoﬀvalue of 1.302 × 10-3 mm2/s for the mini-
mum peritumoral ADC to optimize sensitivity and
specificity for distinguishing between glioblasto-
ma multiforme and metastases.11 However, other
studies considered ADC values < 1.200 × 10-3 mm2/
s to suggest cell infiltration and that ADC values >
1.600 × 10-3 mm2/s are suggestive of vasogenic
edema.13 The values in between these correspond
to a combination of cell infiltration and edema and
thus cannot be used to distinguish these lesions.13
Fig. 7.2
(a) Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and (b) enhanced T1-weighted image (T1-WI) show an
infiltrating low-grade glioma, which has no restricted diffusion (c) DWI and (d) ADC map. In another case, a high-grade
glioma (e) FLAIR and (f) enhanced T1-W with peripheral areas of restricted diffusion and a necrotic center with facilitate
diffusion (g) DWI and (h) ADC map
DWI in the Evaluation of Brain Tumors
101

The width of the tumor infiltration in high-grade
gliomas can also be evaluated by ADC values. Low-
er ADC values were measured closest to the tumor
border. Alternatively, ADC values measured in the
abnormal hyperintensity surrounding metastatic
lesions on T2-weighted images (T2-WIs) remain
constant.13
DTI analysis of the peritumoral region demon-
strated higher FA values in high-grade gliomas
when compared to metastases. This observation
may be explained by the fact that gliomas have
infiltrating tumor cells in their surrounding paren-
chyma, restricting water diﬀusivity and increasing
FA. Alternatively, the area surrounding the meta-
stases is composed of vasogenic edema and white
matter (WM) tract displacement, which reduces
FA.4,11 Previous reports have, however, demon-
strated the utility of FA analysis of the perilesional
region to distinguish metastases from primary
brain tumors, but these results are still controver-
sial.4,11,12 Because tumor cell infiltration is known
to damage myelinated neurofibers, this could
reduce FA values.12 The culmination of the eﬀects
of histological abnormalities that occur in the peri-
tumoral brain tissue will ultimately determine FA
values. Overlap between FA values from infiltration
and edema may occur.12 Indeed, AD and RD may
help to distinguish these. The rapid increase of RD
values in the tumor-infiltrated area may be associ-
ated with myelin sheath destruction when com-
pared to the stable AD and RD increases associated
with vasogenic edema in the extracellular space.12
7.2.3 Patterns of Peritumoral
White Matter Tracts
Maximal resection is a goal of brain tumor treat-
ment. Identifying tumor borders and peritumoral
brain tissue is crucial to surgery success, but diﬃ-
cult to establish in high-grade gliomas. Previous
reports have demonstrated that DWI and DTI
measurements may play an important role in the
assessment of the peritumoral area. These techni-
ques, especially color-coded FA maps and tractog-
raphy, can identify diﬀerent patterns of WM tract
involvement.2,14
The first pattern described consists of normal or
only slightly decreased FA values with an abnor-
mal location or direction resulting from bulk mass
displacement. This pattern suggests that the main
WM tract is intact and thus could be preserved
during resection. The tract can also be better iden-
tified on tractography and on color-coded FA
maps. The second pattern is probably related to
vasogenic edema. FA is substantially decreased,
but the main fiber tracts remain with normal loca-
tions and have normal directionality that is repre-
sented by normal colors on directional color maps,
whereas color intensity is reduced. The following
pattern is characterized by substantially decreased
FA values with abnormal colors on directional col-
or maps. The color change cannot be attributed to
a bulk eﬀect as with disrupted tracts most fre-
quently seen in infiltrating gliomas. The last pat-
tern described consists in an isotropic or almost
isotropic diﬀusivity within the lesion. In this pat-
tern, the tracts cannot be identified on directional
color maps and is observed when some portion of
the tract is completely destroyed by the tumor and
is commonly observed in high-grade gliomas. This
pattern may be useful in preoperative planning,
relying on the notion that the main WM tracts are
already disrupted so no special care is required to
avoid damage during ressection.14
Although these are classical patterns of WM
tracts, disturbances in the peritumoral area better
illustrates their involvement. A combination of
patterns may occur, such as displacement, infiltra-
tion, and edema, and these may limit the clinical
application of these patterns for tumor grading
and diﬀerential diagnoses.2,14 As a result, the main
clinical application of DTI and tractography in
brain tumors is presurgical planning (▶Fig. 7.3).
7.3 Special Cases
7.3.1 Meningioma
Meningiomas represent 14 to 20% of all intracrani-
al brain tumors, and 10% have an atypical behavior
that requires diﬀerent therapeutic approaches.
Diﬀerentiating typical from atypical meningiomas
with conventional MRI is still a challenge. Hetero-
geneous
appearances
and
enhancement,
sur-
rounding edema, and irregular cerebral surfaces
are more commonly detected in atypical meningi-
omas, but they are not unique to these tumors.
Atypical meningiomas have high cellularity and
therefore may have restricted diﬀusion, although
this is not a hallmark for these tumors. Some typi-
cal meningiomas may demonstrate abnormally
increased ADC values that are probably secondary
to increased fluid within the tumor or even a
microcystic component. The high b values meas-
ured, explained later in this chapter, also corrobo-
rate these findings (▶Fig. 7.4).15 The atypical
meningiomas express the proliferation marker Ki-
67. There is an inverse correlation between ADC
DWI in the Evaluation of Brain Tumors
102

values (lower ADC values correlate to high cellular-
ity) and Ki-67 expression (marker of high cell pro-
liferation), and an ADC cutoﬀof 0.70 × 10-3 mm2/s
can be considered an important statistical point to
diﬀerentiate atypical and typical meningiomas.16
7.3.2 Lymphoma
Primary
central
nervous
system
lymphoma
(PCNSL) is usually represented by an infiltrating le-
sion with low signal intensity on T2-WI that
Fig. 7.3
(a) Axial fluid-attenuated inversion recovery and (b) coronal T2-weighted image show a postsurgical partially
removed World Health Organization grade II oligodendroglioma. After deciding to reoperate the tumor, the surgeon
was in doubt regarding the relationship between the lesion and the corticospinal tract and the superior longitudinal
fasciculus. (c) Fractional anisotropy color map shows the deviation of the superior longitudinal fasciculus due to the
mass effect of the lesion. The tractography fused with (d) T1-weighted image demonstrates minimal deviation of the
left corticospinal tract, as well as a surgical plane between the tract and the tumor.
DWI in the Evaluation of Brain Tumors
103

Fig. 7.4
(a) Axial T2-weighted image and (b) axial fluid-attenuated inversion recovery show a left frontal extra-axial
mass, with isointense signal, surrounded by vasogenic edema. The lesion demonstrates hyperintensity on (c) diffusion
weighted imaging and low signal intensity on (d) apparent diffusion coefficient map, characterizing restricted diffusion.
The histological diagnosis was atypical meningioma.
DWI in the Evaluation of Brain Tumors
104

enhances after intravenous contrast administra-
tion.
Nevertheless,
diﬀerential
diagnoses
with
enhancing high-grade gliomas may be diﬃcult. A
previous report demonstrated restricted diﬀusion
in lymphoma compared to glioblastoma multi-
forme that is likely due to the morphology of lym-
phoma, its higher degree of cellularity, and higher
nucleo-to-cytoplasma ratio, when compared to
glioblastoma (▶Fig. 7.5).5
ADC values in PCNSL may also be used as a prog-
nostic tool in the assessment of these patients. A
study has suggested that lower pretreatment ADC
values (cutoﬀof 0.384 × 10-3 mm2/s) can predict
worse clinical outcomes in immunocompetent
patients treated with methotrexate-based chemo-
therapy. The studies concluded that the lower the
ADC is at baseline, the shorter the progression-free
time and overall survival will be. If these findings
were combined with perfusion evaluation, the
presence of low cerebral blood volume could iden-
tify the PCNSL cases with the worst prognoses.17
7.3.3 Epidermoid Tumors
The major diﬀerential diagnosis consideration in
an epidermoid cyst is arachnoid cyst because both
lesions have signal intensity similar to the cerebro-
spinal fluid (CSF) on T1- and T2-WI and usually do
not enhance after intravenous contrast adminis-
tration. Although fluid-attenuated inversion recov-
ery (FLAIR) sequences can be an important tool in
the evaluation of these lesions and contribute to
their diﬀerentiation, DWI evaluation is even more
characteristic. On DWI, the epidermoid tumor has
a hyperintense signal, whereas the arachnoid cysts
are hypointense and demonstrate high diﬀusivity.
The ADC of the epidermoid is similar to the brain
parenchyma or may also be slightly reduced due to
Fig. 7.5
(a) Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery and enhanced (b) T1-weighted image in a case of right frontal lobe
primary central nervous system lymphoma after kidney transplantation. (c) Diffusion weighted imaging and (d)
apparent diffusion coefficient map show restricted diffusion on the lesion. (e) The proton magnetic resonance
spectroscopy demonstrates high choline/N-acetyl aspartate (CHo/NAA) ratio, as well as peak of lipids/lactate.
DWI in the Evaluation of Brain Tumors
105

the tumor contents, and the ADC within the arach-
noid cyst is similar to the CSF (▶Fig. 7.6).2,6
7.3.4 Pediatric Intracranial Tumors
Central nervous system tumors are the most
common type of solid tumors in the pediatric pop-
ulation and are the major cause of death from can-
cer in children. The age of patients, imaging
characteristics, and tumor location are essential
for the diagnosis. Supratentorial tumors are more
common
in
neonates
and
infants,
whereas
infratentorial tumors are more common in chil-
dren older than 2 years.6
The primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET),
which arises from undiﬀerentiated brain cells, is
composed of small round cells with scant cyto-
plasm. The ADC of PNET, mostly in the medullo-
blastoma, is decreased because of high cellularity
and high nucleus to cytoplasm ratios.6 Restricted
diﬀusion is one of the most important indicators
of infratentorial lesions because ADC values are
significantly lower in medulloblastomas than in
other tumors, such as ependymomas, brainstem
Fig. 7.6
(a) Sagittal T1-weighted image and coronal (b) T2-weighted image show a right anterior fossa epidermoid
tumor. The lesion was high signal intensity on (c) diffusion weighted imaging and heterogeneous signal intensity,
predominantly isointense to brain parenchyma, on (d) apparent diffusion coefficient map.
DWI in the Evaluation of Brain Tumors
106

gliomas,
and
juvenile
pilocytic
astrocytoma
(▶Fig. 7.7).6,18
Diﬀusion on pineal masses, including germino-
mas and pinealoblastomas, is restricted due to the
high cellularity of these tumors. DWI is also help-
ful in the diﬀerential diagnosis of these lesions.
Low- and high-grade astrocytomas in the pediatric
population behave similarly to those in adults. The
higher
the cellularity is (usually representing
high-grade gliomas), the lower the ADC values will
be.6
7.4 Posttreatment Evaluation
Diﬀusion imaging can be used to assess posttreat-
ment changes. DWI may serve as an early biomar-
ker
tool
for
predicting
treatment
outcomes,
monitoring treatment response, and detecting
recurrent cancer.9 In a tumor that demonstrated
restricted diﬀusion before treatment, an increased
ADC is a good indicator of treatment response.
Treatment will lead to a reduction in tumor cellu-
larity and a consequent increase in the ADC values,
which may also precede changes in tumor size and
patterns of contrast enhancement.
7.4.1 Immediate Postoperative
Evaluation
The most widely used method to assess therapeu-
tic response after surgery for high-grade gliomas
has been to examine changes in contrast enhance-
ment.8 Subsequent MRI 24 to 48 hours after sur-
gery is performed to reveal the extent of tumor
resection.2,7 Weeks or months after the treatment
is ended, additional imaging is used to evaluate
tumor size, mostly based on the MacDonald crite-
ria evaluation.2,8 Nevertheless, the MacDonald cri-
teria
are
limited
when
evaluating
low-grade
gliomas, which usually do not enhance, and new
therapeutic approaches, such as chemoradiation
with temozolomide and antiangiogenic agents,
pseudoprogression, and pseudoresponse alter the
way conventional MRI scans must be interpreted.8
DWI should be performed during the postopera-
tive
MRI
for
its
prognostic
value.
Areas
of
Fig. 7.7
(a) Axial fluid-attenuated inversion recovery, (b) sagittal T1-weighted image (T1-WI), and (c) enhanced axial
T1-WI show a fourth ventricle lesion with mass effect in the cerebellar vermis. (d) The lesion has hyperintensity on (e)
diffusion weighted imaging and very high choline/N-acetil aspartate ratio at the proton magnetic resonance
spectroscopy. The histological diagnosis was typical medulloblastoma.
DWI in the Evaluation of Brain Tumors
107

restricted diﬀusion may be detected adjacent to
the resected tumor.2,7 The perioperative abnormal-
ities observed on DWI may represent impaired
blood flow due to injury to normal vessels or cyto-
toxic edema with contusion caused by mechanical
stimuli during surgery. DWI may be classified as a
thin linear lesion next to the tumor cavity that
represents a brain contusion and corresponds to
vascular regions extending outward from the
tumor cavity and likely results from interrupted
vascular perfusion of the underlying WM.7 The
DWI
abnormalities
correspond
to
contrast-
enhanced areas in follow-up imaging, and the en-
hancement subsequently regresses to form an area
of encephalomalacia.2,7 This fact should not be
misdiagnosed as tumor recurrence,2 and it is rea-
sonable to expect that the tumor will not recur
where blood flow was disrupted at surgery.7 Thus
restricted diﬀusion in the postoperative MRI with-
in 24 to 48 hours represents infarction and/or con-
tusion and also represents complications induced
by surgery. This abnormality may paradoxically
benefit patients with high-grade gliomas and
serve as a prognostic factor.7
7.4.2 Pseudoprogression
Enhancing lesions that arise on routine follow-up
brain MRI at the site of a previously identified and
treated high-grade glioma might present a signifi-
cant diagnostic dilemma. MRI cannot reliably dis-
criminate
tumor
recurrence/progression
from
inflammatory or necrotic changes resulting from
chemoradiation.19 Radiation necrosis and pseu-
doprogression are forms of treatment-related
enhancement
following
chemoradiation
with
temozolomide.8 Pseudoprogression usually refers
to an increase in contrast enhancement within
the first 3 to 6 months after chemoradiation that
occurs earlier than radiotherapy damage alone in
about 30% of cases. It is generally self-limiting
and
represents
a
combination
of
treatment
eﬀects on residual tumor cells and disruption of
the blood–brain barrier. Pseudoprogression has
been reported to be correlated with O6-methyl-
guanine-DNA
methyltransferase
(MGMT)
pro-
moter
methylation
status.8
The
diagnosis
is
primarily based on routine follow-up conven-
tional MRI exams. The Response Assessment in
Neuro-Oncology (RANO) criteria are currently
used to assess posttreatment changes in brain
tumor patients and are based on conventional
MRI findings. Evidence regarding the use of DWI
and DTI to diﬀerentiate pseudoprogression from
recurrent tumors is currently limited and con-
flicting.8,19
The ADC value of the contrast-enhancing por-
tion of the new lesion can be measured. Higher
ADC values were identified in patients with recur-
rences relative to patients without recurrences.19
This fact is supported by histopathological findings
of increased extracellular spaces and micronecro-
sis in the tumor area. In enhancing nonrecurrent
lesions, fibrosis, gliosis, macrophage invasion, vas-
cular changes, and demyelination predominate,
and restricted diﬀusion is seen.19 However, there is
some disagreement in interpreting ADC values in
recurrent lesions. It would be expected that the
high cellularity of the tumor would reduce ADC
values. Thus the ADC will be influenced by the pre-
dominant histopathological alterations within the
area of tumor recurrence. Changes in ADC would
correspond with tumor progression; thus ADC
changes would not be considered a favorable prog-
nostic factor.8 Furthermore, no diﬀerences in FA
values were observed between recurrence and
nonrecurrence lesions.19,20 AD and RD parameters
may, however, be more sensitive, especially in the
surrounding lesion tissue.19
7.4.3 Pseudoresponse
The unregulated angiogenesis characterized by
dilated and hyperpermeable vessels allows tumor
growth. These vessels promote ineﬃcient tumor
perfusion that leads to necrosis. Novel antiangio-
genic agents for tumor treatment, including beva-
cizumab, act directly against vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF) or its receptor on vessel walls
to inhibit vascularization. Normalization of vascu-
lature causes a reduction in the diameter and per-
meability of the vessels and often causes a rapid
decrease in contrast enhancement (within 24
hours) without a true antitumoral eﬀect.8 Changes
to the RANO criteria have been proposed to
address the evaluation of these new conditions
related to the use of novel drugs. The nonenhanc-
ing portion of the lesion is now evaluated by FLAIR
sequences. Pseudoresponse is demonstrated when
the nonenhancing portion of the tumor increases
in addition to the enhancing portion. In some
cases, DWI can depict restricted areas adjacent to
the lesion that, in some cases, may correspond to
tumor progression in the follow-up MRI examina-
tions (▶Fig. 7.8).8
However, the importance of a new diﬀusion
restricted area in patients with high-grade gliomas
during therapy is unclear. In some cases, this
DWI in the Evaluation of Brain Tumors
108

region may remain stable over time instead of
evolving into a region of enhancing tumor, which
may not represent tumor progression but rather
vascular cooption
by tumors
or
even atypical
necrosis.8 A trend of decreasing ADC in both
contrast-enhanced
MRI
and
FLAIR-hyperintense
regions is shown in tumors that ultimately progress,
whereas stable/nonrecurrent tumors show small
progressive increases in ADC during follow-up.21
7.5 Future Applications
7.5.1 High b Value Diﬀusion
Weighted Imaging (HBDWI)
The use of increased b values on DWI (HBDWI)
(e.g.,
3,000/4,000 mm2/s)
may
be
useful
for
evaluating
pseudoprogression
and
pseudores-
ponse.22,23 The hypothesis is that the kinetics of
signal decay in heterogeneous voxels can be eval-
uated with multiple b factor acquisitions to allow
characterization of the various water diﬀusivity
compartments
within
a
single
voxel.24
There
are several models for interpreting multiple b
values, including kurtosis, biexponential models,
stretched exponential models, and the most com-
mon
two-compartmental
model.24
At
HBDWI,
there is more contrast of the tissues of interest
than at regular b values22,23 and less T2 shine-
through eﬀect.23 The two-compartmental model
detects slow and fast diﬀusion components, repre-
senting intra- and extracellular diﬀusion, respec-
tively. The slow component is more sensitive at
HBDWI, suggesting that ADC values based on
Fig. 7.8
(a) Enhanced T1-weighted image, (b) fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), and (c) diffusion weighted
imaging (DWI) of a postsurgical high-grade glioma that presented failure of the concomitant radio- and chemotherapy.
(d) Antiangiogenic drug was initiated, and, besides a reduction in the enhancing portion of the lesion, (e) an expansion
and tumor infiltration are observed in the FLAIR. (f) DWI demonstrates areas of restricted diffusion that may correspond
to tumor dissemination.
DWI in the Evaluation of Brain Tumors
109

higher b values reflect changes in cellularity more
accurately than at lower b values.22,23 ADC values
acquired at higher b values are lower than those
acquired at standard b values due to the predomi-
nance
of
the
slow
diﬀusion
component
on
HBDWI.23 HBDWI is limited by an inferior signal-
to-noise ratio than regular b value DWI, and opti-
mal b values have not yet established.22
HBDWI can be considered superior to RANO cri-
teria and MacDonald criteria for pseudoresponse
evaluation.22 Areas of high signal intensity on
HBDWI represent tumor recurrence similar to reg-
ular DWI b value images.22 Lower ADC values are
also detected in tumor recurrence compared to
pseudoprogression. However, the fifth percentile
value of the cumulative ADC histogram obtained
with HBDWI is a promising parameter to distin-
guish this.23 The distinction between vasogenic
edema and tumoral infiltration surrounding the
tumor lesion can also be made using DWI with
multiple b values.24
7.5.2 Functional Diﬀusion Maps
The functional
diﬀusion
maps (fDMs)
display
changes in ADC that occur over time and can be a
biomarker for glioma follow-up. The fDM requires
image registration between a current ADC map
and the baseline map. After the appropriate regis-
tration, a voxel-by-voxel subtraction is performed
to compare diﬀerent time points, including post-
surgical and pretreatment points.8,22,25 Each voxel
is then categorized based on the change in ADC
relative to the baseline values. Red voxels repre-
sent increased ADC above baseline (considered
hypocellular
voxels),
blue
voxels
represent
decreased ADC values compared to the baseline
(hypercellular voxels), and green voxels represent
no ADC change. Edema, gliosis, infection, and
ischemia are other tissue conditions that may
influence ADC values, and care should be taken
during map interpretation. In practice, a threshold
of 0.4 × 10-3 mm2/s is used based on the 95% con-
fidence limit of normal-appearing white and gray
matter and allows optimal sensitivity and specif-
icity to distinguish stable from progressive dis-
ease.25 The rate of change in fDM hypercellular
volumes compared to FLAIR hypersignal abnor-
malities may predict tumor progression, time to
progression, and overall survival for antiangiogen-
ic and cytotoxic treatments because the ADC
changes precede changes in standard anatomical
images.25
7.5.3 Diﬀusion Tensor Imaging
Outcomes
The future of DTI is to move beyond the tensor
representation of diﬀusion and improve the well-
known obstacles that include cases of fiber inter-
section and dispersion in the same voxel. The
supertensor representations will be a useful tech-
nique to overcome the crossing fibers obstacle, and
a possible approach is diﬀusion spectrum imaging
(DSI).2
Diﬀusion kurtosis (DK) imaging allows the char-
acterization of nongaussian water diﬀusion and is
complementary to ADC and FA. The mean kurtosis
(MK) can be used to evaluate the gray and white
matter, resolve the crossing fiber tracts, and grade
tumors2 (see Chapter 15).
7.5.4 Tractography
Distinguishing normal tissue from disrupted WM
tracts
is
essential
before
resection
of
brain
tumors.26 The patterns of WM involvement in the
peritumoral area are based on FA maps from DTI
acquisitions.14 However, the diﬀusion tensor model
is ideal only for describing a single fiber population
within a given voxel and does not accurately
describe the microstructure in complex WM voxels
that contain more than one fiber population arising
from intersecting tracts or to partial volume aver-
aging of adjacent pathways that have diﬀerent fiber
orientations.27 To overcome these problems, it is
desirable to use the information derived from high
angular
resolution
diﬀusion
imaging
(HARDI),
which is reconstructed by the q-ball, providing an
orientation distribution function (ODF) that can
better resolve multiple fiber populations within a
single voxel.27 The probabilistic q-ball fiber tracking
approach surpasses standard fiber tracking meth-
ods for tumor presurgical planning26,27 because it is
more sensitive and better delineates the involved
fiber tracts, notably in the spinal cord.27
7.6 Summary
DWI and DTI are advanced MRI techniques that
help brain tumor evaluation. Primary tumor grad-
ing and invasion, diﬀerential diagnosis between
other intracranial lesions, and treatment prognosis
may be assessed by such techniques. New postpro-
cessing and acquisition methods for DWI and DTI
will further improve them as tools for tumor
evaluation.
DWI in the Evaluation of Brain Tumors
110

References
[1] Toh CH, Wei KC, Ng SH, Wan YL, Lin CP, Castillo M. Diﬀeren-
tiation of brain abscesses from necrotic glioblastomas and
cystic metastatic brain tumors with diﬀusion tensor imag-
ing. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2011; 32(9): 1646–1651
[2] Hygino da Cruz LC, Jr, Vieira IG, Domingues RC. Diﬀusion MR
imaging: an important tool in the assessment of brain
tumors. Neuroimaging Clin N Am 2011; 21(1): 27–49, vii
[3] Zulfiqar M, Yousem DM, Lai H. ADC values and prognosis of
malignant astrocytomas: does lower ADC predict a worse
prognosis independent of grade of tumor?—a meta-analysis.
AJR Am J Roentgenol 2013; 200(3): 624–629
[4] Svolos P, Tsolaki E, Kapsalaki E, et al. Investigating brain
tumor diﬀerentiation with diﬀusion and perfusion metrics
at 3 T MRI using pattern recognition techniques. Magn
Reson Imaging 2013; 31(9): 1567–1577
[5] Kickingereder P, Wiestler B, Sahm F, et al. Primary central
nervous system lymphoma and atypical glioblastoma: mul-
tiparametric diﬀerentiation by using diﬀusion-, perfusion-,
and susceptibility-weighted MR imaging. Radiology 2014;
272(3): 843–850
[6] Borja MJ, Plaza MJ, Altman N, Saigal G. Conventional and
advanced MRI features of pediatric intracranial tumors:
supratentorial tumors. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2013; 200(5):
W483–W503
[7] Furuta T, Nakada M, Ueda F, et al. Prognostic paradox: brain
damage around the glioblastoma resection cavity. J Neuro-
oncol 2014; 118(1): 187–192
[8] Shiroishi MS, Booker MT, Agarwal M, et al. Posttreatment
evaluation of central nervous system gliomas. Magn Reson
Imaging Clin N Am 2013; 21(2): 241–268
[9] Chen L, Liu M, Bao J, et al. The correlation between apparent
diﬀusion coeﬃcient and tumor cellularity in patients: a
meta-analysis. PLoS ONE 2013; 8(11): e79008
[10] Server A, GraﬀBA, Josefsen R, et al. Analysis of diﬀusion ten-
sor imaging metrics for gliomas grading at 3 T. Eur J Radiol
2014; 83(3): e156–e165
[11] Lee EJ, Ahn KJ, Lee EK, Lee YS, Kim DB. Potential role of
advanced MRI techniques for the peritumoural region in dif-
ferentiating glioblastoma multiforme and solitary meta-
static lesions. Clin Radiol 2013; 68(12): e689–e697
[12] Min ZG, Niu C, Rana N, Ji HM, Zhang M. Diﬀerentiation of
pure vasogenic edema and tumor-infiltrated edema in
patients with peritumoral edema by analyzing the relation-
ship of axial and radial diﬀusivities on 3.0 T MRI. Clin Neurol
Neurosurg 2013; 115(8): 1366–1370
[13] Pavlisa G, Rados M, Pavlisa G, Pavic L, Potocki K, Mayer D.
The diﬀerences of water diﬀusion between brain tissue infil-
trated by tumor and peritumoral vasogenic edema. Clin
Imaging 2009; 33(2): 96–101
[14] Jellison BJ, Field AS, Medow J, Lazar M, Salamat MS,
Alexander AL. Diﬀusion tensor imaging of cerebral white
matter: a pictorial review of physics, fiber tract anatomy,
and tumor imaging patterns. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2004;
25(3): 356–369
[15] Bano S, Waraich MM, Khan MA, Buzdar SA, Manzur S. Diag-
nostic value of apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient for the accu-
rate
assessment
and
diﬀerentiation
of
intracranial
meningiomas.
Acta
Radiol
Short
Rep
2013;
2(7):
2047981613512484
[16] Tang Y, Dundamadappa SK, Thangasamy S, et al. Correlation
of apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient with Ki-67 proliferation
index in grading meningioma. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2014;
202(6): 1303–1308
[17] Valles FE, Perez-Valles CL, Regalado S, Barajas RF, Rubenstein
JL, Cha S. Combined diﬀusion and perfusion MR imaging as
biomarkers of prognosis in immunocompetent patients
with primary central nervous system lymphoma. AJNR Am J
Neuroradiol 2013; 34(1): 35–40
[18] Rodriguez Gutierrez D, Awwad A, Meijer L, et al. Metrics and
textural features of MRI diﬀusion to improve classification
of pediatric posterior fossa tumors. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
2014; 35(5): 1009–1015
[19] Sundgren PC, Fan X, Weybright P, et al. Diﬀerentiation of
recurrent brain tumor versus radiation injury using diﬀu-
sion tensor imaging in patients with new contrast-enhanc-
ing lesions. Magn Reson Imaging 2006; 24(9): 1131–1142
[20] Alexio GA, Zikou A, Tsiouris S, et al. Comparison of diﬀusion
tensor, dynamic susceptibility contrast MRI and (99m)Tc-
Tetrofosmin brain SPECT for the detection of recurrent
high-grade glioma. Magn Reson Imaging 2014; 32(7): 854–
859
[21] Jain R, Scarpace LM, Ellika S, et al. Imaging response criteria
for recurrent gliomas treated with bevacizumab: role of dif-
fusion weighted imaging as an imaging biomarker. J Neuro-
oncol 2010; 96(3): 423–431
[22] Yamasaki F, Kurisu K, Aoki T, et al. Advantages of high b-val-
ue
diﬀusion
weighted
imaging
to
diagnose
pseudo-
responses in patients with recurrent glioma after bevacizu-
mab treatment. Eur J Radiol 2012; 81(10): 2805–2810
[23] Chu HH, Choi SH, Ryoo I, et al. Diﬀerentiation of true pro-
gression from pseudoprogression in glioblastoma treated
with radiation therapy and concomitant temozolomide:
comparison study of standard and high-b-value diﬀusion
weighted imaging. Radiology 2013; 269(3): 831–840
[24] Vandendries C, Ducreux D, Lacroix C, Ducot B, Saliou G. Stat-
istical analysis of multi-b factor diﬀusion weighted images
can help distinguish between vasogenic and tumor-infil-
trated edema. J Magn Reson Imaging 2014; 40(3): 622–629
[25] Schmainda KM. Diﬀusion weighted MRI as a biomarker for
treatment response in glioma. CNS Oncol 2012; 1(2): 169–
180
[26] Zhang H, Wang Y, Lu T, et al. Diﬀerences between general-
ized q-sampling imaging and diﬀusion tensor imaging in
the preoperative visualization of the nerve fiber tracts with-
in peritumoral edema in brain. Neurosurgery 2013; 73(6):
1044–1053, discussion 1053
[27] Bucci M, Mandelli ML, Berman JI, et al. Quantifying diﬀusion
MRI tractography of the corticospinal tract in brain tumors
with deterministic and probabilistic methods. Neuroimage
Clin 2013; 3: 361–368
DWI in the Evaluation of Brain Tumors
111

8 Diﬀusion Weighted and Diﬀusion Tensor Imaging in
Infectious Diseases
Claudia da Costa Leite, Maria da Graça Morais Martin, and Mauricio Castillo
Key Points
●Diﬀusion weighted imaging (DWI) is a useful
diagnostic tool for central nervous system
(CNS) infectious disease, among other
pathologies.
●Meningitis, regardless of its cause, can present
subarachnoid hyperintensities on DWI. Compli-
cations of meningitis, such as infarctions, venous
thrombosis, empyema, ventriculitis, and abscess
also present characteristic findings on DWI.
●Pyogenic abscess usually presents as a hypoin-
tense rim on T2-weighted imaging, a peripheral
enhancement after contrast administration,
and a hyperintense core on DWI with reduced
apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient (ADC). Fungal or
tuberculous abscesses may present variable
signal intensities on DWI and are not always
hyperintense as pyogenic abscesses are. Fungal
abscesses are commonly multiple, and their
borders are loculated or crenated.
●DWI can identify early findings of herpesvirus
infection with areas of restricted diﬀusion on
the temporal and frontal lobes, insula, and cin-
gulate gyrus.
●In immunocompromised patients, progressive
multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) can
present as a leading edge of hyperintensity on
DWI, sometimes with restricted diﬀusion.
Toxoplasmosis lesions do not present with
restricted diﬀusion.
●DWI is very useful in patients with Creutzfeldt–
Jakob disease because the lesions present as
hyperintense signal on DWI and are better seen
than with other imaging sequences.
8.1 Clinical Applications
8.1.1 Introduction
Neuroimaging is an essential tool in the diagnosis
and
therapeutic
planning
of
central
nervous
system (CNS) infectious disease. The introduc-
tion of diﬀusion weighted imaging (DWI) has
improved
the
diagnosis
of certain
infectious
process. DWI can provide additional information
to
conventional
magnetic
resonance
imaging
(MRI) sequences that allows a better under-
standing of the pathophysiology as well as more
precise and early diagnosis in many infectious
diseases. DWI is an important imaging tool for
the diagnosis of many infectious lesions, such as
encephalitis, abscess, ventriculitis, empyema and
other complications of infectious processes, such
as infarcts due to vasculitis or venous thrombo-
sis. In some instances diﬀusion tensor imaging
(DTI) may help follow up lesion response after
proper treatment is initiated, and may better
evaluate its sequelae. This chapter discusses the
main groups of etiologic agents: bacterial, viral,
fungal, parasitic, and prion diseases, and the
contributions of DWI and DTI in their diagnosis,
therapeutic strategies, and follow-up.
8.1.2 Brief Overview of Infectious
Diseases and DWI and DTI
Bacterial Infections
Bacterial infections require prompt diagnosis and
treatment. The infectious process can be restricted
to the meninges and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
compartment (meningitis, ventriculitis) or can
spread to the brain parenchyma (cerebritis, brain
abscess). It can also be located within the menin-
geal layers (empyema).
Meningitis is defined as the inflammation of the
membranes surrounding the brain and spinal cord.
Usually the diagnosis is based on clinical findings
and CSF analysis. Imaging can be required before
lumbar puncture to rule out increased intracranial
pressure and to detect complications of meningitis.1
In meningitis, computed tomography (CT) is the
most commonly used imaging diagnostic tool,
regardless of underlying bacteria. Magnetic reso-
nance imaging (MRI) is not usually required for
uncomplicated meningitis, but MRI is superior to
CT for depicting meningitis complications, such as
vasculitis and empyema. MRI can show meningeal
abnormalities on fluid-attenuated inversion recov-
ery (FLAIR) or postcontrast T1-weighted images
(the
authors
reserve the
use
of
postcontrast
FLAIR imaging for specific conditions, such as
infectious and carcinomatous meningitis). DWI
DWI and DTI in Infectious Diseases
112

can demonstrate subarachnoid hyperintensities as
well as complications of meningitis, such as acute
infarcts due to septic vasculitis and venous throm-
bosis. Subarachnoid DWI hyperintensity in menin-
gitis is attributed to proteinaceous exudate with
inflammatory cells and debris (▶Fig. 8.1).2
MRI is an excellent tool for the diagnosis of
extra-axial collections associated with meningitis,
which
can
be
sterile
(eﬀusion/hygroma)
or
infected (empyema). These complications are more
common in pneumococcal meningitis aﬀecting
children under 2 years of age. Eﬀusion/hygroma
tends to be bilateral, large, and located in the fron-
tal or temporal regions (▶Fig. 8.2). On the other
hand, empyemas can be located in the subdural or
epidural spaces and are usually hyperintense to
CSF on precontrast T1-weighted images, hyperin-
tense on T2-weighted images, and show peripheral
contrast enhancement and hyperintensity on DWI
with reduced diﬀusion coeﬃcients (▶Fig. 8.3).1
The diagnosis of pyogenic abscess is crucial for
proper and prompt therapeutic management. The
main etiologic agents associated with bacterial
abscesses are Staphylococcus aureus and Strepto-
coccus species.
Classically the evolution of brain abscess con-
sists of four stages: early cerebritis, late cerebritis,
early capsule formation, and late capsule forma-
tion. Regardless of the etiologic agent the MRI
findings of the brain abscess are very similar.3 The
first phase of cerebritis is characterized by vascular
congestion, petechial hemorrhages, and edema,
causing a poorly demarcated parenchymal soften-
ing. The MRI findings are nonspecific, with hyper-
intensity on T2-weighted images and little or no
contrast enhancement. The capsular stage may
begin approximately during the second week and
can last for months, being characterized by a cen-
tral zone of necrosis encircled by a collagen capsu-
le. The abscess capsule can present as a smooth or
Fig. 8.1 Streptococcus pneumoniae meningitis with hyperintensity on diffusion weighted imaging (DWI). (a,b) Axial DWI
shows hyperintense parietal sulci (black arrows) and hypointense subdural effusions bilaterally (white arrows). On the
apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map, (c) the parietal sulci ADC (black arrows) is reduced compared to CSF, although
not reduced compared to the parenchyma. In the subdural collections the ADC is close to cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). (d)
The axial enhanced fluid-attenuated inversion recovery image also shows hyperintensity in parietal sulci (white arrow)
and the bilateral subdural effusion similar to CSF. (e) The contrast-enhanced axial T1-weighted image shows subtle
leptomeningeal enhancement in some sulci (black arrow).
DWI and DTI in Infectious Diseases
113

lobulated hyperintense rim on T1-weighted and a
hypointense rim on T2-weighted images with
smooth and thin contrast enhancement. Because
abscesses are ring-enhancing lesions many other
diﬀerential diagnoses should be included, espe-
cially necrotic tumor. On DWI an abscess usually
presents as hyperintensity with reduced apparent
diﬀusion coeﬃcients (ADCs) within the center of
the abscess. In ring-enhancing lesions, if the ADC
is low, the accuracy of the diagnosis of a capsular
phase abscess versus necrotic tumor is high, and it
is even higher when a complete T2-hypointense
rim is present (▶Fig. 8.4).3 The reduced ADC that
occurs in the center of the lesion is attributable to
pus that contains microorganisms, macromole-
cules, debris, proteins, amino acids, and inflamma-
tory cells that bind, obstruct, and prevent the
normal random motion of water.4 Even though
low ADC in the center of a ring enhancing lesion is
a sign of high accuracy for the diagnosis of bacterial
abscess, some fungal abscesses and even necrotic
tumors (especially metastases) can occasionally
present restricted diﬀusion in its central portion,
and, also, some bacterial abscesses may not have
restricted diﬀusion. Brain abscess has a higher ADC
(less restricted) after treatment than before treat-
ment; thus DWI is a tool to evaluate treatment res-
ponse (▶Fig. 8.5 and ▶Fig. 8.6). Relapse of a brain
abscess decreases ADC values again.6
Gupta et al,7,8 using DTI, found increased frac-
tional anisotropy (FA) in the cavity of the bacterial
abscess (▶Fig. 8.4f), which had a positive correla-
tion with neuroinflammatory molecules, suggest-
ing that FA elevation reflects upregulation of
various
adhesion
molecules
in
brain
abscess
inflammation. Nath et al6 showed in 20 patients
with
abscesses
that
the
FA
in
the
cavities
decreased following a successful 4 week treatment
period.
Ventriculitis is a rare intracranial infection, asso-
ciated with abscess rupture into the ventricular
system, extension of basal cistern meningitis to
Fig. 8.2 Subdural effusion. Bilateral subdural effusion with signal intensity similar to cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), low signal
on (a) axial diffusion weighted imaging and high signal on (b) apparent diffusion coefficient map, high signal on (c) T2,
just more hyperintense to CSF on (d) fluid-attenuated inversion recovery, probably due to proteinaceous content, and
no enhancement on postcontrast (e) T1-weighted image.
DWI and DTI in Infectious Diseases
114

the ventricles, and ventricular empyema exten-
sion, or it may be iatrogenic. It is a potential fatal
CNS infection. The ventricles are enlarged on MRI
scans; the ependyma shows hyperintensity on
fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and
T2-weighted images, and there is contrast en-
hancement of the ventricular lining. Within the
ventricles debris/suppurative content can some-
times be seen as -fluid levels, with sediments
deposited in the depent parts. The debris/suppura-
tive content presents hyperintensity on FLAIR
images and on DWI with reduced ADC (▶Fig. 8.7).9
Other complications associated with meningitis
are vascular, such as acute infarcts and venous
thrombosis (▶Fig. 8.8). DWI is a helpful diagnostic
tool for the diagnosis of acute arterial infarcts but
is less useful in venous infarcts, which may present
as a variety of findings.
In intracranial bacterial infections, neurotuber-
culosis (neurotb) must be emphasized because it
has increased prevalence in immunocompromised
patients, such as those with acquired immunodefi-
ciency syndrome (AIDS) and organ transplants and
those from endemic regions. The main presenta-
tion of neurotb is meningitis (up to 95% of cases)
aﬀecting
mainly
the
basal
meninges.
Brain
parenchyma involvement can be seen as a compli-
cation of meningeal involvement and includes
infarcts or abscess/granuloma.10 DWI is useful for
the diagnosis of acute ischemic infarcts, diﬀerenti-
ating acute from subacute or chronic infarcts, and
detecting vasculitis.11 Tuberculomas can present a
T2-hypointense or T2-hyperintense core, and usu-
ally these lesions present with DWI hypointensity
and ADC map hyperintensity (no restriction of dif-
fusion) (▶Fig. 8.9). However, DWI hyperintensity
and
ADC
map
hypointensity
have
also
been
described for tuberculomas.12 Both tuberculomas
and tuberculous abscess can present as ring en-
hancement, central hyperintensity, or hypointen-
sity on DWI, with or without reduced ADC,
making diﬀerentiation between solid and necrotic
caseation diﬃcult on conventional MRI sequences
and DWI (▶Fig. 8.10).13 ▶Table 8.1 summarizes
the main DWI findings on bacterial infections.
Viral Infectious
The diﬀuse and generalized infection of the brain
known as encephalitis is most often the result of
viruses. CNS viral infection can present as menin-
gitis, encephalitis, and chronic encephalopathy.
Fig. 8.3
This patient had a sinusitis
and suffered a facial trauma, evolving
to meningitis complicated with em-
pyema, cerebritis and/or vasculitis and
infarct in the left hemisphere. (a) The
axial T2-weighted image shows a left
frontal (black arrow) and parafalcine
(white arrow) subdural collections, (b)
which also show hyperintensity on
diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) (c)
and hypointensity on the apparent
diffusion coefficient (ADC) map, typi-
cal of a subdural empyema. (b) Note
also DWI hyperintensities in the left
frontal gyri (arrow), which correlated
with hypointensities on the ADC map
and could be attributable to cerebritis
or infarct. (d) The enhanced axial T1-
weighted image shows contrast en-
hancement along the margins of the
infected collections (arrows).
DWI and DTI in Infectious Diseases
115

Fig. 8.4 Brain abscess and extensive edema within adjacent parenchyma. The abscess has a core of high signal intensity
on the axial T2-weighted image (a), low signal on T1-weighted image pre-(b) and postgadolinium (c) and restricted
diffusion with hyperintensity on the axial diffusion weighted imaging (d) and hypointensity on the apparent diffusion
coefficient (ADC) map (e), whereas the adjacent edema has a facilitated diffusion (hyperintensity on the ADC map).
There is a halo of hypointensity on the T2-weighted image (a) and hyperintensity on the T1-weighted image (b), with
regular peripheral enhancement (c). The diffusion tensor imaging (f) usually shows a high fractional anisotropy value
compared to other cystic lesions, and the color coded map may show an internal heterogeneous pattern (arrow),
suggesting some organization that is typical of pus.
Table 8.1 Main presentations of cranial bacterial infections on diﬀusion weighted imaging
Lesions
DWI findings
Meningitis
normal or CSF hyperintensity on DWI with no ADC restriction compared to parenchyma,
but restricted compared to CSF
Effusion/hygroma
Isointense or slightly hyperintense to CSF on DWI, no restricted diffusion on ADC maps
Empyema
Hyperintense to CSF with low ADC
Brain abscess
Hyperintense core on DWI with low ADC
Successfully treated abscess
Increase ADC compared to untreated abscess
Ventriculitis
Hyperintense intraventricular content on DWI with restricted ADC
Abbreviations: ADC, apparent diffusion coefficient; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; DWI, diffusion weighted image.
DWI and DTI in Infectious Diseases
116

The most common viral CNS infection is herpes
encephalitis type 1, or oral herpesvirus, that
carries a significant morbidity and mortality. The
histopathology on herpes encephalitis is a fulmi-
nating necrotizing and, many times, hemorrhagic
meningoencephalitis, predominantly in the tem-
poral lobes, basal frontal lobes, insula, and cingu-
late gyri.14 The diagnosis of herpes encephalitis is
made by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) techni-
ques in the CSF, but this test can be negative with-
in the first 72 hours of the disease. In such cases,
DWI may play an important role in the detection
of the characteristic lesions because early treat-
ment is crucial. DWI shows hyperintensity in the
aﬀected regions with areas of decreased ADC,
suggesting
cytotoxic
or
excitotoxic
edema
(▶Fig. 8.11). T2-weighted and FLAIR images show
unilateral or bilateral hyperintense lesions in the
temporal lobes, basal frontal lobes, insula, and/or
cingulate gyri, with gyral edema, meningeal or
cortical enhancement, and sometimes hemorrha-
gic foci. DWI shows the same abnormalities, but
these are detected earlier and are easier to be
identified than on other MRI sequences. Further-
more, DWI shows more extensive brain involve-
ment than T1- or T2-weighted images, providing
better mapping of the degree of brain involved.
In the chronic stage of herpes encephalitis there
is increased ADC in the aﬀected areas. Grydeland
et al15 used DTI to study five patients that pre-
sented chronic unilateral medial temporal lobe
lesions due to herpes encephalitis and manifested
both verbal and visuospatial memory deficits.
Besides the abnormalities in the aﬀected side, the
unaﬀected side also showed decreased FA and
increased
mean
diﬀusivity
(MD)
and
radial
Fig. 8.5
Abscess (a) Axial diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) shows a hyperintense lesion in the left temporal lobe
(arrow). (b) The apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) of the lesion is reduced. (c) The coronal contrast-enhanced T1-
weighted image shows peripheral enhancement of the lesion (black arrow) associated with meningeal involvement
(white arrow). The diagnosis was a bacterial abscess. (d) After surgical drainage note reduction of the lesion size, with
hypointensity of its core on DWI (arrow), (e) increased ADC, and persistent enhancement of the borders of the surgical
cavity and adjacent meninges on (f) enhanced axial T1-weighted images. The lack of high DWI signal indicates that all
pus has been drained.
DWI and DTI in Infectious Diseases
117

diﬀusivity (RD) in tracts connecting the medial
temporal lobes with other parts of the brain. The
involvement of the dominant medial temporal
lobe (usually the left) explains the impairment of
verbal memory, and the involvement of the right
medial temporal lobe explains visuospatial memo-
ry compromise. Thus these findings explain how
unilateral herpes encephalitis can produce either
visuospatial and verbal memory impairments.
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is a herpesvirus that
most often aﬀects the CNS of immunocompromised
patients. The most common presentation of CMV
CNS infection is ventriculoencephalitis. In such
cases
FLAIR
and
DWI
can
show
abnormal
Fig. 8.6
Improvement of abscess postsurgery. (a) Axial diffusion weighted imaging shows a hyperintense lesion in the
left hemisphere. (b) Three days following surgical drainage an axial apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map shows
reduction of the lesion volume, increased peripheral edema, and an extra-axial postoperative collection. (c) One-month
follow-up axial ADC map shows almost complete resolution of the lesion.
Fig. 8.7
Patient with pneumococcal
meningitis and ventriculitis with re-
stricted diffusion in the lateral ven-
tricles, which can be seen as (a)
hyperintense fluid levels (arrows) on
diffusion weighted imaging and (b)
hypointensity (arrows) on the apparent
diffusion coefficient map. (c) The fluid-
attenuated inversion recovery image
shows hyperintensity in those loca-
tions, and (d) there is subependymal
enhancement (arrows) on the en-
hanced T1-weighted image.
DWI and DTI in Infectious Diseases
118

hyperintensity
on
subependymal/periventricular
lining and septum pellucidum, whereas enhanced
T1-weighted images can show ependymal enhance-
ment. On DWI the previously described areas show
reduced (restricted) ADC (▶Fig. 8.12).16
Progressive
multifocal
leukoencephalopathy
(PML) is a disease associated with replication of
the JC virus in oligodendrocytes of immunocom-
promised patients and usually aﬀecting the white
matter. The diagnosis is based on PCR of JC virus
DNA in CSF. PML lesions usually have a scalloped
appearance
aﬀecting
the
subcortical
u-fibers,
without mass eﬀect and typically without contrast
enhancement. On DWI the leading edge presents
hyperintensity (▶Fig. 8.13) which is attributed to
active demyelination and inflammation. The lesion
periphery may present as decreased ADC and
MD.17,18 On follow-up studies, the DWI hyperin-
tense rim loses its signal intensity while sustaining
its hyperintensity on T2-weighted images.17 After
highly active antiretroviral therapy Buckle and
Castillo19 found higher maximal ADC values in the
initial evaluation of patients with rapid versus
slow clinical progression.
The direct eﬀect of human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV) in the CNS is associated with the late
stages of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS) and the AIDS dementia complex. Chen et
al20 used DTI in a study of HIV + patients with and
without dementia and found that the white matter
involvement is widespread, more severe in the HIV
patients with dementia than in the HIV patients
without dementia (changes in FA, MD, radial and
axial diﬀusivity) and that radial diﬀusivity (RD) is
the most aﬀected parameter, suggesting an impor-
tant component of demyelination in this disease.
Other viral infections that less commonly aﬀect
the CNS include influenza virus and Epstein–Barr
virus that can also present with DWI changes that
precede and/or are more extensive than those on
Fig. 8.8
Venous thrombosis due to meningitis. (a) Axial fluid-attenuated inversion recovery showing subtle
hyperintensities in the sulci (black arrows) and in the posterior horn of the left lateral ventricle (white arrow). (b) The
diffusion weighted imaging highlights the abnormalities in the lateral ventricles (ventriculitis) (black arrows), the
meningitis in the cerebellar sulci (asterisks) and in the sylvian fissures, and also shows areas of restricted diffusion in
subcortical areas (white arrows), also dark on apparent diffusion coefficient map (c), due to infarcts. (d) The T2 gradient-
recalled echo shows hypointensity in the right transverse venous sinus (white arrow) that presents as a filling defect
(open arrows) on the enhanced (e) axial and (f) sagittal images due to venous thrombosis.
DWI and DTI in Infectious Diseases
119

Fig. 8.9
Miliary tuberculosis. (a) Pa-
tient with multiple small contrast-
enhancing nodules on T1-weighted
image, (b) and edema on fluid-atte-
nuated inversion recovery images. (c)
The diffusion weighted imaging shows
mild hyperintensity in the periphery
(white arrow), and hypointensity in the
core of the lesions (black arrow), (d)
with no restricted diffusion on a
corresponding apparent diffusion co-
efficient map.
Fig. 8.10 Patient with tuberculosis. (a) Enhanced axial T1-weighted image shows a lesion with peripheral enhancement
and perilesional edema. (b) Axial diffusion weighted imaging shows hypointensity on its central portion (arrow).
DWI and DTI in Infectious Diseases
120

T2-weighted
images.
The
hyperintense
DWI
lesions can present as restricted diﬀusion, prob-
ably related to encephalitis and cytotoxic edema.21
The cytotoxic edema as the explanation of ADC
restriction in these cases is still controversial;
some patients present with complete resolution of
the lesions in the follow-up studies or important
clinical recovery both of which would not be
expected in cytotoxic edema.22
Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE) is a
rare progressive degenerative/inflammatory dis-
ease that occurs several years following measles
infection. Correlation between clinical staging of
the disease and MRI findings is poor, and some-
times MRI examinations show normal findings in
severely compromised patients. The regions most
aﬀected are the periventricular and subcortical
white matter and corpus callosum, which present
as
hyperintensity
on
T2-weighted
and
FLAIR
images, generally with no contrast enhancement.
Areas with decreased and increased ADC have
been described in very early SSPE. In the most
advanced stages of the disease, ADC of diverse
regions of the brain is increased, and these values
become higher with disease progression.23
Fungal Infections
Fungal infections are rare in the general popula-
tion, except in diabetic and immunocompromised
patients. CNS involvement in fungal disease may
be
secondary
to
paranasal
sinus
infections
(▶Fig. 8.14) or due to hematogenous dissemina-
tion from other sites such as the lung.24 In the
same manner as bacterial infections, fungal infec-
tions
can
present
as
meningitis,
cerebritis,
abscesses, and granulomas. Vascular complications
can also ensue and include acute infarctions and
mycotic (infectious) aneurysms. CNS involvement
depends on the size of the fungal agent: yeast,
which are small unicellular fungi, more commonly
tend to cause meningitis and microabscesses,
Fig. 8.11
Patient with herpes encephalitis. (a) Studies show bilateral temporal corticosubcortical involvement
characterized by hyperintensity on axial and (b) coronal fluid-attenuated inversion recovery images, extending to frontal
and insular areas. (c) There is hyperintensity on diffusion weighted imaging, (d) hypointensity on apparent diffusion
coefficient map, and (e) no enhancement on enhanced T1-weighted image.
DWI and DTI in Infectious Diseases
121

whereas the large hyphal organisms tend to
involve the brain parenchyma.25
The most common fungal agents resulting in
meningitis
are
Cryptococcus
neoformans
and
Candida albicans. Besides the meningeal contrast
enhancement, DWI can demonstrate subarachnoid
hyperintensity
in
cryptococcal
meningitis
(▶Fig. 8.15). When fungal meningitis is associated
with paranasal sinus infection, the characteristic
findings of the fungal sinus infection should be
searched for and include sinonasal mucosal nodu-
lar thickening, typically without air-fluid levels,
presenting hyperintensity on CT and hypointensity
on T1 and T2-weighted images.25
MRI findings of fungal cerebritis are nonspecific
with T2-weighted and FLAIR hyperintensity and
variable DWI findings and contrast enhancement.
DWI can show a heterogeneous hyperintense le-
sion with foci of restricted diﬀusion, and contrast
enhancement can be subtle or absent.25,26
Both pyogenic and fungal abscesses in immuno-
competent patients can present as ring-enhancing
lesions. In the immunocompromised patient the
lack of enhancement may be related to the host
immune system not working properly.25 A T2-
hypointense rim is also described for both fungal
and bacterial abscesses. The diﬀerentiation of
fungal from pyogenic abscess should be based on
the numbers of lesions wherein fungal abscesses
are usually multiple as well as on the lesion bor-
ders characteristics usually fungal abscesses pre-
senting lobulated or crenulated borders. On DWI,
the walls of fungal abscesses may present as
restricted diﬀusion, but its central portion usually
has no restricted diﬀusion (▶Fig. 8.16). Rarely
restricted diﬀusion of the core of fungal abscesses
similar to pyogenic abscesses have been described
(▶Fig. 8.17 and ▶Fig. 8.18).24,25
Fungal granulomas are rare and usually related
to Aspergillus or Cryptococcus infections. They
present intermediate to low signal intensity on T2-
weighted images with surrounding T2-hyperin-
tense edema.25
Cryptococcus neoformans is a yeastlike fungus that
aﬀects immunocompromised as well as immuno-
competent patients. Cryptococcosis can aﬀect the
CNS as mentioned before and most commonly
presents as meningitis, but it can also present as
parenchymal involvement (gelatinous pseudocysts
or cryptococcomas). Parenchymal involvement can
be secondary to dissemination through the Virch-
ow–Robin spaces, forming gelatinous pseudocysts.
The gelatinous pseudocysts do not present restricted
diﬀusion (▶Fig. 8.19), and their enhancement varies
Fig. 8.12
Patient with cytomegalovi-
rus. (a) Axial fluid-attenuated inversion
recovery and (b) diffusion weighted
image at the atrium level shows a
curvilinear hyperintensity (arrows)
along the ventricular wall with (c)
definite low apparent diffusion coeffi-
cient value (arrows), along with subtle
ependymal enhancement on (d) post-
contrast T1-weighted image (arrows).
DWI and DTI in Infectious Diseases
122

depending on the immune status of the patient.
Cryptococcomas usually occur in immunocompetent
patients, and they can be located in perivascular
spaces or in the cortical regions.27
Aspergillus fumigatus is the most common fun-
gus to result in CNS parenchymal involvement.
CNS invasive aspergillosis can present as encepha-
litis with or without abscess, granulomas, and
dural-based masses. MRI findings of Aspergillus
abscess are the same as already described for other
fungal abscesses, but hemorrhagic foci can occur
and DWI findings vary (▶Fig. 8.20). Aspergillosis
can
also
manifest
as
extra-axial
dural-based
lesions
that
can
show
hypointensity
on
T2-
weighted images and homogeneous contrast en-
hancement. Other characteristics of CNS aspergil-
losis are the occurrence of vascular invasion with
vasculitis, secondary brain infarction, and, rarely,
mycotic aneurysms or parenchymal hemorrhages.
DWI can detect early infarctions that can later be
complicated by cerebral abscesses.24
Parasitic Diseases
The most common parasitic diseases of the CNS
are neurocysticercosis (NCC) and toxoplasmosis,
which most commonly aﬀect immunocompetent
and immunosuppressed patients, respectively.
NCC is a pleomorphic disease in its clinical and
imaging presentations. The main location in the
CNS is the brain parenchyma, followed by the CSF
spaces. Brain lesions present four diﬀerent stages:
vesicular, colloidal, granular nodular, and nodular
calcified. The coexistence of diﬀerent stages in var-
ious locations is frequent. In the vesicular stage the
cysticercus is viable, there is no inflammation, and
the lesion has CSF signal intensity with the sco-
lex as an eccentric mural nodule.28 On DWI the
scolex shows as a
hyperintense dot/comma-
shaped structure (▶Fig. 8.21), and, due to its
small size, its ADC cannot be accurately meas-
ured in many cases. The scolex can also be iden-
tified in the colloidal vesicular stage lesions.
Fig. 8.13
Patient with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome with progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML).
PML lesions involve the subcortical white matter bilaterally and assymetrically. There are hyperintensity lesions on (a) T2,
(b) fluid-attenuated inversion recovery, (c) diffusion weighted imaging (DWI), and (d) apparent diffusion coefficient
map images. On DWI, the periphery of the lesions is hyperintense when compared to their central portions (arrows). (e)
No contrast enhancement is seen on T1-weighted images postgadolinium.
DWI and DTI in Infectious Diseases
123

Detection of the scolex has an important diag-
nostic role because its presence is nearly patho-
gnomonic of NCC.29 In the colloidal stage there is
perilesional edema and peripheral contrast en-
hancement
as
degeneration
begins
and
an
inflammatory process ensues. The signal inten-
sity of the lesion is becames higher than CSF on
FLAIR images as the scolex starts to degenerate.
In the granular nodular stage, the parasite is
dead, the lesion retracts, and the edema and
contrast enhancement progressively subside. On
DWI, NCC in the colloidal vesicular or granular
nodular phases may appear hyperintense with
restriction of diﬀusion (▶Fig. 8.22), which may
be related to cyst degeneration. In the nodular
calcified stage there is mineralization of the
Fig. 8.14 Patient with sinus fungal infection (mucormycosis). Study showes intracranial extension to the anterior fossa
(open arrow) as seen on the (a) coronal enhanced T1-weighted image as a peripherally enhancing lesion, hypointensity
(arrow) on (b) T2-weighted image with perilesional edema. (c) There is restricted diffusion better characterized as
hypointensity on the apparent diffusion coefficient map, (d) but also visible as high signal on diffusion weighted imaging
(arrows).
DWI and DTI in Infectious Diseases
124

lesion.30 Gupta et al31 used DTI in a study of 25
patients with NCC and found decreased MD dur-
ing evolution of NCC lesions from vesicular to
granular. FA presented higher
values in the
calcified stage compared to the other stages,
explained by a decrease of water content from
vesicular to granular forms and more organized
appearance in the calcified lesion.
Fig. 8.15
Cryptococcal meningitis. (a) Magnetic resonance imaging shows enlarged parietal sulci and some foci of
hyperintensity on diffusion weighted imaging (arrow) throughout the frontal and parietal lobes. (b) Note also peripheral
lesion and sulcal hyperintensities on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (arrow) and (c) enhancement in the same
regions on the post-contrast T1-weighted image (arrow).
Fig. 8.16
Fungal abscess. (a) The lesion shows hypointensity on T2 (arrow), (b) hyperintensity on T1-weighted image,
(c) subtle contrast enhancement (arrow), and (d) no susceptibility effect on the T2 gradient-recalled echo. There is
perilesional edema. (e) Diffusion weighted imaging shows peripheral hyperintensity and hypointensity in the core.
DWI and DTI in Infectious Diseases
125

Toxoplasmosis
is
an
opportunistic
disease
whose prevalence has increased since the AIDS
epidemic. Its etiologic agent is an intracellular pro-
tozoan, Toxoplasma gondi. PCR of serum or CSF has
a high sensitivity and specificity for the diagnosis
of toxoplasmosis. The basal ganglia, thalamus, and
cortico–white matter junctions are aﬀected most
commonly.
The
lesions
are
usually
multiple.
Toxoplasma lesions are most commonly seen as
ring-enhancing lesions with an eccentric target
sign that corresponds to a nodule along the wall of
the enhancing rim, a finding that is highly sugges-
tive of toxoplasmosis but is seen in < 30% of cases.
On DWI the lesion core is iso- to slight hypoin-
tense to normal white matter with increased ADC
(no restriction of diﬀusion) (▶Fig. 8.23). The fact
Fig. 8.17 Cryptococcal abscess. The lesion in the right cerebellum shows restricted diffusion with (a) hyperintensity on
diffusion weighted imaging, and (b) hypointensity on apparent diffusion coefficient. There is hypointensity on (c) T2-
weighted image, but not on (d) T2 gradient-recalled echo, confirming that its T2 appearance is not due to hemorrhage
or calcifications. (e) Predominantly peripheral contrast enhancement is seen on postgadolinium T1-weighted image.
Note that there is a smaller lesion with the same characteristics in the left anterior pons (white arrow).
Fig. 8.18
Patient with multiple fungal abscesses. (a) Enhanced axial T1-weighted image demonstrates multiple ring-
enhancing lesions. (b) Axial diffusion weighted image shows that some of these lesions present central hyperintensities
with reduced apparent diffusion coefficient (arrow) in the (c) ADC map.
DWI and DTI in Infectious Diseases
126

Fig. 8.19
Cryptococcal gelatinous pseudocysts. Mucinous cryptococcal material filling and dilating perivascular spaces
within the basal ganglia, known as gelatinous pseudocysts, (a) tend to mirror cerebrospinal fluid signal intensity on T2-
weighted image, and (b) show hyperintensity on fluid-attenuated inversion. There is no restricted diffusion on (c) DWI
and (d) ADC map (arrows on both images) neither (e) contrast enhancement.
Fig. 8.20
Patient immunosuppressed after bone marrow transplant due to myelofibrosis with cerebral and pulmonary
aspergillosis. (a) Axial T2-weighted image shows two lesions with hypointense rim (arrows), central hyperintensity and
peripheral edema. (b) Axial diffusion weighted image shows hyperintensity on the central core and on the borders of
the lesions with restricted diffusion on (c) apparent diffusion coefficient map.
DWI and DTI in Infectious Diseases
127

that the wall of a Toxoplasma abscess has intracel-
lular and extracellular tachyzoites with no collage-
nous capsule and that its core consists primarily of
necrotic tissue without any viscous, proteinaceous,
and inflammatory debris may explain its presenta-
tion on DWI.32 Unfortunately ADC values of lym-
phoma and toxoplasmosis lesions may present a
significant overlap in patients with AIDS; thus the
use of DWI to diﬀerentiate among these lesions is
limited.33
Prion Infections
Prion infections are caused by self-replicating pro-
teins that induce lethal neurodegenerative dis-
eases. The most common human prion infection is
the sporadic Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (sCJD) that
causes dementia in younger patients.34
DWI has an important role in the diagnosis of
prion infections that usually aﬀect cortical and
deep gray matter. Restricted diﬀusion is the typical
finding, although its pathological substrate is still
Fig. 8.21
Multiple neurocysticercosis lesions are identified on (a) fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), (b)
diffusion weighted imaging (DWI), (c) apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map, and, most accurately, on (d) Fast
Imaging Employing Steady-State Acquisition (FIESTA imaging) (GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI). The scolex is identified as
a hyperintense dot on the (b) DWI sequence and (a) FLAIR, and low signal on the (c) ADC map and (d) FIESTA images. It
is particularly easy to see it in the vesicule located in the right thalamus.
DWI and DTI in Infectious Diseases
128

Fig. 8.22
Cysticercosis. Ring-enhanc-
ing nodular left medial parietal lesion
on (a) T1-weighted image has hyper-
intensity on (b) fluid-attenuated in-
version recovery and perilesional
edema. (c) The diffusion weighted
imaging shows hyperintensity in its
core (arrow) and (d) iso-/low signal on
the apparent diffusion coefficient map.
Fig. 8.23
Cerebral toxoplasmosis with multiple basal ganglia and gray matter–white matter junction lesions. (a)
Unenhanced T1-weighted image shows hyperintense borders (arrow) in some lesions, which have a somewhat irregular
and “shaggy” appearance and hypointensity of their central portions. (b) Axial fluid-attenuated inversion recovery and
(c) T2 gradient-recalled echo magnetic resonance images show hyperintense lesions and marked perilesional edema but
no susceptibility effects. (d) Diffusion weighted imaging shows hyperintensity rims (arrow) and hypointensity core in the
lesions, (e) with no restriction on the apparent diffusion coefficient map. (f) Contrast-enhanced T1-weighted image
shows predominantly peripheral but also some internal enhancement of the lesions.
129

controversial (▶Fig. 8.24). It seems that reduced
ADC in the deep gray matter correlates with spon-
giform changes, whereas restricted diﬀusion in the
cortex correlates to spongiform changes, gliosis,
and neuronal loss. In the late stages of the disease,
ADC may be normal in the aﬀected areas.34
In sCJD, DWI has a high sensitivity (83–100%) for
lesion detection. Wang et al, in 2013,35 used DTI in
a cohort of nine patients with sCJD and found
decreased MD, axial diﬀusivity, and radial diﬀusiv-
ity, but normal FA within the caudate nuclei and
pulvinars in comparison with other patients with
progressive dementia and controls. These authors
hypothesize that spongiform changes impair water
diﬀusion in all directions with a relative preserva-
tion of FA.
8.2 Summary
As stated before, DWI can be a very useful tool in
the diagnosis of CNS infectious diseases. Infectious
meningitis can present areas of hyperintensity on
DWI regardless of its etiology, and when this find-
ing is associated with meningeal enhancement it
can suggest the proper diagnosis.
DWI can provide additional information that is
useful
in
the
diﬀerentiation
of
the types of
abscesses because all may present similar appear-
ances
on
conventional
MRI
scans.
Pyogenic
abscesses
present
smooth
walls,
T2-weighted
hypointense rims, and a hyperintense core with
reduced (restricted) ADC. Tuberculous and fungal
abscesses present variable signal intensity on DWI.
Fungal abscesses tend to be multiple with crenated
or lobulated borders. The diﬀusion is variable, but
restricted diﬀusion could be seen.
The most common viral CNS infection is herpes
encephalitis, which presents as areas of restricted
diﬀusion in the temporal and frontal lobes, insula,
and cingulated gyrus. The DWI findings are early
findings of herpes encephalitis and can help in
instituting prompt treatment.
In immunocompromised
patients, PML may
show a leading edge with hyperintensity on DWI
and restricted diﬀusion, usually without contrast
enhancement. Toxoplasmosis lesions are usually
multiple enhancing lesions that do not present
with restricted diﬀusion.
In sporadic Creutzfeldt Jacob disease, DWI is an
important diagnostic tool. DWI has a high sensitiv-
ity (83–100%) for lesion detection in this disease.
Fig. 8.24 Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease. (a,b) Magnetic resonance images demonstrate basal ganglia, thalamus, and frontal
ribbon-like cortical (arrows) signal intensity abnormalities on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery, (c,d) but more striking
on diffusion weighted imaging, (e, f) and with low signal on the apparent diffusion coefficient map. Note the typical
involvement of the posterior and medial thalami (arrows in (c)).
DWI and DTI in Infectious Diseases
130

References
[1] Hughes DC, Raghavan A, Mordekar SR, Griﬃths PD, Connolly
DJ. Role of imaging in the diagnosis of acute bacterial men-
ingitis and its complications. Postgrad Med J 2010; 86
(1018): 478–485
[2] Kastrup O, Wanke I, Maschke M. Neuroimaging of infections.
NeuroRx 2005; 2(2): 324–332
[3] Fertikh D, Krejza J, Cunqueiro A, Danish S, Alokaili R, Melhem
ER. Discrimination of capsular stage brain abscesses from
necrotic or cystic neoplasms using diﬀusion weighted mag-
netic resonance imaging. J Neurosurg 2007; 106(1): 76–81
[4] Ebisu T, Tanaka C, Umeda M, et al. Discrimination of brain
abscess from necrotic or cystic tumors by diﬀusion weighted
echo planar imaging. Magn Reson Imaging 1996; 14(9):
1113–1116
[5] Reddy JS, Mishra AM, Behari S, et al. The role of diﬀusion
weighted imaging in the diﬀerential diagnosis of intracrani-
al cystic mass lesions: a report of 147 lesions. Surg Neurol
2006; 66(3): 246–250, discussion 250–251
[6] Nath K, Ramola M, Husain M, Kumar M, Prasad K, Gupta R.
Assessment of therapeutic response in patients with brain
abscess using diﬀusion tensor imaging. World Neurosurg
2010; 73(1): 63–68, discussion e6
[7] Gupta RK, Hasan KM, Mishra AM, et al. High fractional ani-
sotropy in brain abscesses versus other cystic intracranial
lesions. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2005; 26(5): 1107–1114
[8] Gupta RK, Nath K, Prasad A, et al. In vivo demonstration of
neuroinflammatory molecule expression in brain abscess
with diﬀusion tensor imaging. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2008;
29(2): 326–332
[9] Han K-T, Choi DS, Ryoo JW, et al. Diﬀusion weighted MR
imaging of pyogenic intraventricular empyema. Neuroradi-
ology 2007; 49(10): 813–818
[10] Nickerson JP, Richner B, Santy K, et al. Neuroimaging of
pediatric intracranial infection—part 1: techniques and bac-
terial infections. J Neuroimaging 2012; 22(2): e42–e51
[11] Shukla R, Abbas A, Kumar P, Gupta RK, Jha S, Prasad KN. Eval-
uation of cerebral infarction in tuberculous meningitis by dif-
fusion weighted imaging. J Infect 2008; 57(4): 298–306
[12] Gupta RK, Prakash M, Mishra AM, Husain M, Prasad KN,
Husain N. Role of diﬀusion weighted imaging in diﬀerentia-
tion of intracranial tuberculoma and tuberculous abscess
from cysticercus granulomas-a report of more than 100
lesions. Eur J Radiol 2005; 55(3): 384–392
[13] Gupta RK, Kumar S. Central nervous system tuberculosis.
Neuroimaging Clin N Am 2011; 21(4): 795–814, vii–viii
[14] Sener RN. Herpes simplex encephalitis: diﬀusion MR imag-
ing findings. Comput Med Imaging Graph 2001; 25(5): 391–
397
[15] Grydeland H, Walhovd KB, Westlye LT, et al. Amnesia fol-
lowing herpes simplex encephalitis: diﬀusion tensor imag-
ing uncovers reduced integrity of normal-appearing white
matter. Radiology 2010; 257(3): 774–781
[16] Seok JH, Ahn K, Park HJ. Diﬀusion MRI findings of cytomega-
lovirus-associated ventriculitis: a case report. Br J Radiol
2011; 84(1005): e179–e181
[17] Cosottini M, Tavarelli C, Del Bono L, et al. Diﬀusion weighted
imaging in patients with progressive multifocal leukoence-
phalopathy. Eur Radiol 2008; 18(5): 1024–1030
[18] Barata Tavares J, Geraldo AF, Neto L, Reimão S, Campos JG.
Diﬀusion weighted MR imaging characterization of progres-
sive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) lesions [in Por-
tuguese]. Acta Med Port 2012; 25 Suppl 1: 34–37
[19] Buckle C, Castillo M. Use of diﬀusion weighted imaging to
evaluate the initial response of progressive multifocal leu-
koencephalopathy to highly active antiretroviral therapy: early
experience. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2010; 31(6): 1031–1035
[20] Chen Y, An H, Zhu H, et al. White matter abnormalities
revealed by diﬀusion tensor imaging in non-demented and
demented HIV+patients. Neuroimage 2009; 47(4): 1154–1162
[21] Tokunaga Y, Kira R, Takemoto M, et al. Diagnostic usefulness
of diﬀusion weighted magnetic resonance imaging in influ-
enza-associated acute encephalopathy or encephalitis. Brain
Dev 2000; 22(7): 451–453
[22] Kim JH, Joo B-E, Koh S-B. Serial diﬀusion weighted MR imag-
ing findings in a patient with Epstein-Barr virus encephali-
tis. J Neurol 2007; 254(11): 1616–1618
[23] Abuhandan M, Cece H, Calik M, Karakas E, Dogan F, Karakas
O. An evaluation of subacute sclerosing panencephalitis
patients with diﬀusion weighted magnetic resonance imag-
ing. Clin Neuroradiol 2013; 23(1): 25–30
[24] Saini J, Gupta AK, Jolapara MB, et al. Imaging findings in
intracranial
aspergillus
infection
in
immunocompetent
patients [published correction appears in World Neurosurg
2012;78(6):e1. Note: Chandreshekher, Kesavadas corrected
to Kesavadas, Chandrasekharan]. World Neurosurg 2010; 74
(6): 661–670
[25] Mathur M, Johnson CE, Sze G. Fungal infections of the cen-
tral nervous system. Neuroimaging Clin N Am 2012; 22(4):
609–632
[26] Gaviani P, Schwartz RB, Hedley-Whyte ET, et al. Diﬀusion
weighted imaging of fungal cerebral infection. AJNR Am J
Neuroradiol 2005; 26(5): 1115–1121
[27] Khandelwal N, Gupta V, Singh P. Central nervous system
fungal infections in tropics. Neuroimaging Clin N Am 2011;
21(4): 859–866, viii
[28] Raﬃn LS, Bacheschi LA, Machado LR, Nóbrega JP, Coelho C,
Leite CC. Diﬀusion weighted MR imaging of cystic lesions of
neurocysticercosis: a preliminary study. Arq Neuropsiquiatr
2001; 59(4): 839–842
[29] Del Brutto OH, Rajshekhar V, White AC, Jr et al. Proposed
diagnostic criteria for neurocysticercosis. Neurology 2001;
57(2): 177–183
[30] Santos GT, Leite CC, Machado LR, McKinney AM, Lucato LT.
Reduced diﬀusion in neurocysticercosis: circumstances of
appearance and possible natural history implications. AJNR
Am J Neuroradiol 2013; 34(2): 310–316
[31] Gupta RK, Trivedi R, Awasthi R, Paliwal VK, Prasad KN,
Rathore RK. Understanding changes in DTI metrics in
patients with diﬀerent stages of neurocysticercosis. Magn
Reson Imaging 2012; 30(1): 104–111
[32] Chong-Han CH, Cortez SC, Tung GA. Diﬀusion weighted MRI
of cerebral toxoplasma abscess. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2003;
181(6): 1711–1714
[33] Schroeder PC, Post MJ, Oschatz E, Stadler A, Bruce-Gregorios
J, Thurnher MM. Analysis of the utility of diﬀusion weighted
MRI and apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient values in distinguish-
ing central nervous system toxoplasmosis from lymphoma.
Neuroradiology 2006; 48(10): 715–720
[34] Letourneau-Guillon L, Wada R, Kucharczyk W. Imaging of
prion diseases. J Magn Reson Imaging 2012; 35(5): 998–
1012
[35] Wang LH, Bucelli RC, Patrick E, et al. Role of magnetic reso-
nance imaging, cerebrospinal fluid, and electroencephalo-
gram in diagnosis of sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. J
Neurol 2013; 260(2): 498–506
DWI and DTI in Infectious Diseases
131

9 Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging and Diﬀusion Tensor
Imaging in Demyelination and Toxic Diseases
Celi Santos Andrade, Carolina de Medeiros Rimkus, Claudia da Costa Leite, Alexander M. McKinney, and Leandro
T. Lucato
Key Points
●Demyelinating lesions can be pathologically
heterogeneous, depending on the degree of
inflammation, membrane disruption, and type
of cellular damage. Demyelinating lesions are
more frequently associated with increased dif-
fusion of water molecules (high apparent diﬀu-
sion coeﬃcient [ADC]), but may show areas of
restricted diﬀusion (low ADC), depending on
the age and size of the lesions.
●Diﬀusion tensor imaging (DTI) in chronic dis-
eases, such as multiple sclerosis and neuromye-
litis optica, is more likely to demonstrate occult
microscopic damage, which can be detected
by increased mean diﬀusivity (MD) and
decreased fractional anisotropy (FA) in the nor-
mal-appearing brain tissue.
●Central nervous system (CNS) toxic diseases
can be caused by a wide variety of chemicals,
whether due to medications or environmental
exposure. Although some neurotoxins may
preferentially aﬀect specific CNS structures, the
main magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) find-
ings are often nonspecific, with white matter
(WM) areas of hyperintensity on T2-weighted
and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR)
images, and, less commonly, variable changes
in the basal ganglia and cerebellar nuclei. Typi-
cally, the MRI changes are symmetric and
present with reduced diﬀusion in the acute
phase, a finding often described as acute toxic
leukoencephalopathy.
9.1 Diﬀusion Weighted
Imaging and Diﬀusion Tensor
Imaging in Demyelinating
Diseases
9.1.1 Introduction
Demyelinating lesions are pathologically heteroge-
neous, depending on the phase of inflammatory
activity, the degree of cellular destruction, or their
etiological background.1 The tissue changes associ-
ated with demyelination determine variations in
water content of the tissue, reflecting variable
degrees
of
cellular
swelling
and
extracellular
edema.2
Acute demyelinating lesions may show diﬀerent
levels
of
cytotoxic
or
intramyelinic
edema.
Increases in water concentration in the brain tis-
sues demonstrate nonspecific hyperintensity on
T2-weighted images, but the abnormal cellular
uptake of water or restricted water between mye-
lin membranes reduces its molecular diﬀusion,
showing
high
signal
intensity
on
diﬀusion
weighted images (DWIs) with decreased apparent
diﬀusion coeﬃcient (ADC).2
On the other hand, inflammatory and metabolic
changes may cause vasogenic and interstitial ede-
ma secondary to increased permeability of small
vessels and blood–brain barrier (BBB) disruption,
which causes increased ADC values. The superpo-
sition of events leading to restricted and facilitated
water diﬀusion may produce variable results in
DWI and ADC, from water restriction to mixed
findings to T2 shine-through eﬀects.2
In chronic phases, demyelinating lesions may
show complete resolution, with normalization of
T2, DWI, and ADC, but lesions can also present per-
sistent T2 hyperintense foci, representing residual
gliosis, and persistent demyelination or axonal
loss. In these situations the extracellular space is
expanded frequently, resulting in increased ADC
values.3,4 Although DWI is sensitive to lesions with
long T2 relaxation times, in the late stages of
demyelination
this
technique
is
not
specific
enough to classify or to grade the underlying
pathological substrate.
Diﬀusion tensor imaging (DTI) allows further
assessment of the microstructure of brain tissues.5
Chronic demyelinating lesions frequently show
visible foci of decreased fractional anisotropy (FA)
with increased mean diﬀusivity (MD) (▶Fig. 9.1).
Those DTI parameters do not diﬀerentiate demye-
lination, axon disruption, or gliosis. But recently,
the analysis of decomposed eigenvalues of DTI
showed stronger correlations between radial diﬀu-
sivity (λ〦) and demyelination, whereas the axial
DWI and DTI in Demyelination and Toxic Diseases
132

diﬀusivity (λ||) seems to be associated with more
profound tissue damage or axonal loss.5,6
DTI is also becoming a valuable tool in the diﬀer-
ential diagnosis of demyelinating diseases. Chronic
demyelinating diseases, such as multiple sclerosis
(MS), are known to present extension of micro-
architectural damage outside of the macroscopic
lesions.3,7 Even though the white and gray matter
abnormalities are not visible in DTI maps, several
studies have demonstrated abnormal quantitative
parameters, such as FA reduction and MD increase
in the normal-appearing white matter (NAWM)
and gray matter (NAGM) of patients with demyeli-
nating disorders.5,7,8,9
9.1.2 Multiple Sclerosis
MS is the most common chronic demyelinating
disease in adults. MS lesions usually appear as
hyperintense foci on T2-weighted and fluid-atte-
nuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images with
perivenular distribution, typically aﬀecting the
periventricular, juxtacortical, infratentorial, and
spinal cord white matter (WM). Acute demyelinat-
ing MS lesions present variable DWI and ADC
findings, which are time dependent.10 The ADC
values increase by the time gadolinium (Gd)
enhancement appears, then they progressively
decrease as enhancement vanishes and increase
again with lesion progression to chronic stages.10
Most lesions, by the time of a clinical relapse
evaluation, have some degree of demyelination,
inflammatory
infiltrate
and/or
microstructural
damage, and variable cytotoxic and intramyelinic
edema,5,10
which
may
show
mixed
diﬀusion
eﬀects, with areas of restricted and facilitated dif-
fusion (▶Fig. 9.2) or T2 shine-through eﬀects
(▶Fig. 9.3).
As
already
mentioned,
MS
lesions
show
decreased FA and increased MD, with lower FA in
the ring of enhancement.5 In MS, DTI changes
can be detected in the NAWM, being more evident
in
the
periplaque
regions,
corpus
callosum
(▶Fig. 9.4), and temporal and parietal lobes,5,6
which can be helpful in distinguishing MS from
other demyelinating disorders.
9.1.3 Acute Disseminated
Encephalomyelitis
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) is a
monophasic demyelinating disease with a wide
range of clinical manifestations.3 It is often consid-
ered in the diﬀerential diagnosis of clinical isolated
Fig. 9.1 Chronic demyelinating lesion in a patient with multiple sclerosis. (a) The fractional anisotropy (FA) map shows a
periventricular focus of decreased FA (arrow), (b) whereas the mean diffusivity image demonstrates high signal (arrow),
corresponding to the increased diffusion in a chronic demyelinating lesion.
DWI and DTI in Demyelination and Toxic Diseases
133

syndromes (CISs) and other multiphasic demyeli-
nating diseases, such as MS and neuromyelitis
optica (NMO).11
ADEM lesions aﬀect deep gray matter structures
more frequently than MS, and the white matter
lesions can be larger, with indistinct borders and
Fig. 9.2
Mixed diffusion effects in a diffuse infiltrating multiple sclerosis lesion. (a) Axial fluid-attenuated inversion
recovery shows large, hyperintense, confluent cerebral lesions, especially on the left. (b) Enhanced axial T1-weighted
image shows signs of inflammatory activity characterized by multiple foci of enhancement. (c) On diffusion weighted
imaging the lesion is hyperintense, but notice a more intense hyperintense portion (arrow), when compared to other
areas (arrowheads). (d) The corresponding apparent diffusion coefficient map confirms that they present distinct
behavior: whereas the former shows restricted diffusion (hypointense, arrow), the latter are associated with increased
diffusion (hyperintense, arrowheads).
DWI and DTI in Demyelination and Toxic Diseases
134

occasional
gadolinium
enhancement.11,12
DWI
findings
can
vary,
more
frequently
showing
increased ADC in the central portions of the
lesions. When
restricted
diﬀusion
is
seen,
it
appears in the borders of larger lesions or in the
enhancing margins (▶Fig. 9.5).12,13
Although ADEM is usually monophasic, some
patients may show both clinical and imaging find-
ings of recurrence, with T2-weighted imaging
characteristics that can overlap those of with MS
and NMO.11 Unlike MS, the abnormalities seen on
DWI tend to be restricted to the T2-weighted
Fig. 9.3
T2 shine-through effect in a chronic multiple sclerosis lesion. (a) Axial fluid-attenuated inversion recovery
demonstrates a hyperintense lesion (arrow) with no signs of acute inflammatory exacerbation on (b) corresponding
enhanced axial T1-weighted image. The lesion presents hyperintensity on (c) diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) and (d)
apparent diffusion coefficient map, corresponding to facilitated diffusion (arrows in (c, d)). Thus the increased signal
intensity seen on DWI more likely represents a T2 shine-through effect, and not true restricted water diffusion.
DWI and DTI in Demyelination and Toxic Diseases
135

lesions, and it is unusual to detect increased MD in
the NAWM in ADEM outside of the acute phase.13
In ADEM the deep gray matter structures show
more significant abnormalities on DTI than in MS,
even without evidence of T2-weighted detectable
lesions, and they present as increased MD in the
thalami and basal ganglia.11 These findings suggest
that, not only can the qualitative changes in DTI
parameters be helpful but also the pattern of
abnormalities can play a role in the diﬀerential
diagnosis.
9.1.4 Neuromyelitis Optica
NMO is a demyelinating disease characterized by
severe, recurrent attacks of optic neuritis and
extensive myelitis.14 The classical presentation of
NMO is associated with an autoantibody targeted
to the water channel protein aquaporin 4 (NMO–
immunoglobulin
G
[IgG]),
which
is
not only
present in the optic nerve and spinal cord but is
also commonly found around the ventricles, the
hypothalamus, and the subcortical white matter.15
NMO does not spare the brain, and NMO-related
hyperintense lesions on T2-weighted images tend
to be larger than MS lesions and follow the typical
distribution
of
aquaporin
4
channel
sites
(▶Fig. 9.6), but may show overlapping characteris-
tics with MS and ADEM, especially in the initial
stages.8
There are abnormalities in the NAWM in NMO,
seen as reduced FA in the pyramidal tracts and
optic radiations, presumably associated with wal-
lerian degeneration secondary to optic nerve and
spinal cord lesions.8,15 Recently, a tract-based spa-
tial statistics study showed FA reduction in the
genu and body of the corpus callosum, external
capsules, uncinate fasciculus, inferior longitudinal
fasciculus, and inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus,
mostly related to λ〦(radial diﬀusion) changes,
probably reflecting extensive demyelination.15
Furthermore, DTI changes in the corpus callos-
um in NMO were described as milder and predom-
inantly in its anterior half, whereas in MS DTI
changes are more extensive and have a posterior
predominance.6,8
9.1.5 Tumefactive Demyelinating
Lesion
Tumefactive
demyelinating
lesions
(TDLs)
are
defined as lesions > 2 cm in diameter. They can be
Fig. 9.4
Color fractional anisotropy (FA) maps for a healthy control compared to those for a patient with multiple
sclerosis (MS). (a) The color FA map of a healthy subject compared to that of (b) a patient with MS shows a more intense
red color in the splenium of the corpus callosum of the subject when compared to the patient (arrows in (a,b)). Areas of
decreased color intensity in the MS patient compared to the healthy subject are also observed in the peritrigonal white
matter, bilaterally (arrowheads in (a,b)).
DWI and DTI in Demyelination and Toxic Diseases
136

the first presentation of MS, NMO, ADEM, or idio-
pathic demyelinating events. On MRI, a TDL is a
large white matter lesion with variable mass eﬀect,
absence of cortical involvement, a complete or
open ring of contrast enhancement, vessel-like
structures running through its center, a T2-hypo-
intense ring, and peripheral restricted diﬀusion on
DWI (▶Fig. 9.7).16 Conventional MRI findings
overlap between the diﬀerent demyelinating syn-
dromes and TDL and can mimic high-grade glio-
mas or other neoplastic lesions.16,17
DTI yields additional information to distinguish
TDL from high-grade gliomas.17 High-grade glio-
mas frequently demonstrate a rim of increased FA
in the perilesional edema, which is not usually
described in TDLs.17
Fig. 9.5
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis tumefactive lesions. (a) Magnetic resonance imaging shows two
tumefactive left cerebral subcortical lesions on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery. (b) One of the lesions demonstrates
incomplete ring enhancement in the corresponding enhanced axial T1-weighted image (arrow). The enhancing area
presents peripheral restricted diffusion (arrows in (c, d)), (c) observed as increased signal on diffusion weighted imaging
and decreased signal on the (d) apparent diffusion coefficient map.
DWI and DTI in Demyelination and Toxic Diseases
137

9.1.6 Baló Concentric Sclerosis
Baló concentric sclerosis is a rare variant of acute
demyelinating diseases, characterized by alternat-
ing rings of demyelination and preserved myelin
or remyelination.1 Pathological studies describe
edges of active demyelination surrounding demye-
linated areas where exacerbated inflammatory
activity is present. Interestingly, the active demye-
lination edges sometimes follow the pattern of
hypoxic lesions.1 In the acute phase, MRI shows
concentric bands of demyelination, hyperintense
on T2-weighted images and hypointense on T1-
weighted images, alternating with rings isointense
to white matter thought to be preserved myelin or
remyelination. Concentric ring gadolinium en-
hancement is seen in the bands of active demyeli-
nation and progressively disappears in the late
acute and chronic stages of the disease. Restricted
diﬀusion is frequently present in the enhancing
rings, whereas the nonenhancing bands usually
show high ADC values (▶Fig. 9.8).1
9.1.7 Osmotic Myelinolysis
Osmotic demyelination typically occurs after rapid
correction of hyponatremia.18 It refers, more fre-
quently, to central pontine myelinolysis, with
acute demyelination of white matter tracts in the
pons, sparing peripheral fibers (ventrolateral lon-
gitudinal fibers), and the periventricular white
matter. Similar lesions can occur outside the pons,
aﬀecting the basal ganglia, midbrain, and subcorti-
cal white matter, characteristic of the so-called
extrapontine myelinolysis.19
Osmotic myelinolysis is usually preceded by an
initial phase of unspecific encephalopathy attrib-
uted to the electrolyte disturbance. Following rap-
id
reversal
of
this
disturbance,
a
transient
improvement is observed, and 2 or 3 days later,
the patient progresses to spastic quadriplegia,
pseudobulbar
palsy,
and
variable
levels
of
consciousness.18
In the hyperacute onset of osmotic demyelina-
tion, restricted diﬀusion is seen in the lesions.
Later, there is increasing T2-hyperintensity and
T1-hypointensity, symmetrically distributed in the
central pons, frequently showing a classic trident
appearance (▶Fig. 9.9) with progressive increases
in ADC levels. T1 and T2 changes may take up to 2
weeks to appear after the hyperacute phase when
increased diﬀusion is more often observed.19
9.2 Diﬀusion Weighted
Imaging and Diﬀusion Tensor
Imaging in Toxic Diseases
9.2.1 Introduction
Toxic diseases can be secondary to exposure to a
wide variety of exogenous agents, including cranial
Fig. 9.6
Neuromyelitis optica (NMO) lesions and the aquaporin-4 (AQP-4) channel distribution in the central nervous
system. Overlaid to a (a) sagittal T1-weighted image there is a schematic view of the main distribution of AQP-4 channel
protein sites in the central nervous system. There is a high concentration of AQP-4 channel protein in the central spinal
cord, hypothalamus, subependymal white matter, supraoptic nuclei, optic nerve/chiasm, cerebellar cortex (yellow
spots), ependymal cells (blue spots) and also in the subcortical white matter (orange spots). (b) Acute NMO lesions
commonly present as longitudinally extensive or transverse myelitis on sagittal T2-weighted image, commonly affecting
the medulla and spinal cord junction. (c) Acute lesions may show restricted diffusion, with hyperintensity on diffusion
weighted imaging (axial views at the levels of medulla and pons).
DWI and DTI in Demyelination and Toxic Diseases
138

irradiation,
chemotherapy, antiepileptic agents,
drugs of recreational use, and environmental tox-
ins. Although the CNS is naturally protected by the
BBB from chemically induced neurotoxicity, a great
number of neurotoxins are known to interfere or
damage it, allowing them to penetrate neural tis-
sues and exposing the brain to them. Substances
that are characteristically lipid soluble have a
facilitated penetration and distribution in the CNS,
where they can promote direct neuroglial excito-
toxic injury or metabolic disturbances.20,21
Toxic leukoencephalopathy (TL) may be acute,
and the so-called acute toxic leukoencephalopathy
(ATL) may have a dramatic clinical onset. This
entity must be placed in perspective with the
more common and ubiquitous chronic TL that is
Fig. 9.7
Tumefactive demyelinating lesions (TDLs). TDLs are demyelinating lesions > 2 cm in diameter, frequently
showing mass effect and surrounding edema. (a) Axial fluid-attenuated inversion recovery image show two examples
(arrows). (b) Axial enhanced T1-weighted image shows the enhancing edges that represent areas of increased
inflammatory activity. (c) The lesion periphery frequently shows restricted water diffusion, with hyperintensity on
diffusion weighted imaging (d) and hypointensity on the apparent diffusion coefficient map.
DWI and DTI in Demyelination and Toxic Diseases
139

present in many patients undergoing chemother-
apy or radiation.21 Clinical presentations are some-
what nonspecific in both, generally characterized
by a recent onset of neurological decline, cognitive
changes, headache, and other focal neurological
signs.20,22
The damage generally involves the WM tracts
and
other
high
metabolic
areas,
which
are
Fig. 9.8 Baló concentric sclerosis. (a) Axial T2-weighted image depicts the layered appearance of a Baló demyelinating
lesion (arrow). (b) Rings of active demyelination usually enhance after gadolinium administration (arrow) with
surrounding edges of restricted diffusion characterized by hyperintensity on (c) diffusion weighted imaging (arrow) and
(d) hypointensity on the apparent diffusion coefficient map (arrow).
DWI and DTI in Demyelination and Toxic Diseases
140

particularly susceptible to neurotoxic damage,
including the deep gray matter, brainstem, and
cerebellar
nuclei.22
Therefore,
TL
may
solely
involve the WM, but also may aﬀect the basal gan-
glia, brainstem, and cerebellum.21
Typically, the MRI appearance of ATL is that of
symmetric
hyperintense
WM
lesions
on
T2-
weighted and FLAIR images. Restricted diﬀusion
can be seen in areas of acute demyelination and
cytotoxic edema. Usually, with drug discontinua-
tion, supportive therapy, or specific treatments,
most of these imaging findings are reversible.
Therefore, the clinical features and neurological
outcome are neither necessarily correlated to the
degree of early T2, FLAIR, or DWI abnormalities,
nor to their resolution in subsequent imaging
studies.22
9.2.2 Antineoplastic Treatment
Radiation Therapy
There
is a wide
range
of radiation
therapy
adverse eﬀects, from minor acute symptoms
(headache, fatigue) to life-threatening subacute
and late neurological complications (radionecro-
sis, progressive leukoencephalopathy, radiation-
induced tumors).21 The emphasis here is on
subacute leukoencephalopathy.
Although it is not entirely clear which individual
characteristics are linked to the development of
radiation-induced toxicity, some recognized risk
factors
are
increasing
age,
diabetes
mellitus,
systemic hypertension, combined chemotherapy
regimens,
and
the
presence
of
underlying
leukoaraiosis.23
Regarding subacute leukoencephalopathy, most
patients are asymptomatic. Mild or moderate cog-
nitive impairment is more common than severe
dementia. Although clinical symptoms stabilize or
evolve slowly in most patients, some individuals
may develop progressive dementia and eventually
die.23 Imaging findings usually reflect diﬀuse WM
injury. On MRI, periventricular WM lesions are
depicted as areas of hyperintensity on FLAIR and
T2-weighted images (▶Fig. 9.10), ADC is usually
normal or slightly increased. Brain atrophy may
also coexist. No eﬀective treatment is known to
revert the clinical and imaging features of radia-
tion-leukoencephalopathy.23,24
Chemotherapy
Lately, the so-called chemobrain has been high-
lighted in several studies that evaluate the eﬀects
of chemotherapy in cognition, both during and
after treatment. Advanced neuroimaging techni-
ques have reaﬃrmed the relationship between
chemotherapy and cognitive deficits. The use of
DTI to probe these patients demonstrates wide-
spread reductions in FA, which correlates with
cognitive decline.25
On the other hand, some critical complications
of chemotherapy may produce more acute and
reversible neurological illness, along with striking
imaging findings that may be easily recognized on
MRI scans. Symptoms are usually nonspecific, and
the clinical suspicion should take into account the
history of exposure to neurotoxic agents. Imaging
findings may be easily recognized and usually
subside late in the course of the disease, along
with resolution of clinical symptoms, especially if
Fig. 9.9 Osmotic myelinolysis. (a) Axial T2-weighted image shows a pontine lesion with the typical trident appearance
(arrow). T2 and T1 signal changes frequently appear after a few days or weeks, when increased diffusion is usually seen,
showing hyperintensity on (b) diffusion weighted imaging (arrow) and hyperintensity on (c) the apparent diffusion
coefficient map (arrow).
DWI and DTI in Demyelination and Toxic Diseases
141

the administration of the neurotoxic agent is
interrupted.
Fluorouracil
5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) is widely used for control of
various solid tumors, such as adenocarcinomas of
the gastrointestinal tract, prostate, and breast. In
one series, almost 6% of patients who received
high-dose 5-FU developed an encephalopathy.26
In patients with acute/subacute 5-FU leukoence-
phalopathy, DWI may show marked restricted dif-
fusion in the cerebral WM, especially within the
centrum semiovale (▶Fig. 9.11) and splenium of
the corpus callosum. FLAIR images may be normal
or show mild to moderate hyperintensity in the
periventricular WM.21 Restricted diﬀusion may
completely revert as soon as 1 week to a few
months after drug withdrawal. Eﬀective medical
treatments are not well established, but with-
drawal of 5-FU is mandatory.26
Methotrexate
Methotrexate (MTX) is largely administered to
treat solid cancers, acute lymphoblastic leukemia,
and non-Hodgkin lymphoma. In addition, it is also
an immunomodulator in the treatment of collagen
diseases. Because MTX scarcely penetrates the
BBB, high doses are usually administered via intra-
thecal or intravenous routes to eradicate malig-
nant cells from the CNS. Combined therapy with
irradiation improves therapy eﬃcacy but also
enhances neurotoxicity.27
Fig. 9.10
Radiation leukoencephalopathy. A 53-year-old woman presented with metastatic disease secondary to lung
cancer. (a) An axial enhanced T1-weighted image demonstrated one secondary lesion in the dorsal pons. (b) At the
same time point, an axial fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) image at the plane of the corona radiata was
unremarkable. (c) After 4 months, as the patient was treated using total brain radiation, a diffuse, bilateral and
symmetric leukoencephalopathy appeared in the follow-up FLAIR image, without significant changes on the (d)
corresponding diffusion weighted image. (e) In the apparent diffusion coefficient map, white matter hyperintensity can
be seen (arrows).
DWI and DTI in Demyelination and Toxic Diseases
142

Although not always present, imaging findings
may be typical and conclusive, avoiding unneces-
sary biopsy and other potentially harmful inter-
ventions. DWI may show focal or multifocal areas
of restricted diﬀusion, more often aﬀecting the
periventricular WM (▶Fig. 9.12). Some atypical
sites may be aﬀected, such as the cerebral and cer-
ebellar cortex, subcortical WM, and thalami.21
These unusual imaging findings are associated
with a more severe clinical presentation than that
of classic acute leukoencephalopathy. Postcontrast
enhancement is usually absent in the lesions.28
Toxic eﬀects respond well to therapy with folinic
acid, high-dose leucovorin, and aminophylline.29
Fludarabine
Fludarabine is mainly used in patients with
hematologic
malignancies,
and
as
an
im-
munosuppressive
agent
before
bone
marrow
transplantation.30
Interestingly, MRI abnormalities are dispropor-
tionately mild in comparison to the clinical picture
and histopathological findings. T2-weighted and
FLAIR images depict slight hyperintensity in the
periventricular WM, usually with corresponding
restricted diﬀusion, confirmed by low signal inten-
sity on ADC maps (▶Fig. 9.13). Typically, there is
no associated contrast enhancement.30
Fig. 9.11
Fluorouracil (5-FU) treatment effects. After 5 days of chemotherapy for esophageal cancer, a 57-year-old
woman presented with altered mental status. The initial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an almost normal
(a) fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) image, but signs of restricted diffusion in the periventricular and deep
white matter can be appreciated, (b) identified as hyperintense areas in diffusion weighted imaging, (c) with
corresponding hypointensity on the apparent diffusion coefficient map. After discontinuation of therapy, 18 days after
the initial MRI study, the MRI findings were almost totally reversed on a follow-up examination with (d) FLAIR and (e)
diffusion weighted imaging,
DWI and DTI in Demyelination and Toxic Diseases
143

9.2.3 Drugs of Recreational Use
Heroin
The primary neuropathological eﬀect of injected
heroin is hypoxic-ischemic leukoencephalopathy,
which can be related to prolonged and recurrent
heroin-induced respiratory depression or to infec-
tions.31
Heroin
abusers
may
present
variable
degrees of cerebral atrophy, demyelination, acute
and
chronic
perfusion
abnormalities,
and
decreased nigrostriatal neuronal density.22,31
Spongiform leukoencephalopathy is a rare com-
plication of inhalation of heated heroin, known as
“chasing the dragon,” in allusion to the shape of
the heroin fumes after the heating of the drug
powder on aluminum foil.22,32 Generally it has a
dramatic evolution, with a 23% mortality rate, and
even mild cases may show a significant degree
of spongiform
degeneration
and
neurological
deterioration. MRI shows symmetric hyperinten-
sity on T2-weighted and FLAIR images in the
cerebral
and
cerebellar
WM.
Typically,
the
abnormalities
involve
the
posterior
limbs
of
internal capsules, sparing the anterior limbs.
Although there is a predominant change in the
periventricular WM, the subcortical WM can
also be aﬀected.22 In the acute phase, there is
restricted
diﬀusion
in
the
aﬀected
areas
(▶Fig. 9.14), with progressive normalization or
increase in the ADC values later.22,32
Cocaine
Cocaine is a stimulant drug that increases the
intrasynaptic levels of dopamine and interferes in
the serotonin transporter protein. In addition, it
also stimulates the noradrenergic activity, induc-
ing cardiovascular distress, leading to hyperten-
sion and vasoconstriction, which can produce
hypoxic-ischemic
injury,
cerebral
hemorrhage,
hypertensive encephalopathy, and posterior rever-
sible
leukoencephalopathy
syndrome
(PRES).
Cocaine can also have a direct excitotoxic eﬀect
with an MRI appearance indistinguishable from
the other aforementioned toxic lesions, presenting
as
increased
hyperintensity
on
T2-weighted
images in the cerebral WM, globi pallidi, and sple-
nium of the corpus callosum with variable diﬀu-
sion in the aﬀected areas.31
9.2.4 Other Drugs
Cyclosporine
Cyclosporine-A (CSA) is a potent immunosuppres-
sive agent used in the prophylaxis of graft rejec-
tion
and graft-versus-host
disease
after
bone
marrow transplantation and solid organ trans-
plants. It is also used in the treatment of various
immunologic disorders. Secondary neurological
symptoms include tremor, headache, seizures,
hallucinations,
memory
deficits,
and
visual
Fig. 9.12
Methotrexate (MTX) leukoencephalopathy. A 50-year-old man underwent intrathecal MTX therapy 2 days
before he was found unresponsive. (a) Mild bilateral and symmetric slightly hyperintense areas involved the white
matter on a fluid-attenuated inversion recovery image, with severe restricted diffusion, (b) identified as hyperintense
areas on diffusion weighted imaging, with (c) corresponding hypointensity on the apparent diffusion coefficient map.
DWI and DTI in Demyelination and Toxic Diseases
144

disturbances. Cerebellar, extrapyramidal, and pyr-
amidal syndromes can also occur. PRES and toxic
lesions may ensue (the former is usually more
common), and are usually associated with charac-
teristic imaging features.33
Acute toxic lesions may present soon after the
initiation of CSA. MRI findings are somewhat non-
specific and similar to those found in other toxic
disorders. There is usually bilateral and symmetric
hyperintensity involving the periventricular WM
and corona radiata on T2-weighted and FLAIR
images, associated with foci of restricted diﬀusion
within these areas (▶Fig. 9.15). Reversibility of
clinical symptoms and imaging features after CSA
tapering confirms the diagnosis. Nonetheless, in
some patients, residual FLAIR hyperintensity may
persist, especially if initial FLAIR images showed
severe brain involvement.22 So far, the exact
pathogenesis
of
CSA-neurotoxicity
is
not
understood.
Metronidazole
Metronidazole is an antibiotic widely used to
treat anaerobic and protozoal infections, hospital-
acquired
infections,
Helicobacter
pylori
Fig. 9.13
Fludarabine treatment effects. A 56-year-old woman was given fludarabine 3 weeks earlier for multiple
myeloma. (a) Axial fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and (b) diffusion weighted imaging disclosed foci of
hyperintense signal in the periventricular white matter. (c) Corresponding mild apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC)
reduction was identified as hypointensity on the ADC map (arrows). (d–f) Follow-up magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
after 2 weeks showed more prominent findings, not only in the (d) FLAIR and (e) diffusion weighted images but also in
(f) the areas of restricted diffusion in the ADC map (arrows).
DWI and DTI in Demyelination and Toxic Diseases
145

infections, and Clostridium diﬃcile diarrhea. It
also plays a role as a prophylactic agent after
gastrointestinal surgery and to prevent recurrent
bacterial infection, especially in Crohn’s disease.
Metronidazole is a safe and well tolerated drug
at low doses, but it can be associated with ence-
phalopathy, ototoxicity, and visual impairment
when the dose exceeds 2 g/d or after prolonged
administration.34
MRI typically shows bilateral symmetric hyper-
intense signal on T2-weighted and FLAIR sequen-
ces aﬀecting the cerebellar dentate nuclei, superior
olivary nuclei, dorsal pons and medulla, midbrain
structures (tectum, red nucleus, tegmentum and
in periaqueductal gray matter), and splenium of
the corpus callosum, with variable involvement of
the internal capsules, anterior commissure, and
deep and subcortical WM.34 More often there is
restricted diﬀusion with low ADC values in the
aﬀected supratentorial WM (▶Fig. 9.16), suggest-
ing cytotoxic edema. However, increased diﬀusion
in the cerebellar and brainstem nuclei has been
described, which perhaps corresponds to vasogen-
ic edema in these locations.34 The hyperintense T2
lesions and the DWI changes are thought to be
almost entirely reversible after a few weeks of
drug cessation, accompanied by progressive clini-
cal improvement.34
Vigabatrin
Vigabatrin (VGB) is a drug used to treat infantile
spasms, epilepsy associated with tuberous sclero-
sis, and complex partial seizures in children and
adults. Although VGB is an eﬀective antiepileptic
drug, neurotoxic changes have been described
with cumulative and high doses.35
Imaging findings include bilateral and symmetric
hyperintensity on T2-weighted and FLAIR images
in the basal ganglia, especially in the globi pallidi,
thalami, dentate nuclei, and dorsal brainstem, with
reduced diﬀusion in them (▶Fig. 9.17).35 MRI
abnormalities may be reversible 12 to 16 weeks
after drug discontinuation, but some patients show
Fig. 9.14 Heroin toxicity, “chasing the
dragon” syndrome. A 24-year-old
woman inhaled heroin fumes and
arrived at the emergency room quad-
riplegic and unresponsive. (a-c) The
initial magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) showed signs of leukoencephal-
opathy, with symmetric hyperintense
signal on (a) fluid-attenuated inversion
recovery (FLAIR) from the periventric-
ular to the subcortical white matter.
Those areas demonstrated signs of
restricted diffusion, hyperintensity on
(b) diffusion weighted imaging, and
hypointensity on (c) the apparent
diffusion coefficient map. Symptoms
had mostly resolved after 1 year, but
follow-up MRI at that time showed (d)
persistent white matter abnormalities
on FLAIR associated with severe brain
atrophy.
DWI and DTI in Demyelination and Toxic Diseases
146

improvement or resolution on MRI, even without
cessation
of
VGB.35
VGB-related
MRI
changes
almost exclusively aﬀect young infants, especially
those diagnosed with infantile spasms.35
9.2.5 Environmental Toxins
Carbon Monoxide
Carbon monoxide (CO) is an odorless, colorless,
and nonirritating gas produced by incomplete
combustion of organic substances and carbon-con-
taining fuel. CO has 210 times higher aﬃnity to
hemoglobin than oxygen; thus a small rise in its
concentration can result in toxic levels of carboxy-
hemoglobin. Intoxication is often accidental.36
MRI shows marked ADC reduction with involve-
ment of the basal ganglia and periventricular and
subcortical WM (▶Fig. 9.18), corpus callosum, and
internal capsules. T2-weighted and FLAIR images
show variable signal abnormalities dependent on
the severity of the intoxication. WM abnormalities
frequently reverse within 2 weeks to 10 months.37
However, because of the higher metabolic activity
in gray matter, the basal ganglia are more suscepti-
ble to permanent damage. In the chronic stages, it
is not infrequent to find signs of striatal necrosis,
especially in severe intoxications.37
Fig. 9.15
Leukoencephalopathy following cyclosporine-A (CSA) treatment. CSA was given after bone marrow
transplantation. Pretransplantation magnetic resonance imaging showed no significant abnormalities on (a) fluid-
attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and (b) diffusion weighted imaging (DWI). Nineteen days after CSA therapy
hyperintensities on (c) FLAIR and (d) DWI appeared in the posterior cerebral periventricular white matter, associated
with hypointense areas (arrow) in the (e) corresponding apparent diffusion coefficient map, thus confirming the
presence of restricted diffusion.
DWI and DTI in Demyelination and Toxic Diseases
147

Methanol
Methanol is a component of commercially avail-
able varnishes, solvents, antifreeze, and gasoline
mixtures. Methanol intoxication may be acciden-
tal, intentional, or due to adulteration of alcoholic
beverages. There is a latency period between
ingestion of methanol and clinical onset of symp-
toms, probably because of the concomitant inges-
tion of ethanol. Early symptoms are nonspecific,
including nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain,
followed by variable visual disturbances. Late man-
ifestations are associated with acidosis and accu-
mulation of formic and lactic acids. Methanol
intoxication can be fatal within 6 to 36 hours after
ingestion.38
The typical imaging features of methanol poi-
soning are bilateral lentiform nuclei necrosis with
hyperintensity on T2-weighted, FLAIR images and
DWI and reduced ADC. Hemorrhagic putaminal
lesions can also occur.21 Other aﬀected areas
included are corona radiata, centrum semiovale,
and subcortical WM (▶Fig. 9.19).38
9.2.6 Reversible Splenial Lesions
An important type of lesion that should be men-
tioned here are “reversible splenial lesions.” These
are found in a wide spectrum of clinical conditions
that share common and typical MRI features of
hyperintensity on T2-weighted and FLAIR images
Fig. 9.16
Metronidazole encephalopathy. A 69-year-old woman was put on increasing doses of metronidazole over 2
months for recurrent vaginal infection. An initial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination with fluid-attenuated
inversion recovery images showed (a) bilateral and symmetric hyperintense signal involving the cerebellar dentate
nuclei (arrows), which, in a less intense manner, could also be appreciated in (b) the splenium of the corpus callosum
(arrow). (c) Follow-up MRI examination after 20 days demonstrated more severe signal changes in the splenium, in an
axial T2-weighted image, with (d) hyperintensity on diffusion weighted imaging and (e) hypointense areas on the
apparent diffusion coefficient map (arrows), confirming the presence of restricted diffusion.
DWI and DTI in Demyelination and Toxic Diseases
148

and have reversible reduced diﬀusion within the
posterior corpus callosum39 (▶Fig. 9.20). Because
most lesions are transient and incidentally found
on MRI, no therapy is warranted.
Countless disorders may be associated with
reversible splenial lesions. Reported cases are often
related to encephalitis/encephalopathy syndromes
(usually secondary to viral infections), antiepileptic
drug toxicity/withdrawal, and metabolic disorders
(hypoglycemia
and
hypernatremia).39,40
Several
other conditions with transient splenial lesions,
which can also involve other segments of the cor-
pus callosum, include Marchiafava–Bignami dis-
ease, Wernicke encephalopathy, Kawasaki disease,
hemolytic-uremic
syndrome,
traumatic
brain
injury, and high-altitude cerebral edema. Pharma-
cological agents associated with these reversible
callosal lesions are methylbromide, cisplatinum,
carboplatin, olanzapine, and citalopram.26
In patients with epilepsy, reversible splenial
lesions may be attributed either to seizures or to
their treatments. Almost every antiepileptic drug
has been associated with this type of lesion,
including carbamazepine, phenytoin, valproic acid,
vigabatrin, lamotrigine, oxcarbazepine, topiramate,
clonazepam, and others.40
The main DWI findings in toxic lesions are sum-
marized in ▶Table 9.1.
9.3 Summary
In demyelinating diseases, the findings on DWI
reflect their neuropathological substrates, and thus
are very heterogeneous. Occasionally, DWI can pro-
vide additional valuable information regarding le-
sion age and activity and also about the type of
cellular damage. DTI can show abnormalities in the
NAWM, confirming the findings reported using
magnetization transfer and proton spectroscopy.
Toxic diseases aﬀecting the CNS may aﬀect spe-
cific structures, especially the WM in ATL, but
overall the MRI findings are often nonspecific. In
these disorders the lesions are usually bilateral
and in the acute phase show restricted diﬀusion.
Drug withdrawal results in improvement or reso-
lution of the lesions in most patients.
Fig. 9.17
Vigabatrin-related magnetic
resonance imaging changes in an 8-
month-old child, with chronic epilepsy
secondary to neonatal hypoxia. (a) A
few weeks after starting vigabatrin,
there were slight bilateral and sym-
metric pallidal hyperintensities on a
fluid-attenuated inversion recovery
image, which also showed the residual
posterior cerebral lesions secondary to
the neonatal ischemic event. (b) Pal-
lidal restricted diffusion was detected,
seen as hyperintensity on diffusion
weighted imaging and (c) hypointen-
sity on the apparent diffusion coeffi-
cient map. (d) Five months after drug
discontinuation, diffusion weighted
imaging was unremarkable in the
pallidal region.
DWI and DTI in Demyelination and Toxic Diseases
149

Fig. 9.18 Carbon monoxide (CO) intoxication. Five days after acute CO intoxication, a 33-year-old man showed bilateral
and diffuse cerebral white matter hyperintensity on (a) fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and (b) diffusion
weighted images. After 2 months, corresponding (c) FLAIR and (d) DWI demonstrated improvement of the
abnormalities, which mostly resolved at 9 months follow-up on (e) FLAIR and (f) DWI.
Fig. 9.19
Methanol intoxication. A 56-year-old man arrived in the emergency room with acute blindness, severe
neurological impairment, and systemic symptoms. (a) Axial fluid-attenuated inversion recovery image revealed
extensive symmetric damage to the cerebral white matter, more evident in the frontal and occipital lobes seen as areas
of hyperintensity; there were also similar lesions in the basal ganglia, especially involving the lentiform nuclei. (b)
Diffusion weighted imaging showed hyperintensity in these areas, and (c) corresponding apparent diffusion coefficient
maps demonstrated restricted diffusion, more clearly depicted in the lentiform nuclei (arrows) and occipital white
matter (arrowheads).
DWI and DTI in Demyelination and Toxic Diseases
150

Fig. 9.20
Reversible splenial lesion in an 18-year-old woman with epilepsy. (a) Magnetic resonance imaging shows a
focal splenial hyperintensity on (a) T2-weighted (arrow) and (b) diffusion weighted images. (c) The apparent diffusion
coefficient map confirmed diffusion restriction in the affected area.
Table 9.1 Lesion location and main diﬀusion weighted imaging findings in toxic cerebral lesions
Agent
Lesion locationa
DWI findings
Radiation subacute leukoencephalop-
athy
Periventricular WM
No abnormalities or slightly increased
ADC
Fluorouracil
Cerebral WM, especially within the
centrum semiovale and splenium of
the corpus callosum
Restricted diffusion
Methotrexate
Periventricular WM, less likely affects
cerebral and cerebellar cortex, sub-
cortical WM, and thalamus
Restricted diffusion
Fludarabine
Periventricular WM
Restricted diffusion
Heroin (spongiform leukoencephalop-
athy)
Cerebral and cerebellar WM and pos-
terior limb of internal capsules
Restricted diffusion
Cocaine (direct excitotoxic effect)
Cerebral white matter, globus pallidus,
and splenium of the corpus callosum
Variable diffusion
Cyclosporine
Periventricular WM and corona radiata
Foci of restricted diffusion
Metronidazole
Cerebellar dentate nuclei, superior
olivary nuclei, dorsal pons and medul-
la, midbrain, splenium of the corpus
callosum, with variable involvement of
the internal capsule, anterior commis-
sure, deep and subcortical WM
Restricted diffusion in the supratento-
rial WM, increased diffusion in the
cerebellar and brainstem nuclei
Vigabatrin
Basal ganglia, especially in the globi
pallidi, thalami, dentate nuclei, and
dorsal brainstem
Restricted diffusion
Carbon monoxide
Basal ganglia, periventricular and sub-
cortical WM, corpus callosum, and
internal capsule
Restricted diffusion
Methanol
Lentiform nuclei, usually hemorrhagic
in putamen; WM lesions can occur
Restricted diffusion in lentiform nuclei
Abbreviations: ADC, apparent diffusion coefficient; DWI, diffusion weighted imaging; WM, white matter.
aUsually the lesions are bilateral.
DWI and DTI in Demyelination and Toxic Diseases
151

References
[1] Koelblinger C, Fruehwald-Pallamar J, Kubin K, et al. Atypical
idiopathic inflammatory demyelinating lesions (IIDL): con-
ventional and diﬀusion weighted MR imaging (DWI) find-
ings in 42 cases. Eur J Radiol 2013; 82(11): 1996–2004
[2] Karaarslan E, Arslan A. Diﬀusion weighted MR imaging in
non-infarct lesions of the brain. Eur J Radiol 2008; 65(3):
402–416
[3] Inglese M, Salvi F, Iannucci G, Mancardi GL, Mascalchi M, Fil-
ippi M. Magnetization transfer and diﬀusion tensor MR
imaging of acute disseminated encephalomyelitis. AJNR Am
J Neuroradiol 2002; 23(2): 267–272
[4] Castriota Scanderbeg A, Tomaiuolo F, Sabatini U, Nocentini
U, Grasso MG, Caltagirone C. Demyelinating plaques in
relapsing-remitting
and
secondary-progressive
multiple
sclerosis: assessment with diﬀusion MR imaging. AJNR Am J
Neuroradiol 2000; 21(5): 862–868
[5] Lerner A, Mogensen MA, Kim PE, Shiroishi MS, Hwang DH,
Law M. Clinical Applications of Diﬀusion Tensor Imaging.
World Neurosurg 2014; 82: 96–109
[6] Rimkus CM, Junqueira TF, Callegaro D, Otaduy MC, Leite
CdaC. Segmented corpus callosum diﬀusivity correlates with
the Expanded Disability Status Scale score in the early
stages of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. Clinics
2013; 68(8): 1115–1120
[7] Vrenken H, Pouwels PJ, Geurts JJ, et al. Altered diﬀusion ten-
sor in multiple sclerosis normal-appearing brain tissue:
cortical diﬀusion changes seem related to clinical deteriora-
tion. J Magn Reson Imaging 2006; 23(5): 628–636
[8] Yu CS, Zhu CZ, Li KC, et al. Relapsing neuromyelitis optica
and relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis: diﬀerentiation at
diﬀusion tensor MR imaging of corpus callosum. Radiology
2007; 244(1): 249–256
[9] Huston JM, Field AS. Clinical applications of diﬀusion tensor
imaging. Magn Reson Imaging Clin N Am 2013; 21(2): 279–
298
[10] Werring DJ, Brassat D, Droogan AG, et al. The pathogenesis
of lesions and normal-appearing white matter changes in
multiple sclerosis: a serial diﬀusion MRI study. Brain 2000;
123(Pt 8): 1667–1676
[11] Young NP, Weinshenker BG, Lucchinetti CF. Acute dissemi-
nated encephalomyelitis: current understanding and con-
troversies. Semin Neurol 2008; 28(1): 84–94
[12] Bernarding J, Braun J, Koennecke HC. Diﬀusion- and perfu-
sion-weighted MR imaging in a patient with acute demyeli-
nating encephalomyelitis (ADEM). J Magn Reson Imaging
2002; 15(1): 96–100
[13] Straus Farber R, Devilliers L, Miller A, et al. Diﬀerentiating
multiple sclerosis from other causes of demyelination using
diﬀusion weighted imaging of the corpus callosum. J Magn
Reson Imaging 2009; 30(4): 732–736
[14] Wingerchuk DM, Lennon VA, Lucchinetti CF, Pittock SJ,
Weinshenker BG. The spectrum of neuromyelitis optica.
Lancet Neurol 2007; 6(9): 805–815
[15] Rueda Lopes FC, Doring T, Martins C, et al. The role of
demyelination in neuromyelitis optica damage: diﬀusion
tensor MR imaging study. Radiology 2012; 263(1): 235–242
[16] Enzinger C, Strasser-Fuchs S, Ropele S, Kapeller P, Kleinert R,
Fazekas F. Tumefactive demyelinating lesions: conventional
and advanced magnetic resonance imaging. Mult Scler
2005; 11(2): 135–139
[17] Toh CH, Wei KC, Ng SH, Wan YL, Castillo M, Lin CP. Diﬀeren-
tiation of tumefactive demyelinating lesions from high-
grade gliomas with the use of diﬀusion tensor imaging.
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2012; 33(5): 846–851
[18] Martin RJ. Central pontine and extrapontine myelinolysis:
the osmotic demyelination syndromes. J Neurol Neurosurg
Psychiatry 2004; 75 Suppl 3: iii22–iii28
[19] Ruzek KA, Campeau NG, Miller GM. Early diagnosis of cen-
tral pontine myelinolysis with diﬀusion weighted imaging.
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2004; 25(2): 210–213
[20] Filley CM, Kleinschmidt-DeMasters BK. Toxic leukoence-
phalopathy. N Engl J Med 2001; 345(6): 425–432
[21] Rimkus CM, Andrade CS, Leite CC, McKinney AM, Lucato LT.
Toxic leukoencephalopathies, including drug, medication,
environmental, and radiation-induced encephalopathic syn-
dromes. Semin Ultrasound CT MR 2014; 35(2): 97–117
[22] McKinney AM, Kieﬀer SA, Paylor RT, SantaCruz KS, Kendi A,
Lucato LT. Acute toxic leukoencephalopathy: potential for
reversibility clinically and on MRI with diﬀusion weighted
and FLAIR imaging. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2009; 193(1):
192–206
[23] Soussain C, Ricard D, Fike JR, Mazeron JJ, Psimaras D,
Delattre JY. CNS complications of radiotherapy and chemo-
therapy. Lancet 2009; 374(9701): 1639–1651
[24] Chawla S, Wang S, Kim S, et al. Radiation Injury to the Nor-
mal Brain Measured by 3D-Echo-Planar Spectroscopic Imag-
ing and Diﬀusion Tensor Imaging: Initial Experience. J
Neuroimaging 2013; 3: 9
[25] Deprez S, Amant F, Smeets A, et al. Longitudinal assessment
of chemotherapy-induced structural changes in cerebral
white matter and its correlation with impaired cognitive
functioning. J Clin Oncol 2012; 30(3): 274–281
[26] Tha KK, Terae S, Sugiura M, et al. Diﬀusion weighted mag-
netic resonance imaging in early stage of 5-fluorouracil-
induced leukoencephalopathy. Acta Neurol Scand 2002; 106
(6): 379–386
[27] Kim JY, Kim ST, Nam DH, Lee JI, Park K, Kong DS. Leu-
koencephalopathy and disseminated necrotizing leukoen-
cephalopathy
following
intrathecal
methotrexate
chemotherapy and radiation therapy for central nerve
system lymphoma or leukemia. J Korean Neurosurg Soc
2011; 50(4): 304–310
[28] Ziereisen F, Dan B, Azzi N, Ferster A, Damry N, Christophe C.
Reversible acute methotrexate leukoencephalopathy: atypi-
cal brain MR imaging features. Pediatr Radiol 2006; 36(3):
205–212
[29] Antunes NL, Souweidane MM, Lis E, Rosenblum MK, Stein-
herz PG. Methotrexate leukoencephalopathy presenting as
Klüver-Bucy syndrome and uncinate seizures. Pediatr Neu-
rol 2002; 26(4): 305–308
[30] Lee MS, McKinney AM, Brace JR, Santacruz K. Clinical and
imaging features of fludarabine neurotoxicity. J Neurooph-
thalmol 2010; 30(1): 37–41
[31] Cunha-Oliveira T, Rego AC, Oliveira CR. Cellular and molecu-
lar mechanisms involved in the neurotoxicity of opioid and
psychostimulant drugs. Brain Res Brain Res Rev 2008; 58(1):
192–208
[32] Bartlett E, Mikulis DJ. Chasing “chasing the dragon” with
MRI: leukoencephalopathy in drug abuse. Br J Radiol 2005;
78(935): 997–1004
[33] Gijtenbeek JM, van den Bent MJ, Vecht CJ. Cyclosporine neu-
rotoxicity: a review. J Neurol 1999; 246(5): 339–346
DWI and DTI in Demyelination and Toxic Diseases
152

[34] Heaney CJ, Campeau NG, Lindell EP. MR imaging and diﬀu-
sion weighted imaging changes in metronidazole (Flagyl)-
induced cerebellar toxicity. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2003; 24
(8): 1615–1617
[35] Dracopoulos A, Widjaja E, Raybaud C, Westall CA, Snead OC,
III. Vigabatrin-associated reversible MRI signal changes in
patients with infantile spasms. Epilepsia 2010; 51(7): 1297–
1304
[36] Blumenthal I. Carbon monoxide poisoning. J R Soc Med
2001; 94(6): 270–272
[37] Prockop LD, Chichkova RI. Carbon monoxide intoxication:
an updated review. J Neurol Sci 2007; 262(1–2): 122–130
[38] Takao H, Doi I, Watanabe T. Serial diﬀusion weighted mag-
netic resonance imaging in methanol intoxication. J Comput
Assist Tomogr 2006; 30(5): 742–744
[39] Gallucci M, Limbucci N, Paonessa A, Caranci F. Reversible
focal splenial lesions. Neuroradiology 2007; 49(7): 541–544
[40] Ruscheweyh R, Marziniak M, Evers S. Reversible focal spleni-
al lesions in facial pain patients treated with antiepileptic
drugs: case report and review of the literature. Cephalalgia
2009; 29(5): 587–590
DWI and DTI in Demyelination and Toxic Diseases
153

10 Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging and Diﬀusion Tensor
Imaging of White Matter Diseases In Children
Julie H. Harreld and Zoltan Patay
Key Points
●Though patterns of T2 signal abnormality may
be diagnostic for some pediatric white matter
disorders, many are nonspecific in appearance
on conventional imaging.
●Vasogenic edema, cytotoxic edema, myelin
edema, myelin vacuolation, and white matter
rarefaction all increase brain water content and
cause increased signal on T2-weighted
imaging.
●Diﬀusion weighted imaging and diﬀusion met-
rics, such as apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient and
fractional anisotropy, can distinguish between
these entities and improve magnetic resonance
imaging–based diﬀerential diagnosis of pedia-
tric white matter diseases, and also provide
clues to stage/activity of disease and underly-
ing pathology.
10.1 Physics
In diﬀusion imaging, directional diﬀusion gra-
dients are applied to a T2-weighted (spin-echo)
echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequence before and
after a 180-degree refocusing pulse. Water protons
moving freely through these gradients acquire ran-
dom spins and are thus dephased, causing signal
loss in voxels where water motion (diﬀusion) is
significant. Conversely, stationary or slowly mov-
ing protons generate increased signal on diﬀusion
weighted images (DWIs). The apparent diﬀusion
coeﬃcient (ADC) may be calculated from images
acquired without and with a diﬀusion gradient
and allows quantitation of the displacement of
water molecules over time (mm2/s) in a particular
voxel.1,2
In tissues, water mobility may be restricted by
cell membranes, macromolecules, or decreased
extracellular spaces. In such cases, the signal on
DWI is increased, and the ADC is decreased. For
example, tissues with high cell density, such as
small, round blue cell tumors like medulloblasto-
ma and lymphoma, have decreased or “restricted”
water diﬀusion and therefore appear bright on
DWI. Hypercellularity due to a regional influx of
cells, such as macrophages or glia, may also cause
restricted diﬀusion (decreased ADC) and high sig-
nal on DWI. Cellular swelling due to cytotoxic ede-
ma,
as
in
cerebral
ischemia,
also
results
in
restricted diﬀusion due to resultant decreases in
extracellular freely mobile water. Shift of water
into the myelin sheath from the extracellular
space, as occurs in intramyelinic edema or myelin
vacuolation, may cause restricted diﬀusion in a
similar or related fashion.3 This is in contrast to
vasogenic edema, in which there is an accumula-
tion of extracellular water due to blood–brain bar-
rier (BBB) breakdown or osmotic shifts, causing
increased ADC.4 Though all types of white matter
edema may appear bright on T2-weighted imag-
ing, ADC is increased in vasogenic edema (peritu-
moral
edema,
infection/inflammation),
but
decreased in cytotoxic edema (aﬀecting oligoden-
drocytes and astrocytes) or intramyelinic edema,
permitting
diﬀerentiation.
However,
diﬀerent
types of edema may coexist (see “maple syrup
urine disease” later in this chapter) and even shift
during the course of disease. By providing insight
into the dominant edema type, diﬀusion imaging
may help characterize dynamic white matter dis-
ease processes.
Although diﬀusion is apparently equal in all
directions (isotropic) in gray matter, in white mat-
ter it is greatest parallel to the fiber bundles
(“tracts”)
and
restricted
perpendicular
to the
tracts, a property known as anisotropy. This is
exploited in diﬀusion tensor imaging (DTI) and
fiber tracking, and may be quantified as fractional
anisotropy (FA), a measure of the propensity of
water to diﬀuse in a single direction (e.g., along a
white matter tract). An FA of 0 indicates isotropic
diﬀusion, and the maximal FA of 1 indicates per-
fectly linear, anisotropic diﬀusion along the pri-
mary (longitudinal) eigenvector, which indicates
axonal orientation. The mean of the second and
third eigenvectors, which are perpendicular to the
DWI and DTI of White Matter Diseases In Children
154

axon, is known as radial diﬀusivity and can pro-
vide further quantitation of myelin integrity. These
metrics oﬀer exciting, noninvasive, and reproduci-
ble approaches to qualitative and quantitative
evaluation of white matter diseases.
10.2 Clinical Applications
In the central nervous system (CNS), the lamellar
myelin sheath is formed by the wrapping of speci-
alized oligodendrocyte membrane layers around
intact axons, a process that is driven by neuronal
electrical activity, coordinated activation of myelin
protein genes, and growth and trophic factors pro-
duced by neurons and astrocytes. Disorders of any
of these components may primarily or secondarily
aﬀect myelin to a variable degree. Hypomyelination
describes early and permanent arrest in myelina-
tion (Pelizaeus–Merzbacher disease, trichothiodys-
trophy), as opposed to delayed myelination, in
which myelin is quantitatively inappropriate for
the age of the patient, typically infants. When
myelination progresses but is abnormal due to
defective, absent, or accumulated myelin compo-
nents, it is termed dysmyelination.5 Demyelination,
the loss of qualitatively normal myelin, may be
secondary (due to neuronal or axonal loss, as in
trauma) or primary (due to abnormalities of mye-
lin or oligodendrocytes). Primary demyelinating
disorders may be heritable (metachromatic leuko-
dystrophy,
X-linked
adrenoleukodystrophy),
or
acquired (infection, inflammation, immune disor-
ders, toxins, ischemia).
Because these classic categories are descriptive
rather than histopathologic, they may overlap and
coexist. Dysmyelination predisposes to demyelina-
tion; hypomyelination often accompanies or may
mimic delayed myelination. Similarly, though MRI-
based patterns of pediatric white matter diseases
may occasionally provide a high degree of diagnos-
tic specificity,6 conventional imaging abnormal-
ities are not specific to underlying histopathologic
processes. T1 hypointensity may occur due to rare-
faction of myelin (and tissue matrix) or edema; T2
hyperintensity may be due to cytotoxic, intramye-
linic, or vasogenic edema, or increased white mat-
ter water content due to decreased myelin. The
precise
pathomechanisms
for
many
pediatric
white matter disorders remain unknown, limited
by the rarity of the disorders and limited availabil-
ity of pathological material at various stages of
disease. The ability of diﬀusion imaging to diﬀer-
entiate white matter pathologies contributes to
our growing understanding of the pathological
mechanisms
underlying
these
disorders,
and
becomes stronger as more radiological–pathologi-
cal–molecular
biological
correlation
becomes
available. Because patterns of diﬀusion abnormal-
ities diﬀer based on underlying mechanism, diﬀu-
sion
imaging may contribute to the imaging
semiology and improve the specificity of tradition-
al pattern-based diagnosis. Because many white
matter diseases are characterized by diﬀusion
abnormalities in their early stages, which subse-
quently progress to nonspecific increases in water
diﬀusivity
and
decreased
anisotropy
due
to
demyelination and destruction of the white matter
matrix, DWI/DTI may also be helpful in assessing
the stage and rate of progression of these diseases,
particularly in the early stages of disease.
The overall number of pediatric white matter
disorders is already significant, and new entities
are identified almost every year; the precise mech-
anisms of white matter damage and changes on
brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have yet
to be elucidated in most. We therefore focus on
disorders for which pathomechanisms and how
they relate to diﬀusion imaging findings are
understood (with a reasonable degree of confi-
dence) to illustrate how DWI/DTI can contribute to
pathological understanding and diagnosis in these
and other pediatric white matter disorders.
10.2.1 Restricted Diﬀusion: Active
Inflammatory Demyelination
Accumulation of microglia and myelin-laden mac-
rophages (hypercellularity) and cytotoxic edema of
oligodendrocytes due to proinflammatory cas-
cades and/or metabolic stress results in restricted
diﬀusion in areas of active demyelination.7,8 Once
most or all myelin is lost, these areas demonstrate
increased diﬀusivity and decreased FA in the
“burned-out” phase.9
Inherited: X-linked
Adrenoleukodystrophy
In X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (X-ALD), a sin-
gle-enzyme defect in peroxisomal function results
in accumulation of very long chain fatty acids
(VLCFAs), which disrupt membranes and are toxic
DWI and DTI of White Matter Diseases In Children
155

to oligodendrocytes and, to a lesser degree, astro-
cytes.
Early
demyelination
becomes
suddenly
inflammatory in 90%, with rapid progression.10
Progression is typically centrifugal and posterior
to anterior.11 Diﬀusion is relatively decreased in
the inflammatory “leading edge” (▶Fig. 10.1),
which
pathologically
consists
of
perivascular
inflammatory infiltrates, lipid-laden macrophages,
and reactive astrocytes. In the central demyeli-
nated zone, where myelinated axons and oligoden-
drocytes
are
essentially
absent,
diﬀusivity
is
increased and FA is decreased.12
Fig. 10.1 X-Linked adrenoleukodystrophy. (a) Axial T2-weighted image, (b) enhanced T1-weighted image, (c) diffusion
weighted image, and (d) apparent diffusion coefficient map. Diffusion is relatively decreased in the peripheral,
enhancing inflammatory zone (arrows) surrounding the central demyelinated zone (*), in which water diffusivity is
increased.
DWI and DTI of White Matter Diseases In Children
156

Acquired: Multiple Sclerosis, Acute
Disseminated Encephalomyelitis
Multiple sclerosis is a clinically and pathologically
heterogeneous chronic inflammatory demyelinat-
ing disorder. Active inflammatory lesions show
variable perivascular inflammation, T lympho-
cytes,
and
lipid-laden
macrophages,
whereas
chronic lesions are hypocellular and show variable
remyelination.13
Though
most
white
matter
lesions demonstrate increased diﬀusion, restricted
diﬀusion has been reported in ~ 30% of acute
lesions, usually the tumefactive type, likely reflect-
ing the heterogeneity of underlying pathological
mechanisms.7,8 Axons are relatively preserved.
When present in the acute phase, restricted diﬀu-
sion is most common at the periphery of the le-
sion, may precede T2 signal abnormality and
enhancement, and correlates with attack severity.9
FA is lower in enhancing than in nonenhancing
lesions.14
Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis is charac-
terized pathologically by perivenular demyelina-
tion and inflammation, occurring after viral illness
or infection.13 Monophasic white matter lesions
tend to be large and bilaterally asymmetric, with
increased diﬀusion in the core and variable, often
decreased, ADC at the periphery in the acute phase
(▶Fig. 10.2).15
10.2.2 Restricted Diﬀusion:
Diﬀuse Cytotoxic/Intramyelinic
Edema with White Matter
Cavitation
Inherited: Mitochondrial Respiratory
Chain Deficiency
In mitochondrial disorders, the mitochondria are
unable to meet the metabolic requirements of the
cell (metabolic imbalance), resulting in cytotoxic
edema in the acute phase.16 Though most mito-
chondrial disorders involve deep gray matter with
or without some white matter involvement, some
selectively aﬀect white matter. Isolated deficien-
cies of respiratory chain complexes may result in a
characteristic
cavitating
leukoencephalopathy,
with a distinct pattern of strikingly restricted dif-
fusion throughout the white matter (including the
corpus callosum) during the acute phase, with the
leading
edge
apparently
moving
centrifugally,
which may coexist with increased diﬀusivity and
loss of FA in white matter cavitations in the central
burned-out areas (▶Fig. 10.3).17
Acquired: Global Neonatal Hypoxic
Injury
In certain instances, severe perinatal hypoxia in
term infants may result in acute global neonatal
Fig. 10.2 Tumefactive demyelination. (a) Axial T2-weighted image, (b) enhanced T1-weighted image, and (c) apparent
diffusion coefficient map show three distinct zones: an enhancing core with increased water diffusion (*) surrounded by
a rim of enhancing restricted diffusion corresponding to active inflammation (arrowheads), and peripheral vasogenic
edema. (Courtesy of Dr. W. K. Chong, Ormond Street Hospital for Children, NHS Trust, London, UK.)
DWI and DTI of White Matter Diseases In Children
157

Fig. 10.3
Complex I (respiratory chain) deficiency in a 12-month-old infant with seizures and rapid neurological
deterioration. (a) Axial fluid-attenuated inversion recovery images show extensive white matter abnormality with
sparing of the subcortical white matter and presence of central cavitations (*). (b) Diffusion weighted image and (c)
apparent diffusion coefficient map show strikingly restricted diffusion in affected white matter and increased diffusivity
in cavitations. (d) Involvement of the corpus callosum (arrows) is evident on sagittal T2-weighted imaging. (Courtesy of
Drs. Fred Laningham and Natalie Hauser, Children’s Hospital of Central California, Madera, CA, USA.)
DWI and DTI of White Matter Diseases In Children
158

ischemia with diﬀuse supratentorial cytotoxic ede-
ma
due
to
cerebral
energy
depletion,
with
restricted diﬀusion predominantly involving sub-
cortical white matter (▶Fig. 10.4a), progressing to
widespread
cavitation
(▶Fig.
10.4b)
with
increased diﬀusivity. The brainstem and posterior
fossa are generally spared.6,18 Neonatal herpes
infection and isolated sulfite oxidase deficiency
are
in
the
diﬀerential
diagnosis
for
this
appearance.19
10.2.3 Restricted Diﬀusion,
Regional: Neurotoxicity
In these disorders, rapid extracellular-to-intracel-
lular
or
intramyelinic
fluid
shift
results
in
decreased free water diﬀusion.
Inherited: Maple Syrup Urine
Disease (Classic Type)
In classic maple syrup urine disease, autosomal
recessive deficiency in branched-chain ketoacid
dehydrogenase (a mitochondrial enzyme complex)
results in accumulation of branched-chain amino
acids (especially L-leucine) and their keto-acids
(especially α-ketoisocaproic acid (αKIC). Over-
abundant leucine competitively inhibits uptake of
other amino acids into cells, inhibiting protein
synthesis; myelin synthesis is impaired leading to
dysmyelination. At the same time, αKIC inhibits
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) synthesis, disrupting
sodium–potassium–ATP (NA/K ATPase) function.
Because myelination in the newborn and young
infant is extremely active, hence energy depend-
ent,
cytotoxic
and
intramyelinic
edema
(and
restricted diﬀusion) develop exclusively in myeli-
nated areas, superimposed on a background of dif-
fuse
vasogenic
edema
as
a
sign
of
global
neurotoxicity (▶Fig. 10.5).20,21
Acquired: Methotrexate Toxicity
Methotrexate (MTX) inhibits dihydrofolate reduc-
tase, resulting in adenosine release, which dilates
cerebral blood vessels and slows presynaptic neu-
rotransmitter
release.22
Because
symptoms
improve rapidly with aminophylline, a competitive
adenosine
antagonist,
MTX
neurotoxicity
is
Fig. 10.4
Severe global hypoxic injury in a 4-day-old infant delivered at 38 weeks with vasa previa. (a) Diffusely
abnormal diffusion on apparent diffusion coefficient map at 4 days, which (b) progressed to diffuse cerebral cavitation
and atrophy on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery magnetic resonance imaging by 26 days of life.
DWI and DTI of White Matter Diseases In Children
159

Fig. 10.5
Maple syrup urine disease. Diffuse vasogenic edema on (a) T2-weighted image, with restricted diffusion in
myelinated white matter on (b) diffusion weighted image (DWI) and (c) apparent diffusion coefficient map. (d) Coronal
DWI shows involvement of myelinated white matter not only intracranially, but also in the spinal cord.
DWI and DTI of White Matter Diseases In Children
160

favored to be mediated by the actions of adenosine
in the CNS via unknown mechanisms, potentially
via oxidative stress.22,23 Homocysteine may be
increased or normal.24 Ten to 14 days after MTX
administration, and within hours after the appear-
ance of clinical signs and symptoms, restricted dif-
fusion develops in the centrum semiovale of
aﬀected patients (▶Fig. 10.6a,b). This is unaccom-
panied by T2 or fluid-attenuated inversion recov-
ery (FLAIR) evidence of vasogenic edema in the
early stage (▶Fig. 10.6c), consistent with a “pure”
cytotoxic and/or intramyelinic edema. Therefore
DWI is critical for early, confident diagnosis of
MTX neurotoxicity. This restricted diﬀusion subse-
quently subsides, but in some cases may progress
to loss of tissue matrix, with increased diﬀusivity
and T2 signal in the primarily involved areas.24
10.2.4 Restricted Diﬀusion:
Progressive Oligodendrocyte
Toxicity and Metabolic Failure
Inherited: Krabbe Disease (Globoid
Cell Leukodystrophy),
Metachromatic Leukodystrophy
In Krabbe disease (globoid cell leukodystrophy),
early myelin is normal, but autosomal recessive
deficiency
of
lysosomal
β-galactocerebrosidase
causes accumulation of β-galactocerebroside (a
major component of myelin) and its catabolic
derivative psychosine, which is toxic to oligoden-
drocytes,
as
early
myelination
progresses.25,26
Reduced diﬀusivity is possible early in the disease,
which may correspond to cytotoxic and/or intra-
myelinic edema in the stage of rapid oligodendro-
cyte death and myelin breakdown, followed by
progressive increases in diﬀusion and decreased
anisotropy as
demyelination progresses.5,11,19,26
T2-weighted images may show a “tigroid” pattern
of radiating lines.5 ADC is lower than in primarily
vacuolating disorders, due to influx of microglia
and macrophages.27
In metachromatic leukodystrophy, an autosomal
recessive deficiency of lysosomal arylsulfatase A
causes accumulation of sulfatides and deficiency of
cerebrosides, the main component of myelin, in
the lysosomes of oligodendrocytes and Schwann
cells. Though oligodendrocytes are initially able to
compensate
and
maintain
myelin
membrane
homeostasis, they eventually undergo metabolic
failure.26 Demyelination is the result of oligoden-
drocyte
dysfunction/death
and
instability
of
abnormal myelin.26,28 Diﬀuse white matter signal
abnormality with a tigroid pattern of perivascular
sparing (particularly in the juvenile form) may be
accompanied by restricted diﬀusion in the early
stage (▶Fig. 10.7), suggesting relatively rapid
extracellular to intracellular/intramyelinic water
shifts; inflammation is not a characteristic feature.
In
the
burned-out
phase,
ADC
is
increased
(increased water diﬀusion) and FA is decreased, a
Fig. 10.6 Acute methotrexate toxicity. Restricted diffusion on (a) diffusion weighted image and (b) apparent diffusion
coefficient map, unaccompanied by (c) fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) signal abnormality, consistent with
cytotoxic/intramyelinic edema.
DWI and DTI of White Matter Diseases In Children
161

nonspecific appearance common to demyelinated
white matter.11
10.2.5 Diﬀusion Negative:
Hypomyelination
In disorders characterized primarily by hypomyeli-
nation, axonal density is normal but myelination is
permanently arrested. Myelin destruction is not a
dominant feature. There is no cytotoxicity or influx
of microglia/macrophages to cause restricted diﬀu-
sion. Anisotropy is only slightly decreased because
FA is not entirely dependent on myelin; normal
axonal density may be suﬃcient to maintain FA.27
Inherited: Pelizaeus–Merzbacher
Disease
In Pelizaeus–Merzbacher disease, X-linked reces-
sive mutations in the PLP1 gene result in abnormal
proteolipid protein, a major myelin structural pro-
tein, resulting in diﬀuse hypomyelination in the
CNS and increased water diﬀusion (▶Fig. 10.8a–c).
There is no pathological evidence of active demye-
lination, and peripheral nervous system (PNS)
myelin is spared. There is relative sparing of the
cortex, subcortical white matter, spinal cord, and
brainstem. Atrophy is not a prominent feature. In
areas where myelin is rare or absent, oligodendro-
cytes are few and abnormal. Axonal integrity is
preserved, which may be suﬃcient to maintain
near-normal anisotropy because FA is only slightly
decreased (▶Fig. 10.8d,e).27
Imaging-based
diﬀerential considerations
for
this appearance include other hypomyelinating
disorders, such as trichothiodystrophy, 18q syn-
drome, and Salla disease.29
Acquired: Congenital Hypothyr-
oidism, Severe Early Malnutrition
The generation of myelin by oligodendrocytes is
dependent on coordinated upregulation of myelin
protein genes by trophic factors, deficits in which
may cause delayed or hypomyelination. In congen-
ital hypothyroidism, absent or deficient thyroid
hormone (T3) inhibits terminal diﬀerentiation of
oligodendrocytes and reduced expression of mye-
lin genes, resulting in hypomyelination.30 This
hypomyelination is reversible with early thyroxine
therapy.31 Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1),
which promotes myelination and oligodendrocyte
maturation, may be reduced in severe undernour-
ishment. Permanent hypomyelination may occur if
this
undernourishment
occurs
during
critical
growth periods.5
Fig. 10.7 Metachromatic leukodystrophy. (a) Axial diffusion weighted image and (b) apparent diffusion coefficient map
show that water diffusion is relatively restricted in areas of active disease (arrowheads) and increased in demyelinated
white matter (asterisks). (c) Both processes contribute to diffuse white matter hyperintensity on T2-weighted imaging.
DWI and DTI of White Matter Diseases In Children
162

10.2.6 Increased Diﬀusion:
Abnormal Water Homeostasis
with Myelin Vacuolation
Inherited: Megalencephalic
Leukoencephalopathy with
Subcortical Cysts
In addition to regulating myelin formation and
neurogenesis, and supplying neurons with meta-
bolic substrates, astrocytes play a key role in water
and ion homeostasis in the CNS, including at the
BBB via astrocyte endfeet. In the classic, most com-
mon form of megalencephalic leukoencephalop-
athy with subcortical cysts, autosomal-recessive
mutations in the astrocyte-specific MLC1 gene
product disrupt brain ion and water homeostasis,
leading
to
vacuolating
myelin
degeneration.
Vacuoles form in the outer lamellae of the myelin
sheath, and in the intracellular structures and end-
feet of astrocytes.32 Early diﬀuse cerebral white
matter swelling, with increased ADC (▶Fig. 10.9b,
c) and decreased anisotropy, ultimately leads to
atrophy by the adult years. Bilateral anterior tem-
poral lobe (▶Fig. 10.9a), and sometimes parietal
and frontal lobes, subcortical cysts follow white
matter rarefaction in infancy.33
In Canavan disease, autosomal recessive defects
in oligodendrocyte aspartoacylase causes accumu-
lation of N-acetyl aspartate (NAA) in the extracel-
lular space and unavailability of acetate for myelin
lipid synthesis. Altered osmotic-hydrostatic pres-
sures
due
to
accumulation
of
NAA
in
the
Fig. 10.8 Pelizaeus–Merzbacher disease. Diffuse white matter T2 hyperintensity (a) is due to increased water diffusion
on diffusion weighted imaging (b) and apparent diffusion coefficient map (c) in the setting of hypomyelination.
Fractional anisotropy (FA) is only mildly decreased on the FA map (d) and the directionally encoded color map (e).
(Courtesy of Dr. Ata Siddiqui, Kings College Hospital, London, UK.)
DWI and DTI of White Matter Diseases In Children
163

extracellular space are the proposed cause for the
extracellular and astrocytic edema and myelin
vacuolation observed at pathological section.34
Progression is centripetal, with early changes in
the subcortical white matter accompanied by
restricted diﬀusion (▶Fig. 10.10), which persists
over an extended period of time. This is likely due
to restriction of the extracellular spaces due to
early cellular swelling and myelin vacuolation.
Ultimately, diﬀusion is increased in demyelinated
white matter due to increased size of the extracel-
lular spaces later in the disease.5
Acquired: Osmotic Demyelination
Syndrome (Central Pontine And
Extrapontine Myelinolysis)
Very high or low levels of sodium, or rapid correc-
tion of hyponatremia, which may occur in chroni-
cally
ill
or
undernourished
children,35
cause
osmotic cerebral stress, to which oligodendrocytes
are particularly vulnerable. Signal abnormalities
correspond to the distribution of oligodendrocytes
associated with large neurons in the pons and in
extrapontine
sites,
including
the
thalamus.
Fig. 10.10 Canavan disease. (a) Axial T2-weighted imaging, (b) diffusion weighted imaging, and (c) apparent diffusion
coefficient (ADC) map. ADC differentiates T2 hyperintensity due to restricted water diffusion in the subcortical white
matter (dark on ADC, arrows) from T2 hyperintensity due to white matter rarefaction and increased size of water spaces
(asterisks). (Courtesy of Dr. Ata Siddiqui, Kings College Hospital, London, UK.)
Fig. 10.9 Megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts. Generalized hyperintensity of white matter on
(a) T2-weighted imaging is due to rarefaction and cystic degeneration of white matter and myelin vacuolation, resulting
in increased water diffusion as evidenced by decreased signal on (b) diffusion weighted imaging and increased on (c) the
apparent diffusion coefficient map.
DWI and DTI of White Matter Diseases In Children
164

Restricted diﬀusion may be present in the early
stages (▶Fig. 10.11), likely secondary to character-
istic cellular swelling and myelin vacuolation prior
to myelin rupture. Inflammation is not a feature;
lipid-laden macrophages appear later.36 Findings
on T2-weighted imaging may lag behind the diﬀu-
sion abnormalities in both the acute and the recov-
ery phases; normalization of ADC has been found
to parallel clinical recovery.36
10.2.7 Increased Diﬀusion: Myelin
Rarefaction and Cystic
Degeneration
Inherited: Vanishing White Matter
Disease (Myelin Rarefaction, Cystic
Degeneration)
In vanishing white matter disease, also known as
childhood ataxia with diﬀuse CNS hypomyelina-
tion (CACH), abnormal cellular stress responses
due to autosomal recessive mutations in eukary-
otic translation initiation factor 2B (eIF2B) result in
abnormal astrocyte and oligodendrocyte prolifera-
tion. Recurrent episodes of ataxia, spasticity, and
cognitive decline are characteristic, with rapid pro-
gression after minor head trauma or fright.32 Diﬀuse,
progressive white matter rarefaction with cystic
degeneration results in increased water diﬀusion
(ADC) and decreased FA.27 Diﬀusion may be restricted
early in the disease due to increased numbers of oli-
godendrocytes and their precursors (hypercellularity)
in regions where myelin is relatively spared, such as
the subcortical U fibers (▶Fig. 10.12), cerebellar
white matter, and peduncles.3
Acquired: End-Stage Demyelination
In burned-out white matter disease, diﬀusion
characteristics of white matter lesions are typically
nonspecific, as are pathological findings, reflecting
extensive severe devastation and resultant tissue
matrix
rarefaction.
Increased
diﬀusion
and
decreased FA reflect general pathological findings
of hypocellularity, decreased myelin and oligoden-
drocytes, and an increase in white matter water to
myelin ratio.23
10.3 Summary
Though identifiable patterns of pediatric WM dis-
eases exist on T2-weighted imaging, many are
nonspecific in appearance. Diﬀusion imaging per-
mits distinction of mechanistically and histopatho-
logically distinct areas within the aﬀected white
matter, enhancing understanding of underlying
processes, and providing important clues to stage/
activity of disease and underlying pathology. Rela-
tionships of diﬀusion imaging findings to underly-
ing pathology in the examples covered in this
chapter are summarized in ▶Table 10.1. As new
white matter diseases continue to be discovered,
an understanding of these relationships will con-
tribute to our growing understanding of these
dynamic disease processes.
Fig. 10.11
Osmotic demyelination syndrome. Pontine signal abnormality on (a) T2-weighted image is predominantly
due to intracellular and intramyelinic water shifts, as evidenced by restricted diffusion on (b) diffusion weighted image
and (c) apparent diffusion coefficient map, with minimal surrounding vasogenic edema.
DWI and DTI of White Matter Diseases In Children
165

Fig. 10.12
Early vanishing white matter disease. Diffusely rarefied white matter appears hyperintense on (a) T2-
weighted imaging and hypointense on (b) T1-weighted imaging. On (c) diffusion weighted imaging and (d) apparent
diffusion coefficient map, diffusion is restricted in relatively spared subcortical white matter due to glial proliferation and
relative hypercellularity. (Courtesy of Dr. Ata Siddiqui, Kings College Hospital, London, UK.)
DWI and DTI of White Matter Diseases In Children
166

Table 10.1 Diﬀusion characteristics and patterns of pediatric white matter disease by underlying pathology
Disorder
ADC
FA
Pattern
Restricted diffusion: active inflammatory demyelination
X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy
↓leading edge, acute; ↑
demyelinated zone, late
↑in demyelinated WM
Centrifugal, posterior to an-
terior
Tumefactive multiple sclerosis
↓possible at leading edge,
acute; ↑demyelinated
zone, late
FA lower in enhancing than
in nonenhancing lesions
Most frequently periventric-
ular or subcortical, corpus
callosum, progressive or re-
lapsing-remitting
ADEM
↓possible at leading edge,
acute; ↑demyelinated
zone, late
May be decreased
Most frequently subcortical,
periventricular, asymmetric,
monophasic
Restricted diffusion: diffuse cytotoxic/intramyelinic edema with white matter cavitation
Mitochondrial disorder: com-
plex I deficiency
↓↓in affected WM; ↑in
cavitations
Centrifugal, cavitations in
central burned-out WM
Global neonatal hypoxic injury
↓
Variable
Restricted diffusion, regional: neurotoxicity
Maple syrup urine disease
(classic form)
↓in prenatally myelinated
WM; ↑in nonmyelinated
areas
Diffuse vasogenic edema;
restricted diffusion in prena-
tally myelinated WM
Methotrexate toxicity
↓early, acute; precedes
FLAIR abnormality; nor-
malizes after resolution
Unknown
Centrum semiovale
Restricted diffusion: progressive oligodendrocyte toxicity and metabolic failure
Metachromatic leukodystrophy
May be ↓in acute phase,
↑late in demyelinated WM
↓late in demyelinated WM
Centrifugal, posterior to an-
terior, with eventual diffuse
WM involvement. “tigroid”
perivenular sparing and spar-
ing of subcortical U fibers.
Krabbe disease (globoid cell
leukodystrophy)
↓early along leading edge,
then progressive ↑ADC.
↓
Centrifugal, posterior to an-
terior, with eventual diffuse
WM involvement. “tigroid”
sparing.
Diffusion negative: hypomyelination, delayed myelination
Pelizaeus–Merzbacher disease
Normal
Slightly ↓; near normal
Diffuse WM T2 hyperinten-
sity
Congenital/perinatal hypothyr-
oidism
Normal
Diffuse
Severe nutrient deficiency
Normal
Diffuse
Increased diffusion: abnormal water homeostasis with myelin vacuolation
Megalencephalic leukoencephal-
opathy with subcortical cysts
↑
↓↓
Diffuse; early anterior tem-
poral subcortical cysts
Canavan disease
Early: ↓/= in peripheral
WM, globi pallidi, thalami,
brainstem, dorsal pons,
dentate nuclei Late: ↑
Centripetal WM progression;
globi pallidi, thalami
involved
DWI and DTI of White Matter Diseases In Children
167

References
[1] Mukherjee P, Berman JI, Chung SW, Hess CP, Henry RG. Dif-
fusion tensor MR imaging and fiber tractography: theoretic
underpinnings. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2008; 29(4): 632–
641
[2] McRobbie DW. MRI from Picture to Proton. 2nd ed. New
York, NY: Cambridge University Press; 2007
[3] van der Lei HD, Steenweg ME, Bugiani M, et al. Restricted
diﬀusion in vanishing white matter. Arch Neurol 2012; 69
(6): 723–727
[4] Liang D, Bhatta S, Gerzanich V, Simard JM. Cytotoxic edema:
mechanisms of pathological cell swelling. Neurosurg Focus
2007; 22(5): E2
[5] Knaap MSd, Valk J, Barkhof F, Knaap MSd. Magnetic Reso-
nance of Myelination and Myelin Disorders. 3rd ed. New
York, NY: Springer, 2005
[6] Schiﬀmann R, van der Knaap MS. Invited article: an MRI-
based approach to the diagnosis of white matter disorders.
Neurology 2009; 72(8): 750–759
[7] Hyland M, Bermel RA, Cohen JA. Restricted diﬀusion preced-
ing
gadolinium
enhancement
in
large
or
tumefactive
demyelinating lesions. Neurol Clin Pract 2013; 3(1): 15–21
[8] Popescu BF, Lucchinetti CF. Pathology of demyelinating dis-
eases. Annu Rev Pathol 2012; 7: 185–217
[9] Abou Zeid N, Pirko I, Erickson B, et al. Diﬀusion weighted
imaging characteristics of biopsy-proven demyelinating
brain lesions. Neurology 2012; 78(21): 1655–1662
[10] Kemp S, Berger J, Aubourg P. X-linked adrenoleukodystro-
phy: clinical, metabolic, genetic and pathophysiological
aspects. Biochim Biophys Acta 2012; 1822(9): 1465–1474
[11] Patay Z. Diﬀusion weighted MR imaging in leukodystro-
phies. Eur Radiol 2005; 15(11): 2284–2303
[12] van der Voorn JP, Pouwels PJ, Powers JM, et al. Correlating
quantitative MR imaging with histopathology in X-linked
adrenoleukodystrophy. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2011; 32(3):
481–489
[13] Wingerchuk DM, Lucchinetti CF. Comparative immunopa-
thogenesis of acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, neuro-
myelitis optica, and multiple sclerosis. Curr Opin Neurol
2007; 20(3): 343–350
[14] Filippi M, Agosta F. Imaging biomarkers in multiple sclerosis.
J Magn Reson Imaging 2010; 31(4): 770–788
[15] Bernarding J, Braun J, Koennecke HC. Diﬀusion- and perfu-
sion-weighted MR imaging in a patient with acute demyeli-
nating encephalomyelitis (ADEM). J Magn Reson Imaging
2002; 15(1): 96–100
[16] Sofou K, Steneryd K, Wiklund LM, Tulinius M, Darin N. MRI
of the brain in childhood-onset mitochondrial disorders
with central nervous system involvement. Mitochondrion
2013; 13(4): 364–371
[17] Biancheri R, Rossi D, Cassandrini D, Rossi A, Bruno C, Santor-
elli FM. Cavitating leukoencephalopathy in a child carrying
the mitochondrial A8344G mutation. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
2010; 31(9): E78–E79
[18] Weidenheim KM, Bodhireddy SR, Nuovo GJ, Nelson SJ, Dick-
son DW. Multicystic encephalopathy: review of eight cases
with etiologic considerations. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
1995; 54(2): 268–275
[19] Barkovich AJ. Pediatric Neuroimaging. 5th ed. Philadelphia,
PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2012
[20] Zinnanti WJ, Lazovic J, Griﬃn K, et al. Dual mechanism of
brain injury and novel treatment strategy in maple syrup
urine disease. Brain 2009; 132(Pt 4): 903–918
[21] Parmar H, Sitoh YY, Ho L. Maple syrup urine disease: diﬀu-
sion weighted and diﬀusion tensor magnetic resonance
imaging findings. J Comput Assist Tomogr 2004; 28(1): 93–
97
[22] Bernini JC, Fort DW, Griener JC, Kane BJ, Chappell WB,
Kamen BA. Aminophylline for methotrexate-induced neuro-
toxicity. Lancet 1995; 345(8949): 544–547
[23] Greenfield JG, Love S, Louis DN, Ellison D. Greenfield’s Neu-
ropathology. 8th ed. London: Hodder Arnold; 2008
[24] Brugnoletti F, Morris EB, Laningham FH, et al. Recurrent
intrathecal methotrexate induced neurotoxicity in an ado-
lescent with acute lymphoblastic leukemia: Serial clinical
and radiologic findings. Pediatr Blood Cancer 2009; 52(2):
293–295
[25] Guo AC, Petrella JR, Kurtzberg J, Provenzale JM. Evaluation of
white matter anisotropy in Krabbe disease with diﬀusion
tensor MR imaging: initial experience. Radiology 2001; 218
(3): 809–815
[26] Scriver CR. The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited
Disease. 8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2001
[27] van der Voorn JP, Pouwels PJ, Hart AA, et al. Childhood white
matter disorders: quantitative MR imaging and spectro-
scopy. Radiology 2006; 241(2): 510–517
Table 10.1 continued
Disorder
ADC
FA
Pattern
Osmotic demyelination syndro-
me (central pontine and
extrapontine myelinolysis)
↓early; normalization par-
allels recovery
Pons, thalamus, cortex, pu-
tamen
Increased diffusion: myelin rarefaction and cystic degeneration
Vanishing white matter disease
↓in preserved WM (sub-
cortical U fibers, internal
capsule); ↑in rarified WM
↓
Diffuse, symmetric
End-stage demyelination
↑
↓
Depends on underlying
cause
Abbreviations: ADC, apparent diffusion coefficient; ADEM, acute demyelinating encephalomyelitis; FA, fractional
anisotropy; FLAIR, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery; WM, white matter.
DWI and DTI of White Matter Diseases In Children
168

[28] Patil SA, Maegawa GH. Developing therapeutic approaches
for metachromatic leukodystrophy. Drug Des Devel Ther
2013; 7: 729–745
[29] Harreld JH, Smith EC, Prose NS, Puri PK, Barboriak DP. Tri-
chothiodystrophy with dysmyelination and central osteo-
sclerosis. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2010; 31(1): 129–130
[30] Mitew S, Hay CM, Peckham H, Xiao J, Koenning M, Emery B.
Mechanisms regulating the development of oligodendro-
cytes and central nervous system myelin. Neuroscience
2014; 276: 29–47
[31] Jagannathan NR, Tandon N, Raghunathan P, Kochupillai N.
Reversal of abnormalities of myelination by thyroxine ther-
apy in congenital hypothyroidism: localized in vivo proton
magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) study. Brain Res
Dev Brain Res 1998; 109(2): 179–186
[32] Lanciotti A, Brignone MS, Bertini E, Petrucci TC, Aloisi F,
Ambrosini E. Astrocytes: emerging stars in leukodystrophy
pathogenesis Transl Neurosci 2013; 4(2)
[33] van der Knaap MS, Boor I, Estévez R. Megalencephalic
leukoencephalopathy
with
subcortical
cysts:
chronic
white matter oedema due to a defect in brain ion and
water homoeostasis. Lancet Neurol 2012; 11(11): 973–
985
[34] Baslow MH, Guilfoyle DN. Are astrocytes the missing link
between lack of brain aspartoacylase activity and the spon-
giform leukodystrophy in Canavan disease? Neurochem Res
2009; 34(9): 1523–1534
[35] Ranger AM, Chaudhary N, Avery M, Fraser D. Central pon-
tine and extrapontine myelinolysis in children: a review of
76 patients. J Child Neurol 2012; 27(8): 1027–1037
[36] Ruzek KA, Campeau NG, Miller GM. Early diagnosis of cen-
tral pontine myelinolysis with diﬀusion weighted imaging.
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2004; 25(2): 210–213
DWI and DTI of White Matter Diseases In Children
169

11 Diﬀusion Imaging for the Assessment of Traumatic
Brain Injury
Michael L. Lipton
Key Points
●Diﬀusion sensitized magnetic resonance imag-
ing (dMRI) identifies traumatic brain injury
(TBI) pathology in the absence of abnormalities
on conventional magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI).
●Low fractional anisotropy (FA) is the most
widely reported and convergent finding from
diﬀusion tensor imaging (DTI) in patients with
TBI.
●With the appropriate use of quantitative
approaches, DTI abnormalities can be detected
in patients with TBI from the acute through the
chronic phases of injury.
●As with all imaging findings, clinical context,
including other imaging findings, is essential to
the assessment of dMRI in patients with TBI.
11.1 Introduction
Diﬀusion sensitized MRI (dMRI) provides several
useful metrics for the detection and characteriza-
tion of traumatic brain injury (TBI).1 This chapter
discusses applications of directionally nonselective
dMRI
techniques,
such
as
diﬀusion
weighted
MRI (DWI), as well as directionally sensitive
approaches, such as diﬀusion tensor MRI (DTI), for
detection of brain tissue injury in patients with
TBI. The chapter emphasizes the unique contribu-
tion of DWI and DTI for detection of pathology that
is not revealed by other imaging modalities.
11.2 Clinical Context and Diag-
nostic Criteria
TBI is a major cause of morbidity and mortality
worldwide. Each year, in the United States alone,
more than 2.5 million TBIs occur; over 55,000 indi-
viduals die, over 300,000 are hospitalized, and
more than 2 million are treated and released from
emergency departments.2 An unknown but likely
very large number of TBIs are unrecognized or
dismissed.3
TBI is commonly classified as to its severity
based on clinical examination at the time of injury.
This classification, based largely on the Glasgow
Coma Scale (GCS; scale range 3–15), delineates
severe (GCS 3–8), moderate (GCS 9–12), and mild
(GCS 13–15) TBI. This GCS-based classification is
an excellent predictor of survival to hospital dis-
charge, but does not eﬀectively predict long-term
outcome, especially with more mild degrees of
injury.4 Additional factors used for classification
include the duration of unconsciousness, the dura-
tion of posttraumatic amnesia, and the presence
of focal neurological deficits and imaging ab-
normalities.5,6
Mild TBI (mTBI, also termed concussion) is the
most common form of TBI.2 Patients with mTBI
experience a disturbance of neurocognitive func-
tion following the injury, which may include con-
fusion,
disorientation,
imbalance,
and
other
features. Some, but by no means all, mTBI patients
experience actual loss of consciousness.7 Diagnos-
tic
criteria
for
mTBI
include
no
more
than
30 minutes of unconsciousness, no more than 24
hours of amnesia, and absence of focal neurologi-
cal deficits.8 mTBI is typically not associated with
abnormalities on conventional computed tomog-
raphy
(CT)
and
magnetic
resonance
imaging
(MRI).1 Notwithstanding the relatively mild initial
clinical features and absence of conventional imag-
ing abnormalities, clinical manifestations of mTBI
do arise from brain pathology, particularly trau-
matic axonal injury (TAI).9
Most patients with mTBI will recover, but a sig-
nificant minority (15–30%,) will sustain long-term
adverse consequences, including persistent post-
concussive symptoms, cognitive impairment, and
behavioral dysfunction.7 Thus the consequences of
“mild” TBI are by no means necessarily mild. High-
profile coverage of sports and military-related
mTBI and its long-term adverse eﬀects, including
delayed
neurodegenerative
disorders,
such
as
chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE),10 have
driven increased awareness of mTBI. Patients with
GCS scores in the mTBI range (13–15) who do have
gross imaging abnormalities are often classified as
mild-complicated TBI. These individuals may have
worse prognosis for recovery.11
Diﬀusion Imaging for the Assessment of Traumatic Brain Injury
170

11.3 Pathology and Pathophysi-
ology: Focal and Diﬀuse Injury
TBI pathology is commonly classified based on its
gross pathological and imaging features as focal or
diﬀuse injury.9 Focal injury may be extra-axial
(skull fracture and epidural, subdural, or subarach-
noid hemorrhage) or intra-axial (contusion, lacer-
ation, and hematoma). Much TBI tissue pathology,
however, is a diﬀuse (or, more properly, multifocal)
microscopic injury to the white matter of the
brain, caused by linear and rotational forces. This
pathology is termed traumatic axonal injury (TAI).
When widespread it is often referred to as diﬀuse
axonal injury (DAI). Pathological evidence of TAI
has been demonstrated in all degrees of TBI
severity, including mTBI. Many types of focal TBI
pathology, including hemorrhage and contusion,
are readily detected using CT and conventional
MRI techniques, particularly those sensitive to
hemorrhage
such
as
T1-weighted
and
T2*-
weighted imaging. Although microhemorrhage, as
detected with susceptibility-weighted MRI (SWI),
may be detectable in patients with TAI, wide-
spread TAI may go entirely undetected on conven-
tional MRI scans.1 This is because significant injury
to axons occurs due to forces that do not rupture
even the smallest blood vessels, which are at least
10 times the diameter of and more resilient than
axons. Diﬀuse injury, TAI, is the major determinant
of long-term symptoms, deficits, and disability in
patients with TBI. Dysfunction arising from TBI is
thought to be due to widespread brain network
dysfunction, which can result from even micro-
scopic axonal injury.12,13
In order to understand the nature of dMRI
changes seen in the context of TBI, it is essential to
understand the pathogenesis of brain tissue path-
ology underpinning the imaging changes. Moder-
ate and severe TBI commonly entail frank physical
trauma to the brain surface resulting in contusion-
al injury. In all but the most severe TBI, however,
frank disruption of deeper brain tissue does not
result from the traumatic event. Rather, shear,
stress and rotational force applied to white matter
axons cause intra-axonal cytoskeletal alterations,
such as microtubule damage and neurofilament
misalignment, and set oﬀa cascade of pathological
cellular and molecular events.14 Component mech-
anisms
include
membrane
pump
dysfunction,
inflammation, apoptosis, impaired function of cell
survival pathways, and, eventually, loss of myelin
and axons. TAI pathology evolves over a period of
time (▶Fig. 11.1), and the underlying pathological
processes are typically not detectable using con-
ventional CT and MRI.1,15 Tissue injury, particularly
contusion as well as mass eﬀect due to large hem-
atomas, can lead to secondary ischemic injury or
frank infarction, which may complicate the picture
of focal TBI. Over the long term, loss of central
nervous system (CNS) axons, due to processes
including wallerian degeneration, ensues.14 White
matter fibers remote from the apparent site of
injury as well as cortical regions connected by
these fibers may subsequently exhibit volume loss.
11.4 Diﬀusion Weighted
Imaging—Sensitive Detection of
Traumatic Tissue Injury
11.4.1 Pathophysiology of
Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging
Abnormalities in TBI
As described elsewhere in this handbook, DWI has
been known to be a sensitive means for detection
of cytotoxic edema due to ischemic tissue injury
since its clinical application to stroke became
widespread in the 1990s.16 Although the clinical
utility and acceptance of DWI in stroke is well
established, the cellular mechanisms underlying
these diﬀusion changes remain controversial. Sim-
ilar to stroke, restriction of isotropic diﬀusion is a
manifestation of cytotoxic edema in patients with
traumatic injury. As with stroke, the precise
underlying cellular events remain unclear. Cyto-
toxic edema and its associated eﬀect on diﬀusion
most commonly occurs in traumatic cortical con-
tusion, but may also be a feature of acute TAI and
of intracranial hematoma.
Impact to the head, with or without consequent
fracture, may cause contusion of the brain surface
subjacent to the impact site, which is termed coup
contusion. Subsequent acceleration of the brain
and its impact against the skull opposite the site of
the head impact leads to a secondary, typically
more extensive, contusion. This secondary contu-
sion is termed contrecoup contusion. Importantly,
contusion also occurs in the absence of direct
impact to the head. Acceleration of the head, as in
a whiplash-type mechanism, can produce substan-
tial acceleration of the brain, which subsequently
impacts the skull, with potential for consequent
cortical contusion.
Diﬀusion Imaging for the Assessment of Traumatic Brain Injury
171

Contusion initially results in cytotoxic edema,
which characteristically aﬀects a contiguous re-
gion of brain tissue, aﬀecting both superficial cort-
ical gray matter and subjacent white matter, a
pattern similar to ischemic injury. Unlike infarct,
however, contusional injury does not typically fol-
low a vascular distribution (▶Fig. 11.2). Concur-
rent vascular injury or ischemia secondary to mass
eﬀect,
however,
may
complicate
the
imaging
appearance of contusion on DWI.
Detection of DWI abnormalities in
TBI
The earliest imaging manifestation of traumatic
cortical contusion is restriction of isotropic diﬀu-
sion. This appears as high signal on isotropic DWI
and low apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient (ADC), seen
on ADC images (see ▶Fig. 11.2). Restricted diﬀu-
sion in cortical contusion can be detected before
CT or MRI reveal imaging evidence of tissue injury.
However, DWI evidence of contusion is commonly
identified in conjunction with signs of extracranial
as well as intracranial injury, including scalp hem-
atoma, skull fracture, hemorrhage, and edema
(▶Fig. 11.3). In this regard, location of the diﬀu-
sion abnormalities relative to other signs of injury
is key to correct diagnosis. DWI findings of contu-
sion follow the classical coup contrecoup distribu-
tion already provided. Typically, the extent of
injury opposite the site of impact (contrecoup) is
greater relative to that immediately subjacent to
the site of impact (coup).
Diﬀerential Diagnosis of DWI
Abnormalities in Trauma Patients
Restriction of isotropic diﬀusion is a nonspecific
feature of many forms of brain tissue injury,
including ischemia, infection, and inflammation
(▶Fig. 11.4). This lack of specificity, however, is
typical of imaging findings in general and does not
preclude the diagnostic utility of DWI in TBI. Addi-
tional features, when considered in conjunction
Fig. 11.1 Timeframe of evolving pathological, imaging, and clinical features after traumatic brain injury. Note that
diffusion sensitized magnetic resonance imaging features overlap and that diffusion tensor imaging findings persist into
the chronic phase.
Diﬀusion Imaging for the Assessment of Traumatic Brain Injury
172

with the presence of low ADC, are useful in arriv-
ing at a correct diagnosis of traumatic injury. The
spatial distribution of DWI abnormalities will
occur in typical locations and follow expected pat-
terns of contusion or TAI. Anterior and inferior
frontal and temporal lobe location and a coup con-
trecoup distribution of diﬀusion restriction, associ-
ation with findings of extracranial soft tissue
injury, and skull fracture are typical findings in
contusion. The absence of conformity to arterial
vascular distributions provides further supporting
evidence that cortical diﬀusion restriction is due
to traumatic contusion. Clear conformance of dif-
fusion restriction to an arterial vascular distribu-
tion, on the other hand, is typical of stroke.
Focal diﬀusion restriction involving the white
matter may be a manifestation of acute TAI
(▶Fig. 11.5, ▶Fig. 11.6). Other disorders, such as
brain abscess and multiple sclerosis (MS), also
manifest focal diﬀusion restriction. Predilection for
involvement of the corpus callosum, especially the
splenium, deep white matter structures, and the
gray matter–white matter junction are typical fea-
tures of TBI. Concurrent identification of additional
imaging features is also helpful in narrowing the
diﬀerential
diagnosis.
Useful
features
might
include white matter hyperintensities typical of
MS, other imaging features of abscess, or addition-
al findings of TBI, such as hemorrhage and extrac-
ranial injury.
Clinical context is an essential factor in every
diﬀerential diagnosis. History and other clinical
evidence of TBI as well as the absence of known
alternate diagnoses or their risk factors, including
MS, cerebrovascular disease, or systemic infection,
are necessary to support the correct attribution of
DWI findings to TBI.
Differential diagnosis for intra-
axial isotropic diffusion restric-
tion
●Contusion and traumatic axonal injury
●Stroke
●Cerebritis and abscess
●Demyelination
●Radiation injury
●Surgery
●Hematoma
●Seizures and postictal changes
Fig. 11.2
Contusion and traumatic
axonal injury (TAI) due to nonacciden-
tal injury. This 2-year-old boy was
brought to the emergency depart-
ment with multiple injuries and leth-
argy. Computed tomography was
entirely unremarkable. (a) Susceptibil-
ity-weighted magnetic resonance
imaging (SWI) showed hemorrhage
confined to the splenium. (b) Hyper-
intensity is present within the sple-
nium on T2-weighted fluid-attenuated
inversion recovery imaging. (c) More
extensive high signal on diffusion
weighted imaging co-located with (d)
low apparent diffusion coefficient in-
dicates cytotoxic edema due to acute
TAI, later determined to be a result of
severe shaking.
Diﬀusion Imaging for the Assessment of Traumatic Brain Injury
173

11.5 Diﬀusion Tensor Imaging—
Detection of Microstructural
Traumatic Axonal Injury
11.5.1 Biophysical basis of DTI
Abnormalities in TBI
DWI detects decline in the magnitude (ADC; direc-
tion-independent
net spatial
displacement)
of
water self-diﬀusion in tissue. Lower magnitude
(high signal on DWI and low ADC; i.e., diﬀusion
restriction) is a manifestation of cytotoxic edema
(▶Fig. 11.7). DTI, however, uniquely indexes diﬀu-
sion direction. As explained in Chapter 1, DTI pro-
vides two directional characteristics of
water
diﬀusion in tissue: the dominant direction of
water diﬀusion (principle eigenvector) and the
coherence (i.e., directional homogeneity, indexed
by radial diﬀusivity [RD] and fractional anisotropy
[FA]) of diﬀusion within the voxel. The normally
high degree of anisotropic (directionally coherent)
diﬀusion in normal white matter is conferred by
its highly ordered microstructural environment,
which includes multilayered parallel barriers to
diﬀusion. These barriers include elements of the
cytoskeleton, the axolemma and myelin sheath. As
already described, one or more of these white
matter constituents is aﬀected and altered in TAI.
The consequent loss of barriers to diﬀusion leads
to less coherence of diﬀusion direction across the
voxel, which manifests as lower FA. Higher RD may
Fig. 11.3
Full extent of hemorrhagic contusion revealed by diffusion weighted imaging (DWI). (a) T2-weighted fluid
attenuated inversion recovery, (b) diffusion weighted imaging and (c) apparent diffusion coefficient map shows
heterogeneous signal due to hemorrhage, with areas of T2 shine-through (c) and diffusion restriction in the left frontal
lobe. Note the additional area of diffusion restriction (white arrows; high signal on DWI (e) and (f) low apparent diffusion
coefficient indicating tissue injury due to contusion beyond the area of hemorrhage. This area appeared relatively
normal on computed tomography (not shown) and exhibited only minimal signal hyperintensity on (d) T2-weighted
fluid attenuated inversion recovery.
Diﬀusion Imaging for the Assessment of Traumatic Brain Injury
174

be the predominant factor driving increases in FA
and may be a better predictor of adverse function-
al consequences of TAI. Loss of barriers to diﬀusion
also facilitates an increase in the overall magnitude
of diﬀusion (mean diﬀusivity [MD]), which has
been repeatedly reported as a feature of TAI. FA,
however, is the most widely studied and applied
DTI parameter.17
Newer dMRI methods, such as diﬀusion kurtosis
imaging (DKI), high angular resolution diﬀusion
imaging
(HARDI),
and
others,
provide
more
sophisticated and potentially more accurate char-
acterization
of
directional
diﬀusion.
Although
these techniques hold much promise for improv-
ing clinical assessment of TBI, they have been
much less widely studied, compared to FA from
Fig. 11.4 Differentiating diffusion restriction in multiple sclerosis from traumatic axonal injury (TAI). Axial T2-weighted
fluid attenuated inversion recovery -FLAIR (a), diffusion weighted imaging (b) and apparent coefficients map (c).
Diffusion restriction involves the large lesion adjacent to the ventricle (arrows in a, b and c) that can be differentiated
from TAI by its location and association with other findings of multiple sclerosis (arrowheads in a).
Fig. 11.5
(a) Computed tomography shows splenial hemorrhage typical of traumatic axonal injury (TAI) as well as
diffuse edema, in a patient who was comatose following a high-speed motor vehicle accident. (b) Diffusion restriction
due to TAI, however, is seen to involve the entire splenium, evidenced by high signal on diffusion weighted imaging and
(c) low apparent diffusion coefficient. The additional area of diffusion restriction in the right frontal lobe represents
cytotoxic edema due to surgical placement of an intracranial pressure monitor. (Images courtesy of: George Lantos, M.
D., Jacobi Medical Center, Bronx, NY.)
Diﬀusion Imaging for the Assessment of Traumatic Brain Injury
175

DTI, and the incremental clinical benefit of these
approaches remains to be demonstrated and quan-
tified. The approaches for DTI image analysis
described later in the chapter can be applied to
any DTI metric as well as to DKI, HARDI, and other
approaches. This chapter, however, focuses on the
detection of low FA as a marker of TAI in TBI.
11.5.2 DTI Abnormalities in TBI
Lower FA has been repeatedly identified in multi-
ple white matter locations when patients with TBI
are compared to healthy controls. Moreover, this
finding has held up across studies that diﬀered sig-
nificantly with regard to patient selection and
imaging technique. Patients at all levels of TBI
severity and at all stages of injury (acute, subacute,
and chronic) have shown low FA in studies that
performed
DTI
at a
range
of
magnetic
field
strength, using a variety of technical parameters
and applying diﬀerent approaches to quantifying
and analyzing the DTI data. This convergence of
study findings despite methodological variance
underscores the robustness of DTI as a means for
detecting tissue abnormalities in TBI.1,17
Abnormally high FA has also been detected in
TBI patients at various times following injury,
though less frequently.18 Abnormally high MD has
also been identified in TBI patients.19 Both changes
in FA and MD have been associated with adverse
clinical outcomes, including postconcussion symp-
toms and cognitive impairment, but it remains
unclear how DTI findings near the time of TBI
might be able to predict future recovery and ulti-
mate outcome. To date, relatively few studies have
reported eigenvalue results in TBI.17
11.5.3 Detection of DTI
Abnormalities in TBI
Detection of abnormally low FA as an indicator of
TAI (▶Table 11.1) can be accomplished by a num-
ber of approaches. Qualitative visual assessment of
either grayscale or color-encoded directional FA
images may, in some cases, reveal areas of abnor-
mally low FA as dark areas within the white matter
(▶Fig. 11.8). This approach, however, is fraught
with diﬃculty and may be unreliable, due to the
normal variability of FA across white matter. The
spatial variation in FA results from dispersion,
turning, and crossing of fibers within the voxel.
Thus,
although
normal white
matter
appears
homogeneous on standard structural (e.g., T1- or
T2-weighted) images, FA varies from voxel to voxel
and from region to region to a much greater
degree, conferring a “noisy” appearance. In the
face of this normal variation, only very large
reductions in FA, if any, will be visibly apparent
and distinguishable from normal spatial variation.
As a result, the visual assessment of FA images for
TAI is very insensitive (highly significant abnor-
malities may be invisible) and may be unreliable
(diﬀerences due to disease cannot be easily distin-
guished from diﬀerences due to normal variation).
Another qualitative approach to DTI interpreta-
tion entails the visual assessment of tractography
Fig. 11.6
In the same patient as in ▶Fig. 11.4, (a) computed tomography at a more craniad level shows only diffuse
edema. (b) High signal on diffusion weighted imaging and (c) low apparent diffusion coefficient delineate extensive
traumatic axonal injury involving the corpus callosum and parasagittal gray–white junction bilaterally. (Images courtesy
of: George Lantos, M.D., Jacobi Medical Center, Bronx, NY.)
Diﬀusion Imaging for the Assessment of Traumatic Brain Injury
176

(▶Fig. 11.8, ▶Fig. 11.9, ▶Fig. 11.10, ▶Fig. 11.11).
Tracts are generated using image processing soft-
ware and then assessed for completeness, volume,
and branching. In cases of significant
injury,
changes related to injury can be visualized. How-
ever, tractography results are highly dependent on
the parameters chosen by the user, including FA
and
turning
thresholds
for
tract
termination
(▶Fig. 11.12). It is thus essential to ensure that
abnormal appearances are not the result of techni-
cal factors.
FA images contain quantitative diagnostic infor-
mation. Each pixel in the image contains a meas-
urement, which can be analyzed to determine if it
is abnormal. The assessment of a patient’s FA
images can thus be treated in much the same way
as other laboratory tests. When the measurement
is
obtained
in
a
group
of
healthy,
normal
Fig. 11.7
Cytotoxic edema in nonaccidental trauma. This 90-day-old boy was brought to the emergency department
with lethargy and fussiness. Computed tomography (not shown) revealed skull fractures and a thin right convexity
subdural collection. Edema was suspected, but no parenchymal brain abnormality was evident. (a, b) High signal on
diffusion weighted imaging with (c, d) co-located low apparent diffusion coefficient delineates extensive right
parietooccipital contusion (arrowheads) as well as traumatic axonal injury involving the splenium and deep right parietal
white matter (arrows). Note that the region of cortical contusion crosses the middle cerebral artery -posterior cerebral
artery border zone.
Diﬀusion Imaging for the Assessment of Traumatic Brain Injury
177

individuals, the normal range of FA at a given brain
location
can
be
determined.
Subsequently,
a
patient’s FA can be compared to this normal range
to determine if FA is normal or abnormal at that
location in this particular patient. This same quan-
titative analysis process can be repeated for other
areas. For the general approach just described, we
can identify two essential prerequisites to quanti-
tative analysis of FA, which can be achieved
through several possible analytic approaches. The
requirements include the following:
1. Measurement Standardization: FA must be
measured in the same way in the patient as in
the individuals in whom the normal range is
Fig. 11.8
Visual assessment of fractional anisotropy (FA) images. In the same nonaccidental trauma patient shown in
▶Fig. 11.2, images at a more craniad level show additional signal abnormality on (a) T2-weighted fluid-attenuated
inversion recovery images and (b, c) diffusion restriction, indicating traumatic axonal injury (TAI) within the body of the
corpus callosum. (d) Areas of low FA, however, reveal additional foci of TAI (white arrow) not detected by other imaging
modalities. Note that it is very difficult to discriminate these abnormalities from normal variation of FA.
Diﬀusion Imaging for the Assessment of Traumatic Brain Injury
178

determined. This step is to avoid detecting dif-
ferences between the patient and controls that
are a result of technical factors and may lead to
false-positive findings.
2. Spatial Standardization: The same brain loca-
tion must be compared between the patient
and the individuals in whom the normal range
is determined. This step is important to avoid
both false-negative and false-positive findings.
Measurement Standardization
Published studies suggest that FA is likely invari-
ant, to a large degree, across MRI scanners and
institutions performing DTI. This may hold true
only when the parameters of the DTI acquisition
(e.g., field strength, echo time (TE), b value, num-
ber and orientation of diﬀusion sensitizing direc-
tions) remain the same. The use of diﬀerent
acquisition parameters, however, may lead to dif-
ferences in FA that are the result of technical
factors, not disease. This requirement is similar to
that of many widely used laboratory tests, which
must be assessed in light of normative data gener-
ated using the same equipment and settings
applied to test the patient. The quantitative nature
of FA can then be leveraged when placed into the
context of similarly acquired normative data. Com-
parison of absolute FA values between images
obtained with diﬀerent acquisition parameters
may be a source of error, although the magnitude
of this potential has not been demonstrated.
Another important measurement consideration
is related to the individuals included in the group
used to characterize the range of normal FA meas-
urements. If, for example, we compare the FA
measurements from a young, otherwise healthy
TBI patient to a group of elderly individuals with
cerebrovascular disease, who may have areas of
low FA related to aging or stroke, the TBI patient
may appear normal in comparison to this group,
although this patient harbors true abnormalities
Fig. 11.9 Tract volume and traumatic axonal injury (TAI). In this man with persistent verbal memory dysfunction after
traumatic brain injury, (a-c) T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging shows volume loss of the left frontal and
temporal lobes as asymmetric prominence of the sulci and sylvian fissure. In this right-handed individual, left language
dominance is expected and, consequently, the left uncinate fasciculus should be larger. (d) Tractography, however,
shows the left uncinate fasciculus is smaller than the right, consistent with TAI and the distribution of atrophy.
Diﬀusion Imaging for the Assessment of Traumatic Brain Injury
179

due to TAI. Conversely, when abnormally low FA is
identified in an elderly patient with cerebrovascu-
lar disease, compared to a group of young, healthy
individuals, these abnormalities might be due to
TBI and/or stroke. To minimize the chance of false-
negative and false-positive results, two approaches
can be taken. One approach is to employ compari-
son subjects who are as similar to the patient as
possible, such as all being of the same gender and
age. Although at first glance this might seem an
ideal approach, its limitation is that, each time a
patient is assessed, a diﬀerent comparison group
will be required. An alternate approach is to
employ methods for adjusting for the eﬀects of
potential confounding factors, most commonly for
age and gender.
Spatial Standardization
The FA images constitute a three-dimensional (3-
D)
brain volume.
To
determine
whether
the
patient’s brain is abnormal, specific brain regions
must be chosen for assessment. This can be
performed either by delineating, a priori, regions
of interest (ROIs) for analysis, or by assessing each
voxel in the entire brain volume to identify all
areas of abnormality. Each of these approaches has
limitations and advantages, which will be dis-
cussed here.
ROI can be specified as discrete volumes of
interest (e.g., ellipse, box, etc.), typically hand
drawn, by an experienced radiologist or techni-
cian, on the patient’s brain images using the ROI
drawing tools available on most basic clinical
image processing workstations and MRI scanner
operator consoles. FA is then averaged across each
ROI. Measurements are obtained from the patient
and from a group of normal control subjects,
which are then compared. The comparison can be
quantified using various statistics. Computing the
Z-score is one common approach. Once the Z-score
is computed, a threshold for abnormality must be
applied to determine if the area tested is abnor-
mal, typically at least Z ≤−2. For the ROI approach
to be valid, the location of the ROI within the brain
of the patient must be identical to its location in
Fig. 11.10 This 23-year-old woman was injured in a boating accident. (a) Computed tomography performed on the day
of the injury shows extracranial soft tissue injury in the right supraorbital region. Acute hemorrhage and air are present
within the right orbitofrontal lobe (thick black arrow), due to laceration by a bone fragment from a fracture of the right
orbital roof (not shown). (b, c) Magnetic resonance imaging performed 18 months later shows right orbitofrontal
encephalomalacia on T1 and T2-weighted images (white arrows) and (d) bifrontal hemosiderin deposition on gradient
echo and (e) susceptibility-weighted imaging (thin black arrows) due to hemorrhagic contusion. No other areas of brain
injury were evident.
Diﬀusion Imaging for the Assessment of Traumatic Brain Injury
180

Fig. 11.11 (a,b) Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) delineates additional widespread traumatic axonal injury (TAI). Voxelwise
analysis of fractional anisotropy (FA) images from DTI in the patient presented in ▶Fig. 11.8 reveals multiple areas of
abnormally low FA (red), indicating areas of TAI not detectable on prior computed tomographic and magnetic
resonance imaging studies.
Fig. 11.12 Tractography delineates
axonal degeneration secondary to
gross white matter injury: Truncation
of fibers (long arrow) projecting to the
region of brain laceration in the right
frontal lobe, compared to normal
branching fibers (short arrows).
Diﬀusion Imaging for the Assessment of Traumatic Brain Injury
181

each normal control subject. Because each individ-
ual has a unique head shape and size and the posi-
tion and orientation of slices may not be identical
across individuals, this is a challenging process.
Moreover, it is advantageous for ROIs to be drawn
on a non-FA image, such as the b = 0 or T1-
weighted image. This ensures that visual impres-
sions of the FA images cannot bias the ROI place-
ment. Best practice is to quantify the reliability of
ROI placement by conducting a formal reliability
study. ROIs are drawn on the same subject’s brain
multiple times by the same radiologist or techni-
cian. This procedure is then repeated for additional
subjects. The variability of the resultant average FA
across the ROI in each subject is quantified, typi-
cally using the intraclass correlation coeﬃcient.
Without such quality assurance measures, diﬀer-
ences between a patient and the normal control
subjects may be attributable to observer bias.
ROIs can also be defined using tractography. In
this approach, a tract of interest is delineated and
the average FA across the entire tract is assessed
by comparing it to FA averaged across the same
tract in each normal control. Because tracts are
delineated by manual placement of seed and tar-
get ROI, definition of tracts as ROIs entails the
same
limitations
and
considerations
already
described. In particular, quality assurance proce-
dures are essential to ensuring reliable and repro-
ducible tract delineation across individuals.
To entirely avoid the diﬃculties and risk of error
arising from manual delineation of ROIs for analy-
sis, whole brain approaches can be employed to
quantitatively assess FA. Histograms displaying FA
across all brain (or all white matter) voxels can be
computed using image-processing software. This
approach is free from the risk of observer bias
because no manual delineation of ROIs is required
when the entire brain volume is assessed as one.
Although this approach has shown diﬀerences
between patients and normal individuals, it has
inherently limited sensitivity.20 TBI is a multifocal
disease in which most brain voxels are normal.
Averaging these few abnormal voxels with myriad
unaﬀected
voxels
limits
detection
of
true
abnormalities.
Another whole brain approach to the assess-
ment of FA is the brainwide voxelwise approach.18,
19,21 Prior to the actual assessment of FA, a series of
image processing steps are applied to coregister
the brain volumes of the patient and each of the
normal control subjects. This process transforms
the size and shape of each brain to match that of a
“template” brain. As a result, any individual voxel
in the 3-D brain volume will represent the same
brain location in each individual. Next, FA from
each voxel in the patient’s brain is compared to FA
from the same voxel in the group of normal con-
trol subjects, employing a statistical threshold to
classify each voxel as normal or abnormal. Because
the typical FA brain volume will contain hundreds
of thousands of voxels, this procedure entails hun-
dreds of thousands of comparisons between the
patient and the normal control subjects. In addi-
tion to the need for high-performance computing
to complete this analysis, whenever many simulta-
neous
comparisons
are
made,
the
potential
increases that significant diﬀerences will occur
due to chance alone. Thus such voxelwise analyses
must employ steps to account and minimize this
risk. Two basic approaches are employed. First, a
more stringent statistical threshold is either chos-
en a priori or computed, such as using the false
discovery rate method.22 Whereas, for example,
Z < –2 might be an acceptable significance level in
a single comparison, Z < –3 or even stricter thresh-
olds might be employed in voxelwise analyses.
Second, spatial clustering is employed to reduce
the chance of false-positive findings. In this latter
approach, individual voxels are not recorded as
abnormalities, even though they meet a strict cri-
terion for abnormality. Only where multiple con-
tiguous voxels, each meeting the threshold for
abnormality, constitute a minimum volume of tis-
sue is an abnormality recorded. This approach
dramatically reduces the chance that a false-posi-
tive finding will be reported as a real abnormal-
ity.
In
any
of
the
quantitative
approaches
described, the choice of threshold is always a bal-
ance between sensitivity (risk of false-negative
findings) and specificity (risk of false-positive
findings).18
11.5.4 Diﬀerential Diagnosis of
DTI Abnormalities in Patients with
TBI
The foregoing procedures and approaches allow
for the detection and delineation of brain regions
(ROIs, tracts or clusters of voxels) that diﬀer signif-
icantly from the same locations in a group of nor-
mal control subjects. Building on the extensive
literature identifying low FA as manifestation of
TAI,1,17 low FA detected in a TBI patient can thus be
attributed
to
TAI
(▶Fig.
11.12,
▶Fig.
11.13,
▶Fig. 11.14, ▶Fig. 11.15, ▶Fig. 11.16, ▶Fig. 11.17,
▶Fig.
11.18).
As
with
all
imaging
findings,
Diﬀusion Imaging for the Assessment of Traumatic Brain Injury
182

however, a diﬀerential diagnosis must consider
other potential causes for the low FA findings.
The use of an appropriate normal control group
addresses concerns regarding demographic fac-
tors, such as age and gender, which may impact
FA. Assuming that other potentially confounding
conditions have been excluded from the normal
control subjects, such as medical and psychiatric
disease, the primary source of potential confound-
ing factors is the patients themselves. That is, does
the patient harbor a brain disorder that could
reasonably manifest the type of abnormal FA
detected? To address this question, several factors
must be considered. First, what other disorders
have been shown to result in reductions in FA to
the degree seen in TBI? Second, which of these
potential diﬀerential diagnoses are relevant in the
patient under assessment?
Multiple sclerosis, stroke, and brain tumors are
examples of disorders that have been shown to
reduce FA to a degree that is distinguishable, at
least
in
some
patients,
from
normal
control
Fig. 11.13 Impact of tractography parameters on visual appearance of tracts and their volume. The cingulum has been
delineated in three normal individuals in (a) (top, columns 1–3) and in three patients with traumatic brain injury (TBI) (b)
(bottom, columns 1–3). Three different tracts were generated for each individual (blue, green, lavender) by using three
different fractional anisotropy termination thresholds (0.15–0.30). Note the overall lesser volume of each tract in the TBI
patients as well as the loss of peripheral branching of the tracts. (Republished from Kurki T. Diffusion tensor
tractography-based analysis of the cingulum: clinical utility and findings in traumatic brain injury with chronic sequels.
Neuroradiology 2014;56:833–841. With kind permission from Springer Science and Business Media.)
Diﬀusion Imaging for the Assessment of Traumatic Brain Injury
183

subjects. Changes in FA have also been associated
with other disorders, such as depression, autism,
schizophrenia,
and
substance
abuse.
In
these
research
studies,
which
compare
groups
of
patients to groups of normal control subjects,
significant diﬀerences can be, and have been,
reported despite substantial overlap in the distri-
bution of measurements from the two groups.23
In light of these results, however, it is not possi-
ble to ascribe the FA changes in a specific indi-
vidual
to
the
disease
in
question.
Multiple
studies of TBI, on the other hand, have shown
that FA exceeding a threshold such as Z ≤–2.5,
especially when found at multiple white matter
locations, is detectable in TBI patients, but only
rarely, if at all, in normal control subjects.24 Thus
FA exceeding a validated threshold can be attrib-
uted to TBI, with the understanding that not all
patients with TBI will evince changes of this
magnitude. Ultimately, such an approach sacrifi-
ces some degree of sensitivity in exchange for
greater diagnostic certainty.
11.6 Summary
dMRI, including DWI as well as DTI and its var-
iants, is an important addition to the imaging tool-
box for the clinical assessment of TBI. As with all
imaging methods, dMRI results must be inter-
preted in context with the results of other imaging
and nonimaging clinical information to reliably
attribute dMRI findings to TBI or other potential
etiologies. DWI abnormalities in acute TBI, includ-
ing contusion and TAI, may be detected by visual
assessment, though this approach remains insensi-
tive to microstructural injury. The major advant-
age of dMRI is its ability to detect abnormalities
where standard images appear normal. To realize
this diagnostic improvement and maximize sensi-
tivity and specificity, quantitative analysis techni-
ques must be employed. Quantitative analysis of
dMRI, however, is quite technically demanding.
Improved availability of turnkey solutions for the
postprocessing of dMRI are thus needed to facili-
tate wider use by clinical radiologists and greater
benefit to patients.
Fig. 11.14
Diffusion tensor imaging reveals more extensive traumatic axonal injury than conventional magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI). (a) A small cluster of hyperintensities (white arrow) is shown on T2-weighted fluid-attenuated
inversion recovery (FLAIR) MRI. (b) Areas of abnormally low fractional anisotropy (red) are more extensive than those
shown on T2-weighted FLAIR.
Diﬀusion Imaging for the Assessment of Traumatic Brain Injury
184

Fig. 11.15
Wallerian degeneration following traumatic axonal injury (TAI). This previously healthy 22-year-old laborer
fell head first from a height of 15 feet, impacting his head at the vertex. He was unconscious for several minutes and had
prolonged confusion and amnesia. (a) Computed tomography (CT) on the day of injury showed two punctate
hemorrhages in the body of the corpus callosum (arrow), typical of TAI and unchanged on follow-up CT 24 hours later
(not shown). The patient suffered persistent cognitive impairment, especially slowed processing speed. (b) Areas of
abnormally low fractional anisotropy (red), consistent with TAI, were identified in the corpus callosum (not shown) and
in the biparietal deep white matter. These findings indicate wallerian degeneration of axons traversing the corpus
callosum, projecting to the parietal cortex and thus explaining the localized biparietal atrophy. (c,d) T1-weighted
magnetic resonance imaging was performed 7 years later to investigate persistent cognitive impairment and showed
biparietal atrophy. No additional areas of hemorrhage were identified.
Diﬀusion Imaging for the Assessment of Traumatic Brain Injury
185

Fig. 11.16
(a) Lateral and (b) superior views of diffusion tensor imaging tractography performed in the same patient
shown in ▶Fig. 11.11. Tractography was performed using a seed region of interest encompassing the corpus callosum.
Paucity and frank absence of fibers are evident traversing the location of prior hemorrhage in the body of the corpus
callosum (arrows) and projecting to the regions of biparietal atrophy.
Fig. 11.17 A 45-year-old man was struck by a large metal component that fell from an adjacent truck, crashed through
his car window, and struck him in the head. He was taken by ambulance to the emergency department, where a
computed tomographic scan was normal. Standard magnetic resonance imaging performed 6 days after the injury,
when the patient was suffering from severe postconcussion symptoms, showed no abnormality. Voxelwise analysis of
fractional anisotropy (FA) images shows extensive abnormally low FA in the splenium and an additional area of low FA
(red areas) in the right centrum semiovale.
Diﬀusion Imaging for the Assessment of Traumatic Brain Injury
186

References
[1] Shenton ME, Hamoda HM, Schneiderman JS, et al. A review
of magnetic resonance imaging and diﬀusion tensor imag-
ing findings in mild traumatic brain injury. Brain Imaging
Behav 2012; 6(2): 137–192
[2] Faul M, Xu L, Coronado VG. Traumatic brain injury in the
United States: emergency department visits, hospitaliza-
tions and deaths 2002–2006. Atlanta, GA, Centers for Dis-
ease Control and Prevention: 2010
[3] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Report to Con-
gress on mild traumatic brain injury in the United States:
steps to prevent a serious public health problem. Atlanta,
GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; 2003
[4] McCullagh S, Oucherlony D, Protzner A, Blair N, Feinstein A.
Prediction of neuropsychiatric outcome following mild trau-
ma brain injury: an examination of the Glasgow Coma Scale.
Brain Inj 2001; 15(6): 489–497
[5] Saatman KE, Duhaime AC, Bullock R, Maas AI, Valadka A,
Manley GT Workshop Scientific Team and Advisory Panel
Members. Classification of traumatic brain injury for tar-
geted therapies. J Neurotrauma 2008; 25(7): 719–738
[6] Mataró M, Poca MA, Sahuquillo J, et al. Neuropsychological
outcome in relation to the traumatic coma data bank classi-
fication of computed tomography imaging. J Neurotrauma
2001; 18(9): 869–879
[7] Sterr A, Herron KA, Hayward C, Montaldi D. Are mild head
injuries as mild as we think? Neurobehavioral concomitants
of chronic post-concussion syndrome. BMC Neurol 2006; 6: 7
[8] American Congress of Rehabilitation Medicines. Definition
of mild traumatic brain injury. J Head Trauma Rehabil 1993;
8: 86–87
[9] Bigler ED, Maxwell WL. Neuropathology of mild traumatic
brain injury: relationship to neuroimaging findings. Brain
Imaging Behav 2012; 6(2): 108–136
[10] McKee AC, Cantu RC, Nowinski CJ, et al. Chronic traumatic
encephalopathy in athletes: progressive tauopathy after
repetitive head injury. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 2009; 68
(7): 709–735
[11] McMahon P, Hricik A, Yue JK, et al. TRACK-TBI Investigators.
Symptomatology and functional outcome in mild traumatic
brain injury: results from the prospective TRACK-TBI study.
J Neurotrauma 201 4; 31(1): 26–33
[12] Messé A, Caplain S, Pélégrini-Issac M, et al. Specific and
evolving resting-state network alterations in post-concus-
sion syndrome following mild traumatic brain injury. PLoS
ONE 2013; 8(6): e65470
[13] Sharp DJ, Scott G, Leech R. Network dysfunction after trau-
matic brain injury. Nat Rev Neurol 2014; 10(3): 156–166
[14] Povlishock JT, Katz DI. Update of neuropathology and neuro-
logical recovery after traumatic brain injury. J Head Trauma
Rehabil 2005; 20(1): 76–94
Fig. 11.18
A 27-year-old, previously healthy woman suffered mild traumatic brain injury with loss of consciousness
when the car she was driving was struck on the rear driver’s side. Computed tomographic scan was normal. (a) Magnetic
resonance imaging performed 11 months later due to persistent symptoms and impaired cognitive function showed
only small peripheral white matter hyperintensities on T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery images (red
circle). (b) Voxelwise analysis of fractional anisotropy (FA) images identified multiple areas of abnormally low FA (red
areas), consistent with traumatic axonal injury, in the cerebral white matter subjacent to the left posterior location of
impact (green arrow), which occurred in the motor vehicle accident.
Diﬀusion Imaging for the Assessment of Traumatic Brain Injury
187

[15] Povlishock JT. The window of risk in repeated head injury. J
Neurotrauma 2013; 30(1): 1
[16] Provenzale JM, Sorensen AG. Diﬀusion weighted MR imag-
ing in acute stroke: theoretic considerations and clinical
applications. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1999; 173(6): 1459–1467
[17] Hulkower MB, Poliak DB, Rosenbaum SB, Zimmerman ME,
Lipton ML. A decade of DTI in traumatic brain injury: 10
years and 100 articles later. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2013; 34
(11): 2064–2074
[18] Lipton ML, Kim N, Park YK, et al. Robust detection of trau-
matic axonal injury in individual mild traumatic brain
injury patients: intersubject variation, change over time and
bidirectional changes in anisotropy. Brain Imaging Behav
2012; 6(2): 329–342
[19] Lipton ML, Gulko E, Zimmerman ME, et al. Diﬀusion tensor
imaging implicates prefrontal axonal injury in executive
function impairment following very mild traumatic brain
injury. Radiology 2009; 252(3): 816–824
[20] Benson RR, Meda SA, Vasudevan S, et al. Global white matter
analysis of diﬀusion tensor images is predictive of injury
severity in traumatic brain injury. J Neurotrauma 2007; 24
(3): 446–459
[21] Lipton ML, Gellella E, Lo C, et al. Multifocal white matter
ultrastructural abnormalities in mild traumatic brain injury
with cognitive disability: a voxel-wise analysis of diﬀusion
tensor imaging. J Neurotrauma 2008; 25(11): 1335–1342
[22] Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. Controlling the False Discovery
Rate: a Practical and Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing.
JRStatistSocB 1995; 57: 289–300
[23] White T, Nelson M, Lim KO. Diﬀusion tensor imaging in psy-
chiatric disorders. Top Magn Reson Imaging 2008; 19(2):
97–109
[24] Mac Donald CL, Johnson AM, Cooper D, et al. Detection of
blast-related traumatic brain injury in U.S. military person-
nel. N Engl J Med 2011; 364(22): 2091–2100
Diﬀusion Imaging for the Assessment of Traumatic Brain Injury
188

12 Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging in Hemorrhage
Joana Ramalho and Mauricio Castillo
Key Points
●The pattern of evolving hematomas on conven-
tional magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is
well documented but remains somewhat com-
plex, and its interpretation is further compli-
cated by diﬀusion weighted imaging (DWI).
●T2 shine-through, T2 blackout eﬀects, and sus-
ceptibility artifacts from blood products con-
tribute to the appearance of hemorrhage on
DWI and influence the apparent diﬀusion coef-
ficient (ADC) measurements. Therefore, DWI of
hemorrhage should be interpreted cautiously
and in conjunction with T2- and T2*-weighted
MRI.
●According to recent studies, DWI is accurate in
detection, characterization, and staging of
intraparenchymal hematomas; however, it
should not be interpreted alone but in conjunc-
tion with other sequences. It is also accurate
for detection of hemorrhagic venous infarcts or
hemorrhagic transformation of arterial infarcts
and subdural and epidural hematomas.
●Conversely, DWI has low diagnostic accuracy in
microbleeds and acute subarachnoid hemor-
rhage and should not be used in the latter.
12.1 Introduction
Intracranial hemorrhage diagnosis and characteriza-
tion depend on imaging studies because clinical
signs and symptoms are usually nonspecific. Hem-
orrhage can be classified based on its location as (1)
intra-axial, including parenchymal and intraventric-
ular hemorrhages; and (2) extra-axial, including
epidural, subdural, and subarachnoid hemorrhage,
which may occur in isolation or in diﬀerent combi-
nations depending on the underlying etiology.
Computed tomography (CT) is commonly the
first imaging modality used for suspected intracra-
nial hemorrhage evaluation. Acute blood is mark-
edly hyperdense compared to brain parenchyma,
making its easy to diagnose. However, after the
acute phase, CT provides little information regard-
ing the precise stage of the hemorrhage, and
because subacute hemorrhage becomes progres-
sively less dense in a few days, CT’s utility is con-
fined to the acute period.
Conversely, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
has excellent capabilities to determine the pres-
ence of blood, its underlying etiology, and the age
of the hemorrhage. The MRI appearance of intra-
cranial hemorrhage primarily depends on the oxy-
genation of hemoglobin, the chemical state of its
iron-containing moieties, the integrity of the red
blood cells (RBCs), and the MRI sequences and/or
parameters used (▶Table 12.1). Other factors that
Table 12.1 Signal intensities on diﬀerent magnetic resonance sequences of intraparenchymal hematomas according to
the various stages
Stage of the hematoma
Time (days)
Hemoglobin
T1-WI
T2-WI
GRE
DWI
Hyperacute
< 1
Oxyhemoglobin
(intracellular)
Iso/Hypo
Hyper
Iso/Hyper
Hyper (core)
Hypo (rim)
Acute
1–3
Deoxyhemoglobin
(intracellular)
Iso/Hypo
Hypo
Hypo
Hypo
Early subacute
3–7
Methemoglobin
(intracellular)
Hyper
Hypo
Hypo
Hypo
Late subacute
> 7
Methemoglobin
(extracellular)
Hyper
Hyper
Hyper
Hyper
Chronic
> 14
Ferritin and hemosi-
derin (extracellular)
Iso/Hypo
Hyper/Iso
Hypo (rim)
Iso/Hyper
Hypo (rim)
Iso/Hypo
Hypo (rim)
Abbreviations: DWI, diffusion weighted imaging; Iso, isointense; GRE, gradient-recalled echo imaging; Hyper,
hyperintense; Hypo, hypointense; T1-WI, T1-weighted image; T2-WI, T2-weighted image.
DWI in Hemorrhage
189

influence the MRI appearance of blood are the
hemorrhage location, the local partial pressure of
oxygen, the local pH, the hematocrit, the local glu-
cose concentration, the hemoglobin concentration,
the integrity of the blood–brain barrier, and the
patient’s temperature.1
The
characteristic
MRI
intensity
patterns
observed during the evolution of the hematomas
are well known. Hyperacute hematomas show low
to isointense signal on T1-weighted images and
hyperintense signal on conventional T2-weighted
images with a peripheral thin and irregular hypo-
intense rim.2 This pattern represents oxyhemoglo-
bin forming the bulk of the hematoma with early
deoxyhemoglobin at the periphery, and because
oxyhemoglobin produces no paramagnetic eﬀects
it is a reflection of the water contained in blood.2
Acute hematomas are seen as hypointense lesions
on T2-weighted images3 with isointense signal on
T1-weighted images.4 Although multifactorial, it
has been generally accepted that the basis of this
signal loss on T2-weighted images is
mainly
related to the intrinsic heterogeneity of magnetic
field gradients due to compartmentalized para-
magnetic
deoxygenated
blood.3,5,6,7
Similarly,
“early subacute” hematomas are hyperintense on
T1-weighted images and markedly hypointense on
T2-weighted images, due to the presence of meth-
emoglobin within intact RBCs.3 Over several days
to weeks, the energy status of the RBCs declines,
causing a loss of cellular integrity, and cellular
lyses. In this late subacute phase, hematomas show
an increased T1 and T2 signal intensity caused by
the extracellular methemoglobin. Over months,
the hematoma enters the chronic phase. The cen-
ter of the hematoma may evolve into a fluid-filled
cavity with signal intensity identical to that of cer-
ebrospinal fluid (CSF). The walls of the cavity show
low signal on T1- and T2-weighted images, related
to extracellular hemosiderin and ferritin outside
and within macrophages, and may collapse, leav-
ing behind a thin, fluid-filled slit.
Despite the frequent use of conventional MRI to
evaluate
the
extent,
location,
and
underlying
mechanism of intracranial hemorrhages, diﬀusion
weighted imaging (DWI) has also been studied
and used in this setting. DWI is not the best
sequence for evaluation of intracranial hemor-
rhage; however, it is helpful to recognize blood’s
signal intensity changes over time to reduce the
risk of misdiagnosis. Furthermore, the primary
assessment of patients with early stroke is moving
toward MRI, and DWI may play a crucial role in
the emergent evaluation of these patients.8,9,10 In
this context, understanding the appearance of
intracerebral hemorrhage on DWI is critical to
instituting
appropriate
stroke
management
because hemorrhage is a contraindication for
thrombolytic therapy.
On DWI, restricted diﬀusion shows hyperinten-
sity, whereas fast diﬀusion shows hypointensity.
However, because there is a contribution from the
T2 echo-planar spin-echo baseline image to DWI
signal intensity, not all areas of high signal inten-
sity represent restricted diﬀusion, an eﬀect termed
T2 shine-through, and also not all areas with low
signal represent fast diﬀusion, an eﬀect known as
T2 blackout eﬀect.4 These concepts are particularly
important when interpreting the appearance of
hemorrhage on DWI, and they influence the meas-
urements of
its apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient
(ADC) values.
12.2 Clinical Applications
12.2.1 Intracerebral Hematomas
Hyperacute Hematomas
On DWI, hyperacute hematomas show a heteroge-
neous hyperintense core with focal areas of hypo-
intensity
surrounded
by
a
peripherally
hypointense incomplete rim11,12,13 (▶Fig. 12.1 and
▶Fig. 12.2). The central hyperintensity probably
represents intracellular oxyhemoglobin because it
is also isointense on T1-weighted images, hetero-
geneously hyperintense on T2 and fluid-attenu-
ated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images, with a
variable appearance on gradient-echo images,
but usually heterogeneously hyperintense. The
hypointense incomplete rim has been reported
to occur within the first few hours after a hem-
orrhage8,11,14,15 and is thought to represent early
intracellular deoxyhemoglobin at the periphery
of the hematoma because it is also hypointense
on
T2-weighted
images
and
is
particularly
obvious on gradient-echo images, which have a
stronger
susceptibility
eﬀect.
However,
some
focal areas of low signal intensity on DWI, seen
in
diﬀerent
locations
within
the
hematoma,
show high signal on T2-weighted and gradient-
echo images and may represent unclotted blood
separate from the retracted clot (▶Fig. 12.2).2,16,
17 These hypointense areas are consistently seen
in patients with hyperacute intracranial hemato-
mas and may represent an important imaging
feature
for
diﬀerentiating
hemorrhage
from
infarction.
DWI in Hemorrhage
190

Acute and Early Subacute
Hematomas
Acute
and
early
subacute hematomas
appear
markedly
hypointense
on
DWI,
T2-weighted,
FLAIR, and gradient-echo images (▶Fig. 12.3 and
▶Fig. 12.4). As stated earlier, on T1-weighted
images acute hematomas are heterogeneously iso-
intense or of low intensity, whereas early subacute
hematomas are markedly hyperintense. This lower
signal intensity on DWI has been attributed to
magnetic field inhomogeneity caused by paramag-
netic intracellular deoxyhemoglobin in acute hem-
atomas14
and
paramagnetic
intracellular
methemoglobin in early subacute hematomas,18
which represent the T2 blackout eﬀect.
In the hyperacute, acute, and early subacute
stages, a bright rim of variable thickness and com-
pleteness at the periphery of a hematoma is seen
on DWI.11,12 This bright rim is hyperintense on
T2-weighted images but is usually not seen on gra-
dient-echo images. It probably is not caused by sus-
ceptibility artifacts but may represent the T2 shine-
through eﬀect caused by vasogenic edema.11,19
Late Subacute Hematomas
Late subacute hematomas are hyperintense on
DWI, T1-weighted, T2-weighted, and FLAIR images
Fig. 12.1
Hyperacute intracerebral hematoma. (a) Diffusion weighted imaging shows a heterogeneous hyperintense
core (white arrow) with focal areas of hypointensity surrounded by a peripherally hypointense irregular and incomplete
rim (black arrow). Note the hyperintense area around the hematoma (*) that represents edema. (b) T1-weighted image
shows an isointense hematoma, whereas (c) the T2-weighted image, (d) fluid-attenuated inversion recovery, and (e)
gradient-echo image show a hyperintense hematoma with a well-defined hypointense rim. The surrounding edema is
well depicted in all sequences.
DWI in Hemorrhage
191

Fig. 12.2
Hyperacute intracerebral hematoma with fluid-blood level. (a) Diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) shows a
heterogeneous hyperintense hematoma (white arrow) with focal areas of hypointensity, surrounded by a well-defined
hypointense rim (small white arrow). The hematoma is isointense on (b) T1-weighted image, hyperintense on (c) T2-
weighted image, and shows greater signal loss on (d) gradient-echo image. The fluid-blood level is well depicted in all
sequences. It is seen as a horizontal interface between hypodense bloody serum layered above hyperdense settled
blood. Note the thin area of edema well seen on DWI (black arrow) as a hyperintense rim surrounding the hematoma.
Some of the areas of low signal intensity on DWI described above (*) show high signal on T2-weighted and gradient-
echo images and may represent unclotted blood separated from the retracted clot.
DWI in Hemorrhage
192

and heterogeneously hyperintense on gradient-
echo images (▶Fig. 12.5).
Chronic Stage
In the chronic stage, paramagnetic ferritin and
hemosiderin
are
seen
on
DWI,
T2-weighted
images, and gradient-echo imaging as a dark rim
at the periphery of the hematoma. The diﬀusion
increases as the lesion becomes cystic, and for that
reason the core of a chronic hematoma appears
isointense in the early chronic stage and hypoin-
tense in the late chronic stage (▶Fig. 12.6).
Apparent Diﬀusion Coeﬃcient of
Hematomas
The restriction of diﬀusion (reduced ADC values)
of the intracranial hematomas varies over time
according to diﬀerent authors. Diﬀerent postpro-
cessing
methods
can
strongly
influence
ADC
measurements.14
Atlas et al14 suggested that restricted diﬀusion
(reduced ADC values) is seen within hematomas
containing RBCs with membranes as follows:
hyperacute (intracellular oxyhemoglobin), acute
(intracellular
deoxyhemoglobin),
and
early
Fig. 12.3
Acute intracerebral hematoma. (a) Diffusion weighted imaging shows a markedly hypointense hematoma
surrounded by a continuous rim of bright signal intensity that corresponds to edema. (b) T1-weighted image shows an
isointense hematoma, whereas (c) T2-weighted image, (d) fluid-attenuated inversion recovery, and (e) gradient-echo
image show a markedly hypointense hematoma with a well-defined hyperintensity area of edema. (f) Axial computed
tomography shows a hyperdense hematoma surrounded by hypodense edema.
DWI in Hemorrhage
193

Fig. 12.4 Early subacute intracerebral hematoma. (a) Diffusion weighted imaging, (b) T2-weighted image, and (c) fluid-
attenuated inversion recovery show a markedly hypointense hematoma surrounded by a rim of hyperintense edema. (d)
T1-weighted image shows an isointense hematoma with a central area of hyperintensity that represents intracellular
methemoglobin.
DWI in Hemorrhage
194

subacute
(intracellular
methemoglobin),
and
increased diﬀusion is seen after RBC lysis. How-
ever, Kang et al11 found that ADC values of hema-
tomas were reduced compared with normal brain
tissues during hyperacute, acute, early, and late
subacute
phases,
suggesting
that
diﬀusion
is
restricted in them before and after cell lysis. In the
late subacute phase, cell organelles are found in
the extracellular space, causing high viscosity. Oth-
er biological changes at this stage include high cel-
lularity
resulting
from
the
infiltration
of
inflammatory cells and macrophages. All these
changes may aﬀect the molecular diﬀusion and
the ADC values of a hematoma. Khedr et al12 and
Silvera et al8 also found restricted diﬀusion in early
stages
of
intracranial
hematomas.
Additional
explanations for these findings include (1) shrink-
age of the extracellular space with clot retraction;
(2) change in the osmotic environment once blood
becomes extravascular, which alters the shape of
the RBCs (a phenomenon related to formation of
the fibrin network associated with clots); (3)
conformational changes in the hemoglobin macro-
molecule within the RBC; and (4) the less likely
possibility of contraction of intact RBCs (thereby
decreasing intracellular space). All of these proc-
esses may alter the potential mobility of intracellu-
lar water protons and thus aﬀect their diﬀusion
properties.4,12,20,21
Maldjian et al4 showed that T2- dark hematomas
(with intact red cell membranes and intracellular
blood products) have diﬀusion rates comparable
with those of the brain (despite their low signal on
DWI). The authors argued that obtaining accurate
diﬀusion measurements in regions in which the T2
signal is low could be problematic because an indi-
vidual pixel value may be dominated by the ther-
mal and electronic noise of the imaging system.
Wintermark et al22 also found increased ADC val-
ues in hyperacute hematomas, although lower
than the ADC values of CSF.
Does et al23 and Schaefer et al18 reported that
magnetic susceptibility eﬀects caused a drop in
ADC, and suggested that an accurate ADC value for
Fig. 12.5
Late subacute intracerebral hematoma. (a) Diffusion weighted imaging, (b) T1-weighted image, (c) T2-
weighted image, (d) fluid-attenuated inversion recovery, and (e) gradient-echo image show a hyperintense hematoma
with a small area of surrounding edema.
DWI in Hemorrhage
195

acute and early subacute hematomas could not be
reliably calculated.
Importantly,
the
reduction
in
ADC
values
observed among diﬀerent studies did not signifi-
cantly diﬀer between the diﬀerent stages of the
hematomas. Such a steady decrease in ADC values
would be expected to produce DWI hyperintensity,
which should remain stable throughout the time
course of hematoma. The clear variations seen in
DWI signal intensity according to the stage of the
hematoma imply that factors other than ADC val-
ues influence their signal intensity on DWI.8
DWI is not a simple map of diﬀusion but is a
composite of contributions from diﬀusion and par-
amagnetic eﬀects on T1- and T2-weighted sequen-
ces, and the T2 shine-through eﬀect of hyperacute
hematomas and the T2 blackout eﬀect of acute and
early subacute hematomas is an important compo-
nent of their signal intensity on DWI. The T1 eﬀect
is probably not a main component of their DWI
appearance given that DWI and T1-weighted
sequences show diﬀerent signal intensities dur-
ing hyperacute and early subacute stages. In the
hyperacute phase, the hematoma is mainly isoin-
tense on T1-weighted images and hyperintense
on DWI, and during the early subacute phase
high signal intensity is usually observed on T1-
weighted images, whereas low signal is observed
on DWI.8 Because of these eﬀects, DWI should
not be interpreted alone but in conjunction with
other sequences. Regarding the ADC values of a
chronic hematoma, it is accepted that the ADC
value increases as the lesion approaches a cystic
state.
Fig. 12.6 Chronic and acute basal ganglia hematomas. (a) Axial computed tomography shows a right hypodense basal
ganglia lesion suggestive of chronic hematoma. On the left, there is a basal ganglia hyperdense acute hematoma with
surrounding edema. (b) Diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) shows the chronic hematoma as a hyperintense lesion with a
hypointense rim. (c) Sagittal T1-weighted image, (d) axial T2-weighted image (T2-WI), and (e) fluid-attenuated
inversion recovery (FLAIR) show the chronic hematoma as a cavity with signal intensity similar to cerebrospinal fluid. (d)
A hypointense rim is also seen on T2-weighted image. The acute hematoma is seen as a markedly hypointense left basal
ganglia lesion on (b) DWI, (d) T2-WI, and (e) FLAIR.
DWI in Hemorrhage
196

12.2.2 Small Intracranial
Hemorrhages
DWI can detect relatively small amounts of hemor-
rhage (▶Fig. 12.7), as reported by Chung et al13
However, it has been reported that DWI is not able
to detect microhemorrhages.24 In fact, acute me-
dium to large hematomas show the typical MRI
appearance of mixed signal intensity surrounded
by edema, but small hemorrhages usually show
minimal surrounding edema and may have similar
appearance to calcifications, microinfarcts, and
intravascular thrombus.
Hyperacute
and
late
subacute
microhemor-
rhages, which show high signal on DWI, may go
unnoticed on gradient-echo sequences (due to
insuﬃcient T2 shortening and/or lack of paramag-
netic properties) and cannot be diﬀerentiated from
acute microinfarctions.
12.2.3 Hemorrhagic Infarctions
According to several studies, DWI can diﬀerentiate
hemorrhage from pure infarction in hemorrhagic
arterial (▶Fig. 12.8) or venous (▶Fig. 12.9) infarcts
by showing areas of low signal intensity within
areas of restricted diﬀusion. The signal intensity of
these hemorrhagic lesions corresponds to acute or
early subacute hematomas, but the clinical rele-
vance of these findings is unclear.8,12,13,25
The thrombus inside a venous sinus can also be
depicted on DWI images (▶Fig. 12.10).
12.2.4 Extra-axial Hematomas
The evolution of the MRI signal in extra-axial hem-
atomas is less predictable than the signal changes
occurring in intraparenchymal hematomas. Like
parenchymal hemorrhage, subdural hematomas
Fig. 12.7
Small intracranial hemorrhage: Duret hemorrhage. (a) Diffusion weighted imaging shows a hypodense
midline midbrain lesion, surrounded by hyperdense edema suggestive of a Duret hemorrhage. (b) A T1-weighted image
shows a hyperintense lesion, whereas (c) T2-weighted and (d) fluid-attenuated inversion recovery images show a
hypointense small hematoma, surrounded by edema. (e) The lesion is also markedly hypointense on a susceptibility-
weighted image (SWI). Note also other small lesions on SWI.
DWI in Hemorrhage
197

(SDHs) have five distinct stages of evolution. How-
ever, because the dura is well vascularized and
oxygen tension is high, progression from one stage
to another is slower. Additionally, recurrent bleed-
ing occurs frequently, further complicating the
expected MRI signal intensity. Subdural hemato-
mas usually show heterogeneous low signal on
DWI (▶Fig. 12.11) that may be explained by the
mixed nature of these lesions, which usually con-
tain acute, early, and late subacute blood products
and CSF. Hypointensity is probably caused by para-
magnetic intracellular deoxyhemoglobin and para-
magnetic intracellular methemoglobin.12 Epidural
hematomas (EDHs) evolve in a manner similar to
that of SDHs. EDHs are diﬀerentiated from SDHs
on the basis of their classic biconvexity versus
medial concavity and on the basis of the intensity
of the fibrous dura mater (▶Fig. 12.12).
12.2.5 Subarachnoid Hemorrhage
In the evaluation of acute subarachnoid hemor-
rhage (SAH) DWI is probably not clinically relevant
because these patients usually undergo CT, which
is over 90% sensitive for its detection. Conventional
MRI, particularly FLAIR, is also very sensitive for
SAH detection, leaving little if any use for DWI in
this setting. Furthermore, several studies have con-
cluded that DWI is not accurate in the detection of
SAH.12,20,21,26 However, Busch et at9 detected DWI
changes during acute SAH in an animal model.
12.3 Summary
The appearance of intracerebral hematomas on
DWI is influenced not only by restriction of diﬀu-
sion but also by magnetic susceptibility and T2
Fig. 12.8
Hemorrhagic transformation of an acute infarct. (a) Diffusion weighted imaging and (b) apparent diffusion
coefficient map show restricted diffusion around an acute hemorrhagic lesion. (c) A T1-weighted image shows an iso-/
hypointense hematoma. (d) T2-weighted and (e) fluid-attenuated inversion recovery images show a well-demarcated
hypointense hematoma surrounded by a hyperintense area of cytotoxic and vasogenic edema. (f) Mean transit time
magnetic resonance perfusion shows a delayed transit time in the right middle cerebral artery vascular territory.
DWI in Hemorrhage
198

signal intensity. T2 shine-through eﬀects may con-
tribute to the hyperintensity of hematomas on
DWI, whereas T2 blackout eﬀects may be responsi-
ble for the hypointense signal in hematomas.
Further
research
is
required
to
confirm
the
pathophysiological
and
biochemical
basis
underlying the imaging findings and ADC values of
intracerebral hemorrhages. However, the findings
here described reinforce the well-known principle
that DWI signal intensity changes should be inter-
preted in light of T2 signal intensity changes, espe-
cially during the early period. DWI is also accurate
for detection of hemorrhagic venous or arterial
infarctions and subdural hematomas but has low
Fig. 12.9
Venous hemorrhagic infarct. (a) Diffusion weighted imaging shows a hemorrhagic venous infarct seen as an
area of restricted diffusion with a small hemorrhagic central hypointense lesion. (b) On T1 inversion recovery, (c) T2-
weighted, and (d) fluid-attenuated inversion recovery images the hemorrhagic area is difficult to depict.
DWI in Hemorrhage
199

Fig. 12.10 Superior sagittal sinus thrombosis. (a) Axial computed tomography shows the hyperdense thrombus inside
the superior sagittal sinus (arrow). (b) Postcontrast T1-weighted imaging shows filling defect caused by the thrombus
(delta sign) (arrow). (c) Diffusion weighted imaging shows the hyperintense thrombus (arrow), probably in the
hyperacute stage.
Fig. 12.11
Subdural hematoma. (a) A T1-weighted image shows an isointense right subdural hematoma with small
areas of high signal intensity. (b) On T2-weighted and (c) fluid-attenuated inversion recovery images the hematoma is
seen as a hyperintense subdural collection with an ill-defined blood-fluid level. (d) Diffusion weighted imaging shows a
heterogeneous hypointense hematoma with hyperintensity on (e) the apparent diffusion coefficient map.
DWI in Hemorrhage
200

Fig. 12.12
Epidural hematoma. (a) A hyperintense biconvex extra-axial collection (*) is seen on a T1-weighted image,
(b) T2-weighted image, (c) fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR), and (d) diffusion weighted imaging. Note the
subdural hematoma (arrow) well depicted on (a) T1-weighted and (c) FLAIR images.
DWI in Hemorrhage
201

diagnostic accuracy in small parenchymal hemor-
rhage and SAH.
References
[1] Bradley WG. Hemorrhage and brain iron. In: Stark DD, Brad-
ley WG. Eds. Magnetic Resonance Imaging. 2nd ed. St Louis,
MO: Mosby; 1992
[2] Atlas SW, Thulborn KR. MR detection of hyperacute paren-
chymal hemorrhage of the brain. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
1998; 19(8): 1471–1477
[3] Gomori JM, Grossman RI, Goldberg HI, Zimmerman RA, Bila-
niuk LT. Intracranial hematomas: imaging by high-field MR.
Radiology 1985; 157(1): 87–93
[4] Maldjian JA, Listerud J, Moonis G, Siddiqi F. Computing diﬀu-
sion rates in T2-dark hematomas and areas of low T2 signal.
AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2001; 22(1): 112–118
[5] Thulborn KR, Waterton JC, Matthews PM, Radda GK. Oxy-
genation dependence of the transverse relaxation time of
water protons in whole blood at high field. Biochim Biophys
Acta 1982; 714(2): 265–270
[6] Bryant RG, Marill K, Blackmore C, Francis C. Magnetic relax-
ation in blood and blood clots. Magn Reson Med 1990; 13
(1): 133–144
[7] Clark RA, Watanabe AT, Bradley WG, Jr, Roberts JD. Acute
hematomas: eﬀects of deoxygenation, hematocrit, and
fibrin-clot formation and retraction on T2 shortening. Radi-
ology 1990; 175(1): 201–206
[8] Silvera S, Oppenheim C, Touzé E, et al. Spontaneous intra-
cerebral hematoma on diﬀusion weighted images: influence
of T2-shine-through and T2-blackout eﬀects. AJNR Am J
Neuroradiol 2005; 26(2): 236–241
[9] Busch E, Beaulieu C, de Crespigny A, Moseley ME. Diﬀusion
MR imaging during acute subarachnoid hemorrhage in rats.
Stroke 1998; 29(10): 2155–2161
[10] Shoamanesh A, Catanese L, Sakai O, Pikula A, Kase CS. Diﬀu-
sion weighted imaging hyperintensities in intracerebral
hemorrhage: microinfarcts or microbleeds? Ann Neurol
2013; 73(6): 795–796
[11] Kang BK, Na DG, Ryoo JW, Byun HS, Roh HG, Pyeun YS. Dif-
fusion weighted MR imaging of intracerebral hemorrhage.
Korean J Radiol 2001; 2(4): 183–191
[12] Khedr SA, Kassem HM, Hazzou AM, et al. MRI diﬀusion
weighted imaging in intracranial hemorrhage (ICH). Egypt J
Radiol Nucl Med 2013; 44: 625–634
[13] Chung SP, Ha YR, Kim SW, Yoo IS. Diﬀusion weighted MRI of
intracerebral hemorrhage clinically undiﬀerentiated from
ischemic stroke. Am J Emerg Med 2003; 21(3): 236–240
[14] Atlas SW, DuBois P, Singer MB, Lu D. Diﬀusion measure-
ments in intracranial hematomas: implications for MR
imaging of acute stroke. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2000; 21
(7): 1190–1194
[15] Linfante I, Llinas RH, Caplan LR, Warach S. MRI features of
intracerebral hemorrhage within 2 hours from symptom
onset. Stroke 1999; 30(11): 2263–2267
[16] González RG, Schaefer PW, Buonanno FS, et al. Diﬀusion
weighted MR imaging: diagnostic accuracy in patients
imaged within 6 hours of stroke symptom onset. Radiology
1999; 210(1): 155–162
[17] Schellinger PD, Jansen O, Fiebach JB, Hacke W, Sartor K. A
standardized MRI stroke protocol: comparison with CT in
hyperacute intracerebral hemorrhage. Stroke 1999; 30(4):
765–768
[18] Schaefer PW, Grant PE, Gonzalez RG. Diﬀusion weighted MR
imaging of the brain. Radiology 2000; 217(2): 331–345
[19] Wiesmann M, Mayer TE, Yousry I, Hamann GF, Brückmann
H. Detection of hyperacute parenchymal hemorrhage of the
brain
using
echo-planar
T2*-weighted
and
diﬀusion
weighted MRI. Eur Radiol 2001; 11(5): 849–853
[20] Mitchell P, Wilkinson ID, Hoggard N, et al. Detection of sub-
arachnoid haemorrhage with magnetic resonance imaging. J
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2001; 70(2): 205–211
[21] Rajeshkannan R, Moorthy S, Sreekumar KP, et al. Clinical
applications of diﬀusion weighted MR imaging: a review.
Indian J Radiol Imaging 2006; 16: 705–710
[22] Wintermark M, Maeder P, Reichhart M, Schnyder P, Bogous-
slavsky J, Meuli R. MR pattern of hyperacute cerebral hem-
orrhage. J Magn Reson Imaging 2002; 15(6): 705–709
[23] Does MD, Zhong J, Gore JC. In vivo measurement of ADC
change due to intravascular susceptibility variation. Magn
Reson Med 1999; 41(2): 236–240
[24] Lin DD, Filippi CG, Steever AB, Zimmerman RD. Detection of
intracranial hemorrhage: comparison between gradient-
echo images and b(0) images obtained from diﬀusion
weighted echo-planar sequences. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
2001; 22(7): 1275–1281
[25] Packard AS, Kase CS, Aly AS, Barest GD. “Computed tomog-
raphy-negative” intracerebral hemorrhage: case report and
implications for management. Arch Neurol 2003; 60(8):
1156–1159
[26] Wiesmann M, Mayer TE, Yousry I, Medele R, Hamann GF,
Brückmann H. Detection of hyperacute subarachnoid hem-
orrhage of the brain by using magnetic resonance imaging. J
Neurosurg 2002; 96(4): 684–689
DWI in Hemorrhage
202

13 Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging and Diﬀusion Tensor
Imaging in Spine and Spinal Cord Diseases
Majda M. Thurnher
Key Points
●Diﬀusion weighted imaging (DWI) is the meth-
od of choice for the detection of spinal cord
infarction.
●Diﬀusion tensor imaging (DTI) can be helpful
for diﬀerentiating ependymoma from astrocy-
toma in adults.
●DTI is a promising technique for evaluating
patients with spinal cord injury (detecting the
injury epicenter, diﬀerentiating injured from
normal spinal cord in the absence of T2-signal
changes).
●DWI is a useful tool for diﬀerentiating benign
from malignant vertebral body fractures (when
used with conventional sequences).
●DWI can be a helpful tool for diﬀerentiating
Modic I changes from acute spondylodiskitis.
13.1 Introduction
13.1.1 Technical Considerations
The role of diﬀusion weighted magnetic resonance
imaging (DWI) in the evaluation of brain diseases
was established shortly after its introduction. DWI
became an irreplaceable part of the routine brain
imaging protocol. Further developments with dif-
fusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging (DTI)
and fiber tractography (FT) have catapulted brain
imaging to an even higher level.
Since the first published report on the useful-
ness of DWI in the diﬀerentiation between osteo-
porotic and malignant vertebral body fractures in
1998,1 physicists and clinicians continue to grap-
ple with constructing clinically applicable and
reproducible DWI and DTI sequences for the spine
and spinal cord. Nevertheless, obtaining spinal
cord DWI and DTI remains a challenge due to
numerous technical diﬃculties. The size of the spi-
nal cord, the macroscopic motion related to the
surrounding cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pulsations,
breathing and swallowing movement artifacts, and
local field inhomogeneities are the major technical
issues. Technical solutions are needed to optimize
both image acquisition and image processing.
Studies published on DWI and DTI of the spine are
limited and have mainly been restricted to the cer-
vical spine.
Recently, fairly good technical solutions have
been developed, such as multishot echo-planar
imaging
(EPI),
diﬀusion
weighted
periodically
rotated overlapping parallel lines with enhanced
reconstruction (PROPELLER), spin-echo navigator
spiral DTI, and parallel imaging. The acquisition
times have been reduced, allowing implementa-
tion of DWI/DTI in routine clinical protocols.
Through spatially selective excitation, zoomed
DWI allows for acquisition of high-resolution
images, with a reduced scan time, due to a reduced
field-of-view (rFOV) in the phase-encoding direc-
tion.2 rFOV sequences3,4 have shown promise in
producing high-quality, in vivo human spinal cord
DTI. In one larger study of 223 patients, performed
on a 1.5 T clinical scanner, an rFOV DWI sequence
added clinical utility in 33% of cases where pathol-
ogy was done.4 The rFOV DWI sequence was found
to be helpful in the evaluation of acute infarction,
demyelination, infection, neoplasm, and intradural
and epidural collections.4 In another study, the
diagnostic value of DWI and the measurement of
the apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient (ADC) were
evaluated in 33 patients who presented with a
spinal cord syndrome due to a noncompressive
myelopathy.5 ADC values measured in that study
were significantly lower in spinal cord infarct
(mean ADC 0.81 × 10–3 mm2/s) when compared
with inflammatory spinal cord lesions (mean
ADC 1.37 × 10–3 mm2/s) and with those meas-
ured in healthy control spinal cord (mean ADC
0.93 × 10–3 mm2/s).5
The usefulness of DWI and DTI of the spine has
also been reported in children. In one study, five
controls and five children with cervical spinal cord
injury (SCI) were imaged by using a single-shot,
echo-planar, diﬀusion weighted sequence. Chil-
dren with SCI showed reduced fractional anisotro-
py
(FA)
and
increased
diﬀusion
(D)
values
compared with controls. The study has shown that
the diﬀerences in diﬀusion metrics between non-
injured and injured spinal cords can be demon-
strated in the pediatric population.6
DWI and DTI in Spine and Spinal Cord Diseases
203

13.2 Clinical Applications for
DWI and DTI of the Spinal Cord
13.2.1 Spinal Cord Ischemia
Acute spinal cord ischemia is an uncommon condi-
tion that accounts for 5 to 8% of acute myelopa-
thies.
It
is
associated
with
severe
functional
neurological loss, and paraplegia in up to 33% of
the cases.7 Aortic dissection, open thoracoabdomi-
nal aortic surgery (5–21% risk), mechanical trau-
ma,
and
systemic
hypotension
are
the
most
common causes of acute spinal cord ischemia.7
Rarely, a fibrocartilaginous embolism (FCE) with a
progressive onset (over several hours) could be the
cause.8 Linear T2-hyperintensity on sagittal mag-
netic resonance imaging (MRI) scans, and the
appearance of “snake-eyes” on axial T2-weighted
MRI in the cord, are typical MRI findings. The spi-
nal cord will be swollen, and contrast enhance-
ment will be present in the subacute stage.
Although MRI is the method of choice in the detec-
tion of spinal cord ischemia, in a large number of
cases, initial MRI will not show any abnormality.7
There have been only smaller series published
that describe DWI findings in acute spinal cord
ischemia.9,10,11,12,13,14 The ADC measured in one
published series of spinal cord infarction ranged
between 0.23 and 0.86 × 10–3 mm2/s.14 The short-
est time reported in the literature between the
onset of clinical symptoms and abnormalities
shown on DWI was 3 hours after the onset of
symptoms (▶Fig. 13.1). In one small series of four
children with anterior spinal artery infarction after
minor trauma, DWI confirmed the clinical diagno-
sis in all cases15 and showed the feasibility of DWI
in spinal cord ischemia in a pediatric population.
Clinical rationale for DWI/DTI in spinal cord
ischemia:
●Early detection of spinal cord infarction when
conventional sequences are unremarkable
●Detection of spinal cord infarction due to FCE in
young athletes
13.2.2 Spinal Cord Tumors
The
most
common
intramedullary
tumors
in
adults are ependymomas, followed by astrocyto-
mas,
other
gliomas,
hemangioblastomas,
and
metastases. In the pediatric population, astrocyto-
mas are diagnosed in a higher percentage of cases.
Diagnostic challenges are the diﬀerentiation of
ependymoma
and
astrocytoma,
and
the
diﬀerentiation of resectable from nonresectable
spinal cord tumors based on MRI findings. Epen-
dymomas and hemangioblastomas are considered
resectable, whereas astrocytomas, due to their
infiltrative nature, are considered nonresectable.
Therefore, the determination of resectability is
essential. The value of DWI and DTI in predicting
the resectability of intramedullary tumors has
been shown in a recent study.16 Patients were clas-
sified according to the fiber course with respect to
the lesion. The results were compared with the
surgical findings (existence or absence of cleavage
plane). Despite the low number of patients in
that study (14 patients), the results showed good
interrater reliability for DTI and intraoperative
findings, and the presence or absence of a cleav-
age plane.16 Caution is necessary when DTI is
used in the pediatric population. The pilocytic
astrocytomas, that are common intramedullary
neoplasms in children, show histological and
structural diﬀerences from the infiltrating astro-
cytomas seen in adults. In one published series
of 10 children with intramedullary neoplasms,
preoperative DTI was performed to characterize
the margins of tumors for surgical planning.17 In
all
pilocytic
astrocytomas
(seven
cases)
(▶Fig. 13.2) and one ependymoma (▶Fig. 13.3),
splaying of fibers was found. The ganglioglioma
and high-grade glioma showed evidence of infil-
tration of fibers.17 In another small series, dis-
placement of the fibers was seen in three cases
of ependymoma.18
Ducreaux et al described DTI findings in five
cases of spinal cord astrocytoma (▶Fig. 13.4).18,19
The data suggest that FT can be used for visualiza-
tion of warped and destroyed fibers in cases of sol-
id astrocytomas, but showed some limitations in
cystic astrocytomas. Furthermore, when using DTI
metrics, astrocytomas, ependymomas, and meta-
stases showed similar FA values.18 The lowest FA
values were measured in metastases and the high-
est in hemangioblastomas. Metastatic infiltration
of nerve roots can also be detected by DTI
(▶Fig. 13.5).
It is imperative to identify drop metastases in
children with brain tumors. The presence of drop
metastases is associated with a poor prognosis, so
early detection is crucial to allow modification of
the treatment. Recently, a case of drop metastasis
was reported in which readout-segmented echo-
planar imaging (EPI) was used to identify hyper-
cellular metastases in a child with a primary CNS
tumor.20
DWI and DTI in Spine and Spinal Cord Diseases
204

Fig. 13.1 Spinal cord ischemia in a 64-year-old woman who presented with acute back pain and paraplegia. (a) Sagittal
T2-weighted image of the lumbar spine performed 4 hours after the onset of symptoms shows no abnormality. (b)
Sagittal T2-weighted image 48 hours later demonstrates hyperintensity and swelling of the conus medullaris. (c) On the
T2-weighted image, there is swelling of the anterior gray matter. (d) Diffusion weighted imaging shows high signal
intensity as the result of restricted diffusion in the conus medullaris (with low apparent diffusion coefficient, not shown).
DWI and DTI in Spine and Spinal Cord Diseases
205

The diﬀerentiation between an intramedullary
tumor and tumorlike lesions (TLLs) in the cervico-
medullary junction region and cervical spinal cord
can sometimes be challenging. A recently pub-
lished
series
evaluated
DTI
and
perfusion-
weighted imaging (PWI) in 12 patients with intra-
medullary tumors and 13 with TLL in the cervico-
medullary junction and cervical spinal cord. The
mean FA value of tumors was found to be signifi-
cantly lower when compared with TLL, and the
mean trace ADC and peak height values of tumors
were significantly higher.21
Clinical Rationale for DWI/DTI in
Spinal Cord Tumors
●Diﬀerentiation of ependymoma and astrocytoma
in adults (not in children!) (splayed and
destroyed fibers in ependymoma, diﬀuse
involvement of fibers in astrocytoma)
●Determination of resectability of spinal cord
tumors
●Identification of hypercellular drop metastases
in children with central nervous system (CNS)
neoplasms
●Diﬀerentiation between intramedullary tumor
and tumefactive demyelinating lesions in the
cervicomedullary junction or cervical spinal cord
(high perfusion and low FA in tumors)
13.2.3 Multiple Sclerosis
Multiple
sclerosis
(MS)
is
an
inflammatory
demyelinating disorder of the brain and spinal
cord, with cord lesions found in up to 99% of
autopsy cases.22,23
Increased diﬀusivity has been found in focal MS
lesions in the cord, with a significantly higher iso-
tropic diﬀusion coeﬃcient, when compared to
healthy controls.24 Valsasina et al have shown, in
their study of 44 patients with MS and 17 healthy
controls, that the average cervical cord FA was sig-
nificantly lower in MS patients compared to
controls.25
Early studies that performed DTI measurements
in patients without T2-visible cord signal abnor-
malities have revealed significantly lower FA val-
ues in the lateral, dorsal, and central parts of the
normal-appearing white matter (NAWM) in MS
patients.26 Several studies confirmed that signifi-
cant changes in DTI metrics are present in the
Fig. 13.2 Surgery-proven ependymoma in a 39-year-old female patient (a) On the sagittal T2WI image of the cervical
spine, a bulky mass is noted in the spinal cord at the Th1–2 level, with cord hyperintensity above and below the mass,
representing edema. (b) The mass is T1-isointense to the spinal cord. (c) On the post-contrast T1WI image, strong
enhancement is shown of the solid tumor part. (d) DT-FT Diffusion tensor-Fiber tractograpy shows centrally located
mass with displacement of the fibers.
DWI and DTI in Spine and Spinal Cord Diseases
206

cervical
spinal
cord
of
MS
patients,
in
the
absence of spinal cord signal abnormality at con-
ventional
MRI
examination.26,27,28
Diﬀusional
kurtosis imaging of the spinal cord, used recently
in one study, has demonstrated not only white
but also gray matter damage in patients with
MS.29
Furthermore, DTI metrics of the spinal cord in
MS patients has been compared with electrophy-
siological studies. On DTI acquired in 28 healthy
volunteers and 41 MS patients, FA and ADC were
evaluated in NAWM at the cervical level and
correlated
with
motor-evoked
potentials
(n = 34).30 Asymmetric anatomical changes in
spinal cord NAWM were found in DTI, which
corresponded to asymmetric electrophysiologi-
cal deficits for both arms and legs. Overall, DTI
studies of the spinal cord in MS patients have
demonstrated and confirmed the spinal cord
damage and opened the pathway for further
clinical studies.
13.2.4 Neuromyelitis Optica
The identification, in 2004, of a disease-specific
autoantibody, neuromyelitis optica immunoglobu-
lin G (NMO-IgG), in the serum of patients with
NMO ended the debate about whether NMO is a
variant of MS or a distinct disease.31 NMO-IgG
binds selectively to aquaporin-4 (AQP-4), a water
channel that is densely expressed in astrocytic foot
processes at the blood-brain barrier (BBB). NMO is
currently defined as an autoimmune antibody-
mediated disease, induced by a specific serum
autoantibody, the NMO-IgG, directed against AQP-
4. Unilateral or bilateral severe optic neuritis (ON)
usually precedes longitudinally extensive trans-
verse myelitis (LETM). Extensive signal abnormal-
ities that extend to multiple segments (> three
segments), with cavitations, and patchy enhance-
ment are typical imaging findings. Reported brain
abnormalities range from 20 to 89% of cases,
depending on geographical area.32
Fig. 13.3 Histology-proven the spinal cord astrocytoma (grade III) in a 38-year-old male patient who presented with
pain in the thoracic region, sensory disturbances in the left lower extremity followed by left hemiparesis, and gait
disorder. On spinal sagittal T2-weighted image (a) and Short tau inversion recovery (STIR) (b) hyperintensity and
enlargement of the cord is detected from the C6 to the T10 level. (c) On enhanced T1-weighted image, an ill-defined
enhancement is shown at the T3–6 level. (d) Fiber tractography shows diffuse infiltration of the fibers with no
displacement.
DWI and DTI in Spine and Spinal Cord Diseases
207

The crucial point is the diﬀerentiation from MS,
because some MS treatments can exacerbate NMO.
DTI of the cervical spinal cord was used in one
study to assess cord damage in NMO.33 Ten NMO
patients showed reduced FA and increased MD,
compared with 12 healthy controls. In another
study, decreased FA was found in patients with
NMO when compared with patients with relaps-
ing-remitting
MS.34
The
study
demonstrated
extensive normal-appearing spinal cord damage in
NMO patients, including peripheral areas of the
cervical spinal cord.
Fig. 13.4 Pilocytic astrocytoma of the cervical spinal cord in a five-year-old boy. (a) Sagittal T2-weighted image shows
high signal intensity mass in the cervical spinal cord extending from C2 to the T1 levels, with cord enlargement. The
mass did not show enhancement (not shown). (b) Fiber tractography nicely demonstrates splaying of the fibers.
Fig. 13.5
Biopsy-proven metastatic neuropathy in a 44-year-old woman with breast carcinoma who presented with
lumbar pain irradiating to the right side. (a) Thoracic spine coronal short tau inversion recovery (STIR) shows low signal
linear abnormalities following the spinal roots over multiple segments. (b) Diffusion tensor imaging demonstrates
asymmetry of the nerve roots with multiple thickened nerve roots on the right side. (c) Positron emission tomography/
computed tomography confirmed metastatic disease affecting multiple thoracic nerve roots.
DWI and DTI in Spine and Spinal Cord Diseases
208

13.2.5 Transverse Myelitis
Transverse myelitis (TM) is an acute inflammatory
disease of the spinal cord with a heterogeneous
pathogenesis. MRI findings include central T2-
hyperintensity usually extending over more than
two segments, and involving more than two-thirds
of the cross-sectional area of the cord, with or
without enhancement.35
In one study, a pulse-triggered DTI sequence
with an rFOV technique and coronal acquisition
was used for the assessment of the cervical spinal
cord in patients with myelitis.36 Qualitative assess-
ment of the spinal cord damage was evaluated in
12 healthy volunteers and 40 consecutive patients
with myelitis (25 MS, 11 neuromyelitis optica, 1 sar-
coidosis, 1 Gougerot–Sjögren syndrome, and 2 cases
of idiopathic myelitis). FA and MD measurements
clearly demonstrated a significant FA increase and
an MD decrease in active lesions. In the absence of
active lesions, and regardless of the pathology, FA
decreased and MD increased significantly.36
Clinical Rationale for DWI/DTI in MS,
NMO, and TM
●Not yet part of the routine protocols
●May be useful in the future for therapy
monitoring
●Diﬀerentiation between demyelinating/inflam-
matory disorders and spinal cord ischemia
13.2.6 Spinal Cord Trauma
Knowing the limitations of conventional MRI tech-
niques in estimation of the extent of Spinal cord
injury (SCI), there is a need for the evaluation of
new techniques. DWI has been first evaluated in
animal studies showing promising results.37 The
comparison of conventional T2-weighted images
and DWI in acute SCI showed comparable detec-
tion rates for spinal cord damage in 18 patients
within 24 hours postinjury.38 The detection rates
of high signals on T2-weighted and DWI did not
show significant diﬀerences, being 94 and 72%,
respectively.38 In another study, conventional MRI
and multishot, navigator-corrected DWI were per-
formed in 20 patients with acute spinal cord trau-
ma using 1.5 T MRI within 72 h after the onset of
trauma.39 In that study 20 cases were classified
into four types: edema type (10 cases), mixed type
(6 cases), hemorrhage type (2 cases), and com-
pressed
type
(2
cases).
DWI
hyperintensity
was detected in edema cases, most probably rep-
resenting cytotoxic edema, as well as in two
patients with cord compression. Inhomogeneous
signals were seen in patients with mixed-type
injury. An important limitation of the study is the
lack of axial DWI images, lack of normal controls,
and low b values (400 and 500 s/mm2) used.39
Clinical Rationale for DWI/DTI in
Traumatic Spinal Cord Injury
●Not yet part of the routine protocols
●Promising technique for evaluation of injury
epicenter, diﬀerentiation of injured and normal
spinal cord in the absence of T2-signal changes
13.3 Clinical Applications for
DWI and DTI of the Vertebral
Bodies
13.3.1 Vertebral Body Fracture
The normal bone marrow in an adult consists of
approximately 50% fat and 50% water.
Osteoporotic fractured vertebra contains fat and
edema. In malignant vertebral fractures, the tumor
cells usually have replaced the bone marrow. The
reliable imaging diﬀerentiation of benign and
malignant vertebral body fractures remains a diag-
nostic challenge. In the first published study, all
benign osteoporotic fractures were hypointense or
isointense on steady-state free procession (SSFP)-
based DWI, whereas malignant fractures showed
hyperintensity.1
Malignant
fractures
show
restricted diﬀusion due to dense tumor-cell pack-
ing (▶Fig. 13.6). Acute osteoporotic fractures dem-
onstrate increased diﬀusion caused by increased
water proton mobility in the bone marrow edema
(▶Fig. 13.7). Important exceptions to that rule are
sclerotic metastases and treated metastases, which
will
be
hypointense
(false-negative
results).40
Reported ADC values of benign osteoporotic and
benign traumatic fractures vary from 0.32 to
2.23 × 10–3 mm2/s, whereas the range in malignant
fractures or metastases is 0.19 to 1.04 × 10–3 mm2/
s.41
The
calculated
diﬀusion
coeﬃcients
will
DWI and DTI in Spine and Spinal Cord Diseases
209

depend on the technique applied and also on fat
saturation. The diﬀusion weighted reversed fast
imaging with steady state free precession (DW-
PSIF) sequence (delta = 3 ms) was reported in a
recent study to have the highest accuracy in diﬀer-
entiating benign from malignant vertebral frac-
tures. Qualitatively assessed opposed-phase, DW-
EPI, and DW single-shot turbo spin echo (TSE)
sequences and ADCs (DW-EPI) cannot be used to
accurately diﬀerentiate benign from malignant
vertebral fractures.41
In another recently published study, DWI (b val-
ues: 0, 800, and 1,400 s/mm2) were analyzed in 62
patients with acute compression fractures.42 At
qualitative analysis, hyperintensity was seen in
87% of malignant compression fractures, but only
in 22% of acute osteoporotic compression frac-
tures. The median ADCs of malignant fractures
were significantly lower than those of benign
fractures. When readers used a combination of
conventional sequences and DWI, increased sensi-
tivity, specificity, and accuracy were observed
(97–100%).42
Clinical Rationale for DWI in
Vertebral Body Fractures
●Diﬀerentiation between benign and malignant
fractures (when used with conventional
sequences)
13.3.2 Degenerative Changes and
Spondylodiskitis
Degenerative end plate changes, such as Modic
type I and spondylodiskitis, may both present with
similar clinical symptoms and imaging findings.
Fig. 13.6
Metastatic vertebral body fracture in a 71-year-old patient with a history of adenocarcinoma. (a) Sagittal
short tau inversion recovery magnetic resonance imaging (STIR) shows high signal in the L3 vertebral body. Apparent
diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps calculated from (b) diffusion weighted echo-planar imaging (DW-EPI) and (c) half-
Fourier acquisition single-shot turbo-spin-echo diffusion weighted MR (DW-HASTE) images show average ADC values of
0.9 × 10–4 mm2/s (DW-EPI) and 1.38 × 10–4 mm2/s (DW-HASTE) (arrows). (Courtesy of Andrea Baur-Melnyk. From
Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Bone Marrow, 2013. With kind permission from Springer Science and Business
Media.)
DWI and DTI in Spine and Spinal Cord Diseases
210

Moreover, a postcontrast MRI study will show en-
hancement in both diseases. In one study, 27
patients with erosive intervertebral osteochondro-
sis Modic type I, and 18 patients with spondylodis-
kitis were examined with conventional and DWI
sequences.43 All patients with spondylodiskitis
showed DWI hyperintensity of the vertebral end
plates (▶Fig. 13.8), whereas in patients with
Modic I changes, hypointensity was observed
(▶Fig. 13.9).43
In another study, a “claw sign” was described as
highly suggestive of degeneration, and its absence
is strongly indicative of diskitis/osteomyelitis.44
Seventy-three patients with imaging features that
suggested Modic type 1 changes were classified
clinically into three groups: true degenerative
Modic type 1 changes (n = 33); confirmed diskitis/
osteomyelitis (n = 20); and suspected infection
(n = 20).
These
patients
were
examined
with
DWI.44 When a definite claw was seen, patients
were proved to be infection-free. Conversely, in
cases of absence of claw sign (diﬀuse DWI pattern),
there was proved infection in 17 of 17 cases
(100%) and 13 of 14 cases (93%).44
Clinical Rationale for DWI in
Degenerative Spine Diseases
●Diﬀerentiation of Modic I changes and
spondylodiskitis
13.4 Conclusion
Considering the absence of a true “gold standard,”
the variety of sequences used in published studies,
Fig. 13.7 Osteoporotic vertebral body fracture in a 70-year-old patient. (a) Sagittal short tau inversion recovery image
shows hyperintense signal in the L2 vertebral body (arrow). Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) maps from L2 vertebral
body (arrow in b and c) calculated from (b) diffusion weighted echo-planar imaging (DW-EPI) and (c) half-Fourier
acquisition single-shot turbo-spin-echo diffusion weighted MR (DW-HASTE) images show higher average ADC values of
1.25 × 10–4 mm2/s (DW-EPI) and 1.73 × 10–4 mm2/s (DW-HASTE) (arrows). (Courtesy of Andrea Baur-Melnyk. From
Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Bone Marrow, 2013. With kind permission from Springer Science and Business
Media.)
DWI and DTI in Spine and Spinal Cord Diseases
211

and especially the small number of patients in
published series, DTI and DT-FT of the spine and
spinal cord have not been fully validated.
However, the results demonstrating the accu-
racy and utility of DWI and DTI in diﬀerent spinal
cord diseases and emerging technical solutions
will
help
to
increase
confidence
in
these
techniques.
Fig. 13.8
Bacterial spondylodiskitis in a 74-year-old woman 1 week after L4–L5 disk extraction. (a) On the sagittal T2-
weighted image, high signal is observed in the L4 and L5 vertebral bodies, as well as in the disk space. (b) Low signal is
demonstrated on the sagittal T1-weighted image. (c) On the enhanced T1-weighted image, there is marked
enhancement of the affected vertebral bodies. On (d) Diffusion weighted imaging and (e) the apparent diffusion
coefficient map, homogeneous high signal is present in the L4 and L5 vertebral bodies.
DWI and DTI in Spine and Spinal Cord Diseases
212

References
[1] Baur A, Stäbler A, Brüning R, et al. Diﬀusion weighted MR
imaging of bone marrow: diﬀerentiation of benign versus
pathologic compression fractures. Radiology 1998; 207(2):
349–356
[2] Seeger A, Klose U, Bischof F, Strobel J, Ernemann U, Hauser
TK. Zoomed EPI DWI of acute spinal ischemia using a paral-
lel transmission system. Clin Neuroradiol 2014
[3] Xu J, Shimony JS, Klawiter EC, et al. Improved in vivo diﬀu-
sion tensor imaging of human cervical spinal cord. Neuro-
image 2013; 67: 64–76
[4] Andre JB, Zaharchuk G, Saritas E, et al. Clinical evaluation of
reduced field-of-view diﬀusion weighted imaging of the cer-
vical and thoracic spine and spinal cord. AJNR Am J Neuro-
radiol 2012; 33(10): 1860–1866
[5] Marcel C, Kremer S, Jeantroux J, Blanc F, Dietemann JL, De
Sèze J. Diﬀusion weighted imaging in noncompressive mye-
lopathies: a 33-patient prospective study. J Neurol 2010;
257(9): 1438–1445
[6] Mohamed FB, Hunter LN, Barakat N, et al. Diﬀusion tensor
imaging of the pediatric spinal cord at 1.5T: preliminary
results. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2011; 32(2): 339–345
[7] Nedeltchev K, Loher TJ, Stepper F, et al. Long-term outcome
of acute spinal cord ischemia syndrome. Stroke 2004; 35(2):
560–565
[8] Cuello JP, Ortega-Gutierrez S, Linares G, et al. Acute cervical
myelopathy due to presumed fibrocartilaginous embolism:
a case report and systematic review of the literature. J Spinal
Disord Tech 2014; 27(8): E276–E281
[9] Loher TJ, Bassetti CL, Lövblad KO, et al. Diﬀusion weighted
MRI in acute spinal cord ischaemia. Neuroradiology 2003;
45(8): 557–561
[10] Küker W, Weller M, Klose U, Krapf H, Dichgans J, Nägele T.
Diﬀusion weighted MRI of spinal cord infarction—high
resolution imaging and time course of diﬀusion abnormal-
ity. J Neurol 2004; 251(7): 818–824
[11] Zhang JS, Huan Y, Sun LJ, Ge YL, Zhang XX, Chang YJ. Tempo-
ral evolution of spinal cord infarction in an in vivo experi-
mental study of canine models characterized by diﬀusion
weighted imaging. J Magn Reson Imaging 2007; 26(4): 848–
854
[12] Fujikawa A, Tsuchiya K, Takeuchi S, Hachiya J. Diﬀusion
weighted MR imaging in acute spinal cord ischemia. Eur
Radiol 2004; 14(11): 2076–2078
[13] Stepper F, Lövblad KO. Anterior spinal artery stroke demon-
strated by echo-planar DWI. Eur Radiol 2001; 11(12): 2607–
2610
[14] Thurnher MM, Bammer R. Diﬀusion weighted magnetic res-
onance imaging of the spine and spinal cord. Semin Roent-
genol 2006; 41(4): 294–311
[15] Beslow LA, Ichord RN, Zimmerman RA, Smith SE, Licht DJ.
Role of diﬀusion MRI in diagnosis of spinal cord infarction in
children. Neuropediatrics 2008; 39(3): 188–191
[16] Setzer M, Murtagh RD, Murtagh FR, et al. Diﬀusion tensor
imaging
tractography
in
patients
with
intramedullary
tumors: comparison with intraoperative findings and value
for prediction of tumor resectability. J Neurosurg Spine
2010; 13(3): 371–380
[17] Choudhri AF, Whitehead MT, Klimo P, Jr, Montgomery BK,
Boop FA. Diﬀusion tensor imaging to guide surgical planning
in intramedullary spinal cord tumors in children. Neuro-
radiology 2014; 56(2): 169–174
[18] Vargas MI, Delavelle J, Jlassi H, et al. Clinical applications of
diﬀusion tensor tractography of the spinal cord. Neuroradi-
ology 2008; 50(1): 25–29
[19] Ducreux D, Lepeintre J-F, Fillard P, Loureiro C, Tadié M, Las-
jaunias P. MR diﬀusion tensor imaging and fiber tracking in
5 spinal cord astrocytomas. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2006; 27
(1): 214–216
Fig. 13.9
Modic I changes. (a) On sagittal T2-weighted imaging, no signal change is seen. (b) Bandlike low signal is
demonstrated on the sagittal T1-weighted image in the L4 and L5 vertebral bodies. (c) On the postcontrast T1-weighted
image, enhancement of the affected vertebral bodies is shown. (d) On diffusion weighted imaging, low signal is present
in the L4 and L5 vertebral bodies, suggestive of elevated diffusion. (Courtesy of Cem Calli.)
DWI and DTI in Spine and Spinal Cord Diseases
213

[20] Hayes LL, Jones RA, Palasis S, Aguilera D, Porter DA. Drop
metastases to the pediatric spine revealed with diﬀusion
weighted MR imaging. Pediatr Radiol 2012; 42(8): 1009–
1013
[21] Liu X, Tian W, Kolar B, et al. Advanced MR diﬀusion tensor
imaging and perfusion weighted imaging of intramedullary
tumors and tumor like lesions in the cervicomedullary junc-
tion region and the cervical spinal cord. J Neurooncol 2014;
116(3): 559–566
[22] Ikuta F, Zimmerman HM. Distribution of plaques in seventy
autopsy cases of multiple sclerosis in the United States. Neu-
rology 1976; 26(6 PT 2): 26–28
[23] Toussaint D, Périer O, Verstappen A, Bervoets S. Clinicopa-
thological study of the visual pathways, eyes, and cerebral
hemispheres in 32 cases of disseminated sclerosis. J Clin
Neuroophthalmol 1983; 3(3): 211–220
[24] Clark CA, Werring DJ, Miller DH. Diﬀusion imaging of the
spinal cord in vivo: estimation of the principal diﬀusivities
and application to multiple sclerosis. Magn Reson Med
2000; 43(1): 133–138
[25] Valsasina P, Rocca MA, Agosta F, et al. Mean diﬀusivity and
fractional anisotropy histogram analysis of the cervical cord
in MS patients. Neuroimage 2005; 26(3): 822–828
[26] Hesseltine SM, Law M, Babb J, et al. Diﬀusion tensor
imaging in multiple sclerosis: assessment of regional dif-
ferences in the axial plane within normal-appearing cer-
vical spinal cord. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2006; 27(6):
1189–1193
[27] van Hecke W, Nagels G, Emonds G, et al. A diﬀusion tensor
imaging group study of the spinal cord in multiple sclerosis
patients with and without T2 spinal cord lesions. J Magn
Reson Imaging 2009; 30(1): 25–34
[28] Miraldi F, Lopes FC, Costa JV, Alves-Leon SV, Gasparetto EL.
Diﬀusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging may show
abnormalities in the normal-appearing cervical spinal cord
from patients with multiple sclerosis. Arq Neuropsiquiatr
2013; 71 9A: 580–583
[29] Raz E, Bester M, Sigmund EE, et al. A better characterization
of spinal cord damage in multiple sclerosis: a diﬀusional
kurtosis imaging study. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2013; 34(9):
1846–1852
[30] von Meyenburg J, Wilm BJ, Weck A, et al. Spinal cord diﬀu-
sion tensor imaging and motor-evoked potentials in multi-
ple
sclerosis
patients:
microstructural
and
functional
asymmetry. Radiology 2013; 267(3): 869–879
[31] Lennon VA, Kryzer TJ, Pittock SJ, Verkman AS, Hinson SR.
IgG marker of optic-spinal multiple sclerosis binds to the
aquaporin-4 water channel. J Exp Med 2005; 202(4): 473–
477
[32] Kim W, Kim SH, Huh SY, Kim HJ. Brain abnormalities in neu-
romyelitis optica spectrum disorder. Mult Scler Int 2012;
2012: 735486
[33] Qian W, Chan Q, Mak H, et al. Quantitative assessment of
the cervical spinal cord damage in neuromyelitis optica
using diﬀusion tensor imaging at 3 Tesla. J Magn Reson
Imaging 2011; 33(6): 1312–1320
[34] Pessôa FM, Lopes FC, Costa JV, Leon SV, Domingues RC, Gas-
paretto EL. The cervical spinal cord in neuromyelitis optica
patients: a comparative study with multiple sclerosis using
diﬀusion tensor imaging. Eur J Radiol 2012; 81(10): 2697–
2701
[35] Goh C, Desmond PM, Phal PM. MRI in transverse myelitis. J
Magn Reson Imaging 2014; 40(6): 1267–1279
[36] Hodel J, Besson P, Outteryck O, et al. Pulse-triggered DTI
sequence with reduced FOV and coronal acquisition at 3 T
for the assessment of the cervical spinal cord in patients
with myelitis. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2013; 34(3): 676–682
[37] Schwartz ED, Chin CL, Shumsky JS, et al. Apparent diﬀusion
coeﬃcients in spinal cord transplants and surrounding
white matter correlate with degree of axonal dieback after
injury in rats. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2005; 26(1): 7–18
[38] Pouw MH, van der Vliet AM, van Kampen A, Thurnher MM,
van de Meent H, Hosman AJ. Diﬀusion weighted MR imaging
within 24 h post-injury after traumatic spinal cord injury: a
qualitative meta-analysis between T2-weighted imaging
and diﬀusion weighted MR imaging in 18 patients. Spinal
Cord 2012; 50(6): 426–431
[39] Zhang JS, Huan Y. Multishot diﬀusion weighted MR imaging
features in acute trauma of spinal cord. Eur Radiol 2014; 24
(3): 685–692
[40] Castillo M, Arbelaez A, Smith JK, Fisher LL. Diﬀusion
weighted MR imaging oﬀers no advantage over routine non-
contrast MR imaging in the detection of vertebral metasta-
ses. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2000; 21(5): 948–953
[41] Geith T, Schmidt G, Biﬀar A, et al. Quantitative evaluation of
benign and malignant vertebral fractures with diﬀusion
weighted MRI: what is the optimum combination of b val-
ues for ADC-based lesion diﬀerentiation with the single-shot
turbo spin-echo sequence? AJR Am J Roentgenol 2014; 203
(3): 582–588
[42] Sung JK, Jee WH, Jung JY, et al. Diﬀerentiation of acute
osteoporotic and malignant compression fractures of the
spine: use of additive qualitative and quantitative axial dif-
fusion weighted MR imaging to conventional MR imaging at
3.0 T. Radiology 2014; 271(2): 488–498
[43] Oztekin O, Calli C, Kitis O, et al. Reliability of diﬀusion
weighted MR imaging in diﬀerentiating degenerative and
infectious end plate changes. Radiol Oncol 2010; 44(2): 97–
102
[44] Patel KB, Poplawski MM, Pawha PS, Naidich TP, Tanenbaum
LN. Diﬀusion weighted MRI “claw sign” improves diﬀeren-
tiation of infectious from degenerative modic type 1 signal
changes of the spine. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2014; 35(8):
1647–1652
DWI and DTI in Spine and Spinal Cord Diseases
214

14 Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging and Diﬀusion Tensor
Imaging in Head and Neck Diseases
Eloisa M Santiago Gebrim, Regina Lucia Elia Gomes, Flavia K. Issa Cevasco, and Marcio Ricardo Taveira Garcia
Key Points
Diﬀusion Weighted Imaging in the Head
and Neck
●Diﬀusion weighted imaging (DWI) helps dif-
ferentiate solid from cystic lesions and benign
from malignant head and neck lesions.
●The DWI imaging findings should always be
correlated with the morphological anatomical
images, and interpreting the findings requires
experience and knowledge.
●Some of the indications for DWI are tissue
characterization for primary tumors and nodal
metastases, prediction and monitoring of
treatment response, diﬀerentiation of recurrent
tumor from posttherapeutic changes, evalua-
tion of inflammatory and infectious lesions,
and study of salivary and thyroid glands.
●Generally, malignant tumors show greater
restriction of diﬀusion and a lower apparent
diﬀusion coeﬃcient (ADC) compared to normal
tissues and benign tumors.
●Lymphomas tend to have some of the lowest
ADCs of all tumors in the head and neck.
●Exceptions occur, such as nasopharyngeal
adenoid hypertrophy, which has greater restric-
tion of diﬀusion and a lower ADC, similar to
malignant tumors, probably due to the high
cellularity.
●Other exceptions are classic chordomas and
low-grade chondrosarcomas, which show high
ADC values.
●One of the most important indications for DWI
in the head and neck is the evaluation of cho-
lesteatomas, especially in their postoperative
follow-up; they are hyperintense on DWI.
14.1 Introduction
The addition of diﬀusion weighted imaging (DWI)
to magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) protocols in
the evaluation of head and neck malignancies
increases
lesion
detection
and
helps
with
diﬀerentiating solid from cystic lesions and benign
from malignant lesions. Both the DWI and appa-
rent diﬀusion coeﬃcient (ADC) maps are valuable
for assessing various head and neck pathological
conditions; however, the DWI findings should
always be correlated with the anatomical images,
and
good
collaboration
between
radiologists,
physicists, and clinicians is a prerequisite for opti-
mal patient management.1 The recent studies of
diﬀusion in the head and neck suﬀer from small
samples, susceptibility artifacts associated with
single-shot echo-planar image (EPI) sequences,
and low resolution of diﬀusion images and ADC
maps. Because of these issues, DWI characteristics
and ADC values should not be used in isolation
because there may be overlap between diﬀerent
tumor
types.2
Correct
interpretation
of
DWI
requires experience and knowledge.3
Optimization and standardization of DWI tech-
nical parameters, comparison of DWI with mor-
phological images, and increasing experience are
prerequisites for successful application of this
challenging technique to head and neck lesions.
For this anatomical region, indications for DWI
include, but are not limited to, tissue characteriza-
tion for primary tumors and nodal metastases,
prediction and monitoring of treatment response,
diﬀerentiation of recurrent tumor from postthera-
peutic changes, evaluation of inflammatory and
infectious lesions, and study of salivary and thy-
roid glands.1
In general, malignant tumors tend to show
greater restriction of diﬀusion and, hence, a lower
ADC when compared with normal tissues and
benign tumors. Lymphomas tend to have some of
the lowest ADCs of all tumors in the head and
neck. Furthermore, cancers that show only small
changes (increase or decrease) in ADC during
treatment or in the early posttreatment phase are
more likely to fail treatment. For tumors in gener-
al, variations in ADC may arise from heterogeneity
in cell size and density, as well as microscopic
hemorrhage or calcification.
Future improvement of methods to analyze ADC
maps, including histogram analysis and functional
DWI and DTI in Head and Neck Diseases
215

maps, should advance the applications of DWI in
the head and neck, especially for treatment moni-
toring. Recently, several attempts have been made
to determine perfusion and diﬀusion parameters
separately by using intravoxel incoherent motion
MRI (IVIM-MRI). Perfusion is an important marker
of many physiological and pathological processes
and can be used as a predictive indicator for eﬀec-
tiveness
of
chemoradiation
and
radiotherapy.
Therefore, analyzing DWI and perfusion may be
helpful in the preoperative tumor evaluation. A
simplified IVIM-MRI technique based on the IVIM
model has been used to assess perfusion-related
parameters (PPs) and molecular diﬀusion (D) of
head and neck tumors, which can be determined
with three or four b values (0, 500 and 1,000 s/
mm2; or 0, 200, 400 and 800 s/mm2). This techni-
que is both fast and easy to apply compared with
IVIM-MRI using multiple b values (e.g., 0, 10, 20,
30, 50, 80, 100, 200, 300, 400, and 800 s/mm2). The
time–signal intensity curve (TIC) profiles obtained
after dynamic contrast-enhanced (DCE) MRI repre-
sent tumor tissue perfusion properties. Therefore,
the use of any single technique may not be eﬀec-
tive in the diﬀerentiation of head and neck tumors.
IVIM-MRI is a technique with the potential for
simultaneously assessing both tissue perfusion
and
diﬀusion.
This
multiparametric
approach
using a TIC and IVIM criteria can help in the diﬀer-
entiation between benign and malignant head and
neck tumors and between diﬀerent histological
tumor types with high levels of accuracy.4
This chapter emphasizes the main indications
for DWI in the diﬀerentiation of tumors and
inflammatory processes (▶Table 14.1). The chap-
ter closes with some comments about diﬀusion
Table 14.1 Head and neck lesions with most common apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient (ADC) characteristics for low and
high ADC
Lesions of the head and neck with low ADC
Lesions of the head and neck with high ADC
Lymphoma
Pleomorphic adenoma
Squamous cell carcinoma
Inflammatory process
Soft tissue sarcoma
Chordoma
Metastatic lymph node
Low-grade chondrosarcoma
Warthin tumor
Low-grade glioma (optic)
Rhabdomyosarcoma
Vascular lesion
Primitive neuroectodermal tumor
Hemangioma
Eosinophilic granuloma
Cholesterol granuloma
Inflammatory process
Fungal lesions
Abscess
Hemorrhage following recent surgery
Cerumen in the external ear canal
Meningioma
Fibrous histiocytoma
Cholesteatoma
Dermoid cyst
Nasopharyngeal adenoid hypertrophy
DWI and DTI in Head and Neck Diseases
216

tensor imaging (DTI) applications in the head and
neck.
14.2 Tumors
14.2.1 Squamous Cell Carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) is the most preva-
lent tumor of the head and neck region, and MRI
has aided in lesion detection and characterization,
particularly for areas that are diﬃcult to access
during physical examination, such as the skull
base, nasopharynx, palatine and lingual tonsils,
laryngeal cartilages, and hypopharynx. When a
patient presents with a clinical suspicion of a
malignancy in the head and neck, the first step is
to confirm the diagnosis with imaging. If the diag-
nosis is confirmed, the second step is to assess the
disease extent, regional spread, and metastases.
The third step is to supply specific information
about the tumor nature, trying to identify which
tumors will be more responsive to conventional
chemoradiation. This step is important to select
which cancers will need other therapies, such as
surgery or diﬀerent radiation types. DWI is the
most important and established technique for the
third step.2
Beyond the structural images, DWI is a function-
al technique used mostly for detection and charac-
terization of head and neck tumors. Restriction of
water diﬀusion is observed in malignant tumors
that present low ADC values, due to high cellular-
ity, dense cellular populations, and/or a high
nucleocytoplasmic ratio. Necrosis and nonmalig-
nant changes, such as fibrosis and inflammation,
have less cellularity compared to viable tumor and
hence show high ADC values3 (▶Fig. 14.1).
There
are
several
studies
emphasizing
the
importance of DWI in the evaluation and diﬀeren-
tiation of tumors in the head and neck.5,6,7 Wang
et al6 and Maeda et al7 reported that it is possible
to diﬀerentiate tumors applying the mean ADC
value, showing that benign lesions have higher
ADC values, lymphomas have lower values, and
carcinomas had intermediate values. Wang et al
determined a threshold ADC value of 1.22 × 10–3
mm2/s, with high accuracy (86%), sensitivity (84%),
and specificity (91%) to predict malignancy.6 Other
authors have presented diﬀerent ADC values for
malignant tumors of the head and neck, with less-
er values for lymphomas, intermediate values for
SCC, and greater ADC values for malignant salivary
gland tumors.2 Other capacity attributed to DWI is
to distinguish between well-diﬀerentiated and
poorly diﬀerentiated SCCs by virtue of their ADC
values. The most diﬀerentiated tumors have higher
ADC values, whereas poorly diﬀerentiated tumors
have lower ADC values.2,6,8 This diﬀerence is due to
the higher concentration of cytoplasmic macromo-
lecules, the higher nucleus–cytoplasm relation-
ship, increased cellularity, and the presence of
necrotic foci in undiﬀerentiated neoplastic tissues.
On the other hand, a recent retrospective study
by Surov et al found that the ADC values of naso-
pharyngeal adenoid hypertrophy (NAH) were as
low those previously reported in carcinomas of
Fig. 14.1 Squamous cell carcinoma of the nasopharynx invading the retropharyngeal, paraspinal, parapharyngeal, and
masticator left spaces. The lesion shows (a) heterogeneous signal on the b 1,000 diffusion weighted imaging, (b) middle
intensity signal on the apparent diffusion coefficient map, and (c) diffuse gadolinium enhancement.
DWI and DTI in Head and Neck Diseases
217

the head and neck region, both in children and
adults, a finding that was attributed to the NAH
high cellularity. Because of this behavior, NAH can
be misinterpreted as carcinoma or malignant lym-
phoma, especially in patients over 40 years of age.9
A recent review of the literature on DWI in the
head and neck demonstrates that it shows no
added value in the detection of primary epider-
moid carcinoma, but it may show potential value
in nodal staging and discrimination of recurrence
from posttreatment changes.10
MRI has good diagnostic performance in the
overall pretreatment evaluation of node staging in
patients with SCC. A limited number of small stud-
ies suggest that DWI has a higher accuracy as com-
pared with turbo spin-echo (TSE) MRI for the
detection of nodal metastases. DWI can be comple-
mentary to conventional MRI because size-related
and morphological criteria lack suﬃcient reliabil-
ity for the identification of small nodal metastases
in patients with SCC. Malignant lymph nodes have
a lower ADC than benign lymph nodes, and DWI is
most beneficial in the detection of subcentimeter
metastatic lymph nodes.11,12
Oral inspection, laryngoscopy under general
anesthesia, conventional image analysis of com-
puted tomography (CT) and MRI can also be
impaired by actinic changes, such as local edema,
inflammation, necrosis, fibrosis, mucosal thicken-
ing, and diﬀuse contrast enhancement, limiting
the identification of residual or recurrent tumors
or suggesting false-positive diagnoses, which may
result in unnecessary procedures. Moreover, some
residual
or
recurrent
tumors
may
not
show
increased contrast enhancement, further hinder-
ing the identification of disease.13
The need for early diagnosis of cancer recur-
rence is essential, so MRI techniques have been
developed to increase the sensitivity and specific-
ity for its detection. Diﬀusion imaging sequences
have also been used to distinguish recurrent
tumor
from
postoperative
and
postradition
changes.14 The b = 0 signal intensity is lower in
malignant lesions than in benign tissues with post-
radiation changes. The b = 1,000 signal intensity is
higher in malignancy than in nonneoplastic tis-
sues. Consequently, ADC values are significantly
lower in cancer. These characteristics hold for
before, during, or after the chemoradiation therapy
between inflammatory, fibrotic, and persistent
tumor.14 Some authors demonstrated that cellular
death and vascular changes by therapy could be
detected by DWI before a reduction of lesion
diameter
became
apparent
by
conventional
images. DWI allows monitoring of tumor response
during radiotherapy because loss of tumor cells
and increased free water in tissues result in
increased ADC values14 (▶Fig. 14.2).
DWI helps to distinguish responders from non-
responders, as well as early identification of non-
responding tumors. Radio resistance and poor
outcomes during treatment are determined by
lower cellularity and necrosis mediated by hypo-
xia. Radio sensitivity is determined by solid and
Fig. 14.2
The same patient as in ▶Fig. 14.1, with nasopharynx squamous cell carcinoma after 6 months of
chemoradiation, presented (a) a reduction in the size of the lesion and signal reduction on the b 1,000 diffusion
weighted imaging, (b) absence of reduced apparent diffusion coefficient, and (c) no gadolinium enhancement. The
findings suggest treatment response with significant reduction in cellularity of the lesion.
DWI and DTI in Head and Neck Diseases
218

hypercellular tissues with low pretreatment ADC
values.14 Early studies show that changes in ADC
values may occur before morphological changes,
such as tumor dimension, volume or contrast en-
hancement, mainly in the first 3 months posttreat-
ment. An increase in ADC during treatment is
associated with higher survival rates15 (▶Fig. 14.3
and ▶Fig. 14.4). DWI can detect nonresponders
and can lead to stopping ineﬀective treatments
and avoiding delays in the administration of other,
potentially more eﬀective, treatment alternatives.
Thus DWI has increased sensitivity and accuracy
to detect recurrence and in the diﬀerential diagno-
sis in the posttreatment setting, providing better
results than CT and fludeoxyglucose positron
emission tomography (FDG-PET), including fewer
false-positive results in persistent primary sites
and in metastatic lymph nodes.15
One technical advantage of DWI is the ability to
acquire reproducible images in a short time peri-
od. One disadvantage is its magnetic susceptibility,
especially that due to dental fillings. One potential
solution to reduce susceptibility artifacts is acquis-
ition time parallel imaging. The overlapping ADC
values may be caused by partial volume eﬀects in
tiny structures and lowered ADC (false-positive) in
fibrosis and higher ADC in necrotic parts of recur-
rent tumor (false-negative).13
Diﬀusion sequences should be used routinely in
standard MRI studies as an adjunct to evaluated
response of cancers to nonsurgical treatment.14
14.2.2 Lymphomas
Lymphomas are tumors with high cellularity and
scarce stroma. The usual imaging analysis based
on the characterization of lymph node morphol-
ogy, size, and shape is not reliable to diﬀerentiate
benign from malignant nodes. Molecular imaging
is a noninvasive modality that has the potential of
tissue characterization based on the results of
DWI, spectroscopy, single-photon emission com-
puted tomography (SPECT), and PET-CT.16 Even
though ADC varies with b value, field strength, le-
sion size, and presence of necrosis, Maeda et al
found that the mean ADC for lymphoma is consis-
tent in 0.65 + −0.09 × 10–3 mm2/s7 range. According
to these authors an ADC of 0.76 × 10–3 mm2/s may
be used to distinguish between SCC and lympho-
ma with an accuracy of 98%.7 Sumi et al found dif-
ferences in ADC values in lymph nodes and benign
lymphadenopathy; the latter had higher values,
whereas
lymphomas
had
the
lowest
values
(▶Fig. 14.5), and metastatic lymph nodes had val-
ues that
were slightly higher
than
those
in
lymphomas.8
Compared to PET-CT, which is considered the
gold standard in the detection and monitoring of
lymphoma, DWI has sensitivity and specificity of
90% and 94%, respectively, for this purpose.16
IVIM-MRI may improve the use of DWI and allow
diﬀerentiation of benign from malignant head and
neck tumors. According to Sumi et al the ADC
Fig. 14.3
The same patient as in ▶Fig. 14.1 and ▶Fig. 14.2 with nasopharynx squamous cell carcinoma after 42
months of chemoradiation shows (a) significant reduction in the dimensions of the tumor and signal normalization on b
1,000 diffusion weighted imaging, (b) high signal on the apparent diffusion coefficient map, and (c) faint gadolinium
enhancement. The results suggest complete response after treatment, with fibrous scarring at the site of the primary
lesion.
DWI and DTI in Head and Neck Diseases
219

values and perfusion-related parameter values of
lymphomas were the smallest among all head and
neck tumors17
14.2.3 Orbital Tumors
Orbital tumors are very heterogeneous, and it is
sometimes a challenge to distinguish inflamma-
tory lesions from neoplasms. Diﬀusion restriction
is observed in high cellularity tumors; however,
not all malignant lesions are hypercellular, and
some benign tumors, such as meningioma, fibrous
histiocytoma, and dermoid cyst, have restricted
diﬀusion.18
According to Sepahdari et al the optimal ADC
threshold
for
diﬀerentiating
malignant
from
benign lesions is 1 × 10–3 mm2/s, and an ADC ratio
of 1.2 results in a 63% sensitivity, 84% specificity,
and 77% accuracy. The best results in malignant
tumors are among T2-dark infiltrative lesions
Fig. 14.4
Left cervical level 2 lymph node metastases from the hypopharynx squamous cell carcinoma. (a) Axial
enhanced computed tomography shows a heterogeneous node in contact with the left internal jugular vein. (b) After 4
months of chemoradiation a reduction in size and contrast enhancement of the lymph node are observed on the
enhanced axial T1-weighted image. (c) There is intermediate signal intensity on the b 1,000 diffusion sequence. (d)
There is high signal on the apparent diffusion coefficient map, which indicates response to treatment.
DWI and DTI in Head and Neck Diseases
220

because of their high cellularity. DWI is excellent
in diﬀerentiating lymphoma, which has a low ADC
from inflammatory pseudotumor that has high
ADC; however, there is an overlap between benign
and malignant lesions, particularly in the inter-
mediate ones19 (▶Fig. 14.6). Hemangioma is com-
posed of capillaries in a fibrous stroma. Some may
grow rapidly and have a tendency to bleed. DWI
shows low signal intensity, and their ADC value is
higher
compared
to
that
of
the
brain
(▶Fig. 14.7).20
ADC measurements in optic pathway gliomas
are controversial. According to Jost et al a mean
ADC value of 1.4 × 10–3 mm2/s did not correlate
with either clinical aggressiveness or presence of
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1). On the other
hand, Yeom et al found that optic pathway gliomas
with baseline ADC > 1.4 × 10–3 mm2/s, have higher
water content and are more aggressive, requiring
treatment earlier than those with lower ADC.21,22
MRI has an important role in the diagnosis of
retinoblastoma and also in its staging and determi-
nation of prognosis depending on tumor size, inva-
sion of the choroid and optic nerve, and presence
of bilateral tumors. Moreover, neovascularization
of the iris causes enhancement of the anterior eye
Fig. 14.5 B cell lymphoma. (a) Coronal T2-weighted imaging shows a hyperintense mass in the left cervical region. (b)
Contrast enhanced T1-weighted imaging shows enhancement of the lesion. (c) The lesion is hyperintense on diffusion
weighted imaging and (d) shows restricted diffusion on the apparent diffusion coefficient map.
DWI and DTI in Head and Neck Diseases
221

segment and is associated with tumor recurrence
and metastasis.23 According to Razek et al the ADC
value is higher in well-diﬀerentiated tumors than
in undiﬀerentiated retinoblastomas (▶Fig. 14.8).23
ADC is lower in larger tumors (15 mm), bilateral
lesions, and instances of optic nerve invasion. Cal-
cification is very common in retinoblastomas but
does not interfere in DWI measurements.24
Orbital meningiomas may be classified as pri-
mary if they arise from arachnoid cap cells within
the optic nerve sheath, or secondary if they corre-
spond to extension of tumors adjacent to the orbit,
which represent most of the orbital meningiomas.
According to Bano et al benign meningiomas may
have high cellularity and variable ADC values.25 Fil-
ippi et al found ADC values slightly higher than
those for brain parenchyma in noncalcified menin-
giomas. On the other hand, malignant and atypical
meningiomas that have conventional MRI features
of benign lesions had lower ADC values compared
to truly benign meningiomas.26
14.2.4 Salivary Gland Tumors
Although DWI enables diﬀerentiation of pleomor-
phic adenomas and myoepithelial adenomas from
malignant tumors, a final distinction between
benign and malignant parotid gland tumors based
on ADCs is not possible, owing to an overlap
between values for Warthin tumors and malignant
lesions. Recent studies have shown that the com-
bined use of DWI and DCE imaging significantly
improves diagnostic accuracy in salivary gland
tumors.27
Parotid
MRI
should
include
a
T2-
weighted sequence (without fat saturation), a DWI
sequence
with
ADC
maps,
and
a
perfusion
sequence with enhancement curve to facilitate a
correct diagnosis in more than 80% of patients27
(▶Fig. 14.9). For malignant and benign parotid
gland tumors, the value of combining results from
DWI
and
dynamic
contrast-enhanced
MRI
is
impressive when an ADC threshold is applied to
tumors that show a washout pattern on dynamic
Fig. 14.6
Rhabdomyosarcoma. (a) Coronal T2-weighted imaging shows a hyperintense mass in the right orbit. (b) T1-
weighted pre- and (c) postcontrast images show enhancement of the lesion. (d) The lesion is hyperintense on diffusion
weighted imaging and (e) shows restricted diffusion on the apparent diffusion coefficient map.
DWI and DTI in Head and Neck Diseases
222

contrast-enhanced
images
(ADC
threshold
of
1 × 10–3 mm2/s distinguished Warthin tumors from
carcinomas) and to tumors that show a plateau
pattern (ADC threshold of 1.4 × 10–3 mm2/s distin-
guished pleomorphic adenomas from carcinomas).
However, there is a significant overlap in the ADC
values and TIC patterns between benign and
malignant salivary gland tumors. Therefore, the
use of any single technique may not be eﬀective in
establishing
diﬀerentiation
for
salivary
gland
tumors of diﬀerent histologies.1,4
Another application of DWI is in patients with
symptoms of xerostomia after radiation treatment
when it might help to noninvasively detect the
underlying cause (if it originates from the parotid
gland) and provide information on parotid gland
function.28
14.2.5 Thyroid Gland Tumors
The investigation of thyroid nodules is routinely
performed with ultrasonography and fine-needle
aspiration biopsy (FNAB). However, the result can
be inconclusive in some patients, particularly for
follicular tumors. Recent work has shown that MRI
with DWI may assist in the evaluation of indeter-
minate nodules, especially if surgery is contem-
plated.
Wu
et al,
in
a
recent
meta-analysis,
assessed the accuracy of DWI in the diﬀerentiation
between benign and malignant thyroid nodules,
whose cytological analysis was indeterminate. The
sensitivity and specificity of DWI for detection of
malignant lesions among these nodules were 91%
and 93%, respectively, and the likelihood ratio was
99%.29
Fig. 14.7
Capillary hemangioma. (a) Coronal T2-weighted imaging shows a hyperintense mass in the right eyelid. (b)
Pre- and (c) postcontrast T1-weighted images show enhancement of the lesion. (d) Diffusion weighted imaging and (e)
apparent diffusion coefficient map shows no restricted diffusion. (f) Magnetic resonance venography shows vessels
communicating the hemangioma and superficial and deep venous drainage systems.
DWI and DTI in Head and Neck Diseases
223

DWI may also be helpful for select patients with
an incidentally discovered thyroid nodule who
require further investigation other than ultraso-
nography (▶Fig. 14.10). DWI studies have shown
that patients with Grave’s disease have signifi-
cantly higher thyroid ADC values than patients
with subacute and Hashimoto thyroiditis and sig-
nificantly lower ADCs than healthy volunteers.1
14.2.6 Paranasal Sinuses Tumors
The CT and MRI features of benign and malignant
sinonasal lesions are often nonspecific and over-
lapping. SCCs in the maxillary sinuses are the most
common sinonasal malignancies; however, small
round blue cell tumors (SRBCTs), such as neuroen-
docrine
carcinoma,
olfactory
neuroblastoma,
malignant melanoma, and lymphoma, may be dif-
ficult to diﬀerentiate from SCCs and even from
benign and inflammatory lesions. ADC maps may
be an eﬀective MRI tool for the diﬀerentiation of
benign/inflammatory
lesions
from
malignant
tumors in the sinonasal area. Sasaki et al showed
that overall ADC values of malignant tumors are
significantly lower than those of benign and
inflammatory lesions and that there is no signifi-
cant
diﬀerence
in
ADC
between
benign
and
inflammatory lesions. On ADC maps, percentages
of total tumor areas within malignant tumors hav-
ing extremely low or low ADC (▶Fig. 14.11) are
significantly greater than those within benign and
inflammatory lesions. ADC values also eﬀectively
discriminated lymphomas and SCCs from other
malignant tumors.30
14.2.7 Masticator Space Tumors
Razek et al showed that ADC values of masticator
space malignancies are significantly lower than
those of masticator space infections, with signifi-
cant diﬀerences in the ADC values between SCCs
and soft tissue sarcomas as well as between
Fig. 14.8 Retinoblastoma. (a) Axial T2-weighted imaging shows retinal detachment and vitreous hemorrhage in the left
eye. (b) T1-weighted images pre- and (c) postcontrast show tumor enhancement. (d) Diffusion weighted imaging and
(e) the apparent diffusion coefficient map demonstrate restricted diffusion in the tumor.
DWI and DTI in Head and Neck Diseases
224

bacterial and fungal infections. As soft tissue sar-
comas and non-Hodgkin lymphomas are more cel-
lular and contain more compact cells than SCC,
their ADC values are lower than those of nasopha-
ryngeal carcinoma and oral SCC that extend into
masticator space. CT and MRI cannot always diﬀer-
entiate chronic infections or inflammatory lesions
in the masticator space from malignancy, and
biopsy may be needed. DWI can help in this diﬀer-
entiation because the ADC values of inflammatory
lesions are higher than those of malignant tumors,
which show hypercellularity, a high ratio of intra-
cellular water to extracellular water content, and
restricted diﬀusion, whereas inflammatory lesions
show a low ratio of intracellular water to extracel-
lular water and unrestricted diﬀusion.31
14.2.8 Skull Base Tumors
DWI can help in guiding clinical decisions on inde-
terminate skull base lesions because biopsy is
associated with risks. Ginat et al showed that the
average minimum ADC values in malignant tumors
are lower than those found in benign tumors. No
significant diﬀerences between sarcomas and car-
cinomas were found for the ADC values or the nor-
malized
ADC
ratios.
Overall,
malignant
skull
lesions display lower ADC values than their benign
counterparts. Exceptions include classic chordo-
mas and low-grade chondrosarcomas, which show
high ADC values (▶Fig. 14.12 and ▶Fig. 14.13),
and eosinophilic granulomas, which show low
ADC values.18 Chordomas and chondrosarcomas
have distinct origins and generally distinct histo-
pathologic features and clinical behaviors, but it
may be diﬃcult to distinguish one from the other
on preoperative imaging. Yeom et al showed that
chondrosarcoma has the highest mean ADC values
and is significantly diﬀerent from classic chordoma
and poorly diﬀerentiated chordoma. Poorly diﬀer-
entiated chordoma was characterized by low T2
signal
intensity,
but
other
conventional
MRI
Fig. 14.9
Pleomorphic adenoma. (a) Axial T1-weighted imaging shows a low-intensity right parotid gland mass in the
deep lobe. (b) T2-weighted imaging shows hyperintense lesion, (c) SPGR post-gadolinium shows heterogeneous
contrast enhancement, (d) an ascending curve on the perfusion map and (e) color perfusion map.
DWI and DTI in Head and Neck Diseases
225

features did not distinguish it from other tumor
types. The diﬀerences in ADC values may be attrib-
uted to the extracellular matrices of these tumors.
The higher ADC values of chondrosarcomas, which
have varying degrees of cellularity within a cartila-
ginous stroma, likely reflect relatively free extrac-
ellular water motion. In contrast, the myxoid
stroma of chordomas likely impedes extracellular
water motion. In the case of very low diﬀusion, the
diagnosis of poorly diﬀerentiated chordoma may
be considered because water motion is further
reduced in this cellular tumor when compared
with classic chordoma and chondrosarcoma. This
tumor subtype, however, may be diﬃcult to distin-
guish from other highly cellular neoplasms of the
skull base, such as rhabdomyosarcoma and primi-
tive neuroectodermal tumors. The chondroid var-
iant of chordoma may show stromal features that
mimic the hyaline cartilage seen in chondrosarco-
ma, whereas a subset of chondrosarcoma may
show a myxoid matrix characteristic of chordoma.
Both tumors may have areas of calcification and
even ossification. Because of the close relationship
between histology and tissue water properties,
ADC may fail as a sole predictor of diagnosis in
such cases of histopathologic crossover and varia-
bility but can still provide worthwhile information
about the presumptive diagnosis of a skull base le-
sion. Despite higher ADC among irradiated chordo-
mas, the values were still lower than those of
chondrosarcomas.32
14.3 Inflammatory Process
14.3.1 Cholesteatoma
One of the most useful applications of DWI in the
head and neck is the diagnosis of cholesteatomas.
CT has been considered the method of choice for
imaging inflammatory process of the middle ear,
including
cholesteatoma.33 However,
in
recent
years, several studies have shown an increasing
role of DWI in the evaluation of cholesteatomas,
especially in their postoperative follow-up. The
performance of CT is unsatisfactory in diﬀerentiat-
ing cholesteatoma from other soft tissue masses of
Fig. 14.10 Thyroid adenoma in the right lobe. Axial T2-weighted shows a hyperintense nodule in the right lobe (a), with
high signal diffusion on b 0 (b) and b 1,000 (c), and (d) the apparent diffusion coefficient map without restricted
diffusion in the nodule.
DWI and DTI in Head and Neck Diseases
226

the middle ear or changes in the surgical bed, such
as granulation tissue, fibrous tissue, edematous
mucosa, and cholesterol granulomas.
MRI protocols for diagnosis of cholesteatoma
include T1- and T2-weighted sequences associated
with DWI. A delayed postcontrast T1 sequence can
also be included. Cholesteatoma is an avascular le-
sion and does not enhance, even in the delayed
postcontrast sequence. Other tissues, such as gran-
ulation and fibrous tissues, enhance after gadoli-
nium administration (▶Fig. 14.14). De Foer et al
reported that DWI has significantly higher sensi-
tivity and specificity than delayed gadolinium-
enhanced T1-weighted sequences in the assess-
ment of cholesteatoma. Another advantage of DWI
is that it is faster and does not require the admin-
istration of gadolinium.33,34 It is important to eval-
uate all the sequences acquired, including the
conventional spin-echo sequences, in order to
make the
correct
diagnosis
of cholesteatoma,
because there are other causes of restricted diﬀu-
sion in temporal bone, which include hemorrhage
following recent surgery, cerumen in the external
ear canal, Silastic sheets, bone pate, abscess, and
cholesterol granuloma.35
Cholesteatomas are hyperintense on DWI due to
both restricted diﬀusion and T2 shine-through.
Two diﬀerent DWI techniques may be used in the
evaluation of cholesteatoma: Echo planar imaging
(EPI) and non-EPI sequences. EPI-DWI has limited
spatial resolution and susceptibility artifacts due
to field inhomogeneity in the temporal bone caus-
ing a characteristic high intensity curvilinear arti-
fact (▶Fig. 14.15). These artifacts can obscure a
small cholesteatoma. It is known that a size limit
for detection of cholesteatoma on EPI-DWI is
approximately 5 mm. Non-EPI sequences result in
thinner section thickness and a higher imaging
matrix and are less prone to susceptibility arti-
facts.33,34
Non-EPI sequences improve diagnostic accuracy
for acquired middle ear cholesteatomas in compar-
ison with EPI ones detecting smaller lesions, (~
2 mm). These sequences have also been shown to
have high reliability in detecting recurrent choles-
teatoma with good interobserver agreement and
include single-shot turbo spin- echo sequences—
Half-Fourier single-shot turbo spin-echo (HASTE)
(▶Fig. 14.16) and periodically rotated overlapping
parallel
lines
with
enhanced
reconstruction
Fig. 14.11
Squamous cell carcinoma of the left maxillary sinus. Axial images show a left maxillary sinus mass which is
isointense on (a) T1-weighted imaging and (b) T2-weighted imaging, (c) shows contrast enhancement. (d) Diffusion
weighted imaging and (e) the apparent diffusion coefficient map demostrate restricted diffusion in the tumor.
DWI and DTI in Head and Neck Diseases
227

(PROPELLER) DWI.36 Currently, DWI is considered
an alternative to second look surgery for screening
for, cholesteatoma, helping to avoid unnecessary
surgeries. Recurrence of cholesteatoma after surgi-
cal excision is frequent, especially after closed
mastoidectomy. Before DWI a second-look surgery
was mandatory and considered a standard proce-
dure to be performed 6 to 12 months after a closed
mastoidectomy.36
14.4 Other Inflammatory Proc-
esses
DWI may also be used in the evaluation of other
inflammatory and infectious lesions of the head
and neck. Data from recent studies suggest that
DWI can distinguish abscesses from cystic lesions
and tumors.6,31,37,38 The diﬀerences in ADC values
of these lesions may be explained by their viscos-
ity. The mobility of water protons in cystic lesions
and abscesses is influenced by their viscosity and
protein concentrations. This water mobility will be
lower in a liquid with high proteins and viscosity.6
Razek et al reported that branchial cleft cysts have
the highest ADC values of the cystic lesions due to
their low protein contents, whereas thyroglossal
duct cysts and Tornwaldt cysts showed slightly
lower ADC values due to their higher amounts of
proteins.38
Abscesses cause restricted diﬀusion of water
molecules and have high signal on DWI due to sev-
eral factors, such as the presence of pus with high
viscosity, inflammatory cells, proteins, cellular
debris, and bacteria, whereas necrotic tumors
present lower signal on diﬀusion because the
movement of water molecules is facilitated in
these
lesions
due
to
the
presence
of
fewer
Fig. 14.12 Clival chordoma. Axial images show central skull base mass, which is (a) isointense on T1-weighted imaging,
(b) hyperintense on T2-weighted imaging, and (c) shows contrast enhancement, without restricted diffusion in the
tumor (d) on the diffusion weighted imaging and (e) the apparent diffusion coefficient map.
DWI and DTI in Head and Neck Diseases
228

inflammatory
cells
and
a
more
serous
fluid
(▶Fig. 14.17). Koc et al showed that the ADC val-
ues of abscesses and lymphadenitis were lower
than those of tumor necrosis.37
On the contrary, bacterial infections of the mas-
ticator space in patients with necrotizing otitis
externa and odontogenic infections show unre-
stricted
diﬀusion
with
high
ADC
values
(▶Fig. 14.18). Fungal infections have smaller over-
all ADC values and greater percentages of total
tumor areas with extremely low or low ADC values
among all inflammatory and benign lesions.31
14.4.1 Sinusitis
Secretions within the sinuses may show great vari-
ability, depending on their composition. Extremely
thick secretions produce signal voids on both T1
and T2 sequences and may simulate normal aer-
ated sinuses. Normal sinonasal secretions are pre-
dominantly watery and are observed as having
high signal on T2- and low signal on T1-weighted
imaging. In chronically obstructed sinuses, the
amount of free water decreases and protein con-
centration
and viscosity
increase,
resulting
in
hypointensity on T2- and hyperintensity on T1-
weighted imaging. There is a correlation between
ADC values and the amount of the proteins in the
secretions.39 In addition to protein concentration,
the ADC values are also influenced if the infection
is bacterial or fungal and by the presence of hem-
orrhage. It is reported that fungal infections have
ADC values lower than bacterial ones and are sim-
ilar to hematomas. Organized and coagulated areas
within a hematoma also interfere with diﬀusion.30
14.4.2 Orbital Infections
DWI can be used in evaluation of inflammatory
processes of the orbit. Fluid-attenuated inversion
recovery
(FLAIR)
and
enhanced
T1-weighted
images are sensitive for detection of inflammatory
processes in the uvea, muscles, and vitreous cham-
ber;
however,
DWI
is
better
for
detecting
Fig. 14.13
Low-grade chondrosarcoma. Axial (a) T1-weighted image shows a left-sided isointense mass, (b)
hyperintense on T2-weighted image, (c) enhancement post gadolinium, and no restricted diffusion on (d) diffusion
weighted imaging and (e) in the apparent diffusion coefficient map.
DWI and DTI in Head and Neck Diseases
229

subchoroidal and subretinal abscesses. According
to Bhuta et al the ADC values of the abscesses are
low compared with those of the normal vitreous40
(▶Fig. 14.19).
14.4.3 Optic Neuritis
Optic neuritis may be ischemic, demyelinating, or
infectious. MRI is useful for diagnosing optic neuri-
tis, which shows hyperintensity on T2, contrast en-
hancement, and restricted diﬀusion. The ADC
value is low in an early phase (▶Fig. 14.20) and
high in a chronic phase.
DWI of the optic nerve is challenging because
this is a small, mobile structure surrounded by flu-
id, and susceptibility artifacts from adjacent struc-
tures are common. Images in the coronal plane
with DTI can improve infarct detection.41 Ischemic
optic neuropathy (ION) occurs in the middle-aged
and
elderly
population,
resulting
in
varying
degrees of blindness.
The changes of ADC in ION are theoretically sim-
ilar to those seen in cerebral ischemia. The ADC is
lower within 24 hours (related to cytotoxic ede-
ma), gradually increases to normal around 7 days,
and remains high in the chronic phase because of
vasogenic
edema,
axonal
loss,
and
demyelination.42
14.4.4 Diﬀusion Tensor Imaging
A number of recently published papers have
shown advancements of DTI in neuroradiology
with
increasing
clinical
importance.
However,
Fig. 14.14
Cholesteatoma. (a) Axial computed tomography shows a round, soft tissue mass in the anterior left
epitympanum (arrow) and mild erosion of the head of the malleus. (b) Axial T2-weighted imaging shows that the lesion
is hyperintense, (c) there is no contrast enhancement on enhanced coronal T1-weighted imaging, and (d) the mass is
hyperintense on axial and (e) coronal half-Fourier acquisition single-shot turbo-spin-echo diffusion weighted MR (DW-
HASTE).
DWI and DTI in Head and Neck Diseases
230

applications in the head are yet not well estab-
lished. A feasibility study performed in 2009 on a
3 T magnet demonstrated that it was possible to
define the relationship between the inferior alveo-
lar nerves and adjacent tissues by using DTI and
tractography.43
This
information
can
prevent
injuries
during
surgical
removal
of
masses.15
Another possible application could be the use of
DTI to characterize the courses of large cervical
nerves, such as the vagus, the phrenic, and the
sympathetic chains, for planning in the resection
of cervical schwannomas and neurofibromas.
Fig. 14.15 Cholesteatoma. Axial images demonstrate a lesion in the right epitympanum with hyperintensity on (a) T2-
weighted imaging and (b) no enhancement on T1-weighted imaging postcontrast (arrow). There are enhancing
granulation tissues surrounding the nonenhancing cholesteatoma. (c) Axial echo-planar imaging diffusion weighted
image (EPI-DWI) and (d) periodically rotated overlapping parallel lines with enhanced reconstruction (PROPELLER) DWI
show restricted diffusion, which is better demonstrated on the (d) PROPELLER sequence. Also, notice the high-intensity
curvilinear artifact in the EPI-DWI.
DWI and DTI in Head and Neck Diseases
231

New applications that are beginning to be
studied are the evaluation of the optic pathways in
traumatic, neoplastic, and inflammatory lesions,4,
44 as well as evaluating the auditory pathways in
cases of neurosensory hearing loss and tinnitus.14
DTI may play a role in preoperative evaluation of
patients with large vestibular schwannomas. The
position of the facial nerves in cerebellopontine
angles in relation to the tumors can be predicted
using DTI. Knowledge of the location and course of
the facial nerve is necessary to prevent its injury
during the surgery.45,46
14.5 Summary
The use of DWI in head and neck imaging is recent,
and there are few articles addressing this issue,
most of them with small samples. There are also
some technical diﬃculties, such as susceptibility
artifacts and low resolution of diﬀusion images
and ADC maps, in this complex anatomical area.
The main indications for DWI in the head and neck
are tissue characterization for primary tumors and
nodal metastases, prediction and monitoring of
treatment response, diﬀerentiation of recurrent
tumor from post therapeutic changes, and evalua-
tion of inflammatory and infectious lesions.
Head and neck malignant tumors in general
have high cellularity, hence they show greater
restriction of diﬀusion and a lower ADC com-
pared to normal tissues and benign tumors. Of
the
malignant
tumors,
lymphomas
tend
to
have some of the lowest ADC values, whereas
SCC, the most prevalent tumor of the head and
neck
region,
tends
to
have
intermediated
values.
One of the most useful applications of DWI in
the head and neck is in the evaluation of choles-
teatomas, mainly in the postoperative follow-up.
The other indications are also described in this
Fig. 14.16
Recurrent left cholesteatoma after bilateral mastoidectomy. (a) Axial computed tomography shows
obliteration of both surgical cavities by soft tissue material. (b) Hyperintense tissues on axial T2-weighted imaging with
peripheral contrast enhancement are seen (c,d) bilaterally, and there is hyperintensity of the lesion on the left side on
the (e) axial and coronal (f) half-Fourier acquisition single-shot turbo-spin-echo diffusion weighted MR (DW-HASTE).
DWI and DTI in Head and Neck Diseases
232

Fig. 14.17
Infected second branchial cleft cyst. (a) Axial and (b) coronal T2-weighted images show a hyperintense
lesion located anterior to the left sternocleidomastoid muscle, posterior to the left submandibular gland, and
anterolateral to the left carotid artery. (c) Axial T1-weighted images pre- and (d) post-gadolinium show a thick rim of
enhancement surrounding the lesion secondary to acute inflammation. (e) Diffusion weighted imaging shows
hyperintensity in the lesion. (f) The apparent diffusion coefficient map shows restricted diffusion due to the infectious
process.
DWI and DTI in Head and Neck Diseases
233

Fig. 14.18
Necrotizing external otitis
complicated with skull base osteo-
myelitis in a diabetic patient. (a) Axial
bone window computed tomography
shows right-sided middle ear opacifi-
cation with multiple areas of bone
erosions involving the mandibular
condyle, zygomatic arch, floor of the
middle ear, petrous apex, and clivus.
(b) Axial T2-weighted imaging and (c,
d) contrast-enhanced T1-weighted
imaging demonstrate an inflammatory
soft tissue in the right temporal bone
with extension into the temporoman-
dibular joint. Notice the enhancing
tissue extending from the right tem-
poral bone into mastication, para-
pharyngeal, retropharyngeal, and
prevertebral spaces. (e) Diffusion
weighted imaging and (f) the apparent
diffusion coefficient map show no
restricted diffusion.
DWI and DTI in Head and Neck Diseases
234

Fig. 14.19
Abscess after vitrectomy. (a) Axial T2-weighted imaging shows bilateral vitrectomy and surrounding
hyperintensity in the left eye. (b) T1-weighted images pre- and (c) postgadolinium show contrast enhancement
posteriorly in the left globe, suggesting abscess and endophthalmitis. (d) Diffusion weighted imaging shows
hyperintensity. (e) The apparent diffusion coefficient map shows restricted diffusion in the abscess.
DWI and DTI in Head and Neck Diseases
235

Fig. 14.20 Optic nerve ischemia related to giant cell arteritis. (a) Coronal T2-weighted imaging shows hyperintensity in
the left optic nerve. (b) Diffusion weighted imaging shows hyperintensity in the left optic nerve. (c) The apparent
diffusion coefficient map confirms restricted diffusion. (d) Axial T1-weighted imaging after gadolinium shows contrast
enhancement of the pterygopalatine and temporal fossae with arteritis (arrows).
DWI and DTI in Head and Neck Diseases
236

chapter, divided by location and type of involve-
ment, and tumoral or inflammatory process.
References
[1] Thoeny HC, De Keyzer F, King AD. Diﬀusion weighted MR
imaging in the head and neck. Radiology 2012; 263(1): 19–
32
[2] Emonts P, Bourgeois P, Lemort M, Flamen P. Functional
imaging of head and neck cancers. Curr Opin Oncol 2009; 21
(3): 212–217
[3] Purandare NC, Rangarajan V. Newer imaging techniques in
head and neck cancer. Indian J Surg Oncol 2010; 1(2): 186–
193
[4] Sumi M, Nakamura T. Head and neck tumours: combined
MRI assessment based on IVIM and TIC analyses for the dif-
ferentiation of tumors of diﬀerent histological types. Eur
Radiol 2014; 24(1): 223–231
[5] Chawla S, Kim S, Wang S, Poptani H. Diﬀusion weighted
imaging in head and neck cancers. Future Oncol 2009; 5(7):
959–975
[6] Wang J, Takashima S, Takayama F, et al. Head and neck
lesions: characterization with diﬀusion weighted echo-pla-
nar MR imaging. Radiology 2001; 220(3): 621–630
[7] Maeda M, Kato H, Sakuma H, Maier SE, Takeda K. Useful-
ness of the apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient in line scan dif-
fusion
weighted
imaging
for
distinguishing
between
squamous cell carcinomas and malignant lymphomas of
the head and neck. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2005; 26(5):
1186–1192
[8] Sumi M, Sakihama N, Sumi T, et al. Discrimination of meta-
static cervical lymph nodes with diﬀusion weighted MR
imaging in patients with head and neck cancer. AJNR Am J
Neuroradiol 2003; 24(8): 1627–1634
[9] Surov A, Ryl I, Bartel-Friedrich S, Wienke A, Kösling S. Diﬀu-
sion weighted imaging of nasopharyngeal adenoid hyper-
trophy. Acta Radiol 2014(May): 22
[10] Driessen JP, van Kempen PM, van der Heijden GJ, et al. Diﬀu-
sion weighted imaging in head and neck squamous cell car-
cinomas: A systematic review. Head Neck 2013(Dec): 17
[11] Wu LM, Xu JR, Liu MJ, et al. Value of magnetic resonance
imaging for nodal staging in patients with head and neck
squamous cell carcinoma: a meta-analysis. Acad Radiol
2012; 19(3): 331–340
[12] Vandecaveye V, De Keyzer F, Vander Poorten V, et al. Head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma: value of diﬀusion
weighted MR imaging for nodal staging. Radiology 2009;
251(1): 134–146
[13] Tshering Vogel DW, Zbaeren P, Geretschlaeger A, Vermathen
P, De Keyzer F, Thoeny HC. Diﬀusion weighted MR imaging
including bi-exponential fitting for the detection of recur-
rent or residual tumour after (chemo)radiotherapy for lar-
yngeal and hypopharyngeal cancers. Eur Radiol 2013; 23(2):
562–569
[14] Trojanowska A. Squamous cell carcinoma of the head and
neck-The role of diﬀusion and perfusion imaging in tumor
recurrence and follow-up. Rep Pract Oncol Radiother 2011;
16(6): 207–212
[15] Srinivasan A, Mohan S, Mukherji SK. Biologic imaging of
head and neck cancer: the present and the future. AJNR Am
J Neuroradiol 2012; 33(4): 586–594
[16] Herneth AM, Mayerhoefer M, Schernthaner R, Ba-Ssalamah
A, Czerny Ch, Fruehwald-Pallamar J. Diﬀusion weighted
imaging: lymph nodes. Eur J Radiol 2010; 76(3): 398–406
[17] Sumi M, Nakamura T. Head and neck tumors: assessment of
perfusion-related
parameters
and
diﬀusion
coeﬃcients
based on the intravoxel incoherent motion model. AJNR Am
J Neuroradiol 2013; 34(2): 410–416
[18] Ginat DT, Mangla R, Yeaney G, Johnson M, Ekholm S. Diﬀu-
sion weighted imaging for diﬀerentiating benign from
malignant skull lesions and correlation with cell density. AJR
Am J Roentgenol 2012; 198(6): W597–601
[19] Sepahdari AR, Aakalu VK, Setabutr P, Shiehmorteza M,
Naheedy JH, Mafee MF. Indeterminate orbital masses:
restricted diﬀusion at MR imaging with echo-planar diﬀu-
sion weighted imaging predicts malignancy. Radiology
2010; 256(2): 554–564
[20] Kamano H, Noguchi T, Yoshiura T, et al. Intraorbital lobular
capillary hemangioma (pyogenic granuloma). Radiat Med
2008; 26(10): 609–612
[21] Jost SC, Ackerman JW, Garbow JR, Manwaring LP, Gutmann
DH, McKinstry RC. Diﬀusion weighted and dynamic con-
trast-enhanced imaging as markers of clinical behavior in
children with optic pathway glioma. Pediatr Radiol 2008; 38
(12): 1293–1299
[22] Yeom KW, Lober RM, Andre JB, et al. Prognostic role for dif-
fusion weighted imaging of pediatric optic pathway glioma.
J Neurooncol 2013; 113(3): 479–483
[23] Abdel Razek AA, Elkhamary S, Al-Mesfer S, Alkatan HM. Cor-
relation of apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient at 3 T with prog-
nostic parameters of retinoblastoma. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
2012; 33(5): 944–948
[24] Sepahdari AR, Kapur R, Aakalu VK, Villablanca JP, Mafee MF.
Diﬀusion weighted imaging of malignant ocular masses: ini-
tial results and directions for further study. AJNR Am J Neu-
roradiol 2012; 33(2): 314–319
[25] Bano S, Waraich MM, Khan MA, Buzdar SA, Manzur S. Diag-
nostic value of apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcient for the accu-
rate
assessment
and
diﬀerentiation
of
intracranial
meningiomas.
Acta
Radiol
Short
Rep
2013;
2(7):
2047981613512484
[26] Filippi CG, Edgar MA, Uluğ AM, Prowda JC, Heier LA, Zim-
merman RD. Appearance of meningiomas on diﬀusion
weighted images: correlating diﬀusion constants with histo-
pathologic findings. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2001; 22(1):
65–72
[27] Espinoza S, Halimi P. Interpretation pearls for MR imaging of
parotid gland tumor. Eur Ann Otorhinolaryngol Head Neck
Dis 2013; 130(1): 30–35
[28] Zhang Y, Ou D, Gu Y, et al. Diﬀusion weighted MR imaging
of salivary glands with gustatory stimulation: comparison
before and after radiotherapy. Acta Radiol 2013; 54(8): 928–
933
[29] Wu LM, Chen XX, Li YL, et al. On the utility of quantitative
diﬀusion weighted MR imaging as a tool in diﬀerentiation
between malignant and benign thyroid nodules. Acad Radiol
2014; 21(3): 355–363
[30] Sasaki M, Eida S, Sumi M, Nakamura T. Apparent diﬀusion
coeﬃcient mapping for sinonasal diseases: diﬀerentiation of
benign and malignant lesions. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2011;
32(6): 1100–1106
[31] Abdel Razek AA, Nada N. Role of diﬀusion weighted MRI in
diﬀerentiation of masticator space malignancy from infec-
tion. Dentomaxillofac Radiol 2013; 42(4): 20120183
[32] Yeom KW, Lober RM, Mobley BC, et al. Diﬀusion weighted
MRI: distinction of skull base chordoma from chondrosarco-
ma. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2013; 34(5): 1056–1061, S1
[33] De Foer B, Vercruysse JP, Spaepen M, et al. Diﬀusion
weighted magnetic resonance imaging of the temporal
bone. Neuroradiology 2010; 52(9): 785–807
DWI and DTI in Head and Neck Diseases
237

[34] De Foer B, Vercruysse JP, Bernaerts A, et al. Middle ear cho-
lesteatoma: non-echo-planar diﬀusion weighted MR imag-
ing versus delayed gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted MR
imaging—value in detection. Radiology 2010; 255(3): 866–
872
[35] Lingam RK, Khatri P, Hughes J, Singh A. Apparent diﬀusion
coeﬃcients for detection of postoperative middle ear cho-
lesteatoma on non-echo-planar diﬀusion weighted images.
Radiology 2013; 269(2): 504–510
[36] Li PM, Linos E, Gurgel RK, Fischbein NJ, Blevins NH. Evaluat-
ing the utility of non-echo-planar diﬀusion weighted imag-
ing in the preoperative evaluation of cholesteatoma: a
meta-analysis. Laryngoscope 2013; 123(5): 1247–1250
[37] Koç O, Paksoy Y, Erayman I, Kivrak AS, Arbag H. Role of dif-
fusion weighted MR in the discrimination diagnosis of the
cystic and/or necrotic head and neck lesions. Eur J Radiol
2007; 62(2): 205–213
[38] Abdel Razek AA, Gaballa G, Elhawarey G, Megahed AS, Hafez
M, Nada N. Characterization of pediatric head and neck
masses with diﬀusion weighted MR imaging. Eur Radiol
2009; 19(1): 201–208
[39] White ML, Zhang Y. Sinonasal secretions: evaluation by dif-
fusion weighted imaging and apparent diﬀusion coeﬃ-
cients. Clin Imaging 2008; 32(5): 382–386
[40] Bhuta S, Hsu CC, Kwan GN. Scedosporium apiospermum
endophthalmitis: diﬀusion weighted imaging in detecting
subchoroidal abscess. Clin Ophthalmol 2012; 6: 1921–1924
[41] Iwasawa T, Matoba H, Ogi A, et al. Diﬀusion weighted imag-
ing of the human optic nerve: a new approach to evaluate
optic neuritis in multiple sclerosis. Magn Reson Med 1997;
38(3): 484–491
[42] Hickman SJ, Wheeler-Kingshott CA, Jones SJ, et al. Optic
nerve diﬀusion measurement from diﬀusion weighted
imaging in optic neuritis. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2005; 26
(4): 951–956
[43] Akter M, Hirai T, Minoda R, et al. Diﬀusion tensor tractogra-
phy in the head-and-neck region using a clinical 3-T MR
scanner. Acad Radiol 2009; 16(7): 858–865
[44] Wang MY, Qi PH, Shi DP. Diﬀusion tensor imaging of the
optic nerve in subacute anterior ischemic optic neuropathy
at 3 T. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2011; 32(7): 1188–1194
[45] Roundy N, Delashaw JB, Cetas JS. Preoperative identification
of the facial nerve in patients with large cerebellopontine
angle tumors using high-density diﬀusion tensor imaging. J
Neurosurg 2012; 116(4): 697–702
[46] Gerganov VM, Giordano M, Samii M, Samii A. Diﬀusion ten-
sor imaging-based fiber tracking for prediction of the posi-
tion of the facial nerve in relation to large vestibular
schwannomas. J Neurosurg 2011; 115(6): 1087–1093
DWI and DTI in Head and Neck Diseases
238

15 Future Applications of Diﬀusion Weighted
Imaging: Diﬀusional Kurtosis and Other Nongaussian
Diﬀusion Techniques
Maria Gisele Matheus
Key Points
●Diﬀusional kurtosis imaging (DKI) is a nongaus-
sian diﬀusion technique that shows higher sen-
sitivity and specificity compared with diﬀusion
tensor imaging (DTI) in identifying white and
gray matter microstructure abnormalities.
●DKI also enables more accurate WM tractogra-
phy in anatomical locations of fiber crossing
when compared to diﬀusion tensor imaging.
●Diﬀusion spectrum imaging (DSI) and Q-ball
imaging are high b value diﬀusion techniques
that are being developed, but still should be
validated for clinical use.
15.1 Introduction
Diﬀusional kurtosis imaging (DKI) is a technique
that shows higher sensitivity and specificity com-
pared with diﬀusion tensor imaging (DTI) in iden-
tifying abnormalities in tissue microstructure.1
DKI complements DTI by assessing measures of
nongaussian distribution in diﬀusion.2 To analyze
gaussian
versus
nongaussian
diﬀusion
let’s
remember that water molecule diﬀusion is a ran-
dom process and may be depicted by a probability
distribution. For homogeneous solutions, molecu-
lar diﬀusion follows a gaussian curve form of
distribution, with the width of the distribution
curve proportional to the diﬀusion coeﬃcient
(▶Fig. 15.1a). This is the assumption used by DTI,
resembling the classical diﬀusion example of a
drop of ink in a bucket of still water (▶Fig. 15.1b).
Data from water molecules diﬀusing in the brain
can be used to probe tissue microstructure nonin-
vasively with diﬀusion magnetic resonance imag-
ing
(MRI)
techniques.
Diﬀusion
MRI
is
most
sensitive to the microstructural spaces of 10 μm,
which is the typical distance that a water molecule
diﬀuses during approximately 100 ms (the interval
of time needed to acquire an individual diﬀusion
signal). Thus diﬀusion MRI is ideal for investigating
cell-sized microstructural features and represents
a unique ability to noninvasively assess the micro-
structure of human brain tissue in vivo. Using the
gaussian model approximation, DTI can be used,
Fig. 15.1
(a) Graphic shows diffusion displacement (S) probability (P). (b) Diagram shows random diffusion
displacement in a homogeneous solution, which resembles a drop of ink in a still bucket of water.
Future Applications of Nongaussian Diﬀusion Techniques
239

for example, to measure the anisotropic properties
of white matter by exploring the coherent diﬀu-
sion along axonal fibers. However, the human
brain does not resemble a homogeneous solution;
it has a variety of compartments, including diﬀer-
ent types of cells with variable degrees of mem-
brane permeability (depending on channels and
membrane properties), and distinct intra- and
extracellular contents. This is quite diﬀerent from
the example of a drop of ink in a bucket of still
water (▶Fig. 15.2). Therefore, the gaussian distri-
bution assumption does not truly reflect the prob-
abilistic distribution of water molecules diﬀusing
in brain tissue.3,4,5
More specifically, there are two critical issues for
which DTI is limited. The first one involves fiber
tractography; the DTI model is incapable of resolv-
ing multiple fiber orientations (i.e., crossing fibers).
The second issue is that DTI samples only a fraction
of the information contained in the dynamics of
molecular water diﬀusion; it does not denote mul-
tiple
distinct
intravoxel
compartments
and
is
therefore not capable of depicting intravoxel heter-
ogeneity.6,7,8,9,10 Interestingly, these two limitations
are closely related to each other, so that addressing
the second leads to a resolution of the first.
Several strategies have been studied to solve
these problems; DKI is one of them and it opens
the opportunity for further microstructural assess-
ment. The origin of the word kurtosis comes from
the Greek word kyrtos, meaning curved or arching.
In probabilistic theory and statistics, kurtosis is a
description of a dimensionless metric of “peaked-
ness” (width of peak) for a probability distribution
of a random value. Excess of kurtosis, measured by
DKI, denotes the deviation of a probability distri-
bution from a gaussian form (▶Fig. 15.3). DKI is
not a distinctly new way of acquiring diﬀusion
images, but it is a diﬀerent way to investigate the
information that is contained within the diﬀusion
data.2,3,4,5,11
Fig. 15.2 (a) Diagram shows a heterogeneous medium that resembles brain tissue, before a drop of ink is introduced.
(b) Diagram shows the uneven diffusivity of a drop of ink in the heterogeneous medium.
Fig. 15.3 Diagram shows displacement (S) probability
(P). K = 0 curve shows a purely gaussian distribution.
K > 0 curve shows more weight in the center when
compared to the gaussian form. K < 0 curve shows less
weight in the center.
Future Applications of Nongaussian Diﬀusion Techniques
240

15.2 DKI Acquisition
DKI can be obtained on modern clinical MRI sys-
tems within a clinically acceptable timeframe of 6
to 7 minutes. DKI data are acquired in a similar
fashion compared with conventional DTI, but
require at least three b values (up to 2,000 s/mm2),
which is somewhat higher than typically used in
DTI (1,000 s/mm2). DKI is related to q-space imag-
ing methods, but it is relatively less demanding
in terms of imaging time, hardware requirement,
and postprocessing eﬀort compared with other
techniques.
In order to obtain the DKI with a reasonable
degree of precision, b values somewhat larger than
those employed in DTI are necessary so that the
departure from linearity is measurable. In the
brain, b values of ~ 2,000 s/mm2 are suﬃcient. The
precision of DKI estimates decreases rapidly if the
maximum
b
values
are
reduced
substantially
below 2,000 s/mm2.1
Additionally, the DKI sequence is acquired with
at least 15 diﬀusion gradient directions. Although
this is the minimum number of diﬀusion direc-
tions required, we typically acquire 30 directions
for two reasons: first, oversampling of the diﬀu-
sion directions makes the final estimates for the
DKI metrics less sensitive to motion artifacts, such
as
those
caused
by
cardiac-induced
brain
pulsations; second, by using more directions one
eﬀectively averages some of the higher angular fre-
quencies. In addition, 30 directions is a particularly
convenient choice because the diﬀusion directions
can be chosen to lie on the vertices of a truncated
icosahedron.
Finally, DKI maintains the ability to estimate all
standard DTI metrics, including mean, axial, and
radial diﬀusivity (respectively denoted as MD, D║,
D┴) and fractional anisotropy (FA), and one can
also generate kurtosis metrics, such as mean, axial,
and radial kurtosis (similarly, denoted as MK, K║,
K┴)2,3,4,11,12,13,14 (▶Fig. 15.4).
15.2.1 Postprocessing
In the conventional analysis of DTI data, the loga-
rithm of the signal intensity is fit to a linear func-
tion of the b value, and an estimate for the
diﬀusion coeﬃcient is extracted. In the DKI calcu-
lation the data are fitted to a quadratic function,
which allows for estimates of both the diﬀusion
and kurtosis tensors. From these tensors, DTI and
DKI metrics are then calculated. Most scanner con-
soles provide DWI and FA calculations, as well as
DTI
tractography
automatically
(▶Fig.
15.5).
The resolution is somewhat inferior to that of
conventional clinical DWI, but it maintains diag-
nostic quality (▶Fig. 15.5a). Postprocessing also
Fig. 15.4 Images show the postprocessed diffusion tensor imaging and diffusional kurtosis imaging metrics of a normal
patient. FA, fractional anisotropy. (With permission from Jensen JH, Helpern JA. MRI quantification of non-Gaussian
water diffusion by kurtosis analysis. NMR Biomed 2010; 23(7): page 707.)
Future Applications of Nongaussian Diﬀusion Techniques
241

includes coregistration, averaging, and (optionally)
smoothing.
Noise, motion, and imaging artifacts can intro-
duce errors into the estimated tensors, and suﬃ-
ciently large errors can cause the tensor estimates
to be physically and/or biologically erroneous. Typ-
ically, it is required that the diﬀusion coeﬃcients
be positive and that the kurtosis lie between a pre-
defined minimum value, Kmin, and a predefined
maximum value, Kmax. Any outlier values are sys-
tematically brought into this range. For example, if
the diﬀusion coeﬃcient is calculated to be less
than zero, then both the diﬀusion coeﬃcient and
the kurtosis are reset to zero. In this manner, the
extrinsic and intrinsic artifacts eﬀects on the
final diﬀusion metric maps can be substantially
reduced.
There are a number of factors that can lead to
errors in DKI values. These include regions with
short T2 relaxation (e.g., regions with high iron
content leading to poor signal:noise), gradient
pulse duration eﬀects, motion, inaccuracies of the
fitting model, not fully accounting for imaging gra-
dient contributions to b values, and system noise.
However, the reproducibility of DKI measures of
nongaussianity is similar to that for standard DTI
metrics.4,11,13,15
15.3 DKI Metrics Interpretation:
Applications in the Human Brain
Here we review the accumulating evidence that
DKI can be a powerful and feasible investigational
tool to assess microstructural changes in several
developmental and pathological processes. Kurto-
sis metrics may act as the earliest biomarker to
identify some of these pathological processes. The
principal advantage of DKI metrics compared with
other diﬀusion metrics is that they are sensitive
measures of tissue structure organization and
complexity at a micrometer scale believed to arise
from diﬀusion barriers, such as cell membranes,
organelles, and water compartments (e.g., extrac-
ellular and intracellular). Another advantage is that
DKI is sensitive not only to white matter (WM)
microstructural changes but also to gray matter
(GM) abnormalities.2,14 DKI also enables more
accurate WM tractography in anatomical locations
of fiber crossing when compared to DTI (see
▶Fig. 15.6).
One typical example of DTI metrics interpreta-
tion
is
increased
mean
diﬀusivity
(MD)
and
decreased FA, indicating loss of WM integrity.
Increased D┴is believed to be derived from an
increase in axonal membrane permeability and
loss of myelin integrity, and decreased D║is
believed to reflect axonal damage. Mean kurtosis
(MK) is the kurtosis counterpart of MD, and an
increase in MK appears to be related to an increase
in complexity of the medium due to various fac-
tors, possibly including an increase in organelles,
cell membrane layers, and cell packing, among
others. K┴and K║resemble directional D┴and D║
and correspond to directional kurtosis. The combi-
nation of these parameters ensures a more sensi-
tive characterization than fitting the signal decay
to a monoexponential model only.16
Fig. 15.5
Three diffusion weighted images (DWIs) acquired with multiple b values, maximum b value of 2,000 s/mm2.
(a) DWI b 1,000 s/mm2, (b) fractional anisotropy map, (c) tractography with color orientation. The images were
generated automatically by the scanner software.
Future Applications of Nongaussian Diﬀusion Techniques
242

15.3.1 Aging Process
MK can be regarded as a general index of tissue
microstructural complexity, and, already men-
tioned it refers to tissue structure length scales
compared to or larger than the water molecule dif-
fusion length (typically 5–30 µm) but smaller than
the voxel size. The MK length covers cell mem-
branes, axon sheaths, and myelin layers that act as
barriers to free diﬀusion in each voxel. More spe-
cifically, MK is a sensitive indicator of diﬀusional
heterogeneity. Falangola et al14 has demonstrated
changes in kurtosis metrics in the human frontal
lobes with aging. The WM MK showed a rapid shift
to higher values until age 18 years, likely reflecting
the intense and continuous myelination and fiber
organization that occurs at this time, with a shift
to lower values with aging, probably related to
degenerative changes, including a decrease of
myelin density and myelinated fibers. MK in GM
showed a shift to higher values until age 18, which
is consistent with the known increase of cortical
cell–packing density. This sequence of change in
MK with age is in agreement with postmortem
Fig. 15.6 (a) Conventional diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) tractography is limited by its ability to resolve fiber tracking in
locations of white matter fiber crossing. (b) Conversely diffusional kurtosis imaging (DKI) is more sensitive to the
orientation distribution of water diffusion. The panel shows the voxelwise count of tractography streamlines. Note the
count drop in the corona radiata in DTI tractography compared to DKI. (Courtesy of Dr. Leonardo Bonilha with
permission.)
Future Applications of Nongaussian Diﬀusion Techniques
243

studies sensitive for evaluation of the microstruc-
tural complexity of both GM and WM.14,16 More
recently, Coutu et al17 analyzed DTI and DKI met-
rics in 111 healthy adults between the ages of 33
and 91 years and concluded that DKI metrics pro-
vide additional unique complementary informa-
tion of microstructural changes in the context of
healthy aging when used in combination with DTI
metrics.
15.3.2 Alzheimer Disease
In a study of Alzheimer disease (AD), Fieremans et
al13 demonstrated that WM tract integrity (WMTI)
metrics (derived from DKI using a white matter
microstructural model that relates DKI-derived
metrics directly to WM microstructure) provide
unique information regarding the specific underly-
ing mechanism of WM alterations. The WMTI met-
rics reported were axonal water fraction (AWF), a
marker of axonal density; D axon, the intrinsic dif-
fusivity inside the axon; and De,║and D e,┴, the axial
and radial diﬀusivity, respectively in the extra-
axonal space. They proposed that a decrease in
AWF may act as a specific marker of axonal density
loss, and as a biomarker of AD progression. They
also observed increased De,┴in the splenium of the
corpus callosum from amnestic mild cognitive
impairment (aMCI) patients. The analyses of the
WMTI metrics also corroborate with previously
reported abnormalities in the WM occurring early
in the course of AD, including decreased myelin
and axonal attenuation, loss of oligodendrocytes,
and activation of glial cells.18 Additionally, kurtosis
metrics illustrate the distinct pathophysiologies
underlying WM microstructural changes in AD as
seen in previous diﬀusion MRI studies of the larg-
est cerebral WM tract, corpus callosum (CC), which
showed that the anterior part of the CC appears to
degenerate due to myelin breakdown, whereas
decline in the posterior part of the CC is attributed
to wallerian degeneration secondary to distal GM
pathology in the temporoparietal areas.19
15.3.3 Brain Development
MRI diﬀusion analysis of brain maturation in the
last decade has used DTI and DKI in animal and
human models, revealing that DKI provides addi-
tional microstructural information in brain devel-
opment when compared to DTI.1 A progressive
increase in FA throughout all WM regions reflects
an increase in anisotropy and myelination progres-
sion. This trend is most evident in the first 2 years
of life when myelination is the dominant contribu-
tor to the increase in the microstructural complex-
ity of the WM. The FA peaks relatively earlier in
the splenium than in the genu of the corpus callos-
um in keeping with its well-known caudorostral
pattern of myelination. Paydar et al20 recently
demonstrated that MK, like FA, increases in all
WM regions, likely also as a function of myelina-
tion. However, unlike FA, MK continues to rise
beyond 2 years of life and plateaus at later ages in
all WM locations. It is speculated that this MK pat-
tern represents continued development of the
WM as a result of an increase in the complexity of
intrinsic cellular processes and extracellular matri-
ces, axonal pruning, and functional reorganization
of myelin to allow the progressive increase in axo-
nal conduction velocities, all of which continue
during later stages of development. This later MK
peak and plateau pattern may also represent the
continued maturation of crossing fibers in WM
during late childhood. DTI is limited in the evalua-
tion of both anisotropy and directionality of cross-
ing fibers because the diﬀusion tensor can resolve
only a single fiber orientation within each voxel.
Although FA is diminished inside voxels containing
crossing fibers, MK can better define the multidir-
ectional environment inside these voxels. There-
fore, as isotropic diﬀusion barriers and more
complex fiber patterns continue to materialize in
the WM after myelination has been established, a
nongaussian diﬀusion approach may better char-
acterize these delayed developmental changes.
15.3.4 Trauma
Previous studies of brain injury have observed
reactive astrogliosis activity to peak at 4 to 7 days
postinjury. Animal models show that the com-
bined eﬀect of increased glial cell activity and neu-
ronal pruning may essentially oﬀset any changes
in DTI parameters, including MD and FA. However,
this complex scenario of microstructural changes
appears to be reflected in MK. This observation
agrees with histopathological findings where sig-
nificant increases in reactive astrocytosis and
microglial response at 7 days were observed.21
Furthermore, this increased reactive astrogliosis
corresponds directly to the increased MK seen in
vivo at the subacute stage when DTI parameters,
such as FA and MD, return to baseline, indicating
that MK is sensitive to changes in tissue micro-
structure in response to the injury. Taken together,
the results from DKI and histology support the
idea that MK is sensitive to the changes in tissue
Future Applications of Nongaussian Diﬀusion Techniques
244

microstructural complexity in response to brain
injury. In addition, a well-designed, complex study
of mild traumatic brain injury (TBI) in humans
reported by Grossman et al22 showed that, when
cognitively impaired patients were compared with
cognitively unimpaired patients at baseline visits,
they showed significantly lower MK and FA in the
thalamus and optic radiations. Furthermore, patients
showed associations between MK in the thalamus
and neuropsychological performance on tests of
attention, concentration, and information process-
ing, as well as associations between MK and MD in
various WM regions measured and neuropsycholog-
ical performance on the same tests previously men-
tioned. Because these results were observed in
patients only at baseline and not at follow-up visits,
they may be viewed as suggesting that repair had
occurred and was consistent with the longitudinal
changes observed in DTI and DKI. Nevertheless, it
appears that neuropsychological performance in
mild TBI may be complex and involve global interac-
tion among many brain regions.
15.3.5 Epilepsy
DKI may be an exquisite tool to investigate struc-
tural abnormalities associated with epileptogene-
sis, notably in patients where macromorphological
abnormalities are not identified or their full extent
cannot be ascertained. Examples include malfor-
mations of cortical development and medial tem-
poral lobe sclerosis. Moreover, DKI may disclose
abnormalities associated with forms of epilepsy
typically considered to be “MRI-negative.” For
example, Lee et al23 investigated patients with idi-
opathic
generalized
epilepsy
(IGE),
which
is
believed to arise from paroxysmal thalamocortical
dysfunction. The authors noted DKI-based com-
plex microstructural abnormalities despite a nor-
mal MRI scan on visual inspection. They observed
that conventional microstructural measures (MD
and FA) revealed WM abnormalities in thalamo-
cortical
projections,
whereas
MK
disclosed
a
broader pattern of WM abnormalities involving
thalamocortical and cortical-cortical projections.
The authors concluded that, even though IGE is
traditionally considered a nonlesional form of epi-
lepsy,
microstructural
abnormalities
may
be
located within thalamocortical and cortical-corti-
cal WM connections. Particularly, WM abnormal-
ities shown by MK extended into cortical-cortical
projections, which suggests that the extent of
microstructural abnormalities in IGE may be better
assessed with DKI metrics.23
15.3.6 Other Applications
In stroke, Hui et al24 reported that WM metrics
revealed an increase in axonal density and a large
decrease in intra-axonal diﬀusion compared to the
extra-axonal diﬀusion microenvironment of ische-
mic WM lesions. The well-known decrease in the
apparent diﬀusion coeﬃcients of WM after ische-
mia was found to be driven mainly by a significant
drop in the intra-axonal diﬀusion microenviron-
ment. The results suggested that ischemia prefer-
entially
alters
the
intra-axonal
environment,
consistent with a proposed mechanism of focal
enlargement of axons kwon as axonal swelling or
beading.
In gliomas, Raab et al25 reported changes in MK
values among gliomas of diﬀerent World Health
Organization grades. Low-grade tumors are diﬀer-
ent from normal tissue, and higher-grade tumors
demonstrated MK values relatively similar to nor-
mal WM. The results showed that structural com-
plexity, reflected in MK values, is higher in high-
grade gliomas than in low-grade gliomas but does
not reach the complexity of normal WM. Baek et
al26 reported being able to distinguish early tumor
progression from pseudoprogression on treated
gliomas using histogram analyses of skewness and
kurtosis in a normalized cerebral blood volume
perfusion map.
DKI is still in an early stage of development, and
its practical applications are being explored; how-
ever, it is natural to speculate that DKI will be use-
ful for many of the same applications as DTI. The
potential advantage of DKI over DTI is that the
added metrics quantifying diﬀusional nongaus-
sianity may supply new information to better
characterize both normal and pathological brain
tissue. This may be particularly important in GM
because its water diﬀusion is nearly isotropic (on
the length scales of diﬀusion MRI), which limits
the value of FA and other metrics of diﬀusional
anisotropy obtainable with DTI.
Diﬀusional kurtosis metrics may complement
more conventional diﬀusion metrics in at least
two ways. First, diﬀusional kurtosis can potentially
be more sensitive to some tissue properties, such
as microstructural heterogeneity. Second, diﬀu-
sional kurtosis may be less sensitive to certain con-
founding eﬀects and thereby serve as a more
robust biomarker. One study has found that the
MK in GM is altered substantially less by cerebro-
spinal fluid contamination than either the MD or
the FA.27 A few studies have shown encouraging, if
preliminary, results for applications of DKI to
Future Applications of Nongaussian Diﬀusion Techniques
245

attention deficit hyperactivity disorder.28 It has
also been recently reported29 that the additional
information provided by DKI can be used to
resolve intravoxel fiber crossings, which is not pos-
sible with DTI. As a consequence, DKI may be used
to improve standard DTI-based fiber tracking (see
▶Fig. 15.6). Key advantages of DKI relative to other
methods of quantifying diﬀusional nongaussianity
are that its diﬀusion metrics can be readily
obtained from routine clinical scanning.
15.4 Parei Aqui Faltam Key
Points
Diﬀusion spectrum imaging (DSI) is a q-space
method with the ability to fully characterize the
diﬀusion process.30 To perform DSI, however, one
needs to acquire hundreds of diﬀusion attenuated
images with variable directions and very high
strengths of diﬀusion sensitizing gradients. This
high sampling of q-space prolongs scan time,
and the high b values required pose a challenge
to the gradient performance in current clinical
systems. In addition, these high b values in cur-
rent clinical scanners result in low signal-to-
noise ratio (SNR) due to prolonged echo time
(TE) and substantial diﬀusion induced signal
decay. One approach to overcoming these limita-
tions is to reduce the number of the diﬀusion
encoding gradients as well as the bmax of DSI.
For example, by reducing the number of diﬀu-
sion encoding gradients from 515 to 203, the
scan time can be reduced from 1 h to 30 min. By
lowering bmax, the maximum diﬀusion gradient
strength can be reduced to provide better gra-
dient stability. Moreover, diﬀusion time and TE
can be reduced to provide better SNR for the dif-
fusion weighted images.
Q-ball imaging (QBI) is a high angular resolution
diﬀusion imaging (HARDI) method that is capable
of resolving complex subvoxel WM architecture. It
samples data of a constant b value in q-space.31
Typically, its bmax and number of gradient encod-
ings are approximately two- to threefold lower
than those of DSI; thus it is considered more feasi-
ble for clinical applications. In QBI the orientation
distribution
function
(ODF)
along each radial
direction is derived, and the local fiber orientation
can be inferred by the local maximum ODF in each
voxel. Although QBI and DSI with reduced bmax
and encoding numbers are potentially advanta-
geous for reducing scan time and improving
gradient
stability,
insuﬃcient
sampling
and
inadequate bmax over the q-space may lead to
inaccuracies in estimating fiber orientations.32
15.5 Summary
DKI is a robust and promising investigational tool
to detect changes in microstructural environ-
ments. It is a clinically feasible extension of DTI
that allows for quantification of diﬀusional non-
gaussianity. With DKI, one obtains all the usual
DTI
diﬀusion
metrics
plus
additional
metrics
related to diﬀusional kurtosis. These new metrics
help to better characterize water diﬀusion proper-
ties in brain tissues and, in particular, are sensitive
to diﬀusional heterogeneity. Implementation of
DKI is similar to that of DTI, except that at least
three distinct b values (usually 0, 1,000, and
2,000 s/mm2) and at least 15 distinct diﬀusion
directions are needed; however, they are usually
oversampled with 30 directions for improved
imaging quality. A whole brain DKI data set with
isotropic voxels can be acquired with clinical 3 T
MRI scanners in < 7 min.
15.6 Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank Dr. Joseph A. Help-
ern, Dr. Jens H. Jensen, and Dr. Leonardo Bonilha
for their help with concepts and illustration of kur-
tosis metrics and tractography.
References
[1] Cheung MM, Hui ES, Chan KC, Helpern JA, Qi L, Wu EX. Does
diﬀusion kurtosis imaging lead to better neural tissue char-
acterization? A rodent brain maturation study. Neuroimage
2009; 45(2): 386–392
[2] Jensen JH, Helpern JA, Ramani A, Lu H, Kaczynski K. Diﬀu-
sional kurtosis imaging: the quantification of non-gaussian
water diﬀusion by means of magnetic resonance imaging.
Magn Reson Med 2005; 53(6): 1432–1440
[3] Lu H, Jensen JH, Ramani A, Helpern JA. Three-dimensional
characterization of non-gaussian water diﬀusion in humans
using diﬀusion kurtosis imaging. NMR Biomed 2006; 19(2):
236–247
[4] Jensen JH, Helpern JA. MRI quantification of non-Gaussian
water diﬀusion by kurtosis analysis. NMR Biomed 2010; 23
(7): 698–710
[5] Steven AJ, Zhuo J, Melhem ER. Diﬀusion kurtosis imaging:
an emerging technique for evaluating the microstructural
environment of the brain. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2014; 202
(1): W26–33
[6] Mukherjee P, Berman JI, Chung SW, Hess CP, Henry RG. Dif-
fusion tensor MR imaging and fiber tractography: theoretic
underpinnings. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2008; 29(4): 632–
641
Future Applications of Nongaussian Diﬀusion Techniques
246

[7] Mukherjee P, Chung SW, Berman JI, Hess CP, Henry RG. Dif-
fusion tensor MR imaging and fiber tractography: technical
considerations. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2008; 29(5): 843–
852
[8] Chung HW, Chou MC, Chen CY. Principles and limitations of
computational algorithms in clinical diﬀusion tensor MR
tractography. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2011; 32(1): 3–13
[9] Basser PJ, Pajevic S, Pierpaoli C, Duda J, Aldroubi A. In vivo
fiber tractography using DT-MRI data. Magn Reson Med
2000; 44(4): 625–632
[10] Mori S, van Zijl PC. Fiber tracking: principles and strategies -
a technical review. NMR Biomed 2002; 15(7–8): 468–480
[11] Tabesh A, Jensen JH, Ardekani BA, Helpern JA. Estimation of
tensors and tensor-derived measures in diﬀusional kurtosis
imaging. Magn Reson Med 2011; 65(3): 823–836
[12] Fieremans E, Jensen JH, Helpern JA. White matter character-
ization with diﬀusional kurtosis imaging. Neuroimage 2011;
58(1): 177–188
[13] Fieremans E, Benitez A, Jensen JH, et al. Novel white matter
tract integrity metrics sensitive to Alzheimer disease pro-
gression. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol 2013; 34(11): 2105–2112
[14] Falangola MF, Jensen JH, Babb JS, et al. Age-related non-
Gaussian diﬀusion patterns in the prefrontal brain. J Magn
Reson Imaging 2008; 28(6): 1345–1350
[15] André ED, Grinberg F, Farrher E, et al. Influence of noise cor-
rection on intra- and inter-subject variability of quantitative
metrics in diﬀusion kurtosis imaging. PLoS ONE 2014; 9(4):
e94531
[16] Falangola MF, Jensen JH, Tabesh A, et al. Non-Gaussian diﬀu-
sion MRI assessment of brain microstructure in mild cogni-
tive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease. Magn Reson
Imaging 2013; 31(6): 840–846
[17] Coutu JP, Chen JJ, Rosas HD, Salat DH. Non-Gaussian water
diﬀusion in aging white matter. Neurobiol Aging 2014; 35
(6): 1412–1421
[18] Gouw AA, Seewann A, Vrenken H, et al. Heterogeneity of
white matter hyperintensities in Alzheimer’s disease: post-
mortem quantitative MRI and neuropathology. Brain 2008;
131(Pt 12): 3286–3298
[19] Clerx L, Visser PJ, Verhey F, Aalten P. New MRI markers for
Alzheimer’s disease: a meta-analysis of diﬀusion tensor
imaging and a comparison with medial temporal lobe meas-
urements. J Alzheimers Dis 2012; 29(2): 405–429
[20] Paydar A, Fieremans E, Nwankwo JI, et al. Diﬀusional kurto-
sis imaging of the developing brain. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol
2014; 35(4): 808–814
[21] Zhuo J, Xu S, Proctor JL, et al. Diﬀusion kurtosis as an in vivo
imaging marker for reactive astrogliosis in traumatic brain
injury. Neuroimage 2012; 59(1): 467–477
[22] Grossman EJ, Jensen JH, Babb JS, et al. Cognitive impairment
in mild traumatic brain injury: a longitudinal diﬀusional
kurtosis and perfusion imaging study. AJNR Am J Neurora-
diol 2013; 34(5): 951–957, S1–S3
[23] Lee CY, Tabesh A, Spampinato MV, Helpern JA, Jensen JH,
Bonilha L. Diﬀusional kurtosis imaging reveals a distinctive
pattern of microstructural alternations in idiopathic gener-
alized epilepsy. Acta Neurol Scand 2014; 130(3): 148–155
[24] Hui ES, Fieremans E, Jensen JH, et al. Stroke assessment with
diﬀusional kurtosis imaging. Stroke 2012; 43(11): 2968–
2973
[25] Raab P, Hattingen E, Franz K, Zanella FE, Lanfermann H. Cer-
ebral gliomas: diﬀusional kurtosis imaging analysis of
microstructural diﬀerences. Radiology 2010; 254(3): 876–
881
[26] Baek HJ, Kim HS, Kim N, Choi YJ, Kim YJ. Percent change of
perfusion skewness and kurtosis: a potential imaging bio-
marker for early treatment response in patients with newly
diagnosed glioblastomas. Radiology 2012; 264(3): 834–843
[27] Yang AW, Jensen JH, Hu CC, Tabesh A, Falangola MF, Helpern
JA. Eﬀect of cerebral spinal fluid suppression for diﬀusional
kurtosis imaging. J Magn Reson Imaging 2013; 37(2): 365–
371
[28] Adisetiyo V, Tabesh A, Di Martino A, et al. Attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder without comorbidity is associated
with distinct atypical patterns of cerebral microstructural
development. Hum Brain Mapp 2014; 35(5): 2148–2162
[29] Jensen JH, Helpern JA, Tabesh A. Leading non-Gaussian cor-
rections for diﬀusion orientation distribution function. NMR
Biomed 2014; 27(2): 202–211
[30] Wedeen VJ, Wang RP, Schmahmann JD, et al. Diﬀusion spec-
trum magnetic resonance imaging (DSI) tractography of
crossing fibers. Neuroimage 2008; 41(4): 1267–1277
[31] Tuch DS, Reese TG, Wiegell MR, Wedeen VJ. Diﬀusion MRI of
complex neural architecture. Neuron 2003; 40(5): 885–895
[32] Van AT, Granziera C, Bammer R. An introduction to model-
independent diﬀusion magnetic resonance imaging. Top
Magn Reson Imaging 2010; 21(6): 339–354
Future Applications of Nongaussian Diﬀusion Techniques
247

248
Index
Note: Page numbers set bold
or italic indicate headings or
figures, respectively.
A
abscesses
– Aspergillus 123, 127
– brain tumors 99, 100
– diﬀerential diagnosis 94,
130, 173
– fungal 112, 122, 125–126
– head and neck 228, 233
– post-victrectomy 235
– pyogenic 112–114, 116–
118, 122, 126
– toxoplasmosis 126
– tuberculous 112
active inflammatory demyeli-
nation 155, 167
acute disseminated encephalo-
myelitis 133, 137, 157, 157
aging
– Alzheimer disease 64, 65,
66, 69, 72–73, 74, 76
– association fibers 68
– axial diﬀusivity 66, 70
– balance, gait 69, 71
– cognitive impairment
(mild) 66, 70, 71
– cognitive impairment spec-
trum 65
– cognitive performance 63–
64, 65, 67, 68
– corpus callosum 67, 71, 72
– dementia 65, 69
– dementia with Lewy
bodies 73, 75
– diﬀusion based imaging
strategies 63
– executive function 63
– fractional anisotropy
changes 66, 67–68, 70, 75
– frontotemporal demen-
tia 73, 73
– function-change associa-
tions 67
– hippocampus 71
– imaging physics 63
– imaging techniques 63, 63
– mean diﬀusivity
changes 66, 67–68, 70, 71
– memory 63–64, 69, 71
– myelination 53, 66, 69
– normal 65, 66, 67
– pathophysiology 66
– posterior cortical atro-
phy 74, 77
– progressive supranuclear
palsy 74, 76
– radial diﬀusivity 66, 70
– tractography 71
– vascular dementia 74
– Wallerian degeneration 70
– white matter degenera-
tion 63, 71, 72, 76
– white matter indices 63
AIDS 115, 119, 123
alcoholism 69, 71
Alzheimer disease 64, 65, 66,
69, 72–73, 74, 76, 244
anterior commissure 45, 45
apolipoprotein E (ApoE4) 71
apparent diﬀusion coeﬃ-
cient 3
– as marker 4, 4
– astrocytoma 99
– brain tumors 99–101, 108,
110
– head and neck diseases 215,
216
– hematoma 193
– lymphoma 105, 216
– meningitis 113, 115
– pediatric DWI, DTI 154
– physics 1
– principles 82
– rFOV sequences 203
– stroke 83–84, 87
– TBI 172, 174, 174, 177
– ventriculitis 118
aquaporin-4 (AQP-4) 136, 138
arcuate fasciculus 40, 41
arterial infarction 20, 23
Aspergillus 122–123, 127
astrocytoma
– anaplastic 22
– apparent diﬀusion coeﬃ-
cient 99
– edema 21–22
– fractional anisotropy 204
– pilocytic 21, 204, 208
– spinal cord 204, 207–208
Atlas, S. W. 193
autism spectrum disorders 59,
60
axial diﬀusivity
– aging 66, 70
– brain tumors 101–102
– demyelinating lesions 133
– heritability 56, 56
– metrics, correlates 64, 65
– white matter tract imag-
ing 51, 51–52, 54–55
B
b factor 2, 3, 4, 5, 11
b factor selection 5
Baek, H. J. 245
Baló concentric sclerosis 138,
140
bevacizumab 108
brain tumors
– abscesses 99, 100
– apparent diﬀusion coeﬃ-
cient 99–101, 108, 110
– astrocytomas 99
– axial diﬀusivity 101–102
– biomarkers 99
– cystic lesion diﬀerentia-
tion 99, 100
– diﬀerential diagnosis 137,
183
– diﬀusion kurtosis (DK)
imaging 110
– drop metastases, in chil-
dren 204
– DWI benefits 99
– epidermoid 105, 106
– FLAIR 101, 103, 105, 105,
107
– fractional anisotropy 101–
102
– functional diﬀusion maps
(fDMs) 110
– germinoma 107
– glioblastoma multi-
forme 99, 100, 105
– glioma 100–101, 101, 102,
108, 137, 245
– grading 100, 101
– high b value DWI
(HBDWI) 109
– infiltration 100, 101
– Ki-67 expression 99, 103
– lymphoma (CNS), see lym-
phoma
– medulloblastoma 107
– meningioma 99, 102, 104
– pediatric intracranial 106
– peritumoral white matter
tract patterns 102, 103
– pineal masses 107
– pinealoblastomas 107
– post treatment evalua-
tion 107
– postoperative evalua-
tion 107
– primitive neuroectodermal
tumor (PNET) 106, 107
– prognosis 107
– pseudoprogression 108
– pseudoresponse 108, 109
– radial diﬀusivity 101–102
– recurrence 108
– tractography 102, 103, 110
breast cancer 208
Brownian motion 1, 2
Buckle, C. 119
C
Canavan disease 163, 164, 167
Candida 122
capillary leak syndromes 92
carbon monoxide 147, 150–
151
carotid endarterectomy 92
Castillo, M. 119
central pontine, extrapontine
myelinolysis 164, 165, 167
cerebral venous thrombo-
sis 79, 93, 94
chasing the dragon syn-
drome 144, 146
Chavez, S. 17
chemotherapy 141, 151, 159,
161, 167
– See also specific drugs
Chen, Y. 53, 100, 119
childhood ataxia with diﬀuse
CNS hypomyelination
(CACH) 165, 166
cholesteatoma 215, 226, 230–
232
chondrosarcoma 229
Chung, S. P. 197
cingulum bundle 39, 40
clival chordoma 228
cocaine 144, 151
commissural pathways 39, 43
conduction aphasia 40
corpus callosum
– aging 67, 71, 72
– anatomy 43, 44
– splenium 27, 33, 52, 55
corticobasal degeneration syn-
drome 76
Coutu, J. P. 244
Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease 23,
26, 94, 128, 130, 130
Crohn’s disease 145
Cryptococcus 122, 125–127
cyclosporine 144, 147, 151
cystic lesions, tumors 228
cytomegalovirus 118, 122
D
delayed myelination 155
dementia 65, 69
dementia with Lewy
bodies 73, 75
demyelinating lesions
– acute disseminated ence-
phalomyelitis 133, 137
– axial diﬀusivity 133
– Baló concentric sclero-
sis 138, 140
– DTI benefits 132–133
– fractional anisotropy 132
– mean diﬀusivity 133
– multiple sclerosis, see multi-
ple sclerosis
– neuromyelitis optica 132,
134, 136, 138, 207, 209

Index
249
– osmotic myelinolysis 138,
141
– overview 132, 132, 149
– pediatric 155
– radial diﬀusivity 133
– tumefactive 136, 139
diﬀuse axonal injury 28, 34,
171
diﬀusion kurtosis imaging
(DKI)
– advantages 243, 245
– aging process 243
– Alzheimer disease 244
– brain development 244
– brain tumors 110
– clinical applications 242,
243
– epilepsy 245
– errors 242
– glioma 245
– image acquisition 241, 241
– postprocessing 241, 242
– principles 239, 239, 240,
240
– stroke 245
– TBI 175, 244
diﬀusion MRI 239
diﬀusion sensitized MRI
(dMRI) 170, 184
diﬀusion spectrum imaging
(DSI) 37, 246
diﬀusion tensor imaging (DTI),
see specific diseases and
conditions, white matter
tract imaging
– clinical applications 58, 59–
60, 64, 65, 239
– data analysis 64, 64
– infectious diseases 112
– limitations 240
– metrics, correlates 64, 65
– multiple sclerosis 132
– principles 37, 50, 63, 63
diﬀusion weighted imaging
(DWI), see specific diseases
and conditions
– acquisition matrix 11
– CSF pulsation eﬀects 15
– eddy current artifacts 15,
16
– motion artifacts 15
– Nyquist ghosts 12, 15, 15
– parameters 11, 14
– perfusion eﬀects 13, 14
– phase-encoding errors 11
– physics, see physics
– principles 63, 63, 79, 82
– schematic 82
– SENSE artifacts 17, 17
– spike artifacts 16, 16
– techniques, see techniques
Does, M. D. 195
Dubios, J. 57
dysmyelination 155
E
edema
– acute stroke 88
–– See also stroke
– arterial infarction 20, 23
– cellular 19
– cerebral, diseases associ-
ated 20
– cytotoxic 20, 79, 94, 121,
154, 171, 177
– diﬀuse 175–176
– excitotoxic brain injury 19–
20
– extracellular 19
– neoplasm-related vasogen-
ic 20, 21–22
– pathophysiology 19
– vasogenic 19–20, 83, 84,
101, 154
– venous infarction 22, 24
Einstein, Albert 1
end-stage demyelination 165,
167
ependymoma 204, 206
epidermoid tumors 105, 106
epidural hematoma 198, 201
epilepsy
– corpus callosum splenium
focal lesions 27, 33
– DKI 245
– reversible splenial le-
sions 148, 151
Epstein-Barr virus 119
Escolar, M. L. 58
excitotoxic brain injury 19–20
F
Falangola, M. F. 244
fiber density mapping
(FDM) 64, 66
Filippi, C. G. 222
FLAIR techniques 11, 13, 15
florbetapir 69
fludarabine 143, 145, 151
fluorouracil 142, 143, 151
fractional anisotropy
– aging changes 66, 67–68,
70, 75
– Alzheimer disease 75
– astrocytoma 204
– brain tumors 101–102
– dementia with Lewy
bodies 75
– demyelinating lesions 132
– diﬀusivity heritability 55,
56
– measurement standardiza-
tion 178
– metrics, correlates 64, 65
– multiple sclerosis 136
– spatial standardization 179,
180
– TBI 174, 176–178, 178, 179,
181, 183
– white matter tract anato-
my 36–37, 38–39
– white matter tract imag-
ing 51, 51–52
fronto-occipital fasciculus 43,
43, 44
frontotemporal dementia 73,
73
functional diﬀusion maps
(fDMs) 110
G
Gao, W. 51–53
Geng, X. 53, 55, 57
germinoma 107
glioblastoma multiforme 99,
100, 105
glioma 100–101, 101, 102,
108, 137, 245
global neonatal hypoxic in-
jury 157, 159, 167
GRE imaging 84
Grossman, E. J. 245
Grydeland, H. 117
Gupta, R. K. 114
H
HARDI 37, 110, 175, 246
HASTE 227
Haynes, R. L. 52
head and neck diseases
– abscesses 228, 233
– apparent diﬀusion coeﬃ-
cient 215, 216
– cholesteatoma 215, 226,
230–232
– cystic lesions, tumors 228
– DTI 230
– DWI benefits 215
– DWI indications 215
– infection 229, 234
– IVIM-MRI 215, 219
– lymph nodes, malig-
nant 218–219, 220
– lymphoma, see lymphoma
– masticator space tu-
mors 224
– optic neuritis 230, 236
– orbital infections 229, 235
– orbital tumors 220, 222–
224
– overview 215
– paranasal sinus tumors 224,
227
– salivary gland tumors 222,
225
– sinusitis 229
– skull base tumors 225, 228–
229
– squamous cell carcinoma,
see squamous cell carcinoma
– thyroid gland tumors 223,
226
hemangioma 221, 223
hematoma
– acute 191, 193
– acute basal ganglia 196
– apparent diﬀusion coeﬃ-
cient 193
– chronic stage 193, 196
– clinical studies 193, 195
– CT 189
– DWI 189, 189, 190, 191–194
– epidural 198, 201
– extra-axial 197
– hyperacute 190, 191, 191–
192, 196
– MRI 189, 189, 190
– overview 189
– subacute (early) 191, 191,
194
– subacute (late) 191, 195
– subdural 197, 200
hemorrhage
– DWI 189, 189, 190
– hyperacute 197
– infarctions 197, 198–199
– small intracranial 197, 197
– subacute microhemorrhages
(late) 197
– subarachnoid 198
– venous sinus thrombus 197,
200
heroin 144, 146, 151
herpes encephalitis 25, 29, 94,
95, 95, 112, 117, 121, 130
high b value DWI
(HBDWI) 109
HIV 23, 119
Hui, E. S. 245
hydrocephalus 58
hyperperfusion syndrome 92
hypoglycemia 95
hypomyelination 155, 162
hypothyroidism, congeni-
tal 162, 167
hypoxic ischemic encephalop-
athy 24, 27–28
I
infectious diseases
– abscesses (fungal) 112, 122,
125–126
– abscesses (pyogenic) 112–
114, 116–118, 122, 126
– abscesses (tuberculous) 112
– AIDS 115, 119, 123
– Aspergillus 122–123, 127
– bacterial 112, 116
– Candida 122
– Creutzfeldt-Jakob Dis-
ease 23, 26, 94, 128, 130,
130
– Cryptococcus 122, 125–127
– cytomegalovirus 118, 122

Index
250
– DWI benefits 112
– eﬀusion/hygroma 116
– empyema 116
– Epstein-Barr virus 119
– fungal 121, 124
– granulomas, fungal 122
– herpes encephalitis 112,
117, 121, 130
– influenza 119
– meningitis (bacterial) 112–
113, 113–114, 115, 115–116,
118–119
– meningitis (fungal) 122,
125
– mucormycosis 124
– neurocysticercosis 123,
128–129
– neurotuberculosis (neu-
rotb) 115, 120
– parasitic 123
– prion 128
– progressive multifocal leu-
koencephalopathy
(PML) 112, 119, 123, 130
– subacute sclerosing panen-
cephalitis (SSPE) 121
– toxoplasmosis 126, 129
– venous thrombosis 115,
119
– ventriculitis 114, 116, 118
– viral 115
influenza 119
intra-axial isotropic diﬀusion
restriction 173
K
Kang, B. K. 193
Khedr, S. A. 193
Koc, O. 229
Krabbe disease 58, 59, 161,
162, 167
L
lacunar infarction 79, 89, 91
Le Bihan, D. 11
Lee, C. Y. 245
leukodystrophy, metachro-
matic 161, 162, 167
leukoencephalopathy
– spongiform 144, 146, 151
– subacute 141, 142, 151
– toxic 139–140
limbic encephalitis 26, 30
lymphoma
– apparent diﬀusion coeﬃ-
cient 105, 216
– B cell 221
– cerebral 95, 96
– characterization 219, 221
– CNS 99, 103, 105
– diﬀerential diagnosis 94,
220
– pediatric 154
M
Maeda, M. 217, 219
Maldjian, J. A. 195
malnutrition 162, 167
maple syrup urine dis-
ease 159, 160, 167
masticator space tumors 224
mean diﬀusivity
– aging 66, 67–68, 70, 71
– clinical applications 242
– demyelinating lesions 133
– herpes encephalitis 117
– metrics, correlates 64, 65
– TBI 175–176
mean kurtosis 242–243
medulloblastoma 107
megalencephalic leukoence-
phalopathy with subcortical
cysts 163, 164, 167
memedulloblastoma 154
meningioma 99, 102, 104
meningioma, orbital 222
meningitis
– bacterial 112–113, 113–
114, 115, 115–116, 118–119
– fungal 122, 125
methanol 148, 150–151
methotrexate 142, 144, 151,
159, 161, 167
metronidazole 145, 148, 151
mitochondrial respiratory
chain deficiency 157, 158
mucormycosis 124
multiple sclerosis
– characterization 96, 97, 133
– cytotoxic edema 22, 25
– diﬀerential diagnosis 97,
173, 183
– DTI imaging 132, 133–136,
206, 209
– pediatric 157, 167
N
necrotizing external otitis 229,
234
neurocysticercosis 123, 128–
129
neurofibromatosis type 1 221
neuromyelitis optica 132, 134,
136, 138, 207, 209
neurosurgical planning 47, 48
neurotuberculosis (neu-
rotb) 115, 120
nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) 1–2, 2
Nyquist ghosts 12, 15, 15
O
oligoastrocytoma (anaplas-
tic) 24
oligodendroglioma 103
Oppenheim, C. 84
optic neuritis 230, 236
orbital infections 229, 235
orbital tumors 220, 222–224
osmotic demyelination syn-
drome 164, 165, 167
osmotic myelinolysis 26, 31,
138, 141
outlier detection basedde-
spiking (ODD) 17
ovarian cancer 30
P
paranasal sinus tumors 224,
227
pediatric DWI, DTI
– active inflammatory demye-
lination 155, 167
– acute disseminated ence-
phalomyelitis 157, 157
– apparent diﬀusion coeﬃ-
cient 154
– brain tumors drop metasta-
ses 204
– Canavan disease 163, 164,
167
– clinical applications 155
– cystic degeneration 165
– end-stage demyelina-
tion 165, 167
– global neonatal hypoxic in-
jury 157, 159, 167
– hypomyelination 155, 162
– hypothyroidism, congeni-
tal 162, 167
– Krabbe disease 161, 162,
167
– malnutrition 162, 167
– maple syrup urine dis-
ease 159, 160, 167
– megalencephalic leukoence-
phalopathy with subcortical
cysts 163, 164, 167
– methotrexate 159, 161, 167
– mitochondrial respiratory
chain deficiency 157, 158
– multiple sclerosis 157, 167
– myelin rarefaction 165
– neurotoxicity 159
– osmotic demyelination syn-
drome 164, 165, 167
– Pelizaeus-Merzbacher dis-
ease 162, 163, 167
– physics 154
– spine, spinal cord dis-
eases 203–204
– vanishing white matter dis-
ease 165, 166–167
– water mobility 154
– X-linked adrenoleukodys-
trophy 155, 156, 167
pediatric intracranial tu-
mors 106
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher dis-
ease 162, 163, 167
physics
– apparent diﬀusion coeﬃ-
cient 1
– apparent diﬀusion coeﬃ-
cient as marker 4, 4
– apparent diﬀusion coeﬃ-
cient map 3
– axial diﬀusion 7, 9
– b factor 2, 3, 4, 5, 11
– b factor selection 5
– brain water diﬀusion 1, 4, 4,
36
– brain water diﬀusion aniso-
tropy 6, 6, 7, 7, 8, 8–9
– Brownian motion 1, 2
– fractional anisotropy 7–8, 9
– pediatric DWI, DTI 154
– radial diﬀusion 7
– relative anisotropy 7–8, 9
– Stejskal and Tanner pulse
sequence 1, 2–3
– T2 shine-through eﬀect 3
– tensor model 1, 6, 8–9
– tissue compartment size 4,
4
– tractography 9, 10
pineal masses 107
pinealoblastomas 107
posterior cortical atrophy 74,
77
posterior reversible encephal-
opathy syndrome
(PRES) 92, 93
primitive neuroectodermal tu-
mor (PNET) 106, 107
progressive multifocal leu-
koencephalopathy
(PML) 112, 119, 123, 130
progressive supranuclear
palsy 74, 76
PROPELLER 11, 12–13, 227
punctate cortical infarc-
tions 90, 91
pyramidal tracts 45, 46
Q
Q-ball imaging (QBI) 246
R
Raab, P. 245
radial diﬀusivity
– aging 66, 70
– brain tumors 101–102
– demyelinating lesions 133
– heritability 56, 56
– herpes encephalitis 117
– metrics, correlates 64, 65
– TBI 174
– white matter tract imag-
ing 51, 51–52, 54–55
radiation therapy 141, 142,
151
Razek, A. A. 222, 224

Index
251
recreational drugs 144, 151
retinoblastoma 221, 224
reversible splenial lesions 148,
151
rFOV sequences 203
rhabdomyosarcoma 222
S
salivary gland tumors 222,
225
Schaefer, P. W. 195
SE-EPI 11, 12
Sepahdari, A. R. 220
septic infarction 94
Short, S. J. 57
sinusitis 229
skull base tumors 225, 228–
229
spine, spinal cord diseases
– clinical rationale 206
– degenerative changes 210
– diﬀerential diagnosis 206
– DWI/DTI benefits 203
– ischemia 204, 205
– multiple sclerosis, see multi-
ple sclerosis
– neuromyelitis optica, see
neuromyelitis optica
– pediatric 203–204
– rFOV sequences 203
– spondylodiskitis 210, 212–
213
– technical considera-
tions 203
– transverse myelitis 209
– trauma 209
– tumors 204, 206–208
– vertebral body fracture 209,
210–211
spondylodiskitis 210, 212–213
squamous cell carcinoma
– cancer recurrence 218
– DWI benefits, limita-
tions 219
– lymph nodes, malig-
nant 218, 220
– overview 217, 217
– paranasal sinus tumors 224,
227
– treatment response 218,
218–219
– TSE MRI 218
status epilepticus 27, 32
stroke
– acute stage 82
– apparent diﬀusion coeﬃ-
cient 83–84, 87
– cell death 81
– chronic stage 83
– diﬀerential diagnosis 183
– diﬀusion changes time
course 83, 85–88
– DKI 245
– DWI imaging benefits 79
– DWI reliability 84
– hemorrhagic transforma-
tion 84, 88
– hyperacute stage 82, 82, 83
– large vessel acute 82
– metabolic changes 80, 80,
81
– operationally defined pe-
numbra 82, 83
– overview 79
– pathophysiology 80
– pump failures 80, 80, 81
– subacute stage 83, 84
subacute sclerosing panence-
phalitis 121
subarachnoid hemor-
rhage 198
subdural hematoma 197, 200
Sumi, M. 219
susceptibility-weighted images
(SWI) 84
T
techniques
– FLAIR 11, 13, 15
– PROPELLER 11, 12–13, 227
– SE-EPI 11, 12
tensor model 1, 6, 8–9
thyroid gland tumors 223, 226
tissue plasminogen activator
(tPA) 84
toxic leukoencephalop-
athy 139–141
toxicity (CNS), see specific
drugs
– chemotherapy 141, 151,
159, 161, 167
– environmental toxins 147,
151
– imaging findings 132
– leukoencephalopathy (suba-
cute) 141, 142, 151
– overview 138, 149
– radiation therapy 141, 142,
151
– recreational drugs 144, 151
– reversible splenial le-
sions 148, 151
– toxic leukoencephalop-
athy 139–141
toxoplasmosis 126, 129
tract-based spatial statis-
tics 64
tractography
– aging 71
– brain tumors 102, 103, 110
– clinical applications 243
– TBI 176, 178–181, 182, 183,
186
– technique 9, 10
– white matter tract anato-
my 37
transient global amnesia 96
transient ischemic attack 79,
90
traumatic axonal injury 171,
173, 173, 175, 176, 178–179,
181, 182, 184–185
traumatic brain injury (TBI)
– abnormalities 176
– apparent diﬀusion coeﬃ-
cient 172, 174, 174, 177
– clinical context 170
– concussion 170
– contrecoup contusion 171
– contusion 171–172, 173,
180
– coup contusion 171
– diagnostic criteria 170
– diﬀerential diagnosis 172–
173, 175–176, 179, 181, 182,
183, 183–187
– diﬀuse injury 171
– diﬀusion kurtosis imaging
(DKI) 175, 244
– diﬀusion sensitized MRI
(dMRI) 170, 184
– DTI abnormalities biophysi-
cal basis 174, 177
– DTI abnormalities detec-
tion 176
– DWI abnormalities detec-
tion 172, 173–174
– DWI abnormalities patho-
physiology 171
– focal injury 171
– fractional anisotropy 174,
176–178, 178, 179, 181, 183
– HARDI 175
– intra-axial isotropic diﬀu-
sion restriction 173
– mean diﬀusivity 175–176
– measurement standardiza-
tion 178, 179
– pathology, pathophysiol-
ogy 171, 172
– radial diﬀusivity 174
– regions of interest analy-
sis 180, 182
– spatial standardization 179,
180
– tractography 176, 178–181,
182, 183, 186
– visual assessment 183–184
– voxelwise analysis 182
– Wallerian degeneration 185
– white matter injury 176,
181
tumefactive demyelinating le-
sions 136, 139
tumors, see brain tumors
U
uncinate fasciculus 42, 42
V
vanishing white matter dis-
ease 165, 166–167
vascular dementia 74
vascular pathology
– capillary leak syndromes 92
– cerebral venous thrombo-
sis 79, 93, 94
– DWI applications 79
– edema, see edema
– hyperperfusion syn-
drome 92
– lacunar infarction 79, 89, 91
– lesion mimics 94
– posterior reversible ence-
phalopathy syndrome
(PRES) 92, 93
– punctate cortical infarc-
tions 90, 91
– septic infarction 94
– stroke, see stroke
– transient global amnesia 96
– transient ischemic at-
tack 79, 90
– watershed infarcts 79, 85,
89–90
venous thrombosis 115, 119
ventriculitis 114, 116, 118
vertebral body fracture 209,
210–211
vigabatrin 146, 149, 151
W
Wang, J. 217
Wang, L. H. 130
watershed infarcts 79, 85, 89–
90
white matter tract anatomy
– anterior commissure 45, 45
– arcuate fasciculus 40, 41
– association tracts 38, 39
– brain water diﬀusion 36
– categorization 38
– cingulum bundle 39, 40
– commissural pathways 39,
43
– corpus callosum 43, 44
– dorsal bundle 46
– FACT 37
– fiber-tracking algo-
rithms 37
– fractional anisotropy 36–
37, 38–39
– fronto-occipital fascicu-
lus 43, 43, 44
– functions 36
– imaging 36–37
– inferior longitudinal fascicu-
lus 41, 42
– optic radiation 46, 47
– overview 36
– projection tracts 39, 45
– pyramidal tracts 45, 46

Index
252
– streamlines 37
– superior fronto-occipital
fasciculus 43, 44
– superior longitudinal fasci-
culus 40, 41
– technical considerations 36
– tractography 37
– uncinate fasciculus 42, 42
– ventral bundle 46
white matter tract imaging
– axial diﬀusivity 51, 51–52,
54–55
– axial diﬀusivity heritabil-
ity 56, 56
– corpus callosum sple-
nium 52, 55, 55
– diﬀusion cognition correla-
tions 50, 57
– diﬀusion-cognition correla-
tions 58
– diﬀusivity heritability 56,
56
– early brain development 50
– environmental eﬀects 55,
56
– fractional anisotropy 51,
51–52, 53, 54–55
– fractional anisotropy herit-
ability 56
– GAP43 staining 52
– gender eﬀects 57
– genetic control 50, 55, 56
– handedness 57
– interneuron connection de-
velopment 50
– language 57
– lateralization 50
– lateralization eﬀects 57
– linear anisotropy 53
– maturation 50
– myelination 53, 66, 69
– planar anisotropy 53
– radial diﬀusivity 51, 51–52,
54–55
– radial diﬀusivity heritabil-
ity 56, 56
– region of interest ap-
proach 51–52
– spatial growth patterns 53
– temporal growth pat-
terns 51, 51, 52
– tract-based approach 53, 54
– working memory correla-
tions 57, 58
Wintermark, M. 195
Wolﬀ, J. J. 59
X
X-linked adrenoleukodystro-
phy 155, 156, 167
Y
Yuan, W. 58
Z
Zhai, G. 53

