
Diploma Democracy


Diploma Democracy
The Rise of Political Meritocracy
Mark Bovens and Anchrit Wille
1

3
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, OX2 6DP,
United Kingdom
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of
Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries
© Mark Bovens and Anchrit Wille 2017
The moral rights of the authors have been asserted
First Edition published in 2017
Impression: 1
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
by law, by licence or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics
rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
address above
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer
Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017931834
ISBN 978–0–19–879063–1
Printed and bound by
CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon, CR0 4YY
Links to third party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and
for information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials
contained in any third party website referenced in this work.

Acknowledgements
This book was not written in one gust. The ﬁrst, premature contours of the
argument were developed at the Research School for Social Sciences of the
Australian National University in Canberra, where one of us was a visitor in
2006. A grant from the Netherlands Research Council (NWO) programme
Contested Democracies allowed us to conduct a ﬁrst exploration, which
resulted in an internet report in 2009 and an exploratory article in Acta Politica
(Bovens & Wille 2010). We then extended our analyses and published them as
a book in Dutch (Bovens & Wille 2011). That book, which focused on the rise
of political meritocracy in Dutch politics, struck a chord both in the public
and in the academic debate in the Netherlands, and it was reprinted several
times. The present book follows the main line of argument of that initial book,
but we have completely rewritten the book, expanded the argument, and
extended our analyses to other Western European countries. The manuscript
was ﬁnalised in October 2016.
In the course of the past years, various chapters of this book, in various
stages of sophistication, have been presented as academic papers at a variety of
conferences, such as the European Consortium for Political Research general
conferences, the Council for European Studies conferences, the Dutch Work-
shop European Social Survey, and the annual Dutch-Flemish Political Science
Conferences. We have beneﬁted enormously from the comments of our
discussants at these conferences, such as Paul Dekker, Harry Ganzeboom, Leah
Haus, Marc Hooghe, Tom van der Meer, Christopher Lesschaeve, Martha
Montero-Sieburth, Juan Rodriguez Teruel, Tim Reeskens, George Ross, Jef
Smulders, Guido Tiemann, Lori Thorlakson, Bram Wauters, and Pieter de Wilde.
The more mature versions of most chapters have been read by very know-
ledgeable academic peers and country experts, notably Koen Damhuis, Joop
van Holsteijn, Claes de Vreese, Bram Spruyt, Will Tiemeijer, and Pieter de
Wilde. Their comments have helped enormously to ﬁne-tune our argument
and they have prevented us from making many faux pas with regard to the
speciﬁc aspects of political life in each of the countries in our sample. The
remaining gaffes and lack of subtlety are our responsibility entirely.
Christine Durose gave us permission to use her ﬁgures on pathways to
politics (Durose et al. 2013) for our Figures 7.8 and 7.9. Armèn Hakhvardian

was so kind to help us reproduce parts of his two ﬁgures on trust in EU
institutions (Hakhverdian et al. 2013) for our Figure 8.2. Sabine Saurugger
and Heike Klüver were equally forthcoming in giving permission to use their
data on the level of education in interest groups at the EU level (Klüver &
Saurugger 2013) for our ﬁgure 6.8. Nick de Leu and Frank Verleden were so
kind to share their data on the educational backgrounds of ministers and
members of the Federal parliament in Belgium, respectively. Also, we have
relied on a large variety of publicly accessible data for our analyses. A detailed
overview of these sources can be found in the Appendix.
At all stages of writing this book Karen Laird, with tact, diligence, and wit,
has corrected and improved our English. Manuel Quaden, Research Assistant
at the Utrecht School of Governance, helped us with getting our references
straight. At Oxford University Press, we beneﬁted from the constructive com-
ments of two anonymous reviewers and from the help of Sarah Parker and
Olivia Wells. Dominic Byatt, as ever, has been a gentle but attentive supporter.
Without all these meritorious peers, the argument would have remained
shallow, our data and ﬁgures wanting, and the book unreadable.
Acknowledgements
vi

Contents
List of Figures
xi
List of Tables
xiii
1. Diploma Democracy
1
The Rise of Political Meritocracy
1
Plato’s Dream Come True
3
Diploma Democracy
4
Exploring the Rise of Political Meritocracy
5
Outline: Concepts, Contours, and Consequences of
Diploma Democracy
7
Part I. Concepts and Contexts
2. Diplomas
11
Meritocracy: From Science Fiction to Factual Description
11
Meritocracy and Diplomas
12
The Expansion of the Educational System
15
The Educational Revolution as a Critical Juncture
18
New Openings and Emerging Social Opportunities
19
New Closures and Diminishing Returns
20
The Rise of the Well-Educated in Society
23
3. Democracy
26
Government by or for the People?
26
Principal Elements of Democracy
27
The Participatory Revolution
33
New Openings and Emerging Political Opportunities
34
New Closures and Diminishing Democratization
36
The Rise of the Well-Educated in Democratic Politics
38
4. Education as a Cleavage
40
An Educational Cleavage?
40
Cleavage as a Social and Political Concept
42
Social Differences: Educational Groups as Social Groups
45

Attitudinal Differences: Cosmopolitans versus Nationalists
48
Institutional Differences: Social-Liberal versus Nationalist Parties
52
Different Stages of Cleavage Formation across Europe
56
Cleavage Formation and the Rise of Political Meritocracy
59
Part II. Contours
5. The Education Gap in Political Participation
65
The Hamburger Bildungskampf
65
The Participation Pyramid
66
Education Gaps in Participation
67
The Concentration of Activity
80
Education: A Cause or a Proxy?
82
The Paradox of the Participatory Revolution
86
6. The Meritocratization of Civil Society
91
The Rise of the EU Nerds
91
Civil Society Organizations
92
The Context: An Associational Revolution
94
Participation: The Education Gap in Membership
97
Transformation: From Participation to Professionalization
103
The Opening and Closing of Civil Society
108
7. Political Elites as Educational Elites
111
Ed Miliband’s Greatest Talent
111
From Aristocracy to Meritocracy
112
The Legislative Branch: Parliamentary U-Curves
113
The Executive Branch: An Elitist Tradition
118
The Emergence of a Political Meritocracy
121
Explaining: The Supply and Demand of Higher Educated
Political Candidates
130
Two Faces of Political Meritocracy: Democratization and
Professionalization
133
Part III. Consequences
8. The Consequences of Diploma Democracy
139
Why Bother about Diploma Democracy?
139
Representation: Descriptive Representation Matters
140
Responsiveness: Biased Political Agendas
146
Accountability: Biased Judgement
154
Legitimacy: Distrust and Resentment
155
The Tension between Meritocracy and Democracy
161
Contents
viii

9. Remedying Diploma Democracy
164
No to the Euro-Academics
164
The Rise of Populist Parties: An Increasing Political Visibility
of the Less Educated
166
Spectator Politics: Edifying the Lesser Educated
168
Participation: Adjusting the Arenas
170
Bringing the Ballot Back In
173
More Inclusive Political Elites
177
A Wake-Up Call for Modern-Day Platonists
181
Appendix
184
Sample: Countries Selected
184
The Data on Political Participation and Civil Society (Chapters 4, 5, 6, 8)
184
The Data on Political Elites (Chapter 7)
186
Measuring Education
187
Measuring Political Participation
188
Supplementary Tables and Figures
192
References
194
Index
221
Contents
ix


List of Figures
2.1.
The OED triangle
13
2.2.
Educational attainment by years of schooling, worldwide
and advanced countries
16
2.3.
Educational attainment by education level, advanced countries
17
4.1.
Tertiary level educational attainment in European countries
46
4.2.
Education and household total net income
47
4.3.
Educational homogamy
48
4.4.
Homogamy of the well-educated
49
4.5.
Education and left–right scale
50
4.6.
Education and income differences
50
4.7.
Education and immigrants
51
4.8.
Education and immigration
52
4.9.
Education and European uniﬁcation
53
4.10. Education and voting for nationalist party
54
4.11. Education and voting for green party or left liberal party
55
5.1.
The participation pyramid
66
5.2.
Education and spectator activities
69
5.3.
Education and voting in last national election
71
5.4.
Education and conventional participation outside elections
73
5.5.
Education and protest participation outside elections
75
5.6.
Education and online participation
76
5.7.
Education and taking part in a public debate
77
5.8.
Education and party membership
78
5.9.
Educational background of party members in Belgium, Germany,
and the Netherlands
79
5.10. Education gaps in different forms of political participation, UK
81
5.11. Non-participants, incidental participants, and participants by education
83
5.12. Education and number of political activities
84

6.1.
Growth of civil society organizations in France, Germany,
and UK 1960–2010
95
6.2.
Interests represented by organizations in the Brussels arena 2016
97
6.3.
Membership of civil society organizations across Europe
98
6.4.
Education and number of memberships of associations
99
6.5.
Education and associational membership
100
6.6.
Education gaps membership associations
102
6.7.
Educational differences in participation: type of civil society organization
102
6.8.
Education level staff EU-interest groups
106
7.1.
MPs with higher education since 1854
114
7.2.
University-educated MPs, United Kingdom 1906–2015
116
7.3.
Education of members of the European Parliament 2004–2014
117
7.4.
University-educated cabinet ministers 1946–1984 and 2016
118
7.5.
Social background of university-educated ministers in the
Netherlands 1848–2010
122
7.6.
Social composition of British cabinets 1895–2010
122
7.7.
Social origins, education, and recruitment of political elites
123
7.8.
Traditional pathways to politics
127
7.9.
New professionalized pathway to politics
128
8.1.
Education and political preferences
147
8.2.
Education and Euroscepticism 1973–2010
149
8.3.
Education, level of political activity, and policy position on
immigration issue
150
8.4.
The popularity of representational styles among MPs
152
8.5.
Education and preference for referendums
153
8.6.
Education and evaluation of government and politicians
157
8.7.
Education and political trust
159
A.7.1. Educational composition of British cabinets 1885–2015
192
List of Figures
xii

List of Tables
4.1.
Education and cleavage elements
58
5.1.
Education gaps in political participation, six countries
80
6.1.
Types of civil society organizations
93
6.2.
Educational proﬁle of volunteers
101
7.1.
The rise of political meritocracy
134
A.7.1. Educational level of Belgium federal cabinet ministers 1999–2014
192
A.7.2. Educational background of French ministers, 1986–2012
192
A.7.3. Education level of cabinet ministers in the Netherlands 1848–2017
193


1
Diploma Democracy
The Rise of Political Meritocracy
Lay politics lies at the heart of democracy. Political ofﬁces are the only ofﬁces
for which no formal qualiﬁcations are required. Every adult citizen has the
constitutional right to run for ofﬁce. Any citizen can become a member of
parliament, an alderman, or a minister, regardless of his or her educational
qualiﬁcations or professional status. Lay politics was the essence of Athenian
democracy after the reforms of Cleisthenes, and lay politics is still the key-
stone of modern representative democracy. In Germany, for example, article
38 of the Grundgesetz speciﬁes that ‘Any person who has attained the age of
majority may be elected’ to the German Bundestag. Likewise, article 4 of the
Dutch Grondwet proclaims: ‘Every Dutch citizen has the equal right to choose
members of representative bodies, or to be chosen as a member’.
Contemporary political practices are diametrically opposed to this constitu-
tional ideal. Most contemporary democracies in Western Europe are governed
by a select group of well-educated citizens. They are diploma democracies—
ruled by those with the highest formal qualiﬁcations. University graduates
have come to dominate all relevant political institutions and arenas, from
political parties, parliaments and cabinets, to organized interests, deliberative
venues, and internet consultations.
Have a look at the parliaments in Western Europe. In the British House of
Commons, after the 2015 elections, nine out of ten MPs were university
graduates. This was the highest percentage ever in the long history of this
institution. In the 2013 Bundestag, 86 per cent of the MPs had attended an
institute of higher education. Only ten members, less than two per cent, had
Hauptschule as their highest degree, the lowest number in the post-WWII
era. After the 2012 elections, almost 97 per cent of the members of the Dutch
Tweede Kamer had attended college or graduate school. More than 90 per cent
had formally acquired at least a college degree—the highest percentage
since the introduction of universal suffrage in 1918. In Denmark, Belgium,

and France, between 75 and 90 per cent of the MPs have the equivalent of a
college or a graduate degree. This is not because everybody goes to college
nowadays—over 70 per cent of the electorate in Western Europe is still only
educated up to secondary level, at the highest.
This rise of a political meritocracy is part of larger trend. In the information
society, educational background is a very signiﬁcant social marker. Educa-
tional qualiﬁcations are important indications of social status and they are
very closely correlated with lifestyle, cultural attitudes, and political prefer-
ences. Like class or religion, educational background is an important source of
social and political divides.
Tell us what your highest diploma is, and we will tell you who you are and
what you do. If you are a university graduate, you will watch public television,
such as BBC or Canvas, and read ‘quality’ papers, such as The Guardian, Die
Zeit, or Libération. You will do your utmost to get your children into a public
school in the UK, a Gymnasium in Germany and the Netherlands, or one of
the Grandes écoles in France. You will spend your holidays in an apartment in
Tuscany, on a camping écologique in the south of France, or walking a coastal
path in Britain. You will live in a university town, a green pre-war suburb, or in
the nineteenth-century, gentriﬁed parts of the inner cities, such as Prenslauer
Berg in Berlin, De Pijp in Amsterdam, or Notting Hill in London. You will be
moderately in favour of the European Union, worry about climate change, the
state of higher education, and xenophobia, and vote for a Green or social
liberal party.
On the other hand, if your educational career ended after junior high school
or primary vocational training, the chances are that you will watch commer-
cial television, such as SBS, VTM, or ITV, and read tabloid papers—if you read
any newspaper at all—such as The Sun in England, Bild in Germany, or BT in
Denmark. Your children will attend a local state school in the UK, a large ROC
in the Netherlands, or a lycée professionnel in France. You will spend your
holidays in a caravan at a local campground, make day trips to the seaside,
or you will board a charter ﬂight to a holiday resort in Spain or Turkey. You
will live in former industrial areas and manufacturing towns, in the post-war
satellite cities, such as Marzahn in Berlin, Lelystad in the Netherlands, or
Slough in England, or, in the twentieth century, outskirts of the major cities.
You will be sceptical about the EU, worry about crime and immigration, and
vote for a nationalist party, or perhaps not at all.
Given these very considerable differences in lifestyle, social environment,
and worldviews between well-educated and lower-educated citizens, the rise
of a political meritocracy has important political consequences. Well-
educated and less well-educated citizens do not always share the same con-
cerns and preferences. Those who are well educated tend to be cosmopolitans,
whereas the lower-educated citizens are more likely to be nationalists. This is
Diploma Democracy
2

not a matter of more or less Enlightenment, but is related to other preferences
and interests. Well-educated citizens beneﬁt from open borders; those with
less education experience the burdens of Europeanization and mass immigra-
tion. For the well-educated and their children, the free movement of persons,
labour, and capital within the EU offers many opportunities to study and work
abroad. For those with less education and their children, it means having to
cope with increasing competition in the labour market, a boarding house for
Bulgarian migrant workers next door, and an inﬂux of non-native speakers in
their schools and neighbourhoods.
Plato’s Dream Come True
This book documents the rise of a political meritocracy and its consequences
for democracy and the political landscape in Western Europe. As with many
pieces of political theory, the roots of this essay can be traced to Plato. Each
year, the students at both our institutes read Plato’s Republic. In the introduc-
tory lectures, Plato is traditionally portrayed as the counterpoint of democratic
governance as we know it. Over the past years we had both grown increasingly
uncomfortable with the juxtaposition of Plato’s meritocratic polity, run by
philosopher-kings, and contemporary parliamentary democracy, supposedly
run by ordinary citizens. This juxtaposition simply no longer rang true. Upon
closer inspection, modern parliamentary democracy comes surprisingly close
to Plato’s ideal of a state governed by academically trained experts.
Plato’s ideal state, as sketched at length in the Republic, is ruled by the best
and the brightest, carefully selected after years of study and rigorous intellec-
tual tests and academic trials. His political class is an academic upper crust, a
small professorial corps d’élite, consisting of the brightest men and women of
the polis. This book will argue that Plato’s supposedly utopian ideal, of a state
governed by academic experts, has more or less been realized in contemporary
Western European parliamentary democracies. The selection mechanisms and
the institutional context may be different, but the outcomes are surprisingly,
and discomfortingly, alike. An example is the former Belgian federal cabinet-
Di Rupo that was installed in 2011. All thirteen new ministers were extremely
well educated: they all had, at the very minimum, a master’s degree (licentiaat).
Several ministers had completed two studies, and at least three held PhD
degrees. Eight had worked at a university before embarking on a political
career and two, Johan Vande Lanotte and Paul Magnette, retained their chairs
as university professors while in ofﬁce. Likewise, in the third Merkel cabinet,
installed in Germany in 2013, fourteen out of ﬁfteen ministers had the
equivalent of a master’s degree, nine had a PhD degree, seven had worked at
a university, and two were university professors before entering politics.
Diploma Democracy
3

In many Western democracies, all branches of government are dominated by
the well-educated. This holds true for almost every other political arena, as we
will demonstrate in this book. Modern parliamentary democracy is a Platonic
meritocracy, a state run by university graduates and former academics. Plato’s
dream has come true.
Diploma Democracy
The concept of meritocracy was coined by Michael Young in his satirical essay
The rise of the meritocracy, ﬁrst published in 1958, from which we take our
subtitle. The book was written as a fable, as a quasi-scientiﬁc report situated in
2034. It ﬁts within the British tradition of dystopian science ﬁction novels,
such as Orwell’s 1984 and Huxley’s Brave New World. In his ﬁctional report,
Young describes how the British class system transformed from an aristocracy
into a meritocracy between 1945 and 2034. This was purportedly the result of
the expansion of higher education and the application of strictly scientiﬁc
principles to the admission of students to schools, and to the selection of
personnel in ﬁrms, ofﬁcials in the civil services, and leaders in politics and
business. Merit—deﬁned as IQ+effort—determined social status, instead of
birth, inheritance, or nepotism.
In his introduction to the Transaction edition, Young (1994) describes how
difﬁcult it was to get the book published. The manuscript was turned down by
eleven publishers and was only published because a friend had started a
publishing house. Soon after, however, Penguin picked it up and in the sixties,
hundreds of thousands of copies were sold. According to Young, the title must
have been one of the reasons for its success. His neologism ‘meritocracy’—
partly Latin, partly Greek—was attractive to many, because of the role it
assigned to education. ‘In all industrial societies the growth of massive educa-
tional systems has been one of the most signiﬁcant phenomena of the cen-
tury’ (Young 1994: xiv). However, ‘meritocracy’ did not become a current
concept for empirical, descriptive reasons alone. The notion of meritocracy
also legitimized new forms of social stratiﬁcation. Social class was the most
familiar form of closure in Britain at the time Young’s essay was published,
and so the notion of meritocracy could be read as an attack on class stratiﬁca-
tion (Dench 2006). It legitimized new forms of elite formation based on
educational achievements and technical qualiﬁcations. Also, it ﬁtted very
nicely within the neo-liberal worldview that became dominant in the latter
half of the twentieth century, because it implies that individuals, through
their competencies and efforts, are responsible for their own career.1
Young’s book was written as ﬁction, whereas our book is deﬁnitely
meant as a work of non-ﬁction. Over the past half-century, the concept
Diploma Democracy
4

of meritocracy—literally ‘rule by the meritorious’—has become a standard
concept in social and political theory. It is a contested concept, however,
as ‘merit’ can be deﬁned in many ways. In this book, merit is used in the
Platonic sense of prolonged intellectual and academic training. In modern
society, there is a convenient indicator for this type of merit: the length of
formal education, as measured by the highest diploma. We therefore use
the term diploma democracy as shorthand for a modern political meritoc-
racy. A diploma democracy is a democracy which is dominated by the
citizens with the highest formal education qualiﬁcations. In less academic
terms: a diploma democracy is ruled by the citizens with the highest
degrees.
Exploring the Rise of Political Meritocracy
This book explores the context, contours, and consequences of the rise of such
an education-based, political meritocracy. It is an ampliﬁcation of an earlier
book on diploma democracy, which was published in Dutch (Bovens & Wille
2011). Its aim is ﬁrst of all to explore the extent to which contemporary West
European democracies are dominated by higher educated citizens. Originally,
our study was conﬁned to the Dutch parliamentary democracy, with which
we are most familiar. However, in this book, we will expand our argument to
other advanced West European democracies, notably Belgium, Denmark,
France, Germany, and the UK. An analysis of national and international
survey data will be made to examine trends with regard to voting and a
range of other forms of political participation, participation in civil society
organizations, and the educational stratiﬁcation of the political elites.
Secondly, our aim is to discuss the consequences of this rise of political
meritocracy. After all, why should the rise of an education-based meritocracy
in politics be something to worry about? Is it not reassuring to know that our
representatives and leaders have had such a solid academic grounding? Plato,
the founder of the ﬁrst Academy, certainly thought so. He would probably
have approved of the professorial Di Rupo and Merkel Cabinets. However, the
rise of an education-based meritocracy does not ﬁt easily within the normative
foundations of modern representative democracy. According to Robert Dahl
(1979: 131), the great theorist of modern democracy, ‘the doctrine of merit-
ocracy [is] the enduring rival to democratic ideas.’
Citizens with low or medium educational qualiﬁcation levels currently
make up approximately 70 per cent of the electorate, yet they are virtually
absent from cabinets, parliaments, and, for that matter, from most other
political arenas. This dominance of well-educated citizens may lead to an
‘exclusion bias’ in politics, in which particular types of opinions are not
Diploma Democracy
5

represented. For example, surveys suggest that those with lower education
qualiﬁcations predominantly worry about crime, social security, and the cost
of living, whereas the well-educated are much more concerned about the
quality of schools. Also, the well-educated are much more positive about
the beneﬁts of the EU and immigration than the less well-educated segments
of the population. Such biases in representational relationships can be a
serious threat to the legitimacy and stability of parliamentary democracy.
This book has limited ambitions. We want to document the rise of political
meritocracy and discuss its consequences. We look at European countries
where we would expect the rise of political meritocracy to be more prominent
than elsewhere in the light of their high percentages of well-educated citizens
and the meritocratic character of the educational system and the labour
market in these countries. The countries in question are Belgium, Denmark,
the Netherlands, the UK, and, to a lesser extent, Germany and France. We
substantiate this selection in Chapter 4. We could have included other coun-
tries, such as Austria, Switzerland, or Finland, but we have refrained from
doing so for pragmatic reasons. This is not a study in comparative politics;
we will not systematically compare a range of parliamentary democracies in
order to document dissimilarities or to charter the workings of the different
political systems. Our undertaking is ﬁrst of all explorative and argumentative.
Therefore, a few prominent cases will do. Focusing on a restricted set of similar
cases leads us to answer the general question of what is common to all cases,
rather than the question of variation between them (Caramani 2010). How-
ever, at some points in the argument we will present more general data on
larger samples of European countries, to put our ﬁndings in a broader perspec-
tive. And, when looking at civil society and the political elites, we also will take
the EU level into account.
We also would like to emphasize that this is an argumentative rather than
an explanatory study. The main aim of our exercise is to take stock of the
education gaps in political participation. That is, to describe the differences
among educational groups and at some point later in this book to consider
their political implications. We realize that description ‘is not very fashionable
in political science these days’ (Schlozman et al. 2012: xxi) and often con-
sidered, mistakenly, a ‘mundane task’ or ‘residual category’ of ‘little intrinsic
scientiﬁc value’ (Gerring 2012: 721). However, a better and more complete
description of the educational differences in the full range of political partici-
patory behaviours is helpful to gain a better picture of the extent to which
contemporary West European democracies are diploma democracies.
Our main purpose, therefore, is not to explain who is active and who is not.
We are not primarily interested in explaining political behaviour or even in
explaining the rise of political meritocracy. We are not election researchers,
Diploma Democracy
6

seeking to explain and predict voting patterns and other forms of political
behaviour. We will use data gathered in election studies and social surveys, but
our agenda is different from theirs. We are interested in the macro effects on
representative democracy of the dominance of the well-educated, not in
the effects of education per se. However, we will discuss in passing social
mechanisms that might elucidate this dominance of well-educated groups in
politics. What is so important about education? Does it enhance efﬁcacy,
skills, or political socialization? Or is it a proxy for other factors, such as
cognitive abilities, network position, or socio-economic status? Is the absence
of less-educated citizens in political ofﬁce caused by educational inﬂation, or is
it a side effect of the decline of mass organizations and the transformation of
political parties and social movements into professional organizations? These
issues will be discussed in the course of our examination of the major political
arenas in parliamentary democracies.
Outline: Concepts, Contours, and Consequences
of Diploma Democracy
The ﬁrst part of the book introduces our main concepts and contexts. Chapter 2
is concerned with diplomas and the educational expansion. It demarcates the
various educational categories, it documents the spectacular rise in the num-
ber of well-educated citizens over the past decades, and it explores to what
extent this educational revolution has constituted a new critical juncture in
society. Chapter 3 is concerned with democracy and the participatory expan-
sion. It discusses the various conceptions of representative democracy that are
relevant for an assessment of the rise of political meritocracy, and it explores
the potential effects of the participatory revolution on democratic equity.
Chapter 4 explores to what extent an emerging social and political educa-
tional cleavage can be observed across Europe. By using a broad notion of
cleavage,
which
includes
socio-structural
differences,
attitudinal,
and
institutional-behavioral differences, we attempt to establish to what extent
the advent of new divisions related to the expansion of higher education
occurs across a range of European countries.
The second part of the book sketches the contours of an emerging diploma
democracy in six mature Western European democracies: Belgium, Denmark,
France, Germany, the Netherlands, and the UK. Chapter 5 examines the
differences between educational groups regarding the major forms of political
participation. Chapter 6 does the same for civil society and organized inter-
ests. Chapter 7 concentrates on the meritocratization of the political elites.
Diploma Democracy
7

The consequences of diploma democracy are the subject of the third and ﬁnal
part. In Chapter 8 we assess the rise of diploma democracy and discuss some
potential tensions between political meritocracy and representative democ-
racy, such as descriptive deﬁcits, policy incongruences, biased standards, and
cynicism and distrust. Finally, Chapter 9 looks at ways to remedy, or at least
mitigate, some of the negative effects of diploma democracy.
Note
1. See Donovan (2006) and Mijs (2015) for the mixed reception of Young’s essay.
Diploma Democracy
8

Part I
Concepts and Contexts


2
Diplomas
Meritocracy: From Science Fiction to Factual Description
Life sometimes imitates art. Written in the 1950s as science ﬁction, Michael
Young’s book has turned out to be surprisingly realistic in hindsight. Many
Western European countries underwent major educational transformations in
the second half of the past century, which have strongly enhanced the merito-
cratic nature of society. This has resulted in a sharp increase in the number of
well-educated citizens in society, but also in increased social stratiﬁcation along
educational lines. The level and type of education attained has become a very
important resource inﬂuencing a person’s chances in life and position in society.
Diplomas are important screening devices. Take the case of Ellen Joncheere. In
2013, she was headhunted to become the new CEO of the NMBS, the Belgian
national railways. Eventually she had to withdraw her candidacy, because it
turned out she did not have a master degree. There were no doubts about her
managerial competencies, she was a successful CEO of a large ﬁrm in waste
management, but a MA-degree, in any type of discipline, was a prerequisite for
the job. Another example is Annissa Temsamani, a junior minister in the Belgian
Verhofstad-II cabinet. In 2003, after seventy-four days in ofﬁce, she had to
resign, because it was suggested she had lied about having a tertiary degree.1
Differences in educational capital also have led to new social divisions. As
Larry Mead (2013: 171) observed: ‘The longer meritocracy exists, the more it
serves to intensify inequality rather than reducing it.’ In France, for example,
there is growing unease about the system of Grandes écoles. They were meant
to be the apex of the republican ideal of meritocracy—only open to the best
and the brightest, regardless of class or social status, who were selected
through a rigorous system of entry exams. However, over the past decades,
the inﬂux of students from lower social classes and immigrant families has
slowed to a trickle. This has transformed these schools into a bulwark for the
well-educated (upper) middle classes who can provide their children with the
necessary economic and social capital to successfully pass the concourses.

According to Richard Descoings, the late director of Sciences Po: ‘We used to
have an aristocracy of blood. Now we have a new aristocracy of status con-
ferred by success in getting into this school or that. In France, you crack the
champagne when you get on to the admission list for one of the Grandes écoles,
not when you graduate.’2
In Britain too, the golden age of social mobility is over, according to John
Goldthorpe (2016), the Oxford based sociologist of stratiﬁcation. Younger
generations from less well-off families face less favourable mobility chances
than did their parents or grandparents. One of the reasons is that the more
well-off parents use their cultural, economic, and social resources to ensure
that their children remain at the top of the educational and social ladder. They
provide their children with a competitive advantage in the educational system
and in the labour market, by enabling them to attend elite schools and
elite universities. These investments in elite education do pay off. According
to the Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission (2014), 75 per cent of
senior judges, 59 per cent of the cabinet, 57 per cent of permanent secretaries,
50 per cent of diplomats, 47 per cent of newspaper columnists, 44 per cent
of public body chairs, 38 per cent of members of the House of Lords, and
12 per cent of the Sunday Times Rich List attended Oxbridge—compared to
less than 1 per cent of the population as a whole.
This chapter documents how education and diplomas have become such
important social markers in Western societies. Education can be the result of
informal processes—through family, neighbours, peers, or life experiences—
or of formal learning that is dispensed by special institutions, such as schools
and universities. Modern Western societies rely on the latter. They are ‘cre-
dentials societies’ in which ‘certiﬁcation of achievement—through the college
degree, the professional examination, the license—becomes a condition of
higher employment’ (Bell 1972: 34).
The length of formal education, as measured by the highest degree, has
become a major determinant of social status, income, and, as we shall show
later in this book, entrance into the political elites. First we will describe the
relationship between education and meritocracy and how we classify educa-
tional levels. Second, we will describe how the enormous educational expan-
sion in the second half of the twentieth century has constituted a critical
juncture for the rise of new social and political divides.
Meritocracy and Diplomas
The Elements of Meritocracy
According to Jonathan Mijs (2015: 3), the concept of meritocracy can be
broken down into three constituent elements: (1) careers are open to talents;
Diploma Democracy
12

(2) educational opportunity is matched to natural ability; and (3) achievement
and not ascription is the basis for social inequality. Natural ability and
achievement, instead of social origin and inherited social capital, determine
one’s success in school and in the labour market. To determine whether trends
over time are tending towards such a meritocratic conﬁguration, the so-called
‘OED triangle’, is often used (see Figure 2.1).
The triangle helps to identify the pattern that should emerge in order to
produce a more meritocratic society.3 First of all, the relationship between
class origins and educational qualiﬁcations, the O–E arrow, should weaken
over time. Tertiary education should be open to intellectual talents, irrespect-
ive of their social class. On the other hand, the association between educa-
tional qualiﬁcations and social destination, the E–D arrow, should become
stronger. The selection of candidates for high-status jobs should be based
primarily on educational qualiﬁcations and not on origin, social networks,
or nepotism. As a result, the direct impact of class origins on social destination,
the O–D arrow, should weaken.
Diplomas and Educational Stratiﬁcation
Education is the engine of meritocracy. The educational system recognizes with
diplomas those who reach a level of educational attainment. The diplomas are
taken as measures of merit and are used as criteria of eligibility for occupations
and positions (McNamee & Miller 2009: 14). The educational system is there-
fore also a system of stratiﬁcation—a division of society into permanent groups
or categories, such as the ‘lower’, ‘medium’, and ‘higher’ educated.4 Character-
istic of the educational hierarchy is that it is structured according to the level of
the diploma conferred by a particular educational institution. At the top of the
Education (E)
Origin (O)
Destination (D)
weakening
strenghtening
Figure 2.1. The OED triangle
Diplomas
13

hierarchy are the institutions that offer doctoral degrees, while institutions
offering primary or elementary level education are at the bottom.
There is a wide variety in educational systems among Western democracies
and, therefore, also in the classiﬁcation of diplomas and the level of education.
Educational institutions are rooted in different national traditions of educa-
tion and occupational training, which have ties with different parts of the
labour market and educate students for different occupations or professions
(Bleiklie 2003: 345). These factors make it difﬁcult to talk about a clear and
unequivocal hierarchical system across countries, or even over time within
countries. As Schröder and Ganzeboom (2014: 120) observe:
Due to the crucial role of education in modern society, countries keep reforming
their education systems, forever increasing or decreasing the number of different
school types and programmes, abolishing some and adding others. . . . Compara-
tive measurement in cross-national designs and also in a historical perspective, to
some extent, always means comparing the incomparable.
Formal education is, thus, a difﬁcult variable, methodologically, to use in
comparative and longitudinal research. For example, one of the basic tools
for describing and analysing different levels of formal education in statistical
research is the international standard classiﬁcation of education (ISCED). The
2011 version distinguishes no fewer than nine levels of education (UNESCO
2012).5 It is common practice to condense these nine levels into three, rather
crude, categories: low, medium, and high. They underscore a common stage of
learning.
Citizens with no formal qualiﬁcations at all, with primary education, or
who have been educated up to the ﬁrst level of secondary education (ISCED
levels 0, 1, and 2) are considered to have a low level of educational attainment.
In Western Europe, these are the citizens who have left school at the end of
compulsory education. Recent cohorts would have spent around ten years in
school6 and have ﬁnished school at the age of about sixteen. They have no
formal diplomas, or a diploma from the ﬁrst stage of secondary education,
such as junior high school, primary vocational training, or middle school.
These are the low-skilled citizens who work in industry, construction, service
delivery, or who are unemployed.
Those who have completed upper secondary, post-secondary non-tertiary
education, or short-cycle tertiary education (ISCED levels 3, 4, and 5) belong
to the group with a medium level of educational attainment. In Western
Europe, they have typically spent between eleven and fourteen years in
school, leaving the educational system between the ages of seventeen and
twenty. They have a diploma from senior secondary education, secondary
vocational training, primary professional education, or advanced vocational
training. These are the medium-skilled, vocationally trained employees that
Diploma Democracy
14

work at the medium levels in industry, construction, service delivery, ﬁnance
and administration, health and child care, welfare, or who are self-employed.
Citizens with a degree from long cycle tertiary education (ISCED levels 6, 7,
and 8) belong to the highly educated group. In Western Europe, they have spent
about ﬁfteen years or more in school and are twenty-one or older when they
graduate. They have at least a BA degree from a college, a university, or from a
professional university, such as, for example, a Fachhochschule in Germany, a
former polytechnic in the UK, Institutes Universitaires de Technologie (IUT) in
France, or a Hogeschool in the Netherlands. On the Continent, they will often
also have an MA degree, or even an advanced research degree, such as a PhD or
doctorate. These are the well-educated professionals and managers that work
in research and development, the creative industries, legal and ﬁnancial ser-
vices, cultural institutions, healthcare, higher education, and ICT.
In most parts of this book we will stick to these three educational levels, but
occasionally, if this is relevant for our argument, we will differentiate within
them. We do realize that the adjectives ‘low’, ‘medium’, and ‘high’ imply a
social hierarchy. For this reason, the OECD uses more neutral terms, such as
‘primary’, ‘secondary’, and ‘tertiary’ education, to differentiate between levels
of education. For reasons of parsimony, we will follow common practice and
distinguish lesser, medium, and highly educated groups of citizens. Wherever
this is feasible and more adequate, we will also use the more neutral triplet.
The Expansion of the Educational System
The most striking feature of the educational system in Western Europe and
many other industrial societies is the sheer scale of its expansion in the second
half of the twentieth century (Lauder et al. 2006: 7). This includes an increase
in the number of students, but also an increased massiﬁcation and diversiﬁ-
cation of higher education.
The Increase in Educational Attainment
The global expansion of education includes, ﬁrst of all, an increase in educa-
tional attainment According to Robert Barro and Jong Wha Lee (2013: 188),
the world population aged ﬁfteen and above was estimated to have an average
of 3.2 years of schooling in 1950, increasing steadily to 5.3 years in 1980, and
7.8 years in 2010. In advanced countries,7 the average in 2010 was about
eleven years of schooling, compared to 7.1 years in developing countries.
Figure 2.2, which is based on their data, summarizes the progress in educa-
tional attainment of the population aged ﬁfteen years and older in the past
half-century.
Diplomas
15

According to Barro and Lee, the biggest improvement in average years of
schooling among the younger cohorts was recorded between 1970 and 1990,
in the advanced countries. Many European countries carried out major edu-
cational reforms in the twentieth century aimed at increasing compulsory
schooling, and unifying and improving curricula.8
The Massiﬁcation of Higher Education
Complementary to the expansion of compulsory schooling was the broaden-
ing of the access to higher education. This has resulted both in higher enrol-
ment rates and in higher absolute numbers of tertiary institutions, students,
and staff. In 1970, UNESCO estimated that there were roughly 32.5 million
students enrolled in higher education worldwide. By the year 2000, this
number had increased to nearly 100 million, and in 2010 to 178 million
(Tremblay et al. 2012: 17). In the advanced countries in particular, this has
resulted in a signiﬁcant increase in the percentage of the total population that
has obtained tertiary qualiﬁcations (see Figure 2.3). This has increased from a
few percentage points in the 1950s to about 20 per cent in 2010.
In a seminal report to the OECD, Martin Trow (1974) distinguished three
stages in the expansion of higher education. In the ﬁrst stage, called the elite
university phase, participation in higher education is less than 15 per cent of
the relevant age group. In the second, mass higher education phase, partici-
pation rates exceed 15 per cent but remain below 50 per cent. Third, at its
universal stage, higher education participation rates exceed 50 per cent of the
relevant age group. Whereas the elite university is by and large the privilege
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
average years of schooling
world
advanced
Figure 2.2. Educational attainment by years of schooling, worldwide and advanced
countries (population age 15+, source: Barro & Lee 2013: 187, table 3)
Diploma Democracy
16

of the upper class, mass higher education can already be referred to as a right
of the middle classes; in the universal phase, a majority of the population
participates in higher education.
Available statistics suggest that enrolment in higher education in econom-
ically advanced countries in the second half of the last century developed
from a small elite sector, in which some 5 per cent of adolescents participated,
to a greatly expanded mass system. In Europe, the evolution of systems of elite
higher education into systems of mass higher education took place from the
1960s and early 1970s onward (Trow 2005). In some cases, such as Finland and
Sweden, a universal system is emerging in which over 50 per cent of the
adolescents takes part.9
The Increasing Diversiﬁcation of ‘Higher’ Education
Prior to the 1960s, higher education in Western Europe was the exclusive
sphere of the university.10 Vocational training in engineering, social work,
teacher training, business administration, and nursing was not perceived as
higher education. This was provided by separate professional schools, where
students were trained for a speciﬁc occupation or a profession (Kyvik 2009: 3).
In the late 1960s, it became increasingly clear that it was impossible for the
traditional research universities to accommodate large numbers of students
(Christensen & Newberry 2015). Other types of higher education institutions,
geared mainly towards teaching and professional training, were thought to be
appropriate for absorbing the growing numbers of students (Trow 1974). New
types of institutions were created in order to deal with a growing, more
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
% population advanced countries completed schooling  
primary
secondary
tertiary
Figure 2.3. Educational attainment by education level, advanced countries (% of
population age 15+ completed schooling, source: Barro & Lee 2013: 187, table 3)
Diplomas
17

diversiﬁed group of students, and the rapidly mounting need of private and
public organizations for better educated employees (Trow 2005: 17).
These new institutions—whether ‘universities of applied science’, ‘univer-
sity colleges’, ‘institutes of technology’, or ‘polytechnics’—provided a com-
prehensive education (Kyvik & Lepori 2010: 4). During the ﬁnal decades of the
twentieth century, terms such as ‘post-secondary’, ‘tertiary’, and ‘third-level’
gained in popularity. The traditional adjective ‘higher’ suggested a certain
degree of cognitive rigour, an expectation that students learn to question
prevailing rules and tools and understand theories, methods and substance
of ‘academic’ knowledge (Teichler 2004: 3). In the 1980s, the OECD became a
fervent advocate of substituting the term ‘higher’ education by ‘tertiary’
education. In this book we will use both terms interchangeably.
The Educational Revolution as a Critical Juncture
Daniel Bell was among the ﬁrst to recognize that the process of democratiza-
tion and expansion of higher education, which started in the 1960s, had
major consequences for contemporary Western societies. According to him,
in the post-industrial society ‘the major class . . . is primarily a professional
class, based on knowledge rather than property’ (Bell 1973: 374). A host of
theorists have followed his lead and used knowledge and education to
delineate new structural divisions.11 For Talcott Parsons (1971: 97), these
educational developments, especially in higher education, were so import-
ant that he referred to these by the term the ‘educational revolution’. The
enormous increase in educational attainment, the growth of university
enrolments, and the diversiﬁcation and expansion of academic occupa-
tions were, for Parsons, as important as the industrial and democratic
revolution had been. The educational revolution, to some extent, synthe-
sized the themes of the other two: equality of opportunity and equality of
citizenship.12
Educational expansion, together with secularisation, increased social mobil-
ity, and afﬂuence, was assumed to weaken the distinctiveness of class and the
salience of religious identities. Class and religion were no longer the only
sources of identity, but were cross-cut by other sources of political attitudes
and preferences (Evans & De Graaf 2013: 4–5). The most inﬂuential theorist in
this respect was Ronald Inglehart (1977; 1989) who developed an inﬂuential
theory of intergenerational value change from materialist to post-materialist
values. Inglehart examined changes in religious beliefs, work motivation,
political conﬂict, attitudes toward children and families, and attitudes toward
divorce, abortion, and homosexuality.
Diploma Democracy
18

Recently, this discussion has been supplemented by a line of research that
points to the increasing importance of education as a key to understanding
emerging cultural divides in politics.13 Allardt (1968) and Kriesi (1998) have
argued that the ‘educational revolution’ of the 1960 and 1970s has constituted
a ‘critical juncture’ for the rise of new political differences and conﬂicts. In
knowledge economies, levels of formal education not only determine to a
large extent socio-economic positions, they also affect attitudes and political
preference formation (Kalmijn & Kraaykamp 2007: 568–9). Well-educated and
less well-educated individuals exhibit signiﬁcant differences in attitudes and
preferences regarding cultural issues such as immigration, ethnic diversity,
and European uniﬁcation, as we shall see later in this book. Some even argue
that educational differences constitute the basis for a new type of social and
political cleavage in society (Stubager 2010).
The contours of such an emerging educational cleavage will be traced in
Chapter 4. Here we will explore competing claims with respect to the impact
of the educational revolution. The role ascribed to education in the develop-
ment of society is debatable and, to some extent, contradictory. For some
theorists, the educational revolution functioned as a critical juncture, opening
up new opportunities for social mobility and the rise of new practices and new
social structures. Others have emphasized how the educational revolution
initiated new closures.
New Openings and Emerging Social Opportunities
Education as the Engine of Social Mobility
According to some, the educational revolution has changed the social oppor-
tunity structure in many West European societies. In numerous respects, the
notion of meritocracy, coined in the 1950s by Young, has become the
dominant ideology. If you are talented enough, and study hard, you can
achieve success, no matter where you start in life. In the post-industrial
society, educational and occupational success is based on individual achieve-
ment rather than on social background, ethnicity, or gender (Lauder et al.
2006: 9–10).
In this perspective, the increasing importance attached to education reﬂects
its role as the key institution in administering meritocratic justice. By extend-
ing access to formal education, governments have managed to expand the
social opportunities for children from less privileged backgrounds. Mass
higher education may have helped to make the labor force more productive,
but the rationale was never just economic. The other goal was equal status—a
society where ordinary people could claim equivalence (Mead 2013: 171).
Diplomas
19

‘Stay in school and get ahead’, has become, therefore, one of the modern
mantras of our times. Those with higher levels of formal schooling are gener-
ally expected to have better chances of occupational and ﬁnancial success.
High levels of education are perceived as a form of social capital that is
associated with higher income, increased opportunities for employment,
and better job security:
the educational system has come to play a central role in supporting social
mobility, both upward and downward—providing opportunities to the bright
and hardworking children’ of those of ‘humble’ origins, but at the same time
preventing ‘the lazy, dull, or troubled children’ of the advantaged classes from
enjoying the fruits of their parents’ success.
(Treiman et al. 2003: 2)
Education, so the argument goes, has become the primary engine of social
mobility in the modern world.
New Closures and Diminishing Returns
The educational revolution, however, has not only created new ways of getting
ahead. The claim that the educational system and the competition for high-
status jobs are based on merit is contested by theoretical perspectives that focus
on issues of social exclusion. It may be argued that the expansion of higher
education has also led to exclusionary forces and professional enclaves and
that the educational meritocracy has generated a new educational aristocracy.
Diplomas as Screening Devices
The cases of Ellen Joncheere and Anissa Temsamani illustrate how in contem-
porary Western societies, diplomas function as important screening devices
(Woodhall 2001). Evaluation on the basis of degrees has in today’s ‘credential
society’ become the dominant gatekeeping strategy to ﬁll jobs with well-
trained people. As the famous French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu (1977: 21)
put it: ‘a school diploma is a piece of universally recognized and guaranteed
symbolic capital, good on all markets.’ In today’s large organizations, employ-
ers and those making hiring decisions have taken to using these ‘educational
credentials’ as a shorthand to sort out the right candidates. Diplomas have
become the hard ‘evidence’: ‘a cost-effective way to limit the pools of eligibles
and to aid in the hiring of people presumed to have qualities that organiza-
tions value in ﬁlling a position’ (McNamee & Miller 2009: 112).
Diplomas are positional goods, however. Their value diminishes as more
people acquire them. Educational expansion will thus give rise to ‘credential
inﬂation’. The American sociologist Randall Collins (2002: 24) describes how:
Diploma Democracy
20

The process of credential inﬂation is largely self-driven; it feeds on itself. A given
level of education at one time gave access to elite jobs. As educational attainment
has expanded, the social distinctiveness of that degree and its values on the
occupational marketplace have declined; this in turn has expanded demand for
still higher levels of education.
These factors inﬂuence the extent of upward mobility in a society, and the
degree to which intergenerational transfer of privileges takes place. In this
theoretical account, education is not about fairness and equity, but about the
reproduction of stratiﬁcation and privilege. Pierre Bourdieu (1984; 2006) has
shown how schooling is a resource and a social marker for certain positions
that are characterized and recognizable by symbols, such as clothing, lan-
guage, and ways of thinking and behaving. The curriculum, pedagogy, and
assessment reﬂect the norms, rituals, expectations, and practices consistent
with the upbringing of children from professional middle-class backgrounds.
Various researchers have described education, particularly higher education,
as a mechanism for social reproduction.14 In this perspective, the education
system is not the neutral arbiter of a meritocratic selection process. On the
contrary, it primarily serves to legitimate the unequal allocation of credentials,
jobs, and rewards. By sorting people into categories of its own making (PhDs,
MAs, BAs, high school graduates, dropouts), the education system generates
new class stratiﬁcations and actually promotes social inequality. Education
systems have thus fallen short of the meritocratic ideal.
New Privileges and Elites
Education has progressively come to be seen as the primary means of upward
social mobility. Opportunities to get ahead on the basis of self-employment or
starting a new business, which was a major route to upward mobility in the
past, have declined. Lawrence Mead (2013) has observed that the idea that
success in school was the only road to achievement was absent in the 1960s.
Many people who failed in school succeeded later, while the idea of success
was broad and varied. Success could be achieved in various ways, using differ-
ent talents. In business or politics, success required a range of skills, and it was
difﬁcult to say who was a success until late in life. This has changed in recent
decades: ‘The meritocracy, however, has created a less forgiving hierarchy
based on academic prowess alone. It now seems much cleared who is success-
ful and who is not. That verdict is also delivered much earlier in life when it
shapes self-esteem more strongly.’ (Mead 2013: 169).
Moreover, while the equality of educational opportunity is increasing at
lower levels of education, access to universities and other elite institutions
continues to be viewed as the purview of the already higher educated. In other
Diplomas
21

words, the effect of social origins on educational attainment is the greatest at
the high end of the educational spectrum:
Today most students at elite schools come from families were the parents were
already college-educated. . . . There is thus little prospect that disadvantaged
groups . . . can achieve equal status just by levelling the playing ﬁeld. The compe-
tition is simple too tough . . . The . . . project to equalize status through education
has achieved much but it has hit diminishing returns.
(Mead 2013: 172)
Educational inﬂation has also generated a drive for new privileges. Tradition-
ally, Britain and France boast selective institutions that play a large role in
both the stratiﬁcation process, and the selection of elites at the top of political
positions. Britain has a highly selective private system of grammar schools
alongside a largely non-selective state school system.15 In France, there is
unease about the admission to the Grandes écoles, the elite universities, as
was shown in the quote from Richard Descoinges, the late director of Sciences
Po, at the beginning of this chapter. In their study of the social background of
students in four of the most selective French schools, Michel Euriat and
Claude Thélot (1995) found that between 1950 and 1993, the proportion of
students recruited from the lower social classes signiﬁcantly diminished.16
These trends have generated public debates about improving the access to
these elite universities.
The Persistence of Tertiary Education across Generations
There is empirical evidence that European societies are not progressing unam-
biguously towards a more meritocratic conﬁguration, according to the
dynamics of the OED triangle. The OED triangle has been the subject of
extensive cross-national and technically sophisticated economic and socio-
logical research.17 In more recent years, the association between education
and social stratiﬁcation, instead of growing stronger, has lessened: ‘In ﬁve out
of six European societies studied over the late twentieth century . . . the ED
association was found actually to weaken: i.e. individuals’ social destinations—
in this case deﬁned in terms of class—were becoming less closely related to their
educational attainment’ (Goldthorpe 2014: 267). In an OECD study that meas-
ured intergenerational social mobility in twelve developed OECD countries,
Britain comes out as the least socially mobile society, followed closely by Italy
and the United States. Denmark has the largest intergenerational social mobility,
followed by Australia and Norway (OECD 2010: 185). According to this study, a
child growing up in a poor family in Denmark has three times the chance of
doing better than his or her parents than a child growing up in Britain, the
United States, or Italy.
Diploma Democracy
22

Across all OECD countries, coming from a more highly educated family
increases the probability of achieving tertiary education relative to having a
medium parental educational background (OECD 2010: 188). Likewise, a
sizeable drop in the probability of achieving tertiary education is associated
with growing up in a lower educated family vis-à-vis a medium-educated one
(Causa et al. 2009: 18). The same applies across the EU. In the EU-28, there is
persistence in attending tertiary education across generations. In 2011,
according to Eurostat:
the persistence of high educational attainment (63.4 %) is the most signiﬁcant
among the education groups. The higher is the educational level of the parents,
the higher is the rate of persistence: the persistence of medium educational
attainment is 59.2 % and of low educational attainment only 34.2 %. . . . if a person
is born into a family with low educated parents, the possibility to be low educated
themselves is 34.2 %, while if the parents had high education, the possibility to be
low educated is just 3.4 %.
(Grundiza & Lopez Vilaplana 2013: 3)
This is not all that different from the sort of social closure Michael Young
described in his 1958 satire.
The Rise of the Well-Educated in Society
The average reader of this book may take for granted that large segments
of society are well educated. After all, he or she is likely to live in a social
world that is largely inhabited by well-educated people. Most of his or
her friends, colleagues, family, and neighbours will probably have at least
a college degree. This, however, is not self-evident. In fact, it is a very recent
phenomenon.
Throughout most of the twentieth century, the vast majority of citizens in
most European countries had few educational qualiﬁcations and, in effect, fell
into the low educated category. Some made it to vocational training, thus
qualifying as medium educated, but only a very small proportion of the
population acquired a college or university degree. For example, according
to the 1960 census in the Netherlands, only 85,000 citizens had academic
qualiﬁcations—a tiny ﬁgure representing less than 1 per cent of the labour
force—and one that included 8,000 Catholic priests, who had completed the
major seminary. Another three per cent, about 200,000 citizens, qualiﬁed
as having a medium level of education, while an overwhelming 96 per cent
was classiﬁed as low educated. Similar ﬁgures apply for Belgium: in 1961,
2 per cent of the population had completed tertiary education, 6 per cent
had secondary qualiﬁcations, and the rest, a vast 92 per cent, had primary
qualiﬁcations only (Elchardus 2012: 41).
Diplomas
23

Two generations ago, in the early 1960s, there were no distinct educational
groups in society. The major divides were between social classes, most notori-
ously in the UK, but also in Germany and Italy; or between religious
groups, such as Catholics and Protestants in the Netherlands and in Northern
Ireland, or between religious and secular segments, for example in Belgium
and France.
Nowadays, in most European countries, the percentage of well-educated
citizens is higher than that of the less well-educated. In 2015, according to
the OECD, 21 per cent of the EU-22 workforce (age 25–65) had primary educa-
tional qualiﬁcations; 52 per cent secondary qualiﬁcations; and 27 per cent
had at least the equivalent of a bachelor degree.18 In 1992, only 11 per cent
classiﬁed as tertiary educated. The number of well-educated citizens in the EU
has therefore more than doubled in the past twenty years. There are still
considerable differences within Europe, as we will show in Chapter 4. The
southern and eastern countries, such as Portugal, Slovakia, Croatia, Slovenia,
the Czech Republic, and Bulgaria, tend to have the lowest percentages of well-
educated citizens, and the western and northern countries, such as Belgium,
Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Estonia, and Finland, the highest.
This rapid increase in the number of well-educated citizens in Western
Europe does not mean that the groups with low and medium levels of educa-
tional attainment have all but disappeared in the information society. On the
contrary, the well-educated group remains a small educational stratum. In
2015, almost 75 per cent of the workforce did not qualify as being well
educated. Since the OECD-ﬁgures only comprise those between twenty-ﬁve
and sixty-ﬁve years of age, the number of well educated among the electorate
will be even lower, because most of the elderly citizens will not have tertiary
degrees. Despite the impressive increase in educational qualiﬁcations in
the past decades, the well-educated are a minority in European advanced
democracies—a substantial and very vocal and politically active minority, as
we shall see, but a minority nonetheless. Between two-thirds and three-
quarters of all EU citizens do not have a college or graduate degree.
How the differences in formal qualiﬁcations affect political participation
and citizenship will be the subject of the coming chapters. As we shall see in
Chapter 4, levels of education are important drivers of differences in income
levels and we also see strong levels of educational homogamy, particularly
among well-educated citizens, which is indicative of social closure. Along with
the growing importance of international migration, processes of globaliza-
tion, and Europeanization—which intensiﬁed in the 1990s and early 2000s—
this trend has set the stage for a profound transformation of political conﬂicts
in the different European countries.
Against the background of these social and political transformations, the
dominance of the well-educated in politics is less innocent than the Platonic
Diploma Democracy
24

dream suggests. It does raise serious questions about the representativeness of
contemporary democracy. To this notion of democracy we now turn.
Notes
1. We owe these examples to Bram Spruyt.
2. The Financial Times, 9 January 2010.
3. Compare Whelan & Layte 2004: 10.
4. For a general discussion of processes of stratiﬁcation see Tilly 1999; Massey 2007: 6.
5. Some databases, for example the ESS, use earlier versions of the ISCED in which
only ﬁve or seven levels were distinguished. In the appendix to his book an
overview is provided of the various datasets that have been used, and of the various
ways in which educational groups have been classiﬁed in these datasets.
6. Depending on the minimum age of entry into the formal school system. In most
European countries compulsory education starts around the age of ﬁve or six.
7. The ‘advanced countries’ are: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey,
United Kingdom, United States. (Barro & Lee 2013: 198).
8. See Leschinsky & Mayer 1990; Fort 2006. Fort provides an extensive description of
changes in compulsory schooling in fourteen European countries, with particular
attention to the historical developments of each national education system.
9. See Osborne 2003: 5; Kivinen et al. 2007: 233.
10. See Bleiklie 2005; Kyvik 2009; Christensen & Newberry 2015.
11. See Wright 1985.
12. See Kriesi 1993: 23; Turner 1993.
13. Compare Kriesi 1998; Houtman 2001; Stubager 2010; Dolezal 2010; Bornschier
2010.
14. See, among others: Treiman et al. 2003: 2; Collins 1979; Bowles & Gintis 1976;
Lauder et al. 2006: 11–13.
15. See Sutton Trust 2008; Barnardo’s 2010. Lack of mobility has been an issue in the
United Kingdom. Since 2010 there is an advisory non-departmental public body,
the Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission (SMCP), that monitors the
progress of government and others in improving social mobility and reducing
child poverty in the UK. See https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/social-
mobility-and-child-poverty-commission.
16. See the discussion by Dogan 2003: 46–7.
17. Compare Causa & Johansson 2010; Erikson & Goldthorpe 2010; Goldthorpe 2014;
Breen & Karlson 2014.
18. OECD, Education at a glance 2016, table A1.1.
Diplomas
25

3
Democracy
Government by or for the People?
A diploma democracy is a democracy which is ruled by the citizens with the
highest degrees. Is this a problem? That depends on your idea of democracy.
To some, a ‘diploma democracy’ is a contradiction in terms. After all, wasn’t
democracy supposed to be all about rule by the people, as opposed to rule by a
well-educated or otherwise privileged elite?
Although ideals of democratic governance can vary in many ways, the
deﬁnition ‘rule by the people’, originating etymologically from the terms
demos + kratia, is often used as a starting point (Dahl 2006: 8). This leaves
open the question as to which ‘people’ should rule. There are generally two
very broad views on this issue: a more direct one, of ‘government by the
people’, and a more representative view of ‘government for the people’.1
According to the ﬁrst view, democracy implies the maximum possible par-
ticipation of citizens in shaping laws and policies. This means direct involve-
ment of ordinary citizens in political decisions, thus making the idea of
‘sovereignty of the people’ as real as possible (Dahl 2000: 37–8). For example,
in the Athenian democracy—much to the dismay of Plato—each citizen could
attend the ecclesia, the town meetings, and could cast his vote on each topic
that was discussed. Also, the members of the executive, the boulè, were chosen
by lot from the citizenry each month. From this classical perspective, rule by an
educational elite is something that is to be loathed—an anathema.
The problem in contemporary democracies is, of course, that millions of
citizens cannot assemble in a single place to discuss issues, nor do they speak
clearly with one voice. That is why ‘large scale’ democratic politics has adopted
representative institutions (Dahl 2000: 85). Representative government
places a limit on participation by the people, with as result that democracy is
seen increasingly to develop in the direction of ‘government for the people’.
According to this view, citizens are ‘controllers’ rather than participants.
However, this arrangement serves more than practical purposes alone.

Most liberal or representative models of democracy depart from the notion
that citizens, in general, are not sufﬁciently qualiﬁed to participate directly in
political decisions.2 The average citizen usually does not think enough about
political issues and, above all, lacks the competence to do so. From this
perspective, one of the obvious difﬁculties of a direct democracy is that
everyone has an equal right to vote, even though most citizens are not
properly educated on all political issues. The fear that the uninformed masses
would steer the course of society has led many great political thinkers to
express their concern about this ‘shortcoming’ of democracy. Far from enhan-
cing democracy, encouraging a more widespread popular participation might,
in fact, destabilize it. In the words of Joseph Schumpeter (2011 [1942]: 262):
The typical citizen drops down to a lower level of mental performance as soon as
he enters the political ﬁeld. He argues and analyses in a way which he would
readily recognize as infantile within the sphere of his real interests. He becomes a
primitive again. His thinking becomes associative and affective.
These two views on the role of citizens embody the most important models of
democracy. Direct or deliberative democracy relies on the more expansive and
ambitious versions of democracy and aims to shape the notion of ‘govern-
ment by the people’. Liberal or representative democracy, the dominant form
of democracy, is a process-oriented model of ‘government for the people’.
Common to both views is that they concern the procedures of political
decision-making, not substantive political ideologies. They stipulate the
mechanisms for free and equal voice so that citizens can communicate about
their preferences, their needs, and their views, and can hold political decision-
makers accountable.3
Democracy, therefore, is not one idea or even one set of ideas about the way
a political community might be governed, but a diverse collection of related
conceptions. We address some of these conceptions in this chapter. In the
following pages, we look ﬁrst at the different understandings of democracy
and the principal elements underlying them. Then we address how democra-
tization in the past decades has opened up new opportunities for many
citizens to participate and to voice concerns. Yet, as we shall see in Chapters
5, 6, and 7, this has at the same time closed down opportunities for other
citizens to inﬂuence decision-making, and paved the way for a diploma
democracy.
Principal Elements of Democracy
There is not one model of democracy, but there are several.4 Different
models bring distinctive normative expectations to bear on elite and citizen
Democracy
27

engagement in decision-making. The models differ in the emphasis they put
on the different yardsticks or elements, such as representation, responsiveness,
accountability, and legitimacy that are used to assess the quality of democratic
processes. Evaluations of a political state of affairs, such as the rise of diploma
democracy, may vary greatly, depending on the way these different yardsticks
are perceived.
Representation: Who Are to Be Made Present and How?
Representative democracy fuses two ideas from vastly different origins—
democracy and representation (Dahl 1989). The most straightforward deﬁn-
ition of representation comes from Hanna Pitkin (1967: 10), who says that
representation is simply ‘how the absent thing is made present’ again. Repre-
sentation, according to Pitkin, means ‘acting in the interest of the represented,
in a manner responsive to them’. In other words, political representation is
the activity of making citizens’ voices, opinions, and perspectives ‘present’ in
the public policymaking processes, and it occurs ‘when political actors speak,
advocate, symbolize and act on the behalf of others in the political arena’
(Dovi 2014).
These almost deceptively simple deﬁnitions hide the fact that representation
is a complex and much contested concept encompassing important questions.
First, there is the question of who or what is to be represented: the personal
characteristics of individuals, such as gender, age, profession, class, or educa-
tion, their opinions, their interests, or the common good. Second is the ques-
tion as to how should they be represented: as delegates bound by strict
mandates, or as trustees free from speciﬁc instructions (Cotta & Best 2000: 493).
The question of who or what is to be represented touches on what Pitkin
(1967) refers to as descriptive, and Ankersmit (2002) as mimetic representation.
In essence, this suggests that policymakers should form a ‘microcosm’ of
society: a representative sample of the population. The absence of a given
descriptive group may lead to inequalities in political power. Moreover, it
suggests that the unrepresented or under-represented groups ‘cannot rule or
are not suitable for rule’ and this carries with it ‘a legacy of second-class
citizenship’ (Mansbridge 1999: 649–50). Under-representation or exclusion
of certain social groups may thus undermine the democratic legitimacy and
conﬁdence in public institutions. From this egalitarian perspective of repre-
sentation, the rise of diploma democracy, particularly with regard to Members
of Parliament and holders of public ofﬁce, is a serious problem.
The idea of descriptive or mimetic representation raises difﬁcult questions,
however. To begin with, there is the problem of deﬁning the characteristics
according to which representation is to be evaluated. Which personal
characteristics are politically relevant: gender, age, ethnicity, educational
Diploma Democracy
28

achievements? Next, there is the difﬁculty of achieving this. Since all soci-
eties are divided in complex ways along multiple axes, descriptive represen-
tation on all relevant demographic dimensions cannot be realized within
the conﬁnes of a legislature or an executive of manageable size (Verba et al.
1995: 165). And then there is the issue of ‘where—and on what basis—one
draws the line . . . at what point do efforts to achieve good descriptive repre-
sentation start to look ridiculous?’ (Farrell & Scully 2007: 48). Should polit-
ical parties reserve seats in parliament for the proverbial senior lesbian,
physically challenged citizens from the Sikh community?
The representative ideal is that citizens and their interests should be repre-
sented in democratic deliberations and decisions in proportion to their
numbers in the polity. With regard to diploma democracy, the issue is how
politically relevant the educational differences among the citizenry are. In
most modern western democracies, gender and ethnicity have been regarded
as important social characteristics, which justify afﬁrmative action in a variety
of social and political arenas.5 Does that also apply to educational inequal-
ities? We will return to this issue in Chapters 8 and 9.
Afﬁrmative action is a crude way to rebalance inequalities between socio-
demographic groups in representative bodies. Surely, there are other ways in
which the representation of interests can be advanced. While elected politi-
cians may not share the same characteristics as their constituents, this does
not mean that they do not, to use Pitkin’s words (1967: 209), act ‘in the
interest of the represented, in a manner responsive to them’. Well-educated
representatives may act as spokespersons for their less educated constituents.
The next question, therefore, is: what do representatives need to do and how
should they do this?
One of the issues is whether representatives should act as delegates or as
trustees—this is also known as the mandate-independence controversy (Pitkin
1967).6 Delegate conceptions of representation require representatives to fol-
low their constituents’ preferences and to act on a mandate. According to this
view, delegates should act as a ‘mouthpiece’ for the wishes of their constitu-
ency and have little to no autonomy from their constituency. Essentially,
representatives are to act as the voice of those who are—literally—not present,
simply following the expressed preferences of their constituents, and there is
little room for representatives to act according to their own conscience. An
important question from this perspective is whether well-educated represen-
tatives are sufﬁciently responsive to the needs and interests of their less
well-educated voters. Are the well-educated MPs sufﬁciently able to recognize
the interests and preferences of their less educated constituents, and can they
make them ‘present’ in parliament? This is particularly open to question if
there are large differences in social characteristics and political attitudes
between educational groups and if they have few social contacts in daily life.
Democracy
29

From this delegate perspective, the rise of diploma democracy is problematic,
because it may enlarge the gap between the well-educated representatives and
the lesser educated segments of the electorate.
In trustee models, on the other hand, representatives have sufﬁcient auton-
omy to deliberate and act in favour of the greater common good and national
interest, even if it means going against the short-term interests of their own
constituencies.7 This model, which was defended by Edmund Burke and John
Stuart Mill, provided a solution to the problem of uninformed constituents
who lack the necessary knowledge on issues to take an educated position.
Edmund Burke assumed that participation of the people in the elaboration of
public policy decisions presupposed an excessive simpliﬁcation of issues;
otherwise the citizens would not be able to comprehend them. John Stuart
Mill stated that while all individuals have a right to be represented, not all
political opinions are of equal value. He even suggested a model in which
constituents would receive votes according to their level of education; that is,
citizens with university degrees receiving the most votes, and working-class
citizens receiving fewer votes. From this perspective, the rise of diploma
democracy is unproblematic and even to be applauded, because it will
enhance the quality of political debate and decision-making.
Representation in this trustee vision of representative democracy is there-
fore not just a one-way road from society to politics, from bottom to top. It is
also, and even predominantly, a process from top to bottom, from politics to
society, in which representative elites are expected to educate and lead the
demos. The representatives take the initiative to address the citizenry, propos-
ing ideas and solutions, shaping interest and identities, and asking the con-
sent of the represented on these proposals (Cotta & Best 2007: 4). From this
perspective, diploma democracy is not a contradiction in terms, but rather
a pleonasm.
Responsiveness: Matching Policy Preferences and Policy Outcomes
A second approach to assessing the quality of democracies is to focus on
substantive representation or policy responsiveness. In democracies, the outcomes
that a government produces should, in one way or another, reﬂect the policy
preferences of the citizens. Hence the concern of political researchers is often
to assess the extent to which parties or governments manage to respond to the
policy preferences of their constituents.8 It is the regular repetition of elections
which allows voters to inﬂuence the decisions of those who govern, and
which stimulates their representatives to be responsive.
The idea that voters make their choice of representatives between compet-
ing elites only once every so many years and then let their representatives
govern, as suggested in so many theories of representative democracy, is
Diploma Democracy
30

becoming supplanted by the idea of dynamic representation. Studies on
democratic representation show that different mechanisms apply during elec-
tions and between elections (Arnold & Franklin 2012). During elections, elect-
oral turnover is the representational mechanism (Esaiasson & Narud 2013: 3).
Citizens can bring public policies in line with their preferences by voting for
parties and representatives that share their values and views on speciﬁc pol-
icies, and they can retrospectively reward good representatives and punish bad
ones. Between elections, responsiveness is the mechanism through which the
representative relationship is maintained (Esaiasson et al. 2013: 22). Between
elections, elected ofﬁcials have a strong incentive to adapt their decisions to
the opinion of the mass public (Bühlmann & Kriesi 2013: 50). From a dynamic
perspective, assessing the quality of democracy means that we not only must
evaluate and judge the patterns of representation, but also those of policy
responsiveness. In a diploma democracy, educational inequalities in political
participation may bend the responsiveness of the political elites in the direc-
tion of the policy preferences of the well-educated.
As with representation, responsiveness is not a one-way road from society to
politics. From bottom to top democratic responsiveness would result in pol-
icies that mirror the public’s expressed preferences. But ideas of dynamic
responsiveness are increasingly being modiﬁed by theories that show that
public opinion is the product of the debate and struggle for attention in the
public sphere. Democratic responsiveness is not restricted to a bottom-up
process in which public opinion is an exogenous factor. In ‘rational anticipa-
tion’ of electoral repercussions, representatives adapt public policies to
changes in public demand (Stimson et al. 1995). Or, from a top-down perspec-
tive, citizens adjust their preferences as a reaction to the terms proposed by the
elite (Soroka & Wlezien 2010). The political supply of information, the issuing
of positions and political preferences by the elite is, in this perspective, crucial
for understanding the quality of the democratic process. In a diploma dem-
ocracy, educational inequalities among opinion leaders, in civil society, lobby
groups, and the media; and among political elites, in parties, parliaments, and
cabinets, may bias public opinion in the direction of the policy preferences of
the well-educated. We return to this issue in Chapter 8.
Accountability: Ex Post Control
How diploma democracy is evaluated also depends on your perspective on
accountability. In a representative democracy, there has to be a variety of
institutional accountability mechanisms that safeguard citizens’ control over
their governments. This involves mechanisms that oblige decision-makers
to inform representative bodies and the general public about their policies
and performance, to provide justiﬁcations for their choices, and to answer
Democracy
31

questions and engage in debate about their decisions.9 Ultimately, account-
ability mechanisms also imply the possibility of sanctions or rewards, depend-
ing on the evaluation of the performance of the executive. An important
corollary is that, between elections, elected representatives need to check
whether the executive is using its resources wisely, whether it is implementing
the policy intelligently, and whether the policy is producing the desired
effects. Representative institutions must, therefore, have ex post control instru-
ments at their disposal, including questions, interpellations, and plenary
debates, to evaluate executive performance, backed up by the eventual possi-
bility to withdraw conﬁdence from a minister or a cabinet, or to impeach a
president.
As government policies become more complex in modern societies, so do
the organizational arrangements needed to implement them. The thickening
of government by the increase in the number of layers in the hierarchy, and
the number of people in each layer, has coincided with the ‘diffusion of
accountability’ (Light 1995: 640). It has intensiﬁed the ‘problem of many
hands’ (Bovens 1998), because it complicates the process of identifying who
is accountable for failure of performance. For the general public, it becomes
more difﬁcult to assess the responsibility of political leaders and to evaluate an
incumbent ofﬁceholder’s performance, as even the most minimal views of
electoral accountability suggest. Also, the accumulation and dispersion of
accountability forums—parliaments, courts, audit ofﬁces, stakeholder panels,
network peers, ombudsmen, media—do not form a coherent and comprehen-
sive accountability system (Papadopoulos 2010). One of the relevant issues in
this respect is whether these accountability forums are sufﬁciently represen-
tative to prevent elite domination and to maintain popular legitimacy.
Another issue is what standards these accountability forums use to hold the
political elites to account. In a diploma democracy, educational inequalities in
the composition of accountability forums may bias accountability processes
in favour of the preferences of the well-educated.
Legitimacy: Conﬁdence and Support
In the end, representativeness, responsiveness, and accountability all contrib-
ute to the legitimacy of democratic governance. Each in its own way can
help to enhance conﬁdence in the government of the day and in the fairness
of the political system as a whole. High levels of representativeness will
mainly provide input legitimacy, and can enhance popular conﬁdence that
the preferences and interests of a broad array of citizens will be taken into
account in political decisions. They also make it possible for the electorate
to better identify with political representatives and public ofﬁcials. High levels
of responsiveness are important for output legitimacy. They align citizens’
Diploma Democracy
32

preferences with policy outcomes. Accountability provides throughput legit-
imacy, because it supplies the mechanisms for procedural fairness and checks
and balances. Flaws in each of these elements of democracy may not only
provide biases in policy agendas, but they may also lead to low levels of support
for the government and to diminishing conﬁdence in democratic institutions.
We will return to these issues of democratic legitimacy in Chapter 8.
The Participatory Revolution
In the last part of the twentieth century, many Western countries went
through a modernization of their democratic institutions by a so-called par-
ticipatory revolution. From the late 1960s onwards, a general expansion of the
political action repertory was seen, which was characterized by new, direct
forms of action, such as demonstrations, the organization of petitions, and
strikes (Barnes & Kaase 1979). Originally, these were initiated by student
protesters. Later, however, they were also adopted by environmentalists,
women’s lib, the peace movement, and other social movements, and eventu-
ally by neighbourhood associations, teachers, nurses, farmers, and a wide
spectrum of society (Dalton et al. 2003a: 8).
Nowadays, far more citizens than in the era of Burke and Mill have the
resources necessary to deal with the complexities of politics and to make their
own political decisions. The public’s access to information about politics has
increased in many ways, due to expansion of the mass media, especially
television and the internet. The increasing skills and resources of average
citizens have stimulated new expectations about citizenship and the organ-
ization of democratic politics. A belief has emerged that ‘the people’ can, and
should, be trusted to make complex political decisions and to otherwise
actively participate in the democratic governing of society. As Dalton
(2006: 7) notes: ‘Engaged citizens may still vote, but this is less central to
their deﬁnition of citizenship.’ They also email their representatives, sign
internet petitions, and engage in political action through Twitter, Facebook,
or other online media. Occasionally, they take to the streets to demonstrate.
Popular demonstrations have become a recurring feature of representative
democracies: witness the protests over globalization, economic inequality,
and corporate greed, as well as the rallies to save pensions, to object against
welfare cuts, the increase of tuition in higher education, or the inﬂux of
immigrants.
Governments have reacted to this participatory revolution by developing
more ‘horizontal’ styles of policymaking, in which a broad array of citizen
groups, interest organizations, and other stakeholders are involved in agenda-
setting, decision-making, and implementation (Pierre & Peters 2005). They are
Democracy
33

increasingly embedding public participation in decision-making by means of
citizen’s assemblies, deliberative public meetings, and online public dialogues.
Policies are not only discussed by elected ofﬁcials in the hallways and meeting
rooms of parliaments and town halls, but also by local activists, interest group
representatives, and independent experts in community centres, conference
halls, and commercial congress facilities. Self-regulation and voluntary agree-
ments have supplemented, and in some cases replaced, formal rules and
regulations. In addition, new venues have been created for citizens to discuss
and evaluate street-level policy implementation, such as citizen panels in
public bureaucracies, city panels and neighbourhood councils in local gov-
ernment, student bodies in schools and universities, and patient councils in
hospitals and healthcare institutions. This transition from government to
governance has opened new channels for citizen participation and, at the
same time, weakened the central position of traditional representative insti-
tutions in Western democracies.
The liberal or representative model of democracy is slowly being supple-
mented with new, more direct democratic conceptions, such as participatory
and deliberative ones. However, the question which then arises is: ‘who
participates and deliberates in these new political venues?’ We will discuss
this issue in Chapter 5.
New Openings and Emerging Political Opportunities
The participatory revolution has changed the political opportunity structure
in modern democracies, in much the same way as the educational revolution
has changed the structure of social opportunities. The extension of political
participation has removed some of the barriers to equal political voice and
control. Together, these new democratic arrangements have opened up the
opportunities to inﬂuence democratic choice in at least three different ﬁelds:
in terms of preference formation, political mobilization, and aggregation. At
the same time, new barriers to political equality have appeared in these ﬁelds,
as we will show in the next section.
New Opportunities for Preference Formation
In the 1970s and 1980s, many social scientists anticipated that the rising
educational level of the population would diminish the differences between
the public and the political class. In the 1990s, the proliferation of informa-
tion sources reinforced that expectation. Several theories indicate that in
advanced industrial societies the structural opportunities and resources for
getting information have expanded, and that this has increased the cognitive
Diploma Democracy
34

abilities and political skills of citizens for preference formation.10 The general
public today has the potential to be better informed than a generation ago
(Blumler & Kavanagh 1999). The proliferation of media channels has created a
new age of information abundance. In the 1970s, TV news about politics was
available in the living room about twice a day. Citizens had to wait for
newspapers to be printed and delivered if they wanted more than these
news messages. In the 2010s, political news is available 24/7, from cell phones,
tablets, and news channels.11 The media environment has evolved from
offering little political information and little choice to providing plenty
of diverse media content to a broad audience. The ‘top-down’ inﬂuence of
newspapers and broadcast media has waned in the face of the ‘explosion’ of
information available via the internet (Craig 2004). As Brants and Voltmer
(2011: 9) indicate: ‘With its openness, interactive structure and ﬂexibility, the
Internet has fundamentally changed the position of the public, from being at
the consuming end of political communication to active, creative and vocal
citizenship’.12
New Opportunities for the Mobilization of Preferences
Political organizations, such as political parties, interest organizations, and
social movement organizations, play a key role in structuring and mobilizing
the individual preferences during election campaigns and between elections
(Bühlmann & Kriesi 2013: 48). In the past decades, widespread social frag-
mentation has produced individuation. Group-based ‘identity politics’ has
lost more and more ground. The decline of mass organizations is affecting
political parties and other traditional pillars of organized mass society (Van
Biezen et al. 2012). However, the dense networking potential of today’s new
communication technology enables different forms of political organization
and ‘DIY’ (Do It Yourself) actions that are more personalized and ‘in which
individually expressive personal action frames displace collective action
frames in many political causes’ (Bennett 2012: 20).
A whole array of professionally organized single issue organizations, interest
groups, and ad hoc pressure groups, numerous charities, cause and campaign-
ing groups, think tanks, and international agencies have entered the fray to
cater to newly arising interests and preferences. They accommodate the
expanded political repertoires that are no longer exclusively focused on the
formal institutions of the state. The rise of the internet has facilitated these
civil associations, by making it easier and less costly for them to organize
support, coordinate action, and to contact members and sympathizers
(Blumler 2013). Some of these groups are supported by professional publicity
departments, and are capable of creating an impressive level of visibility and
attention for ‘their’ issues in the media and on the political agenda.
Democracy
35

New Opportunities for the Aggregation of Preferences
The participatory revolution has also extended and innovated the devices
for identifying and aggregating the preferences of the people. Elections are
being called for an increasing number of political ofﬁces, particularly at
the local level. The referendum and the citizen initiative have been introduced
in many liberal democracies as a supplement to representative elections, to
inform politicians by means of a vote on a preferred policy by the public. The
frequent use of mass survey techniques and the rising importance of opinion
polls in day-to-day political decision-making have emerged as very inﬂuential
ways of obtaining information on what the population thinks or what kind of
policy agenda it endorses. Similarly, the introduction of new deliberative and
participatory forms of policymaking, through citizen panels, consultations,
and other forms of horizontal policymaking, have opened new venues for
citizens to participate in political deliberations and policy formation.
New Closures and Diminishing Democratization
The various transformations of the past decades have opened up the decision-
making system in many respects, but have not engendered an unequivocal
process of democratization. New mechanisms have developed that may also
restrict or even close down access to the democratic process.
New Closures for Political Preference Formation
Although the rise of the internet and the proliferation of television channels
in recent years have made more information available than ever before,
they have also made it easier to avoid exposure to political news than in the
1970s, when there were only a few broadcast networks available. Prior (2007:
15–19) argues that in the 1950s and 1960s, broadcast television nudged
people who did not care very deeply about politics into watching the news.
And even in today’s news saturated media environment, politically uninter-
ested people might ﬁnd it difﬁcult to avoid the abundance of politically
relevant material. Yet with the arrival of the internet, and with the many
media choices, political learning as a by-product has become less common.
The information overload allows ‘more people to choose what they want to
consume—and only that’ (Blumler 2013: 1). Some authors suggest that media
bias and selective avoidance may lead to increasing intolerance of dissent,
may create segregated communities (Glynn et al. 1999), and may impair demo-
cratic processes because of increasing polarization and reduced deliberation
(Sunstein 2009).
Diploma Democracy
36

New Closures for Political Mobilization and Organization
Political parties still remain the most important political organizations. How-
ever, the marked and often dramatic decline in party membership between
the 1960s and 1990s has changed the nature of many party organizations in
Western Europe. The drop in party membership has put an end to the organ-
izational format of the mass party. Modern political parties have become cadre
parties (Koole 1992) or cartel parties (Katz & Mair 1995), who communicate
with the electorate via the media and the internet (Scarrow 2014). Political
parties are moving further away from civil society and closer to the state. The
reduction in membership has occurred in tandem with dealignment among
the citizens (Mair & Van Biezen 2001).
The new array of single-issue organizations, lobby groups, and ad hoc,
online pressure groups is subject to a similar process of homogenization.
After an initial period of bottom-up mobilization and organization, they
tend to professionalize and specialize. Many modern civil society organiza-
tions operate on the basis of small, often highly professional cadres, with
very limited grassroot membership participation. These new political organ-
izations often become the domain of well-educated specialists who have the
bureaucratic skills and expert knowledge to participate in policymaking
processes and implementation trajectories. We will return to this in
Chapter 6.
New Closures for Political Aggregation
In Western Europe, the introduction of elections at the regional and Euro-
pean level has created new second order elections. These elections are per-
ceived as less important than national elections, which are of a ﬁrst order
nature. A core assumption underlying the notion of second order elections is
that there is ‘less at stake’ in these elections and that turnout is lower,
because voters are less interested in casting their vote (Dandoy & Schakel
2013: 21). Therefore, opening up the political arena to democratic decision-
making processes at the supranational and regional level does not mean that
these occasions are similarly used by voters to express their voice as they do
at the national level. Some voters are more likely to disconnect themselves
from these second order arenas than from the national, ﬁrst order arena. It
therefore also represents a new barrier in the use of this institutional channel
of voice and choice.
Likewise, the new deliberative and participatory forms of policymaking may
suit some citizens better than others. Meetings at which people have to discuss
policies in their community are fraught with the possibility of conﬂict.
Mansbridge (1980: 273) concluded that face-to-face assembly allows those
Democracy
37

who have no trouble speaking in public to defend their interests. Rather than
creating community, face-to-face meetings ‘may frighten away the very
people’ they are trying to enlist as participants. Such meetings are difﬁcult
because they usually increase the level of emotional tension. Moreover, citi-
zens who can speak or write well, or who are more comfortable organizing and
taking part in meetings, are likely to be more effective when they get involved
in politics. Those who possess civic skills ﬁnd political activity less daunting
and costly and, therefore, are more likely to take part (Verba et al. 1995).
More ‘political talk’ does not necessarily equate to more democratic outcomes
(Mutz 2006).
The Rise of the Well-Educated in Democratic Politics
The participatory revolution is closely connected to the educational revolu-
tion which we described in Chapter 2. Firstly, it is in large part a product of
the post-WWII educational expansion. The enormous extension of higher
education has produced large cohorts of citizens who would pass the thresh-
olds of Burke and Mill. They are well informed, if not experts, on a range of
policy matters and possess the information and communication skills to be
effective in politics. They started entering the political stage in the 1970s,
demanding more participatory possibilities, and have never left since. Sec-
ondly, the participatory revolution paved the way for the rise of the well-
educated in politics to the detriment of the lesser educated. As we shall see in
Chapters 5 and 6, these new venues for political participation are the domain
of the well-educated. More horizontal, deliberative forms of policymaking
are perfectly ﬁtted for university-trained citizens. They have acquired the
necessary expertise and skills to be successful in these rather demanding
political arenas.
This raises the question of what the net results of all these participatory
innovations contribute to answering Robert Dahl’s classic question of ‘who
actually governs?’ Have these modernizations deepened and broadened
democracy, or have they basically shifted the political powers to new elites?
There is something paradoxical about the fact that, in an era in which there
are more channels to participate and in which the legitimacy of democracy
as a political system is higher than even before (Norris 2011), some of the
eldest democracies in the world are taking on the trappings of Platonic
meritocracies. We will discuss the implications of the rise of the well-
educated in politics in Chapter 8. First, however, we will try to document
their rise as a distinct social group and their dominance in a range of political
venues.
Diploma Democracy
38

Notes
1. In the Gettysburg address, Lincoln formulated these different perspectives on
democracy. He referred to ‘government of the people, government by the people,
and government for the people’. The ﬁrst two are process oriented and are the basis
for representative and participatory democracy. The last vision refers to a substan-
tive conceptualization and is the basis for output legitimacy. Compare: Bühlmann
& Kriesi 2013: 44.
2. See Budge 1996: 69; Kriesi 2005.
3. See Dahl 2006; Schlozman et al. 2012: 2.
4. See Held 2006; Manin 1997.
5. See Mansbridge 1999; Krook 2010; Celis & Childs 2012.
6. There are various intermediate forms of action between these two classic polar
positions. See Andeweg & Thomassen 2005; Mansbridge 2011; Judge 2014.
7. See Pitkin 1967; Dovi 2014.
8. Compare Miller & Stokes 1963; Schmitt & Thomassen 1999; Powell 2004; Soroka &
Wlezien 2010; Gilens 2012.
9. See Bovens 2007.
10. See Klingemann & Fuchs 1995; Dalton 2013; Norris 2002, 2011.
11. See Prior 2007.
12. See also Kriesi 2013: 39.
Democracy
39

4
Education as a Cleavage
An Educational Cleavage?
In the 1960s and 1970s, the time when both authors of this book were
growing up, Dutch society was strongly divided along religious lines. Social
and political life was organized within pillars, with each pillar having its own
separate school system, separate newspapers, separate broadcasting networks,
and separate political parties.1 For example, the three-story apartment build-
ing in which one of the authors lived as a child was occupied by three families,
one family to each ﬂoor. His family was Catholic, and they lived on the ﬁrst
ﬂoor. The ﬂat below, on the ground ﬂoor, was rented by a devout Protestant
family. Above them, on the second ﬂoor, lived a secular family. As a young
child, he would play with the Protestant and the secular children in the
playground behind the ﬂat. This changed as soon as they went to primary
school. The Protestant children living on the ground ﬂoor went to the local
Protestant denominational school, the secular kids from the second ﬂoor went
to the public primary school, and the Catholic children went to the local
Catholic school. After school, each would go to separate, denominational
sports clubs and Sunday schools—although the Protestants would play soccer
on Saturday and go to Bible class on Sunday, whereas the Catholics would play
soccer on Sundays and attend Bible class during weekdays; and the lucky
secular kids, it should be noted, had no Bible class at all and could play soccer
all weekend. Childhood friendships across religious lines were rare. Religious
homogamy was very common and the various social groups would only meet
in the army, when conscripted, or at work. This division also extended into
politics. Protestants would vote for the various Protestant parties, the large
majority of Catholics—in the late 1950s up to 95 per cent—would vote for the
Catholic Party, while the secular citizens would vote for the social democrats
or for the liberal party.
The situation was similar in other countries, such as Belgium, Austria, and to a
lesser extent, Germany, as well. However, historical developments in the various

countries resulted in different cleavages and in different combinations of these
cleavages. Belgium was not only divided along the lines of class and religion,
but also linguistically—with Flemish being spoken in Flanders and French in
Wallonia. In Britain, on the other hand, class divisions were sharper and more
predominant and enduring than in other Western European countries.
In the twenty-ﬁrst century, many of these class and religious divisions have
faded. This does not mean that modern Western European societies have
become undivided and homogeneous. Today’s toddlers may play together in
day-care centres, but as soon as they go to primary school, their paths often
diverge according to the educational backgrounds of their parents. Nowadays
in the Netherlands, well-educated parents send their children to schools
offering alternative educational approaches, such as Montessori, Dalton,
Steiner, and Jenaplan schools, or they enrol them in private schools. Lesser-
educated parents send their kids to the local neighbourhood school, or to state
schools. After school, the children with well-educated parents play hockey, or
tennis, and they are driven to ballet, theatre, or music classes.2 Children
whose parents have less education play soccer or handball, if they are members
of a club at all.
The two educational groups hardly meet or mingle. The well-educated live
in the university towns, in green pre-war suburbs, or in the nineteenth-
century, gentriﬁed parts of the inner cities, whereas the less well-educated
can be found in former manufacturing towns, in the post-war satellite cities,
or, in the twentieth-century outskirts of the major cities.3 Nor do they mate;
educational homogamy has replaced religious homogamy. In the Netherlands,
85 per cent of all marriages are between partners with (almost) similar
educational qualiﬁcations. Only two out of a thousand marriages are
between a partner with a university degree and a partner with primary
qualiﬁcations only.4 These educational divides have become visible in the
political landscape, too, as we shall see. Green and social liberal parties, such
as Groenlinks and D66, get the majority of their votes from the tertiary
educated. Nationalist parties, such as the PVV, mainly attract voters with
primary and secondary levels of education.
The emergence of social divides along educational lines has not been
limited to the Netherlands. It has been documented extensively for Belgium
by political sociologists from Brussels (Elchardus & Glorieux 2012) and for
Denmark by Rune Stubager (2010). The purpose of this chapter is to move
beyond these single country studies and to identify through a comparative,
descriptive analysis, to what extent the contours of an educational cleavage
can be observed across Europe. Our approach is macro-oriented and explora-
tory. By using a broad notion of cleavage, which includes socio-structural
differences, attitudinal, and institutional-behavioural differences, we attempt
to establish the extent to which new divisions related to the expansion
Education as a Cleavage
41

of higher education and the participatory revolution have advanced across
European countries. At the end of this chapter, we select six Western European
countries for a more detailed analysis of the rise of political meritocracy and its
consequences.
Cleavage as a Social and Political Concept
A Restructuration of Cleavages
First, however, we have to be more precise about our central concept. The
concept of cleavage was ﬁrst formulated by Seymour Martin Lipset and Stein
Rokkan (1967). It denotes ‘a speciﬁc type of conﬂict in democratic politics that
is rooted in the social structural transformations that have been triggered by
large-scale processes’ (Bornschier 2009: 1). Lipset and Rokkan identiﬁed a
number of such large-scale ‘critical junctures’ in the history of European
society, which eventually led to the formation of cleavages within European
society. Among these are the Reformation, the emergence of nation states, and
the Industrial Revolution.
The socio-economic cleavage over the distribution of economic resources is
frequently seen as the most pervasive political conﬂict in modern democracies
(Lijphart 1999). Differences in social class and property, for example between
lower versus upper classes, workers versus owners, manual versus non-manual
workers, coincide both with differences in political preferences (left versus
right) and with party formation and voting behaviour (social democrats versus
liberal-conservative parties). But other opposing social groups sometimes
also coincide with coherent, and opposing preferences, and with subsequent
political behaviour and party formation, and are therefore also referred to as
cleavages.5 These are distinguished, for example, by religion, such as religious–
secular, or Catholic–Protestant as in the Netherlands of the twentieth century;
by ethnicity, language, such as Flemish–francophone in Belgium; or by geog-
raphy, for example urban–rural or centre–periphery in Scandinavia.
As a result of the increasing modernization of Western societies, traditional
cleavages have eroded over the last decades.6 Some scholars claim that the
dealignment of traditional links between social groups has led to a decline of
ideological and structural voting.7 Modern political parties mobilize their voters
primarily on the basis of issues rather than group identity, making traditional
cleavage politics less relevant. Another line of research suggests a shift in the
type of structures that underpin new issue divides. Cleavage-like categories such
as age or generations, gender, and the rise of social cultural professionals are at
the basis of new political conﬂict lines (Deegan-Krause 2007: 541).
Recently, this position was supplemented by a line of research that points to
the increasing importance of education as a key to understanding emerging
Diploma Democracy
42

political and social conﬂict lines. Political scientists and sociologists have
started to pay attention to the importance of education in the rise of new,
cultural conﬂicts in Western, post-industrial societies.8 Increasingly, educa-
tion is studied separately from class or income as a source of political attitudes
and preferences, particularly with regard to post-materialistic issues.9
Cleavages: Three Elements and Three Levels
The term ‘cleavage’ has proven to be a rather ‘stretchy’ concept.10 It has been
used progressively to denote any controversial conﬂict matter in party sys-
tems. Stephano Bartolini and Peter Mair (1990: 215) have tried to restrict the
use of the concept by deﬁning a political cleavage as consisting of three
different elements:
an empirical element, which identiﬁes the empirical referent of the concept, and
which we can deﬁne in social-structural terms; a normative element, that is the set of
values and beliefs which provides a sense of identity and role to the empirical
element, and which reﬂect the self-consciousness of the social group(s) involved;
and an organizational/behavioural element, that is the set of individual interactions,
institutions and organizations, such as political parties, which develop as part of
the cleavage.
(emphasis added)
The existence of distinct or even opposing social groups is not sufﬁcient to
speak of a political cleavage. A cleavage is more than mere social conﬂict or
political opposition (Bartolini 2000). According to Hanspeter Kriesi (2010:
673), ‘a structural division is transformed into a cleavage, if a political actor
gives coherence and organized political expression to what otherwise are
inchoate and fragmentary beliefs, values and experiences among members
of some social group’. For a social division to become a political cleavage, all
three elements—the social-structural, attitudinal, and a behavioural or organ-
izational element—have to be present at the same time. Kevin Deegan-Krause
(2007), using the three elements deﬁned by Bartolini and Mair, recognizes
three different levels of cleavage formation. The ﬁrst level is called a difference
and refers to the situation in which only one cleavage element is present, for
example, the existence of clearly distinguishable social groups. The second
level is called a divide, referring to a situation in which two cleavage elements
are present. The third level is the full cleavage situation in which all three
elements of Bartolini and Mair are present and combined.
Different Stages of Cleavage Formation
The cleavage concept is a very demanding one that limits the possibilities
of ﬁnding any new examples of cleavages.11 The concept has a static bias.
Education as a Cleavage
43

The search for ‘full cleavages’ hampers a more dynamic and explorative
approach—one in which the contours of evolving divisions become progres-
sively manifest. Using the cleavage concept as structured by Deegan-Krause
makes it possible to study the different stages of cleavage crystallization.
Rather than focusing on full cleavages, we suggest an approach in which
stages of cleavage formation are examined, to enable the study of the rise of
new political conﬂict lines in a more dynamic perspective. Newly emerging
political divisions do not directly manifest themselves as full-ﬂedged cleav-
ages. The latter result from a process of adaptation, restructuration, and ‘freez-
ing’ of these new divisions. Societies in which these different cleavage
elements are superimposed on one another differ from societies in which
differences are limited to one element only. In the latter case, conﬂicts will
remain moderate, and their capacity to divide will remain restricted. Where
different elements coincide and overlap, they are more likely to create deep
social differences and evolve into full political cleavages. Within a particular
country, increasing or decreasing levels of cleavage formation at various
points in time might be expected to be found. Also, we would expect different
countries, at the same point in time, to differ with regard to the extent that
divisions along these various elements can be observed.
In this chapter we will explore the cleavage formation, that is, the degree of
consolidation of educational differences, in European societies. A high degree
of overlap between values and preferences, political behaviour, and socio-
demographic characteristics such as educational levels, is indicative of the
rise of a new cleavage. This is the basis on which we attempt to explore the
contours of an emerging educational cleavage in Europe, and it has meant
dividing our main question—can we discern the formation of an educational
cleavage in Europe?—into three subquestions, along the lines of Bartolini and
Mair’s conceptualization.
Although the focus of this chapter ultimately lies at the country level, it is
important to consider that the various elements that make up a divide or a
‘full’ cleavage are measured at the individual level. Systematic differences (or
gaps) between those with a low and those with a high level of education
constitute the different cleavage elements. A full educational cleavage presents
itself as a compounded division that encompasses socio-structural, attitudinal,
and behavioural differences that are manifested at the level of individuals. It is
important to stress, however, that our approach does not aim to explain
individual voting behaviour or party choice. Rather, it moves back from the
micro to the macro level and explores the advent, occurrence, and political
signiﬁcance of a new social structural division, related to the expansion of
education across distinct European countries. We will construct an index
of cleavage crystallization (or formation) that aims to measure to what extent
the various differences along educational lines are merging. The aggregate
Diploma Democracy
44

measures of the covariation of the differences between the educational groups
give an indication as to what extent it is possible to generalize about the rise of
new educational divides and, possibly, a full cleavage throughout Europe.12
Social Differences: Educational Groups as Social Groups
A ﬁrst explorative question is whether we can observe structural social differ-
ences between the well-educated and those with less education. Are they
distinct groups in society, on a par with the Catholics and Protestants of our
childhood? As the post-industrial economy is increasingly based on know-
ledge and information, we would expect a process of educational structuration
to involve increased group homogeneity along educational boundaries. Hence
we would expect a socio-structural segmentation along educational lines; and
concurrently, educational patterns of stratiﬁcation and segregation.
According to the literature, education is more important than class in more
highly modernized and wealthy countries or regions.13 Therefore, we expect
the educational divides to be more developed in the Western European and
Nordic countries.14 In these countries, with a broadly accessible system of
higher education and a meritocratic labour market, we would expect to ﬁnd
more established patterns of social division along educational, instead of class,
lines. The Southern European countries are characterized by segmented
insider–outsider labour markets and they are highly family oriented.15 There
we would expect fewer social divisions along educational lines. In Central and
Eastern Europe (CEE) the situation is less clear-cut. With the collapse of
socialist communism, labour markets have rapidly shifted from closed to
more open employment systems. For many, the economic transition has
increased career insecurity, as skills acquired under socialism have tended to
become less marketable. Prevailing wisdom holds that the consolidation
of the market institutions will enhance meritocratic allocation of rewards
(Doman´ski 2011).
Cleavages are rooted in demography. The ﬁrst issue is whether we can
observe substantive social groups. Does it make sense at all to distinguish
different educational segments in society? As we saw in Chapter 2, for a large
part of the twentieth century the overwhelming majority of citizens in most
European countries had few educational qualiﬁcations and in effect, fell into
the low-educated category. Back then, it made little sense to speak of distinct
educational groups, because the group of well-educated citizens was so small.
This changed as a consequence of the educational revolution. In 2015, accord-
ing to the OECD, 27 per cent of the EU-22 workforce was well educated—more
than double the 11 per cent who classiﬁed as well-educated EU citizens in
1992 and more than twenty-ﬁve times higher than the meagre 1 per cent
Education as a Cleavage
45

recorded in the 1960s. This massive expansion of the number of well-educated
citizens provides the demographic basis for cleavage formation. However,
there are still considerable differences within Europe, as can be seen from
Figure 4.1. The southern and eastern countries, such as Hungary, Portugal,
Slovakia, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Italy, and Romania, tend to have the
lowest percentages of well-educated citizens, and the northern and western
countries, such as the UK, Ireland, Norway, Switzerland, Finland, Sweden, and
Belgium, the highest.
A second issue is whether these different educational groups coincide with
different social strata. In all contemporary industrial societies, education has
come to play an important role in selecting people for positions in the occu-
pational structure (McNamee & Miller 2009). Tertiary educational credentials
are required for professional, technical, and managerial occupations and for
most non-clerical white-collar jobs in large private and public sector organ-
izations (Collins 1979). People with higher education earn more and are less
likely to be unemployed (Wilkinson & Pickett 2010: 103–17). This is con-
ﬁrmed by the ESS data, as shown in Figure 4.2. In all European countries large
differences in net household income can be observed between educational
levels. These differences tend to be the largest in former communist countries,
such as Poland, the Czech Republic, Hungary, and Slovenia.
Thirdly, education is an important driver of new patterns of social segrega-
tion. The increased participation of men and women in higher education
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
UK IE NO CY CH FI LU SE EE LI BE ES IS DK NL
F
LV AU SL GR PL BG DE HU PT CZ CA SK MT MK IT RO
2006
2015
Figure 4.1. Tertiary level educational attainment in European countries (%, from 15 to
64 years, Eurostat 2006 & 2015)
Diploma Democracy
46

means that the chances of meeting members of the opposite sex with the same
educational level at an age when individuals typically start to date, have also
grown. Girls began to enter higher education on a large scale in the late
twentieth century (Esping-Andersen 2009: 21). Women’s inroads in academia
have created the necessary condition for homogamy, which is used here as a
proxy measure for educational segregation. In the past, most people found
their partners close to home, as opportunities to meet partners from further
away were much more limited. The greater participation in education, com-
bined with the more social and spatial mobility, individual afﬂuence and
opportunities to travel, and internet access, have caused personal relationships
to become less and less territorially based. Hence, social-structural categories,
such as education, play an increasingly pivotal role in partner choice.16
The ESS 2014 data in Figure 4.3 indicate that there is a strong correlation
between the educational characteristics of the partners in a relationship. The
growing opportunity to meet people with the same level of qualiﬁcation in
the course of the educational career is a by-product of the selection process
in the educational system (Blossfeld 2009: 519–20).
As a result, the likelihood of educational homogamy signiﬁcantly increases
with the level of educational attainment. According to the German sociologist
Heike Wirth (2000), this has caused a tendency for increased social distance
between the upper and lower educational groups. In her research, the highest
United Kingdom
Austria
Switzerland
Netherlands
Belgium
France
Germany
Denmark
Sweden
Country
Household’s total net income, all sources
Highest level of 
education, ES - ISCED
Finland
Lithuania
Poland
Czech Republic
Slovenia
Hungary
Portugal
Spain
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Norway
Ireland
ES-ISCED I , less than lower
secondary
ES-ISCED II , lower
secondary
ES-ISCED IIIb , lower tier
upper secondary
ES-ISCED IIIa , upper tier
upper secondary
ES-ISCED V1, lower tertiary
education, BA level
ES-ISCED V2, higher tertiary
education, >= MA level
ES-ISCED IV, advanced
vocational, sub-degree
Figure 4.2. Education and household total net income, all sources (0 = 1st decile,
10 = 10th decile. Mean score by education, ESS 2014)
Education as a Cleavage
47

degrees of social closure are found for the most privileged educational group,
that is, university graduates, as well as for the least privileged educational
group. In our sample, this is particularly the case in western and northern
European countries such as Norway, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Sweden, the
UK, Belgium, the Netherlands, and Lithuania, as can be observed in Figure 4.4.
Educational homogamy increases social inequality, as the educational
resources of well-educated (and less educated) partners are then pooled and
cumulate. It indicates a level of external ‘closure’ of the evolving educational
social-structural categories that is essential in Stephano Bartolini‘s (2000)
understanding of the cleavage concept.
Attitudinal Differences: Cosmopolitans versus Nationalists
For a social difference to become politically relevant, these new groups must
share distinct values and beliefs. To what extent do higher-educated groups
have different political preferences than the lesser educated groups? Education is
an important source of values and beliefs that are independent of socio-
economic interests and income.17 Well-educated and less well-educated indi-
viduals exhibit signiﬁcant differences in attitudes and preferences regarding
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
United Kingdom
Ireland
Austria
Switzerland
Germany
France
Belgium
Netherlands
Denmark
Norway
Sweden
Finland
Lithuania
Estonia
Poland
Czech Republic
Slovenia
Portugal
Spain
Figure 4.3. Educational homogamy (Correlation education respondent with education
partner. Gamma graphically shown; individual level, ESS 2014)
Diploma Democracy
48

cultural issues such as immigration, ethnic diversity, and European uniﬁca-
tion, that have become much more salient in the past decades.
Traditionally, most voters and political parties in Western Europe can be
positioned along a social-economic, left–right dimension and along a
religious–secular dimension. Figure 4.5 depicts the mean scores of educational
levels on a left–right scale. There are remarkably few differences in left–right
orientation between educational levels across Europe. No clear pattern, across
education levels or across countries, can be observed with regard to left–right
placement. Clearer differences are seen regarding income redistribution. In
most countries, the lesser educated are somewhat more in favour of reducing
differences in income levels than the well-educated, as can be seen from
Figure 4.6.
In addition to these traditional conﬂict dimensions, which reach back to the
late nineteenth and early twentieth century, a new cultural conﬂict dimen-
sion has manifested itself in the past three decades.18 The crucial themes along
this cultural dimension are immigration and integration, globalization,
and European uniﬁcation. This new division between what could be called
Austria
10
10
15
15
20
20
% respondents with tertiary education
% partners of respondent with tertiary education
25
25
30
30
35
35
40
40
45
45
Czech Republic
France
Ireland
Poland
Switzerland
Slovenia
Spain
Germany
Lithuania
Sweden
Netherlands
Estonia
United Kingdom
Belgium Finland
Denmark
Norway
Portugal
Figure 4.4. Homogamy of the well-educated (Relationship between % respondents
having a tertiary educational attainment and % partner with tertiary education. Country
level, ESS 2014)
Education as a Cleavage
49

United Kingdom
Austria
Switzerland
Netherlands
Belgium
France
Germany
Denmark
Sweden
Country
Finland
Estonia
Lithuania
Poland
Czech Republic
Slovenia
Hungary
Portugal
Spain
Norway
Ireland
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Placement on left-right scale
Highest level of 
education, ES - ISCED
ES-ISCED I , less than lower
secondary
ES-ISCED II , lower
secondary
ES-ISCED IIIb , lower tier
upper secondary
ES-ISCED IIIa , upper tier
upper secondary
ES-ISCED V1, lower tertiary
education, BA level
ES-ISCED V2, higher tertiary
education, >= MA level
ES-ISCED IV, advanced
vocational, sub-degree
Figure 4.5. Education and left–right scale (Where would you place yourself on a ‘left’
and ‘right’ scale, where 0 means the left and 10 means right? Mean score by education,
ESS 2014)
United Kingdom
Austria
Switzerland
Netherlands
Belgium
France
Germany
Denmark
Sweden
Finland
Estonia
Lithuania
Poland
Czech Republic
Slovenia
Hungary
Portugal
Spain
1
2
Government should reduce differences
in income levels
3
4
5
Norway
Ireland
Country
Highest level of 
education, ES - ISCED
ES-ISCED I , less than lower
secondary
ES-ISCED II , lower
secondary
ES-ISCED IIIb , lower tier
upper secondary
ES-ISCED IIIa , upper tier
upper secondary
ES-ISCED V1, lower tertiary
education, BA level
ES-ISCED V2, higher tertiary
education, >= MA level
ES-ISCED IV, advanced
vocational, sub-degree
Figure 4.6. Education and income differences (Government should take measures to
reduce differences in income levels, 1 = agree strongly, 5 = disagree strongly. Mean score
by education, ESS 2014)
50

‘cosmopolitans’ and ‘nationalists’ has emerged gradually, fuelled by the waves
of non-Western immigration and the process of European uniﬁcation.
This division between cosmopolitan and nationalist attitudes coincides in
most European countries with the educational chasm. The educational gap is
particularly strongwhen it comes tothe issue of the admittance and treatment of
immigrants. Ranged on one side of this new line of conﬂict are the citizens who
accept social and cultural heterogeneity and who favour, or at least condone,
multiculturalism. These are the more highly educated, as Figures 4.7 and 4.8
show. On the other side are citizens who are very critical about multiculturalism
and who prefer a more homogeneous national culture. These are predominantly
citizens with lower educational levels.
Within each of the countries the differences between the well and the less
educated are very consistent. Levels of cosmopolitanism differ very strongly
between countries however—notably with southern and eastern countries
scoring on average much lower. For example, in the Czech Republic and
Hungary, the respondents with the highest educational levels are less cosmo-
politan than even the least educated respondents in countries like Sweden,
Finland, Switzerland, and Germany.
United Kingdom
Austria
Switzerland
Netherlands
Belgium
France
Germany
Denmark
Sweden
Finland
Estonia
Lithuania
Poland
Czech Republic
Slovenia
Hungary
Portugal
Spain
2
3
4
Country’s cultural life undermined or
enriched by immigrants
5
6
7
8
9
Norway
Ireland
Country
Highest level of 
education, ES - ISCED
ES-ISCED I , less than lower
secondary
ES-ISCED II , lower
secondary
ES-ISCED IIIb , lower tier
upper secondary
ES-ISCED IIIa , upper tier
upper secondary
ES-ISCED V1, lower tertiary
education, BA level
ES-ISCED V2, higher tertiary
education, >= MA level
ES-ISCED IV, advanced
vocational, sub-degree
Figure 4.7. Education and immigrants (Country’s cultural life is generally undermined
(= 0) or enriched (= 10) by people coming to live here from other countries. Mean score
by education, ESS 2014)
Education as a Cleavage
51

With regard to EU-uniﬁcation, the differences within and between coun-
tries are somewhat less pronounced. In most western and northern countries,
the well-educated are more positive about the process of EU uniﬁcation than
the less educated. However, in some eastern member states, such as Lithuania
and the Czech Republic, the least educated are more positive about the beneﬁts
of the EU, as the mean scores show in Figure 4.9.
Institutional Differences: Social-Liberal versus Nationalist Parties
To what extent are these educational differences reﬂected in the political
landscape? Cleavages have sides, and the behavioural dimension of a cleavage
manifests itself in voting for speciﬁc political parties or support for particular
political organizations. In our childhood, the protestant adults by and large
would vote for the various Protestant political parties, and almost all the
Catholics would vote for the Catholic Party. What kinds of parties attract
the higher educated and what parties are popular with voters with lower levels
of educational achievement? We looked at two indicators in particular: voting
for two newly emerging party families, i.e., nationalist parties on the one hand
and the Green and social-liberal parties on the other.
United Kingdom
Austria
Switzerland
Netherlands
Belgium
France
Germany
Denmark
Sweden
Finland
Estonia
Lithuania
Poland
Czech Republic
Slovenia
Hungary
Portugal
Spain
Norway
Ireland
Country
2
Immigration bad or good for country’s
economy
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Highest level of 
education, ES - ISCED
ES-ISCED I , less than lower
secondary
ES-ISCED II , lower
secondary
ES-ISCED IIIb , lower tier
upper secondary
ES-ISCED IIIa , upper tier
upper secondary
ES-ISCED V1, lower tertiary
education, BA level
ES-ISCED V2, higher tertiary
education, >= MA level
ES-ISCED IV, advanced
vocational, sub-degree
Figure 4.8. Education and immigration (good or bad for economy, 1 = bad for economy,
10 = good for economy. Mean score by education, ESS 2014)
Diploma Democracy
52

While European party systems continue to bear the footprint of class and
religious cleavages, a restructuring of political space occurred in the past dec-
ades. The educational and participatory revolutions of the 1960s and 1970s
encouraged the rise of protest politics that has inﬂuenced the party politics in
Western Europe. New actors with new types of preferences entered the political
stage. In a long-term perspective, the rise of the left libertarian pole of the new
cultural dimension of conﬂict, and the expression of a new value division, were
part of the secularization of the religious cleavage (Bornschier 2010: 2). This
development has led to the emergence of Green and social liberal parties and a
transformation of the political left (Kriesi et al. 2012).
On the other side of this cultural conﬂict, a remarkable change in the
European political landscape has occurred over the past decades: the emer-
gence of nationalist populist parties such as the FPÖ in Austria, Vlaams Belang
in Belgium, the Danish People’s Party, the True Finns Party, France’s Front
National, AfD and Pegida in Germany, the Jobbik Party in Hungary, Lega Nord
in Italy, the Party for Freedom in the Netherlands, the Sweden Democrats, and
UKIP in the UK.
As can be observed from Figure 4.10, these nationalist parties tend to draw
large proportions of the low- and medium-educated voters, and relatively few
Highest level of 
education, ES - ISCED
ES-ISCED I , less than lower
secondary
ES-ISCED II , lower
secondary
ES-ISCED IIIb , lower tier
upper secondary
ES-ISCED IIIa , upper tier
upper secondary
ES-ISCED V1, lower tertiary
education, BA level
ES-ISCED V2, higher tertiary
education, >= MA level
ES-ISCED IV, advanced
vocational, sub-degree
United Kingdom
Austria
Switzerland
Netherlands
Belgium
France
Germany
Denmark
Sweden
Finland
Estonia
Lithuania
Poland
Czech Republic
Slovenia
Hungary
Portugal
Spain
Norway
Ireland
2
European Union: European unification
gone too far or go further 
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Country
Figure 4.9. Education and European uniﬁcation (0 = has gone too far; or should go
further = 10. Mean score by education, ESS 2014)
Education as a Cleavage
53

well-educated voters. This is particularly the case in western and northern
European countries, such as Denmark, France, Switzerland, the Netherlands,
Norway, and Sweden. It is not the case in Eastern European countries, such as
Hungary and Poland. In Hungary, the Jobbik Party attracts more well- and
middle-educated than less educated voters.
At the other end of the ﬁeld are the Green and libertarian parties, such as
Groen! and Ecolo in Belgium, Les Verts in France, Die Grüne in Germany, D66
and GroenLinks in the Netherlands, and the Liberal Democrats in the United
Kingdom, to name but a few. Since the late seventies, the Green parties have
become established political actors throughout Western Europe. According to
Dolezal (2010: 548), they ‘are supported by voters who are young, highly
educated, work as social-cultural specialist or are students. . . . These structural
components are connected with environmental, libertarian, and pro-
immigration attitudes’. Our analysis of the ESS data yields similar conclusions,
as can be observed from Figure 4.11. In all countries, the Green and social
liberal parties predominantly attract voters from the high end of the educa-
tional spectrum.19
Both party families, the nationalist populist parties on the one hand, and
the Greens and social-liberals on the other hand, embody the institutional-
ization of the new conﬂict line, particularly in western and northern Europe.
They have gained a place in the political arena, because they represent
groups of voters who not only share a particular set of issue attitudes, but
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
UKIP
Sinn Féin
FPÖ
Swiss People's Party
Party for Freedom
Vlaams Belang
Front National
AfD
Dansk Folkeparti
Progress Party
Sverigedemokraterna
True Finns
Party Order and Justice
Jobbik
Law and Justice
UK
IE
AU
CH
NL
BE
FR
DE
DE
NO
SE
FI
LI
HU
PO
low educated
middle educated
high educated
Figure 4.10. Education and voting for nationalist party (%, ESS 2014)
Diploma Democracy
54

also speciﬁc social characteristics—their educational background. Again, edu-
cation is independent from social class or income. If education coincided with
socio-economic class, we would expect class voting along the traditional left–
right dimension, with the least educated predominantly voting for traditional
leftist, labour parties and the well-educated for right-wing, conservative par-
ties. According to Dutch sociologists Jeroen van der Waal, Peter Achterberg,
and Dick Houtman, cross-cutting cultural voting that is rooted in educational
differences has caused a gradual erosion of the pattern of leftist working-class
voting. Class voting still exists, but socio-economic class cannot explain the
rise and the support of both the Green-liberal and of the populist-nationalist
parties. The well-educated increasingly vote for social liberal parties instead of
for conservative, right-wing parties, while many of the less well-educated no
longer vote for leftist, social democratic parties but for nationalist, conserva-
tive parties (Van der Waal et al. 2007: 416–17). As they aptly expressed it in the
title of their seminal book: ‘Farewell to the leftist working class’(Houtman
et al. 2008).
However, in at least one respect the process of cleavage formation has not
fully materialized. Unlike with other cleavage dimensions, such as class, reli-
gion, or region, these new political parties do not explicitly articulate the
interests of lower or higher educated citizens. There is no such thing as a
‘University Graduate Party’ or a ‘Union for the Low Educated’, in contrast to,
for example, the ‘Labour Party’, the ‘Christlich Sociale Union’, or the ‘Lega
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Green Party
Liberal Democrats
Green Party
Grüne
Green Party
Green Liberal Party
Radical Liberals
Green Left
Democrats 66
Ecolo
Groen!
EELV
Bündnis 90/ Die Grünen
Det Radikale Venstre
Green Party
Miljöpartiet de gröna
Green League
 LVZS
UK
IE
AU
CH
NL
BE
FR
DE
DK
NO
SE
FI
LI
low educated
middle educated
high educated
Figure 4.11. Education and voting for green party or left liberal party (%, ESS 2014)
Education as a Cleavage
55

Nord’, whose names explicitly refer to the social groups they organize and
represent. Educational levels as such are not very attractive labels for rallying
supporters. ‘Lower educated’—unlike, for example, ‘working class’ in the
past—is not a positive label for identiﬁcation, because of the social stigma of
inferiority that is attached to it (Spruyt 2012). For the less educated, a regional
or national identity provides much more positive labels. Likewise, the well-
educated, because of the liberal ethos of egalitarianism, feel embarrassed to
openly distinguish and organize themselves on the basis of their higher
qualiﬁcations (Kuipers & van den Haak 2014).
Different Stages of Cleavage Formation across Europe
This chapter explored the formation of an educational cleavage in different
European democracies. Rather than focusing on full cleavages, we looked at
stages of cleavage formation across twenty European countries. We carried out
a ﬁrst systematic exploration of various cleavage elements in a comparative
perspective. It is still too early to reach deﬁnite conclusions about the standing
of this new emerging cleavage. More compelling evidence of the existence of a
‘full cleavage’ would require an extended discussion of a range of other issues,
including more, and much more sophisticated, indicators of the various elem-
ents, that goes far beyond the limits of a single chapter.20
Nevertheless, on the basis of this ﬁrst exploration of the three cleavage
elements, a few preliminary conclusions can be drawn regarding the rise of
new educational political conﬂict lines in West European politics. First, the
structural element. In all European countries, the numbers of the well-
educated have risen sharply in the past four decades, and in many countries
the well-educated have become a very sizable social group—from a quarter to
even beyond one third of the population in western Europe. Levels of educa-
tion are important drivers of differences in income levels, and we also see
strong levels of educational homogamy, particularly among the well-
educated, which is indicative of the sort of social closure Lipset and Rokkan
had in mind. Segmentation and segregation along educational lines are stron-
gest in the Nordic and Western European countries—the impact of large
cohorts with higher levels of education. The stratiﬁcation along educational
lines is, however, more evident in the Eastern European countries.
Second, these new social categories also diverge on various core values and
political preferences. Signiﬁcant differences can be observed regarding the
relatively new cultural issues that have become salient in the past decades.
The well-educated endorse more cosmopolitan, pro-immigration, and pro-
European values than the lesser educated.21 This can be observed across all
twenty countries, although on average all educational groups tend to be much
Diploma Democracy
56

more cosmopolitan in the Nordic and Western countries than in the Eastern
European countries.
These shared political preferences must also produce institutions, organiza-
tions, and opportunities for political behaviour that articulate these prefer-
ences, in order to transform social and attitudinal differences into political
divides. We see the emergence of such institutional elements in particularly
the countries of western and northern Europe. The arrival of two new types of
party families is evident: Green and social-liberal parties on the one hand,
versus the new nationalist-populist parties on the other. The electorate of the
former party family is predominantly well educated, whereas the nationalistic
parties, with the exception of the former communist countries, tend to get
most of their votes from the group of lower and medium-educated citizens.
The association between education levels and support for emerging political
parties shows that the social differences have become politically important.
To what extent do the social-structural, preferential, and behavioural differ-
ences coincide? In their seminal essay, Lipset and Rokkan (1967: 152) warned
that ‘any attempt at comparative analysis across so many divergent national
histories is fraught with great risks. It is easy to get lost in the wealth of
fascinating detail and it is equally easy to succumb to facile generalities and
irresponsible abstractions.’ In an attempt to avoid both these traps, we have
formalized the differences between the countries—based on the correlations
of education within each of the distinct cleavage elements—and present the
results in Table 4.1.
Table 4.1 consists of the three key elements of cleavage formation that we
have distinguished here. It records whether the contours of these elements are
present (or observable) in a given country. A plus in this assessment table
indicates that education is associated with the indicators grouped under the
cleavage elements. With regard to most indicators, we used a correlation value
higher than 0.2 as a threshold. For rating the status of educational homogamy
in the different countries, we have used a yardstick of 15 per cent of the
population that has tertiary qualiﬁcations and has a partner with tertiary
qualiﬁcations. These ‘ratings’ or plusses need to be interpreted with a great
degree of caution, as this assessment is the result of a ﬁrst, exploratory ana-
lysis, and the differences are sometimes very small.
On the basis of this initial, provisional analysis, we can perceive some
patterns. The degree to which the contours of this educational cleavage have
been crystallized out varies within Europe. Educational differences matter
most in the western and northern countries of Europe, such as Belgium,
Denmark, and to a somewhat lesser extent the Netherlands, the UK, Finland,
Austria, and Switzerland. In these countries, the contours of something resem-
bling a full cleavage are visible. The link between education and the cleavage
elements is the weakest in the countries of southern and eastern Europe.
Education as a Cleavage
57

Table 4.1. Education and cleavage elements (%, correlations and associations, ESS 2014)
Structural element
Political preference
Political behavior
relation
income-level
education
(pearson
corr)
homogamy: %
tertiary education
with partner
tertiary education
Criterion:
>0.2 (income)
and >15%
(homogamy)
relation
preference
immigration and
education
(pearson corr)
relation
preference EU
and education
(pearson corr)
Criterion:
>0.2
relation vote
choice and
education
(cramer’s V)
Criterion:
>0.2
1
United Kingdom
0.38
19.5
+
0.30
0.11
0.23
+
2
Ireland
0.37
10.7
0.28
0.10
0.13
3
Austria
0.16
8.2
0.34
0.28
+
0.27
+
4
Switzerland
0.30
11.2
0.26
0.22
+
0.21
+
5
Germany
0.29
14.3
0.29
0.20
+
0.11
6
France
0.41
11.2
0.34
0.19
0.22
+
7
Belgium
0.41
20.4
+
0.29
0.20
+
0.28
+
8
Netherlands
0.34
18.4
+
0.28
0.19
0.23
+
9
Denmark
0.37
25.8
+
0.37
0.26
+
0.22
+
10
Norway
0.32
26.5
+
0.29
0.07
0.19
11
Sweden
0.27
17.1
+
0.28
0.10
0.19
12
Finland
0.36
18.9
+
0.28
0.14
0.27
+
13
Lithuania
0.26
18.8
+
0.08
0.01
0.19
14
Estonia
20.1
0.12
0.06
0.13
15
Poland
0.35
11.6
0.15
0.03
0.23
+
16
Czech Republic
0.31
7.3
0.08
0.05
0.23
+
17
Hungary
0.34
0.09
0.04
0.07
18
Slovenia
0.50
8.4
0.31
0.02
0.25
+
19
Portugal
0.48
11.6
0.27
0.06
0.22
+
20
Spain
0.49
13.3
0.26
0.17
0.22
+

Even though the countries in the sample are all democratic, their particular
histories and political opportunity structures seem to play a role in the emer-
gence of the various elements. For example, in the UK, the attitudinal differ-
ences have developed into a positional divide only recently. While in 2010,
the social liberal Liberal Democrats successfully moved to the fore, the major-
itarian electoral system makes it very difﬁcult for new nationalistic parties,
such as UKIP or the more extreme British National Party, to enter the British
Parliament. This is different for the European Parliament (EP), however, due
to the system of proportional representation that applies in EP elections. In
2014, UKIP became the largest British party in the EP with 27.5 per cent of the
votes—whereas in the 2015 national elections, the party obtained only one
seat in the British Parliament. Similarly, in Germany, a strong Green party
has evolved, while nationalistic counterparts have emerged only recently
and had not yet entered the Bundestag when we completed this study in the
fall of 2016.
Cleavage Formation and the Rise of Political Meritocracy
It is clear that although education as a socio-demographic category played
only a minor role in the Lipset and Rokkan framework, it has now become
more salient in contemporary politics. Whether this new educational division
superimposes on top of the others (reinforcing cleavages) or cuts across the
others (cross-cutting cleavages) can have clear consequences for the conﬂict
lines in society. Where lines of education, class, religion, or regions coincide,
they are more likely to create deep social differences. Against the background
of the emergence of these educational differences, divides, and in some cases a
nascent cleavage, the rise of a political meritocracy can have a signiﬁcant
impact on the working of European democracies.
We will discuss these consequences in Chapter 8. First, we will establish the
extent to which the selected Western democracies have become political
meritocracies. The institutionalization of the educational divide will not
only occur in the form of political parties. It will also translate into differences
in political participation, in transformations in civil society, and in different
patterns of political elite formation.
Country Selection
The aim of this book is not to focus on the variation between countries (or on
its determinants) but to address broad common developments. Descriptive
analysis allows us to establish the scope of the educational divide. Given these
limited ambitions, we predominantly look at those European countries where
Education as a Cleavage
59

we would expect the rise of political meritocracy to be more prominent than
elsewhere, because of the high percentages of well-educated citizens in the
population and the meritocratic character of the educational system and the
labour market. These are Belgium, Denmark, the Netherlands, the UK, and, to
a lesser extent, Germany and France. Of these six western countries, Denmark
and Belgium scored highest on our cleavage indicators, followed by the
Netherlands and the UK. Germany also scored high on the social and attitu-
dinal elements, but did not have a nationalist party in the Bundestag when we
ﬁnished this book. France scores high too, except for the homogamy among
the tertiary educated.
We could have included other countries, such as Austria, Switzerland, or
Finland, but we have refrained for pragmatic reasons. This is not a study in
comparative politics. In the rest of this book we will not systematically com-
pare a range of parliamentary democracies in order to document dissimilarities
or to charter the workings of the different political systems. Our enterprise is
ﬁrst of all explorative and argumentative. Therefore, a few countries will do.
The focal point of the remainder of this book, our ultimate dependent
variable, is the rise of political meritocracy. Chapter 5 will examine the dom-
inance of the well-educated in the major venues for political participation;
Chapter 6 looks at civil society organizations; and Chapter 7 will concentrate
on the meritocratization of the political elite.
Notes
1. Compare: Lijphart 1975; Verba et al. 1978.
2. See Van der Houwen 2010: 45.
3. Compare De Vries 2009; De Voogd 2011.
4. See Te Riele et al. 2012; Latten 2005: 12.
5. See Lipset & Rokkan 1967: 9–26; Deegan-Krause 2007: 540.
6. See Clark & Lipset 1991; Evans 1999; Evans & De Graaf 2013.
7. Compare Dalton et al. 1984; Franklin et al. 1992; Van der Brug 2010.
8. Compare Van der Waal et al. 2007; Enyedi 2008; Houtman et al. 2008; Kriesi et al.
2006; Kriesi et al. 2008; Bornschier 2010; Bovens & Wille 2011; Bovens 2012.
9. Compare Van de Werfhorst & De Graaf 2004; Kalmijn & Kraaykamp 2007; Van den
Berg & Coffé 2012.
10. Compare Knutsen 2009; Bornschier 2009; Kriesi et al. 2012: 8–12.
11. See Kriesi 2010: 673–85; Kriesi et al. 2012: 9.
12. In order to address our questions and to analyse the emerging contours of an
education cleavage in European democracies, we have used the data from the
2010 (round 5) European Social Survey (ESS). The data are based on the cumulative
data ﬁle (edition 2.0) and we included twenty-three countries in the analysis.
Excluded from our analysis are Israel, Lithuania, Ukraine, and Turkey. Austria,
Diploma Democracy
60

Italy, and Malta were not part of the ESS survey. The most important variable in our
analysis is our independent variable: educational attainment. The international
standard classiﬁcation of education (ISCED) was used as the basic tool for describ-
ing and analysing different levels of education. Respondents were asked to state
their highest achieved level of (formal) education, ranging from ‘did not complete
primary education’ to ‘second stage of tertiary education’.
13. See Kalmijn & Kraaykamp 2007: 568; Van den Berg & Coffé 2012: 175.
14. Countries such as Sweden, Finland, Denmark, Norway, and the Netherlands top
the Knowledge Economy Index of the World Bank Institute. See https://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/Knowledge_Economic_Index.
15. Compare Esping-Andersen 1990; Ferrera 1996.
16. Compare Wirth 2000; Blossfeld & Timm 2003; Haandrikman 2011.
17. See, for example, Van der Waal et al. 2007: 407.
18. Compare Achterberg 2006; Pellikaan et al. 2007; Aarts & Thomassen 2008;
Houtman et al. 2008; Van der Brug 2008; Kriesi et al. 2008; Fligstein 2008; Van
der Brug & Van Spanje 2009; Bornschier 2010, 2012; Kriesi 2010; Kriesi et al. 2012.
19. The political support shown by the different educational groups for these new
political parties also emerges at the level of party afﬁliation—the political parties
people feel closest to.
20. For example, establishing a full cleavage also would require far more extensive
monitoring and measuring of the emergence of these new potential cleavages and
of the social and political conditions for their formation, development, and sur-
vival. Likewise, it would require more analysis of the institutional and organiza-
tional actors that form and keep these social groups together as groups, articulate
and construct preferences, and contribute to the production and reproduction of
these new education cleavages—i.e., what are the equivalents of the unions and
churches in previous cleavage formations? Which political actors or organizations
create and exploit new identiﬁcations? How do they differ from country to
country?
21. Compare also Houtman et al. 2008; Kriesi et al. 2008; Fligstein 2008; Kriesi et al.
2012.
Education as a Cleavage
61


Part II
Contours


5
The Education Gap in Political Participation
The Hamburger Bildungskampf
In 2008, the German city of Hamburg decided to reform its secondary school
system, with the aim of enhancing the educational opportunities of pupils
from less privileged families.1 One of the central elements of the plan was a
proposal to postpone the selection of students for the pre-academic (Gymna-
sium) and more vocational (Realschule) tracks by two years. By extending the
period of ‘joint learning’, students from less well-educated families would
have more time to develop their talents. The reforms were based on research
in Scandinavian countries and experiments in other German cities, which
showed that late selection helps to enhance the educational careers of talented
children from poorly educated and low-income families. Soon the proposal
became the object of vehement protests from well-educated parents with
children in the Gymnasia. They started an emotional campaign ‘Wir wollen
lernen’ (we want to learn) to halt the reforms. With the help of the local media
and tabloid press, they managed to force the local council to hold a referen-
dum in 2010, in which the citizens of Hamburg were asked to accept or reject
the reform proposal. The protesters won—58 per cent voted in favour of
maintaining the early selection in schools, whereas the reform proposal
received only a 45 per cent ‘yes’ vote.
The votes were not evenly spread across the city, however. To begin with, a
mere 40 per cent of the citizens went to the polling booth. In the well-to-do
parts of the city, the turnout was high—in the richest neighbourhoods over
60 per cent. In the parts of the city inhabited by the less well-educated, the
turnout was much lower—around 12 per cent in the poorest areas. The very
citizens who were meant to proﬁt from the reforms could not be mobilized to
vote, let alone to campaign in favour of the reforms.
The 2010 Hamburg Bildungskampf neatly illustrates the topic of this
chapter: educational differences in political participation and their political
implications. We will ﬁrst explore the degree to which educational differences

matter in the extent and form of political participation of citizens in a variety
of arenas. The aim of the exercise is to take stock of the education gaps in
participation.
This stocktaking exercise is based on a cross-arena comparison. In the
academic division of labour, normally either voting, or non-electoral polit-
ical actions, or party membership, are studied. As a result, much of the
literature on the impact of education follows a rather compartmented
approach, with a focus on distinct political arenas. We, however, propose
to study these arenas simultaneously, to allow a better understanding of the
true extent of the education gap. We focus on the six countries that were
selected in Chapter 4: Belgium (BE), Denmark (DK), France (FR), Germany
(GE), the Netherlands (NL), and the United Kingdom (UK). In order to
explore education differences in political participation in these European
democracies, we have used a range of reports and data from the European
Social Survey (ESS), ISSP, and the Eurobarometer. The appendix describes the
data and variables.
The Participation Pyramid
Political participation can take many forms. Together, these forms can be
thought of as a participation pyramid (Milbrath 1965) in which acts vary in
terms of their difﬁculty and which can therefore be ranked from easy to
difﬁcult. The acts most commonly engaged in are ranked at the bottom,
while those less frequently employed are rated at the top. Figure 5.1 represents
political office
membership political party
or civil society organization
non electoral activities
voting
spectator actitivies:
watching, reading, discussing politics
Figure 5.1. The participation pyramid
Diploma Democracy
66

this pyramid. Activities such as watching, reading, and talking about politics
form the base of the pyramid. Holding political ofﬁce is at the peak of the
pyramid.2
Political activities also vary in the extent to which an activity can be
multiplied. Voting is an activity for which there is a mandated equality—
each citizen has one and only one vote in each election (Verba et al. 1995: 9,
168–9). Other activities dictate no such equality of inputs. Individuals may
spend as many hours campaigning for a good cause, attend as many political
meetings or demonstrations, and write as many emails to public ofﬁcials as
their time and inclination permit. Moreover, these activities differ in their
capacity to convey detailed messages to policymakers. Voting is a blunt instru-
ment when it comes to the translation of the speciﬁc political preferences of
voters. Many other acts are more ‘information rich’ (Verba et al. 1995: 9, 169)
in that they explicitly state the speciﬁc political preferences or wishes of
participants.
Are the well-educated signiﬁcantly more likely to engage in all these forms
of political participation, and how large are the disparities between educa-
tional groups? Are there differences in the forms of political participation
engaged in by the highly educated versus those with less education? Does
the expanded political action repertory, with a great range of political activ-
ities available to ordinary citizens, result in smaller educational inequalities?
In this chapter, we will discuss the spectator activities, voting, non-electoral
activities, and membership of political parties. Membership of civil society
organizations will be the topic of Chapter 6, and holding political ofﬁce the
topic of Chapter 7.
Education Gaps in Participation
Spectator Politics: Watching, Reading, and Talking Politics
At the bottom of the political participation pyramid, we ﬁnd the most rudi-
mentary forms of political engagement. For most of us, the lion’s share of our
political involvement is not spent by engaging in political activity, let alone
decision-making, but rather in watching politics and listening to others doing
politics (Green 2010: 4). People talk about politics, comment on the news they
have watched and the newspapers they have read, give their personal views on
current local, national, or world issues while discussing current affairs at
birthday parties, in the pub, at the dinner-table, in class, or at the workplace.
Politics often starts with spectatorship.3 In fact, this is where political dis-
courses are shaped. This is where people are exposed to similar and dissonant
political views, where political opinions are formed and calibrated, and where
the ‘public sphere’ begins. Some of the political information that citizens
The Education Gap in Political Participation
67

receive may come from discussions with friends and family. But most of it
comes from the media, as opposed to direct experience of the political process.
The digital revolution has made the circulation of information simpler, and
facilitated access to information on political topics. It has contributed to the
rise of the ‘monitorial citizen’, as Schudson (1998) called it.
What role do spectator activities play in the different educational groups in
the six countries? In the ESS, respondents were asked about the amount of time
they spent on politics and current affairs and how they spent it on average
weekdays—by watching it on television, by listening to the radio, or by reading
the newspapers.4 The responses could vary from ‘none’ to ‘more than three
hours’. Figure 5.2 shows the educational differences in media behaviour for
those who watch and read about politics for a half an hour or more on an
average weekday. Most people watch politics on television, only one in twenty
does not. On average, about 60 per cent of the respondents watch for half an
hour or longer. The lesser educated are just as likely as those with a tertiary
education to spend an extended period of time watching politics.
The educational differences are larger when it comes to reading about
politics. Those with a tertiary education in the six countries are more likely
to read about politics for longer than half an hour, compared to those with
primary or secondary education. The middle category leans towards the lower
educated group when it comes to reading the news. On average, one out of
three of more highly educated respondents in Belgium, Denmark, and the
Netherlands spends more than a half an hour reading about the news, com-
pared to one out of ﬁve or six in the lower educated groups in these countries.
Similar differences can also be observed regarding talking about politics. In all
six countries, large majorities of the well-educated report they sometimes or
often discuss politics with friends. For the less educated this applies to less
than half of the respondents in most countries.
All in all, when it comes to spectator activities, while highly educated people
appear to read and talk more about politics, the groups do not differ largely in
the amount of time they spend watching politics.
Voting
The next layer of the pyramid is voting. In parliamentary democracies, this is
the pivotal form of political participation. Electoral systems have evolved
slowly in Europe. To enhance democracy, rights have been extended and
barriers to voting have been removed.5 Many countries nowadays allow resi-
dent non-nationals to vote in local elections. One of the most signiﬁcant
transformations in the democratic process throughout Western Europe has
been the widespread introduction of regional and European elections. As a
result, electorates in Europe now have more opportunities to participate in
Diploma Democracy
68

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany
Netherlands
United
Kingdom
Watch politics: half an hour a day or more (ESS 2002–2012)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany
Netherlands
United
Kingdom
Reading political news: half an hour a day or more (ESS 2002–2012)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany
Netherlands
United
Kingdom
Often or sometimes discuss politics with friends (ISSP 2014)
low educated
middle educated
high educated
low educated
middle educated
high educated
low educated
middle educated
high educated
Figure 5.2. Education and spectator activities (%, six rounds ESS 2002–2012, ISSP 2014)
69

elections than ever before. Of all political activities, voting is one of the least
demanding forms of political participation, and is by far the most common
activity that provides an equal opportunity to all to participate.
In the literature, education is considered to be one of the strongest predict-
ors of voter turnout. A meta-analysis of Kaat Smets and Carolien van Ham
(2013) shows that in two thirds of the studies education is positively and
signiﬁcantly related to individual level turnout.6 At the same time, this posi-
tive relationship between education and voter turnout at the individual level
is contradicted by a dynamic trend at the aggregate level: over time, rising
levels of education in society did not increase aggregate turnout. On the
contrary, the average turnout has declined in established democracies, from
about 85 per cent in 1960 and over 80 per cent in 1980 to about 75 per cent in
2011.7 Richard Brody (1978) famously termed this inconsistency as the ‘puz-
zle of political participation’.
One of the reasons for this puzzling outcome may be that participation has
become increasingly unequal. Armin Schäfer and Wolfgang Streeck (2013)
point out that, due to the falling turnout level, participation is growing
more unequal as, particularly, the most disadvantaged groups are failing to
vote. Voters with more education participate more frequently: ‘these differ-
ences tend to grow larger as turnout declines, because lower overall participa-
tion rates go along with more unequal participation’ (Schäfer & Streeck 2013:
13).8 Klaus Armingeon and Lisa Schädel (2015) indicate that educational
inequality in electoral participation has risen indeed in the past decades.
Based on an analysis of ninety-four electoral surveys in eight Western European
countries between 1956 and 2009, they observe that the difference in national
election turnout has increased between the half of the population with the
lowest level of education and the half with the highest. This increase in
unequal turnout levels varies across countries. In some countries, such as
Germany, Norway, Sweden, and Italy, inequality in participation is clearly
on the rise. In the UK, Denmark, and the Netherlands, no such long-term
increase in educational inequality in voter turnout levels has occurred.
Notwithstanding whether or not inequalities have increased, our analysis of
the ESS data, displayed in Figure 5.3, reveals that in every Western European
country in our sample, the well-educated are more inclined to vote.9 Unsur-
prisingly, given its system of compulsory voting, the analysis shows that in
Belgium, electoral participation is highest and the educational gap is smallest.
But also in Denmark, where there is no compulsory voting, the education gap
is relatively narrow.
The existence of variation across countries implies that ‘unequal participa-
tion is not universal’ (Gallego 2015: 33), or unavoidable. The educational
differences in turnout depend on different conditions. First, the type of elec-
tion is important. Nationwide elections are the most salient ones for most
Diploma Democracy
70

citizens, with participation and turnout rates that are much higher than those
in regional, local, or European elections.10 Elections for the latter institutions
have thus been categorized as ‘second order’ (Reif & Schmitt 1997). A key
explanation for the lower rates of participation, and larger participation gaps,
is the subordinate role played by these ‘second order’ elections. There is less at
stake than at national elections, they have less political salience than national
elections, and consequently, voters have less incentive to vote (Gaxie 1978:
227). This also implies that looking at national elections only, underestimates
the existence of educational gaps (Schäfer & Streeck 2013: 11–12).
Next are the contextual characteristics. Aina Gallego (2010, 2015) demon-
strates that voter turnout is more equal where voting is easy. Education is less
related to the probability to vote where the ballots are simple, where registra-
tion is state initiated, and where the number of electoral parties is small. Those
factors effectively counterbalance the lack of individual resources.11 Import-
antly, these ﬁndings suggests that differences in the turnout rates of different
groups can be reduced by making the electoral procedure very easy, or by
introducing compulsory voting. We return to this topic in Chapter 9.
The increased opportunities to vote in second order elections, such as local
elections, referendums, and for remote supranational institutions, have
increased democratic access to a number of decision-making arenas, but at
the same time also widened the educational gap (Wille 2011: 108–10). They
multiply the demands on voters to become informed on the issues of each
election. Sometimes voters simply do not have enough information to choose
between speciﬁc competing policy programmes, or they cannot accurately
assign credit and blame to the right ofﬁce holders. Sometimes they do not
even know about the speciﬁc policy in question, or about the basic structure of
low educated
middle educated
high educated
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany
Netherlands
United
Kingdom
Voted last national election 
Figure 5.3. Education and voting in last national election (%, ESS 2014)
The Education Gap in Political Participation
71

government and how it operates.12 Complex and divided government makes it
complicated for voters to know which politicians they are to ‘hold accountable’
in what election.
Conventional Participation Outside Elections
Voting is a pivotal but relatively rare and general form of political participa-
tion. Citizens try to inﬂuence the political process in the periods between
elections in a variety of other ways. Many of these activities have the capacity
to convey more precise messages and to generate more pressure to respond
than a single vote is able to do. Contacting an elected ofﬁcial, wearing a badge,
handing out ﬂyers, joining election campaign rallies, organizing the commu-
nity, talking to a councillor during a neighbourhood meeting, are all considered
‘conventional’ forms of participation outside elections. They are acts of pol-
itical involvement related to the electoral process, or attempts to inﬂuence
the political process through well-accepted, often moderate forms of political
participation.
An analysis of the ESS data for our six Western European countries reveals
the existence of statistically signiﬁcant differences between educational groups
in all six countries regarding these conventional activities outside elections.
Figure 5.4 displays the size of the differences between those with higher and
those with lower levels of educational achievement for activities such as wear-
ing campaign badges, donating money, contacting a politician, attending a
rally, or working for a political party, action group, or organization.
In all six countries, the well-educated are more inclined to inﬂuence the
political process outside elections through these ‘conventional’ methods,
although wearing a badge, attending a rally, and working for a political
party are less popular forms of participation. Donating money, and working
in an organization are the most popular activities; and relatively large differ-
ences are seen between higher and lower educated groups for these forms of
participation in all six countries.
Protest Participation Outside Elections
Participation patterns in Western democracies have changed considerably
over the last couple of decades. During the early 1970s, the political science
literature expanded the scope of the political participation research to include
‘protest’ forms of participation, such as demonstrations, the organization of
petitions, and strikes. In more recent years joining boycotts and buycotts has
become popular too. The consumer boycott was used in the seventies and
eighties to protest against political regimes, such as apartheid in South Africa,
Diploma Democracy
72

or the Pinochet regime in Chile. Buying fair trade and environmentally
friendly products instead of regular brands, has turned consumption into a
public issue and a venue for individual political action (Balsiger 2010: 312).
Some brand this as a new form of Do-It-Yourself-politics (DIY) and argue that
the distinction between citizen and consumer roles in public life is becoming
increasingly blurred.13 By applying direct public pressure on corporations to
adopt higher environmental, or labour standards, ‘citizens have out-sourced
their politics from the voting booths to the supermarkets’ (Simon 2011: 147).
Examples include the campaigns against Apple, Microsoft, and the sweatshop
labour campaign against Nike.
Initially, these protest forms of political participation were carried out
mostly by a well-educated middle class. The greater inclination of the well-
educated to take part in street protest was related to the fact that this group in
general tends to be over-represented in all forms of political participation,
both ‘conventional’ and ‘unconventional’. The literature is not conclusive,
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany Netherlands United
Kingdom
Worn or diplayed campaign badge/sticker (ESS 2014)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany Netherlands United
Kingdom
Contacted politician or government official (ESS 2014) 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Belgium
Denmark
France Germany Netherlands United
Kingdom
Donated money or raised funds (ISSP 2014)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany Netherlands United
Kingdom
Attended meeting or rally (ISSP 2014)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany Netherlands United
Kingdom
Worked in political party or action group (ESS 2014)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany Netherlands United
Kingdom
Worked in organisation or association  (ESS 2014)
low educated
middle educated
high educated
Figure 5.4. Education and conventional participation outside elections (%, ESS 2014,
ISSP 2014)
73
The Education Gap in Political Participation

however. Verba, Schlozman, and Brady (1995) showed in their study from the
1990s that the inclination to take part in a street protest is less affected by an
individual’s level of education, compared to other forms of political partici-
pation. In their follow-up study, they found that, while political inequality in
general has increased, the differences between the highly educated and the
lesser educated regarding participation in street protests have narrowed
(Schlozman et al. 2012: 122–4). Other surveys support this ﬁnding.14 The
education gap in protest activity has closed over the past decades and protest
and demonstrations have ‘normalized’. On the other hand, a sample of ﬁfty-two
demonstrations in ﬁve European countries (the UK, Belgium, the Netherlands,
Spain, and Switzerland) in the period 2009–2012, shows that over 60 per cent of
the protest participants either currently attend or have attended university
(Olcese et al. 2014).
Our Figure 5.5, based on the ESS surveys, shows a mixed picture too. In
Belgium, Denmark, and the Netherlands, relatively few citizens tend to take
part in demonstrations and no differences between educational groups can be
observed. In France, Germany, and the UK, demonstrations are more popular,
especially among the better educated.
Educational differences are comparatively larger for other cause-oriented
activities. In all six countries, the well-educated sign political petitions more
often. Also, they are more engaged in joining boycotts. Figure 5.5 shows that
those with higher levels of educational attainment participate twice as often
in boycotts, compared to those with a lower educational background, in most
countries. Political consumerism and product boycotts can achieve a great
deal of public attention, but they are highly selective in their social base. The
literature indicates that political consumerism might even be more strongly
biased than other forms of political participation.15
Internet Activism
The use of the Internet and social media has become a popular form of
political mobilization and participation—the so-called internet activism. The
use of social networking sites such as Facebook, Google Plus, and Twitter has
spawned new opportunities for communication and information-sharing
among citizens, and between citizens and elected politicians. These range
from circulating a petition among friends, linking and liking political content,
to connecting with issue-oriented groups that support a speciﬁc cause, or
following the posts of politicians or other public ﬁgures.
Despite the obvious and growing importance of online media for partici-
pation, the debate on their speciﬁc contribution is still unresolved (Della
Porta 2013: 86). The internet, and social network sites in particular, can
provide an opportunity to groups of people who were less active in the
74
Diploma Democracy

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany
Netherlands
United
Kingdom
Taken part in public demonstration 
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany
Netherlands
United
Kingdom
Signed petition
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany
Netherlands
United
Kingdom
Boycotted certain products 
low educated
middle educated
high educated
low educated
middle educated
high educated
low educated
middle educated
high educated
Figure 5.5. Education and protest participation outside elections (%, ESS 2014)

traditional political channels—these are also known as slacktivists.16 While
some are positive about the democratic prospects of the new media, others
indicate that ‘online political opportunities do nothing to change the fact
that those with higher education and higher income are much more likely to
be politically active than those who are less socio-economically advantaged’
(Oser et al. 2013).
Figure 5.6 shows that in Western Europe, respondents with a higher level of
education are two to three times more likely to express their views via internet
and social media than people with low qualiﬁcations. Hence, while differences
are seen across the various countries, it is clear that this relatively new form of
political participation affords disproportionate representation to the well-
educated, who have easy access to the internet and possess digital skills.
Participation in Deliberative Settings
Governments and public institutions are increasingly embedding ‘public
participation’ in public policymaking by means of citizens assemblies, delib-
erative public meetings, and online public dialogues. This has increased
the number of channels for citizen participation. Deliberative protagonists
advocate the idea of strong ‘participatory democracy’, as alternative to ‘thin
democracy’, or ‘politics as zoo-keeping’, as Benjamin Barber (1984) called it.
Voice rather than votes is perceived as the new vehicle of empowerment.
Although there are no exact data about the scale and the extent to which
deliberate procedures are applied, these reforms have become popular with
local, regional, and national governments, and are even making inroads at the
European level.17
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany
Netherlands
United
Kingdom
Expressed views on the internet 
low educated
middle educated
high educated
Figure 5.6. Education and online participation (%, ISSP 2014)
76
Diploma Democracy

Analyses of different forms of citizen participation reveal that the more
demanding the act of participation is in terms of the required skills and
commitment, the more likely it is that it will be disproportionately engaged
in by people with a higher socio-economic status (Mansbridge 1980). Studies
into deliberative forms of policymaking have repeatedly demonstrated that
highly educated men have more inﬂuence than other citizens.18 They are
over-represented in these arenas, they converse more easily, and they are
rhetorically skilled, which means that they are listened to more often than
other participants.19
The Eurobarometer data, displayed in Figure 5.7, show indeed that educa-
tional differences can be observed in participating in a public debate, such as
consultations, deliberative assemblies, or interactive policymaking sessions,
but in some countries the gap is less pronounced than in others. We ﬁnd the
smallest gaps in Denmark and the UK, and the largest gap in Germany. Nearly
one in three highly educated individuals have taken part in public debate at
the local or regional level in Germany, whereas only one out of every seven of
the less well-educated has attended these sorts of meetings. This suggests that,
although some progress has been made in opening access to the decision-
making, concern about growing disparities in voice in these forms of activity is
warranted.
Political Party Membership
For much of the twentieth century, political parties were the most important
vehicles for political participation in modern democracies. But party member-
ship has shrunk in Europe since the 1980s, and at an especially fast rate in the
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany
Netherlands
United
Kingdom
Political participation in public debates
low educated
middle educated
higher educated
Figure 5.7. Education and taking part in a public debate (%, Flash EB 373 2013)
The Education Gap in Political Participation
77

ﬁrst decade of this century.20 In roughly ten years up to 2008, party member-
ship fell in Germany by 20 per cent. In the UK, where the decline is even more
pronounced at 36 per cent, the political parties have lost around one million
members over the course of the last three decades. As a result, only about 1.1
per cent of the UK electorate were party members in 2010, making member-
ship levels in the UK among the lowest of Europe. It is only slightly higher in
France (1.9 per cent in 2009) and Germany (2.3 per cent in 2007). In the UK,
the Caravan Club now has more members than all the political parties put
together, writes the Economist magazine.21
Who is still a member? According to the ESS data of 2002–201022 presented
in Figure 5.8, the well-educated are more inclined to join a political party than
citizens with less education. In all countries, with the exception of Denmark
and France, membership rates of the well-educated are signiﬁcantly higher
than those of the less well-educated.
An increasing volume of literature based on intra-party surveys shows that
party members are relatively unrepresentative when it comes to educational
background.23 The modern political party has become a party of, and for, well-
educated professionals. Yet, the differences between parties are large as can be
seen from Figure 5.9, which shows the educational distribution of party mem-
bers for the countries where the differences are largest. In Germany, for example,
no less than two thirds of the members of the Grüne, and more than half of the
FDP members, fall into the category of the well-educated (Spier Klein 2015). This
is different for the CDU and the CSU, where members with low educational
qualiﬁcations still account for almost half of their membership. The educational
proﬁles of party members in Belgium and the Netherlands are comparable.
Very few members nowadays are low educated and the well-educated are
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany
Netherlands
United
Kingdom
Member of political party  
low educated
middle educated
high educated
Figure 5.8. Education and party membership (%, ESS 2002–2010)
Diploma Democracy
78

0
20
40
60
80
100
Ecolo
PS
Open VLD
CD&V
Party members Belgium (2014)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Linke
Grüne
SPD
FDP
CSU
CDU
Party members Germany (2009)
0
20
40
60
80
100
Groen Links
PvdA
D66
CDA
VVD
CU
SGP
Party members the Netherlands (2008)
lower educated
middle educated
higher educated
lower educated
middle educated
higher educated
lower educated
middle educated
higher educated
Figure 5.9. Educational background of party members in Belgium, Germany, and the
Netherlands (%, Based on intra-party surveys. Sources: Belgium: Van Haute & Gauja
2015; Germany: Spier Klein 2015; Netherlands: Den Ridder 2014)

over-represented among the members. In Belgium, one party stands out because
of the exceptionally high educational attainment levels of its members: almost
75 per cent of the grassroots members of Ecolo, the green party, hold a
higher education qualiﬁcation at degree level (Van Haute & Gauja 2015). In
the Netherlands, the same phenomenon is seen in social-liberal parties such as
D66, and GroenLinks, where the well-educated account for over 80 per cent of
their membership (Den Ridder 2014).
The Concentration of Activity
Participatory Inequalities
A consistent pattern of participatory inequalities is visible across nearly all the
different forms of participation: higher levels of education mean higher levels
of political activity. But across what areas or types of participation are these
gaps more or less prominent? Table 5.1 examines the extent to which these
gaps are observable for activities that are measured in the ESS.24 The table
represents the odds ratios (OR) for the different activities.25 The OR shows the
probabilities of the well-educated becoming active in relation to the less well-
educated becoming active. There is a distinctive but skewed pattern across the
different forms of political participation. Wearing a badge and participation in
a demonstration are, on average, the least unequal in terms of participatory
input. The largest participatory gaps are evident for becoming active in an
organization or political party.
Table 5.1 reveals also differences between countries. For example, when
it comes to the political activity within political parties, Denmark, the
Netherlands, and Belgium show relatively small differences between the
educational groups, whereas in the UK and France the differences are relatively
large. In general, the largest education gaps in political participation can be
found in the UK, and the smallest in Denmark.
Table 5.1. Education gaps in political participation, six countries (odds ratio, ESS 2014)
ESS 2014
badge
demons
contact
boycott
petition
organization political
party
mean
country
Belgium
2.7
1.5
2.7
2.4
3.8
3.4
4.3
3.0
Denmark
1.8
0.9
2.9
2.0
1.8
2.5
3.1
2.1
France
2.7
3.7
3.7
2.5
4.2
4.4
7.5
4.1
Germany
2.1
2.8
2.5
4.9
3.5
2.6
3.7
3.2
Netherlands
2.1
1.5
2.1
3.2
3.0
3.0
4.8
2.8
United Kingdom
2.3
3.5
3.0
3.2
3.5
11.5
6.3
4.8
Mean activity
2.3
2.3
2.8
3.0
3.3
4.6
4.9
–
Diploma Democracy
80

Our analysis thus far shows a rise of participatory inequalities in the newer
forms of political participation. To illustrate how an extended repertoire of
political activities is accompanied by stronger participatory inequalities, we
have projected the educational gaps estimated by the British data of the 2015
Audit of the Hansard Society in Figure 5.10. The Audit surveyed a sample of
1,124 respondents in the UK and asked about their participation in twelve
political activities in the past year. It is clear from the ﬁgures that the new,
more personalized and less collective forms of action, such as public consult-
ations, online discussions, boycotts, and e-petitions, show larger differences in
participation between the different educational groups than the old-school
activities, such as attending political meetings and joining demonstrations.
Participants, Incidental Participants, and Non-participants
It is important to ask not only whether the well-educated are over-represented
in each particular participation area, but also how much overlap there is in
these activities. Does the same group of highly educated citizens participate in
this set of political activities, or is participation more equally distributed when
considered on an overall basis? How many well-educated citizens engage in
more activities than average? How many have engaged in one or two activities
in addition to voting? And how many are merely ‘spectators’ and have not
participated in any of these activities?
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
membership political party
attended political meetings
demonstration, picket or march
contacted the media
taken an active part in a campaign
created or signed a paper petition
taken part in a public consultation
contacted a local councillor or MP
discussion online or on social media
donated money charity or organisation
boycotted certain products
created or signed an e-petition
low educated
middle educated
high educated
Figure 5.10. Education gaps in different forms of political participation, UK (%, Hansard
Society Audit 2015)
81
The Education Gap in Political Participation

To examine the extent of concentration of political activity, we counted the
number of activities undertaken, besides voting, by each respondent, and
then classiﬁed citizens on the basis of the frequency of their participation.
We distinguished three groups: the non-participants, who have engaged in no
activity at all; the incidental participants, who have engaged in one or two
activities in addition to voting;26 and the participants, who have engaged in
three or more activities. All are displayed in Figure 5.11. This classiﬁcation
provides a clear picture of how much political activity the average citizen
undertakes and what the backgrounds of the (non-) participants are.
The very active participants constitute a relatively small part of the body
politic. Figure 5.11 shows that a disproportionate number of these activists
belong to the group with a high level of individual attainment. The propor-
tion of participants who are well-educated is between three to six times higher
than that of people with less education. The well-educated are also over-
represented in the group of incidental participants. In all countries, the less
educated tend to be over-represented among the non-participants. Large parts
of the less educated did not participate in any political activity at all.
Figure 5.12 shows that in all countries educational level correlates with
political activity. The higher the level of educational qualiﬁcations, the higher
the mean number of political activities.
Education: A Cause or a Proxy?
In the six European countries, just as in the United States and elsewhere in
Europe,27 the well-educated are over-represented in almost every participatory
venue. Their voices resonate more strongly in the ballot box, are heard more
loudly in political parties, and they dominate the deliberative settings in
conference halls and on the internet. Educational background is of major
importance for the form and extent of political participation of citizens.
How to explain these large differences in participation? The relationship
between educational differences and political participation has generated a
larger volume of literature than can be dealt with here. One of the relevant
issues for the topic of this book is whether the length of formal education is a
direct cause of participation, or only a proxy for other factors, such as social
network position, cognitive ability, or socialization.28
Education as a Cause
Numerous studies have underpinned the strong causal relationship between
educational attainment and political participation. ‘Formal education is
almost without exception the strongest factor in explaining what citizens do
Diploma Democracy
82

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany
Netherlands
United
Kingdom
Non-participants (participated in none of the activities) 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany
Netherlands
United
Kingdom
Incidental participants (participated in one or two activities)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany
Netherlands
United
Kingdom
Participants (participated in three or more activities)
low educated
middle educated
high educated
low educated
middle educated
high educated
low educated
middle educated
high educated
Figure 5.11. Non-participants, incidental participants, and participants by education
(%, ESS 2014)

in politics and how they think about politics’ (Nie et al. 1996: 2). At least three
different sets of explanations are given for this robust relationship.
First, a necessary condition for involvement in political activities is motivation.
As Sydney Verba and his colleagues (1995: 354) put it: ‘Political partici-
pation is the result of political engagement.’ The various indicators of political
engagement—for example, interest in politics, efﬁcacy, and political
knowledge—provide insight into the desire, knowledge, and self-assurance
that impel people to be engaged in politics. Moreover, education is an
extremely powerful predictor of civic engagement.29 Education can also
make participation easier by providing individuals with political knowledge.
Education has a large impact on cognitive capacity—the ability of individuals
to gather information on a variety of subjects, organize facts, and efﬁciently
process information (Campbell 2006: 59). Better-informed citizens are more
likely to participate in politics, are better able to discern their self-interests, and
are better able to connect their enlightened self-interest to speciﬁc opinions
about the political world (Delli Carpini & Keeter 1996). The well-educated
citizens of Hamburg are a case in point.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Denmark
ES-ISCED I
ES-ISCED II
ES-ISCED
IIIb
ES-ISCED
IIIa
ES-ISCED IV ES-ISCED V1 ES-ISCED V2
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Belgium
ES-ISCED I
ES-ISCED II
ES-ISCED
IIIb
ES-ISCED
IIIa
ES-ISCED IV ES-ISCED V1 ES-ISCED V2
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
ES-ISCED I
ES-ISCED II
ES-ISCED
IIIb
ES-ISCED
IIIa
ES-ISCED IV ES-ISCED V1 ES-ISCED V2
France
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Netherlands
ES-ISCED I
ES-ISCED II
ES-ISCED
IIIb
ES-ISCED
IIIa
ES-ISCED IV ES-ISCED V1 ES-ISCED V2
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Germany
ES-ISCED I
ES-ISCED II
ES-ISCED
IIIb
ES-ISCED
IIIa
ES-ISCED IV ES-ISCED V1 ES-ISCED V2
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
United Kingdom
ES-ISCED I
ES-ISCED II
ES-ISCED
IIIb
ES-ISCED
IIIa
ES-ISCED IV ES-ISCED V1 ES-ISCED V2
Figure 5.12. Education and number of political activities (mean number), ESS 2014
84
Diploma Democracy

Second, education enhances participation by developing skills that are
relevant to politics (Verba et al. 1995: 305). Civic skills, the communication
and organizational abilities that allow citizens to use time and money effect-
ively in political life, constitute an important resource for political participa-
tion. Civic skills are acquired throughout life at home and, especially, in
school. Norman Nie and his colleagues (1996: 40–4) call this the cognitive
pathway to political engagement. They argue that verbal cognitive proﬁciency
is the most relevant cognitive skill in relation to democratic citizenship.
Success in democratic politics largely depends on analytical and rhetorical
skills, because democratic politics largely rely on the utilization and manipu-
lation of language through argument and debate. For many highly educated
people, writing letters or emails, engaging in debates, and running meetings
are all in a day’s work. Yet they can be very intimidating for people for whom
these are not regular activities.
Third, education is not only presumed to transform individuals, it also stimu-
lates social participation. Social settings often function as the recruitment net-
works through which solicitations for political activities are mediated.30 These
bring citizens into politics by exposing them to political cues, even in the
context of activities having no connection to politics. Since the social networks
of the less well-educated mostly include people with similar levels of education,
and since they are less integrated in civil society organizations, they are lesslikely
than people with higher levels of education to encounter the stimulus needed to
embark on political activities.31 The development of an educational cleavage, as
argued in Chapter 4, implies that the impact of education will become more and
more indirect, and that the differences in, for example, the structure of social
networks, that are highly correlated with education, have an independent
inﬂuence on political behaviour.
Education as a Proxy
The idea that education in itself causes participation has been progressively
challenged. One critique contends that relative, rather than absolute, educa-
tion levels are most important for both aggregate participation levels and
inequality in participation.32 Because education is the key to success in the
labour force, the argument goes, an individual’s education is only meaningful
in a comparative sense. A related critique of the conventional view is that the
apparent relationship between education and participation is, in point of fact,
spurious. Advocates of this theory assert that education is a proxy for pre-adult
characteristics that, in fact, affect participation levels (Persson 2015). Com-
pared to highly educated people, those with less education are more likely to
come from ﬁnancially and culturally disadvantaged families and from families
in which the parents themselves were also less likely to be socially active.
85
The Education Gap in Political Participation

Once these inﬂuences are taken into account, education is left with no inde-
pendent effect.33
Given the main topic of this book, this debate about the causal relationship
between education and participation is not of prime relevance to our argu-
ment. After all, as we said in the ﬁrst chapter, this is not a book about the
effects of education per se. Our ambition is limited to documenting the
dominance of the well-educated in contemporary politics and to discussing
the consequences of this. However, we will return to this issue in Chapter 9, in
the discussion on ways to mitigate the rise of political meritocracy. If educa-
tion is a direct cause of different levels of participation, then it makes
sense to search for educational remedies, such as enhanced citizenship pro-
grammes. However, if education is only a proxy, we should be looking in other
directions.
The Paradox of the Participatory Revolution
The Political Invisibility of the Less Well-educated
Ever since the seminal work of Almond and Verba (1963: 379–87), political
scientists have shown repeatedly that educational levels substantially affect
the political interest and participation of citizens.34 As far back as the early
seventies, Philip Converse (1972: 324) considered education to be the univer-
sal solvent for ‘the puzzle of political participation’. The notion that formal
education strongly correlates with citizenship characteristics is basically
uncontested, and research on political participation has consistently revealed
a robust and positive relationship between number of years of education and
political participation.35
However, systematic analysis of the implications of this relationship for the
functioning of modern democracies is largely lacking. A battery of variables,
such as gender, age, education, income, etc.—some theoretically motivated,
others simply used as controls—are usually included in survey analysis, yet
little attention is given to how these variables make a difference. This under-
theorized approach to the meaning of these variables inhibits a real under-
standing of the impact of educational differences on the workings of our
democracy. The large differences in political behaviour between those with
lower levels and those with high levels of education emphasize the need to
rethink the treatment of education as a usual suspect in survey work (Achen
1992). This is particularly salient in the light of the fact that, since the
‘educational revolution’ of the 1970s, the number of well-educated citizens
has risen enormously and in many Western European countries now equals
the number of citizens with less education.
86
Diploma Democracy

Much of the literature is concerned with the causal relationships between
education and political participation. Far less attention has been given to the
political consequences of the gap in participation between the well and the
less educated. One of the reasons for this is probably that, of all demographic
characteristics that function as background variables, education has been
politically the least visible. Political groups have been organized on basis of
gender, income, religion, race, and ethnicity (Verba et al. 1995: 172). So far,
education as a category has not mobilized a politically visible group with a
clear shared interest, demanding equal rights or an improved position.
Although education frequently appears on the political agenda as a policy
issue, it is always considered a means to improve the position of groups
that are otherwise socially or politically disadvantaged. In political research,
education tends to be packaged together with other politically relevant char-
acteristics. For example, having little education is often tied to a number of
other characteristics, such as income, race, and gender. Hence, education is
not a politically visible characteristic. There are no parties for the poorly
educated. This may be the reason why the impact of educational differences
on the workings of our democracy has long been a neglected ﬁeld of study.
More Democracy, Less Political Equality
The repertory of political activities has changed considerably in the past dec-
ades. Mass-based forms of participation are in decline, while individual acts of
engagement are on the rise, especially among younger age groups. The emer-
gence of new forms of political participation may have reduced age and gender-
based inequalities, but they do not offer a solution for inequalities based on
education.36 Education remains highly signiﬁcant, both for conventional and
newly emerging political acts. The well-educated currently comprise around a
third of the population in the six countries, yet they dominate almost every
participatory venue.
One of the paradoxes at the heart of contemporary democratic politics is that
more democratic opportunities have brought less political equality in this
respect. The creation of new political arenas and governing structures, local,
regional, and European, has created more opportunities for participation.
Online media have greatly expanded the repertoire of actions available to
activists. More deliberate forms of policymaking have evolved to broaden the
access to public decision-making. Strengthening democracy is often presumed
to reduce political inequalities, to improve the quality of political representa-
tion, and to increase legitimacy of the political system in the process. But is this
presumption correct? Our analysis of different forms of citizen participation
supports the view that the more demanding the act of participation is, the
The Education Gap in Political Participation
87

more likely it is that that type of participation will be disproportionately engaged
in by higher-educated citizens.
These disparities need not be a problem if the various educational groups
share the same preferences on the most salient issues. The well-educated could
then act as active spokesmen for the least educated, who are less able and
willing to devote their time to engaging in political debate and advocacy.
However, as could be observed in the battle over the school reform in Hamburg
with which we started this chapter, educational background is not politically
neutral. Less well-educated and well-educated voters sometimes can have very
divergent interests and political preferences. Accordingly, some interests
might be muted, not because of a lack of concern regarding a particular
controversy, but instead because some citizens have difﬁculty making them-
selves heard on the political stage.
Notes
1. The case description is based on Mängel (2010) and Rommele & Schober (2010). We
thank Guido Tiemann for bringing it to our attention.
2. We depart from a broad conceptual deﬁnition of political participation. First, we
deﬁne watching, talking, and reading about politics as an act of political participa-
tion, and we think that political participation should be understood as something
done by people whether they are in their role as citizens, or as politicians or
professional lobbyists. We differ in this approach from Van Deth (2014: 351–2).
3. The term ‘spectator democracy’ is often negatively used as the opposite of ‘partici-
patory democracy’, to refer to a democracy with many passive citizens, who most of
the time are superﬁcially interested in politics, in which only a few citizens are active
and engaged in politics. Green (2010: 4) suggests, however, that such spectatorship
is inherent to the very nature of politics itself: ‘When a politician makes a speech,
there are thousands who tune in to hear what he or she hast to say. When public
interest organizations engage in public protest, the very logic of their efforts assume
a non-acting but watching broader public who might be inspired to join the cause’.
Rather than continuing to insist that spectators ought to become actors, theorists
must accept that spectators are part of the reality of modern democratic politics and
try to develop theories which give them a role as spectators. Also Manin’s (1997:
197–9) notion of audience democracy and Rosanvallon and Goldhammer’s (2008:
17) counter-democracy recognize the reality and relevance of spectatorship.
4. The ESS drafted an additional set of questions which asked respondents how much
time they spent on media consumption. These questions made it possible to identify
what proportion of their media time is spent on news, politics, and current affairs.
5. In Western Europe, barriers to enfranchisement based on property were lowered
during the late nineteenth century. Education and gender barriers disappeared by
the middle of the twentieth century or even later. All six countries lowered the
voting age for both men and women to eighteen by the late twentieth century (UK
Diploma Democracy
88

and the Netherlands in 1970, Germany in 1971, France in 1974, Denmark in 1978
and Belgium in 1981).
6. Smets and Ham (2013: 348) show that a standard deviation change in educational
level increases turnout by roughly 0.72 standard deviation units. See also Campbell
2009; Gallego 2010.
7. Compare Schäfer & Streeck 2013, Armingeon & Schädel 2015. Although the
decline in turnout is a general trend across Western Europe (Mair 2013), there is a
variation across our six countries. In Germany and France, turnout dropped over 20
per cent between 1970 and 2010, whereas Belgium and Denmark scored a mere 3
percentage points lower than in the 1970s.
8. Scervini and Segatti (2012) also demonstrate that the decline in participation rates
is correlated with education differences between individuals.
9. A caveat is in place here. This measure of voting turnout relies on the accuracy of
the reports supplied by survey respondents. Days, weeks, or even years after
elections they were asked whether they had voted. Verbal self-reporting, to be
sure, is not a totally reliable way of capturing actual behaviour. Self-reported
turnout rates in surveys overestimate actual turnout (Schmeets 2008). Non-voters
may be too embarrassed to admit their failure to vote (Lewis-Beck et al. 2008: 86);
and, at least in the United States, the well-educated are most likely to over-report
voting (Silver et al. 1986).
10. See Franklin 1999; Lijphart 1997.
11. Compare Blais 2000; Rosenstone & Hansen 1993; Verba et al. 1978; Verba,
Schlozman, & Brady 1995.
12. See Delli Carpini & Keeter 1996; Lupia & Johnston 2001: 194.
13. See Bennett 2012.
14. See Aelst & Walgrave 2001: 481.
15. See Stolle et al. 2005; Marien et al. 2010.
16. Slacktivists (the term is a combination of the words slacker and activism) are lazy
activists: individuals with a political opinion, who participate from behind their
computer. By simply clicking a button, they can spread their opinion on a political
issue through blogs.
17. In the autumn of 2007, Tomorrow’s Europe brought together a representative
group of 362 citizens from all twenty-seven EU member states for a weekend of
deliberation in Brussels, discussing the future of the EU. Tomorrow’s Europe was
thus the ﬁrst Europe-wide Deliberative Poll). In addition, the European Commis-
sion’s Interactive Policy Making (IPM) initiative allows European citizens, con-
sumers, and businesses to send their problems relating to different EU policies
directly to the European Commission. This system has been put in place to facilitate
the stakeholders’ consultation process by the use of easy-to-use and straightforward
online questionnaires, making it easier both for respondents to participate and for
policymakers to analyse the results.
18. Compare Mansbridge 1980; Wille 2001: 100–2; Van Stokkom 2003; Mutz 2006.
19. Compare Sanders 1997; Hartman 1998; Hooghe 1999.
20. See Van Biezen et al. 2012; Scarrow 2014.
21. Economist, 4 August 2012.
The Education Gap in Political Participation
89

22. Later rounds of the ESS did not contain an item on party membership.
23. Compare Seyd & Whiteley 2004; Scarrow & Gezgor 2010; Whiteley 2011; Van
Biezen et al. 2012; Den Ridder 2014; Scarrow 2014.
24. The differences in internet participation have not been empirically tested in any
detail, because of the unavailability in the ESS data and the incomparability with
other surveys. Data from the different ESS rounds (2002–2014) contain no items on
digital political participation. The ISSP has measured internet use, however, and
the data are clear. The overtime trend emphasizes the increasing diffusion of the
medium among the population at large. Another telling fact is that, as education
levels rise, so does internet use.
25. The odds ratio (OR) is one way to quantify how strongly the presence or absence of
participation is associated with educational attainment. If the OR is greater than 1,
then participation in an action is considered to be ‘associated’ with having educa-
tion, in the sense that the being well educated raises (relative to being not well
educated) the odds of participation in an activity.
26. This category is also labelled as ‘accidental activists’ (Wille 1994), as ‘monitorial
citizens’ (Schudson 1998), or as ‘standby citizens’ (Amna & Ekman 2014).
27. Compare similar studies of participation and political equality in Europe: ‘the
widest gulf between activists and non-participants are in terms of educational
attainment’ (Teorell et al. 2007: 410). Research by Li and Marsh (2008) in the UK
show that educational differences have a far more pronounced effect than other
variables. Also, studies performed under auspices of the OECD in Austria (Walter &
Rosenberger 2007) and Norway (Lauglo & Oia 2007) show that education’s impact
on civic engagement is strong.
28. Verba et al. 1995 endorse the ﬁrst position. For the second position see: Nie et al.
1996; Kam & Palmer 2008; Berinsky & Lenz 2011.
29. See Putnam 1995; Verba et al. 1995; Nie et al. 1996: 17.
30. Compare Nie et al. 1996; Verba et al. 1995.
31. See Nie et al. 1996; Gesthuizen 2005; Rolfe 2012: 126–50.
32. See Nie et al. 1996; Tenn 2005; Persson 2014a.
33. See Kam & Palmer 2008; Janmaat & Mons 2011; Janmaat et al. 2014; Eckstein et al.
2012; Persson 2014b.
34. This paragraph is based on Bovens & Wille 2010.
35. See Verba & Nie 1972: 95–101; Verba et al. 1978; Gaxie 1978; Marsh & Kaase 1979;
Rosenstone & Hansen 1993; Verba et al. 1995: 433; Nie et al. 1996; Lijphart 1997:
2–3; Putnam 2000; Gesthuizen 2005; APSA 2006: 1.
36. Compare also Marien et al. 2010; Stolle & Hooghe 2011.
Diploma Democracy
90

6
The Meritocratization of Civil Society
The Rise of the EU Nerds
‘We are young, European, and working in the “Brussels bubble”.’ In an open
letter, published in the European Voice (May 8, 2013) ﬁve political-science
graduates, working as public-affairs consultants, defended their profession.
Their letter read as follows:
We chose to become public-affairs practitioners because we were passionate about
politics and the prospect of a challenging job thatwould test our abilitytomarshalthe
factsandargueacase.WeareEuropeanUnionnerdswhoenjoydiscussingthepositive
and negative aspects of comitology, and who always feel some excitement when
walking down the corridors of the European Parliament, the European Commission,
or the buildings of permanent representations. We like pushing policymakers on the
ﬁner points of the ﬁnancial-transaction tax or the new data-protection rules, or
discussing how an EU-US free-trade agreement would affect transatlantic relations.
These things matter—they affect the trajectory of Europe and 500 million Europeans.
We take pride in being part of an informed conversation on issues that are always on
top of the political agenda, and in being a part of the change.
These ﬁve ‘European Union nerds’ are a ﬁne illustration of the rise of political
meritocracy in civil society. They are passionate about inﬂuencing the course
of EU policymaking, they are experts in EU politics, and they make their living
out of it. Their letter also signiﬁes several larger trends in Western European
civil societies: the enormous increase in the number and importance of civil
associations, the dominance of the well-educated within these organizations,
and a shift from grassroots participation to professionalization.
Many popularly rooted mass organizations, such as trade unions, women’s
federations, veterans’ associations, and fraternal groups, have witnessed a
decline in membership and political inﬂuence in a number of advanced dem-
ocracies. Their role as intermediary between politics and society has been taken
over by professionally managed advocacy groups that operate with university

educated public affairs consultants. In the ‘third sector’, too, active engage-
ment and participation ‘by the people’ have given way to meritocracy, or, in
other words, to rule by the well-educated. These trends will be the main topic
of this chapter. But before we document them, we will ﬁrst introduce our main
subject: civil society organizations.
Civil Society Organizations
‘Wonder Babies’ of Democracy
Interest groups, such as the public affairs ﬁrms that employ the EU-nerds, are
part of the civil society—sometimes also known as the ‘nonproﬁt’, the ‘vol-
untary’, the ‘third’ or the ‘charitable’ sector. The civil society arena includes
within it an enormous collection of entities—self-organized citizens, sport and
leisure clubs, churches, hospitals, social movements, NGOs, business associ-
ations, labour unions, interest groups, charities, and a myriad of other mani-
festations of public participation.1
Civil society organizations sometimes seem to be the ‘wonder babies’ of dem-
ocracy. They are supposed to foster social cohesion, social trust, and the func-
tioning of democracy (Putnam 2000: 223–4). They are expected to empower the
disadvantaged; to bring unaddressed problems to public attention; toarticulate a
variety of preferences; to provide alternative platforms for engagement at the
local, regional, national, and EU level; and generally to ‘mobilize individual
initiatives in pursuit of the common good’ (Salamon 2010: 168–9). Participation
in civil society organizations is deemed to imply strong democratic credentials.
They are thought to be the training grounds for skills that nurture political
participation—Alexis De Tocqueville called them ‘schools of democracy’.
Not all of these credentials have been empirically validated. For example,
there is little empirical evidence in Western Europe for the ‘school of democ-
racy’ thesis.2 Participation in civil society organizations does not in itself foster
democratic competences or inclinations. However, and most important for
our topic, they have been proven to be important venues for political recruit-
ment, and hence, if not schools, they are at least ‘pools of democracy’.3
Classifying Civil Society Organizations
We start out with a broad deﬁnition of civil society that refers to the set of
institutions, organizations, and behaviours situated between the state, the
business world, and the family (Anheier 2000: 17). This broad concept of
civil society includes an enormous variety of associations. Therefore, in the
literature it is common to classify them along two axes: purpose and organ-
izational form.4 The results of this classiﬁcation are presented in Table 6.1.
Diploma Democracy
92

The ﬁrst axis is deﬁned by the primary aim of the organization. Civil society
organizations can be segmented into three distinct sectors that can be roughly
labelled as: 1) ‘volunteer-run associations’, which are characterized by neutral
or recreational aims, such as social clubs; 2) ‘social movements’ or cause
organizations that pursue broader societal causes and use protest and political
means to achieve them; examples are political parties and activist groups;
and 3) ‘non-proﬁt organizations’ that pursue sectional interests. Examples of
the latter are lobby organizations and interest groups, such as trade unions
and professional associations that attempt to inﬂuence public policy.
The second axis plots the organization’s relationship to its constituents. These
relationships deﬁne the internal organizational structure. These, too, can be div-
ided into three types. ‘Total participation’ refers to organizations, which are both
controlled and run by their constituents, with as archetype the volunteer-run
‘grassroots’ associations. ‘Limited participation’ refers to organizations in which
constituents deﬁne and shape policies and approve programmes, but rely on paid
staff to carry out daily operations. These organizations often have a powerful
elected board that represents their constituents. Prime examples are protestant
churches and labour unions. ‘Token participation’, ﬁnally, refers to organizations
in which constituents hardly play a role. They are controlled and run by paid staff.
This is the case with most non-proﬁt organizations. The framework presented in
Table 6.1 is not only useful to incorporate the massive diversity in civil society, it
can also help to understand the dynamics of meritocratization.
Table 6.1. Types of civil society organizations
Aims and relationship to the state
civil society I
voluntary
organizations
civil society II
social movement
& cause groups
civil society III
professional
organizations
Relationship to
constituents
full
participation
Self-help
organizations
Community
advocacy
groups
limited
participation
Sport clubs
Religious
organizations
Trade Unions
token
participation
Amnesty
International
Professional
Associations,
National Chambers
of Commerce,
Greenpeace
NGOs, Think tanks
Source: Adapted from Hasenfeld & Gidron 2005: 100
The Meritocratization of Civil Society
93

The Context: An Associational Revolution
A Non-Proﬁt Boom
According to Lester Salamon (2010: 168), one of the world’s leading scholars on
the civil society sector, the number of philanthropic, volunteering, and civil
society organizations has expanded spectacularly over the past decades through-
out the world: ‘we seem to be in the midst of a global associational revolution, a
massive upsurge of organized private, voluntary activity in virtually every corner
of the globe’. Salamon is the director of the Johns Hopkins Center for Civil
Society Studies, which runs the Comparative Nonproﬁt Sector Project that
analyses the development of the civil society sector in over forty countries across
the world.5 In the US, for example, there was an ‘advocacy explosion’ in the
1960s and 1970s, during which the number of interest groups ‘skyrocketed’, and
this expansion continued through the 1980s (Fiorina & Abrams 2009: 130).
Between 1981 and 2006, the number of explicitly political groups—those listed
in the Washington Representatives directory—more than doubled (Schlozman
et al. 2012: 349). The third sector grew signiﬁcantly in all the countries of
Europe, as well (Salamon et al. 1999). At the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst
century, the workforce employed in the non-proﬁt sector was larger in relative
economic terms in most Western European countries than in the US. It
varied from 6.8 per cent of the economically active population in Germany
and 11 per cent in the UK, to 13 per cent in Belgium, and 15.9 per cent in the
Netherlands—compared to 9.2 per cent in the US (Salamon 2010: 188).
Some basic statistics on the scale of these sectors in the early twenty-ﬁrst
century bear this development out for France, Germany, the UK, and the
EU. Figure 6.1 shows an impressive increase in the number of civil society
organizations in France and Germany. From the late 1970s on, in France the
non-proﬁt boom spawned some 60,000 to 70,000 new associations every
year—with as result that by 2010, there were around 1,200,000 associations
operating (Archambault et al. 2014: 221–2). In Germany, the number of non-
proﬁt organizations (eingetragene Vereine) jumped more than six-fold from
86,000 in 1960 in what was formerly West Germany, to 580,000 in 2011
(Archambault et al. 2014: 221). Increasing governmental action and expenditure
has stimulated the creation of these new organizations at all political levels.6
There has been a steady proliferation of non-proﬁt organizations in the civil
society in the UK too. Figure 6.1 shows that the number of registered charities
in Britain in the post–Second World War period rose to180,000 in 2010. Since
this number includes every small-scale charity in the UK, this ﬁgure also
indicates that a similar cumulative increase can be seen for the main national
NGOs, although in smaller numbers (Hilton et al. 2013: 42–5). In 2013–2014,
the National Council of Voluntary Organizations (NCVO 2016) calculated
there were over 160,000 civil society organizations in the UK.7 A small number
Diploma Democracy
94

0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
70000
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
France: the number of associations founded each year
0
100000
200000
300000
400000
500000
600000
700000
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
Germany: the number of associations
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
120000
140000
160000
180000
200000
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
United Kingdom: number of registered charities 
Figure 6.1. Growth of civil society organizations in France, Germany, and UK
1960–2010 (abs, sources: France and Germany: Archambault et al. 2014: 221–2; UK:
Hilton 2011: 238)
95

of truly enormous NGOs lead the way, most of which are active on a national
or international scale.8 ‘The Oxfams and the Greenpeaces of this world—the
438 organizations classiﬁed as “major” by the NCVO—had a combined
income of £15.5 billion, or 44 per cent of that for the entire sector’ (Hilton
et al. 2013: 3).9
Expansion at the European and International Level
At the EU level, too, civil society organizations have mushroomed over the
past two decades.10 Brussels is estimated to be the second largest city in the
world for lobbyists, after Washington. The number of interest groups
exploded in the early 1990s and has remained at a high level since then
(Berkhout & Lowery 2010: 457). The EU has been looking at ways to incorp-
orate NGOs, civil society, and business representatives in its decision-making,
as a way to try to make the Union more democratic.
A joint transparency register launched by the European Commission and
the European Parliament gives a complete picture of the many active players,
such as public affairs professionals, NGOs, semi-public organizations,
churches, think tanks, foundations, and so on, that try to inﬂuence MEPs,
commissioners, ofﬁcials, and journalists.11 The Transparency Register has
been set up to answer core questions such as: what interests are being pursued,
by whom and with what budgets? The system is operated jointly by the
European Parliament and the Commission. Anybody who wants to lobby
the European institutions must sign up to the EU Transparency Register.
This is the only way to gain access to the European Commissioners, their
cabinets and directors-general, but also to the European Parliament building.
The register has grown considerably since it came into effect in June 2011.
Figure 6.2 shows that of approximately 9,500 special interest groups and
organizations registered in the EU register in 2016,12 more than half (52 per
cent) are companies, trade and business associations, trade unions, and pro-
fessional associations. Another 25 per cent are NGOs, and 12 per cent are
professional consultancies, law ﬁrms, or self-employed consultants. The data
presented in this ﬁgure indicate that certain interests are more likely to be
defended in Brussels than others. Many of the groups promote corporate
interests rather than representing citizen concerns.
Processes of internationalization have opened up new venues for civil
society organizations, and today a huge number of advocacy organizations,
interest groups, non-governmental organizations, and philanthropic founda-
tions are active at the international level.13 Many organizations have become
large-scale global actors and developed protest business organizational struc-
tures (Jordan & Maloney 1997). For instance, World Wildlife Fund (WWF)
has ofﬁces in over eighty territories. It employs 6,200 staff, has more than
Diploma Democracy
96

5 million supporters, and has invested around $11.5 billion over the past years
in more than 13,000 projects (Maloney 2015b: 101). Greenpeace is present in
more than ﬁfty-ﬁve countries across Europe, the Americas, Asia, Africa, and
the Paciﬁc. In 2014, it had over 3 million supporters worldwide, received over
€292 million in grants and donations, and spent some €107 million on
fundraising.14 Amnesty International has opened regional ofﬁces in cities in
Africa, Asia-Paciﬁc, Central and Eastern Europe, Latin America, and the Middle
East. In 2015, the organization received donations from more than 2 million
individuals, raised €278 million for human rights work, and spent €260
million.15 This demonstrates the change from the ‘politics of the amateur to
the politics of the professional’ (Maloney 2015a: 156).
The expansion of civil society and non-governmental organizations, at the
national, European, and international level, is probably one of the most
important political developments of the past forty years. Given their import-
ant functions in modern democracies, the next question is: who governs these
‘pools of democracy’?
Participation: The Education Gap in Membership
Education Gaps in Membership and Volunteering
The ultimate principals of civil society organizations, almost by deﬁnition, are
their members. After all, they are voluntary institutions, initiated and run by
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
I - Professional consultancies/law firms/self-employed
consultants
II - In-house lobbyists and trade/business/professional
associations
III - Non-governmental organisations
IV - Think tanks, research and academic institutions
V - Organisations representing churches and religious
communities
VI - Organisations representing local, regional and
municipal authorities, other public or mixed entities, etc.
Figure 6.2. Interests represented by organizations in the Brussels arena 2016 (%, source:
Transparency Index, consulted 22 June 2016)
The Meritocratization of Civil Society
97

private citizens. We therefore ﬁrst look at membership patterns in civil society.
Survey data about the membership of individuals of civil society organiza-
tions, based on random samples of the public, allow us to establish who the
members of these ‘pools of democracy’ actually are. Using data taken from the
Eurobarometer, Figure 6.3 presents a snapshot of the membership in civic
organizations across the EU member states. It shows that European civil
society is characterized by substantial cross-national variation in levels of
civic participation.
Immediately obvious is the slope in membership of civil society organiza-
tions from the North-West to the South-East regions of Europe. The Scandi-
navian and Western European countries have the highest percentages of
membership, followed by the countries of Southern Europe, with the coun-
tries of Eastern Europe lagging behind. This pattern is consistent with ﬁndings
in the literature.16 Civic cultures and historical developments, which inﬂu-
enced social and political trust, explain many of these differences.
For the reasons outlined in Chapter 4, and to keep the analyses manageable
in terms of the number of nations and cultural compatibility, we again focus
on the six selected Western European countries—Belgium, Denmark, France,
Germany, the Netherlands, the UK—to get a more detailed picture of the
46
34
33 32 31 30 29
28
26
23
21 20 19
17 17 16
14
13 13 12 11 9
8
7
6
6
5
4
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
se
lu
fi
at
ie
fr
dk
de
nl
es
be
EU27
uk
cz
mt
pt
si
el
it
cy
sk
pl
bg
hu
ee
lv
lt
ro
Figure 6.3. Membership of civil society organizations across Europe (%, Flash EB 373
2013)
Diploma Democracy
98

educational gaps in associational membership. Using ESS data, we ﬁrst looked
at differences in membership across the educational levels.
Figure 6.4 shows that an education gap in civil society membership is visible
in all six countries. The number of memberships of civil society organisations
increases with the level of educational attainment. In most countries, citizens
with tertiary qualiﬁcations are twice as often member than citizens with
primary qualiﬁcations only. A comparison of the membership proportions
of the various type of organizations, displayed in Figure 6.5, shows that edu-
cation gaps are manifest for almost all types of associations. Regardless of
the type of association, well-educated citizens are more likely to be a member.
The only exceptions are trade unions in Belgium and the Netherlands, and
churches.
Not only do we see that organizational membership is stratiﬁed by educa-
tion, but also, the intensity of involvement, in terms of time and money, and
the volume of activities, rise with educational level.17 If we move beyond
membership and focus on volunteering, similar forms of educational strati-
ﬁcation emerge. The importance of volunteering is often emphasized when
it comes to civil society. The UK, the Netherlands, Germany, and Denmark
have long-standing traditions in volunteering and have well-developed vol-
untary sectors. A report on volunteering by the European Commission
(2010), based on national surveys and reports, identiﬁed a clear positive
correlation between level of education and the level of volunteering. Volun-
teers come from the more highly educated segments of the population: the
more well-educated people are, the more likely they are to volunteer, as
Table 6.2 shows.
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany
Netherlands
United
Kingdom
low educated
middle educated
high educated
Figure 6.4. Education and number of memberships of associations (means, ESS 2002)
The Meritocratization of Civil Society
99

Largest Gaps for Cause Groups and Professional Associations
Thus far, it is clear from the various data and from previous studies that civic
participation is associated with education. However, these educational
inequalities also vary with the different types of organizations (Van der Meer
2009). The aims of the organizations shown in Table 6.1 can have substantial
and relevant impacts on the educational differences in organizational mem-
bership. The resources that are required to participate differ from association
to association,18 and hence the educational gaps across the various types
of association do so, as well. This is clearly visible in the ESS data that are
displayed in Figures 6.6 and 6.7. By calculating the better educated: less edu-
cated ratio, we were able to determine the educational gap in membership for
different types of civil society organizations in the six countries studied.
If we look at the aggregate pattern across the ten different organizations in
Figure 6.6, we ﬁnd the largest educational differences in membership for the
political activist and interest organizations, such as environmental, humanitar-
ian, and professional associations. The smallest educational gaps can be observed
in social clubs, churches, labour unions, and sports clubs. With the exception of
the unions, the latter are all non-political organizations. This means that the
most activist political organizations in civil society—those actors who energetic-
ally try to inﬂuence the political agenda—are the domain of the well-educated.
Figure 6.7, compiled on the basis of a study by Dutch political scientist Tom
van der Meer (2009: 116–17), also using the ESS 2002 data, shows a similar
pattern in all six countries in our sample.19 Civil society I organizations, such
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany Netherlands
United
Kingdom
Belongs to church or religious organisation (ISSP 2014)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany Netherlands
United
Kingdom
Belongs to sports club (ISSP 2014)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany Netherlands
United
Kingdom
Member of trade union (EB 2013)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany Netherlands
United
Kingdom
Member of professional association (EB 2013)
low educated
middle educated
high educated
Figure 6.5. Education and associational membership (%, source: Flash EB 373 2013,
and ISSP 2014)
100
Diploma Democracy

as voluntary and leisure organizations, are among the most equal organiza-
tions in terms of educational background characteristics. Although the well-
educated may play tennis or hockey and the less well-educated handball or
soccer, they all participate in these type of organizations. In most countries,
much larger differences are seen amongst the membership of civil society II
organizations, such as social movements, cause groups, and activist associ-
ations, and civil society III organizations, such as interest groups and profes-
sional associations. These organizations draw their members disproportionately
from among the well-educated.
Table 6.2. Educational proﬁle of volunteers
Percentage of individuals engaged in volunteering according to the highest education level attained
Belgium
Denmark
France
Flanders:
Primary education: 25%
Primary education: 34%
Primary education: men:
13.7%/women: 12.9%
Vocational education: 36%
Short non-vocational
education: 36%
Secondary education: 39%
Secondary education: men:
22.6%/women: 15.1%
Medium length non-vocational
education: 42%
Tertiary education: 42%
High school: men: 25%/
women: 22%
Section 1.01 Source: France
Bénévolat 2016: 9
University: 45%
University: men: 32.7%/
women: 31%
Source: Boje, Fridberg & Ibsen
2006: 58
French Community:
Secondary education: 16%
Technical and professional
education: 11%
High school: 29%
University: 32%
Source: European volunteer
centre and Association of
Voluntary Service
Organisations2004
Germany
The Netherlands
United Kingdom
Only limited information on
education levels available in
the National Survey.
Primary education: 24%
Several surveys (National Survey
of Volunteering 1997 and
Citizenship Survey
2007–2008) report that
those with higher
educational qualiﬁcations
were more likely to volunteer
than those with fewer or no
qualiﬁcations.
Preparatory vocational
education: 36%
Secondary education: 42%
Low education level: 22%
General and vocational
secondary education 45%
Medium education level: 32%
High education level: 42%
Tertiary/higher education:
54%
Source: Federal Ministry for
Family, the Elderly, Women
and Youth 2006
Source: CBS 2008
Source: Study on Volunteering in
the European Union 2010: 8.
Sources: based on information from national reports on volunteering compiled from the different studies on
http://ec.europa.eu/citizenship/europe-for-citizens-programme/studies/index_en.htm (information retrieved 1 July
2016). See national reports on this website for further information.20
The Meritocratization of Civil Society
101

1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
social club
religious/church
trade union
sports/outdoor club
cultural/hobby activity
consumer/automobile
enviromental/peace/animal
humanitarian
business/profession/farmers
education/teacher
Figure 6.6. Education
gaps
membership
associations
(mean
ratio
higher-lower
educated membership in the six countries, ESS 2002)
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany
Netherlands
United 
Kingdom
civil society I  (volunteer run organizations)
civil society II (cause organizations)
civil society III (non-profit sectional organizations)
Figure 6.7. Educational differences in participation: type of civil society organization
(%, relative participation rates high educated–low educated, source: based on ESS 2002
and adapted from Van der Meer et al. 2009: 117)
Diploma Democracy
102

The effects of the participatory revolution, the topic of Chapter 5, and the
associational explosion, the topic of this chapter, run parallel. The rise of a
wide range of new social movements and professionalized groups, and the
emergence of new forms of participation, have had serious impacts on the
levels and the nature of mobilization in civil society organizations. Whereas
the traditional mass organizations, such as unions, churches, and mass parties
attracted members from all social strata, the new social movements and single-
issue organizations draw their members from the greatly expanded, university
educated upper middle class.21
Transformation: From Participation to Professionalization
The rise of political meritocracy in civil society is not just a matter of an
education gap in membership of civil society organizations. It also manifests
itself through a transformation of the nature of civil society organizations
themselves. Several factors have combined to bring this transformation about,
such as the growth of institutional funding that reduces the reliance on
individual membership, the professionalization of the policymaking process
itself, and an increasingly technocratic approach to inﬂuencing policy out-
comes.22 The arena in which civil society organizations operate is highly
competitive and the need to secure adequate funding has led to processes of
‘businessiﬁcation’ and ‘professionalization’.23
From Total Participation to Token Participation
The shift in membership from popularly rooted mass organizations to profes-
sionally managed advocacy groups in many cases also implies a shift in
forms of participation. In the Netherlands, civic organizations estimate
that passive members or donor members make up two-thirds of their mem-
bership, and that the relative size of this group has grown in recent decades
at the expense of that of the group of active members and volunteers
(De Hart 2005: 65). This process of increasing passivity is accompanied by a
trend towards professionalization: two-thirds of organizations have seen an
increase in the numbers of paid staff (De Hart 2005: 65).
Moreover, many single-issue advocacy groups are no longer membership
groups in the traditional sense (Fiorina & Abrams 2009: 131). The public
interest group sector has witnessed a development of large-scale memberless
organizations that offer limited opportunities for citizen involvement
(Maloney 2012). These groups have found that most citizens are content to
be ﬁnancial supporters, rather than active members and that offering such
limited involvement is an efﬁcient way to mobilize support. They have no
The Meritocratization of Civil Society
103

members, let alone local chapters, and operate solely through mailing lists,
newsletters, and ﬁnancial donations. ‘Members are a non-lucrative distrac-
tion’ as the American sociologist Theda Skocpol (2003: 134) put it.
From the 1970s on, civic groups watched as many of their less well-educated
members gradually fell away. The wave of professionalization in the 1980s saw
local volunteers being replaced by paid staff. Increased ﬁnancial support of
citizen interest groups by governmental organizations reduced the need for
member contributions. After all, seeking and serving members becomes
unnecessary when funding by governmental bodies makes it possible for
interest groups to focus fully on professional activities. Why spend a great
deal of organizational resources on grassroots membership? Consequentially,
the members of these groups grew less connected, and those doing the lion’s
share of the outreach in the associations became less embedded in the
organizations.
This transformation meant a shift from ‘total’, or ‘limited’, participation to
‘token participation’, and also a shift from ‘from organizations with intensive
mutual contacts between the members to organizations in which there are
(virtually) no contacts at all’ (De Hart 2005: 65). Civic engagement and grass-
roots political involvement is needed less and less in these types of voluntary
organizations. Kay Schlozman and her colleagues (2015) show that in the US,
organizations without members have become the predominant organiza-
tional form in terms of both numbers and spending. A similar trend is seen
among organizations operating at the EU level: here, too, members are experi-
enced more as a restraint than a resource.24
The emergence of astroturf participation, in which action is sponsored by
elite consultants working for powerful interest groups and corporations, rep-
resents a further step in the ongoing professionalization of organized interest
politics (Maloney 2015b: 107–8). ‘Astroturﬁng’ refers to political action that
appears to be grassroots and spontaneous, but in fact comes from an outside
organization, such as a think tank, or consulting ﬁrm, that, as a marketable
service, incentivize public activism.25 A substantial number of transnational
civil society organization are, as Peter Kotzian and Jens Steffek (2013: 56)
indicate, ‘creations of a very small number of international professionals,
and at times even founded by international organizations themselves.’
These non-grassroots organizations are using the cover of a citizen-based
group to voice opinions and to gain access to the political agenda.26
These transformations of associational life illustrate the need to update
contemporary understandings of representation of citizens by civic organiza-
tions. Civic organizational membership has come to represent something
more akin to ‘afﬁliation’ rather than to fully engaged ‘participation’ (Walker
et al. 2011: 1321). The willingness of governments to extend participatory
Diploma Democracy
104

democracy and to ‘bring citizens in’ by funding civic organizations has, as a
perverse side effect, actually ‘driven citizens out’ (Greenwood 2007).
‘Hired Guns’: The Professionalization of Civil Society Organizations
Many of these interest groups no longer try to inﬂuence policy via the mobil-
ization of large numbers of members and supporters, but through the deploy-
ment of expertise and technical knowledge.27 They serve as a channel to
provide speciﬁc expertise to government bodies from a variety of sectors.
They are embedded in the detailed work of government, whether through
changing the terms of the debate, through representative work on countless
ofﬁcial advisory or expert committees, through the drafting of technical
regulations, or through their increasing acceptance of ofﬁcial funding. In
their open letter to the public, discussed at the start of this chapter, the ﬁve
young consultants put it in the following way:
public affairs is much more than lobbying. We provide expertise to our clients, EU
and national institutions, and other interested stakeholders. This expertise is
based on a well-rounded understanding of the facts, and we believe that hearing
these views helps politicians draft better legislation.
This politics of expertise means that civil society organizations write policy
papers and sometimes play a central role in regulating and implementing
policies.28 They recruit highly qualiﬁed professionals, such as lawyers, engin-
eers, and economists, and, as these ‘hired guns’ gain in power, the role of
members and activists diminishes (Skocpol 2003). According to Heike Klüver
(2012: 505), highly professionalised interest groups ‘ﬁnd it much easier to
provide information to decision makers than interest groups that largely rely
on untrained volunteers.’
Together with Sabine Saurugger, Klüver (2013) mapped interest group pro-
fessionalization in the EU, drawing on a large new data set on organizational
structures of interest groups. Figure 6.8 is based on their ﬁndings and shows
the education level of interest group employees, for different types of interest
groups. The vast majority of associations is characterized by a high level of
staff education. About 62 per cent of all cause groups and 58 per cent of all
sectional groups in their sample were found to have a high-average (MA) level
of staff education. Similarly, 22 per cent of all the cause groups and 22 per cent
of all the sectional groups could be classiﬁed as having, on average, a very high
(PhD) level of staff education.
Klüver and Saurugger (2013: 17) found no systematic differences in staff
education levels between cause and sectional groups, regardless of whether
the interest groups lobbied for private, interests, such as those of the European
The Meritocratization of Civil Society
105

automobile industry, or for a general cause, such as environmental protection
or human rights. Similar professionalization patterns are observable, irrespect-
ive of interest group type.
From Activists to Communication Professionals
It is important to view this transformation of the third sector in the context of
more fundamental developments that are underway in European societies.
The expansion of education and the service sector, and a further profession-
alization of the modern welfare state since the 1960s has led to the emergence
of a new category of professionals. This new class of ‘knowledge workers’ not
cause groups
very high educated
low educated
middle educated
high educated
sectional groups
very high educated
low educated
middle educated
high educated
Figure 6.8. Education level staff EU-interest groups (%, source: based on data from
Klüver & Saurugger 2013: 13)
Diploma Democracy
106

only provided the personnel to ﬁll the positions created by the transformation
of the welfare state, it also contributed to the rise of new social movements
and the massive expansion of the modern civil society.29 These new profes-
sionals have found employment in local government, engineering, the ﬁnan-
cial sector, architecture, law, and medicine (Hilton et al. 2013: 10). They are
the ‘social and cultural specialists’, as Hanspeter Kriesi (1989) called them, the
occupational segments among whom support for the new social movement,
protest activities, and the other modes of unconventional participation was
concentrated.30
The key factor underlying this transformation was, again, the expansion of
tertiary education. Matthew Hilton and his colleagues describe how these
professionals:
were the sons and daughters who had often been the ﬁrst within their family to
receive a university education. . . . They were the higher-degree educated ecologists
and environmental scientists who would gather in the environmental organiza-
tions. . . . They were . . . the engineers and development economists who would
staff Oxfam and Christian Aid, and who would pass through the revolving doors
of international institutions to spearhead the technocratic solutions to third-
world development. They were what would be later termed ‘expert citizens’ rather
than ‘grass-roots activists’.
(Hilton et al. 2013: 8–10)
This process continues in the twenty-ﬁrst century. Two types of professionals
are particularly on the ascent: lawyers and communication specialists. Sabine
Saurugger (2009: 2) describes how the majority of European interest groups,
working in areas as diverse as agriculture or electricity providers, recruit fewer
and fewer grassroots personnel with a local background. Instead, communi-
cation and law professionals are recruited for these strategic positions: ‘All staff
members of COPA (Comité des organizations profesionnelles agricoles de
l’UE) responsible for lobbying the EU have a university degree. They have
never worked for any of the national Farmer’s Unions before, or had a career in
the farming sector.’ This replacement of local activists by lawyers and com-
munication professionals can also be found in other policy sectors. For
example, in the ﬁeld of trade unions, this professionalization is called ‘high
level unionism’, or the ‘elite and expert unionism’ (Saurugger 2012: 77). So
far, the professionals have not systematically replaced the activists in all EU-
level civil society organisations. According to Saurugger (2012: 77–8): ‘in a
number of groups—farmers, the European Women’s Lobby, and the trade
unions—activists still represent the majority amongst the elected representa-
tives. It is in the secretariats that we see a professionalization of the associ-
ation, with staff moving from association to association in order to pursue
their career path.’
The Meritocratization of Civil Society
107

The Opening and Closing of Civil Society
Pools of Diploma Democracy
The ‘associational explosion’, the rise in number and inﬂuence of civil society
organizations and interest groups since the 1970s, has transformed the mean-
ing of civil society group activity and democratic citizenship. Initially, the
social and political movements changed from ‘largely class-based and closed
camps to more open coalitions’ (Evers and Laville 2004: 37). This meant an
opening up of civil society for a new array of interests, causes, and concerns.
Mass political parties, the unions, churches, and women’s groups saw declin-
ing levels of participation, but new social movements, pressure groups, non-
governmental
organizations,
and
advocacy
groups
have
dramatically
expanded their numbers and membership since the early 1970s.
These new civic groups are heavily skewed towards well-educated citizens.
They are run by highly educated professionals. They interact with university
educated members of parliament, with professional policymakers, and aca-
demically trained public managers. And they recruit their members and
acquire their ﬁnancial donations almost exclusively from the well-educated
strata of society. Despite the positive functions that are usually assigned to
civil society, it seems equally clear that, even in the broadest deﬁnitions
of participation, large sections of the population do not engage, or only
passively, in contemporary civil society activity. Civic engagement tends to
be sustained by a relatively small core of professionals and full-time
activists, drawn disproportionally from those in society with higher levels
of education. From this perspective, civil society organizations are, indeed,
not the ‘schools of democracy’ they were proclaimed to be. And as ‘pools of
democracy’, they tend to be rather narrow and closed off, since they contain
a relatively small and conﬁned sample of the citizenry—they are ‘pools of
diploma democracy’.
The next question is what these transitions in civil society imply for the
functioning of modern democracies. The high level of educational attainment
of these associational ‘representatives’ have made them less representative in
mimetic terms. As Elmer Schattschneider (1960: 34–5) so eloquently put it:
‘The ﬂaw in the pluralist heaven is that the heavenly chorus sings with a
strong upper-class accent.’ This casts doubt on their capacity to speak in the
name of ‘their’ constituencies. Civil society organizations are expected to
convey issues and interests ‘upwards’ from citizens to political decision–
makers, and political information ‘downwards’ from the political level to
citizens. In recent years, various studies of political representation by interest
groups have raised concerns about the extent to which representation of
interests by these groups is unequal, and the extent to which groups fail to
represent their members equally.31
Diploma Democracy
108

In the case of the US, David Kimball and his colleagues (2012) found
evidence that the lobbying agenda does not reﬂect the policy priorities of
the public. They show that the types of issues that are most important to
the public differ from the types of issues that lobbyists bring to the attention
of government ofﬁcials. Theda Skocpol (2002, 2004) goes even further, argu-
ing that the shift from huge membership organizations to lean professional
advocacy groups has pushed American society in the direction of an
oligarchy.
The net effect of these changes in civil society in Western Europe may well
be a similarly skewed and unbalanced system of agenda setting as in the
US. As Beate Kohler-Koch and Christine Quittkat (2013: 15–16) point out for
the EU level:
NGOs are prevented from serving as the citizens’ transmission belt by structural
reasons as well as by their own self-image. The many stages of the European
multilevel system, the complexity of EU governance, and the necessity of profes-
sionalization create distance and favor the separate existence of an NGO elite
ﬁxated on Brussels. . . . Their mission and legitimacy are not based on a mandate
but derived from a script written together with dedicated members.
The professionalization of civil society has had signiﬁcant impacts on demo-
cratic politics. Understanding these effects is key for appreciating the rise of
diploma democracies. We will return to this issue in Chapter 8.
Notes
1. Compare Salamon 2010; Fioramonti & Thümler 2013.
2. See Hooghe 2003; Van der Meer & Van Ingen 2009.
3. See Nie et al. 1996: 369; Van Ingen 2009.
4. This classiﬁcation is based on: Kriesi 1996: 153; Hasenfeld & Gidron 2005; Van der
Meer et al. 2009.
5. See http://ccss.jhu.edu/.
6. See Gray and Lowery 1996; Maloney 2015b.
7. If the widest deﬁnitions of the sector are employed such that all forms of associ-
ational life are included, the NCVO estimated there to be approximately 160,000
organizations all over Britain, ranging from the tiny, local, and informal to the huge,
global, and highly organized NGOs. To obtain this estimate, data from a variety of
sources
was
compiled
together.
Retrieved
from:
https://data.ncvo.org.uk/a/
almanac16/size-and-scope/ (28 April 2016).
8. The same NCVO survey found that less than 3 per cent of all civil society organiza-
tions could be classiﬁed as ‘large’ or ‘major’. This small proportion of organizations,
with an annual income of £1m or more, account for 80 percent of the sector’s total
income.
The Meritocratization of Civil Society
109

9. Organizations with an income of £100,000 or less make up 83 percent of the sector
in terms of the number of charities, but account for less than ﬁve percent of the
total income according to the 2016 NCVO survey.
10. Compare Berkhout and Lowery 2010: 449; 8–9; Mahoney 2008: 26–30; Maloney
2015a; 2015b; Lowery & Gray 2015.
11. The Transparency Register has been set up to answer core questions such as: what
interests are being pursued, by whom and with what budgets. The system is
operated jointly by the European Parliament and the Commission. Anybody who
wants to lobby the European institutions must sign up to the EU Transparency
Register. This is the only way to gain access to the European Commission’s top
ofﬁcials (Commissioners, their cabinets and directors-general) but also to the
European Parliament building.
12. Consulted 22 June 2016.
13. Compare Slaughter 2004; Johanssen & Lee 2014; Hall et al. 2014.
14. Greenpeace Annual Report 2014, p. 28–9, retrieved from: http://www.greenpeace.
org/international/Global/international/publications/greenpeace/2015/ANNUAL_
REPORT_2014.pdf (1 July 2016).
15. https://www.amnesty.org/en/2015-global-ﬁnancial-report/, retrieved 1 July 2016.
16. Compare, amongst others, Dekker & Van den Broek 2005; Morales 2009: 42.
17. See Verba et al. 1995; Van Der Meer 2009: 112; Schlozman et al. 2012: 378.
18. See Verba et al. 1995; Van der Meer 2009: 113; Schlozman et al. 2012: 375–81.
19. A score of 0 means the groups are equally likely to participate. A positive score
means that the higher educated group is more likely to participate (by that factor)
than the less educated, whereas a negative score implies the opposite. The ﬁgure
runs from –1 to inﬁnitely positive. The less educated hardly participate compared
to the well-educated, indicating maximal inequality (Van der Meer 2009: 116).
20. Comparative conclusions should be treated with caution: countries have used
different surveys and different categorizations of educational attainment, different
methodologies, and survey samples.
21. See also Kriesi 1993: 195, 260.
22. Compare Maloney 2012, 2015b; Saurugger 2012.
23. Compare Zald and McCarthy 1987; Jordan and Maloney 1997; Maloney 2012, 2015b.
24. See Saurugger 2009; Kohler Koch 2010.
25. See Howard 2006; Walker 2014.
26. Many movements and campaigns can be placed on a continuum between grass-
roots and astroturf. For example, the Brexit campaign incorporated elements of
grassroots infrastructure in its reliance on the anger and discontentment of the
participants. It also had elements of astroturf, namely the large extent to which it
relied on support from political elites.
27. See Crenson & Ginsberg 2002; Saurugger 2012.
28. See Maloney 2012; Van Deth & Maloney 2012.
29. See Kriesi 1989, 1993: 23; Hilton et al. 2013: 54–79.
30. Compare Kriesi 1989, 1993: 27–43; Rootes 1995: 227; Bang 2005.
31. Compare Piewitt et al. 2010; Kohler-Koch 2010; Schlozman et al. 2012, 2015;
Rodekamp 2013.
Diploma Democracy
110

7
Political Elites as Educational Elites
Ed Miliband’s Greatest Talent
In his ﬁrst year as the leader of the British Labour Party, Ed Miliband was asked
about his chosen talent if he were to appear on Britain’s Got Talent. He
answered that he used to be able to solve Rubik’s Cube in ninety seconds.
This reply earned him the reputation of being a geek, a reputation that con-
tributed to his devastating loss of the 2015 parliamentary elections. His geeky
reputation was not entirely undeserved. Ed Miliband grew up in the privileged
milieu of North London intellectuals. His father was a Marxist professor in
politics and his mother, also an academic, was a political activist.1 He was a
bookish child who gained A levels in mathematics and physics, and read
Philosophy, Politics and Economics at Corpus Christi College in Oxford. He
later went on to graduate from the London School of Economics, and he spent
three semesters at Harvard University teaching economics and political theory.
Shortly after his graduation from the LSE, he was appointed as a special adviser
to Chancellor Gordon Brown. In 2005, at the age of thirty-ﬁve, he was elected
into Parliament and soon served as junior minister in the Blair and Brown
cabinets. In 2010 he won the leadership of the Labour Party, but he never quite
managed to overcome the perception that he was nerdy, or even cartoonish
in nature. The ﬁrst image that comes up on Google when you type in ‘Ed
Miliband’, is an unﬂattering picture of him awkwardly eating a bacon sandwich.
The rise and fall of Ed Miliband is exemplary for the transformation of the
British Labour Party in which ‘manual workers and trade union secretaries
with low formal qualiﬁcations have been almost wholly replaced by graduates
of public schools and universities’ (Jun 2003: 173). This transformation of
Labour can be observed throughout Western Europe. For most of the twenti-
eth century, social democratic parties counted many less-educated citizens
among their members and representatives. Nowadays, these parties are dom-
inated by geeky professionals who have moved into politics straight out of
university.

From Aristocracy to Meritocracy
When Daniel Bell, in the early 1970s, explored the rise of meritocracy in
Western societies, he assumed that the realm of politics would not be affected:
‘Only in politics, where positions may be achieved through the ability to
recruit a following or through patronage, is the mobility ladder relatively
open to those without formal credentials’ (Bell 1972: 30–1). The past forty
years have proven him wrong.
Contemporary political elites are educational elites. In twenty-ﬁrst-century
Western Europe, almost all incumbents in political ofﬁce have very high
formal credentials. Have a look at the 150 members of the Tweede Kamer,
the Dutch House of Representatives, installed in September 2012. While
twenty-two of the members had bachelor’s degrees, no fewer than 115 mem-
bers held at least a master’s degree. A further eight members had studied at
university or at a university of applied sciences, without ever having com-
pleted their studies—often because they had become too involved in politics.
Only two members had lower educational qualiﬁcations. In other words, 145
out of 150 members, almost 97 per cent, had attended college or graduate
school, and 91 per cent had formally acquired at least a college degree—the
highest percentage since the introduction of universal suffrage in 1918. Low
and medium educated citizens have almost completely disappeared from the
Tweede Kamer. Similar ﬁgures apply to Members of Parliament in other
advanced Western European democracies, as we will show in this chapter.
Cabinets are even more tilted towards the well-educated. In the countries in
our sample, with an occasional exception, the ministers are all extremely well
educated.
This dominance of the well-educated in political ofﬁce is a relatively mod-
ern phenomenon. During the nineteenth and a large part of the twentieth
century, political elites were formed on the basis of class or property—
ownership of land in agrarian societies, and capital in the industrial society.
Often they were better educated than the average citizen—the upper classes in
general had much better access to education—but this was not the prime
source of their political power; that was based on status, land, or wealth.
In the information society, however, knowledge and information are the
most important social and economic goods. Political power is increasingly
concentrated not among the landed gentry, patricians, or manufacturers, but
among the ‘symbolic analysts’, ‘creative professionals’, and all those other
citizens with ample capacity to process information2—or to solve a Rubik’s
Cube in ninety seconds. Aristocracy, rule by the nobility, and plutocracy, rule
by the wealthy, have given way to meritocracy, rule by the well-educated.
This chapter takes stock of the educational background of those citizens
that are active at the highest level of the participation pyramid depicted in
Diploma Democracy
112

Figure 5.1. This level concerns those who hold political positions—the mem-
bers of the legislative and executive branches. We focus on the national level;
on members of the lower houses of parliament and on cabinet members. Given
the increasing importance of EU governance, we will also look at the members
of the European Parliament and the members of the EU Commission.
First, we will document to what extent these political elites in Western
European democracies have become educational elites. A second aim is to
analyse whether this is a sign of an emerging political meritocracy. Thirdly,
we explore why educational background is important in the selection of
members of the legislative and executive branches. Why have university
graduates become so dominant? What are the mechanisms that produced
this bias?
As in the previous chapters, we limit our analyses to Belgium, Denmark,
France, Germany, the Netherlands, and the UK. We also look at the supra-
national level, the EU. The evidence on the educational proﬁles of MPs and
the cabinet ministers is drawn from different primary and secondary sources,
which are summarized in the Appendix. Our practice throughout was to use
the most recent available data that allow us to provide an indication of the
educational backgrounds for legislatives and executives in the six different
countries and the EU, after the most recent election, and to compare these
with previous periods. We partly relied on data collected by colleague
researchers working on comparable projects.
The Legislative Branch: Parliamentary U-Curves
The Long-Term Trend: Parliamentary U-Curves
Most Western European countries have had parliaments since at least the mid-
nineteenth century. The proportion of Members of Parliament with a univer-
sity education in this parliamentary era shows a U-shaped trend. This U-curve
pattern, which holds for nearly all six countries, is also reported by the French
political scientists Daniel Gaxie and Laurent Godmer (2007: 111–13). This can
be seen from Figure 7.1, which in large part is based on their data. The
proportion of university graduates among members of Parliament was very
high during the second half of the nineteenth century. However, at the
beginning of the twentieth century, less educated social groups started enter-
ing the various parliaments due to the extension of suffrage and the rise of
new political parties, particularly socialist and communist parties (Gaxie &
Godmer 2007: 111). During the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century, the pro-
portion of deputies with university degrees decreased substantially in most
countries. After World War I, the number of MPs with higher educational
qualiﬁcations increased, ﬁrst gradually and then sharply from the seventies
Political Elites as Educational Elites
113

onwards. In most countries, the social democratic parties in particular have
seen rapid increases in recent decades in the number of MPs with university
degrees.
In Belgium, at the end of the nineteenth century, the percentage of mem-
bers of the federal Parliament with a university degree (WO) reached a peak
of 74 per cent (Verleden 2014: 63). After the socialists entered Parliament,
this percentage started to drop, a process that accelerated after the electoral
reforms of 1919. The percentage of university graduates was at its lowest
in 1958, when this stood at 40 per cent. From the sixties onwards it started
to rise, reaching between 70 and 80 per cent in the twenty-ﬁrst century
(Verleden 2014: 63). Of the members of Parliament that sat after the
elections of 2010, 94 per cent had graduated at an institute of higher educa-
tion (Verleden 2014: 66).
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1854
1864
1872
1881
1890
1900
1910
1920
1925
1933
1943
1951
1959
1969
1977
1987
1997
2007
2017
Belgium
1933
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1854
1864
1872
1881
1890
1900
1910
1920
1925
1943
1951
1959
1969
1977
1987
1997
2007
2017
Denmark
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1854
1864
1872
1881
1890
1900
1910
1920
1925
1933
1943
1951
1959
1969
1977
1987
1997
2007
2017
France
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1854
1864
1872
1881
1890
1900
1910
1920
1925
1933
1943
1951
1959
1969
1977
1987
1997
2007
2017
Germany
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1854
1864
1872
1881
1890
1900
1910
1920
1925
1933
1943
1951
1959
1969
1977
1987
1997
2007
2017
Netherlands
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1854
1864
1872
1881
1890
1900
1910
1920
1925
1933
1943
1951
1959
1969
1977
1987
1997
2007
2017
United Kingdom
Figure 7.1. MPs with higher education since 1854 (%, source: Gaxie & Godmer 2007:
112; Belgium data: Verleden & Heyneman; own data)
Diploma Democracy
114

Denmark is the only exception to this general U-curve pattern. In Denmark,
no U-curve is seen during the twentieth century. Instead, the trend shows a
slowly upwardly tilting, rather ﬂat line. The Nordic countries traditionally
have had far fewer members of Parliament with university degrees than
other European countries.3 In Denmark, a majority of the members of the
Folketinget had only a basic education well into the twentieth century (Gaxie
& Godmer 2007: 110). Conversely, the number of well-educated MPs has
always been relatively low during most of the past century (Gaxie & Godmer
2007: 112). However, in the past decade, the situation in Denmark has
converged rapidly with the other countries in our sample. After the 2011
elections, the well-educated made up 74.9 per cent of the Folketinget
(Folketinget 2012: 3).
In France, up to 75 per cent of the French members of Parliament had a
university degree in the second half of the nineteenth century. After the
extension of suffrage, this percentage gradually declined, dropping to less
than 40 per cent after World War II (Gaxie & Godmer 2007: 111; Cotta &
Best 2000: 497). This was largely due to the growth of the socialist and
communist parties, both of which had many MPs with only a basic or medium
level of educational attainment. In the 1950s, this trend started to reverse. In
1958, half of the members of the Assemblée nationale held graduate degrees;
in 1968 this had climbed to about two-thirds, and in 2002 had reached 82 per
cent (Costa & Kerrouche 2009: 333). In 2002, many of the French representa-
tives had been educated at either Sciences Po (14.5 per cent), the Ecole
nationale d’administration (ENA, 6 per cent), or at one of the other Grandes
écoles (4.5 per cent). Another 14.5 per cent also held PhDs (Costa & Kerrouche
2009: 333).
In Germany, the familiar U-curve is once again in evidence. In the nine-
teenth century, over 80 per cent of the members of the Reichstag had gradu-
ated from university. This percentage gradually declined as suffrage expanded.
The lowest numbers of university graduates, between 30 and 40 per cent,
occurred in the Weimar era, when the Reichstag had large numbers of less
educated representatives from Christian-democratic, social-democratic, com-
munist, and national-socialist parties. For example, between 1920 and 1949,
the majority of SPD deputies (between 50 and 58 per cent) and a substantial
part of the Christian Democratic deputies (between 20 and 34 per cent) had
only elementary education (Gaxie & Godmer 2007: 117–18). After World
War II, the percentage of university graduates in these parties rose steeply
(Anderson 1993: 6) and now, in the twenty-ﬁrst century, the less educated
have all but disappeared from the Bundestag. In the 2013 Bundestag,
543 (86.1 per cent) of the 598 MPs had attended an institute of higher
education—of whom 521 (82.6 per cent) actually had graduated.4 Only ten
Political Elites as Educational Elites
115

members (1.6 per cent) had Hauptschule as their highest level of educational
attainment and qualiﬁed as less educated, a number that was the lowest in the
post–World War II era.
The same pattern can be observed in the Netherlands. In the nineteenth
century, when the nobility and the patrician class dominated Parliament,
some 75 to 80 per cent of the MPs in the Netherlands had a university degree
(Van den Berg 1983; Secker 1991). As suffrage was expanded, this percentage
declined substantially. In the decades after 1918, the year in which universal
suffrage was introduced, the percentage of university graduates among mem-
bers of the Tweede Kamer averaged between 40 and 50 per cent. It was not
until the late ﬁfties that this percentage started to rise, and by the late sixties,
some two-thirds of the members of Parliament were university graduates
(Secker 2000: 292; Cotta & Best 2000: 514–16). In the twenty-ﬁrst century,
we see that over 90 per cent of all members of Parliament have college or
graduate qualiﬁcations. There are virtually no MPs with only an elementary
education (Bovens & Wille 2016).
In the UK, large differences can be traced in educational background in the
House of Commons between MPs of the Conservative and Labour Parties
during much of the twentieth century (see Figure 7.2). The Conservatives have
always been rather well educated—indeed, for much of the past century the
number of university educated Tory MPs varied between 50 and 70 per cent.
Labour MPs traditionally were far less well educated. Before World War II, the
proportion of university graduates among Labour MP’s was under 20 per cent.
0
1906
1910
1910
1918
1922
1923
1924
1929
1931
1935
1945
1950
1951
1955
1959
1964
1966
1970
1974
1974
1979
1983
1987
1992
1997
2001
2005
2010
2015
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Conservative university educated
Labour university educated
Figure 7.2. University-educated MPs, United Kingdom 1906–2015 (%, source: Butler
and Butler 2011; Sutton Trust 2015)
Diploma Democracy
116

After World War II, this percentage rose steadily, reaching 87 per cent in 2015
(Sutton Trust 2015). On the Conservative side, this percentage grew from an
average of two-thirds in the period 1945–1974 to 91 per cent in 2015. After the
2015 elections, nine out of ten MPs were well educated (Sutton Trust 2015),
the highest percentage ever.
British MPs have become much better educated in the past eighty years.
However, in one respect, they have become less of an educational elite. Over
the course of the past decades, the proportion of members graduating from
Oxbridge has been gradually shrinking. In 1979, 36 per cent of the MPs elected
from the three main parties had attended Oxford or Cambridge (McGuinness
2010: 7), whereas after the 2015 election, only 26 per cent of all MPs had done
so (Sutton Trust 2015: 3).
The new kid on the block is the European Parliament, which has been
directly elected by EU voters every ﬁve years since 1979. It will not come as a
surprise that a substantial majority of the Members of European Parliament
(MEPs) has academic qualiﬁcations (see Figure 7.3). A team of French researchers
(Beauvallet-Haddad et al. 2016: 113) concludes, based on an analysis of the
biographies of all Members of the European Parliament (MEPs) serving in the
sixth (2004–2009), seventh (2009–2014), and eighth term (since 2014), that
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
high school or less
undergraduate
graduate
PhD
6th EP
7th EP
8th EP
Figure 7.3. Education of members of the European Parliament 2004–2014 (%, source:
Beauvallet-Haddad et al. 2016: 115)
Political Elites as Educational Elites
117

more than eight in ten MEPs are higher education graduates. What is striking
is the very high percentage of PhDs—no less than 26.5 per cent of the MEPs
has a doctorate degree.
The Executive Branch: An Elitist Tradition
We do not have data that go back to the nineteenth century on the education
qualiﬁcations of ministers for all the countries in our sample. However, the
data that are available show that the post–World War II European executive
has always been better educated than the legislative. This can be observed
from Figure 7.4, which provides some data on Western European cabinet
ministers, from the post-war period until 1984 and in the 2010s. In the post-
war decades, the percentage of university graduates among cabinet ministers
varied between 65 per cent in Denmark, to 90 per cent in the Netherlands.
This is far higher than the percentage for Members of Parliament during
those decades. However, particularly in countries with a high proportion of
ministers from socialist or social-democratic parties, citizens with primary or
secondary qualiﬁcations still stood a chance of becoming a cabinet minister.
In most Western European countries, the number of university graduates
among the ministers increased substantially after 1984. The ministers in
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany
Netherlands
United 
Kingdom
1946–1984
2016
Figure 7.4. University-educated cabinet ministers 1946–1984 and 2016 (%, source:
Thiebault 1991: 26; own data)5
Diploma Democracy
118

most contemporary cabinets in the countries in our sample, with an occa-
sional exception, are all (very) well educated.
In Belgium, about 85 per cent of the Belgian federal cabinet ministers in the
period 1948–1984 were university graduates (Thiebault 1991: 25–6). Later,
during a period that started with the Verhofstadt-cabinets in 1999 until
2014, this percentage rose to 95 per cent.6 Of the 126 cabinet ministers serving
during this period, more than 83 per cent had a master’s degree as the highest
level of educational attainment, and another 12 per cent held a PhD. For
example, all sixteen ministers of the Belgian federal cabinet-Di Rupo, installed
in December 2011, had graduate diplomas (licentiaat). Several ministers had
completed two studies, and four held the equivalent of a PhD degree. Eight
had worked at a university before embarking on a political career and two were
university professors when they entered the cabinet.
In Denmark, in the ﬁrst decades after World War II, about two-thirds of the
cabinet members had a university degree—again, the lowest percentage in our
sample. However, over the past ten years, the level of highest education
qualiﬁcation achieved by the members of the Danish cabinets, too, has
risen. For example, almost all the ministers in the second Rasmussen cabinet,
installed in June 2015, have at least a bachelor’s degree from a teaching
college, a business school or a university. Of the nineteen ministers, nine
have an master’s degree, and one also has a PhD. Only one minister—Troels
Lund Poulsen, the minister for Business—did not go to college after ﬁnishing
secondary school. On the other hand, only one minister worked as an
academic—brieﬂy—before entering politics.7
In France, the government is overwhelmingly populated by university
graduates. According to ﬁgures from Valentin Behr and Sébastien Michon
(2012: 5–6), over 90 per cent of the members of the French government in
the period between 1986 and 2012 held university degrees (compared to 80
per cent between 1959 and 1984).8 Many were graduates of the prestigious
Grandes écoles, in particular Sciences Po and/or the ENA. Between 1986 and
2012, 36 per cent of the members of government had graduated from these
top schools, versus 20 per cent in the period from 1959 to 1984. However,
Behr and Michon (2013: 335–6) also reported that the percentage of graduates
from the most prominent Grandes écoles (ENA, ENS, Polytechnique, ENFOM)
was dwindling, having declined from around 50 per cent in the 1990s to
a mere 18 per cent in more recent cabinets. Since 2007, in the cabinets of
Fillon (2007–2012) and Ayrault (2012–2014), the number of ENA-graduates in
particular has dropped signiﬁcantly. This trend is related to the smaller share
of higher civil servants in French government.
As in the other countries, the members of the German cabinet tend to
be even better educated than the average MP. Between 1949 and 2012,
81.4 per cent of all the 194 ministers that served in the Federal cabinets had
Political Elites as Educational Elites
119

a university degree (Scharfenkamp 2013: 8). In the ﬁrst decade of the twenty-
ﬁrst century, the German cabinet members had a very high academic proﬁle,
even compared to the other cabinets in our sample. For example, of the
twenty-one ministers that served in the Merkel-II (2009–2013) cabinet,
all had graduate diplomas, with the exception of Dirk Niebel who had a
bachelor’s degree in Administration and Ilse Aigner, who had a professional
degree in electrical engineering. No fewer than fourteen ministers had PhD
degrees and seven had worked at a university, including Chancellor Angela
Merkel, before embarking on a political career.9 Quite signiﬁcantly, several
ministers were accused of having plagiarized their doctoral dissertations, and
two ministers—Karl-Theodor Zu Guttenberg and Annette Schavan—were
forced to resign for this reason. The Merkel-III cabinet, installed in 2013,
boasted similarly high academic qualiﬁcations. Fourteen out of ﬁfteen minis-
ters had the equivalent of a master’s degree, nine had a PhD degree, seven
had worked at a university, and two were university professors before entering
politics. Johanna Wanka, who served as the Minister of Education in both
cabinets, was a rector before she became a minister. The contemporary
German cabinets are by far the most learned cabinets in Western Europe.
Ministers in the Netherlands have always been extraordinarily well edu-
cated compared to the rest of the population. Although a university educa-
tion had always been an important asset for a career as a political executive,
after World War II, a graduate diploma developed into a crucial credential
for anyone seeking political ofﬁce. In the decades since 1940, at least
82 per cent of all ministers have had a graduate diploma. Between 93 and
97 per cent of the ministers in the Dutch cabinet belong to the group of the
well-educated.10
With regard to the British cabinet members, three patterns can be observed
between 1895 and 2010.11 First, once again, an U-curve can be seen over time.
In the late nineteenth century the cabinets were dominated by Conservative
graduates from the universities of Oxford and Cambridge. Between the twenties
and the late ﬁfties, the number of university graduates dropped considerably
and varied between 30 and 50 per cent. From the late ﬁfties onwards, the
number of university graduates rose steadily; since the nineties there have
only been one or two cabinet members who did not have a university educa-
tion. Secondly, as was to be expected given the ﬁgures for Members of Parlia-
ment, there are quite large differences between Conservative and Labour
administrations. Throughout most of the twentieth century, Labour cabinets,
on average, boasted fewer university graduates than Conservative cabinets.
This ended with the Blair cabinets. Nowadays, Labour ministers are as highly
educated as Tory ministers. Thirdly, the members of cabinets are, on average,
more highly educated than the backbenchers in Parliament. Also, the percent-
age of Oxbridge graduates is much higher among cabinet members than
Diploma Democracy
120

among Members of Parliament. In the Cameron cabinets, for example, 69 per
cent of the ministers serving in the ﬁrst cabinet and 50 per cent in the second
cabinet had graduated from Oxford or Cambridge. And with the exception of
Gordon Brown, every university-educated British Prime Minister since 1937
has studied at Oxford (Sutton Trust 2015).
The EU executive is no exception to this general pattern of very learned
ministers. The great majority of commissioners are highly educated and enjoy
the beneﬁts of a university education—often abroad. In the early years
(1952–1995) of the European Commission, 83 per cent of the commissioners
had a university education (MacMullen 2000: 43)—a percentage that has
increased even further in recent commissions. For example, all twenty-eight
commissioners in the Juncker Commission, which took ofﬁce in 2014, have a
university education, and at least four commissioners have a PhD degree.
Only one ofﬁcial, agriculture commissioner Phil Hogan from Ireland, has an
undergraduate degree (BA).12
The Emergence of a Political Meritocracy
From Upper Class to Middle Class
At the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century, therefore, a very substantial
majority of the Members of Parliament and almost all the cabinet ministers
in Western Europe were university graduates. To what extent can this be seen
as a mark of an emerging political meritocracy? To answer this question, a
more extensive analysis of the relationship between social origins, higher
education and political ofﬁces is required.
In the nineteenth century, higher education was accessible only to a very
select group, and education level was simply another indicator of social
status.13 While access to education was dependent on social status, the selec-
tion of a well-educated executive was tantamount to selecting ministers from
the upper social strata. This changed in the second half of the twentieth
century, as illustrated by Figure 7.5, which shows the social origins of univer-
sity educated cabinet ministers in the Netherlands.
The diagram shows that, at ﬁrst, university-educated ministers were mainly
drawn from the upper classes. Of all the university-educated ministers in
ofﬁce in the period 1848–1888, 88 per cent came from an upper-class back-
ground; just 4 per cent had a middle-class background. In the period after
World War II, this had shifted considerably: half of the ministers with an
academic education originated from a middle-class background; half came
from an upper-class background—highly educated ministers from lower-
class backgrounds were, and still are, uncommon. The strong increase in
Political Elites as Educational Elites
121

0
20
10
40
30
60
50
80
70
100
90
1848–1888 1888–1918 1918–1940 1940–1946 1946–1967 1967–1994 1994–2010
upper class
middle class
lower class
Figure 7.5. Social background of university-educated ministers in the Netherlands
1848–2010 (%, source: Secker 1991: 94; own data)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1895–1914
1914–1924
1924–1945
1945–1964
1964–1990
1990–2012
aristocrats
middle class
working class
Figure 7.6. Social composition of British cabinets 1895–2010 (%, source: Butler &
Butler 2011)
Diploma Democracy
122

university-educated ministers in the period after 1940 is due to an increase in
ministers from a middle-class background.
Similar trends are evident in the UK. According to Kavenagh and Richards
(2003: 175), political leadership in Britain was traditionally ‘exercised by men
of high birth and breeding’. However, due to universal suffrage, organized mass
political parties, and increasing professionalization of political life, the political
power of the aristocracy slowly eroded. As a result, ‘there has been a gradual
movement from prestige to meritocracy in recruitment to the political elite’.
Figure 7.6 shows how, since World War II, aristocrat ministers have gradually
disappeared from the cabinet—as have ministers from working-class backgrounds.
From Ascription to Achievement
Figure 7.7 helps to clarify the transformation of a political aristocracy into an
educational meritocracy. It is the political equivalent of the OED triangle
which we saw in Chapter 2. Arrow (a) represents the impact of social origins
on educational opportunities. Arrow (b) represents the impact of educational
achievement on access to elite posts. Thus, the indirect effect of social origins
on ministerial recruitment is the product of (a) and (b), and this decreased in
the period 1888–1940. Arrow (c) represents the direct effect of social origins on
the recruitment of ministers. If this effect is strong, then the recruitment for
minister posts is biased towards members of upper classes, even if they lack
educational attainment. For example: in the Netherlands, the percentage of
ministers from upper class backgrounds without a graduate degree was 64 per
cent in the period 1848–1888. This percentage rose to 77 per cent in the period
1888–1918 (Secker 1991: 94), but ﬁfty years later, in the period 1967–94, had
fallen to 0 per cent.
The pattern of ministerial recruitment changed because the increasing
accessibility of higher education diversiﬁed the social composition of the
Social origin
Education
Access to 
political elite
(a)
(c)
(b)
Figure 7.7. Social origins, education, and recruitment of political elites (source: ﬁgure
adapted from Aberbach et al. 1981: 57)
Political Elites as Educational Elites
123

pool of university graduates, thus weakening the direct effect of social origin
on education. The greater accessibility of universities made tertiary education
less socially exclusive, and thus signiﬁcantly enlarged the pool of university-
educated candidates available for political careers.14 Achievement became more
signiﬁcant for recruitment to the political elite than ascription.
Education has become a dominant sorting mechanism in determining
access to the political elite. Nowadays, graduates from middle-class back-
grounds have far more opportunity for advancement in the political hierarchy
than aristocrats without a graduate degree. In the Dutch cabinets, for example,
ministers are disproportionately drawn from the well-educated segment of the
population; but when the professions of the fathers of the ministers are
considered, the social origins of the current Dutch political executive appear
to be predominantly middle class. Among the fathers of the ministers in the
second Rutte cabinet, for example, we ﬁnd a sales representative, several civil
servants, a solicitor, a banker, a teacher, a wholesaler in paper, a small pub-
lisher, a consultant, and a milkman. Similarly, among the fathers of the very
well-educated ministers in the Belgian Di Rupo government, we ﬁnd several
professional politicians, a farmer, a teacher, a grain merchant, a salesman, and
a miner. Di Rupo himself was the son of an immigrant worker, and three of his
siblings were placed in an orphanage after the early death of his father.
Among parliamentarians, we see similar mechanisms at work. The data
show a marked decline in the representation of the nobility, and this group
has now become non-existent or negligible in most European parliaments
(Rush 2007: 31). The post-war accessibility of tertiary education, which we
described in Chapter 2, contributed to an opening up of the parliamentary
profession to a rapidly increasing number of graduates (Gaxie & Godmer
2007: 125). Opportunity structures widened, especially in the second half of
the twentieth century. This made it easier for political party members from the
(lower) middle-class sections of the population to attain tertiary education, in
readiness for a parliamentary career. As a result, a fast-growing number of
would-be parliamentarians or political leaders held university degrees and
were ready to compete within their political parties, whereas in previous
periods their middle-class origins would have prevented them from entering
either university or parliamentarian positions. At the same time, this trend
also contributed to the closing of the political profession. An academic degree
became a prerequisite for such a career (Gaxie & Godmer 2007: 129).
From Political Amateurs to Professional Politicians
The rise of political meritocracy has gone hand in hand with a long-term trend
of political professionalization. This can be observed at the level of the individual
Diploma Democracy
124

politician, the political party, the political institutions, and the political sys-
tem (Borchert 2003: 8–10).
The period from 1900 up to World War II can be characterized as a period of
formation and consolidation of political parties everywhere in European dem-
ocracies. This period saw the rise of a new type of MP: the professional
politician (Fiers & Secker 2007: 141). As MPs steadily acquired more duties, it
became increasingly difﬁcult to combine parliamentary activities with any
other occupation. As a result, more and more MPs in Europe became paid
party politicians. They received a salary comparable to the senior civil service
(Fiers & Secker 2007: 158). Parliamentarians became what Max Weber (1919)
called Berufspolitiker, professionals who effectively live for and off politics.
This professionalization of politicians would not have been possible with-
out the evolution of political parties (Fiers & Secker 2007: 154). With the
emergence and success of the mass party, driven by its appeal to speciﬁc
swathes of the electorate, it was crucial for parties to have inﬂuential repre-
sentatives in key positions of the state system (Fiers & Secker 2007: 154). In the
period 1920–1960, the new mass political parties and interest groups provided
the channels through which citizens from the lower and middle classes could
emerge as pivotal political ﬁgures (Cotta & Best 2000: 516). They offered
aspiring ministers a functional substitute for the prestige, skills, and relation-
ships previously derived from social status and high state ofﬁce. As they
developed in the direction of catch-all parties, with more openness to a wider
electorate, the ties to trade unions and predeﬁned sectors in society became
looser; and this brought a stabilization in the recruitment of party ofﬁcials.
Electoral strategies became more competitive and the proﬁle of the candidates
became important. With the transformation into cartel parties, political parties
became an integral part of the state itself, helped by the allocation of state
subsidies (Koole 1992; Katz and Mair 1995, 2009). Politics was becoming more
and more a profession in itself, offering opportunities for a more prolonged
career in the party. Party functionaries had a real chance to climb the ladder
in politics.
This process of professionalization is also seen at the level of the political
institutions and the political system, a development that is closely tied to the
rapid increase in the size and the complexity of the public sector in the
twentieth century. The public sector has become multi-layered, as a result of
the expansion of the European Union and the increasing importance of
regional and urban governance. As was described in Chapter 6, the number
of public institutions has grown, due to the steep rise in the number of
agencies, regulatory authorities, and bodies of oversight. A vast number of
lobby groups, think tanks, and public affairs consultants make a living by
mediating between private interests and political institutions. This has
made the work of political ofﬁcials more demanding. They have to negotiate
Political Elites as Educational Elites
125

between various levels of governance, navigate through complex divisions of
power, and deal with the very professional and suave representatives of special
interests. Career politicians and candidates with professional expertise in the
public sector at large have a competitive advantage in dealing with these
challenges, compared with those who have other occupational backgrounds
(Borchert & Stolz 2002: 23). The best preparation for high political ofﬁces is to
have ‘on-the-job occupational training’ (Borchert & Stolz 2002: 24).
From Outsider Recruitment to Insider Recruitment
This professionalization of politics also has had its effects on the recruitment
patterns of the political elites. Research on pathways to politics, conducted by
Catherine Durose from Birmingham University and a team of colleagues,
commissioned by the British Equality and Human Rights Commission, has
provided insights into how the political recruitment patterns have changed
during the past half century (Durose et al. 2011; 2013). These researchers
describe how new, professional pathways into politics have emerged in the
past decades. Although their analyses only concern the UK, very similar
recruitment patterns can be observed in the other countries in our sample.
During much of the twentieth century, local parties and local (elective)
ofﬁces served in most countries as a training ground and assessment centre
for those aspiring to ‘higher political ofﬁce’ (Borchert 2011). In France, the
vast majority of parliamentarians began their political careers in the local
arena before being promoted to the national stage.15 Several positions, such
as that of mayor or municipal ofﬁcer, have always been compatible with
holding a seat in Parliament. In Germany, local politics functioned as the
recruitment base for federal and state legislators, with both party ofﬁce and
public ofﬁce serving as points of access (Borchert & Stolz 2011). In the UK, too,
these pathways have traditionally been facilitated through long-standing
involvement within a political party at the local level, for example as an
activist, a party agent or councillor (Durose et al. 2013). For many, and par-
ticularly older, established Tory politicians, political activism started at a
young age, in some cases encouraged by their parents’ involvement in politics.
In the case of the Labour Party, it often started with involvement in a local
trade union.
These traditional pathways provided less-educated aspiring politicians with
‘on the job’ training in political skills and offered them relevant work experi-
ence. As we saw, this was particularly the case for the Western European
Christian and social-democratic parties. Mass political parties, unions, and
fraternities had many active members with little formal education to whom
they provided courses and trainings, as well as hands-on experience in dis-
cussing, lobbying, negotiating, and running a meeting.
Diploma Democracy
126

Another traditional, somewhat more professional, career path that can be
distinguished in political recruitment, is through paid employment in par-
ticular occupations. These ‘politics facilitating’ occupations, such as teaching,
journalism, or the civil service, generate speciﬁc skills that can be usefully
transferred into politics, such as good verbal communication, the ability to
present a written argument, scrutiny, and investigation. Careers in these
occupations provided ‘brokerage’ (Norris and Lovenduski 1997) for a political
career. They offered opportunities, particularly for medium-educated citizens,
to acquire relevant political skills and access to the political elites. These more
‘traditional’ pathways into national politics are pictured in Figure 7.8, which
we have adapted from Durose and her colleagues (2013).
Catherine Durose and her colleagues describe how in recent years the
former activists and those with ‘politics-facilitating’ professions have been
side-lined and replaced with ‘professional politicians’. This is visible in the
declining number of politicians from the trade union movement and the
teaching professions. In contrast, the ‘professional politician’ route into
national politics is becoming progressively the norm.
Along this new pathway, aspiring politicians ﬁrst go to university, during
which they may get involved in some form of activism. This is then followed
High social-economic status
Early political socialization 
Membership political party
Membership unions
Active local political party
Active participation unions
Councilor
Facilitating occupations 
Member Parliament
Figure 7.8. Traditional pathways to politics (based on: Durose et al. 2013: 252)
Political Elites as Educational Elites
127

by working in a para-political occupation, for example as an aide to an MP or to
a parliamentary group, as a special advisor or political assistant to a minister,
or by working at party headquarters, for a think tank or policy body, a lobby
group, media organization, or within an international political organization.
Specialization in these jobs polishes political, communication, and networking
skills. Figure 7.9 shows these more professionalized venues into politics.
Ed Miliband’s rise to political prominence in the Labour Party is a prime
example of this new pathway. As a teenager, he worked as an intern to MP and
family friend Tony Benn. Shortly after he graduated from Oxford, he became a
policy adviser and speech writer for Labour’s Shadow Treasury team. After he
obtained his master’s from the LSE, he was appointed as a special adviser to
Chancellor Gordon Brown. His antagonist, David Cameron, followed a very
similar path. After he graduated from Brasenose College in Oxford, Cameron’s
ﬁrst job was at the Conservative Research Department, which is part of
the Tory Party Headquarters. After ﬁve years of working behind the scenes,
he, too, became a special adviser, ﬁrst to the Chancellor of the Exchequer,
Norman Lamont, and later to Home Secretary Michael Howard.
In France and Belgium, this professional career path often runs through a
ministerial antechamber. The number of members of the ministerial antecham-
bers varies, but, on average, there are 300 ofﬁcial members in France (Dogan
2003: 55). In Belgium, it has been estimated that there are twenty-eight
advisers for each minister (Pelgrims and Brans 2006: 16). The passage through
these ministerial antechambers, cabinets as they are called in France and
Belgium, is nowadays considered the royal road to high public ofﬁce. Univer-
sity graduates enter these political advisory positions after they have ﬁnished
their university education, with the clear intention of leaving them a few years
Work for national
Political party
Go to university
Join a political
party
Work in a political
institution
Work for
campaign
organisation
Successful
professional
career
Stand as
MP
Figure 7.9. New professionalized pathway to politics (source: Durose et al. 2013: 259)
Diploma Democracy
128

later, hoping for a promotion in the state hierarchy, in a large public corpor-
ation, or a public institution (Dogan 2003).
The rise of this new pathway to politics is clearly visible in the changing
background of MPs. In Belgium, for example, the percentage of MPs who had
previously worked for a union has gradually declined, from about 20 per cent
in the 1960s to almost zero in the past decade. However, the percentage of
MPs who had previously worked as an aide in parliament or in a ministerial
cabinet rose steeply, from about 10 per cent in the early 1970s to about 35 per
cent in 2010 (Verleden 2014: 64–5). Of the 182 members who sat in the
2010–2014 Belgian federal Parliament, only three had worked for a union,
whereas ﬁfty-eight had worked in a ministerial cabinet and twenty-one had
previously worked as an assistant to an MP or a party (Verleden 2014: 66).
When candidates are selected for eligible positions, ‘party staff members or
previous personal staff of ministers have a competitive advantage over other
occupational categories’ (Put & Maddens 2013: 59). Likewise, in Germany, the
politicized bureaucracy, offers a broad array of these professional stepping
stones for aspiring politicians (Borchert 2011).
In the UK, the number of MPs who were politicians or political organizers
before coming to Westminster rose from 3 per cent in 1979 to 14 per cent in
2010 (McGuinness 2010: 6). Moreover, Peter Allen (2013) found that MPs with
pre-parliamentary experience in Westminster reach higher ofﬁces in Parlia-
ment and in the cabinet and do so at a faster pace than MPs who followed
the traditional local pathway to politics. Particularly the ‘special advisers’ do
exceptionally well (Goplerud 2015). For example, David Cameron, Nick Clegg,
and Ed Miliband, the former leaders of the main British political parties, had all
been special advisers before they became MPs. Christine Durose and her team
(2013) reported that many candidates and politicians commented on how
these professionalized paths had helped them to either negotiate or circum-
vent the closed cliques and patronage of local politics as an important step on
the path to standing for selection. This new professional pathway is virtually
inaccessible to aspiring politicians who did not attend college or graduate
school—of the special advisers, 99.1 per cent had a university degree, and
half of them had gone to Oxbridge (Goplerud 2015: 336).
These more professional pathways to politics are also clearly visible in the
European Parliament (EP). Past members of the EP have worked as professors,
researchers or in other academic positions, as information or communications
professionals, or as journalists. Willy Beauvallet-Haddad and his colleagues
(2016: 108) calculated that over a quarter (26 per cent) of the members of the
EP that started its parliamentary term (eighth) in July 2014 had gained previ-
ous experience as a parliamentary assistant, a member of a cabinet of a
minister or European commissioner, or as staffer in a political organization.
About 11 per cent of the MEPs are professional politicians: they have never, or
Political Elites as Educational Elites
129

seldom, worked outside politics (Beauvallet-Haddad et al. 2016: 108). The
strong increase of career politicians is the result of the empowerment of the
EP over the last thirty years (Salvati 2016: 71).
The shift in background and career lines of parliamentarians and ministers
implies a shift in the access to political ofﬁce, from an outsider recruitment
system, characterized by a high degree of lateral entry from outside careers,
towards an insider recruitment system, which requires a long internship within
political institutions as a prerequisite for admission to the political elite.
Insider recruitment systems ensure that candidates are more experienced
and fully socialized into the norms of the political institutions. They maxi-
mize internal integration within the elite. Outsider systems provide the execu-
tive with external inputs and outside experiences. They maximize integration
of the political elite and other parts of society.16
Explaining: The Supply and Demand of Higher Educated
Political Candidates
How can the present and persisting dominance of the well-educated among
the political elites be explained? Why have the university graduates proﬁted
so much from the professionalization of politics? Political elites are subject to
formal and informal selection processes. Before ofﬁce holders are democratic-
ally elected, they are ﬁrst selected. One approach to explaining the rise of an
educational meritocracy is to consider the political recruitment process as any
other job market and to look to supply and demand in the political market
place (Norris 1997: 209). The supply side is determined by the motivation and
political capital of the candidates. By political capital we mean all the assets
that facilitate political careers, which vary by party or political networks. The
demand for candidates is produced by the qualities of the job and by the
attitudes of ‘recruiters’ to get the right people on board.17 This approach offers
several potential explanations for the dominance of university graduates.
The Supply Side: Educational Inﬂation
A very obvious reason for the increasing numbers of the well-educated among
political executives is the increasing supply of university graduates—a direct
consequence of the enormous rise in level of education in the post–World
War II decades. Because the number of seats in parliament and the number
of cabinet posts in most countries has barely grown since the 1960s, the
educational environment has become more competitive. ‘As the population
becomes more and more educated, an ever increasing amount of education is
required to arrive at the same relative position in the networks that, in turn,
Diploma Democracy
130

act to facilitate political engagement’ (Nie et al. 1996: 131–2). This means that
the relative position of the least educated has deteriorated substantially.
The decline in participation of the less-educated is therefore due to educa-
tional inﬂation. A secondary school diploma, which in the 1950s would have
been quite an achievement, nowadays has little value in most political arenas,
because there are so many university graduates to compete with. Similarly, the
elitist character of an average university title has declined with its relative
diffusion. This could explain the disappearance of the less- educated in public
ofﬁce—they have simply been crowded out by the increasing number of the
well-educated among their peers. As on the job market, their relative position
has deteriorated; they increasingly ﬁnd themselves at the end of the queue.
In their research on successful and unsuccessful political candidates in the
UK, Catherine Durose and her team (2013: 260) cite a local councilor, an
unsuccessful parliamentary candidate, reﬂecting on how her lack of higher
education was used against her in the selection process:
When I was trying to become a parliamentary candidate I was asked on more than
one occasion what my qualiﬁcations were and they meant academic qualiﬁca-
tions. One woman even said it was a real shame because one of the other candi-
dates was a lawyer and another one had a PhD and although I seemed like a really
nice woman I wasn’t really [of] their calibre.
Apparently, the well-educated are in much higher demand on the political
market. But why would this be the case in established democracies?
The Supply Side: Network Centrality
American political scientists Norman Nie, Jane Junn, and Kenneth Stehlik-
Barry (1996: 45) argue that an important explanation for the dominance of
the well-educated in politics is due to network centrality: ‘Those with higher
levels of formal education are substantially more likely to be found closer to
the central nodes of politically important social networks, while those with
less education are more likely to be found at the periphery.’ According to them
there is a threefold relation between education and social network centrality.
A high level of educational attainment leads to high-status occupations that
involve a variety of managerial and supervisory responsibilities, which pull
people towards the centre of social networks. Second, educational attainment
leads to higher family incomes, which reinforces the centrality of university
graduates in social and economic networks. Third, university graduates are
much more likely to be members of voluntary organizations, which also
reinforces their position in social networks that are relevant for political
recruitment. University graduates are very prominent among the social elites
that supply candidates for the political elites.
Political Elites as Educational Elites
131

Although Norman Nie and his colleagues focused on political engagement
and forms of political participation such as voting, working on political
campaigns, and attending meetings, these explanations also appear relevant
for occupying political ofﬁce. In the Netherlands, ministers of the former
Balkenende-IV Cabinet (2007–2010), for instance, occupied, on average sixteen
positions in voluntary associations and non-political organizations, beyond
their regular professional activities. This indicates an extremely high social
network centrality. Scheuch (2003: 121) indicated how, in Germany, top
politicians accumulate memberships in public bodies and associations, and
how this tendency to move into a broker position between the various
sectorial elites further increased after uniﬁcation.
The Demand Side: Political Skills
Tim Besley and Marta Reynal-Querol (2011b) present robust evidence, drawn
from a wide range of countries over more than 150 years, that political
selection with respect to education differs between autocracies and democra-
cies. They found that democracies are more likely than dictatorships and
autocracies to select government leaders who have a graduate education:
‘Democratically elected leaders are around 20 percent more likely to be highly
educated than leaders chosen in autocracies’ (2011b: 563). Likewise, Mark
Hallerberg and Joachim Wehner (2013) found that economic and ﬁnancial
political ofﬁcials in established democracies tend to be generalists, whereas
new democracies have greater incentives to select technical specialists. Appar-
ently, different political regimes demand different competencies of political
leaders. What does the job of a political executive in an established democracy
demand? Does it require speciﬁc skills or competencies?
A large part of the job of political executives in established democracies
consists of talking: talking with other members of the cabinet, talking with the
legislature, with senior civil servants, with interest groups, or with party
members. Moreover, over the past forty years, the role of the media in politics
has greatly expanded in established democracies, thereby increasing the need
for communication skills. Performances of political executives, whether at
party conferences or ministerial visits to schools, that used to be given to a
fairly small audience, are currently witnessed by potential TV, radio, and
internet audiences. The opportunities to broadcast public performances have
become much larger. The growing importance of the (new) media in the day-
to-day life of politicians has a signiﬁcant effect on the nature of the executive
and legislative job and on the required relevant competencies. Public com-
munication takes up more and more of executives’ time and resources.18
Ministers today have to be much more concerned with the media presentation
of their policies, their departments, and themselves.
Diploma Democracy
132

Against this background, it comes as no surprise that university graduates—
lawyers and social scientists in particular—are dominant among the West
European political executives.19 They boast a very high verbal proﬁciency,
both orally and in writing, which is a very relevant skill if one is to be
successful as a politician.20 Mutatis mutandis, these skills also are needed to
be successful as a Member of Parliament (Gaxie and Godmer 2007: 129). After
all, the word ‘Parliament’ comes from the French verb ‘parler’.
The Demand Side: Cadres That Clone
Research in the United States suggest that the underrepresentation of the
working class in legislatures is best explained by the ‘demand-side character-
istics of the political environment, such as parties, interest groups and insti-
tutions’ (Carnes 2016a: 98). Another explanation for the dominance of the
more highly educated, therefore, lies in the transformation of most political
parties from mass parties into cadre or cartel parties, which we discussed
above. In Western Europe, cooptation mechanisms within parties are the
single most important selection stage within political careers. Parties thus
control access to a career in politics—parties are ‘the eye of the needle’
(Norris 1997, Wessels 1997) through which all recruitment takes place. In
the cartel party, neither the voters nor the average rank and ﬁle members of
political parties have much inﬂuence upon the composition of the list of
candidates. The cadres in political parties determine which individuals are to
represent them in Parliament and in political ofﬁces.
Josje den Ridder (2014) shows how in the Netherlands, the members of the
major political parties are better educated than their electorates, and that those
elected are the best educated of all—as we saw, almost all the Dutch MPs have a
university education. Comparable ﬁndings are reported for MPs in the UK
(Norris and Lovenduski 1997: 169) and in Germany (Wessels 1997: 88).
These data corroborate ‘the law of increasing disproportion’ at the top of the
political hierarchy (Aberbach et al. 1981: 47). This may be the result of ‘homo-
philia’: the like choose the like. The university-educated cadres in political
parties, wittingly or unwittingly, select candidates that resemble themselves.
Two Faces of Political Meritocracy: Democratization
and Professionalization
Two contradictory processes have affected the selection of political elites in the
past century: ‘democratization’ and ‘professionalization’ (Cotta & Best 2000:
495). Whereas democratization refers to an extension of the social niches from
which the political elites are drawn, professionalization refers to a restriction of
Political Elites as Educational Elites
133

the admission to the political arena. These trends are contradictory, since
democratization is socially inclusive, while professionalization is exclusive.
Democratization resulted in an opening up of the political elites and the
replacement of the old upper class by a university-educated middle class. In
many Western European democracies, hereditary patrician elites were
replaced by meritocratic, educational elites over the course of the twentieth
century. University-trained politicians took over the legislative and executive
branches of government. The massive expansion of higher education, which
we discussed in Chapter 2, produced large numbers of university graduates
both within and outside the elites. The blurring of social barriers as a result of
emancipatory movements during the twentieth century—seen ﬁrst in the
religious parties, later in the social democrats—and the democratization pro-
cess in the sixties and seventies, opened up the ranks for political ofﬁce and
brought about a substantial change in the recruitment of Members of Parlia-
ment and ministers. The connection between social origin and the opportun-
ities for a political career weakened, and by the twenty-ﬁrst century,
educational achievement rather than ascription determined the chance of
recruitment to political ofﬁce. This is depicted in Table 7.1.
Professionalization, on the other hand, meant the emergence of full-time,
highly specialized politicians. The most important result of this change was
the ‘academization’ of the political elite. Accessing politics without a univer-
sity degree has become less and less likely. Moreover, politics has become a
full-time career. The professionalization of politics has reduced the transfer-
ability of skills between politics and other careers (Kavenagh & Richards 2003:
190). Specialization encourages politically relevant communication and net-
working skills needed for professional politicians, but at the same time pro-
duces a narrowing of political outlook and experience.
The end result is a somewhat less biased political elite than before the
introduction of general suffrage, but still a highly biased political elite. Despite
the impressive increase in educational qualiﬁcations in the past decades,
the well-educated remain a minority in European democracies. In Western
Europe, citizens with primary and secondary level diplomas still account for at
least two-third of the adult population. Nevertheless, they are virtually absent
in the parliaments and cabinets. As a consequence, some voices may be much
better heard in the political arena than others.
Table 7.1. The rise of political meritocracy
Traditional political elite
Meritocratic political elite
Social origin
Upper class
Middle class
Political capital
Status, family, social network
Education; professional and political expertise
Access
Ascription: hereditary
Achievement: merit-based
Diploma Democracy
134

While theories of democracy seem to have made their peace with demo-
cratic elitism and the professionalization of politics, it is questionable whether
less- and medium-educated citizens feel represented by a political ﬁeld
dominated by university graduates such as Ed Miliband. Being ‘book-smart’
is not the same thing as understanding people. This is the topic of Chapter 8.
Notes
1. Biographical information on Ed Miliband was retrieved from Wikipedia, consulted
19 February 2016.
2. See Reich 1991; Castells 1997; Florida 2004.
3. Compare Gaxie & Godmer 2007: 114; Jensen 2003: 93; Narud 2003: 306; Hagevi
2003: 361.
4. Source: DHB Kapitel 3.9 Schul- und Hochschulbildung, p. 5 (8 May 2015).
5. The 2016 data of ministers are collected from the Belgium federal government
cabinet of Charles Michel (in ofﬁce since October 2014), the Danish cabinet of
Lars Lokke Rasmussen (in ofﬁce since June 2015), the French cabinet of Manuel
Valls (in ofﬁce since March 2014), the German cabinet of Angela Merkel (in ofﬁce
since 17 December 2013), the Dutch cabinet of Mark Rutte (in ofﬁce since 5
November 2012), the UK David Cameron cabinet (in ofﬁce from 8 May 2015 till
13 July 2016).
6. See Table A.7.1 in the Appendix.
7. Authors’ calculations on the basis of http://www.stm.dk/_a_2819.html (consulted
7 August 2015).
8. See Table A.7.2 in the Appendix.
9. Authors’ calculations on the basis of https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Second_Mer
kel_cabinet and personal biographies available online.
10. See Table A.7.3 in the Appendix.
11. On the basis of Figure A.7.1 in the Appendix.
12. Authors’ calculations, based on the biographies of the commissioners of the
Juncker Commission, retrieved from the website of the European Commission:
http://ec.europa.eu/commission/2014-2019_en.
13. See Aberbach et al. 1981; Cotta & Best 2000: 508.
14. See Aberbach et al. 1981; Cotta & Best 2007: 17.
15. See Dogan 2003; Costa & Kerrouche 2009: 340–1.
16. See Aberbach et al. 1981: 67–8.
17. In comparative research, it is important to keep in mind that varying features of the
political system also inﬂuence the structure of opportunities in the political
marketplace, affecting the selection of political executives.
18. Compare Blondel & Thiebault 1991; Kavenagh & Richards 2003; Norris &
Lovenduski 1997.
19. See Blondel & Thiebault 1991; Dowding & Dumont 2009.
20. See Bull 2012; Kwiatkowski 2012.
Political Elites as Educational Elites
135


Part III
Consequences


8
The Consequences of Diploma Democracy
Why Bother about Diploma Democracy?
Why bother about the rise of diploma democracy? What is so terrible about
highly educated citizens having a disproportionate amount of political inﬂu-
ence? Is it not reassuring to know that our representatives and leaders have
such a solid academic grounding? Are we not much better off with a diploma
democracy?
Plato certainly thought so. In his Republic, he argued that only the most
intelligent and well-balanced citizens were to be permitted to govern the state.
He developed an extensive system of tests designed to select children on the
basis of courage, intellect, and insight. The chosen, the youths with a ‘golden’
nature, were subsequently required to study for many years before they quali-
ﬁed for admission to governmental positions. The second choice, the ‘silver’
souls who were brave but not as brilliant, were allowed to become soldiers and
policemen. The ‘bronze’ masses, the ignorant souls who were mainly driven
by their emotions, were to be kept far away from state administration and were
required to conﬁne themselves to trade and agriculture. Plato was convinced
that brilliance was hereditary and consequently developed an ingenious
system of mandatory mating festivals to ensure that gold only paired with gold.
Michael Young’s quasi-scientiﬁc equation, ‘IQ + effort = MERIT’, was vintage
Plato. After all, intelligence and perseverance are precisely the characteristics
for which Plato held that the philosopher-kings were to be selected. In his
quasi-historic report, Young described the progression of Britain to a radical
meritocracy in the period 1870–2033, thanks to a combination of drastic
education reforms, a system of annual IQ tests, and the emergence of
genetic testing. These make it possible to select promising children at an
extremely early age and to school them for the top positions in society. In
the United Kingdom of 2033, just as in Plato’s Republic, IQ and education
wholly determine one’s place in society.

Ultimately, the meritocracy comes to grief in both Plato and Young. The
meritocracy proves to be an unstable form of government. In Plato’s Republic,
this is because the elite fails to maintain a rigorous selection, as a result of
which weaker characters are able to come to power. Young was critical about
the rise of meritocracy, too. In line with the spirit of the times, The Rise of the
Meritocracy was revealed as a dystopia. The essay warns that selection by
intelligence facilitates the formation of a new hereditary class. Revolts break
out in 2033 and 2034—in which the author of the report is killed (!)—because
the masses, driven by rage and resentment, are no longer content with their
inferior social position.
This sums up the uneasy relationship between meritocracy and democracy
in a nutshell. Is a meritocracy compatible with democracy? Is it fair that
the well-educated wield much more political power than the less educated
‘masses’? Is a diploma democracy ultimately an unstable form of govern-
ment that is doomed to end in anarchy and revolt? We will investigate
various forms of uneasiness that are created by the rise of an educational
meritocracy in the context of advanced Western democracies. We will dis-
cuss the consequences of diploma democracy for each of the elements of
democracy—representation, responsiveness, accountability, and legitimacy—
that we distinguished in Chapter 3.
Representation: Descriptive Representation Matters
Description: Relative and Absolute Deﬁcits
To start with, there is the issue of who is to be represented. The descriptive ideal
is that citizens and their interests should be represented in political arenas in
proportion to their numbers in the polity. With regard to their educational
background, politicians and policymakers in contemporary western European
democracies are not at all a representative sample of the population.
But hasn’t this always been the case? Hasn’t the percentage of university
educated MPs always been disproportionate to the electorate? Even in the
gilded era of the mid-twentieth century, when parliaments still had high
numbers of less well-educated representatives, an inordinate percentage of
members were university graduates, compared to the electorate. It could in
fact be argued that, in relative terms, the educational gap has decreased—after
all, the number of university graduates among the general population has
risen sharply, thanks to the educational expansion of the late twentieth
century.
Did the descriptive gap decrease in relative terms? The available research
shows mixed outcomes for some of the countries in our sample. In Belgium,
Michael van Droogenbroeck and Stef Adriaenssens (2004) controlled for the
Diploma Democracy
140

improvement in educational qualiﬁcations of the electorate, in order to gain a
better view of the educational representativeness of federal MPs between 1936
and 2003. They concluded that the relative gap has increased, because the rise
in educational levels amongst MPs has been much stronger than in the
electorate, resulting in ‘a dramatic decline in the representation of the low
educated’ (2004: 53). In 2003, 45 per cent of the electorate in Belgium had
primary education only, against zero per cent of the MPs; and a mere 8 per
cent of the electorate had received a university education, against 80 per cent
of the MPs. This increasing discrepancy between electorate and MPs could
be observed in all three party families in Belgium: the liberals, Christian-
democrats, and social democrats.
Looking at elite transformation between 1932 and 1999 in Denmark, Peter
Christiansen and Lise Togeby (2007: 47) came to an opposite conclusion. The
MPs in Denmark are signiﬁcantly better educated than the electorate, ‘but the
distance between the people and the political elite was reduced over the course
of the twentieth century.’ In 1999, the educational level of the Danish popula-
tion had risen far more than that of the MPs. However, as we saw in Chapter 7,
the educational level of the Folketinget has risen sharply since 1999. After the
2011 elections, almost 75 per cent of the Folketinget was well educated, com-
pared to less than 24 per cent of the general population (Folketinget 2012: 3).
For the Netherlands, we have collected data for the period 1980–2012
(Bovens & Wille 2016). During this time, the relative gap became smaller,
because the percentage of the general population that was well educated has
increased more than among MPs. This is partly due to a ceiling effect—the
percentage of well-educated MPs was already very high (80 per cent in 1981;
91 per cent in 2012) and could therefore not rise much further. Josje den
Ridder (2014: 230) shows that for the more traditional parties, such as the
liberal-conservatives and the social democrats, the educational congruence
between MPs and electorate has decreased since the nineties, because the
representatives have become much better educated than their electorates.
What matters most for representation, however, is the absolute gap. In all
the parliaments in our sample, the absolute descriptive gap has increased
enormously. This is because parliaments have a ﬁxed number of members.
Even though most parliaments were enlarged in the course of the twentieth
century, the extra number of seats did not compensate for the upsurge of the
well-educated. Over the course of the past decades, the low- and medium-
educated have more or less disappeared from parliament, from cabinets, and
from many other political arenas, even though they still constitute a large
majority in the electorate.
As we saw in Chapter 3, there are strong limits to mimetic notions of
political representation, given the restricted number of representatives
in any given polity and the large variety of sociodemographic differences
The Consequences of Diploma Democracy
141

in society. Nevertheless, descriptive educational representation matters for a
number of reasons.
Symbolic Deﬁcits: ‘Unﬁt to Govern’
Firstly, descriptive representation matters because of the symbolic signiﬁcance
of who is present and who is not. In the Politics of Presence (1995), Anne Philips
argues that the composition of elected bodies is a legitimate matter of demo-
cratic concern. The fair representation of large social groups requires their
presence in elected assemblies. Philips focused on the underrepresentation
of women, social classes, and ethnic minorities, but her analyses are also
applicable to educational groups. After all, as we saw in Chapter 4, educational
background is an important marker for social stratiﬁcation and social segrega-
tion in contemporary Western European societies. The well-educated and the
less well-educated live in different social worlds and do not mingle. They differ
in health, in life expectancies, in wealth, and in income. Well-educated and
less-educated citizens have different interests and preferences on a number of
salient political issues. Why, then, do we worry about gender or ethnic inequal-
ities in political representation, but not about educational inequalities?
The consequent exclusion of certain groups in political arenas may presume
the inferiority of the excluded group and it signiﬁes that ‘certain kinds of
people are less suited to govern than the rest’ (Philips 1995: 40). In symbolic
terms, therefore, the complete absence of the majority of low and medium
educated citizens in many political venues constitutes a serious deﬁcit. When
political decision-makers and representatives are predominantly drawn from
the ranks of the highly educated, this relegates the rest to the category of
political minors. Philips (1995: 39) alleges that ‘they remain like children, to
be cared for by who know best. However public-spirited their mentors may be,
this infantilization of large segments of the citizenry is hardly compatible with
modern-day democracy’. Therefore, descriptive representation matters ﬁrst of
all for symbolic reasons, because of ‘what it conveys to us about who does and
who does not count as a full member of society’ (Philips 2012: 517).
Democratic Deﬁcits: The Like Prefer the Like
Secondly, there is an emerging literature that shows that descriptive represen-
tation matters for heuristic and democratic reasons.1 As the British political
scientist Oliver Heath (2015: 176) pointed out: ‘all else being equal, people
with a given social characteristic prefer candidates or leaders who share that
characteristic: women are more likely than men to vote for female candidates,
and black people are more likely than white people to vote for black candi-
dates’. According to him, voters use the social background of politicians as a
Diploma Democracy
142

heuristic shortcut to estimating a candidate’s policy preferences. Likewise,
Nicholas Allen and Katja Sarmiento-Mirwaldt (2015: 2) argued that when
voters evaluate a politician, they make inferences, often unconsciously, about
his or her policy positions based on the politician’s race, gender, religion, and
so on. According to them ‘there is good evidence, from Britain and elsewhere,
that citizens generally want representatives who are “like them,” either in
appearance or thought, who are local, and who have experienced what they
have experienced.’ This implies that the over-representation of university
graduates in parliament is simply not in line with the preferences of large
parts of the electorate.
Experimental research has indeed conﬁrmed that a university background
in political representatives is not attractive to many voters. Rosie Campbell
and Philip Cowley (2014) conducted a poll in the UK in which respondents
were given descriptions (cues) of two candidates and asked to choose between
them. They found particularly large effects when they varied the educational
status of the candidates. In the original cue, candidate George had gone to
university. Telling respondents in the next wave that George had left school at
eighteen changed the popularity of the candidates: ‘The less educated version
of George was seen as less experienced . . . but in every other way he was seen as
a better candidate than the university-educated version’ (Campbell and
Cowley 2014: 754). In a later wave, they told respondents that George had
left school at the age of sixteen. This version of George was considered less
suitable than the eighteen-year-old school leaver, but even this lesser educated
candidate was preferred to one who had obtained a PhD. The researchers were
surprised by their outcomes, as they candidly remarked (2014: 755): ‘Perhaps
because we spend our lives working in universities, the ﬁnding that respond-
ents seemed noticeably to prefer a candidate who had not been to university
surprised (and depressed) us somewhat.’
Their ﬁndings are conﬁrmed by other research. Nicholas Carnes and Noam
Lupu (2016a) concluded, on the basis of comparable experiments in surveys in
Britain, the US, and Argentina, that hypothetical candidates from the working
class are considered as equally qualiﬁed, and just as likely to get votes, as
afﬂuent and well-educated candidates. In descriptive terms, therefore, the
over-representation of the well educated in political ofﬁce is indeed not in
line with the preferences of many voters.2 This also has serious implications
for how people from different educational backgrounds relate to politics.
Sarah Birch (2014: 99) puts it as follows:
Our representative institutions are thus populated by sets of people who are rather
different from those they represent. Whether they are, in consequence, less able to
perform their representative role is moot; sufﬁce it to say, it is not surprising that
when ordinary people . . . observe the political elite, they see a group of people with
whom they believe they have little in common.
The Consequences of Diploma Democracy
143

But Aren’t University Graduates Better Politicians?
For those who, just as Burke, Mill, and Schumpeter, are sceptical about the
ability of ordinary citizens to reﬂect upon complicated policy issues, the rise of
diploma democracy is a blessing in disguise. At long last, Western democracies
are governed by the best and the brightest. We may lose a bit in terms of
descriptive quality, but this is more than compensated by the gains in profes-
sional quality. Surely, people with a university education are better political
leaders. This remains to be seen, however. It is not by any means clear that
academic training enhances political efﬁcacy and integrity.
Many scholars take for granted that education is a proxy for leadership
quality—after all, this is their raison d’etre as university teachers. Few have
tested this assumption, however. Among the ﬁrst to have done so are the
aforementioned American political scientists Nicholas Carnes and Noam
Lupu (2016b). They used three different large data sets to examine whether
college-educated political ofﬁcials performed better on a range of political
outcomes. Firstly, they examined cross-national data on leadership transitions
in a range of countries and found that college-educated leaders performed about
the same as or worse than leaders with less formal education: ‘Scholars and
citizens routinely assume that educated leaders produce better economies and
better countries. In reality, whether the national executive has a college degree
does not seem to predict how a country will perform’ (2016b: 42). They then
looked at how members of the US Congress performed and found that mem-
bers with college degrees ‘do not tend to stay in ofﬁce longer, pass more bills,
or win re-election more often’ (2016b: 44). In line with the outcomes of the
experiments of Campbell and Cowley, they even found that college-educated
members of Congress performed slightly worse at the polls. Thirdly, they
analysed a large Brazilian data set on corruption in municipalities. Again,
they found no evidence that college-educated mayors were less corrupt than
mayors who had not studied at university.
Their outcomes falsify the Platonic conjecture, which is implicit in many
discussions on education and political leadership: ‘Politicians with college
degrees do not tend to govern over more prosperous nations, are not more
productive legislators, do not perform better at the polls, and are no less likely
to be corrupt’ (2016b: 36).
Decoupled Representation: The Rise of Unelected Professionals
These descriptive democratic deﬁcits are reinforced by the rise of unelected
bodies and professional civil society organizations. In recent years, most West
European democracies have seen a striking expansion in the number of pro-
fessional bodies that exercise ofﬁcial authority. Most of these are only loosely
Diploma Democracy
144

tied to the elected institutions of democracy. Examples are central banks and
the increasing number of independent regulatory agencies, such as competi-
tion and antitrust authorities, utility regulatory agencies, ﬁnancial market
supervisors, pharmaceutical regulators, healthcare authorities, and environ-
mental commissions.3 A second important category are supranational bodies
and international committees, such as the myriad of comitology committees
in the European Union.4 This ‘rise of the unelected’, as Frank Vibert (2007)
called it, means that professional bodies play a much larger role in the life of
democratic regimes than in previous periods.
A common feature of these bodies is that they operate in technically sophis-
ticated areas and on the basis of highly specialised expertise. Also, they are run
by well-educated professionals—lawyers, engineers, economists, and doctors.
These unelected bodies make many of the detailed decisions that affect
people’s lives and may have, in practice, greater impact on society than the
activities of elected politicians: ‘The words of an independent bank governor
may carry more weight in ﬁnancial markets than the words of a ﬁnance
minister’ (Vibert, 2007: 6). The ‘outsourcing’ of government functions to
these unelected bodies has reinforced the descriptive deﬁciencies. It has
decoupled political representation from the way public policies are made
and implemented.
Similar trends of decoupled representation are observable in organized civil
society, as we saw in chapter six. Interest groups, civic associations and social
movements are increasingly integrated in the policy processes. They produce
policy papers, attend expert meetings, and play a central role in implementing
policies. Many of these groups no longer try to inﬂuence policy via the
mobilization of large numbers of members, but through the deployment of
expertise (Crenson and Ginsberg 2002). As a consequence, these groups have
become increasingly professionalized (Saurugger 2007: 397–8). Beginning
in the 1970s, civic groups lost ground among many less educated citizens.
Seeking and servicing members became less of a necessity, as funding by
governmental bodies permitted interest groups to focus wholly on profes-
sional activities. Consequentially, members of these groups became less con-
nected, and the less educated disappeared both from their ranks and their ﬁles.
The professionalization of electoral politics, as described in Chapter 7, has
reinforced this decoupling between representatives and represented. The high
levels of educational attainment of political representatives, policymakers,
and activists have made the political class more homogeneous and more
parochial. Selection of representatives has made politics a sphere of its own,
only very loosely coupled to churches, unions, small businesses, and grass-
roots civil society. Changes in the social make-up of parliaments, notably the
disappearance of blue-collar workers, the low- and the medium-educated,
have made representation more indirect. Meritocratization has increased the
The Consequences of Diploma Democracy
145

social distance between the legislative and the executive branches on the one
hand, and large parts of the general public on the other (Gaxie & Godmer
2007: 131).
Responsiveness: Biased Political Agendas
Different Policy Preferences: Cosmopolitans versus Nationalists
Then there is the question of what is represented. The fact that political
ofﬁcials do not match their constituents on important demographic charac-
teristics does not necessarily imply that they are unresponsive to the needs
and interests of their constituents. Well-educated MPs can act as active spokes-
men for the least educated, who are less able to devote time to political debate
and advocacy. Accordingly, protestant ministers, teachers, ‘Red Barons’, and
an army of university graduates, such as Tony Blair or Ed Miliband, have
defended the interests of the working class in parliament throughout the
past century. Likewise, many NGOs and independent regulatory authorities,
although populated by highly educated policy professionals, claim to speak
and act for consumer interests and absent citizens (Van Veen 2014). Similarly,
the different activity levels between educational groups need not be a problem
if the activists and non-activists share the same preferences on salient issues.
Responsiveness becomes more problematic, however, in the case of a sub-
stantial gap in political attitudes between active and inactive citizens, or
between political ofﬁcials and large parts of the electorate. The voice of those
who do participate may be different from the voice of those who abstain.
Participation may then fail to represent the preferences of all citizens equally
with regard to salient political issues. This misrepresentation arises from what
Berinsky (2004) termed an ‘exclusion bias’: the exclusion of the preferences of a
sometimes sizeable portion of the public. This raises the question of to what
extent the higher educated activists and representatives differ in their policy
preferences from the politically passive less well-educated groups.
To answer this question, we ﬁrst need to establish whether educational
groups differ in terms of political concerns and preferences. We saw in
Chapter 4 that there are some differences in left–right orientation between
low and more highly educated individuals in Western European countries.
Also, the well-educated tend to be less egalitarian with regard to income
redistribution than those with less education, but the differences are not
that large in Western Europe. Much larger differences can be observed regard-
ing the new cultural conﬂict dimension that emerged in Western Europe at
the end of the twentieth century.
The educational gap in preferences is particularly strong regarding some
very salient sociocultural issues such as immigration, ethnic diversity, and
Diploma Democracy
146

European uniﬁcation.5 The well-educated, by and large, can be qualiﬁed as
cosmopolitans, who endorse open borders and value pluralism, and are in
favour of the European Union. The low- and medium-educated, on the other
hand, tend to be nationalists, who are more in favour of monoculturalism,
limits on immigration, and an exit from the European Union.6
The data displayed in Figure 8.1 show that this clearly applies in respect of
the six Western European countries in our sample. The gap scores in Figure 8.1
can range from +1.5 to –2.5. A positive score indicates that the lower educated
have on average a stronger preference or a more positive evaluation than the
higher educated. A negative score indicates the reverse. A larger score indicates
that the difference in average preferences and evaluations between the lower
and higher educated is relatively large. A zero score or a score close to zero
means that the difference in the averages of these two groups is relatively
small. In most countries, policy incongruence between those with a high and
those with a low level of education was relatively low regarding the state of
education and health services. It was highest regarding the admittance of
immigrants. Those with lesser levels of education much stronger agree with
the statement that immigration is bad for the economy than the highly
educated.
Figure 8.1 also conﬁrms that the European Union is an important topic of
contestation between educational groups in Western Europe. Both in the ESS
and the Eurobarometer surveys, the less educated consistently show less
support for EU membership. They think European uniﬁcation has gone too
–2.5
–2
–1.5
–1
–0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany
Netherlands
United Kingdom
European unification go further or gone too far
State of health services in country nowadays
Immigration bad or good for country's economy
State of education in country nowaday
Figure 8.1. Education and political preferences (differences in mean scores lower and
higher educated groups, ESS 2014)
The Consequences of Diploma Democracy
147

far, they have less trust in the European Union and its institutions, and
they are far less positive about the beneﬁts of the EU than university gradu-
ates. For example, in the Eurobarometer surveys on ‘Europeans in 2014’,
much more highly educated respondents were inclined to trust (39 per cent)
the European Union than less educated groups (19 per cent). Also, they were
nearly twice as likely to answer that the European Union has a positive image.
Similar differences apply with regard to the euro: 60 per cent or more of
the respondents who ﬁnished their education at the age of twenty or
above, or are still studying, were in favour of the euro, compared with less
than 40 per cent of those who ﬁnished school by the age of ﬁfteen. The
former group was also much more optimistic about the future of the EU than
the latter. And only 28 per cent of the well-educated deﬁned themselves
solely by their nationality and not as European citizens, compared with
58 per cent of the less educated.7
Research by Dutch political scientist Armèn Hakhverdian and his colleagues
(2013) shows that this gap in levels of Euroscepticism between well and lesser
educated has increased considerably in the period between 1973 and 2010 in
western and southern European member states. After the Maastricht Treaty
was signed in 1992, both the level of Euroscepticism and the educational
divide increased. This trend intensiﬁed after 2000, when the euro was intro-
duced. The widening of the educational divide is almost entirely due to the
mounting levels of Euroscepticism among the low- and medium-educated
from the early nineties onwards. By contrast, the percentage of Eurosceptics
among the well-educated is low, and, on average, fairly stable. All six of the
Western European countries in our sample were included in their research and
show signiﬁcant educational divides (see Figure 8.2). The educational gap is
the highest in the UK and Denmark, and its increase has been the largest in the
Netherlands and Denmark.
The Activists Are More Cosmopolitan
To assess whether active and inactive citizens differ in politically relevant
ways, it is necessary to compare the concerns and preferences of political
activists with the concerns and preferences of those who take no part in
politics (Schlozman et al. 2012: 118–19). It is conceivable, at least in theory,
that the political activists act as trustees for the more passive citizens and
espouse the same preferences. In that case, the over-representation of the
well educated in all political venues would not be a problem in terms of
responsiveness.
We therefore compared the political participation rates of highly educated
groups with those of groups with less education and combined them with the
responses on one of the immigration questions in the ESS 2002–2012 data, to
Diploma Democracy
148

examine whether the groups advocating speciﬁc positions exhibited equal
levels of participation. As was to be expected, the highly educated segments
out-participated the less well-educated groups, and this pattern was consist-
ently repeated in all six countries (see Figure 8.3). More importantly, the
higher educated respondents were not only much more active politically,
they also took a more cosmopolitan position on immigrant issues than the
politically inactive, less well-educated group. It is highly likely, therefore, that
public opinion is biased towards the preferences of the well-educated.
1970
0
.2
Proportion eurosceptics
.4
.6
.8
1980
1990
2000
2010
1970
0
.2
Proportion eurosceptics
.4
.6
.8
Belgium
Denmark
1980
1990
2000
2010
Germany
France
Year
Year
Year
Year
Year
Year
1970
0
.2
Proportion eurosceptics
.4
.6
.8
1980
1990
2000
2010
1970
0
.2
Proportion eurosceptics
.4
.6
.8
1980
1990
2000
2010
Netherlands
United Kingdom 
1970
0
.2
Proportion eurosceptics
.4
.6
.8
1980
1990
2000
2010
1970
0
.2
Proportion eurosceptics
.4
.6
.8
1980
1990
2000
2010
Education group:
Low
Middle
High
Figure 8.2. Education and Euroscepticism 1973–2010 (Eurobarometer, based on
Hakhverdian et al. 2013: Figure A1 & A2)
The Consequences of Diploma Democracy
149

Reduced Responsiveness: Incongruences between Political Elites
and Electorates
The next question is whether these educational gaps in preferences and levels
of activity result in reduced policy responsiveness. Is the political agenda
biased towards well-educated citizens? Are there evident incongruences
between the preferences of the well-educated Members of Parliament and
those parts of the electorate with a low or medium level of education? We
do not have empirical material for all six countries, but several studies from
the Netherlands and Belgium are available that provide some insight into
policy congruence between political elites and electorates.
Focusing on the Netherlands, Rudy Andeweg (2011) reached a positive
conclusion about political responsiveness in general. He argued that what
matters most for democracy is whether policy preferences of parliament as a
whole reﬂect those of the electorate as a whole. He analysed policy congruence
at the aggregate level between parliament and the electorate, using elite and
mass surveys. The quality of representation appears to have increased sub-
stantially from 55 to 60 per cent in the 1970s to 89 per cent in 2006.8,9
This optimistic conclusion about the health of policy responsiveness in the
Netherlands, however, is not one shared by everyone. Armèn Hakhverdian
looked beyond collective congruence and disaggregated the electorate in
subgroups based on education, upon which a striking pattern emerged, both
at the local and the national level:
The preferences of Dutch local representatives on multicultural issues exhibit
a much closer match with the preferences of higher educated citizens compared
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
allow many
allow some
allow a few
allow none
Allow many/few immigrants
lower educated
middle educated
higher educated
Figure 8.3. Education, level of political activity, and policy position on immigration
issue (means; N = 47,955; all six countries; ESS 2002–2012)
Diploma Democracy
150

to lower educated citizens. We ﬁnd comparable ‘congruence gaps’ of about
20 percentage points with regard to other sociocultural attitudes. In contrast,
we ﬁnd no evidence for unequal representation on redistributive attitudes.
(Hakhverdian 2015: 4)
At the national level, these incongruences are even larger. Using the same item
to tap attitudes towards multiculturalism, congruence between national rep-
resentatives and the well-educated is as high as 94 per cent. However, congru-
ence between parliamentarians and less well-educated citizens was only
59 per cent. His conclusions were quite straightforward:
For all intents and purposes, Dutch parliamentarians and higher educated citizens
hold identical views towards multiculturalism, at least in 2006 when these data
were gathered. . . . Even in one of the most proportional democracies in the world,
political representation remains biased in favor of the upper echelons of society.
(Hakhverdian 2015: 4)10
Loes Aaldering (2016) has come to similar conclusions. Her analysis of data of
the Dutch Parliamentary Election Studies 1994–2010 shows that the prefer-
ences of the least educated citizens are poorly represented compared to the
preferences of higher educated citizens. She ﬁnds this unequal representation
on ethical, socio-economic, and cultural issues. Interestingly, her study shows
that successful nationalist populist parties enhanced the substantive represen-
tation of the least educated in certain policy areas. We will discuss the effects
of the rise of nationalist parties in Chapter 9.
In Belgium, Christophe Lesschaeve (2016) studied policy congruence
between highly educated and less educated voters, based on a data set that
contained voters and party positions on ﬁfty policy statements, gathered in
the run-up to the 2009 regional election in Flanders. His ﬁndings more or less
resemble the outcomes for the Netherlands. At the aggregate level, the differ-
ences in policy congruence between highly and less well-educated voters are
signiﬁcant, but relatively small. However, in speciﬁc policy domains, such as
immigration, transportation, culture and media, tax, budgetary and economic
policy, there are much larger representational biases in favour of the highly
educated. This indicates that political representation is biased towards those
with the highest level of education.
Diverging Ideas about Democratic Representation
Elected ofﬁcials have incentives to represent more than their own narrow
selﬁsh interests—at least if they wish to remain in ofﬁce. Therefore, the how
of representation is relevant too. As we saw in Chapter 3, representational
style comes in two basic ﬂavours. Representatives can act on the basis of public
demands, often referred to as the delegate or mandate model, or on the basis of
The Consequences of Diploma Democracy
151

their own perception of what is best for their constituents, which is referred to
as a trustee or independence model.
The modernization of democracy has inspired new ideas about the operation
of representative democracies. Representative institutions are increasingly
expected to be responsive to the public and to take into account the interest of
citizens in the process of policymaking. Individual representatives are expected
to act as delegates, responsive to the needs of their voters rather than as trustees
or party loyalists (Zittel 2007: 224). A substantial body of literature ﬁnds consid-
erable differences between educational groups regarding representational
styles.11 Across Western Europe, the well-educated are more inclined to endorse
trustee relationships with MPs, whereas the less educated prefer mandate
relationships. Christopher Carman (2006: 110) concludes, based on his research
in the UK, that: ‘the more highly educated one is, the better one may understand
the inherent complexities in the parliamentary process and, therefore, endorse a
trustee relationship with one’s MP. Less educated individuals, on the other
hand, may not feel as secure with the abstract relationship necessary with an
independence model.’ Other studies report comparable ﬁndings about different
perspectives of groups with less, and groups with more, education as regards the
way they perceive the relationship between themselves and the representatives
they elect, and in particular the roles they are expected to play.12
How do parliamentarians perceive their roles as representatives and how
does this compare to these citizen expectations? Surveying MPs in different
countries, Agnieszka Dudzin´ska and her colleagues (Dudzin´ska et al. 2014: 26)
concluded that the party delegate model is dominant among MPs in Western
Europe (see Figure 8.4).
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Belgium
France
Germany
Netherlands
United Kingdom
trustee
party delegate
voters delegate
Figure 8.4. The popularity of representational styles among MPs (%, based on Dudzin´ska
et al. 2014: 26, Table 2.2)
Diploma Democracy
152

Hence in this respect, too, we ﬁnd substantial incongruences in the respon-
siveness of MPs. Their role perceptions match much better with the preferences
of the well-educated than with the less well-educated parts of the electorate.
Similar educational differences can be observed with regard to alternative
notions of democracy. Hilde Coffé and Ank Michels (2014) found that, when
asked about their support for different types of democracy processes, less well-
educated citizens were more likely to support stealth, and, in particular, direct
democracy, compared with more highly educated citizens. These notions of
democracy offer an alternative to representative democracy for those who feel
dissatisﬁed and inefﬁcacious. This can also be observed in Figure 8.5. In ﬁve of
the six countries in our sample, the lesser educated are more in favour of
referendums than the higher educated.
These ﬁndings are supported by the analyses of Besir Ceka and Pedro
Magelhães (2014; 2016), who examined attitudes toward democracy in
twenty-nine countries using European Social Survey. Their results show that
the extent to which individuals emphasize one or the other conception of
democracy is structured by the social status they enjoy in their societies: ‘high
status individuals—both in terms of income and relative education—are more
likely to espouse conceptions that are consistent with the political status quo
in their countries and to eschew conceptions of democracy that may consti-
tute a challenge to that status quo’ (2014: 2). For example, ‘in countries
where direct democracy institutions are less institutionalised or non-existent,
higher status individuals turn out to be less prone than lower status ones to
understand democracy as something that should include referendums and
initiatives’ (2014: 3).
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany
Netherlands
United
Kingdom
(Strongly) agree referendum is good 
low educated
middle educated
high educated
Figure 8.5. Education and preference for referendums (%, ISSP 2014)
The Consequences of Diploma Democracy
153

The overall picture regarding responsiveness is that educational background
is not politically neutral. Different levels of education may sometimes lead to
diverging political opinions. In the past decades, the preferences of the low-
and medium-educated regarding some of the most salient issues of our time
have been less well represented than the preferences of the well-educated.
Because the higher educated are over-represented among political participants
and politicians, the political agenda tends to be biased towards their priorities
and preferences.
Accountability: Biased Judgement
The consequences of diploma democracy also make themselves felt at the end
stages of the policy cycle, when policies are evaluated and politicians are held
to account. Democracy is more than merely a complex of institutions and
procedures, designed to ensure that citizens are able to inﬂuence the policy
process. It must also provide them with opportunities for evaluating the
outcomes and the justiﬁcation behind the policy decisions, for sanctioning
and, eventually, for ‘throwing the rascals out’. Another consequence of dip-
loma democracy may be that it privileges the perspectives of more highly
educated groups in the operation of accountability mechanisms.
Firstly, accountability forums, too, may suffer from descriptive deﬁcits and
decoupling. The absence of low- and medium-educated citizens in parlia-
ments, professional bodies, and interest groups also implies that they play
no part in processes of policy evaluation and accountability. Parliaments are
pivotal forums for political accountability; independent regulatory agencies
have become central forums for professional accountability; and civil society
organizations play an important role in social forms of accountability. Oli-
garchic tendencies in parties and civil society organizations imply that the
executives or boards who run such organizations are more likely to be in a
position to exercise autonomy in developing their policies and strategies
without having to consult with members and broader sets of stakeholders.13
Secondly, what are the standards used by these accountability forums to
hold the political elites to account? In a diploma democracy, educational
inequalities in the composition of accountability forums may bias account-
ability processes in favour of the preferences and interests of the well-educated
and this may also lead to biased judgement. Efforts to hold political ofﬁcials
and civil society organization leaders to account may be biased by the stand-
ards and judgements of the more educated stakeholders and board members.
British political scientists Nicholas Allen and Sarah Birch have conducted
various experiments to investigate how citizens evaluate the ethical behaviour
of political leaders.14 Their ﬁndings indicate that in some respects, citizens from
Diploma Democracy
154

different educational levels place different demands on the political process and
on politicians, and come to judge them differently. For example, they show that
citizens who report reading ‘quality newspapers’, such as The Guardian or The
Times, are more concerned with conﬂicts of interest among politicians than
with legality, while those who do not report reading ‘quality newspapers’
predominantly focus on issues of legality (Birch & Allen 2015: 54). When voters
and politicians talk about standards in public life, they mean different things:
‘what many politicians take for granted as “normal politics”, many citizens will
think about in terms of right and wrong’ (Allen & Birch 2015: 6). Citizens use a
broader set of standards to judge public ofﬁcials, and also take into account ‘the
words that politicians use, the promises they make and break’ (2015: 7). They
conducted a number of open focus group discussions to explore the standards
that citizens use. One of the most interesting ﬁndings to emerge from these
focus groups was ‘a tendency for people to understand political ethics in a way
that varies considerably from the views that seem to inform elite groups,
including, it must be said political scientists’ (2015: 65). This implies that
there can be discrepancies between the standards the general public applies
and the more sophisticated elite-level classiﬁcations of good public behaviour
(2015: 64). Another ﬁnding was that those who exhibit greater levels of political
sophistication ‘are less critical of political elites than others and less prone to
seeing wrong-doing as a pervasive aspect of British politics’ (2015: 142).
Educational differences in the evaluation and appreciation of political
accountability are also visible in the survey ﬁndings of the yearly Audits of
the Hansard Society in the UK. The British public is not very positive about
Parliament when it comes to holding the government to account. However,
those with university degrees are more inclined to reﬂect favourably than
those with lower level or no qualiﬁcations (Hansard 2016: 26).
Research in the Netherlands by Claartje Brons (2014: 96) has yielded similar
ﬁndings. Ordinary citizens set high moral standards for politicians. They want
a reliable and veriﬁable political class, and they want to ensure the necessary
checks and balances are in place to curb a political culture of self-interest and
nepotism. Political ofﬁcials should behave decently and communicate openly
and honestly. Brons concluded, on base of longitudinal survey research and
in-depth interviews, that politically dissatisﬁed citizens have a desire for
empathetic, reliable political authorities who stick to virtues in politics.
Legitimacy: Distrust and Resentment
Disaffection and Distrust
The legitimacy of a political meritocracy is based primarily on outputs.
Government by experts offers the best guarantee for sound policies and
The Consequences of Diploma Democracy
155

hence the best chance of prosperity for as many voters as possible. The
legitimacy of a democracy, however, is based on more than the sum of a series
of outputs. Democracy is also about inputs. Citizens must have the feeling that
they count, that their voices are heard and they are able to impact policy. In a
diploma democracy, the well-educated voices resonate much more strongly in
the ballot box; in deliberative sessions and expert meetings; in parliaments
and cabinets. It is impossible to gainsay the effects of this on democratic
legitimacy. One may expect to ﬁnd serious gaps in political trust and conﬁ-
dence between educational groups. Could the permanent absence of the low-
and medium-educated in parliaments and in cabinets even lead to a crisis of
conﬁdence, as predicted by Michael Young? Will large segments of the popu-
lation with primary and secondary levels of educational attainment no
longer identify with the well-educated governing political elites and hence
become cynical and indifferent towards politics? This is termed the disaffection
hypothesis in the survey literature on trust.15 It suggests that citizens with
lower education levels will have a low amount of trust in government and
politics, because they feel excluded from meaningful political and social
participation.
We do ﬁnd indications that conﬁrm this hypothesis. For example, Figure 8.6
shows that the various educational groups differ quite strongly in their evalu-
ations of government and politicians. In all countries, a majority of the less
educated (strongly) agrees with the statement: ‘government does not care
what people like me think’. Also, the less educated are far more likely to
agree with the statement that ‘they have no inﬂuence on what the govern-
ment does’, compared to the well-educated. And nearly half of the less well-
educated groups agree that most politicians are in politics only for what they
can get out of it personally—reﬂecting a cynical view of politicians.
Likewise, there is a strong, and positive relation between education and
political trust. More highly educated citizens exhibit higher levels of general
political trust than the less educated.16 This positive relationship between
years of schooling and political trust is strongest in the established, merito-
cratic Western and Northern European democracies. In the new democracies
in eastern Europe, with their high levels of corruption, the trust ﬁgures are
much lower, with the highest educated sometimes being less trustful than the
less educated.17 In the Netherlands, for example, level of education is by far
the most important explanatory factor for differences in political trust: the
more educated the citizens are, the more satisﬁed they are with politics.18 As a
matter of fact, the most remarkable ﬁnding is the effect of a university educa-
tion. Even after all other factors are included, a graduate education makes the
most difference when it comes to political conﬁdence and satisfaction—even
to the extent that the largest divide is between university graduates and the
rest of the educational strata (Dekker et al. 2016: 164).
Diploma Democracy
156

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany
Netherlands
United
Kingdom
Government does not care what people like me think 
low educated
middle educated
high educated
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany
Netherlands
United
Kingdom
No influence on what government does 
low educated
middle educated
high educated
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany
Netherlands
United
Kingdom
Politicians in politics only for personal profit
low educated
middle educated
high educated
Figure 8.6. Education and evaluation of government and politicians (% (strongly)
agreeing, ISSP 2014)
157

These educational gaps in political trust can also be observed in Figure 8.7,
which is based on our ESS data. In all six countries, well-educated citizens
show much higher levels of political trust in parliaments, politicians, and
parties than citizens with low or medium qualiﬁcations.
These differences in political trust are also conﬁrmed by more qualitative
research. A study by Margit Wessels (2014) reveals how the less well-educated
groups that she interviewed in the Netherlands, relate their personal
experiences with social security, care, police, crime, and immigrants to a
government
that is
seen
as
unresponsive. She
points out
that
‘the
respondents complain about political leaders’ lack of accountability to the
public. They “do what they want,” but it rarely becomes clear why a certain
decision had to be taken, how a decision relates to “what you have voted for,”
or how a decision would be in the public interest’ (2014: 772).
In the UK, research by Mary Holmes and Nathan Manning (2013), who
focus on the white working class, shows similar patterns. The participants in
their qualitative study felt that political ofﬁcials paid scant attention to their
daily struggles, and they felt that politics had been corrupted. ‘No one listens
to us ordinary people’, ‘they are too busy lining their own pockets up there’, or
‘them that runs the country don’t know what they’re doing’ (Holmes &
Manning 2013: 494) are the stereotypical cynical views expressing a lack of
political trust and a feeling of social exclusion. These authors argue that the
decline of class as an organizing framework for politics has left ‘ordinary’
people with a feeling that they are unrepresented by political elites:
Our respondents were still looking for politicians to connect with them and relate
to ‘ordinary’ people. The evidence from our participants is that politicians over-
whelmingly fall short of their expectations. They are unlikely to connect with
politicians from elite backgrounds whose attempts at communication are read as
disingenuous, condescending and obfuscatory.
(Manning and Holmes 2013: 488)
Distrust and the New Political Divide
In West European societies, this education gap in political trust coincides with
the new sociocultural conﬂict dimension in politics that has emerged in the
past three decades and was described in Chapter 4. There is a strong connec-
tion between attitudes towards immigration and the EU, and levels of political
conﬁdence and cynicism. Citizens who have positive attitudes towards
migrants and the EU also are politically conﬁdent. Those who have strong
concerns about immigration and European uniﬁcation feel powerless and
show high levels of political mistrust.19 The well-educated, cosmopolitan
citizens and activists are socially and politically conﬁdent. They express trust
in the national and European political institutions and they feel included in
Diploma Democracy
158

the political process. They take for granted that they are listened to and that
their interests are taken care of, and they see globalization and EU uniﬁcation,
not as threats, but as opportunities. The less well-educated nationalist citizens,
on the other hand, show high levels of social distrust and political cynicism.
They think MPs and parties are uninterested in their opinions. They feel they
are not being listened to by politicians and that politics today ignores the
opinions of the common person. Given the composition of present day
political parties, parliaments and cabinets, these feelings of distrust and alien-
ation should not come as a surprise.
Social Exclusion: The Winners Take All
Over-representation of well-educated citizens in the political system is par-
ticularly problematic if diplomas confer beneﬁts in other social spheres as
well. Plato resolved this by prohibiting philosopher-kings from owning per-
sonal goods and property. Nor were they allowed to know who their children
were, in order to prevent nepotism. The meritocracy of Michael Young, by
contrast, was a typical ‘winner-takes-all society’. Those with the highest levels
of education had the best jobs, owned the most property, and wielded the
greatest amount of political power. Because this social capital was largely
transferable via heritage and upbringing, Young foresaw a closed society in
which social mobility would die out within a few generations. Power and
wealth was concentrated among a self-satisﬁed intellectual elite, and the vast
poverty-stricken and cynical underclass had little to lose by rebelling. In the
book, the meritocracy perishes as a result of revolts, which were ignited by
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany Netherlands United
Kingdom
Trust in the European Parliament 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany Netherlands United
Kingdom
Trust in national parliaments  
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany Netherlands United
Kingdom
Trust in politicians 
low educated
middle educated
high educated
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Belgium
Denmark
France
Germany Netherlands United
Kingdom
Trust in political parties 
Figure 8.7. Education and political trust (mean scores, ESS 2014)
The Consequences of Diploma Democracy
159

government proposals to institute a hereditary meritocracy and to reserve the
right to education for the children of the elite; who, in a full-ﬂedged meritoc-
racy, would, on average, be the most intelligent children.
A diploma democracy may not remain stable if large parts of the population
feel they are no longer represented politically, and if they have no hope of
being able to improve their social position. Social cohesion and democracy
both may come under pressure in the case of overlapping cleavages, wherever
educational stratiﬁcation, economic inequality, social divides, and political
tensions systematically co-occur. In Chapter 4, we outlined the emergence of
education as a cleavage in Western Europe. Nowadays, the amount of educa-
tion received is strongly correlated with a person’s chances in the labour
market and in life. Levels of education are important drivers of differences in
income levels and we also see strong levels of educational homogamy, par-
ticularly among the well-educated, which is indicative of the sort of social
closure that Lipset and Rokkan had in mind.
The Belgian sociologist Mark Elchardus and his co-researchers at the Free
University in Brussels have pointed out that that this chasm could lead to
structural feelings of dissatisfaction and to the rejection of fundamental demo-
cratic principles by those who ﬁnd themselves systematically excluded.20 This
may be particularly the case in highly developed meritocratic societies, such as
Belgium, the Netherlands, the UK, and the Scandinavian countries (De Keere
& Elchardus 2012: 298). In those countries, the less well-educated have a
much more negative evaluation of the way society is developing than the
well-educated. Less well-educated people are often vulnerable and long for
more equality; and the stronger the longing for equality is, the more likely
they are to opt for nationalist positions on the new cultural dimension
(Elchardus & Spruyt 2012). They feel the egalitarian society is in decline and
this decline is blamed on the established parties, intellectuals, and elites
(Elchardus & Spruyt 2016: 125–6).
Bram Spruyt, the successor of Elchardus in Brussels, states that contempor-
ary support for populism by the less educated is partly embedded in their
perception of an educational conﬂict in society. Populism is attractive for
those who hold that the well-educated have too much, and the less educated
too little, inﬂuence (Spruyt 2014: 124). In their support for populist appeals,
the less educated vent their feelings of economic, cultural, and political
vulnerability:
our results indicate that populist attitudes are grounded in a deep discontent, not
only with politics but also with societal life in general. Besides, people character-
ized by a strong feeling of lack of political efﬁcacy, people who believe that they
live in a world that is unfair and where they do not get what they deserve, or
people for whom the world changes too fast so that they lose track, all support
populism.
(Spruyt et al. 2016: 8)
Diploma Democracy
160

It is worth noting that a lack of external political efﬁcacy was by far the single
most important predictor for populist support, accounting for about half of
the total explained variance (Spruyt et al. 2016: 10). The rise of nationalist
parties and populist politicians in the ﬁrst decade of the twenty-ﬁrst century
can be interpreted, at least in part, as a manifestation of the resentment
against the rise of a social and political meritocracy.
The Tension between Meritocracy and Democracy
The ‘educational revolution’ of the 1960s and 1970s, which led to a signiﬁcant
expansion of higher education, constituted a new ‘critical juncture’ for the rise
of new political differences and conﬂicts. The ‘participatory revolution’ of the
1980s and 1990s changed the political opportunity structure in modern dem-
ocracies, in much the same way as the educational revolution changed the
structure of social opportunities. This book examined the ensuing rise of a
political meritocracy and the political disparities that come with it. We limited
our analyses to six mature Western European democracies, but we are quite
conﬁdent similar patterns and disparities can be found in other mature dem-
ocracies, such as the Scandinavian countries, Canada, or the United States.21
Why should we bother about diploma democracy? Are we not better off
with political meritocracy? Meritocracy has a place in education, in science,
and in professional sports. In these arenas, position and status should be based
solely on ability and achievement. We are also better off with meritocracy in
the executive branch, at the ministries, the municipalities, and at all the
professional organizations charged with implementing policy. However,
when it comes to arenas where the political agenda is set and policy is
determined, such as in the corridors of power, deliberative hearings, and in
parliament, the situation is different. Here, the familiar argument against the
ship-of-state metaphor still holds up.
In his Republic, Plato compared the state to a ship—the navigation of which,
surely, should not be left to the ignorant and untrained, to the passengers.
To safely steer the ship through stormy seas, a knowledge of navigation, of
technology, and of water currents is essential. The shipping industry is quite
rightly therefore not a democracy but a meritocracy. Speciﬁc qualiﬁcations and
considerable experience are required to become a helmsman. According to
Plato, the same should apply with respect to navigating the ship of state. Yet
what he failed to note is that there is a difference between making policy and
implementing it, between determining the object of the voyage and setting the
course. In a democracy, the laymen, the passengers are the ones who, as equal
partners, determine the destination. It is subsequently the task of the steersmen
and the crew—the cabinet and the civil servants—to sail the ship there safely.
The Consequences of Diploma Democracy
161

The problem with diploma democracy is that the voice of the more highly
educated passengers prevails over the rest. They sometimes have preferences
for alternative destinations and are more successful in getting their way. They
dominate the pilothouse and lounge on the upper deck, while the less well-
educated passengers watch with distrust and cynicism from below deck. And
where Plato saw meritocracy as the solution to Athenian populism, today’s
diploma democracy, by contrast, is a source of populism. A further meritocra-
tization of our society may well, in time, constitute a serious threat to our
political and social stability. A revolt of the unqualiﬁed masses, as described by
Michael Young, may not even be that ﬁctional.
Diploma democracy is a ﬂawed form of democracy, as ultimately it excludes
a sizeable proportion of the population from meaningful political participa-
tion. Citizens with low or medium educational qualiﬁcation levels currently
make up a large majority of the electorate, yet they are extremely under-
represented on nearly all rungs of the participation ladder. The situation is
not that different from the late nineteenth century, when formal diplomas
sometimes determined whether or not a citizen was entitled to vote. Modern
democracies all have full and universal suffrage. Every adult citizen is entitled
to participate on an equal basis. In practice, however, the educational inequal-
ities operate as a hidden census, a cens caché, as the French political scientist
Daniel Gaxie (1978) has called it. Almost a century after the introduction of
universal suffrage, some advanced Western democracies are, practically speak-
ing, back to where they started. How, then, can we mitigate, or even remedy,
the effects of diploma democracy?
Notes
1. Compare Carnes & Lupu 2015; Carnes & Sadin 2015; Allen & Sarmiento-Mirwaldt
2015; Heath 2015.
2. The Pew Research Center ﬁnds for the US that clear majorities of those with only
some college experience (55 percent) and those with no more than a high school
diploma (58 percent) say ordinary Americans would do a better job solving the
country’s problems than elected ofﬁcials. Those with postgraduate degrees are
more skeptical: 49 per cent think that ordinary Americans would not do a better
job than politicians (2015: 101).
3. Compare Gilardi 2008; Magetti 2010; Van Veen 2014.
4. Compare Brandsma 2013.
5. Van der Waal & De Koster (2015: 334–5) argue that the opposition to trade and
economic openness, which is predominantly interpreted in economic terms as
driven by the self-interest of the economically weak, can also be explained from
their opposition to cultural diversity.
Diploma Democracy
162

6. Compare Kalmijn & Kraaykamp 2007; Elchardus & Spruyt 2012; Kriesi et al. 2012;
Den Ridder et al. 2014; Elsässer & Schäfer 2016: 16.
7. European Commission 2014: 54, 57, 61, 78, 106.
8. Lindeboom (2012), too, investigated the correspondence of issue priorities in the
Netherlands between 1971 and 2008 and concluded that, despite recent concerns
about the manifestation of a gap between citizens and political elites, the priority
issues of the government would seem to move hand in hand with public priorities.
9. Andeweg (2011: 50) also shows that the general rise of policy congruence had no
impact on legitimacy, however, and that the percentage of citizens agreeing that
politicians promise too much has increased.
10. See also Schakel & Hakhverdian 2015: 15.
11. Compare Carman 2006; 2007; Barker & Carman 2012; Bengtsson & Wass 2011:
159–60.
12. Carman 2007; Barker & Carman 2012; Bengtsson & Wass 2011: 159–60.
13. Compare Katz & Mair 1995; Mair 2013; Schlozman et al. 2015.
14. See Birch & Allen 2015; Allen & Birch 2015.
15. See Nye et al. 1997; Norris 1999; Phar & Putnam 2000.
16. Compare Bovens & Wille 2010; Borgonovi 2012; Hooghe, Marien, & Vroome 2012;
Hakhverdian & Mayne 2012; Elchardus & De Keere 2013; Andeweg 2014.
17. See Hakhverdian & Mayne 2012; Van der Meer & Hakhverdian 2016.
18. Compare Dekker & Van der Meer 2009; Bovens & Wille 2011; Den Ridder et al.
2014; Dekker et al. 2016.
19. See McLlaren 2012: 230; Den Ridder et al. 2014; Dekker et al. 2016.
20. See Elchardus 2002; Elchardus & Smits 2002; Elchardus & De Keere 2010, 2013.
21. Compare for the latter Schlozman et al. 2012; Murray 2012; Putnam 2015.
The Consequences of Diploma Democracy
163

9
Remedying Diploma Democracy
No to the Euro-Academics
In the days preceding the referendum on the European Convention in the
Netherlands, in June 2005, a lone picketer could be seen demonstrating in the
market square in Leiden carrying a sign that read: ‘NATIONAL POLITICIANS
BEFORE EURO-ACADEMICS’. That sign was a succinct reﬂection of the pre-
dominantly negative sentiments regarding the EU. More than a decade later,
in June 2016, it resonated in a triumphant speech of Nigel Farage, the leader of
the UK Independence Party. When it became clear that more than half of the
nearly 33 million referendum voters in the UK had cast their ballots to leave
the EU, he declared it a ‘victory for real people, a victory for ordinary people, a
victory for decent people.’1 The project of European unity may have made
substantial advances over the past sixty years, at least in the view of its
supporters, but somewhere along the way, the EU quite evidently has left
many of the ordinary citizens behind.
One of the more notable aspects of both referendums was that those back-
ing the European Convention and the Remain option, and those opposing it,
were not divided along the traditional left–right cleavage, but rather according
to educational background. In the Netherlands in 2005, a small majority of
the well-educated voted in favour of the convention; among those with a
lower and medium level of education, at least two-thirds voted against.2
Likewise, in the 2016 EU Referendum in the UK, strong educational differ-
ences could be observed. With the exception of Scotland, the Leave vote was
much higher in those regions of Britain populated by citizens with low
educational qualiﬁcations, and much lower in those regions with a larger
number of university graduates.3 According to Matthew Goodwin and
Oliver Heath (2016: 1–2): ‘ﬁfteen of the 20 “least educated” areas voted to
leave the EU while every single one of the 20 “most educated” areas voted
to remain.’

The European referendums laid bare the educational chasm in the
Netherlands, the UK, and the rest of Western Europe, which was described
in Chapter 8. The supporters of the process of Europeanization can be found
mainly amongst university educated citizens. This group is politically self-
conﬁdent, internationally oriented, and has ample access to the relevant
political arenas and social elites. The group of opponents, by contrast, is
predominantly comprised of less well-educated population groups, who are
socially less active, who feel excluded, and for whom the pace of internation-
alization is simply too high.
The anti-EU vote of the less educated during the Dutch and the UK referen-
dums was not an irrational, populist ﬂare-up. The EU in general, and the
European Convention in particular, are projects masterminded by legal
scholars and other well-educated technocrats, who, far away in the corridors
and cubicles of Brussels, make decisions without consulting the ‘ordinary’
people to whom these decisions relate. For many people with a lower or
medium level of education, the process of European uniﬁcation has not
been an unequivocal blessing. It brought an end to strong national
symbols, such as national currencies, industries, and airlines. The common
market provided ample opportunities for the creative class, but brought
insecurity and, in some instances, massive unemployment for the unskilled.
The referendums offered the latter an opportunity to say ‘no’ to all these
Euro-academics.
The example of European uniﬁcation illustrates how in a diploma democ-
racy the ‘educated’ opinions are included and the ‘non-educated’ opinions are
sometimes excluded from the participatory and representative arenas. How-
ever, the EU referendums also point to a possible way to stem the rise of
diploma democracy: by introducing more direct forms of democracy. We
will discuss a variety of remedies, some instrumental, others more structural,
which may help to mitigate the dominance of the well-educated in a diploma
democracy. The remedies focus on institutional reforms of existing proced-
ures, but also contain suggestions to bring about changes in the behaviour of
different actors. They aim to make the political voice more representative and
politics more responsive, accountable, and legitimate.
We will group these remedies loosely, according to the various layers of the
participation pyramid that was presented in Chapter 5. We will start with
remedies that address differences in political skills and knowledge, and then
examine remedies that may enhance non-electoral activities and participation
in civil society and politics. This is followed by a discussion of merging
deliberative and more direct forms of democracy. The chapter ends with the
peak of the pyramid, the political elite. But ﬁrst we will discuss whether
institutional remedies are necessary at all.
Remedying Diploma Democracy
165

The Rise of Populist Parties: An Increasing Political
Visibility of the Less Educated
Democratic Populism
Upon closer inspection, the Brexit and the Dutch rejection of the European
Convention raise the question of whether the political systems in Western
Europe are in need of remedies at all. It may well be that the mature Western
European democracies are resilient enough to mitigate, or even accommodate,
the rise of political meritocracy. We saw that the education gap manifested
itself mainly with regard to sociocultural issues, such as the admittance of
asylum seekers, cultural integration of immigrants, and EU uniﬁcation.
Regarding these issues, differences in the level of formal education will lead to
very divergent political opinions. As a consequence, the over-representation of
the well-educated may lead to serious distortions of the political agenda.
Against this background, the rise of populist and nationalist parties in
Western Europe need not necessarily be the political catastrophe which it is
often perceived to be. In the long run, the emergence of nationalist parties in
parliament, such as the N-VA in Flanders, Dansk Folkeparti in Denmark, Front
National in France, AfD in Germany, LPF and PVV in the Netherlands, or UKIP
in Britain, could be a blessing in disguise.4 One could argue that it has
made the less educated more visible in the European political landscape.
New Eurosceptic and nationalist parties, with a populist style, have success-
fully campaigned on a platform that addresses the issues and preferences of
the low- and medium-educated segments of the electorate.
Loes Aaldering (2016: 11–15) has shown how, in the Netherlands, the
substantive representation of the least educated on cultural issues improved
in the decade after 2002, when successful nationalist populist parties, such as
the LPF, TON, and the PVV, entered parliament and, for brief periods, were
even part of government coalitions. Congruence between the opinions of the
less educated and the position of the government increased on issues such as
law enforcement and integration of immigrants. In fact, on integration, the
views of the less educated gained enough ground as to draw level, as far as
representation by government was concerned, with those of the other educa-
tional groups.
This indicates that in mature democracies, the political system may be open
and ﬂexible enough to remedy some of the substantive deﬁcits that are caused
by the rise of political meritocracy. Campaigning on more nationalistic plat-
forms, political entrepreneurs have successfully been able to mobilize the
neglected parts of the electorate, i.e., those with a low to medium level of
education. Some of these political entrepreneurs were even very highly edu-
cated. For example, Bart de Wever, the leader of the N-VA in Flanders, was a
Diploma Democracy
166

PhD student in history and made it to the ﬁnal of the TV quiz De slimste mens
ter wereld (‘The smartest person in the world’). Pim Fortuyn, the charismatic
leader of the LPF in the Netherlands, was a part-time professor in sociology at
one point in his career. And Boris Johnson, the ﬂamboyant leader of the Brexit
campaign in the Conservative Party, studied classics at Balliol College in
Oxford. Despite their ‘booksmart’ backgrounds and dandyish behaviour,
they struck a chord with many less well-educated voters.
These nationalist parliamentary parties and entrepreneurs have operated as
a mouthpiece for the low and medium educated and they have forced the
traditional, mainstream political parties to pay more attention to the negative
effects of immigration, globalization, and European uniﬁcation. Nationalist
and populist parties thus can operate as safety valves in a democracy which is
dominated by the well-educated. They can be a parliamentary outlet for the
feelings of discontent and resentment against the political elites of large num-
bers of citizens. Nationalist parties can thus support inclusionary politics that
expand
democratic
representation
to
previously
marginalized
groups—
provided they operate within the limits of the democratic constitutional state.
The Flemish writer David van Reybrouck (2008: 64) has even argued
in favour of a ‘democratic populism’, a populism that pits itself against the
establishment and the elites, but which operates within the framework of
parliamentary democracy:
No one has to be afraid of absurd policy proposals and sweeping statements.
Populism can be as anti-elitist and anti-establishment as it wishes to be, provided
it is not anti-parliamentary and anti-democratic. It is an enrichment to society if
the least educated can ﬁnd democratic parties within the political spectrum to
which they can relate.
According to Van Reybrouck, such a democratic populism is part and parcel of
democracy; it helps to stir political conﬂict and debate, which is the essence of
democratic politics. He looks forward to the rise of an enlightened populism, a
populism ‘which does not shout, but speaks’; a populism which acknowledges
the needs of the least educated, but goes beyond simplistic solutions; a popu-
lism that takes seriously the new chasm between highly educated and less
well-educated citizens and that can reconcile globalization with the need for a
sense of belonging.
The effect of the rise of nationalist parties may very well be that the less
educated will become a more politically visible group, on a par with other
emancipatory social movements, such as immigrants, women, or gays and
lesbians, with a clear shared interest, demanding equal rights or an improved
position. Consequently, educational background will no longer be seen as a
‘usual’, but rather as a ‘prime’ suspect in political research.
Remedying Diploma Democracy
167

Spectator Politics: Edifying the Lesser Educated
More Education?
Many will ﬁnd it risky to stake all on the horse of parliamentary populism.
After all, a bleaker scenario is possible, too, in which populist parties and their
supporters turn against parliamentary democracy out of resentment over the
advent of political meritocracy. In this scenario, many low- and medium-
educated citizens will come to see parliamentary democracy as rigged and
illegitimate—a bunch of elitist proﬁteers—and turn instead to autocratic,
charismatic leaders. It is high time, therefore, to examine the institutional
ways to stem the rise of diploma democracy. We start with spectator politics,
the more rudimentary forms of political engagement.
The sophists, Plato’s intellectual adversaries in ancient Athens, had a
straightforward answer to the rise of meritocracy: democratize diplomas.
They provided training in academic and rhetorical skills to any citizen who
could afford their fees. In contemporary democracies, too, this could be a
powerful remedy. If education is the universal solvent for the puzzle of polit-
ical participation, why not increase the education levels of as many citizens as
possible? After all, education, for all its overlap with other status indicators,
such as class, occupation, and income, does have an independent impact on
political behaviour (Lewis-Beck et al. 2008). This is because the educational
experience is a main source of political information for most citizens. In
school, we learn political facts and how to think and talk about them. More
extensive education provides citizens with relevant knowledge and skills, plus
the attitudes and dispositions of effective citizenship. The ﬁrst possible venue
for remedying diploma democracy would thus be to provide more extensive
education to all citizens. The more highly educated citizens are, the better.
However, raising the general level of education is not a catch-all solution to
ﬁll the gap between the less and the well-educated in political engagement.
First of all, there is the risk of educational inﬂation. Education, by its very
nature, is meritocratic. The gap between the well-educated and the less well-
educated may very well remain, but at a higher level. The well-educated may
start to acquire extra qualiﬁcations, beyond college, such as graduate degrees and
internationaldiplomas.Moreover,educationisapositionalgood,andraisingthe
general level of education will not help to open up political ofﬁce to the least
educated—quite the contrary, as we saw in Chapter 7. As long as the number of
positions inthe political networks andinthe representativearenas remainsmore
or less constant, the educational environment will become increasingly com-
petitive. As a result, an ever-increasing amount of education will be required to
qualify for political ofﬁce.5 The least educated—soon to be those citizens with
secondary qualiﬁcations only—will simply be crowded out by the increasing
number of peers with graduate or even postgraduate qualiﬁcations.
Diploma Democracy
168

Secondly, there is the broader issue, discussed in Chapter 5, of whether
education is a cause or only a proxy. If education is a direct cause of different
levels of participation, then it makes sense to search for educational remedies,
such as extending compulsory education. However, it may well be that, in
many respects, education is only a proxy. Advocates of this theory assert that
pre-adult characteristics, such as family background, in fact affect participation
levels (Persson 2015).6 Education is left with no independent effect, once these
factors are taken into account (Kam & Palmer 2008; Persson 2014b).
More Intensive Civic Education
As we said, the jury is still out on the cause or proxy debate. Meanwhile,
introducing civic education into the secondary school curriculum would
appear to be another sensible option. Civic education as such is not a pos-
itional good, and introducing more intensive civic education programmes
across the board would raise the levels of civic engagement and civic skills of
all segments of the population. This would not alter the dominance of the
well-educated in political ofﬁce, as the crowding-out effects would still be
seen. However, it may provide less well-educated citizens with more of a
stimulus for engagement, as well as the skills to operate in the expanding
variety of participatory and deliberative arenas. Also, better information and
education about politics may reduce some of the negativity about politics.7
There is, indeed, empirical evidence that well-designed, school-based
courses in civic education can have a positive effect on the civic dispositions
of students. It can increase their levels of political tolerance and can equip
them with the civic knowledge and the participatory skills necessary for
informed and effective citizenship. Kay Schlozman and her colleagues
(2012: 569), reviewing evaluations of civic education in the US, point out
that civic education has the potential to reduce political equality, but that the
conditions that make such programmes effective are numerous and not easily
met. Also, a comprehensive, cross-national study into the effects of citizenship
education on adult participation in a diverse set of twenty-eight countries
showed that civic education programmes had an effect on democratic norms,
political participation, and political values, although the inﬂuences varied
considerably across countries (Torney-Purta et al. 2001).
Positive effects of citizenship education have also been reported in some of
the countries in our sample. Karin Wittebrood (1995), for example, has shown
how civic education at secondary schools in the Netherlands contributes to
political involvement. Students who followed an intensive course in civic
education showed an increased interest in political issues, higher political
efﬁcacy, and a greater readiness to participate in politics. Paul Whiteley (2014)
reports similar effects for Britain, where compulsory lessons on citizenship
Remedying Diploma Democracy
169

were introduced in secondary schools in 2002 following the recommenda-
tions of an advisory group chaired by the late Bernard Crick. He found that the
citizenship education programme had ‘a signiﬁcant impact on three key
indicators of civic engagement, namely, efﬁcacy, participation and know-
ledge.’ (2014: 530). Unfortunately, in 2014, Michael Gove, the Minister of
Education in the Cameron cabinet, put an end to compulsory citizenship
education, in an attempt to trim the national curriculum.
For teenagers, learning by doing has a more positive effect on political
engagement than learning by listening. In England, Avril Keating and Jan
Janmaat (2016: 419–22) found that school-based political activities at the
formative age of ﬁfteen or sixteen can continue to inﬂuence political behav-
iour at a later age. Moreover, they concluded that it was an even ‘more potent
driver of political participation than formal citizenship education.’ Teenagers
who participated in school councils, mock elections, and debating teams, were
more likely to vote, to sign a petition, or to contact an MP or local councillor,
even after leaving school. This was independent of their family background
and latent political interest. These positive outcomes notwithstanding, Keat-
ing and Janmaat end their paper on a sobering note: ‘Schools play a role in
political socialisation, but often a relatively small one . . . families, the media,
political parties and other mobilisation agents also play important roles’
(2016: 425). Civic education is relevant, but it is not the universal solvent
for differences in political knowledge, skills, and engagement.
Participation: Adjusting the Arenas
Mini Publics
The next layers of the participation pyramid are voting, non-electoral activ-
ities, and membership of civil society organizations and political parties. We
will start with the latter two. There is little chance of returning to the mass
political parties that dominated much of the twentieth century. The changing
educational stratiﬁcation of modern democracies is here to stay, so it seems,
and so are the cadre parties and the advocacy groups. As political parties
become increasingly footloose, deliberative forms of policymaking may
become important venues in legitimizing policy proposals. Is it possible to
adjust these new political arenas to tone down the inordinate amount of
inﬂuence wielded by highly educated citizens?
Experiments with urban democracy suggest that it is possible to involve the
least educated in deliberative policymaking. However, to do so will require
speciﬁc reforms, such as decentralization, to enable deliberations to focus on
speciﬁc, practical issues; the selection and training of participants; and an
active involvement of street-level professionals (Fung 2004). Also, recent
Diploma Democracy
170

decades have been marked by an upsurge of so-called mini publics.8 These are
relatively small deliberative forums that not only involve self-selected activists
and professional experts, but also lay citizens and non-partisans. In these mini
publics, the representativeness of the public at large is enhanced through
random selection, stratiﬁed sampling, or quality seats. Examples are the con-
sensus conferences in Denmark and the Citizen’s Assembly on electoral
reform which was organized in British Columbia in 2004 (Goodin & Dryzek
2006: 5–6).
Deliberative Polling and Citizen Juries
Another way to gauge the feelings of the not-so-vocal, less well-educated
majority of citizens is the deliberative poll, a method originally designed and
applied by James Fishkin (1995: 134–76). Fishkin’s initial case involved a
random and representative sample of several hundred citizens from the British
electorate. These citizens were gathered together for a weekend and divided
into smaller groups, in which a number of important social themes were
intensively discussed. They were provided with carefully balanced informa-
tional materials and could consult with experts, lobbyists, and politicians
holding a wide range of views. After a number of days of intensive, face-to-
face discussions, their opinions on the issues discussed were polled. In
this major UK example, the result was a combination of Big Brother, Question
Time, and Adventure Island rolled into one, as the deliberations and polls were
held and recorded in the studios of Channel 4 and subsequently extensively
aired on television. Similar experiments have been conducted in British
Columbia and Ontario in Canada, in Iceland, Ireland, the Netherlands,
Belgium, and even at the level of the European Union.9 In most of these
experiments, the over-representation of the well-educated was reduced to
some extent, because the participants were chosen on the basis of random,
representative sampling, instead of by self-selection. Speciﬁc measures were
taken to accommodate less well-educated participants during the deliber-
ations, for example, through providing them with brieﬁng documents that
were tested for ‘understandability’, and with the help of trained moderators
(Isernia & Fishkin 2014: 316–17). Nevertheless, the less educated remain
hesitant to participate in these experiments. In the EuroPolis deliberative
poll, for example, less than 10 per cent of the participants had a low level of
education, compared to 31 per cent of the European general population
(Isernia & Fishkin 2014: 321).
Whoever may ﬁnd deliberative polls a bit too taxing—after all, not everyone
wants to participate in lengthy discussions in television studios—could also
consider the possibility of randomly composed citizens’ juries (Goodin &
Dryzek 2006: 5). These are relatively small groups of ordinary citizens, either
Remedying Diploma Democracy
171

selected at random by lot or by stratiﬁed sampling, who receive information,
can hear evidence and cross-examine witnesses, and, after deliberating a
proposal, can cast a vote. The outcomes can be used by an agency or by a
municipal council in weighing the advisability of the proposal at hand. While
not a full-ﬂedged alternative to party politics, they do offer a certain equality
check on deliberative decision-making (Huitema et al. 2005).
Participation Ceilings for Lobby Groups
The problem with these new deliberative arenas and consultative settings is
not just the under-representation of the less educated. As important is the
dominance of professional advocacy groups, interest organizations, and
lobbyists, which we discussed in Chapter 6. Resources such as skills, money,
and time make it possible for these highly professionalized organizations to be
much more active than ordinary citizens. Placing constraints on the use of
resources can therefore serve to regulate the inequalities of political voice in a
diploma democracy.10 Lobbying inﬂuence can be controlled under strict rules,
with restrictions on the amount of lobbying that is permitted to be under-
taken. Transparency registers provide citizens with a direct source of informa-
tion about who is engaged in lobby activities, which interests are being
pursued, and what level of resources are invested in these activities. Also,
political reforms in the area of political party and candidate ﬁnance can
make political party registration, candidate nomination, or funding for polit-
ical parties more transparent and open to scrutiny.
A More Realistic Citizenship Model
Many proposals for democratic reform contain an implicit bias towards the
skills and the preferences of the well-educated. The over-representation of
highly educated people in politics—and in political science—has led to a
biased model of what citizenship entails. Many proposals for democratic
innovation and renewal are based, implicitly or explicitly, on a very
demanding model of competent citizenship. An important assumption in
this model is that citizens are knowledgeable about politics, understand
their own interests as individuals and groups, develop thoughtful political
opinions, and put these forward by means of political participation. They are
expected to be able to read voluminous dossiers, attend lengthy meetings,
and to intervene at the right moment and in the right tone of voice. It is
only a mild exaggeration to say that at least a bachelor’s degree in political
science or public administration is needed to be able to live up to these
expectations. Many political reforms are designed by political scientists for
political scientists.
Diploma Democracy
172

This implicit ideal of the informed, competent, and committed citizen can
be observed in the internet consultations regarding national legislation, the
deliberative policy projects organized by regional authorities, and in the
neighbourhood management projects organized by local councils. It is a
political citizenship model that ﬁts many well-educated citizens like a glove.
However, it is too demanding for many ordinary citizens, and it overestimates
the amount of time and effort they wish to spend on politics. To their dismay,
policymakers have discovered that their assumption that citizens, when facili-
tated in the right way, are able and willing to participate in large numbers, is
incorrect. In reality, for many citizens, citizenship and politics tend to be
sporadic and occasional matters.11
The search for ways to strengthen democracy, therefore, should be
grounded on a more realistic idea of citizenship. Alternative notions, such as
‘monitory democracy’ (Keane 2009), ‘audience democracy’ (Manin 1997), and
‘stealth democracy’ (Hibbing & Theiss-Morse 2002) are more realistic. They
proceed on the assumption that most citizens are at the most occasionally,
rather than continuously, active. Most citizens are reasonably accurate in
monitoring what happens politically and socially, but given an opportunity
for participation, they will choose to do so only sporadically, if deemed really
necessary. This brings us to another set of potential remedies.
Bringing the Ballot Back In
Deliberation in the Shadow of Direct Democracy
The example of the EU referendums suggests another important way to
involve the less educated, one that is less time consuming and more egalitar-
ian than deliberative policymaking. Bringing the ballot box back in will have a
mitigating effect on diploma democracy, as ballots are a tried and tested
means to redress the incommensurate inﬂuence of participatory elites. After
all, in a ballot, every voice, whether loud or soft, eloquent or brusque, well-
educated or not, is equally important. For this reason, deliberative processes
should, where possible, be concluded by ballots. In that way, the minority of
dexterous and verbally skilled citizens can be prevented from pushing through
their preferences against the wishes of the more silent, rhetorically less skilled
majority. In a ballot, the ground rule is: one person, one vote. This guarantees
that, when the ﬁnal decision is made, the voice of a truck driver counts just as
much as that of a political science graduate. By limiting the ballots to the ﬁnal
phase of decision-making, sufﬁcient room remains to mobilize expertise and
creativity during the conceptual and planning stages. This could be thought of
as deliberating in the shadow of direct democracy.
Remedying Diploma Democracy
173

Corrective Referendums
Such ballots can take the form of corrective referendums. These allow enough
room for professionals, advocacy groups, and expert citizens to provide pro-
fessional input, to map out scenarios, and to draft policy proposals. At the
same time, citizens who lack the desire, time, or courage to participate in the
deliberations, thus have at least the opportunity to express their opinion
about the ﬁnal plans on equal terms. Corrective referendums provide less of
a solution for the tilted agenda-setting problem, discussed in Chapter 4, but at
least they provide an egalitarian check on expert decision-making. The British
Columbia Citizen’s Assembly recommendations were put to a referendum in
just this way.
We saw in Chapter 8 that less well-educated citizens are more likely to
support direct forms of democracy, compared with more highly educated
citizens. For those who are cynical about traditional party-based politics,
referendums provide an opportunity to have a more unﬁltered say regarding
a particular policy issue (Schuck & De Vreese 2015: 156). Issues that political
elites do not wish to address can be brought into the political arena, forcing
them to be more sensitive to the preferences of less well-organized and repre-
sented groups. For instance, the EU referendum in the UK, and the French,
Dutch and Irish rejections of the European Convention and the Lisbon Treaty
have had serious consequences for the EU integration project. All these EU
referendum outcomes were part of a bigger picture of discontent, showing
European political elites that they have apparently been unable to secure a
popular endorsement of European uniﬁcation.
Hence, referendum democracy may foster a wider distribution of power
through the system, while referendums can be integrated into consoci-
ational frameworks for deliberation and bargaining.12 Referendums can
‘open up the political process to groups emerging from civil society rather
than from the established party system’ (Mendelsohn & Parkin 2001: 18).
Referendums can politicize topics and can engage citizen and make them
more knowledgeable of certain issues. In the US, participation in direct
democracy enhances the voters’ general awareness. Moreover, it constitutes
an incentive for political elites to provide more information about the issue
in question. Empirical studies show that citizens are politically better
informed when they have more extended political participation rights
(Kriesi 2005: 90).
But what about the risk of referendums being hijacked by ﬁrebrands? Plato,
for one, would have detested the introduction of referendums. He feared that
direct forms of democracy would pave the way for demagogues. Joseph
Schumpter too, was afraid that direct democracy would led to radical and
substandard outcomes. The example of Switzerland shows that this need not
Diploma Democracy
174

be the case in more mature democracies. Switzerland is the world capital of
referendums and, at the same time, a very stable democracy (Trechsel & Kriesi
1996). At the national level, referendums are regularly held, about four times a
year; on cantonal and local levels, they are even more frequent. Every law
passed by parliament that affects the constitution is ‘mandatory’ to go to a
referendum. But is also possible to demand an ‘optional referendum’, or to
launch an initiative. A large variety of issues can be submitted to the
popular vote: the advancement of footpaths, social security measures, the
price of bread, or the construction of minarets. According to Swiss political
scientist Hanspeter Kriesi (2005) referendums have a tempering rather than
a radicalizing inﬂuence. They lead to a negotiation or consensus democ-
racy, that forces compromises at the bargaining table (Trechsel & Kriesi
1996: 192). The referendum ‘hangs like a sword of Damocles’ over the
parliamentary process. It generates ‘slow but inclusive’ decision-making
and it also limits the role of parties. Referendums can thus be valuable
instruments to complement the traditional forms of indirect democracy
(Dalton et al. 2003b: 261). However, the example of Switzerland also
shows that referendum democracy requires a careful institutional design
and a mature civic culture.
The case of the Hamburg Bildungskampf shows, moreover, that the referen-
dum instrument in itself does not guarantee an equal voice of all citizens. The
problem of lower turnout at the polling booth remains (Schäfer & Streeck
2013). An expanded use of referendums and the information demands they
make on citizens may even reinforce the education gap in participation, as was
the case in Hamburg. This limits the use of referendums and other ballots as a
speciﬁc remedy for diploma democracy. Is there anything that can be done
about the problem of low turnout?
Compulsory Voting
Arend Lijphart (1997) has suggested reintroducing compulsory voting to remedy
the unequal inﬂuence at elections. Making voting a legal obligation would
draw groups with low education qualiﬁcations back to the polling booths—
whether, once there, they would actually cast a ballot is something else
entirely (Dekker & Hooghe 2003: 159). For example, after the Netherlands
abolished compulsory voting in 1970, turn-out levels dropped by over 20 per
cent, in particular among the low and middle educated electorates (Irwin
1974). Compulsory voting also would provide incentives for alienated citizens
to become more informed about politics (Engelen 2007: 31). But even if this is
not the case, compulsory voting surely gives political parties an electoral
motive to continue to devote attention to the interests of the least educated
voters. They are no longer a quantité negligable, as they are in countries where
Remedying Diploma Democracy
175

voting is no longer compulsory and where large numbers of the least educated
can be expected not to turn up at the polling booth.
The evidence on the effects of compulsory voting on educational gaps in
turnout is mixed. Cross country comparisons suggest that compulsory voting
does raise the general turnout substantially, by up to ten or ﬁfteen per cent
(Engelen 2007: 26). Ellen Quintelier and her colleagues from Leuven (2011)
also ﬁnd, in a study of thirty-six countries participating in the 2004 Inter-
national Social Survey Programme (ISSP), that compulsory voting is associated
with higher overall turnout rates. However, they did not ﬁnd any effects on
the educational gap. According to them, compulsory voting raises the turnout
level equally across all educational groups (2011: 406). Armin Schäfer (2011:
8–9), on the other hand, is more positive about the effects of compulsory
voting on the educational gap. His analysis, also on the basis of ISSP data, this
time collected from twenty-two countries, reveals that the differences in
electoral participation are smaller if the overall participation rate is higher.
The inequality gap (based on education and income) is particularly large in
countries with low turnout rates and almost disappears in high-turnout coun-
tries. This suggests that if compulsory voting helps to raise the level of overall
turnout, it may indirectly contribute to reducing educational differences in
electoral participation. Aina Gallego (2010: 246), looking at twenty-eight
advanced democracies, comes to a similar conclusion: ‘Logically, when almost
everyone votes, little room is allowed for inequalities to emerge; thus, raising
overall turnout rates is an effective way of reducing inequalities in voter
participation.’
An alternative to full-scale compulsory voting is the option of making
voting compulsory for selected categories of people. Sarah Birch and Guy
Lodge (2015) have suggested, for example, that all voters be required to vote
in the ﬁrst election in which they are eligible to do so. This socializes these
new electors into making the trip to the polling booth. Aside from compul-
sion, turnout can be raised by making voting more attractive. Gaps in the
turnout rates of different groups can be reduced by making the electoral
procedure easier (Gallego 2010: 346). This can be done with the help of
initiatives that affect the way votes are cast, such as postal voting or e-voting,
or with other facilities that make voting easier, such as providing a choice of
points for voting, increasing the number of places where it is possible to cast
one’s vote, allowing people to vote in places like at a bus or railway station,
at the workplace, at shopping centres, or during the weekends. These are
often perceived as sensible measures to increase turnout. The costs and
beneﬁts of such innovations are yet unclear, as is it difﬁcult to assess how
many more people it would motivate to vote. Whether these additional
measures would raise turnout levels among the least educated groups is
even more uncertain.
Diploma Democracy
176

More Inclusive Political Elites
Party Renewal
We now turn to the upper layers of the participation pyramid, those which
involve holding political positions. Political gatekeepers, such as political
parties, play an important role in the under-representation of the lesser edu-
cated in political ofﬁce (Carnes 2016a). One way to bring citizens with pri-
mary and secondary qualiﬁcations back in touch with political elites is by
increasing their role inside political parties. We saw in Chapter 7 that the
university-educated cadres in political parties, wittingly or unwittingly, select
candidates that resemble themselves. The nearly universal decline of party
membership (van Biezen et al. 2012), has been a motive for parties to become
more internally democratic. A wide variety of reforms in party structures and
practices is suggested to provide for more direct member involvement in the
choice of candidates for public ofﬁce, the selection of the leader of the party,
and the formulation or approval of party programmes (Cross & Katz 2013: 2).
Party primaries that give rank and ﬁle party members the right to decide on
the composition of the parliamentary list for the elections are a way to
democratize candidate selection (Rahat & Hazan 2007: 57–8). However, a
more open selection of candidates will not help if people with a low or
medium level of education do not stand for ofﬁce. Nicholas Carnes (2016b;
2016c), who has extensively studied the under-representation of the working
class in the US, argues that actively recruiting politically capable candidates is
important. In areas where unions actively recruit and train their members to
run for political ofﬁce, workers hold many more seats in local councils and
state legislatures. According to him ‘these efforts take many forms, but their
basic features are similar. In most cases, labor groups identify talented workers,
encourage them to run for ofﬁce, train them, and then provide grassroots
support during their campaigns’ (2016c: 4). This is in line with our ﬁndings for
Denmark, which, until recently, had high numbers of low- and medium-
educated Members of Parliament, due to the strong connection between
unions and political parties.
More Descriptive Representation
A more radical step would be to resort to afﬁrmative action. Just as with
gender, age, or ethnic background, political parties could strive for more
educational balance when selecting their candidates for parliament and
other representative bodies.13 This may imply preferential treatment, reserved
seats, or even quotas for the less educated in order to remedy some of the
representative deﬁcits discussed in Chapter 8. Many parties have reserved seats
for women, candidates from ethnic minorities or from peripheral regions.
Remedying Diploma Democracy
177

Why not do the same for the low- and medium-educated in order to increase
their numbers in parliament?
When groups in society are systematically excluded from the political pro-
cess, striving for more descriptive representation can compensate for these
representational distortions. In particular, group mistrust and low legitimacy
by disadvantaged groups can be good reasons for more descriptive represen-
tation, argues Jane Mansbridge (1999). In these circumstances, descriptive
representation enables ‘enhanced communication’. Shared societal character-
istics between representatives and constituents may make people more pre-
pared to trust their representatives (1999: 641). Descriptive representation
denotes not only visible characteristics, but also shared experiences. ‘Being
one of us’ is assumed to promote loyalty to the interests of the group. More-
over, in cases where interests and preferences are not fully formed, it can help
to have representatives whose characteristics match those of their constitu-
ents. This can result in what she calls ‘introspective representation’ (1999:
646–7), enabling representatives to act on the basis of what they believe their
core voters would wish.
Descriptive representation as a practice is highly contested among political
scientists.14 Similarity says very little about what a representative does and
about the interests that will be promoted, simply because ‘being’ does not
equal ‘doing’. Low- and medium-educated MPs do not necessarily share and
further the preferences of the low- and medium-educated electorate—just as
some very well-educated politicians, such as Bart de Wever, Pim Fortuyn, or
Boris Johnson, have campaigned on platforms that many of their fellow
university graduates abhorred. Next, there is the problem of ‘essentialism’.
For example, the notion that ‘only women can understand women’s issues’
(Mansbridge 1999: 637); or the problem of where and on what basis one
selects the group that needs to be represented, and where to draw the line.
Finally, carried to extremes, descriptive representation may actually perpetuate
the very problems it seeks to address. That is, by typecasting representatives—
women only representing women, blacks only representing blacks, the low-
skilled only the less educated—one reinforces societal stereotypes and
divisions (Mansbridge 1999: 639).
That said, some degree of representative description can help to remedy
some of the pitfalls of diploma democracy, such as the feelings of distrust and
distaste the least educated nowadays harbour towards politicians (Farrell &
Scully 2007: 48–9). A number of contemporary democracies have, therefore,
introduced measures to safeguard a more even representation of different
groups in a variety of social and political arenas. These measures have included
the use of quotas in the selection of ‘minority’ candidates (Krook & O’Brien
2010). The evidence on the effects of these is mixed. Some researchers ﬁnd
that the increased presence of women and minorities appears to have little or
Diploma Democracy
178

no impact on the political engagement of these constituents. Others show
that having a mimetic representative can have positive effects on a range of
behaviours and attitudes among women and ethnic minorities.15 Some note
the positive effect of offering a role model, or they argue that the inclusion of
‘minorities’ in political ofﬁce sends important signals that lead them to
become more politically involved, or at least, to feel more satisﬁed with the
decision-making process.16
Sortition: A ‘House of Lots’
We have already discussed the role of lot in the composition of deliberative
conventions. A more radical application is to select members of legislative
bodies and other political ofﬁcials by lot instead of by elections. In Plato’s
Athens, there were various institutions in place to guard against a meritocra-
tization of public life—to Plato’s great displeasure, it should be noted. After the
reforms of Cleisthenes, for example, nearly all administrative positions were
fulﬁlled by citizens chosen by lot. This was meant to restrain the formation of
a governing elite.
Over the past decades, there has been a burgeoning literature on ‘sorti-
tion’—the use of lot in democratic politics.17 A variety of reforms have been
proposed to select one of the representative bodies in a bicameral system,
either the House of Representatives, the Senate, or the House of Lords, by lot
instead of by direct or indirect elections, or even heritage. The German polit-
ical philosopher Hubertus Buchstein (2009) has even proposed applying sor-
tition to the European Union. He has suggested adding a second chamber to
the European Parliament, consisting of 200 citizens proportionally chosen by
lot from the electorate in the member states. He called this second chamber
the ‘House of Lots’. It would have serious veto powers, a right of initiative, and
its members would be provided with extensive support by experts.
Most of these proposals do not replace the electoral representation entirely.
Rather they introduce a mixed system, which provides for a more egalitarian
check on the increasingly professionalized and elitist system of recruitment of
the legislative through political parties and elections. However, some go even
further, suggesting that the entire legislative process be based on multi-body
sortition—on a series of checks and balances, all based on allotment instead of
elections.18
Introducing Plebiscitary Elements
In a knowledge society, choosing aldermen, mayors, or ministers by lot is a
rather radical solution. It is one thing to randomly select the legislative, in
order to limit descriptive deﬁcits and disparate issue agendas, but selecting the
Remedying Diploma Democracy
179

executive by lot is something else again. Meritocracy has a welcome place in
the executive branch. After all, high levels of skills and expertise are very
relevant for the effective and efﬁcient execution of policies. Direct elections
for governing ofﬁcials, preferably in combination with compulsory voting,
could be an alternative. The vote of those with a low level of education would
thus have an impact equal to that of those with a high level of educational
attainment, forcing political parties and candidates to take their interests into
account—instead of the present situation in which extremely well-educated
party elites select the candidates, as we saw in Chapter 7.
Introducing some plebiscitary elements into the representative democracy
would not only allow the voice of groups with a low level of education to be
more clearly heard during the process of recruiting the political elite, they can
also bring more variety to the political style and expertise. Electing govern-
ment administrators could, for example, lead to more room for the symbolic
and emotive dimensions of politics. Next to formal qualiﬁcations, in the form
of titles and diplomas, informal competences such as charisma and persua-
siveness are also relevant. In this way, a bridge can be laid between the daily
life, the Lebenswelt, of the less educated and the policy world of the academic
elites. It may help to increase the degree of identiﬁcation with the political
system and promote trust in the political leaders.
Combating Status Monopolies
The rise of political meritocracy is closely connected to the increasing merito-
cratic nature of Western European societies. We concluded in Chapter 8 that
over-representation of well-educated citizens in the political system is particu-
larly problematic if diplomas confer beneﬁts in other social spheres as well.
This could threaten social coherency and democracy, as the systematic exclu-
sion of the low- and medium-educated will lead to structural feelings of
dissatisfaction on their part.
David Miller (1996: 300), following Michael Walzer (1983), has therefore
argued that a meritocracy is not only more stable but also socially more just,
the greater the variety of socially valued merit available: ‘Economic contribu-
tion would be one kind of merit, education and scholarship another, artistic
achievement a third, public service yet another, and so forth.’ If each of these
dimensions comes with its own status ladders from which citizens may derive
self-respect, the risk of status monopolies declines markedly. If becoming a
minister, a professor, or a top executive is not in the cards, a person can always
become a TV presenter, professional football player, Britain’s Got Talent
ﬁnalist, or Volunteer of the Year, and earn a hefty salary, achieve high social
status, or considerable social recognition.
Diploma Democracy
180

This means, in the ﬁrst place, that sufﬁcient channels should remain open
in society to foster social mobility and stratiﬁcation that is not associated with
formal qualiﬁcations. It also means that the value of all the diplomas and tests,
which, as a proxy for merit, have become such an important factor in our
society, should be put into perspective. The tyranny of the diplomas will have
to be challenged, and competences acquired other than through formal edu-
cation will also have to be recognized (Elchardus 2002: 270). This is especially
so when they lead to bottlenecks in the opportunity structure, as James Fishkin
(2014: 1) calls them: ‘narrow places through which people must pass if they
hope to reach a wide range of opportunities that fan out on the other side’. To
ameliorate this he advocates opportunity pluralism ‘to increase the range of
opportunities open to people in all stages in life to pursue different paths
that lead to forms of human ﬂourishing’.
Most importantly, it means that access to essential social goods and services,
such as healthcare, social security, and education, should not be yoked to an
individual’s formal qualiﬁcations or social position: ‘Merit of any sort should
only be allowed to govern the distribution of a certain range of goods and
services, and in particular not those goods and services which people regard as
necessities’ (Miller 1996: 300). There are huge disparities in disposition and
talents between people, and there will always be large groups of citizens lacking
the formal or informal competences in demand on the job market. For these
groups, too, it should be possible to have a decent and meaningful existence.
A Wake-Up Call for Modern-Day Platonists
Resolving the pitfalls of diploma democracies will not depend on the intro-
duction of one single innovation or even on the introduction of a set of
reforms. As political scientists, we teach our students time and again that
political reforms are hard to realize, given the complexity of political pro-
cesses. Innovations seldom work out as planned and often produce results that
are unexpected. It is one thing to plan new initiatives and to change political
arrangements—implementing them is another thing entirely.
Enlightened populist parties, civic education, compulsory voting, corrective
referenda, and other ballots, will not in themselves restore the low- and
medium-educated to all of the rungs of the participation ladder. Democracy
will continue to be dominated by the better educated, the rhetorically and
intellectually skilled, as it has been since its beginnings in ancient Athens.
However, as in the Athenian democracy, so despised by Plato, they do give the
least educated important veto powers. The EU referendums, for example, have
been a wake-up call for the Euro-academics who have been so busy in govern-
ing for the people instead of with the people.
Remedying Diploma Democracy
181

Enlightened populist parties, referenda, compulsory voting, deliberative
polls, sortition, and plebiscites force the political elites to take into account
the perspectives of the less well-educated, for whom Europe is a threat rather
than an opportunity. At the very least, they force the Euro-academics to
contemplate further how they can get to a ‘yes’.
Notes
1. Paul Armstong, ‘Nigel Farage: Arch-eurosceptic and Brexit “puppet master”’, CNN,
15
July
2016,
retrieved
from
http://edition.cnn.com/2016/06/24/europe/eu-
referendum-nigel-farage (24 June 2016).
2. According to the Dutch Parliamentary Election Study 2006, 48 per cent of the well-
educated voted in favour of the Convention and 47 per cent against. Among the
middle educated, this was 37 per cent versus 61 per cent and for the less educated,
36 per cent versus 62 per cent. Exit polls (www.peil.nl, 7 July 2005) suggested
higher numbers of opponents, but similar proportions: 51 per cent of the well-
educated, 72 per cent of the middle educated, and 82 per cent of the less educated
said they had voted against the convention.
3. Compare Goodwin & Heath 2016; Pattie 2016; http://blogs.ft.com/ftdata/2016/
06/24/brexit-demographic-divide-eu-referendum-results/.
4. Mudde & Kaltwasser (2012: 16) for example, argue that populism ‘can be both a
corrective and a threat to democracy’ depending on two main contextual factors:
the degree of democratic consolidation and whether populists sit in opposition or
in government. In consolidated democracies, populism in opposition is expected
to have a small positive impact on the quality of democracy, whereas populism in
government should have a moderate effect on democracy, either positive or
negative.
5. Compare Nie et al. 1996: 131–2.
6. See Nie et al. 1996; Kam & Palmer 2008; Berinsky & Lenz 2011.
7. See Flinders 2012; Stoker and Hay 2016; Seyd 2016: 342.
8. See Goodin & Dryzek 2006; Grönlund et al. 2014.
9. See Van Reybrouck 2013: 109–21; Isernia & Fishkin 2014; Meijer et al. 2017.
10. See Schlozman et al. 2012: 544–57 for some proposals.
11. Compare also Wille 1994; Schudson 1998; Fiorina 1999.
12. See Papadopoulos 2005: 461; LeDuc 2015.
13. See, in general, Krook & O’Brien 2010; Michon 2013.
14. Compare Farrell & Scully 2007: 48; Dovi 2008.
15. Merolla et al. 2013; Fowler et al. 2014.
16. See Hayes & Hibbing 2016.
17. Compare Callenbach & Philips 1985; Sutherland 2008; Barnett & Carty 2008;
Dowlen 2008; Buchstein 2009; Dowlen & Delannoi 2010; Bouricius 2013; Van
Reybrouck 2013: 121–50.
18. Bouricius 2013; Van Reybrouck 2013: 128–38.
Diploma Democracy
182


Appendix
Sample: Countries Selected
We focus in Part II and III on the six countries that were selected in Chapter 4: Belgium,
Denmark, France, Germany, the Netherlands, and the UK. We are aware that these
countries differ with regard to important elements of the political system, namely in
terms of the territorial organization of the state (two federal states, Belgium and Germany;
a rather decentralized and regionalized country, the UK; and unitary and quite centralized
states such as France, and to a lesser extent the Netherlands and Denmark) and political
system (majoritarian electoral system in the UK, versus more proportional representation
in the others; presidential system in France, versus parliamentary in the others).
The Data on Political Participation and Civil Society (Chapters 4, 5, 6, 8)
We have beneﬁted from several survey data sources. The European Social Survey (ESS)
was used for most empirical analyses in Chapters 5 and 8. The European Social Survey
is a biannual multi-country survey, collecting data since 2002, that covers topics
such as public opinion and political engagement. We also used data from the Inter-
national Social Survey Programme (ISSP) that annually conducts a major compara-
tive survey in a number of countries, including the countries in our sample. In
addition, we have used data from the Eurobarometer (EB), and from the Audit of
Political Engagement, an annual public opinion poll produced by the Hansard
Society in the UK. The data on the tertiary level educational attainment in European
countries in 2006 and 2015, shown in chapter 4, are available on the website of
Eurostat: http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat.
Robustness Checks
To determine the validity of the main ﬁndings, various robustness checks were per-
formed, to test the persistence of the differences in political participation between
educational groups. We particularly used the ESS1-6 cumulative data ﬁle, the EES
2014 (round 7) data, and the ISSP 2014 data to test the robustness of the ﬁndings. In
all these data, we checked whether we could ﬁnd parallel patterns. Based on these tests,
we conclude that the educational differences are observable in a variety of indicators of
political participation across different surveys.

ESS Data
InmostoftheanalysisforChapters4,5,and8weusedtheESS-72014,whichcoverstwenty-
two countries. All information on the data is available at http://www.europeansocialsurvey.
org/.Inaddition,weusedtheESS1-6cumulativedataﬁle,includingsixroundsovertheyears
2002–2012. The data include the following editions of the integrated ESS data ﬁles:
1. ESS1 edition 6.4 (release date 26.11.14): 2002
2. ESS2 edition 3.4 (release date 26.11.14): 2004
3. ESS3 edition 3.5 (release date 26.11.14): 2006
4. ESS4 edition 4.3 (release date 26.11.14): 2008
5. ESS5 edition 3.2 (release date 26.11.14): 2010
6. ESS6 edition 2.1 (release date 26.11.14): 2012
Analytical Sample
In the analysis of the ESS data, we used an analytical sample that was limited to
individuals between seventeen and seventy-one years old at the time of the survey.
By limiting the age range, the educational variation is more limited than if the full age
range were analysed. On the other hand, this limited the effect of age on our ﬁndings.
Weighting
Design and population weights for the ESS data were applied to allow for valid inference
from the combined samples to the population.
International Social Survey Programme: Citizenship II—ISSP 2014
InChapter 5,6,and8wealsousedtheISSP2014data,retrievedfromtheGESISDataArchive.
This wave covers information of a sample from persons aged eighteen years and older from
thirty-four international countries. We selected data for six countries: Belgium, Denmark,
France, Germany, the Netherlands, United Kingdom. Information on the data is available at
http://zacat.gesis.org/webview/index.jsp?object=http://zacat.gesis.org/obj/fStudy/ZA6670.
Eurobarometer
In Chapters 5 and 6 we also used political participation data that come from the Flash
Eurobarometer 373 that surveyed Europeans’ engagement in participatory democracy.
The Eurobarometer survey was carried out in the twenty-seven member states of the
European Union in February 2013. Some 25,551 respondents were interviewed. We
retrieved the data from the GESIS Data Archive. More information on these Euroba-
rometer data is available at: http://zacat.gesis.org/webview/index.jsp?object=http://
zacat.gesis.org/obj/fStudy/ZA6670.
Hansard Society
In Chapter 5 we used political participation data from the Audit of Political Engage-
ment 2015, which is the annual poll measuring public opinion about politics and the
political process in the UK since 2004. More information is available at: https://www.
hansardsociety.org.uk/projects/audit-of-political-engagement.
Appendix
185

The Data on Political Elites (Chapter 7)
For our analyses in Chapter 7, we used a mix of primary and secondary sources to collect
data on the education background of ministers and Members of Parliament in Belgium,
Denmark, France, Germany, the Netherlands, and the UK. Information on the educa-
tional records was collected from biographies issued by the parliaments and govern-
ment websites in the six countries. Additional information was used to complete the
cases descriptions.
• For Belgium, Nic de Leu (University of Gent) has provided his data on ministerial
proﬁles in Belgium which were coded according to the SEDEPE codebook. For the
information on parliamentarians we used Van Droogenbroeck and Adriaenssens
(2004), and data kindly provided by Frederik Verleden (2014).
• For Denmark, we used data from Gaxie & Godmer (2007), Jensen (2004), and the
Folketinget (2012) for the educational background of the Danish MPs. Biograph-
ical data for the Rasmussen II cabinet were collected from the website of the Danish
government at http://stm.dk/_a_2819.html.
• For France, we have used data from Behr and Michon (2013) and Dogan (2003) for
the government. The chapter on France from Best and Gaxie (2000) was the base
for a ﬁrst exploratory summary of the French parliament.
• For Germany, the information on the composition of the latest German parlia-
ments was retrieved from www.bundestag.de and we used the information of
Wessels (1997) on the composition of German parliament till 1994. Educational
background information of current German ministers was collected from http://
www.bundesregierung.de.
• For the Netherlands: we used the long-term data of the Dutch MPs collected by Van
den Berg (2007) and Van den Berg & Van den Braak (2004). Earlier data on the
careers and background of Dutch ministers originate from Secker’s (1991) study. The
career data on ministers who were members of the cabinets in the period 1990–2012
and MPs since 2004 were collected by the authors of this book. The biographic
material was taken from the website ‘Parlement & Politiek’ (www.parlement.com).
• For the UK, data were retrieved from the House of Commons on www.parliament.
uk and www.gov.uk. Most of the historical data were taken from Butler and Butler
(2011) and from the Sutton Trust reports.
• For the European Union, we have used the information from the study of Beauvallet-
Haddad et al. (2016) for the background of the members of the European Parlia-
ment. The data on the European commissioners were based on MacMullen
(2000) and collected during a previous project (Wille 2013). The biographies of
commissioners of the Juncker Commission were retrieved from the website of the
European Commission: http://ec.europa.eu/index_en.htm.
Moreover, we used international comparative data about MPs which were collected
by Best & Cotta (2000) and Cotta and Best (2007). We particularly relied on the data
analysis from Gaxie and Godmer (2007). The empirical base for their research is the
DATACUBE, a collection of data concerning the characteristics of national legislators in
Diploma Democracy
186

European countries. Data from the Blondel and Thiébault (1991) study on ministers
were retrieved from the SEDEPE (Selection and Deselection of Political Elites) website.
Measuring Education
Education in the ESS data
The ESS data, that we used in Chapters 4, 5, 6, and 8, contain detailed information
about educational attainment. The ESS data have implemented a harmonized educa-
tion variable for a large subset of the countries (developed by Schneider 2010), which is
valid in a comparative education study. The harmonized measures attempt to accom-
modate for future changes in the ISCED standard. Different variables were used in the
different rounds for measuring the highest level of education.
Highest level of education, EDULVLA:
(Based on ISCED-97; categories 0–1 and 5–6 are collapsed)
Coding frame
0—Not possible to harmonize into 5-level ISCED
1—Less than lower secondary education (ISCED 0-1)
2—Lower secondary education completed (ISCED 2)
3—Upper secondary education completed (ISCED 3)
4—Post-secondary non-tertiary education completed (ISCED 4)
5—Tertiary education completed (ISCED 5–6)
55—Other
Highest level of education, EISCED:
(European survey version of ISCED-97, ES-ISCED)
Coding frame
0—Not possible to harmonize into ES-ISCED
1—ES-ISCED I, less than lower secondary
2—ES-ISCED II, lower secondary
3—ES-ISCED IIIb, upper secondary, vocational or no access V1
4—ES-ISCED IIIa, upper secondary, general and/or access to V1
5—ES-ISCED IV, advanced vocational, sub-degree
6—ES-ISCED V1, lower tertiary education, BA level
7—ES-ISCED V2, higher tertiary education, >= MA level
55—Other
Three Levels of Education
The educational variable in the ESS data sets is recoded into three categories:
1 = Lower education (lower secondary or less) includes ISCED level 0 Not completed
primary education, 1 Primary or ﬁrst stage of basic, and 2 Lower secondary or
Second stage of basic education. Also short vocational programs (less than three
years) taken after primary school.
2 = Medium education (higher secondary and post-secondary, non-tertiary) includes
ISCED level 3 Upper secondary (A, B, C) and 4 post-secondary, non-tertiary.
Appendix
187

3 = Higher education (post-secondary) includes ISCED level 5 and higher, i.e. any
stage of tertiary education (e.g. BA, BSc, MA, PhD), including vocational ISCED
5B programmes which have different names in different countries.
Our education classiﬁcation (of low, medium, high educated) in Chapter 2 is based
on the revised ISCED 11, which classiﬁes education along nine levels. Since the ofﬁcial
ISCED 2011 mappings were not available at the time of the ESS surveys, ISCED-97
mappings were used as a starting point for these surveys.
Education in the ISSP
The ISSP makes use of the following categories to measure the highest level of
educational attainment:
1. No formal education
2. Primary school (elementary education)
3. Lower secondary (secondary completed does not allow entry to university:
obligatory school)
4. Upper secondary (programmes that allows entry to university)
5. Post-secondary, non-tertiary (other upper secondary programmes toward labour
market or technical formation)
6. Lower level tertiary, ﬁrst stage (also technical schools at a tertiary level)
7. Upper level tertiary (Master, Doctor)
The education variable in the ISSP data set is recoded to three categories:
1 = No formal education, primary school (elementary education), Lower secondary
(secondary completed does not allow entry to university: obligatory school)
2 = Upper secondary (programmes that allows entry to university), Post-secondary,
non-tertiary (other upper secondary programmes toward labour market or tech-
nical formation)
3 = Lower level tertiary, ﬁrst stage (also technical schools at a tertiary level); Upper
level tertiary (Master, Doctor)
Education in the Eurobarometer
When using the data from the Eurobarometer, we have deﬁned the levels of education
as follows: high educated are those who ﬁnished their education aged twenty or over;
the middle educated are those who ﬁnished their education aged sixteen to nineteen;
the low educated ﬁnished their education aged ﬁfteen or under.
Measuring Political Participation
Measuring Political Participation in the ESS (Chapter 5)
The ESS study uses the following questions to measure political participation:
• Voting is measured by asking whether or not respondents voted in the latest
national election: ‘Some people don’t vote nowadays for one reason or another.
Did you vote in the last [country] national election in [month/year]?’
Diploma Democracy
188

• Vote choice: ‘Which party did you vote for in that election?’
• Political party membership is measured using the following question: ‘Are you a
member of any political party?’
Participation Index (Chapter 5)
The political participation index used in Chapter 5 is constructed on the base of data
from the ESS survey. The index measures the number of political activities the respond-
ents took part in, in the past year: contacted a politician, government, or local govern-
ment ofﬁcial; worked in a political party or action group; worked in another organization
or association; wore or displayed a campaign badge/sticker; signed a petition; took part in
lawful public demonstration; and boycotted certain products (0–7).
Spectator Activity (Chapter 5)
The ESS study uses the following questions to measure spectator activities:
• ‘On an average weekday, how much of your time watching television is spent
watching news or programmes about politics and current affairs1? [No time at all–
More than 3 hours].’
• ‘How much of this time is spent reading about politics and current affairs? [No
time at all–More than 3 hours].’
Participation in the ISSP (Chapter 5)
Different forms of political participation are measured on the base of the following
question:
‘Here are some different forms of political and social action that people can take.
Please indicate if you have:
1. Signed a petition
2. Boycotted, or deliberately bought, certain products for political, ethical, or envir-
onmental reasons
3. Taken part in a demonstration
4. Attended a political meeting or rally
5. Contacted, or attempted to contact, a politician or a civil servant to express your
views
6. Donated money or raised funds for a social or political activity
7. Joined an internet political forum or discussion group.’
Participation in the Hansard Society 2015 (Chapter 5)
To measure political engagement, the Hansard Society uses the following questions:
‘In the last 12 months have you done any of the following to inﬂuence decisions,
laws or policies?
• Contacted a local councillor or MP
• Contacted a local councillor/MP
• Contacted the media
• Taken an active part in a campaign
• Created or signed a paper petition
Appendix
189

• Created or signed an e-petition
• Donated money or paid a membership fee to a charity or campaigning
organization
• Boycotted certain products for political, ethical or environmental reasons
• Attended political meetings
• Donated money or paid a membership fee to a political party
• Taken part in a demonstration, picket, or march
• Voted in an election
• Contributed to a discussion or campaign online or on social media
• Taken part in a public consultation.’
Measuring Participation in Civil Society Organizations (Chapter 6)
The Flash EB 373, 2013 measures participation by the following question:
‘Are you a member of any of the following types of non-governmental organizations
or associations?
• an organization with a speciﬁc economic, social, environmental, cultural, or sport-
ing interest
• a Trade Union
• a professional association.’
The ISSP-2014 measures civil society participation by the following question:
‘People sometimes belong to different kinds of groups or associations. For each type
of group, please indicate whether you; belong and actively participate, belong
but don’t actively participate, used to belong but do not any more, or have never
belonged to it.
• A church or other religious organization
• A sports, leisure, or cultural group.’
The ESS-1 2002 measures participation in voluntary organizations:
‘For each of the voluntary organizations I will now mention, please use this card to
tell me whether any of these things apply to you now or in the last 12 months, and, if
so, which:
• a sports club or club for outdoor activities?
• an organization for cultural or hobby activities?
• a trade union?
• a business, professional, or farmers’ organization?
• a consumer or automobile organization?
• an organization for humanitarian aid, human rights, minorities, or immigrants?
• an organization for environmental protection, peace, or animal rights?
• a religious or church organization?
• a political party?
• an organization for science, education, or teachers and parents?
• a social club, club for the young, the retired/elderly, women, or friendly societies?
• any other voluntary organization such as the ones I’ve just mentioned?’
Diploma Democracy
190

Measuring Political Trust, Interest, and Efﬁcacy (Chapters 5 and 8)
ESS7-2014 measures political trust by the following questions:
• ‘Using this card, please tell me on a score of 0–10 how much you personally trust
each of the institutions I read out. 0 means you do not trust an institution at all,
and 10 means you have complete trust.
1. Parliament
2. Politicians
3. Political parties
4. European Parliament.’
• ‘How much would you say the political system in [country] allows people like you
to have a say in what the government does? [00 = not at all, 10 = completely].’
• ‘And how much would you say that the political system in [country] allows people
like you to have an inﬂuence on politics? [00 = not at all, 10 = completely].’
• ‘How much would you say that politicians care what people like you think?’
[00 = not at all, 10 = completely].’
• ‘How interested would you say you are in politics? [very interested, 1–not at all
interested 4]’
ISSP-2014 measures political efﬁcacy as follows:
• ‘To what extent do you agree or disagree with the following statements? [Strongly
Agree (1), Strongly Disagree (5)]
• People like me don’t have any say about what the government does
• I don’t think the government cares much what people like me think
• Most of the time we can trust people in government to do what is right
• Most politicians are in politics only for what they can get out of it personally’
‘When you get together with your friends, relatives, or fellow workers, how often do
you discuss politics? [Often (1)–Never (4)]’
Measuring Political Preferences (Chapters 4 and 8)
ESS7-2014 measures political preferences as follows:
• ‘Now, using this card, please say what you think overall about the state of educa-
tion in [country] nowadays? [0 = Extremely bad, 10 = extremely good]
• Still using this card, please say what you think overall about the state of health
services in [country] nowadays? [0 = Extremely bad, 10 = extremely good]
• The government should take measures to reduce differences in income levels. [1 =
agree strongly, 5 = disagree strongly]
• Now thinking about the European Union, some say European uniﬁcation should
go further. Others say it has already gone too far. Using this card, what number on
the scale best describes your position? [0 = uniﬁcation has gone too far, 10 =
uniﬁcation should go further]
• Would you say it is generally bad or good for [country]’s economy that people come to
live here from other countries? [0 = bad for the economy, 10 = good for the economy]
Appendix
191

• And, using this card, would you say that [country]’s cultural life is generally
undermined or enriched by people coming to live here from other countries? [0
= cultural life undermined, 10 = cultural life enriched]
• Is [country] made a worse or a better place to live by people coming to live here
from other countries? [0 = worse place to live, 10 = better place to live]
• In politics people sometimes talk of ‘left’ and ‘right’. Using this card, where would
you place yourself on this scale, where 0 means the left and 10 means the right?
• Now, using this card, to what extent do you think [country] should allow people of
the same race or ethnic group as most [country]’s people to come and live here [1 =
allow many to come and live here, 4 = allow none].’
Measuring Income by the ESS-7 2014 (Chapter 4)
‘This card, please tell me which letter describes your household’s total income, after tax
and compulsory deductions, from all sources? If you don't know the exact ﬁgure, please
give an estimate.’
Supplementary Tables and Figures
Table A.7.1. Educational level of Belgium federal cabinet ministers 1999–2014 (abs.; junior
ministers excluded)
Government
Years
Low
education
Medium
education
High Education:
master or
equivalent
High Education:
doctoral or
equivalent
N =
Verhofstadt I
1999–03
1
10
2
14*
Verhofstadt II
2003–07
15
2
17
Verhofstadt III
2007–08
12
3
15
Leterme I
2008–08
1
13
1
15
Van Rompuy I
2008–09
1
16
1
18
Leterme II
2009–11
1
1
13
1
16
Di Rupo I
2011–14
12
4
16
Michel
2014–
13
2
15
Total
2
3
104
16
126*
Source: Own calculations; * information on 1 minister was missing
Table A.7.2. Educational background of French ministers, 1986–2012 (%)
Government
Year
Ecole Nationale
d’Administration (ENA)
Science
Po Paris
Prominent major
school
Major school
(Grand école)
Chirac
1986–88
32
34
46
48
Rocard
1988–91
17
20
37
42
Cresson
1991–92
22
30
46
50
Bérégovoy
1992–93
19
32
51
53
Balladur
1993–95
25
34
41
44
Juppé
1995–97
19
30
36
38
Jospin
1997–2002
29
42
50
54
Raffarin
2002–05
17
36
39
46
de Villepin
2005–07
24
39
42
55
Fillon
2007–12
15
27
32
44
Ayrault
2012–14
15
25
18
40
Source: Behr and Michon (2013: 337)
Diploma Democracy
192

Table A.7.3. Education level of cabinet ministers in the Netherlands 1848–2017 (%, junior
ministers excluded)
Years
Primary
Secondary
College
Graduate
Unknown
Total
(N)
1848-1888
3
13
15
58
11
100%
118
1888–18
–
7
35
58
–
100%
72
1918–40
–
–
31
69
–
100%
61
1940–46
–
3
14
83
–
100%
29
1946–67
1
3
12
84
–
100%
68
1967–94
–
7
8
85
–
100%
89
1994–2017
–
5
11
84
–
100%
112
Source: Secker (1991: 84) added with own calculations from Parlement & Politiek (www.parlement.com)
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Salisbury (C)
Balfour (C)
Campbell-Bannerman (Lib)
Asquith (L)
L.I. George
Bonar Law (C)
MacDonald (C)
Baldwin (C)
MacDonald (L)
MacDonald (Nat)
Baldwin (C)
Chamberlain (C)
Churchill (C)
Atlee (L)
Churchill (C)
Eden (C)
MacMillan (C)
Home (C)
Wilson (L)
Heath (C)
Wilson (L)
Callaghan (L)
Thatcher (C)
Major (C)
Blair (L)
Brown (L)
Cameron (C)
Cameron (C)
1895
1902
1905
1914
1919
1922
1924
1924
1929
1931
1935
1937
1945
1945
1951
1955
1957
1963
1964
1970
1974
1976
1979
1990
1997
2007
2010
2015
Oxbridge
university
none
Figure A.7.1. Educational composition of British cabinets 1885–2015 (abs., sources:
Butler and Butler 2011; Sutton Trust 2015)

References
Aaldering, L. 2016. ‘Political representation and educational attainment: evidence from
the Netherlands (1994–2010)’. Political Studies. Doi: 10.1177/0032321715622788.
Aarts, K. & J. Thomassen. 2008. ‘Dutch Voters and the Changing Party Space
1989–2006’. Acta Politica. 43 (2–3): 203–34.
Aberbach, J.D., R.D. Putnam, & B.A. Rockman. 1981. Bureaucrats and Politicians in
Western Democracies. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Achen, C.H. 1992. ‘Social Psychology, Demographic Variables, and Linear Regression:
Breaking the Iron Triangle in Voting Research’. Political Behavior. 14 (3): 195–211.
Achterberg, P. 2006. Considering Cultural Conﬂict: Class Politics and Cultural Politics in
Western Societies. Maastricht: Shaker Publishing.
Aelst, P. & S. Walgrave. 2001. ‘Who is that (wo) man in the street? From the normal-
isation of protest to the normalisation of the protester’. European Journal of Political
Research. 39 (4): 461–86.
Allardt, E. 1968. ‘Past and Emerging Political Cleavages’. In: Party Systems, Party
Organizations, and the Political of New Masses. O. Stammer (eds.). ‘Beiträge zur 3er.
internationalen Konferenz über vergleichende politische Soziologie, Berlin, 15–20
January 1968, Berlin’: Institut für politische Wissenschaf and der Freien Universität
Berlin. 66–76.
Allen, N. & S. Birch. 2015. Ethics and Integrity in British Politics: How Citizens Judge their
Politicians’ Conduct and Why It Matters. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Allen, N. & K. Sarmiento-Mirwaldt. 2015. ‘“In it together”? The political consequences
of perceived discommunions of interest in British politics’. Research & Politics.
2 (2): 1–10.
Allen, P. 2013. ‘Linking Pre-Parliamentary Experience and the Career Trajectories of the
1997 General Election Cohort’. Parliamentary Affairs. 66: 685–707.
Almond, G.A. & S. Verba. 1963. The Civic Culture: Political Attitudes and Democracy in
Five Nations. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Amnå, E. & J. Ekman. 2014. ‘Standby citizens: diverse faces of political passivity’.
European Political Science Review. 6 (2): 261–81.
Anderson, C. 1993. ‘The composition of the German Bundestag since 1949: long-term
trends and institutional effects’. Historical Social Research. 18 (1): 3–25.
Andeweg,
R.B.
2011.
‘Approaching
Perfect
Policy
Congruence:
Measurement,
Development, and Relevance for Political Representation’. In: Political Representation
and Policy Congruence in Modern Societies Essays in Honour of Jacques Thomassen.
M. Rosema, B. Denters, & K. Aarts (eds.). Amsterdam: Pallas Publications. 39–52.

Andeweg, R.B. 2014. ‘A growing conﬁdence gap in politics? Data versus discourse’. In:
Power, Politics, and Paranoia: Why People are Suspicious of Their Leaders. J. W. van
Prooijen & P.A. van Lange (eds.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 176–96.
Andeweg, R.B. & J.J. Thomassen. 2005. ‘Modes of political representation: Toward a
new typology’. Legislative Studies Quarterly. 30 (4): 507–28.
Anheier, H.K. 2000. ‘Managing non-proﬁt organisations: towards a new approach’.
Civil Society Working Paper series. 1. London: Centre for Civil Society, London School
of Economics and Political Science.
APSA (American Political Science Association), Taskforce on Inequality and American
Democracy. 2006. ‘Inequalities of Political Voice’. Available online at www.apsanet.org.
Accessed 6 April 2008.
Archambault, E., E. Priller, & A. Zimmer. 2014. ‘European Civil Societies Compared:
Typically German–Typically French?’. Voluntas: International Journal of Voluntary and
Nonproﬁt Organizations. 25 (2): 514–37.
Armingeon, K. & L. Schädel. 2015. ‘Social Inequality in Political Participation: The Dark
Sides of Individualisation’. West European Politics. 38 (1): 1–27.
Arnold, C. & M.N. Franklin. 2012. ‘Introduction: Issue congruence and political respon-
siveness’. West European Politics. 35 (6): 1217–25.
Balsiger, P. 2010. ‘Making political consumers: the tactical action repertoire of a
campaign for clean clothes’. Social Movement Studies. 9 (3): 311–29.
Bang, H. 2005. ‘Among everyday makers and expert citizens’. In: Remaking govern-
ance: peoples, politics and the public sphere. J. Newman (eds.). Bristol: Policy Press.
159–78.
Barber, B. 1984. Strong democracy: Participatory politics for a new age. Berkeley; London:
University of California Press.
Barker, D. & C. Carman. 2012. Representing Red and Blue: How the Culture Wars Change
the Way Citizens Speak and Politicians Listen. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Barnardo’s Policy and Research Unit. 2010. Unlocking the Gates. Giving disadvantaged
children a fairer deal in school admissions. available online at http://www.barnardos.org.
uk/resources/research_and_publications/unlocking-the-gates-giving-disadvantaged-
children-a-fairer-deal-in-school-admissions/publication-view.jsp?pid=PUB-1427.
Accessed 19 March 2015.
Barnes, S.H. & M. Kaase (eds.). 1979. Political action: Mass participation in ﬁve western
democracies. Beverly Hills: Sage: 97–136.
Barnett, A. & P. Carty. 2008. The Athenian Option: Radical Reform for the House of Lords.
Exeter: Imprint Academic.
Barro, R.J. & J.W. Lee. 2013. ‘A new data set of educational attainment in the world,
1950–2010’. Journal of Development Economics. 104: 184–98.
Bartolini, S. 2000. The Class Cleavage: the Political Mobilization of the European Left.
Cambridge: Cambridge University.
Bartolini, S. & P. Mair. 1990. Identity, Competition and Electoral Availability. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Beauvallet-Haddad, W., S. Michon, V. Lepaux, & C. Monicolle. 2016. ‘The changing
composition of the European parliament: MEPs from 1979 to 2014’. French Politics.
14 (1): 101–25.
References
195

Behr, V. & S. Michon. 2012. ‘The representativeness of French cabinet members in the
Fifth Republic: A smokescreen?’. séminaire ‘Is representative democracy in “crisis”?’.
Université Paris-1 Sorbonne. 14 December 2012.
Behr, V. & S. Michon. 2013. ‘The representativeness of French cabinet members in the
Fifth Republic: A smokescreen?’ French Politics. 11 (4): 332–55.
Bell, D. 1972. ‘On Equality: I. Meritocracy and Equality’. Public Interest. 29 (3): 29–68.
Bell, D. 1973. The Coming of Post-Industrial Society: A Venture in Social Forecasting.
New York: Basic Books.
Bengtsson, Å. & H. Wass. 2011. ‘The Representative Roles of MPs: A Citizen Perspective’.
Scandinavian Political Studies. 34 (2): 143–67.
Bennett, W.L. 2012. ‘The Personalization of Politics: Political Identity, Social Media,
and Changing Patterns of Participation’. The ANNALS of the American Academy of
Political and Social Science. 644 (1): 20–39.
Berg, J. van den & H. Coffé. 2012. ‘Educational and class cleavages in voting behaviour
in Belgium: The effect of income, EGP class and education on party choice in Flanders
and Wallonia’. Acta Politica. 47 (2): 151–80.
Berg, J.T.J. van den. 1983. De toegang tot het Binnenhof: De maatschappelijke herkomst van
Tweede Kamerleden tussen 1849 en 1970. Weesp: Van Holkema & Warendorf.
Berg, J.Th.J. van den. 2007. ‘Parlementariërs in tijden van Politieke Turbulentie’. In: Een
Verdeeld Electoraat: De Tweede Kamerverkiezingen van 2006. K. Aarts, H. van der Kolk &
M. Rosema (eds.). Utrecht: Spectrum.
Berg, J. Th. J. van den & B. van den Braak. 2004. ‘Kamerleden als passanten in de Haagse
politiek: De maatschappelijke herkomst van Tweede-Kamerleden 1970-2004’. In:
Jaarboek Parlementaire Geschiedenis. C.C. van Baalen et al. (eds.). Den Haag:
SDU. 69–81.
Berinsky, A. 2004. Silent voices: Public opinion and political participation in America.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Berinsky, A.J. & G.S. Lenz. 2011. ‘Education and political participation: Exploring the
causal link’. Political Behavior. 33 (3): 357–73.
Berkhout, J. & D. Lowery. 2010. ‘The changing demography of the EU interest system
since 1990’. European Union Politics. 11 (3): 447–61.
Besley, T., J.G. Montalvo, & M. Reynal-Querol. 2011a. ‘Do Educated Leaders Matter?’.
Economic Journal. 121 (554): 205–27.
Besley, T. & M. Reynal-Querol. 2011b. ‘Do Democracies Select More Educated Leaders?’
American Political Science Review. 105 (3): 552–66.
Best, H. & M. Cotta (eds.). 2000. Parliamentary Representation in Europe 1848–2000.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Best, H. & D. Gaxie. 2000. ‘Detours to Modernity: Long Term Trends of Parliamentary
Recruitment in Republican France 1848-1999’. In: Parliamentary Representation in Eur-
ope 1848–2000. H. Best & M. Cotta (eds.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 88–137.
Biezen, I. van, P. Mair, & T. Poguntke. 2012. ‘Going, going,... gone? The decline of party
membership in contemporary Europe’. European Journal of Political Research. 51 (1): 24–56.
Birch, S. 2014. ‘Citizens excluded’. In: Democracy in Britain: Essays in Honour of James
Cornford. G. Lodge & G. Cornford (eds.). London: Institute for Public Policy Research.
97–106.
References
196

Birch, S. & N. Allen. 2015. ‘Judging politicians: The role of political attentiveness in
shaping how people evaluate the ethical behaviour of their leaders’. European Journal
of Political Research. 54 (1): 43–60.
Birch, S. & G. Lodge. 2015. ‘Voter Engagement, Electoral Inequality and First-Time
Compulsory Voting’. Political Quarterly. 86 (3): 385–92.
Blais, A. 2000. To vote or not to vote?: The merits and limits of rational choice theory.
Pittsburgh PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Bleiklie, I. 2003. ‘Hierarchy and specialisation: on the institutional integration of
higher education systems’. European Journal of Education. 38 (4): 341–55.
Bleiklie, I. 2005. ‘Organizing higher education in a knowledge society’. Higher Educa-
tion. 49 (1–2): 31–59.
Blondel, J. & J.L. Thiébault (eds.). 1991. The Profession of Government Minister in Western
Europe. London: Macmillan.
Blossfeld, H. P. 2009. ‘Educational assortative marriage in comparative perspective’.
Annual Review of Sociology. 35: 513–30.
Blossfeld, H.P. & A. Timm (eds). 2003. Who Marries Whom? Educational Systems as
Marriage Markets in Modern Societies. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Blumler, J.G. 2013. ‘The Fourth Age of Political Communication’. Keynote address.
Delivered at the Workshop on Political Communication Online, the Free University
of Berlin.
Blumler, J.G. & D. Kavanagh. 1999. ‘The third age of political communication: Inﬂu-
ences and features’. Political communication. 16 (3): 209–30.
Boje, T., T. Fridberg, & B. Ibsen (eds.). 2006. Den Frivillige Sektor I Danmark - Omfang og
Betydning. Kobenhavn: Socialforskningsinstituttet, 06:19.
Borchert, J. 2003. ‘Professional politicians: Towards a comparative perspective’. In: The
Political Class in Advanced Democracies. J. Borchert & J. Zeiss (eds.). Oxford: Oxford
University Press. 1–25.
Borchert, J. 2011. ‘Individual Ambition and Institutional Opportunity: A Conceptual
Approach to Political Careers in Multi-level Systems’. Regional & Federal Studies. 21 (2):
117–40.
Borchert, J. & K. Stolz. 2002. ‘Fighting Insecurity: Political Careers in the Federal
Republic of Germany’. Paper APSA Annual meeting Boston.
Borchert, J. & K. Stolz. 2011. ‘Introduction: Political Careers in Multi-level Systems’.
Regional & Federal Studies. 21 (2): 107–15.
Borgonovi, F. 2012. ‘The relationship between education and levels of trust and toler-
ance in Europe’. The British Journal of Sociology. 63 (1):146–67.
Bornschier, S. 2009. ‘Cleavage Politics in Old and New Democracies’. Living Reviews in
Democracy. 1 (1). Available online at https://www.lrd.ethz.ch/index.php/lrd.
Bornschier, S. 2010. ‘The New Cultural Divide and the Two-Dimensional Political Space
in Western Europe’. West European Politics. 33 (3): 419–44.
Bornschier, S. 2012. ‘Why a right-wing populist party emerged in France but not in
Germany: cleavages and actors in the formation of a new cultural divide’. European
Political Science Review. 4 (1): 121–45.
Bourdieu, P. 1977. Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
References
197

Bourdieu, P. 1984. Distinction: A Social Critique of Judgments of Taste. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Bourdieu, P. 2006. ‘The forms of capital’. In: Education, Globalisation and Social Change.
H. Lauder, P. Brown, J.A. Dillabough, & A.H. Halsey (eds.). Oxford: Oxford University
Press. 105–18.
Bouricius, T.G. 2013. ‘Democracy Through Multi-Body Sortition: Athenian Lessons for
the Modern Day’. Journal of Public Deliberation. 9 (1) article 11: 1–19.
Bovens, M. 1998. The Quest for Responsibility: Accountability and Citizenship in Complex
Organisations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bovens, M. 2007. ‘Analysing and Assessing Accountability: A Conceptual Framework’.
European Law Journal. 13 (4): 447–68.
Bovens, M. 2012. Opleiding als scheidslijn: Van oude en nieuwe maatschappelijke
breukvlakken. Inaugural Address Van Doorn Chair Erasmus University Rotterdam,
21 June 2012.
Bovens, M. & A. Wille. 2010. ‘The education gap in political participation and its
political consequences’. Acta Politica. 45 (4): 393–422.
Bovens, M. & A. Wille. 2011. Diplomademocratie: over de spanning tussen meritocratie en
democratie. Amsterdam: Bert Bakker.
Bovens, M. & A. Wille. 2016. ‘De meritocratisering van de politieke elite’. In Meritocratie:
Op weg naar een nieuwe klassensamenleving. P. de Beer & M. van Pinxteren (eds.).
Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press. 165–97.
Bowles, S. & H. Gintis. 1976. Schooling in capitalist America: Educational reform and
contradictions of economic life. New York: Basic Books.
Brandsma, G.J. 2013. Controlling Comitology: Accountability in a multi-level system.
Houndmills: Palgrave MacMillan.
Brants, K. & Voltmer, K. 2011. ‘Introduction: Mediatization and de-centralization of
political communication’. In: Political communication in postmodern democracy.
K. Brants, et al. (eds.). Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan UK. 1–16.
Breen, R. & K.B. Karlson. 2014. ‘Education and social mobility: new analytical
approaches’ European Sociological Review. 30 (1): 107–18.
Brody, R. A. 1978. ‘The puzzle of political participation in America’. In: The New American
Political System. A. King (ed.). Washington: American Enterprise Institute. 287–324.
Brons, C. 2014. Political discontent in the Netherlands in the ﬁrst decade of the 21th century.
Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Brug, W. van der. 2008. ‘Een crisis van de partijendemocratie?’. Res Publica. 50 (1): 33–48.
Brug, W. van der & J. van Spanje. 2009. ‘Immigration, Europe and the “New” Cultural
Cleavage’. European Journal of Political Research. 48: 308–34.
Brug, W. van der. 2010. ‘Structural and ideological voting in age cohorts’. West European
Politics. 33(3): 586–607.
Buchstein, H. 2009. Demokratie und Lotterie: Das Los als politisches Entscheidungsinstru-
ment von der Antike bis zur EU. Frankfurt/New York: Campus.
Budge, I. 1996. The New Challenge of Direct Democracy. Cambridge, MA: Polity Press.
Bühlmann, M. & H. Kriesi. 2013. ‘Models for democracy’. In: Democracy in the Age of
Globalization and Mediatization. H. Kriesi et al. Houndmills Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan. 44–68.
References
198

Bull, P. 2012. ‘What makes a successful politician? The social skill of politics’. In: The
Psychology of Politicians. A. Weinberg (eds.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
61–75.
Butler, D. & G. Butler. 2011. British political Facts, (10th rev. Ed.) Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Callenbach, E. & M. Philips. 1985. A Citizen Legislature; A modest proposal for the random
selection of legislators. Berkeley/Bodega: Bantree Books/Clear Glass.
Campbell. D.E. 2006. ‘What is Education’s Impact on Civic and Social Engagement’.
In: Measuring the Effects of Education on Health and Civic Engagement: Proceedings of the
Copenhagen Symposium. Paris: OECD. 25–126.
Campbell, D.E. 2009. ‘Civic engagement and education: An empirical test of the sorting
model’. American Journal of Political Science. 53 (4): 771–86.
Campbell, R. & P. Cowley. 2014. ‘What Voters Want: Reactions to Candidate Charac-
teristics in a Survey Experiment’. Political Studies. 62 (4): 745–65.
Caramani, D. 2010. ‘Of differences and similarities: Is the explanation of variation a
limitation to (or of) comparative analysis?’. European Political Science. 9 (1): 34–48.
Carman, C.J. 2006. ‘Public preferences for parliamentary representation in the UK: An
overlooked link?’. Political Studies. 54 (1): 103–22.
Carman, C.J. 2007. ‘Assessing preferences for political representation in the US’. Journal
of Elections, Public Opinion and Parties. 17 (1): 1–19.
Carnes, N. 2016a. ‘Why are so few working-class people in political ofﬁce? Evidence
from state legislatures’. Politics, Groups and Identities. 4 (1): 84–109.
Carnes, N. 2016b. ‘Keeping Workers Off the Ballot: Gatekeeper Biases and the Shortage
of Candidates from the Working Class’. Paper for the Washington Centre for Equit-
able
Growth.
Available
online
at
http://equitablegrowth.org/working-papers/
keeping-workers-off-the-ballot-electoral-gatekeepers-and-the-shortage-ofcandidates-
from-the-working-class/. Accessed 29 July 2016.
Carnes, N. 2016c. ‘Casting a Wider Net: The Untapped Potential of Programs to
Increase the Economic Diversity of the Candidate Pool’. unpublished paper.
Carnes, N. & N. Lupu. 2015. ‘Rethinking the comparative perspective on class and repre-
sentation: Evidence from Latin America’. American Journal of Political Science. 59 (1): 1–18.
Carnes, N. & N. Lupu. 2016a. ‘Do Voters Dislike Working-Class Candidates? Voter
Biases and the Descriptive Underrepresentation of the Working Class’. Unpublished
paper.
Carnes, N. & N. Lupu. 2016b. ‘What Good is a College Degree? Education and Leader
Quality Reconsidered’. The Journal of Politics. 78 (1): 35–49.
Carnes, N. & M. Sadin. 2015. ‘The “Mill Worker’s Son” Heuristic: How Voters Perceive
Politicians from Working-Class Families—and How They Really Behave in Ofﬁce’.
The Journal of Politics. 77 (1): 285–98.
Carpini, M.X.D. & S. Keeter. 1996. What Americans know about politics and why it
matters. New Haven CT: Yale University Press.
Castells, M. 1997. The Information Age: Economy, Society and Culture. Oxford: Blackwell.
Causa, O., S. Dantan, & A. Johansson. 2009. ‘Intergenerational Social Mobility in
European OECD Countries’. OECD Economics Department Working Papers. Nr. 709.
OECD Publishing.
References
199

Causa, O. & A. Johansson. 2010. ‘Intergenerational social mobility in OECD countries’.
OECD Journal: Economic Studies. 1: 1–44.
Ceka, B. & P. Magelhães. 2016. ‘How people understand democracy: A social domin-
ance approach’. In: How Europeans View and Evaluate Democracy. M. Ferrin &
H.P. Kriesi (eds.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 90–110.
Celis, K. & Childs, S. 2012. The substantive representation of women: What to do with
conservative claims?. Political Studies. 60 (1): 213–25.
Childs, S. & M.L. Krook. 2009. ‘Analysing women’s substantive representation: From
critical mass to critical actors’. Government and Opposition. 44 (2): 125–45.
Christensen, S.H. & B. Newberry. 2015. ‘The Role of Research in Academic Drift
Processes in European and American Professional Engineering Education outside
the Universities’. In: Engineering Education in Context: International Perspectives on
Engineering
Education.
S.
Christensen,
C.
Didier,
A.
Jamison,
M.
Meganck,
C. Mitcham, & B. Newberry (eds.). Springer Science+Business Media B.V.
Christiansen, P.M. & L. Togeby. 2007. ‘Elite Transformation in Denmark 1932–1999’.
Comparative Social Research. 23: 35–54.
Clark, T. & S.M. Lipset. 1991. ‘Are Social Classes Dying?’. International Sociology. 6 (4):
397–410.
Coffé, H. & A. Michels. 2014. ‘Education and Support for Representative, Direct and
Stealth Democracy’. Electoral Studies. 35: 1–11.
Collins, R. 1979. The Credential Society: A historical Sociology of Education and Stratiﬁca-
tion. New York: Academic Press.
Collins, R. 2002. ‘Credential inﬂation and the future of universities’. In: The Future of the
City of Intellect. S. Brint (eds.). Stanford: Stanford University Press. 23–46.
Converse, P.E. 1972. ‘Change in the American Electorate’. In: The Human Meaning of
Social Change. A. Campbell & P.E. Converse (eds.). New York: Russell Sage.
Costa, O. & K. Kerrouche. 2009. ‘MPs under the Fifth Republic: Professionalisation
within a Weak Institution’. West European Politics. 32 (2): 327–44.
Cotta, M. & H. Best. 2000. ‘Between Professionalization and Democratization:
A Synoptic View on the Making of the European Representative’. In: Parliamentary
Representation in Europe 1848–2000. H. Best & M. Cotta (eds.). Oxford: Oxford
University Press: 493–527.
Cotta, M. & H. Best. 2007. Democratic representation in Europe: Diversity, change and
convergence. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Craig, G. 2004. The media, politics and public life. Sydney: Allen & Unwin.
Crenson,
M.
A.
&
B.
Ginsberg.
2002.
Downsizing
democracy:
How
America
sidelined its citizens and privatized its public. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press.
Cross, W. & R. Katz. 2013. Challenges of Intra-Party Democracy. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Dahl, R.A. 1979. ‘Procedural Democracy’. In: Philosophy, Politics and Society, Fifth Series.
P. Laslett & J. Fishkin (eds.). Oxford: Blackwell, 97–133.
Dahl, R.A. 1989. Democracy and its Critics. Yale University Press.
Dahl, R.A. 2000. On Democracy. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Dahl, R.A. 2006. On political equality. New Haven: Yale University Press.
References
200

Dalton, R. 2006. Citizenship norms and political participation in America: The good news
is . . . the bad news is wrong. Occasional Paper 2006.01. Washington DC: The Center for
Democracy and Civil Society, Georgetown University.
Dalton, R. J. 2013. Citizen politics: Public opinion and political parties in advanced industrial
democracies. Thousand Oaks CA: Sage/Cq Press.
Dalton, R.J., S. Flanagan, P. Beck, & J. Alt. 1984. Electoral Change in Advanced Industrial
Democracies: Realignment or Dealignment. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Dalton, R.J., B.E. Cain, & S.E. Scarrow. 2003b. ‘Democratic Publics and Democratic
Institutions’. In: Democracy Transformed? Expanding Political Opportunities in Advanced
Industrial Democracies. B.E. Cain, R.J. Dalton, & S.E. Scarrow (eds.). Oxford: Oxford
University Press. 250–75.
Dalton, R.J., S.E. Scarrow, & B.E. Cain. 2003a. ‘New Forms of Democracy? Reform and
Transformation of Democratic Institutions’. In: Democracy Transformed? Expanding
Political Opportunities in Advanced Industrial Democracies. B.E. Cain, R.J. Dalton, &
S.E. Scarrow (eds.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 1–22.
Dandoy, R. & A. Schakel (eds.). 2013. Regional and national elections in Western Europe:
territoriality of the vote in thirteen countries. Houndmills, Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan
Deegan-Krause, K. 2007. ‘New Dimensions of Political Cleavage’. In: Oxford Handbook of
Political Behaviour. Dalton, R.J. & H.D. Klingemann (eds.). Oxford: Oxford University
Press. 538–56.
Dekker, P. & M. Hooghe. 2003. ‘De burger-nachtwaker: een de-institutionalisering van
de politieke participatie in Nederland en Vlaanderen’. Sociologische Gids. 50 (2):
156–81.
Dekker, P. & A. van den Broek. 2005. ‘Involvement in voluntary associations in North
America and Western Europe: trends and correlates 1981–2000’. Journal of Civil
Society. 1 (1): 45–59.
Dekker, P. & T. van der Meer. 2009. ‘Opleidingsverschillen verder onderzocht’. In: Crisis
in aantocht: Verdiepingsstudie Continu Onderzoek Burgerperspectieven. P. Dekker, T. van
der Meer, P. Schyns & E. Steenvoorden (eds.). Den Haag SCP: 135–52.
Dekker, P., W. Tiemeijer, & M. Bovens. 2016. ‘Het zijn de academici: opleiding als sociale
en politiek-culturele scheidslijn’. In: Ontwikkelingen in het marktonderzoek 2015, Jaar-
boek Markt Onderzoek Associatie. A.E. Bronner, P. Dekker, E. de Leeuw, L.J. Paas, K. de
Ruyter, A. Smidts & J.E. Wieringa (eds.). Haarlem: Spaar en Hout.
Della Porta, D. 2013. Can democracy be saved?: Participation, deliberation and social
movements. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Dench, G. 2006. The Rise and Rise of Meritocracy. Oxford: Blackwell/The Political Quarterly.
Deth. J.W. van. 2014. ‘A conceptual map of political participation’. Acta Politica 49 (3):
349–67.
Deth, J.W. van & W.A. Maloney (eds.). 2012. New participatory dimensions in civil society:
professionalization and individualized collective action. London: Routledge.
Dogan, M. 2003. ‘Is there a ruling class in France?’. Comparative Sociology. 2 (1): 17–89.
Dolezal, M. 2010. ‘Exploring the Stabilization of a Political Force: The Social and
Attitudinal Basis of Green Parties in the Age of Globalization’. West European Politics.
33 (3): 534–52.
References
201

Domanski, H. 2011. ‘Rise of Meritocracy in Poland: 1982–2008’. European Sociological
Review. 27 (3): 400–11.
Donovan, C. 2006. ‘The Chequered Career of a Cryptic Concept’. In: The Rise and Rise of
Meritocracy. G. Dench (eds.). Oxford: Blackwell/The Political Quarterly. 61–72.
Dovi, S. 2008. ‘Political Representation’. In: The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Fall 2008 Edition). Zalta, E.N. (eds.). Available online at http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/fall2008/entries/political-representation/.
Dovi, S. 2014. ‘Political Representation’. In: The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
(Spring 2014 Edition). E.N. Zalta (eds.). Available online at http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/spr2014/entries/political-representation/.
Dowding, K. & P. Dumont (eds.). 2009. The Selection of Ministers: Hiring and Firing.
London: Routledge.
Dowlen, O. 2008. The Political Potential of Sortition: A study of the random selection of
citizens for public ofﬁce. Exeter: Imprint Academic.
Dowlen, O. & G. Delannoi (eds.). 2010. Sortition: Theory and practice. Exeter: Imprint
Academic.
Droogenbroeck, M. van & S. Adriaenssens. 2004. ‘De stratiﬁcatie van representatie:
Veranderingen in de representatieve kwaliteit van de Belgische parlementsleden
(1937-2003)’. Sociale Wetenschappen. 47 (2): 41–58.
Dudzinska, A., C. Poyet, O. Costa, & B. Weßels. 2014. ‘Representational Roles’. In:
Representing the people: a survey among members of statewide and substate parliaments.
K. Deschouwer & S. Depauw (eds.). Oxford: OUP: 19–38.
Durose, C., F. Gains, L. Richardson, R. Combs, K. Broome, & C. Eason. 2011. ‘Pathways
to Politics’. In: Equality and Human Rights Commission Research report 65. Manchester.
Durose, C., L. Richardson, R. Combs, C. Eason, & F. Gains. 2013. ‘“Acceptable Differ-
ence”: Diversity, Representation and Pathways to UK Politics’. Parliamentary Affairs.
66 (2): 246–67.
Eckstein, K., P. Noack, & B. Gniewosz. 2012. ‘Attitudes toward political engagement and
willingness to participate in politics: trajectories throughout adolescence’. Journal of
Adolescence. 35 (3): 485–95.
Elchardus, M. 2002. ‘Onderwijs in de symbolische samenleving: Zijn individualisme en
meritocratie nog zinvol?’. Sociologische Gids. 49 (3): 259–74.
Elchardus, M. 2012. ‘Onderwijs als (nieuwe) sociale scheidslijn’. In: De sociale klasse
voorbij. Over nieuwe scheidingslijnen in de samenleving. Ministerie van Binnenlandse
Zaken en Koninkrijksrelaties, het Ministerie van Onderwijs, Cultuur en Wetenschap,
het Ministerie van Sociale Zaken en Werkgelegenheid en het SCP en de RMO. Den
Haag. 35–84.
Elchardus, M. & K. de Keere. 2010. ‘Institutionalizing the new self. A comparative
analysis’. European Societies. 12: 743–64.
Elchardus, M. & K. de Keere. 2013. ‘Social control and institutional trust: Reconsidering
the effect of modernity on social malaise’. The Social Science Journal. 50: 101–11.
Elchardus, M. & I. Glorieux (eds.). 2012. Voorspelbaar uniek: Dieper graven in de symbo-
lische samenleving. Tielt: Lannoo.
Elchardus, M. & W. Smits. 2002. Anatomie en oorzaken van het wantrouwen. Brussel:
VUB-Press.
References
202

Elchardus, M. & B. Spruyt. 2012. ‘The contemporary contradictions of egalitarianism:
An empirical analysis of the relationship between the old and new left/right align-
ments’. European Political Science Review. 4 (2): 217–39.
Elchardus, M. & B. Spruyt. 2016. ‘Populism, Persistent Republicanism and Declinism:
An Empirical Analysis of Populism as a Thin Ideology’. Government and Opposition.
51 (1): 111–33.
Elsässer, L. & A. Schäfer. 2016. ‘Group Representation for the Working Class? Opinion
Differences among Occupational Groups in Germany’, Discussion Paper 16/3,
Cologne: Max Planck Institute for the Study of Societies.
Engelen, B. 2007. ‘Why Compulsory Voting Can Enhance Democracy’. Acta Politica.
42: 23–39.
Enyedi, Z. 2008. ‘The Social and Attitudinal Basis of Political Parties: Cleavage Politics
Revisited’. European Review. 16 (3): 287–304.
Erikson, R. & J.H. Goldthorpe. 2010. ‘Has social mobility in Britain decreased? Recon-
ciling divergent ﬁndings on income and class mobility’. British Journal of Sociology.
61: 211–30.
Esaiasson, P. & H.M. Narud. 2013. ‘Between Election Democracy: an introductory note’.
In: Between-election democracy:
the representative relationship after election day.
H.M. Narud & P. Esaiasson (eds.). Colchester: ECPR Press. 1–14.
Esaiasson, P.M., M. Giljam, & M. Persson. 2013. ‘Community Responsiveness and other
central concepts in Between-Election Democracy’. In: Between-election democracy: the
representative relationship after election day. H.M. Narud & P. Esaiasson (eds.). Colches-
ter: ECPR Press. 15–34.
Esping-Andersen, G. 1990. The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Esping-Andersen, G. 2009. The Incomplete Revolutions: Adapting to Women’s New Roles.
Cambridge: Polity Press.
Euriat, M. & C. Thélot. 1995. ‘Le recrutement social de l’élite scolaire depuis quarante
ans’. Education et Formations. 41: 3–20.
European Commission. 2010. Volunteering in the European Union. Final report submitted
by GHK to the EAC-EA and DG EAC, Brussels.
European Commission. 2014. Europeans in 2014. Special Report Eurobarometer 415.
Brussels.
European volunteer centre and Association of Voluntary Service Organisations AVSO.
2004. Voluntary Activity in Belgium. Facts and Figures. Brussels.
Evans, G. (ed.). 1999. The End of Class Politics? Class Voting in Comparative Perspective.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. Evans, G. & N. de Graaf (eds). 2013. Political Choice
Matters: Explaining the Strength of Class and Religious Cleavages in Cross-national
Perspective. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Evers, A. & J.L. Laville (eds.). 2004. The third sector in Europe. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar
Publishing.
Farrell, D. & R. Scully. 2007. Representing Europe’s Citizens? Electoral Institutions and the
Failure of Parliamentary Representation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Federal Ministry for Family, the Elderly, Women and Youth. 2006. Freiwilliges Engage-
ment in Deutschland 1999–2004. Berlin.
References
203

Ferrera, M. 1996. ‘The “Southern model” of welfare in social Europe’. Journal of European
social policy. 6 (1): 17–37.
Fiers, S. & I. Secker. 2007. ‘A Career through the Party: The Recruitment of Party
Politicians in Parliament’. In: Democratic Representation in Europe: Diversity, Change
and Convergence. M. Cotta & H. Best (eds.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 136–59.
Fioramonti, L. & E. Thümler. 2013. ‘Civil society, crisis, and change: Towards a theor-
etical framework’. Journal of Civil Society. 9 (2): 225–32.
Fiorina, M.P. 1999. ‘Extreme Voices: A Darks Side of Civic Engagement’. In: Civic
Engagement in American Democracy. T. Skocpol & M.P. Fiorina (eds.). Washington:
Brookings Institution Press.
Fiorina, M.P. & S.J. Abrams. 2009. Disconnect: The Breakdown of Representation in
American Politics. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Fishkin, J. 1995. The Voice of the People: Public Opinion and Democracy. New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Fishkin, J. 2014. Bottlenecks: A new theory of equal opportunity. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Fligstein, N. 2008. Euroclash: The EU, European Identity, and the Future of Europe. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Flinders, M. 2012. Defending Politics: Why Democracy Matters in the 21st Century. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Florida, R. 2004. The Rise of the Creative Class. New York: Basic Books.
Folketinget. 2012. Folketingets medlemmer i tal ved valget 2011 (22 February 2012).
Copenhagen: Folketinget.
Fort, M. 2006. ‘Educational Reforms Across Europe: A Toolbox for Empirical Research’.
unpublished paper.
Fowler, D.J., J.L. Merolla, & A.H. Sellers. 2014. ‘Descriptive representation and evalu-
ations of government’. Politics, Groups, and Identities, 2 (1): 66–89.
France Bénévolat. 2016. L’évolution de l’engagement bénévole associatif en France, de 2010
à 2016. Paris.
Franklin, M. N., T. Mackie, & H. Valen (eds.). 1992. Electoral Change: Responses to
Evolving Social and Attitudinal Structures in Western Nations. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Franklin, M. N. 1999. ‘Electoral engineering and cross-national turnout differences:
what role for compulsory voting?’. British Journal of Political Science. 29 (01): 205–16.
Fung, A. 2004. Empowered Participation: Reinventing Urban Democracy. Princeton: Prince-
ton University Press.
Gallego, A. 2010. ‘Understanding unequal turnout: Education and voting in compara-
tive perspective’. Electoral Studies. 29 (2): 239–48.
Gallego, A. 2015. Unequal Political Participation Worldwide. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Gaxie, D. 1978. Le cens caché. Paris: Seuil.
Gaxie, D. & L. Godmer. 2007. ‘Cultural Capital and Political Selection: Educational Back-
grounds of Parliamentarians’. In: Democratic Representation in Europe: Diversity, Change
and Convergence. M. Cotta & H. Best (eds.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 106–35.
References
204

Gerring, J. 2012. ‘Mere Description’. British Journal of Political Science. 42 (4): 721–46.
Gesthuizen, M. 2005. ‘How Socially Committed are the Dutch Low-Educated? Histor-
ical Trends, Life-Course Changes and Two Explanations for Educational Differences’.
European Sociological Review. 22 (1): 91–105.
Gilardi, F. 2008. Delegation in the Regulatory State: Independent Regulatory Agencies in
Western Europe. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Gilens, M. 2012. Afﬂuence and inﬂuence: Economic inequality and political power in Amer-
ica. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Glynn, C.J., S. Herbs, G.J. O’Keefe, R.Y. Shapiro. 1999. Public opinion. Boulder:
Westview Press.
Goldthorpe, J. H. 2014. ‘The Role of Education in Intergenerational Social Mobility:
Problems from Empirical Research in Sociology and some Theoretical Pointers from
Economics’. Rationality and Society. 26 (3): 265–89
Goldthorpe, J.H. 2016. ‘Social class mobility in modern Britain: Changing structure,
constant process’. British Academy Lecture in Sociology, London, 15 March 2016.
Available online at http://www.britac.ac.uk/events/2016/Social_class_mobility_in_
modern_Britain.cfm.
Goodin, R.E. & J.S. Dryzek. 2006. ‘Deliberative Impacts: The Macro-political Uptake of
Mini-publics’. Politics and Society. 34 (2): 1–26.
Goodwin, M. & O. Heath. 2016. ‘Brexit and the left behind: a tale of two countries’. LSE-
blog. Available online at http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/brexit/2016/07/22/brexit-and-the-left-
behind-a-tale-of-two-countries/. Accessed 4 August 2016.
Goplerud, M. 2015. The First Time is (Mostly) the Charm: Special Advisers as
Parliamentary Candidates and Members of Parliament. Parliamentary Affairs. 68:
332–51.
Gray, V. & D. Lowery. 1996. ‘A niche theory of interest representation’. The Journal of
Politics. 58 (1): 91–111.
Green, J. E. 2010. The eyes of the people: democracy in an age of spectatorship. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Greenwood, J. 2007. Organized civil society and democratic legitimacy in the European
Union. British journal of political science. 37 (2): 333–57.
Grönlund, K., A. Bächtiger, & M. Setälä (eds.). 2014. Deliberative Mini-Publics Involving
Citizens in the Democratic Process. Colchester: ECPR Press.
Grundiza, S. & C. Lopez Vilaplana. 2013. Population and social conditions: Intergenera-
tional transmission of disadvantages. Eurostat: Statistics in focus 27/2013.
Haandrikman, K. 2011. ‘Spatial homogamy: the geographical dimension of partner
choice’. Tijdschrift voor Economische en Sociale Geograﬁe. 102 (1): 100–10.
Hagevi, M. 2003. ‘Sweden: between Participation Ideal and Professionalism’. In: The
political class in Advanced Democracies: A comparative handbook. J. Borchert & J. Zeiss
(eds.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 352–73.
Hakhverdian, A. 2015. ‘Does it Matter that Most Representatives are Higher Educated?’.
Swiss Political Science Review. 21 (2): 237–45.
Hakhverdian, A. & Q. Mayne. 2012. ‘Institutional Trust, Education, and Corruption:
A Micro-Macro Interactive Approach’. The Journal of Politics. 74 (3): 739–50.
References
205

Hakhverdian, A., E. van Elsas, W. van der Brug, & T. Kuhn. 2013. ‘Euroscepticism and
education: a longitudinal study of 12 EU member states, 1973–2010’. European Union
Politics. 14 (4): 522–41.
Hall, P., W. Jacoby, J. Levy, & S. Meunier (eds.). 2014. The Politics of Representation in
the Global Age: Identiﬁcation, Mobilization, and Adjudication. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Hallerberg, M. & J. Wehner. 2013. ‘The Technical Competence of Economic Policy-
Makers in Developed Democracies’. Available online at http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/
ssrn.2191490. Accessed 5 February 5, 2013.
Hansard Society. 2016. Audit of political engagement: The 2016 Report. London: HMSO.
Hart, J. J. M. de. 2005. Landelijk verenigd: grote ledenorganisaties over ontwikkelingen op het
maatschappelijk middenveld. Den Haag: Sociaal en Cultureel Planbureau.
Hartman, I. 1998. ‘De andere kant van politieke participatie: Kanttekeningen bij de
huidige democratisering van bovenaf ’. Vorming. 14 (1): 7–18.
Hasenfeld, Y. & B. Gidron. 2005. ‘Understanding multi-purpose hybrid voluntary
organizations: The contributions of theories on civil society, social movements and
non-proﬁt organizations’. Journal of civil society. 1 (2): 97–112.
Haute, E. van & A. Gauja (eds.). 2015. Party members and activists. London: Routledge.
Hayes, M. & M. Hibbing. 2016. ‘The Symbolic Beneﬁts of Descriptive and Substantive
Representation’. Political Behavior. doi:10.1007/s11109-016-9345-9.
Heath, O. (2015). ‘Policy Representation, Social Representation and Class Voting in
Britain’. British Journal of Political Science. 45 (1): 173–93.
Held, D. 2006. Models of democracy(3rd edition). Cambridge: Polity.
Hibbing, J.R. & E. Theiss-Morse. 2002. Stealth Democracy: Americans’ Beliefs about How
Government Should Work. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hilton, M. 2011. ‘Politics is Ordinary: Non-governmental Organizations and Political
Participation in Contemporary Britain’. Twentieth Century British History. 22 (2):
230–68.
Hilton, M., J. McKay, & J.F. Mouhot. 2013. The politics of expertise: How NGOs shaped
modern Britain. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Holmes, M. & N. Manning. 2013. ‘Them that runs the country don't know what they're
doing’: political dissatisfaction amongst members of the white working class’. The
Sociological Review. 61 (3): 479–98.
Hooghe, M. 1999. ‘The Rebuke of Thersites: Deliberative Democracy Under Conditions
of Inequality’. Acta Politica. 34: 287–301.
Hooghe, M. 2003. Sociaal kapitaal in Vlaanderen: verenigingen en democratische politieke
cultuur. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Hooghe, M., S. Marien, & T. de Vroome. 2012. ‘The cognitive basis of trust. The relation
between education, cognitive ability, and generalized and political trust’. Intelligence.
40 (6): 604–13.
Houtman, D. 2001. ‘Class, Culture, and Conservatism: Reassessing Education as a Vari-
able in Political Sociology’. In The Breakdown of Class Politics: A Debate on Post-Industrial
Stratiﬁcation. T.N. Clark & S.M. Lipset (eds.). Boulder, CO: Westview. 161–95.
Houtman, D., P. Achterberg, & A. Derks. 2008. Farewell to the Leftist Working Class.
New York: Transaction Publishers.
References
206

Houwen, K. van der. 2010. ‘Lidmaatschappen en deelname aan verenigingen’. Sociale
samenhang: participatie, vertrouwen en integratie. Den Haag: CBS: 41–52.
Howard, P.N. 2006. New Media Campaigns and the Managed Citizen. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Huitema, D., M. van de Kerkhof, & M. van Tilburg. 2005. ‘Burgerjury en de dilemma’s
van interactieve besluitvorming’. Bestuurskunde. 14 (6): 23–32.
Ingen, E. van. 2009. Let’s come together and unite: Studies of the changing character of
voluntary association participation. Tilburg: Tilburg University.
Inglehart, R. 1977. The Silent Revolution: Changing Values and Political Styles among
Western Publics. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Inglehart, R. 1989. Culture Shift in Advanced Industrial Society. Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Irwin, G. 1974. ‘Compulsory Voting Legislation: Impact on Voter Turnout in the
Netherlands’. Comparative Political Studies. 7 (3): 292–315.
Isernia, P. & J. Fishkin. 2014. ‘The EuroPolis deliberative poll’ European Union Politics.
15 (3): 311–27.
Janmaat, J. G. & N. Mons. 2011. ‘Promoting ethnic tolerance and patriotism: the role
of education system characteristics’. Comparative Education Review. 55 (1): 056–81.
Janmaat, J. G. T. Mostafa, & B. Hoskins. 2014. ‘Widening the participation gap: The
effect of educational track on reported voting in England’. Journal of Adolescence.
37 (4): 473–82.
Jensen, T. 2003. ‘Denmark: Professionalism in an Egalitarian Political Culture’. In: The
political class in Advanced Democracies: A comparative handbook. J. Borchert & J. Zeiss
(eds.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 84–106.
Jensen, T.K. 2004. De folkevalgte—en analyse af folketingsmedlemmernes sociale baggrund
og repræsentationsadfærd. Aarhus: Universitetsforlag.
Johansson, H. & J. Lee. 2014. ‘Bridging the Gap: How do EU-Based Civil Society
Organizations Acquire Their Internal Representation?’. VOLUNTAS: International
Journal of Voluntary and Nonproﬁt Organizations. 25 (2): 405–24.
Jordan, G. & W.A. Maloney. 1997. The protest business?Mobilising campaign groups.
Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Judge, D. 2014. Democratic incongruities: Representative democracy in Britain. Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Jun, U. 2003. ‘Great Britain: From the Prevalence of the Amateur to the Dominance of
the Professional Politician’. In The Political Class in Advanced Democracies. J. Borchert
& J Zeiss (eds.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 164–86.
Kalmijn, M. & G. Kraaykamp. 2007. ‘Social stratiﬁcation and attitudes: a comparative
analysis of the effects of class and education in Europe’. The British Journal of Sociology.
58 (4): 547–76.
Kam, C. & C. Palmer. 2008. ‘Reconsidering the effects of education on political partici-
pation’. Journal of Politics. 70 (3): 612–31.
Katz, R. & P. Mair. 1995. ‘Changing Modes of Party Organization and Party Democracy:
The Emergence of the Cartel Party’. Party Politics. 1 (1): 5–28.
Katz, R. & P. Mair. 2009. ‘The cartel party thesis: A restatement’. Perspectives on politics.
7 (4): 753–66.
References
207

Kavenagh, D. & D. Richards. 2003. ‘Prime Ministers, Ministers and Civil Servants in
Britain’. Comparative Sociology. 2 (1): 175–95.
Keane, J. 2009. The Life and Death of Democracy. London: Simon & Schuster.
Keating, A. & J.G. Janmaat. 2016. ‘Education Through Citizenship at School: Do School
Activities Have a Lasting Impact on Youth Political Engagement?’. Parliamentary
Affairs. 69 (2): 409–29.
Keere, K. De & M. Elchardus. 2012. ‘Persoonlijk geluk en maatschappelijke verzuring.
Een analyse naar de effecten van modernisering op publieke en private evaluatie’. In:
Voorspelbaar uniek: Diepe graven in de symbolische samenleving. M. Elchardus &
I. Glorieux (eds.). Tielt: Lannoo. 276–303.
Kimball, D.C., F.R. Baumgartner, J.M. Berry, M. Hojnacki, & B.L. Leech. 2012. ‘Who
cares about the lobbying agenda?’. Interest Groups & Advocacy. 1 (1): 5–25.
Kivinen, O., J. Hedman, & P. Kaipainen. 2007. ‘Opportunity and Returns to University
Education: From Elite University to Mass Higher Education’. Acta Sociologica. 50 (3): 231–47.
Klingemann, H.D. & D. Fuchs (eds.). 1995. Citizens and the State. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Klüver, H. 2012. ‘Informational Lobbying in the European Union. The Effect of Organ-
isational Characteristics’. West European Politics. 35 (3): 491–510.
Klüver, H. & S. Saurugger. 2013. ‘Opening the Black Box. The professionalization of
Interest Groups in the EU’. Interest Groups & Advocacy. 2 (2): 185–202.
Knutsen, O. 2009. ‘Cleavage’. APSA-CP. 20 (2): 14.
Kohler-Koch, B. 2010. ‘Civil society and EU democracy: “Astroturf” representation?’.
Journal of European Public Policy. 17 (1): 100–16.
Kohler-Koch, B. & C. Quittkat. 2013. De-Mystiﬁcation of Participatory Democracy:
EU-Governance and Civil Society. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Koole, R. 1992. De opkomst van de moderne kaderpartij: veranderende partijorganisaties in
Nederland 1960–1990. Utrecht: Het Spectrum.
Kotzian, P. & J. Steffek. 2013. ‘Do members make a difference? A study of Transnational
Civil Society Organizations’. European Political Science Review. 5 (1): 55–81.
Kriesi, H. 1989. ‘New social movements and the new class in the Netherlands’. American
Journal of Sociology. 94 (5): 1078–116.
Kriesi, H. 1993. Political mobilization and social change. The Dutch case in comparative
perspective. Aldershot: Avebury.
Kriesi, H. 1996. ‘The organizational structure of new social movements in a political
context’. In: Comparative perspectives on social movements: Political opportunities,
mobilizing structures, and cultural framings. D. McAdam, J.D. McCarthy, & M.N. Zald.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 152–84.
Kriesi, H. 1998. ‘The transformation of cleavage politics’. European Journal of Political
Research. 33 (2): 165–85.
Kriesi, H. 2005. Direct democratic choice: The Swiss experience. Oxford: Lexington Books.
Kriesi, H. 2010. ‘Restructuration of Partisan Politics and the Emergence of a New
Cleavage Based on Values’. West European Politics. 33 (3): 673–85.
Kriesi, H. 2013. ‘Conclusion: An assessment of the state of democracy given the
challenges of globalization and mediatization’. In: Democracy in the Age of Globaliza-
tion and Mediatization. H. Kriesi et al. London: Palgrave Macmillan. 202–15.
References
208

Kriesi, H., M. Bornschier, M. Dolezal, T. Frey, E. Grande, & R. Lachat. 2008. West
European Politics in the Age of Globalization. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kriesi, H., E. Grande, M. Dolezal, M. Helbling, D. Hoglinger, S. Hutter, & B. Wüest.
2012. Political Conﬂict in Western Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kriesi, H., E. Grande, R. Lachat, M. Dolezal, S. Bornschier, & T. Frey. 2006. ‘Globaliza-
tion and the transformation of the national political space: Six European countries
compared’. European Journal of Political Research. 45 (6): 921–56.
Krook,
M.L.
2010.
‘Studying
political
representation:
A
comparative-gendered
approach’. Perspectives on Politics. 8 (1): 233–40.
Krook, M.L. & D. O’Brien. 2010. ‘The politics of group representation: Quotas for
women and minorities worldwide’. Comparative Politics. 42 (3): 253–72.
Kuipers, G. & M. van den Haak. 2014. ‘De cultuurkloof? Cultuurverschillen en sociale
afstand in Nederland’. In: Gescheiden werelden: Een verkenning van de sociaal-culturele
scheidslijn in Nederland. M. Bovens, P. Dekker & W. Tiemeijer (eds.). Den Haag:
SCP & WRR.
Kwiatkowski, R. 2012. ‘Politicians and power: MPs in the UK parliament’. In: The
Psychology of Politicians. A. Weinberg (eds.). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. 39–58.
Kyvik, S. 2009. The dynamics of change in higher education. Dordrecht: Springer.
Kyvik, S. & B. Lepori. 2010. ‘Research in higher education institutions outside the
university sector’. In: The Research Mission of Higher Education Institutions outside the
University Sector. S. Kyvik & B. Lepori (eds.). Springer Netherlands. 3–21.
Latten, J. 2005. Zwanger van segregatie: Een toekomst van sociale en ruimtelijke segregatie?
Oratie UvA. Amsterdam: Vossiuspers.
Lauder, H., P. Brown, J.A. Dillabough, & A.H. Halsey. 2006. ‘Introduction: The Prospects
for Education: Individualization, Globalization, and Social Change’. In: Education,
Globalization, and Social Change. H. Lauder, P. Brown, J.A. Dillabough, & A.H. Halsey.
(eds.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 1–70.
Lauglo, J. & T. Oia. 2007. Education and Civic Engagement: Review of Research and a Study
on Norwegian Youths. No. 12. Paris: OECD publishing.
LeDuc, L. 2015. ‘Referendums and deliberative democracy’. Electoral Studies. 38:
139–48.
Leschinsky, A. & K.U. Mayer (eds.). 1990. The comprehensive school experiment revisited:
Evidence from Western Europe. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang Verlag.
Lesschaeve, C. 2016. ‘Naar een voorwaardelijk model van ongelijkheid in vertegen-
woordiging: Een onderzoek naar het moderatie-effect van beleidsdomeinen op onge-
lijkheid in beleidscongruentie’. Res Publica. 58 (1): 61–80.
Lewis-Beck, M.S., W.G. Jacoby, H. Norporth, & H.F. Weisberg. 2008. The American Voter
Revisited. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Li, Y. & D. Marsh. 2008. ‘New Forms of Political Participation: Searching for expert
citizens and everyday makers’. British Journal of Political Science. 38: 247–72.
Light, P.C. 1995. Thickening government: Federal hierarchy and the diffusion of account-
ability. Washington DC: The Brookings Institution.
Lijphart, A. 1975. The Politics of Accommodation: Pluralism and Democracy in the Nether-
lands. Berkeley: University of California Press.
References
209

Lijphart, A. 1997. ‘Unequal participation: Democracy's unresolved dilemma. Presiden-
tial address, American Political Science Association, 1996’. American Political Science
Review. 91 (1): 1–14.
Lijphart, A. 1999. Patterns of democracy. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Lindeboom, G. 2012. ‘Public priorities in government’s hands: Corresponding policy
agendas in the Netherlands?’. Acta Politica 47 (4): 443–67.
Lipset, S.M. & S. Rokkan. 1967.‘Cleavage Structures, Party Systems and Voter Align-
ments: an Introduction’. In: Party Systems and Voter Alignments: Cross-National
Perspectives. S.M. Lipset & S. Rokkan (eds.). New York: Free Press.
Lowery, D. & V. Gray. 2015. ‘An introduction to the population ecology approach’.
In:
The
organization
ecology
of
interest
communities:
Assessment
and
agenda.
D. Lowery, D. Halpin, & V. Gray (eds.). Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire:
Palgrave Macmillan. 1–15.
Lupia, A. & R. Johnston. 2001. ‘Are voters to blame? Voter competence and elite
maneuvers in referendums’. In: Referendum democracy: Citizens, elites, and deliberation
in referendum campaigns. M. Mendelsohn & A. Parkin (eds.). Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan. 191–210.
MacMullen, A. 2000. ‘National routes to a European Elite’. In: At the Heart of the Union:
Studies of the European Commission (2nd edition). N. Nugent (eds.). London: Palgrave
Macmillan. 28–50.
Magalhães, P. & B. Ceka. 2014. The meaning of democracy changes for Europeans depending
on their education status, income and national context. London: LSE-Europpblog Avail-
able online at http://bit.ly/1mPoZzo. Accessed 27 August 2014.
Magetti, M. 2010. ‘Legitimacy and Accountability of Independent Regulatory Agencies:
A Critical Review’. Living Reviews in Democracy. 2: 1–9.
Mahoney, C. 2008. Brussels versus the Beltway: Advocacy in the United States and the
European Union. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.
Mair, P. 2013. Ruling the void: The hollowing of Western democracy. London: Verso Books.
Mair, P. & I. van Biezen. 2001. ‘Party membership in twenty European democracies,
1980–2000’. Party politics. 7 (1): 5–21.
Maloney, W.A. 2012. ‘The Democratic Contribution of Professionalized Representa-
tion’. In: New participatory dimensions in civil society: Professionalization and individu-
alized collective action. J.W. van Deth & W.A. Maloney (eds.). London: Routledge.
Maloney, W.A. 2015a. ‘Much ado about something?’. In: Citizenship and Democracy in
an Era of Crisis: Essays in Honour of Jan W. Van Deth. T. Poguntke, S. Rossteutscher,
R. Schmitt-Beck & S. Zmerli (eds.). London: Routledge.
Maloney, W.A. 2015b. ‘Organizational Populations: Professionalization, Maintenance
and Democratic Delivery’. In: The Organization Ecology of Interest Communities:
Assessment and Agenda. D. Lowery, D. Halpin, & V. Gray (eds.). London: Palgrave
Macmillan. 99–116.
Mängel, A. 2010. ‘Hamburger Bildungskampf ’, Blätter für deutsche und international
Politik. 7 (July 2010): 13–16. Available online at https://www.blaetter.de/archiv/
jahrgaenge/2010/juli/hamburger-bildungskampf.
Manin, B. 1997. The principles of representative government. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
References
210

Manning, N. & M. Holmes. 2013. ‘“He's snooty ‘im”: exploring “white working class”
political disengagement’. Citizenship Studies. 17 (3–4): 479–90.
Mansbridge, J. 1980. Beyond Adversary Democracy. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Mansbridge, J. 1999. ‘Should Blacks Represent Blacks and Women Represent Women?
A Contingent “Yes”’. The Journal of Politics. 61: 628–57.
Mansbridge, J. 2011. ‘Clarifying the concept of representation’. American Political
Science Review. 105 (3): 621–30.
Marien, S., M. Hooghe, & E. Quintelier. 2010. ‘Inequalities in Non-institutionalised
Forms of Political Participation: A Multi-level Analysis of 25 countries’. Political
Studies. 58 (1): 187–213.
Marsh, A. & M. Kaase. 1979. ‘Background of political action’. In: Political action: Mass
participation in ﬁve western democracies. S. Barnes & M. Kaase (eds.). Beverly Hills, CA:
Sage Publications. 97–136.
Massey, D. S. 2007. Categorically unequal. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
McGuinness, F. 2010. The social background of MPs, London: House of Commons
Library. SN/SG/1528.
McLaren, L. 2012. ‘The cultural divide in Europe; Migration, multiculturalism, and
political trust’. World Politics. 64 (2): 199–241.
McNamee, S. J. & R. Miller, Jr. 2009. The meritocracy myth. Lanham: Rowman &
Littleﬁeld Publishers.
Mead, L. M. 2013. ‘The Universities: Avatars of Modernity’. Society. 50 (2): 167–75.
Meer, T. van der. 2009. States of freely associating citizens. The Hague: ICS.
Meer, T. van der & A. Hakhverdian. 2016. ‘Political Trust as the Evaluation of Process
and Performance: A Cross-National Study of 42 European Countries’. Political Studies.
First published online: March 29, 2016. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/00323217-
15607514.
Meer, T. van der, W.M. te Grotenhuis, & P.L.H. Scheepers. 2009. ‘Three Types of
Voluntary Associations in Comparative Perspective: The Importance of Studying
Associational Involvement through a Typology of Associations in 21 European
Countries’. Journal of Civil Society. 5 (3): 227–41.
Meer, T. van der & E. van Ingen. 2009. ‘Schools of democracy? Disentangling the
relationship between civic participation and political action in 17 European coun-
tries’. European Journal of Political Research. 40 (2): 281–308.
Meijer, A., R. van der Veer, A. Faber, & J. Penning de Vries. 2017. ‘Political innovation as
ideal and strategy: the case of aleatoric democracy in the City of Utrecht’. Public
Management Review. 19 (1): 20-36. Doi:10.1080/14719037.2016.1200666.
Mendelsohn, M. & A. Parkin. 2001. Referendum Democracy: Citizens, Elites and
Deliberation in Referendum Campaigns. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Merolla, J. L., A.H. Sellers, & D.J. Fowler. 2013. ‘Descriptive representation, political
efﬁcacy, and African Americans in the 2008 presidential election’. Political Psychology.
34 (6): 863–75.
Michon, L. 2013. ‘Hoe om te gaan met quota in de politiek en intersectionaliteit’. Res
Publica. 55 (3): 377–88.
Mijs, J. J. 2015. ‘The Unfulﬁllable Promise of Meritocracy: Three Lessons and Their
Implications for Justice in Education’. Social Justice Research, 29 (1):14–34.
References
211

Milbrath, L. 1965. Political Participation: How and Why do People Get Involved in Politics?
Chicago: Rand McNally.
Miller, D. 1996. ‘Two Cheers for Meritocracy’. The Journal of Political Philosophy. 4 (4):
277–301.
Miller, W.E. & D.E. Stokes. 1963. ‘Constituency inﬂuence in Congress’. American
Political Science Review. 57 (1): 45–56.
Morales, L. 2009. Joining political organizations: institutions, mobilisation and participation
in western democracies. Colchester: ECPR Press.
Mudde, C. & C.R. Kaltwasser. 2012. Populism in Europe and the Americas: Threat or
corrective for democracy? Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Murray, Ch. 2012. Coming Apart: The State of White America, 1960–2010, New York: Crown.
Mutz, D.C. 2006. Hearing the other side: Deliberative versus participatory democracy.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Narud, H.M. 2003. ‘Norway: Professionalization – Party-oriented and Constituency-
based’. In: The political class in Advanced Democracies: A comparative handbook.
J. Borchert & J. Zeiss (eds.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 298–319.
National Council of Voluntary Organizations. 2016. UK Civil Society Almanak 2016.
Available online at https://data.ncvo.org.uk/. Accessed 1 May 2016.
Nie, N.H., J. Junn, & K. Stehlik-Barry. 1996. Education and democratic citizenship in
America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Norris, P. 1997. ‘Conclusions: comparing passages to power’. In: Passage to Power:
Legislative
Recruitment
in
Advanced
Democracies.
P.
Norris
(eds.).
Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. 209–31.
Norris, P. (eds.). 1999. Critical Citizens: Global Support for Democratic Governance. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Norris,
P.
2002.
Democratic
phoenix:
Reinventing
political
activism.
Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Norris, P. 2011. Democratic Deﬁcit: Critical Citizens Revisited. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Norris, P. & J. Lovenduski. 1997. ‘United Kingdom’. In: Passage to Power: Legislative
Recruitment in Advanced Democracies. P. Norris (eds.). Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press. 158–86.
Nye, J.S., P.D. Zelikow, & D.C. King (eds). 1997. Why people don’t trust government.
Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
OECD. 2010. Economic Policy Reforms: Going for Growth 2010. Available online at http://
www.oecd.org/eco/growth/economicpolicyreformsgoingforgrowth2010.htm. Accessed
20 March 2015.
Olcese, C., C. Saunders, & N. Tzavidis. 2014. ‘In the streets with a degree: How political
generations, educational attainment and student status affect engagement in protest
politics’. International Sociology. 29 (6): 525–45.
Osborne, M. 2003. ‘Increasing or Widening Participation in Higher Education?
A European overview’. European Journal of Education. 38 (1): 5–24.
Oser, J., M. Hooghe, & S. Marien. 2013. ‘Is Online Participation Distinct from Ofﬂine
Participation? A Latent Class Analysis of Participation Types and Their Stratiﬁcation’.
Political Research Quarterly. 66 (1): 91–101.
References
212

Papadopoulos, Y. 2005. ‘Implementing (and Radicalizing) Art. 1-47.4 of the Constitution: Is
the Addition of Some (Semi-) Direct Democracy to the Nascent Consociational European
Federation Just Swiss Folklore?’. Journal of European Public Policy. 12 (3): 448–67.
Papadopoulos, Y. 2010. ‘Accountability and multi-level governance: more accountabil-
ity, less democracy?’. West European Politics. 33 (5): 1030–49.
Parsons, T. 1971. The System of Modern Societies. Englewood-Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
Pattie, C. 2016. Shefﬁeld: what happened in this city explains why Britain voted for Brexit.
Available online at http://theconversation.com/shefﬁeld-what-happened-in-this-
city-explains-why-britain-voted-for-brexit-61623.
Pelgrims, C. & M. Brans. 2006. An institutional perspective on personal advisors in
Belgium. Political actors and the failure to change an institution during a critical
juncture. Paper presented at the 14th NISPAcce Annual Conference, 11–13 May
2006, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
Pellikaan, H., S.L. de Lange, & T. van der Meer. 2007. ‘Fortuyn’s legacy: Party system
change in the Netherlands’. Comparative European Politics. 5 (3): 282–302.
Persson, M. 2014a. ‘Social Network Position Mediates the Effect of Education on Active
Political Party Membership’. Party Politics. 20 (5): 724–39.
Persson, M. 2014b. ‘Testing the Relationship Between Education and Political Partici-
pation using the 1970 British Cohort Study’. Political Behavior. 36 (4): 877–97.
Persson, M. 2015. ‘Education and Political Participation’. British Journal of Political
Science. 45 (3): 689–703.
Pew Research Center. 2015. Beyond Distrust: How Americans View Their Government.
Washington: Pew Research Center.
Pharr, S. & R.D. Putnam (eds.). 2000. Disaffected Democracies: What is Troubling the
Trilateral Countries?. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Philips, A. 1995. The Politics of Presence, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Philips, A. 2012. ‘Representation and inclusion’. Politics & Gender. 8 (4): 512–18.
Pierre, J. & B.G. Peters. 2005. Governing Complex Societies: Trajectories and Scenarios. New
York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Piewitt, M., M. Rodekamp, & J. Steffek. 2010. ‘Civil Society in World Politics: How
Accountable are Transnational CSO’s?’. Journal of Civil Society. 6 (3): 237–58.
Pitkin, H.F. 1967. The Concept of Representation. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Powell, G.B. 2004. ‘Political Representation in Comparative Politics’. Annual Review of.
Political Science. 7: 273–96.
Prior, M. 2007. Post-broadcast democracy: How media choice increases inequality in political
involvement and polarizes elections. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Put, G.J. & B. Maddens. 2013. ‘The Selection of Candidates for Eligible Positions on PR
Lists: The Belgian/Flemish Federal Elections 1999–2010’. Journal of Elections, Public
Opinion and Parties. 23 (1): 49–65.
Putnam, R. (eds.). 2002. Democracies in Flux: The Evolution of Social Capital in Contem-
porary Society. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Putnam, R.D. 1995. ‘Tuning In, Tuning Out: The Strange Disappearance of Social
Capital in America’. Political Science and Politics. 27 (4): 664–7.
Putnam, R.D. 2000. Bowling Alone: The collapse and revival of American community. New
York: Simon and Schuster.
References
213

Putnam, R.D. 2015. Our Kids: The American Dream in Crisis. New York: Simon and
Schuster.
Quintelier, E., M. Hooghe, & S. Marien. 2011. ‘The Effect of Compulsory Voting on
Turnout Stratiﬁcation Patterns: A Cross-National Analysis’. International Political Sci-
ence Review. 32: 396–416.
Rahat, G. & R.Y. Hazan. 2007. ‘Political Participation in Party Primaries: Increase in
Quantity, Decrease in Quality?’. In: Participatory Democracy and Political Participation:
Can Participatory Engineering Bring Citizens Back In? T. Zittel & D. Fuchs. London:
Routledge. 57–72.
Reich, R. 1991. The Work of Nations: Preparing Ourselves for 21st-Century Capitalism.
London: Simon and Schuster.
Reif, K. & H. Schmitt. 1997. ‘Second-order elections’. European Journal of Political
Research. 31 (1–2): 109–24.
Reybrouck, D. van. 2008. Pleidooi voor populisme. Amsterdam/Antwerpen: Querido.
Reybrouck, D. van. 2013. Tegen verkiezingen. Amsterdam: Bezige Bij.
Ridder, J. den. 2014. Schakels of obstakels? Nederlandse politieke partijen en de eensgezind-
heid, verdeeldheid en representativiteit van partijleden. Leiden: Leiden University.
Ridder, J. den, I. Glas, & P. Dekker. 2014. ‘Een globaliseringsscheidslijn?’. In: Gescheiden
werelden?: Een verkenning van sociaal-culturele tegenstellingen in Nederland. M. Bovens,
P. Dekker & W.L. Tiemeijer (eds.). Den Haag: SCP & WRR. 131–64.
Riele, S. te, R. Kloosterman & A. de Graaf. 2012. Ontwikkelingen in opleidingshomogamie.
Den Haag: CBS.
Rodekamp, M. 2013. Their members’ voice: Civil society organizations in the European
Union. Wiesbaden: Springer Science & Business Media.
Rolfe, M. 2012. Voter turnout: A social theory of political participation. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Römmele, A. & H. Schober. 2010. Warum die Primarschule in Hamburg gescheitert ist.Available
online
at
http://blog.zeit.de/zweitstimme/2010/07/19/warum-die-primarschule-in-
hamburg-gescheitert-ist.
Rootes, C. 1995. ‘Environmental consciousness, institutional structures and political
competitions in the formation and development of Green parties’. In: The Green
Challenge: The development of green parties in Europe. D. Richardson & C. Rootes
(eds.). London: Routledge. 170–84.
Rosanvallon, P. & A. Goldhammer. 2008. Counter-democracy: Politics in an age of distrust.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rosenstone, S. & J. Hansen. 1993. Mobilization, participation, and American democracy.
New York: McMillan.
Rush, M. 2007. ‘The Decline of the Nobility’. In: Democratic Representation in Europe:
Diversity, Change and Convergence. M. Cotta & H. Best (eds.). Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press. 30–50.
Salamon, L. M. 2010. ‘Putting the civil society sector on the economic map of the
world’. Annals of Public and Cooperative Economics. 81 (2): 167–210.
Salamon, L. M., H.K. Anheier, R. List, S. Toepler & S.W. Sokolowski. 1999. Global Civil
Society: Dimensions of the Nonproﬁt Sector. Baltimore: Center for Civil Society Studies.
References
214

Salvati, E. 2016. ‘Towards a European Parliamentary Class? A Proposal for a Typology of
the MEPS’. Journal of Comparative Politics. 9 (1): 59–74.
Sanders, L. 1997. ‘Against Deliberation’. Political Theory. 25 (3): 347–76.
Saurugger, S. 2007. ‘Democratic “Misﬁt”? Conceptions of Civil Society Participation in
France and the EU’. Political Studies. 55 (2): 384–404.
Saurugger, S. 2009. ‘Analyzing Civil Society Organizations’ Changing Structures in the
EU. Lessons from the social movement and party politics literature’. ECPR Joint
Sessions, 15–19 April 2009, Workshop 5 (Professionalization and Individualized
Collective Action: Analysing New ‘Participatory’ Dimensions in Civil Society),
Lisbon, Portugal.
Saurugger, S. 2012. ‘The Professionalization of EU’s Civil Society. A conceptual frame-
work’. In: New Participatory Dimensions in Civil Society: Professionalization and Individu-
alized Collective Action. J. van Deth & W. Maloney (eds). London: Routledge. 69–83.
Scarrow, S. 2014. Beyond party members: Changing approaches to partisan mobilization.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Scarrow, S. & B. Gezgor. 2010. 'Declining memberships, changing members? European
political party members in a new era'. Party Politics. 16 (6): 823–43.
Scervini, F. & P. Segatti. 2012. ‘Education, inequality and electoral participation’.
Research in Social Stratiﬁcation and Mobility. 30 (4): 403–13.
Schäfer, A. 2011. ‘Republican Liberty and Compulsory Voting’. MPIfG Discussion Paper
No. 11/17. Cologne: Max Planck Institute for the Study of Societies. Available online
at http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2018112. Accessed 29 July 2016.
Schäfer, A. & W. Streeck. 2013. ‘Introduction: Politics in the Age of Austerity’. In Politics
in the Age of Austerity. A. Schäfer & W. Streeck (eds.). Cambridge: Polity Press.
Schakel, W. & A. Hakhverdian. 2015. Unequal Representation in the Netherlands. unpub-
lished manuscript. University of Amsterdam.
Scharfenkamp, K. 2013. ‘Which Qualiﬁcations Does a Minister of the German Federal
Government Need to be Reoccupied?’. CIW-Discussion Paper. No 2. University of
Münster.
Schattschneider, E.E. 1960. The Semi-sovereign People: A Realist’s View of Democracy in
America. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Scheuch, E.K. 2003. ‘The Structure of the German Elites across Regime Changes’.
Comparative Sociology. 2 (1): 91–133.
Schlozman, K.L., P.E. Jones, H.Y. You, T. Burch, S. Verba, & H.E. Brady. 2015. ‘Organ-
izations and the Democratic Representation of Interests: What Does It Mean When
Those Organizations Have No Members?’. Perspectives on Politics. 13 (04): 1017–29.
Schlozman, K.L., S. Verba, & H.E. Brady. 2012. The Unheavenly Chorus: Unequal political
voice and the broken promise of American democracy. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Schmeets, J. J. G. 2008. ‘Respons, selectiviteit en vertekening’. In: Het Nationaal Kiezer-
sonderzoek 2006. Opzet, uitvoering en resultaten. J. J. G. Schmeets & R.V.D. Bie (eds.).
Den Haag/Heerlen: CBS.35–42.
Schmitt, H. & J.J.A. Thomassen. 1999. Political representation and legitimacy in the
European Union. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
References
215

Schneider, S.L. 2010. ‘Nominal comparability is not enough:(In-) Equivalence of
construct validity of cross-national measures of educational attainment in the Euro-
pean Social Survey’. Research in Social Stratiﬁcation and Mobility. 28 (3): 343–57.
Schröder, H., & H.B. Ganzeboom. 2014. ‘Measuring and Modelling Level of Education
in European Societies’. European Sociological Review. 40 (1): 119–36.
Schuck, A. & C. de Vreese. 2015. ‘Public support for referendums in Europe: A cross-
national comparison in 21countries’. Electoral Studies. 38: 149–58.
Schudson, M. 1998. The Good Citizen: A History of American Civic Life. New York: Free Press.
Schumpeter, J.R. 2011 [1942]. Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, 2nd ed. New York:
Harper Colophon Books.
Secker, I. 2000. ‘Representatives of the Dutch People: The Smooth Transformation of
the Parliamentary Elite in a Consociational Democracy 1849-1998’. In: Parliamentary
Representation in Europe 1848–2000. H. Best & M. Cotta (eds.). Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Secker, W.P. 1991. Ministers in beeld: De sociale herkomst van de Nederlandse ministers
(1848–1990). Leiden: DSWO Press.
Seyd, B. 2016. ‘Exploring political disappointment’. Parliamentary Affairs. 69: 327–47.
Seyd, P. & P. Whiteley. 2004. ‘British party members an overview’. Party Politics 10 (4):
355–66.
Silver, B.D., B.A. Anderson, & P.R. Abramson. 1986. ‘Who Overreports Voting?’.
American Political Science Review. 80 (2): 613–24.
Simon, B. 2011. ‘Not going to Starbucks: Boycotts and the out-scouring of politics in the
branded world’. Journal of Consumer Culture. 11 (2): 145–67.
Skocpol, T. 2002. ‘United States: From Membership to Advocacy’. In: Democracies in
Flux: The Evolution of Social Capital in Contemporary Society. R.D. Putnam (eds.).
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 103–36.
Skocpol, T. 2003. Diminished Democracy: From Membership to Management in American
Civic Life. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
Skocpol, T. 2004. ‘Voice and Inequality: The Transformation of American Civic
Democracy’. Perspectives on Politics. 2 (1): 3–20.
Slaughter, A.S. 2004. A New World Order. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Smets, K. & C. van Ham. 2013. ‘The embarrassment of riches? A meta-analysis of
individual-level research on voter turnout’. Electoral Studies. 32 (2): 344–59.
Social Mobility and Child Poverty Commission (2014). Elitist Britain? London,
28 August 2014.
Soroka, S.N. & C. Wlezien. 2010. Degrees of Democracy: Politics, public opinion, and policy.
Cambridge University Press.
Spier, T. & M. Klein. 2015. ‘Party membership in Germany: rather formal, therefore uncool?’.
In: Party members and activists. E. van Haute & A. Gauja (eds.). London: Routledge. 84–99.
Spruyt, B. 2012a. Living apart together? Over de gevolgen van onderwijsverschillen in de
symbolische samenleving. PhD-thesis Vrije Universiteit Brussels.
Spruyt, B. 2014. ‘An asymmetric group relation? An investigation into public perceptions
of education-based groups and the support for populism’. Acta Politica. 49 (2): 123–43.
References
216

Spruyt, B., G. Keppens, & F. Van Droogenbroeck. 2016. ‘Who Supports Populism and
What Attracts People to It?’. Political Research Quarterly. 69 (2). Doi: 10.1177/
1065912916639138.
Stimson, J. A., M.B. MacKuen, & R.S. Erikson. 1995. ‘Dynamic representation’. American
Political Science Review. 89 (3): 543–65.
Stoker, G. & C. Hay. 2016. ‘Understanding and Challenging Populist Negativity
towards Politics: The Perspectives of British Citizens’. Political Studies. First published:
22 February 2016. Doi: 10.1177/0032321715607511.
Stokkom, B. van. 2003. ‘Deliberatie zonder democratie? Ongelijkheid en gezag in
interactieve beleidsvorming’. Beleid & Maatschappij. 30 (3): 153–65.
Stolle, D. & M. Hooghe. 2011. ‘Shifting inequalities: patterns of exclusion and inclu-
sion in emerging forms of participation’. European Societies. 13: 119–42.
Stolle, D., M. Hooghe, & M. Micheletti. 2005. ‘Politics in the super-market: a three
nation pilot survey on political consumerism as a form of political participation’.
International Review of Political Science. 26: 245–69.
Stubager, R. 2010. ‘The Development of the Educational Cleavage: Denmark as a
Critical Case’. West European Politics. 33 (3): 505–33.
Study on Volunteering in the European Union. 2010. Country Report United Kingdom.
http://ec.europa.eu/citizenship/pdf/national_report_uk_en.pdf.
Sunstein, C.R. 2009. Going to Extremes: How like minds unite and divide. Oxford University
Press.
Sutherland, K. 2008. A People’s Parliament: A (Revised) Blueprint for a very English Revolu-
tion. Exeter: Imprint Academic.
Sutton Trust. 2008. Social Selectivity of State Schools and the Impact of Grammars:
A Summary and Discussion of Findings from Evidence on the Effects of Selective Educational
Systems. Available online at http://www.suttontrust.com/wp-content/uploads/2008/
10/GrammarsReviewSummary.pdf. Accessed 19 March 2015.
Sutton Trust. 2015. Parliamentary Privilege—The MPs 2015. Research Brief, Edition 4
(May 2015).
Teichler, U. 2004. ‘Changing Structures of the Higher Education Systems: the increas-
ing complexity of underlying forces’. In: Diversiﬁcation of Higher Education and the
Changing Role of Knowledge and Research. UNESCO Forum Occasional Paper Series,
Paper No. 6. Paris: UNESCO. 2–15.
Tenn, S. 2005. ‘An alternative measure of relative education to explain voter turnout’.
Journal of Politics. 67 (1): 271–82.
Teorell, J., P. Sum, & M. Tobiasen. 2007. ‘Participation and political equality: an assess-
ment of large-scale democracy’. In: Citizenship and involvement in European democracies:
A comparative analysis. J.W. van Deth, J.R. Montero, & A. Westholm (eds.). London:
Routledge. 384–414.
Thiebault, J-L. 1991. ‘The Social Background of Western European Cabinet Ministers’.
In: The Profession of Government Minister in Western Europe. J. Blondel, & J-L. Thiébault
(eds.). London: Macmillan. 19–30.
Tilly, C. 1999. Durable Inequality. Berkeley: University of California Press.
References
217

Torney-Purta, J., R. Lehman, H. Oswald, & W. Schultz. 2001. Citizenship and Education in
Twenty-Eight Countries: Civic Knowledge and Engagement at Aged Fourteen. Amsterdam: The
International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement.
Trechsel, A.H., & H. Kriesi. 1996. ‘Switzerland: the referendum and initiative as a
enterpiece of the political system’. In: The referendum experience in Europe.
M. Gallagher & P.V. Uleri (eds.). London: Palgrave Macmillan. 185–208.
Treiman, D. J., H. B. Ganzeboom, & S. Rijken. 2003. Educational expansion and educational
achievement in comparative perspective. Los Angeles: California Center for Population
Research.
Tremblay, K., D. Lalancette, & D. Roseveare. 2012. ‘Assessment of Higher Education
Learning Outcomes Feasibility Study Report’. Feasibility study report. Vol. 1. Paris:
OECD publishing.
Trow, M. 1974. ‘Problems in the transition from elite to mass higher education’. In:
Policies for Higher Education, OECD (ed.). Paris: OECD. 55–101.
Trow, M. 2005. Reﬂections on the Transition from Elite to Mass to Universal Access:
Forms and Phases of Higher Education in Modern Societies since WWII. In: Inter-
national Handbook of Higher Education Ph. Altbach (ed.). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Turner, B.S. 1993. ‘Talcott Parsons, Universalism and the Educational Revolution:
Democracy versus Professionalism’. The British Journal of Sociology. 44 (1): 1–24.
UNESCO. 2012. International Standard Classiﬁcation of Education (ISCED 2011).
Montreal: UNESCO Institute for Statistics.
Veen, A. van. 2014. Regulation without Representation? Independent Regulatory Authorities
and Representative Claim-Making in the Netherlands. PhD thesis. Utrecht University.
Verba, S. & N.H. Nie. 1972. Participation in America: Political Democracy and Social
Equality. New York: Harper and Row.
Verba, S., N.H. Nie, & J-O. Kim. 1978. Participation and Political Equality: A Seven-Nation
Comparison. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Verba, S., K.L. Schlozman, & H.E. Brady. 1995. Voice and Equality: Civic Voluntarism in
American Politics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Verleden, F. 2014. ‘Het volk en zijn vertegenwoordigers’. Samenleving en Politiek. 21 (4):
60–7.
Verleden, F. & C. Heyneman, Databank Belgische Parlementsleden sinds 1830. Leuven:
Centrum voor Politicologie KU Leuven.
Vibert, F. 2007. The Rise of the Unelected: Democracy and the New Separation of Powers.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Voogd, J. De. 2011. Bakﬁetsen en rolluiken: De electorale geograﬁe van Nederland, Utrecht:
Bureau de Helling.
Vries, R. De. 2009. Opleiding en stedelijkheid 1998–2008. Den Haag: CBS.
Waal, J. Van der, P. Achterberg, & D. Houtman. 2007. ‘Class Is Not Dead–It Has Been
Buried Alive: Class Voting and Cultural Voting in Postwar Western Societies
(1956–1990)’. Politics and Society. 35 (3): 403–26.
Waal. J. Van der & W. De Koster. 2015. ‘Why do the less educated oppose trade
openness? A test of three explanations in the Netherlands’. European Journal of
Cultural and Political Sociology. 2 (3–4): 313–44.
References
218

Walker, E.T. 2014. Grassroots for hire: Public affairs consultants in American democracy.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Walker, E.T., J.D. McCarthy, & F. Baumgartner. 2011. ‘Replacing Members with Man-
agers? Mutualism among Membership and Non-membership Advocacy Organiza-
tions in the United States’. American Journal of Sociology. 116 (4): 1284–337.
Walter, F. & S. Rosenberger. 2007. Skilled Voices. Reﬂections on Political Participation and
Education in Austria. No. 11. Paris: OECD publishing.
Walzer, M. 1983. Spheres of Justice. New York: Basic Books.
Weber, M. 1919. Politik als Beruf. Berlin: Duncker and Humblot.
Werfhorst, H.G. & N.D. de Graaf. 2004. ‘The sources of political orientation in post-
industrial society: social class and education revisited’. The British Journal of Sociology.
55 (2): 211–35.
Wessel, M. van. 2014. ‘The communicative constitution of representation and exclu-
sion’. Citizenship Studies. 18 (6–7): 758–75.
Wessels, B. 1997. ‘Germany’. In: Passage to Power: Legislative Recruitment in advanced
democracies. P. Norris (eds.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 76–97.
Whelan, C. & R. Layte. 2004. ‘Economic change, social mobility and meritocracy:
Reﬂections on the Irish experience’. Quarterly Economic Commentary. Dublin:
ESRI. 1–20.
Whiteley, P.F. 2011. ‘Is the party over? The decline of party activism and membership
across the democratic world’. Party Politics. 17 (1): 21–44.
Whiteley, P. 2014. ‘Does Citizenship Education Work? Evidence from a Decade of
Citizenship Education in Secondary Schools in England’. Parliamentary Affairs. 67:
513–35.
Wilkinson, R. & K. Pickett. 2010. The Spirit Level: Why Equality is Better for Everyone.
London: Penguin books.
Wille, A. 1994. The Accidental Activist: Potential Political Participation in the Netherlands.
Amsterdam: University of Amsterdam.
Wille, A. 2001. ‘Politieke participatie en representativiteit in het interactieve beleid-
sproces’. In: Lokale interactieve beleidsvorming: Een vergelijkend onderzoek naar de con-
sequenties van interactieve beleidsvorming voor het functioneren van de lokale democratie.
J. Edelenbos & R. Monnikhof (eds.). Utrecht: Lemma. 87–115.
Wille, A. 2011. Democratische drempels: de moeizame relatie tussen participatie en democra-
tie. In: Democratie doorgelicht: Het functioneren van de Nederlandse democratie.
R. Andeweg & J. Thomassen (eds.). Leiden: Leiden University Press. 103–18.
Wille, A. 2013. The Normalization of the European Commission: Politics and Bureaucracy in
the EU Executive. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wirth, H. 2000. Bildung, Klassenlage und Partnerwahl: Eine empirische Analyse zum
Wandel der bildungs- und klassenspeziﬁschen Heiratsmuster. Opladen: Leske + Budrich.
Wittebrood, K. 1995. Politieke Socialisatie in Nederland: Een onderzoek naar de verwerving
en ontwikkeling van politieke houdingen van HAVO en VWO-leerlingen. Amsterdam:
Thesis Publishers.
Woodhall, M. 2001. ‘Financing higher education: The potential contribution of fees
and student loans’. International Higher Education. 22 (8).
References
219

Wright, E.O. 1985. Classes. London: Verso.
Young, M. 1958/1994. The Rise of the Meritocracy. With a new introduction by the author.
New Brunswick: Transaction.
Zald, M. N. & J.D. McCarthy. (eds.). 1987. Social movements in an organizational society:
collected essays. New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers.
Zittel, T. 2007. ‘Can participatory engineering bring citizens back in?’. In: Participatory
Democracy and Political Participation. T. Zittel & D. Fuchs (eds.). London: Routledge/
ECPR. 223–8.
References
220

Index
Aaldering, Loes 151, 166
absolute deﬁcits, descriptive gap 140–2
accidental activists see incidental participants
accountability 31–2
consequences of diploma democracy 154–5
and legitimacy 33
and voter turnout 72
achievement vs ascription 124, 134
Achterberg, Peter 55
Adriaenssens, Stef 140–1
AfD 53, 54, 166
afﬁrmative action 29, 177–8
age cleavage 42
aggregation, political 36, 37–8
Aigner, Ilse 120
Allardt, E. 19
Allen, Nicholas 143, 154–5
Allen, Peter 129
Almond, G. A. 86
Amnesty International 97
Andeweg, Rudy 150, 163n9
Apple 73
Argentina 143
aristocracy 112
Armingeon, Klaus 70
ascription vs achievement 124, 134
astroturf participation 104
Athenian democracy 1, 26, 168, 179, 181
attitudinal differences 48–52, 57
audience democracy 88n3
Australia 22
Austria 60
cleavage 40, 57
Green and libertarian parties 55
nationalism 53, 54
political participation 90n27
Ayrault, Jean-Marc 119
badge wearing 72, 73, 80
Balkenende, Jan Peter 132
ballots see voting
Barber, Benjamin 76
Barro, Robert 15–16
Bartolino, Stephano 43, 44, 48
Beauvallet-Haddad, Willy 129
Behr, Valentin 119
Belgium 6, 60
civil society
context 94
participation 98–9, 100, 101, 102
cleavage 40–1
educational 41, 57
linguistic 42
consequences of diploma democracy
legitimacy 157, 158, 159, 160
representation 140–1
responsiveness 147, 149, 150, 151, 153
Di Rupo cabinet 3, 5, 119, 124
educational attainment 24, 46
educational homogamy 48
education level of MPs 1–2
Green and libertarian parties 54, 55
nationalism 53, 54
NMBS 11
political elites 113
emergence of meritocracy 128–9
executive branch 118, 119
legislative branch 114
political participation 66
concentration of activity 80, 83–4
conventional participation outside
elections 72, 73
in deliberative settings 77
internet activism 76
political party membership 78, 79, 80
protest participation outside
elections 74, 75
spectator politics 68, 69
voting 70, 71, 89nn5, 7
religious/secular divide 24
remedying diploma democracy
participation 171
populist parties, rise of 166–7
trends in educational attainment 23
Verhofstad-II cabinet 11
Bell, Daniel 12, 18, 112
Benn, Tony 128
Bennett, W. L. 35

Berinsky, A. 146
Besley, Tim 132
Birch, Sarah 143, 154–5, 176
Blair, Tony 111, 120, 146
Blumler, J. G. 36
Bornschier, S. 42
Bourdieu, Pierre 20, 21
boycotts 72–3, 74, 75
participatory inequalities 80, 81
Brady, H. E. 74
Brants, K. 35
Brazil 144
Brexit referendum/campaign 164–5, 166,
167, 174
grassroots–astroturf continuum 110n26
British National Party 59
broadcast media
participatory revolution 33
political preference formation 35, 36
spectator politics 68, 69
Brody, Richard 70
Brons, Claartje 155
Brown, Gordon 111, 121, 128
Buchstein, Hubertus 179
Bulgaria 24
Bündnis 90 (Germany) 55
Burke, Edmund 30, 144
businessiﬁcation of civil society
organizations 103
buycotts 72
Byatt, Dominic vi
cadre parties 133
Cameron, David 121, 128, 129, 135n5
Campbell, Rosie 143, 144
Canada
British Columbia Citizen’s Assembly 171, 174
deliberative polling 171
meritocracy vs democracy 161
Carman, Christopher 15
Carnes, Nicholas
political elites 133, 177
representation 143, 144
cartel parties 125, 133
catch-all parties 125
cause groups, membership of 100–3
CD&V 79
CDA 79
CDU 78, 79
Ceka, Besir 153
central banks 145
charitable sector see civil society
Chile 73
Christiansen, Peter 141
churches, membership of 99, 100
citizenship 33
citizens’ juries 171–2
civic education, intensifying 169–70
civic skills 85
civil society
context 94–7
decoupled representation 145
EU nerds, rise of the 91–2
increasing size and complexity 125–6
meaning 92–3
opening and closing of 108–9
organizations 92–3
accountability 154
classiﬁcation 92–3
professionalization 103–7, 109
remedying diploma democracy 170
from total to token participation 103–5
as ‘wonder babies’ of democracy 92
participation 97–103
transformation 103–7
class see social class
cleavage
attitudinal differences 48–52
educational 40–2, 160
political participation 85
educational groups as social groups 45–8
elements 43
formation, and rise of political
meritocracy 59–60
formation, stages of 43–5
Europe 56–9
institutional differences 52–6
levels 43
meaning 42
restructuration 42–3
as social and political concept 42–5
Clegg, Nick 129
Cleisthenes 1, 179
Coffé, Hilde 153
Collins, Randall 20–1
communication professionals 107
communication skills 132–3
community organization 72, 80
Comparative Nonproﬁt Sector Project 94
compulsory education 14, 25n6
compulsory voting 70, 175–6
consequences of diploma democracy
accountability 154–5
importance 139–40
legitimacy 155–61
representation 140–6
responsiveness 146–54
tension between meritocracy and
democracy 161–2
Conservative Party (UK)
Johnson 167
ministers 120–1
MPs 116–17
recruitment of political elites 126, 128
Index
222

contacting an elected ofﬁcial 72, 80, 81
Converse, Philip 86
corrective referendums 174–5
cosmopolitans 2, 56–7
activists 148–50
vs nationalists 51–2
consequences of diploma
democracy 146–8, 149
trust 158–9
counter-democracy 88n3
Cowley, Philip 143, 144
credential inﬂation 20–1
Crick, Bernard 170
Croatia 24, 46
CSU 78, 79
CU 79
Czech Republic
cosmopolitans vs nationalists 51, 52
educational attainment 24, 46
income distribution 46
D66 see Democrats 66
Dahl, Robert 5, 38
Dalton, R. 33
Damhuis, Koen v
Dansk Folkeparti (Danish People’s Party) 53,
54, 166
decoupled representation 144–6
Deegan-Krause, Kevin 43, 44
Dekker, Paul v
delegate model of representation 29–30,
151–2
deliberative democracy
government by the people 27
participatory revolution 34
deliberative polling 171
deliberative settings, participation in 76–7
democracy
elements of 27–33
government by vs for the people 26–7
new closures 36–8
new opportunities 34–6
participatory revolution 33–4
rise of the well-educated 38
democratic deﬁcits, descriptive gap 142–33
democratization
of diplomas 168–9
political elites 133–5
Democrats 66 (D66) 54, 55
educational cleavage 41
party membership 79, 80
demography 45–6
demonstrations 72, 73–4, 75
participatory inequalities 80, 81
participatory revolution 33
Denmark 6, 60
civil society 98–9, 100, 101, 102
consequences of diploma democracy
legitimacy 157, 158, 159
representation 141
responsiveness 147, 148, 149, 153
educational attainment 24
educational cleavage 41, 57
educational homogamy 48
education level 2
of MPs 1–2
Green and libertarian parties 55
intergenerational social mobility 22
Knowledge Economy Index 61n14
nationalism 53, 54
political elites 113
executive branch 118, 119
legislative branch 114, 115
political participation 66
concentration of activity 80, 83–4
conventional participation outside
elections 72, 73
in deliberative settings 77
internet activism 76
political party membership 78
protest participation outside
elections 74, 75
spectator politics 68, 69
voting 70, 71, 89nn5, 7
remedying diploma democracy
inclusive political elites 177
participation 171
populist parties, rise of 166
Descoings, Richard 12, 22
descriptive representation 140–6
remedying diploma democracy 177–9
Deth, J. W. van 88n2
diploma democracy, meaning of 5
diplomas
democratization of 168–9
educational revolution as a critical
juncture 18–19
educational stratiﬁcation 13–15
expansion of educational system 15–18
meritocracy 11–15
new closures and diminishing returns 20–3
new openings and emerging social
opportunities 19–20
rise of the well-educated in society 23–5
as screening devices 11, 20–1
direct democracy see deliberative democracy
Di Rupo, Elio 3, 5, 119, 124
disaffection 155–8
distrust
descriptive representation 178
and disaffection 155–8
new political divide 158–9
Do-It-Yourself (DIY) politics 73
Dolezal, M. 54
Index
223

donations
civil society organizations 103–4, 108
participatory inequalities 81
Dovi, S. 28
Droogenbroeck, Michael van 140–1
Dudzin´ska, Agnieszka 152
Durose, Catherine v, 126, 127, 129, 131
dynamic representation 31
earnings see income distribution
Ecolo 54, 55, 79, 80
educational attainment
and homogamy 47–8
increase in 15–16
left–right placement 49, 50
network centrality 131
trends 23–5, 45–6
educational groups as social groups 45–8
educational homogamy 47–8, 56, 57,
58, 160
educational inﬂation 130–1, 168
educational revolution 86
cleavages 45–6
as critical juncture 18–19, 161
as engine of social mobility 19–20
and participatory revolution, connection
between 38
protest politics 53
educational segments 45–6
educational stratiﬁcation 11, 13–15, 21
educational system, expansion of 15–18
EELV 55
Elchardus, Mark 160
electoral systems 59
evolution 68
simpliﬁcation 176
and voter turnout 71
elites
new 21–2
political see political elites
environmentally friendly products 73
essentialism 178
Estonia 24, 48
ethnicity
cleavage 42
cosmopolitans vs nationalists 146–7
representation 29, 177–9
Euriat, Michel 22
euro 148
Euro-academics 164–5, 181–2
European Commission
Interactive Policy Making (IPM) 89n17
political elites 113, 121
Transparency Register 96
Europeanization process 24
European Parliament (EP)
political elites 113
emergence of meritocracy 129–30
legislative branch 117–18
proportional representation 59
sortition 179
Transparency Register 96
trust in 159
European uniﬁcation
attitudinal differences 49–51, 52,
53, 58
cosmopolitans vs nationalists 147–8, 149
distrust and the new political
divide 158–9
European Union (EU) 6
civil society
context 94, 96, 97
opening and closing of 109
participation 98
professionalization 105–6, 107
transformation 104
deliberative polling 171
education level and lifestyle 2, 3
Euro-academics, opposition to 164–5
intergenerational social mobility 23
nerds, rise of the 91–2
political elites 113, 121
public sector, changes in 125
referendums 164–5, 174, 181
see also Brexit referendum/campaign
rise of unelected professionals 145
sortition 179
Tomorrow’s Europe 89n17
trends in educational
attainment 24, 45–6
Euroscepticism 148, 149
Evers, A. 108
exclusion bias 146
expert citizens 107
fair trade products 73
Farage, Nigel 164
Farrell, D. 29
FDP 78, 79
Fillon, François 119
Finland 60
cosmopolitans 51
educational attainment 24, 46
educational cleavage 57
educational homogamy 48
Green and libertarian parties 55
Knowledge Economy Index 61n14
massiﬁcation of higher education 17
nationalism 51, 53, 54
Fishkin, James 171, 181
ﬂyers, handing out 72
Fort, M. 25n8
Fortuyn, Pim 167, 178
FPÖ 53, 54
Index
224

France 6, 60
civil society
context 94, 95
participation 98–9, 100, 101, 102
consequences of diploma democracy
legitimacy 157, 158, 159
responsiveness 147, 149, 153
education level
and lifestyle 2
of MPs 2
Grandes écoles 11–12, 22
executive branch 119
political elites 115
Green and libertarian parties 54, 55
nationalism 53, 54
political elites 113
emergence of meritocracy 126, 128–9
executive branch 118, 119
legislative branch 114, 115
political participation 66
concentration of activity 80, 83–4
conventional participation outside
elections 72, 73
in deliberative settings 77
internet activism 76
political party membership 78
protest participation outside
elections 74, 75
spectator politics 69
voting 71, 89nn5, 7
religious/secular divide 24
remedying diploma democracy
ballots 174
populist parties, rise of 166
social mobility, lack of 11–12
Front National 53, 54, 166
Gallego, Aina 70, 71, 176
Ganzeboom, H. B. v, 14
Gaxie, Daniel 113, 162
gender
cleavage 42
descriptive representation 177–9
representation 29
social segregation 47
voting rights 88n5
generational cleavage 42
geographical cleavage 42
Germany 6, 60
civil society
context 94, 95
participation 98–9, 100, 101, 102
class divide 24
cleavage 40
consequences of diploma democracy
legitimacy 157, 158, 159
responsiveness 147, 149, 153
cosmopolitans vs nationalists 51
education level
of Bundestag MPs 1
and lifestyle 2
Green and libertarian parties 54, 55, 59
Grundgesetz, article 38 1
Merkel cabinets 3, 5, 120, 135n5
nationalist parties 53, 59
political elites 113
emergence of meritocracy 126, 129
executive branch 118, 119–20
legislative branch 114, 115–16
supply and demand of higher educated
political candidates 132, 133
political participation 66
concentration of activity 80, 83–4
conventional participation outside
elections 72, 73
in deliberative settings 77
Hamburger Bildungskampf 65–6, 175
internet activism 76
political party membership 78, 79
protest participation outside
elections 74, 75
spectator politics 69
voting 70, 71, 89nn5, 7
populist parties, rise of 166
Gerring, J. 6
globalization 24, 49, 159
Godmer, Laurent 113
Goldhammer, A. 88n3
Goldthorpe, John H. 12, 22
Goodwin, Matthew 164
Gove, Michael 170
governance, transition from government
to 34
Grandes écoles see France: Grandes écoles
Great Britain see United Kingdom
Green, J. E. 88n3
Green League (Finland) 55
Green Left (Netherlands) 55
Green Liberal Party (Switzerland) 55
Green parties
educational cleavage 41
membership 80
vs nationalist parties 52–6, 57
Green Party (Ireland) 55
Green Party (Norway) 55
Green Party (Switzerland) 55
Green Party (UK) 55
Greenpeace 96, 97
Groen! 54, 55
GroenLinks 54
educational cleavage 41
party membership 79, 80
Grundiza, S. 23
Grüne (Austria) 55
Index
225

Grüne (Germany) 54, 55, 59
party membership 78, 79
Guttenberg, Karl-Theodor Zu 120
Hakhverdian, Armèn v–vi, 148, 150–1
Hallerberg, Mark 132
Ham, Carolien van 70
Hamburger Bildungskampf 65–6, 175
Hart, J. J. M. de 104
Haus, Leah v
Heath, Oliver 142, 164
higher education
accessibility 123–4
communication professionals 107
diversiﬁcation of 17–18
massiﬁcation of 16–17
as mechanism for social reproduction 21
persistence across generations 22–3
and political skill 144
social segregation 46–8
as social status indicator 121
social strata 46
Hilton, Matthew 96, 107
Hogan, Phil 121
Holmes, Mary 158
Holsteijn, Joop van v
homogamy, educational 47–8, 56, 57,
58, 160
Hooghe, Marc v
horizontal policymaking
participatory revolution 33–4
political aggregation 36, 37–8
rise of the well-educated 38
Houtman, Dick 55
Howard, Michael 128
Hungary
cosmopolitans 51
educational attainment 46
income distribution 46
nationalism 51, 53, 54
Huxley, Aldous, Brave New World 4
Iceland 171
identity politics 35
immigration see migration patterns
incidental participants 81–2, 83–4
income distribution 56, 57
attitudinal differences 49, 50
social strata 46, 47
Industrial Revolution 42
infantilization 142
information society 2, 112
Inglehart, Ronald 18
institutional differences 52–6, 57
international committees 145
international standard classiﬁcation of
education (ISCED) 14–15, 61n12
internet
activism 74–6, 87
e-petitions 81
participatory inequalities 81, 90n24
communication between political parties
and the electorate 37
participatory revolution 33
political mobilization and organization 35
political preference formation 35, 36
introspective representation 178
Ireland
deliberative polling 171
educational attainment 46
Green and libertarian parties 55
nationalism 54
referendums 174
Italy
class divide 24
educational attainment 46
intergenerational social mobility 22
nationalism 53
political participation 70
Janmaat, Jan 170
Jobbik Party 53, 54
Johns Hopkins Center for Civil Society
Studies 94
Johnson, Boris 167, 178
Joncheere, Ellen 11, 20
Jun, U. 111
Juncker, Jean-Claude 121
Junn, Jane 131
Kaltwasser, C. R. 182n4
Kavenagh, D. 123
Keating, Avril 170
Kimball, David 109
Klüver, Heike vi, 105
Knowledge Economy Index 61n14
knowledge workers 106–7
Kohler-Koch, Beate 109
Koster, W. De 162n5
Kotzian, Peter 104
Kriesi, Hanspeter 19, 43, 107, 175
Labour Party (UK)
Miliband 111
ministers 120–1
MPs 116–17
recruitment of political elites 126, 128
Laird, Karen vi
Lamont, Norman 128
Laville, J. L. 108
Law and Justice 54
lawyers 107
lay politics 1
Lee, Jong Wha 15–16
Index
226

Lega Nord 53
legitimacy 32–3
consequences of diploma democracy 155–61
Lesschaeve, Christophe 151
Leu, Nick de vi
Li, Y. 90n27
liberal democracy see representative democracy
Liberal Democrats 54, 55, 59
libertarian parties see social-liberal parties
Lijphart, Arend 175
‘like prefer like’ phenomenon 142–3
Lincoln, Abraham 39n1
Lindeboom, G. 163n8
linguistic cleavage 41, 42
Linke 79
Lipset, Seymour Martin 42, 56, 57, 59, 160
Lithuania
cosmopolitans 52
educational homogamy 48
Green and libertarian parties 55
nationalism 52, 54
lobby groups
homogenization 37
participation ceilings for 17
local politics, recruitment of political elites
from 126
Lodge, Guy 176
Lopez Vilaplana, C. 23
lots 26, 172, 179
LPF 166, 167
Lupu, Noam 143, 144
LVZS (Lithuania) 55
Maddens, B. 129
Magelhães, Pedro 153
Magnette, Paul 3
Mair, Peter 43, 44
Maloney, W. A. 97
mandate-independence controversy 29
Manin, B. 88n3
Manning, Nathan 158
Mansbridge, Jane 28, 178
Marsh, D. 90n27
mass parties 125
McNamee, S. J. 20
Mead, Lawrence 11, 21, 22
media
communication between political parties
and the electorate 37
communication skills of political elites 132
contacting the 81
participatory revolution 33
political preference formation 35, 36
spectator politics 68
see also broadcast media; print media;
social media
Meer, Tom van der v, 100
Mendelsohn, M. 174
merit, meaning of 5
meritocracy
and diplomas 12–15
elements of 12–13
rise of 1–3
from science ﬁction to factual
description 11–12
Merkel, Angela 3, 5, 120, 135n5
Michel, Charles 135n5
Michels, Ank 153
Michon, Sébastien 119
Microsoft 73
migration patterns 24
attitudinal differences 49–51, 52, 58
distrust and the new political divide 158
responsiveness 146–7, 148–9
Mijs, Jonathan 12
Miliband, Ed 111, 128, 129, 135, 146
Miljöpartiet de gröna 55
Mill, John Stuart 30, 144
Miller, David 180, 181
Miller, R., Jr. 20
mini publics 171
mobilization, political 35, 37
monitorial citizens 68
see also incidental participants
monitory democracy 173
Montero-Sieburth, Martha v
motivation, and political participation 84
Mudde, C. 182n4
multiculturalism 51, 150–1
nationalist parties
educational cleavage 41
political responsiveness 151
rise of 166, 167
social exclusion 161
vs social-liberal parties 52–6, 57
nationalists 2
vs cosmopolitans 51–2
consequences of diploma
democracy 146–8, 149
distrust 159
nation states, emergence of 42
neighbourhood meetings 72
nepotism 159
Netherlands 6, 60
civil society
context 94
participation 98–9, 100, 101, 102
transformation 103
cleavage
educational 41, 57
religious 24, 40, 42
consequences of diploma democracy
accountability 155
Index
227

Netherlands (cont.)
legitimacy 156, 157, 158, 159, 160
representation 141
responsiveness 147, 148, 149, 150–1, 153
educational homogamy 48
education level
and lifestyle 2
of Tweede Kamer members 1, 112
European Convention
referendum 164–5, 166
Green and libertarian parties 54, 55
Grondwet, article 4 1
Knowledge Economy Index 61n14
nationalism 53, 54
political elites 112, 113
emergence of meritocracy 121–2,
123, 124
executive branch 118, 120
legislative branch 114, 116
supply and demand of higher educated
political candidates 132, 133
political participation 66
concentration of activity 80, 83–4
conventional participation outside
elections 72, 73
in deliberative settings 77
internet activism 76
political party membership 78, 79, 80
protest participation outside
elections 74, 75
spectator politics 68, 69
voting 70, 71, 89n5
remedying diploma democracy
ballots 174, 176
civic education 169
participation 171
populist parties, rise of 166, 167
trends in educational attainment 23
network centrality 131–2
Nie, Norman 84, 85, 131, 132
Niebel, Dirk 120
Nike 73
NMBS 11
non-governmental organizations see civil
society
non-participants 81–2, 83–4
nonproﬁt sector see civil society
Northern Ireland 24
Norway
educational attainment 24, 46
educational homogamy 48
Green and libertarian parties 55
intergenerational social mobility 22
Knowledge Economy Index 61n14
nationalism 54
political participation 70, 90n27
N-VA 166
occupational structure 46
OED triangle 13, 22
political equivalent 123
online media see internet
Open VLD 79
opinion polls 36
organization, community 72, 80
Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD)
intergenerational social mobility 22–3
levels of education 15
tertiary education term 18
trends in educational attainment 24
Orwell, George, 1984 4
Oser, J. 76
Oxfam 96
Parker, Sarah vi
Parkin, A. 174
parliamentary U-curves 113–18
Parsons, Talcott 18
participants 81–2, 83–4
participation see political participation
participation pyramid 66–7, 165
political elites 112–13
participatory revolution 33–4
associational explosion 103
and educational revolution, connection
between 38
paradox of the 86–8
political aggregation 36
protest politics 53
parties see political parties
Party for Freedom 53, 54
Party Order and Justice 54
Pegida 53
petitions 72, 74, 75
e-petitions 81
participatory inequalities 80, 81
Philips, Anne 142
Pitkin, Hanna 28, 29
Plato 181
consequences of diploma
democracy 140
ideal state 3–4
lots 179
merit, meaning of 5
philosopher-kings 159
referendums 174
selection system 139
ship of state 161–2
plebiscites 179–80
pleonasm, diploma democracy as 30
plutocracy 112
Poland 46, 54
political aggregation 36, 37–8
political consumerism 72–3, 74
Index
228

political elites
from aristocracy to meritocracy 112–13
democratization and
professionalization 133–5
emergence of meritocracy 121–30
executive branch 118–21
inclusive 177–81
legislative branch 113–18
Miliband 111
recruitment 126–30
supply and demand of higher educated
political candidates 130–3
political knowledge 84
political meetings, attending 72, 81
political mobilization and organization 35, 37
political participation
concentration of activity 80–2
conventional participation outside
elections 72
in deliberative settings 76–7
education as cause vs proxy 82–6, 169
Hamburger Bildungskampf 65–6
internet activism 74–7
meaning 88n2
paradox of participatory revolution 86–8
participation pyramid 66–7
political party membership 77–80
protest participation outside
elections 72–4
puzzle of 70, 86
remedying diploma democracy 170–3
spectator politics 67–8
voting 68–72
political parties
compulsory voting 175
educational cleavage 41
membership 37, 77–80
participatory inequalities 80, 81
remedying diploma democracy 170
professionalization process 125
recruitment of political elites 126, 129
renewal 177
transparency 172
trust in 158, 159
see also nationalist parties; populist parties;
social-liberal parties
political preference formation 34–5, 36
populist parties 166–7
Portugal 24, 46
post-materialist values 18
Poulsen, Troels Lund 119
preference formation 34–5, 36
pressure groups 37
print media
political preference formation 35
spectator politics 68, 69
Prior, M. 36
privileges 21, 22
professional associations, membership
of 100–3
professionalization
civil society organizations 103–7, 109
political elites 124–6, 133–5
recruitment 127–8
rise of unelected professionals 144–6
Progress Party 54
protest participation outside elections 72–4, 75
PS 79
public consultations 81
public opinion 31, 36
public sector see civil society
Put, G. J. 129
PvdA 79
PVV 41, 166
Quaden, Manuel vi
Quintelier, Ellen 176
Quittkat, Christine 109
Radical Liberals 55
Radikale Venstre, Det 55
Rasmussen, Lars Lokke 119, 135n5
Reeskens, Tim v
referendums
attitudes towards 153
Brexit see Brexit referendum/campaign
corrective 174–5
Netherlands, on European
Convention 164–5, 166
Reformation 42
regulatory agencies 145
relative deﬁcits, descriptive gap 140–2
religion
cleavage 24, 40–1, 42
membership of religious organizations 99, 100
secularization 18, 53
remedying diploma democracy
ballots 173–6
Euro-academics 164–5
inclusive political elites 177–81
participation 170–3
populist parties, rise of 166–7
spectator politics 168–70
wake-up call for modern-day
Platonists 181–2
representation 28
consequences of diploma democracy 140–6
descriptive/mimetic 28–9
and legitimacy 32
representative democracy 28
accountability 31–2
government for the people 26–7
participatory revolution 33, 34
responsiveness 30–1
Index
229

responsiveness 30–1
consequences of diploma democracy 146–54
and legitimacy 32–3
Reybrouck, David van 167
Reynal-Querol, Marta 132
Richards, D. 123
Ridder, Josje den 133, 141
Rokkan, Stein 42, 56, 57, 59, 160
role models 179
Romania 46
Rosanvallon, P. 88n3
Ross, George v
Rutte, Mark 124, 135n5
Salamon, Lester 92, 94
Sarmiento-Mirwaldt, Katja 143
Saurugger, Sabine vi, 105, 107
Scervini, F. 89n8
Schädel, Lisa 70
Schäfer, Armin 70, 176
Schattschneider, Elmer E. 108
Schavan, Annette 120
Scheuch, E. K. 132
Schlozman, Kay L. 6, 74, 104, 169
Schröder, H. 14
Schudson, M. 68
Schumpeter, Joseph 27, 144, 174
Scully, R. 29
secularization 18, 53
Segatti, P. 89n8
self-esteem 21
SGP 79
Simon, B. 73
single-issue organizations/groups 37, 103
Sinn Féin 54
skills
civic 85
communication 132–3
political 144
and political participation 85
Skocpol, Theda 104, 109
slacktivists 76
Slovakia 24, 46
Slovenia 24, 46
Smets, Kaat 70
Smulders, Jef v
social class
cleavage 24, 41, 42
compared with educational cleavage 45
UK 41
diplomas as screening devices 21
French Grandes écoles 11, 22
and identity 18
intergenerational social mobility 22
massiﬁcation of higher education 17
OED triangle 13
political elites 112, 121–2, 123, 124
demand for higher educated political
candidates 133
democratization 134
post-industrial society 18
social-liberal vs nationalist parties 55
UK 4, 24, 41
Young’s The Rise of the Meritocracy 4
social exclusion 159–61
social-liberal parties
educational cleavage 41
membership 80
vs nationalist parties 52–6, 57
social media
activism 74–6
participatory inequalities 81
participatory revolution 33
social mobility
credential inﬂation 21
education as engine of 19–20
educational revolution 18
intergenerational 22–3
new privileges and elites 21
status monopolies, combating 181
Young’s The Rise of the Meritocracy 159
social networks
network centrality 131–2
and political participation 85
social segregation 46–8
social strata 46
sophists 168
sortition 179
South Africa 72
Spain 74
SPD 79
spectator politics 67–8, 69, 81
remedying diploma
democracy 168–70
sports club membership 100
Spruyt, Bram v, 160
standards in public life 155
standby citizens see incidental participants
status monopolies, combating 180–1
stealth democracy 173
Steffek, Jens 104
Stehlik-Barry, Kenneth 131
Streeck, Wolfgang 70
street protests see demonstrations
strikes 72
supranational bodies 145
Sverigedemokraterna
(Sweden Democrats) 53, 54
Sweden
cosmopolitans 51
educational attainment 24, 46
educational homogamy 48
Green and libertarian parties 55
Knowledge Economy Index 61n14
Index
230

massiﬁcation of higher education 17
nationalism 51, 53, 54
voting 70
Swiss People’s Party 54
Switzerland 60
cosmopolitans 51
educational attainment 46
educational cleavage 57
Green and libertarian parties 55
nationalism 51, 54
referendums 174–5
street protests 74
symbolic deﬁcits, descriptive gap 142
teaching professions, recruitment of political
elites from 127
television see broadcast media
Temsamani, Anissa 11, 20
Teorell, J. 90n27
tertiary education see higher education
Teruel, Juan Rodriguez v
Thélot, Claude 22
third sector see civil society
Thorlakson, Lori v
Tiemann, Guido v
Tiemeijer, Will v
Tocqueville, Alexis de 92
Togeby, Lise 141
Tomorrow’s Europe 89n17
TON 166
trade unions
membership of 99, 100
professionalization 107
recruitment
of political elites 126, 127, 129
of politically capable candidates 177
Transparency Register 96
Treiman, D. J. 20
Trow, Martin 16
True Finns Party 53, 54
trust 156–8, 159
plebiscites 180
trustee model of representation 29, 30,
152
unelected professionals, rise of 144–6
UNESCO 16
United Kingdom 6, 60
Brexit see Brexit referendum/campaign
civil society
context 94, 95
participation 98–9, 100, 101, 102
cleavage
class 4, 24, 41
educational 57, 59
consequences of diploma democracy
accountability 154–5
legitimacy 157, 158, 159, 160
representation 143
responsiveness 146, 147, 148, 149,
153
educational attainment 46
educational homogamy 48
education level
of House of Commons MPs 1
and lifestyle 2
Green and libertarian parties 54, 55
nationalism 53, 54
nationalist parties 59
Northern Ireland 24
political elites 113
emergence of meritocracy 123, 126,
128, 129
executive branch 118, 120–1
legislative branch 114, 116–17
Miliband 111
supply and demand of higher educated
political candidates 131, 133
political participation 66, 90n27
concentration of activity 80–1, 83–4
conventional participation outside
elections 72, 73
in deliberative settings 77
internet activism 76
political party membership 78
protest participation outside
elections 74, 75
spectator politics 69
voting 70, 71, 88–9n5
remedying diploma democracy
ballots 174
civic education 169–70
participation 171
populist parties, rise of 166, 167
selective educational institutions 22
social-liberal parties 59
social mobility
intergenerational 22
lack of 11–12, 22, 25n15
Social Mobility and Child Poverty
Commission (SMCP) 25n15
Young’s The Rise of the Meritocracy 4,
139–40
United Kingdom Independence Party
(UKIP) 53, 54, 59, 166
Farage, Nigel 164
United States
civic education 169
civil society
context 94
opening and closing of 109
transformation 104
consequences of diploma
democracy 161
Index
231

United States (cont.)
representation 143, 144, 162n2
intergenerational social mobility 22
political elites, more inclusive 177
political participation 82, 89n9
referendums 174
Valls, Manuel 135n5
Vande Lanotte, Johan 3
Verba, Sydney 74, 84, 86
Verleden, Frank vi
Verts, Les 54
Vibert, Frank 145
Vlaams Belang 53, 54
vocational training 17, 23
Voltmer, K. 35
volunteers 99, 101
political elites 131
see also civil society
voting 67, 68–72
age 88–9n5
compulsory 70, 175–6
remedying diploma democracy
173–6
Vreese, Claes de v
VVD 79
Waal, Jeroen van der 55, 162n5
Walker, E. T. 104
Walzer, Michael 180
Wanka, Johanna 120
Wauters, Bram v
Weber, Max 125
Wehner, Joachim 132
Wells, Olivia vi
Wessels, Margit 158
Wever, Bart de 166–7, 178
Whiteley, Paul 169–70
Wilde, Pieter de v
Wirth, Heike 47–8
Wittebrood, Karin 169
women see gender
World Bank Institute, Knowledge Economy
Index 61n14
World Wildlife Fund (WWF) 96–7
Young, Michael, The Rise of the Meritocracy 4,
11, 19, 162
consequences of diploma democracy 140
crisis of conﬁdence 156
merit equation 139
social closure 23
winner-takes-all society 159–60
Index
232

