
Logic as a Liberal Art 


Logic as a Liberal Art
An Introduction to Rhetoric & Reasoning
R. E. Houser
The Catholic University of America Press  |  Washington, D.C.

Copyright © 2020
R. E. Houser
All rights reserved
The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of 
American National Standards for Information Science—Permanence 
of Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1984.
∞
Design and composition by Kachergis Book Design
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Houser, R. E., author.
Title: Logic as a liberal art : an introduction to rhetoric and reasoning 
/ R.E. Houser.
Description: Washington, D.C. : The Catholic University of America 
Press, 2020. | Includes bibliographical references and index. | Summary: 
“This textbook for a first course in logic takes a verbal rather than 
symbolic approach, based on the student’s natural language. It starts by 
discussing grammar, rhetoric, and the essential nature of logic; formal 
logic is then taken up following Aristotle’s division of the three acts of 
the mind”—Provided by publisher.
Identifiers: LCCN 2019035083 | ISBN 9780813232348 (paperback) | 
ISBN 9780813232355 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Logic—Textbooks. | Rhetoric. | Reasoning.
Classification: LCC BC108 .H68 2020 | DDC 160—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2019035083

To M. C. S. and C. J. H. C.
who are one with me in the love
of the Catholic Liberal Arts
!


What is madness? To have erroneous perceptions, 
and to reason correctly from them.
—Voltaire, Philosophical Dictionary


Contents
Contents
Contents
Acknowledgments	
xiii
A Note to the Logic Instructor	
xvii
A Note to the Student	
xxiii
Part 1. Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
Lesson 1. A Grounding in Grammar	
3
Problem Set 1: Grammar Review  |  14
Lesson 2. Rhetoric: An Introduction	
17
Problem Set 2: Rhetorical Analysis  |  22
Lesson 3. The Canon of Five Rhetorical Skills and the Five Parts 
of a Classical Speech	
26
Problem Set 3: The Rhetoric of Socrates in the Apology  |  33
Lesson 4. The Three Rhetorical Appeals	
35
Problem Set 4: The Three Appeals  |  40
Lesson 5. Aristotle Invents Logic—Twice	
50
Problem Set 5: Problem Solving  |  56
ix

x  
 Contents
Lesson 6. Aristotle Organizes the Logic of Discovery and Proof	
58
Problem Set 6: Three Acts of the Mind  |  64
Part 2. The Logic of Terms
Lesson 7. Language, Thought, and Reality	
69
Problem Set 7: Signs  |  77
Lesson 8. Categories: Working toward Definitions by Answering 
the “What?” Question	
80 
Problem Set 8: Recognizing and Using Categories  |  89
Lesson 9. Clarifying Concepts through Division and Collection 
of Terms	
92
Problem Set 9: Argument Using Division  |  99
Lesson 10. Aristotle’s Predicables	
107
Problem Set 10: Recognizing Essence, Property, and Accident  |  117
Lesson 11. Answering the “Why?” Question: Causes	
120
Problem Set 11: The Four Causes  |  132
Lesson 12. Different Kinds of Definitions 	
137
Problem Set 12: Definitions  |  144
Part 3. The Logic of Propositions
Lesson 13. Statements and Propositions	
153
Problem Set 13: Statements and Propositions  |  163
Lesson 14. Properties of Categorical Propositions	
166
Problem Set 14: Basic Categorical Propositions   |  174
Lesson 15. Recognizing the Kinds of Categorical 
Propositions	
175
Problem Set 15: Advanced Categorical Propositions  |  182
Lesson 16. Categorical Propositions in Context	
185
Problem Set 16: Propositions in Context  |  189

Contents  
 xi
Lesson 17. Euler and Venn Diagrams of Propositions	
193
Problem Set 17: Euler and Venn Diagrams of Propositions  |  202
Lesson 18. Opposition	
205
Problem Set 18: Opposition  |  214
Lesson 19. Conversion	
218
Problem Set 19: Conversion  |  227
Lesson 20. Obversion	
229
Problem Set 20: Obversion and Advanced Manipulations  |  235
Lesson 21. Hypothetical Propositions 	
238
Problem Set 21: Hypothetical Propositions  |  248
Lesson 22. Advanced Conditional Propositions	
250
Problem Set 22: Advanced Hypothetical Propositions  |  256
Part 4. The Logic of Arguments
Lesson 23. Two Kinds of Reasoning	
263
Problem Set 23: Distinguishing Deductive from Inductive 
Reasoning  |  265
Lesson 24. The Categorical Syllogism	
268
Problem Set 24: Identifying Categorical Syllogisms  |  277
Lesson 25. Validity of Categorical Syllogisms	
279
Problem Set 25: Validity of Categorical Syllogisms  |  289
Lesson 26. Categorical Syllogisms in Prose	
292
Problem Set 26: Categorical Syllogisms in Prose  |  295
Lesson 27. Venn Diagrams of Categorical Syllogisms	
298
Problem Set 27: Venn Diagrams of Categorical Syllogisms  |  305 
Lesson 28. Enthymemes and Epicheiremas	
306
Problem Set 28: Enthymemes and Epicheiremas  |  313
Lesson 29. Extended Categorical Arguments	
319
Problem Set 29: Longer Categorical Arguments  |  323

xii  
 Contents
Lesson 30. Hypothetical Arguments	
335
Problem Set 30: Hypothetical Arguments  |  344
Lesson 31. Advanced Hypothetical Arguments	
350
Problem Set 31: Standardized Test–Style Arguments  |  355
Lesson 32. Induction	
360
Problem Set 32: Induction  |  371
Lesson 33. Complex Arguments	
375
Problem Set 33: Complex Arguments  |  379
Answers to Selected Problems	
387
Appendixes	
417
Appendix 1: Chronology of Logicians and Their Logical Works	
419
Appendix 2: A Selection of English-Language Textbooks in Logic	
433
Bibliography	
435
Index of Names	
443
Index of Subjects	
447

Acknowledgments
Acknowledgments
Acknowledgments
First and foremost, I would thank the numerous logic students I have 
taught over the years. They are too many to name, but my debt to them is 
immeasurable, as well as my pleasure in being included within the journey of 
their formal education.
Two of my own teachers, however, I must mention. I received an excel­
lent education in the public schools of Dallas, especially at the junior high 
and high school levels. The post-Sputnik era saw the development of honors 
programs in science and mathematics, but the humanities by no means were 
neglected, as has recently become the trend. For my first two years in high 
school, however, I was exposed for the first time to the Catholic tradition of 
education, at two different high schools run by the Christian Brothers (FSC). 
And though I have taught logic—both verbal and symbolic—for many years, 
I never took a course in logic, in high school or university, as an undergradu­
ate. I did not need to do so, because of the teaching of two men. 
Br. Leonard, FSC, taught me how to reason deductively while leading 
me through plane geometry at Mullen High School in Denver. His course 
opened up the world of deductive argument like no one had, before or since. 
Our textbook covered a good portion of Euclid’s Elements, I think. But we 
did not read Euclid’s proofs; Br. Leonard had us do the proofs ourselves, us­
ing a book that contained only a few sample proofs in the chapters and no 
xiii

xiv  
 Acknowledgments
answers in the back. Clear, precise, and absolutely rigorous “sweet reason” 
was his guiding principle, in the class and out. So when it came time for our 
presidential election debates in 1960—one debate at each class level—I was 
tapped for the freshmen debate and chose to support Mr. Nixon. There were 
comments from my friends and strained looks from some teachers; it was, 
after all, a Catholic school and Mr. Kennedy his opponent. But Br. Leonard’s 
only comment to me was, “Strong arguments.”
The next year, at Bishop Kelley High School in Tulsa, Oklahoma, I met 
Br. Kilian Bernardine, FSC, who had helped found the school the year be­
fore and taught there for thirty-five years. A large man, vigorous in body 
and mind, in Algebra 2 he extended the range of reasoning beyond what I 
had heretofore imagined. The abstract problems, like quadratic equations, I 
loved; but word problems proved more difficult. To help us out, Br. Bernar­
dine suggested searching the used bookshops of Tulsa for older math books, 
circa 1880–1920, with harder problems than those in our own textbook. So 
under him I not only learned to love the hard problems but also took my 
very first steps in academic research, courtesy of my mother, who drove me 
to the shops. A tough grader, Br. Bernardine rearranged our seats in order 
from the highest to the lowest grade in the previous quarter, something that 
might now be thought harassment, but was an inducement to harder study. 
The class consisted in Brother questioning individual students, and when he 
approached you, his giant hand took hold of your upper arm in a squeeze 
that started gently and became more and more severe until you came up with 
the right answer or he had mercy on your arm, but not on your mind. When 
parents complained about so many low grades in his classes, Br. Bernardine 
replied that a student of his, who had never gotten more than a C in math, 
had been accepted into the U.S. Military Academy at West Point the previous 
year. Until he died, my father, whose command of math made him a highly 
decorated bombardier/navigator in World War II, complained about Br. Ber­
nardine giving me the only B I ever received in math. My reply: “But Daddy, 
he taught me how to think about everything under the sun.” 
In sum, I esteemed Br. Leonard, and I loved Br. Bernardine. And between 
them they set me on my intellectual journey: to math and science, followed 
by the liberal arts, and culminating in philosophy. It took me a long time to 
realize that my intellectual journey simply followed the path that had been 
taken for centuries: quadrivium, trivium, humanities, philosophy. 

Acknowledgments  
 xv
Let me add one final note of deep appreciation. On several points that 
come up in this book, one of the readers appointed by the Catholic Universi­
ty of America Press corrected a mistake or taught me a truth I did not know 
before. The book is better, much better, for the extensive and insightful com­
ments of Dr. Brian Carl. His review was superb, an exemplary professional 
job. And I thank him.

A Note to the Logic Instructor
A Note to the Logic Instructor

A Note to the Logic Instructor
In the twenty-first century there are two ways to study logic. The minority 
approach, which held universal sway in the West for centuries, is what we 
might call the “verbal” way, or learning logic in what is nowadays called a 
“natural” language. This way of learning and teaching logic was invented, of 
course, by Aristotle and developed by later ancient, medieval, Renaissance, 
and early modern logicians. It was considered so fixed and perfected that Kant 
confidently used the logic of judgments, as found in what Aristotelians call 
the “second act of the mind,” as an absolutely firm foundation for the tran­
scendental deduction of his own categories.
The more recent approach was invented in the last part of the nineteenth 
century by the German mathematician Gottlob Frege and popularized in the 
early twentieth century by the British philosophers Bertrand Russell and Al­
fred North Whitehead, in their Principia Mathematica (we should add Log­
icae, since their title was an homage to Newton’s Philosophiae Naturalis Prin­
cipia Mathematica). This approach to logic resulted from Frege’s studies of 
the foundations of arithmetic. He found that mathematics is built on certain 
basic logical truths; and because Frege approached logic through mathemat­
ics, the way logicians like Russell and Whitehead presented logic itself was 
in a format employing mathematical-style symbols. Their way of presenting 
logic by using the language of mathematical-style symbols, rather than the 
verbal language of ordinary discourse, was highly original and powerful. It 
xvii

xviii  
 A Note to the Logic Instructor
has proven particularly useful in the study of science for the simple reason 
that mathematics has become the common language of science itself. And 
its utility in technological advances, such as computers, is beyond question. 
Symbolic logic, however, is not without its drawbacks as a means of teach­
ing and learning logic as a systematic academic discipline in a first logic course 
at the undergraduate level. Let me mention three reasons. First, because it 
uses the language of abstract symbols, it is often hard to learn, especially for 
those people who, for good reasons or bad ones, shy away from mathematics. 
The second and far greater problem is one of applying logic to real, verbal dis­
course. This application is necessary, but it requires repeated translations from 
the highly abstract language of symbolic logic into the ordinary language of 
verbal speech and writing and back again. The last and perhaps greatest prob­
lem with symbolic logic is that it tends to separate the logic we have already 
learned during our normal intellectual development from the logic we learn 
in logic class. For the logic presented in a logic course is not the first logic the 
student learns; we start learning logic when we start learning our native lan­
guage. All too often, then, symbolic logic is treated as an alien discipline one 
learns for the course, with little or no connection to the student’s intellectual 
life outside the logic classroom. And this result in turn can undercut belief 
that logic or reasoning of any form can result in our acquiring truth, which 
feeds directly into the widespread skepticism in our culture and especially its 
academic sphere. 
For these reasons, if we look at the history of using symbolic logic to 
teach college courses in logic for the last century, we can discern a definite but 
very odd trend. Before World War II, symbolic logic was pretty well limited 
to graduate education and to the domain of mathematicians. Alfred North 
Whitehead’s career path is a fine illustration. During his tenure at Cambridge 
(1884 to 1910) he wrote primarily in mathematics and logic, publishing with 
Bertrand Russell Principia Mathematica (1910, 1912, 1913). At the University 
of London (1910 to 1924) he was appointed professor of applied mathematics 
and wrote in the areas of logic and philosophy of science, then expanded into 
philosophy of education. It was not until he went to Harvard (1924–1937) 
that he moved fully into philosophy proper, founding the metaphysical move­
ment known as “process philosophy.” This was a development stemming from 
his symbolic approach to logic, where a “natural language” statement like 
“there are two chairs” is analyzed into a series of more abstract and relational 
claims: “There is an x which is a chair; and there is a y which is a chair; and x 

A Note to the Logic Instructor  
 xix
is not identical with y; and if there is a chair z, then z is identical to either x 
or y.”1 This logical analysis led Whitehead to reverse the Aristotelian priority 
of substance over relation, which had committed “the fallacy of misplaced 
concreteness,” and affirm the universe is made up of “actual occasions” funda­
mentally constituted by sets of relations. 
In North America, teaching logic courses in the symbolic way began in 
earnest shortly after World War II and by the 1960s was used in many un­
dergraduate logic courses. I myself have taught logic in both its symbolic and 
verbal (or Aristotelian) modes. Beginning in the 1970s, many factors, but in 
my view primarily the difficulties experienced by undergraduate students in 
learning logic in the symbolic way, led first to the movement called “informal 
logic,” which understood formal logic to mean symbolic logic, and tried to 
come up with a more easily understood alternative, but could not bring itself 
to “retreat” back to Aristotelian logic. Then after a few years the step was made 
to “critical thinking,” which tended to empty logic of the rigor it has in both 
its verbal and symbolic forms. At this point, the teaching of logic expanded 
beyond the Philosophy and Mathematics departments and was justified on 
the grounds that faculty in all departments can think critically, so they should 
be able to teach what they do. These developments can be traced by tracking 
the changes in the editions of popular logic textbooks, such as Copi. Most 
such textbooks are still structured around symbolic logic, conceived as the 
real logic, but with verbal logic appended, as a shortcut to syllogistic, since the 
means of teaching syllogistic in symbolic logic, the predicate calculus, is nor­
mally studied after propositional calculus. This long and arduous approach 
has produced textbooks of huge size that can hardly be accommodated in 
a one-semester course. In short, insistence on teaching logic in the symbol­
ic way that “professionals” like to pursue their own researches has had the 
perverse effect of pulling students away from mastering the logical rigor that 
symbolic logic was supposed to impart in the first place. What has resulted 
is a kind of logical hippogriff, whose eagle head and wings are like symbolic 
logic, flying through the aery heights of abstract thought, and trailing behind 
it the horse’s body of verbal logic, for use when the mythical beast touches its 
hooves to the ground of everyday experience.
Because of such difficulties, in this book I have wholeheartedly embraced 
1. Ronald Desmet and Andrew David Irvine, “Alfred North Whitehead,” in The Stanford Encyclope­
dia of Philosophy, ed. Edward N. Zalta (Fall 2018 edition), https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2018/
entries/whitehead/.

xx  
 A Note to the Logic Instructor
the verbal approach to logic, primarily in order to position the study of logic 
in its natural setting, much as a scientist might study tropical plants or po­
lar bears in their natural habitats. The natural habitat of logic is the verbal 
and written language of ordinary human discourse, taken in its full range, in­
cluding the high-level verbal discourse that can be encountered in university 
courses. The problem sets are designed to mirror this wide range. While they 
normally begin with elementary problems of the textbook variety, a serious 
effort has been made to reach up to real problems, taken from real authors, in 
their own words. One cannot deal with the logic of Plato’s arguments apart 
from reading Plato’s own writings. And here the verbal approach has a genu­
ine advantage. Discourse in ordinary or natural language often contains clues 
that help us to understand its logic. Such clues, of course, are missing from the 
mathematical-type language used in symbolic logic. While mathematical-style 
symbols do on occasion offer insightful help in seeing logical relations, and 
we will employ symbols from time to time in this book, by using ordinary or 
natural language to study logic we can avoid the large headache of translating 
from the language of mathematical-style symbols to ordinary language and 
back again. So we content ourselves with the smaller but real headaches in­
volved in searching out the logic contained within verbal or natural language.
Now I have criticized other textbooks for being too large, so I must admit 
that this textbook also contains more material than can normally be taught 
in a one-semester logic course. In class I usually cover about twenty-eight of 
the thirty-three lessons, though on two occasions, with particularly excellent 
classes, I did manage to get in all the lessons. So choices do have to be made. 
As a result, this book has been designed consciously to offer a number of dif­
ferent ways of teaching the first (and usually only) course in logic students will 
take. Of course, I myself prefer to situate logic within the trivium. But I have 
myself tried all five of the other modes listed here:
1. Skipping grammar and rhetoric: Too many teachers of philosophy are 
dismissive of grammar and really despise rhetoric, in the way Plato despised its 
creators, the sophists. (But Aristotle was more even-handed.) Teachers who 
choose to skip over grammar and rhetoric will probably want to start with 
lesson 6, or perhaps lesson 7. But hard choices still will have to be made. And 
in defense of keeping some rhetoric, let me add that the “information revolu­
tion” makes it more necessary than ever to distinguish ethos, pathos, and logos. 
So please consider cutting lessons from later in the book rather than cutting 
lesson 4.

A Note to the Logic Instructor  
 xxi
2. Purely formal logic: The few logic books that take a verbal approach 
almost inevitably omit most of the logic of terms (lessons 7–12). This part of 
logic is sometimes dismissed as being neo-scholastic or importing too much 
metaphysics into logic, though Aristotle himself used the categories, predica­
bles, and causes throughout his logical books. I tried for a few years omitting 
this section entirely. The problems with doing so are practical, not theoretical. 
My utilitarian criterion is this: does a student understand a classical definition 
like “a human is a rational animal” or “a triangle is a three-sided plane figure”? 
Teachers tend to think they do, because the students have heard these formu­
lae so often; but a bit of probing shows most students do not. If they do not 
understand such definitions after taking the class, then I have failed in my task 
as a teacher. The topics covered in part 2 are all designed as preparation for 
lesson 12. So I tend to cut lessons in part 3 or 4 more than in part 2. But if you 
want a purely formal logic course, it would focus on lessons 13 and beyond.
3. Analysis of problems: a course that focuses on giving students maximum 
practice in logical analysis of problems, which is helpful in their other classes. 
For this course I would concentrate on teaching theory by doing problems in 
class. Please don’t skip diagramming sentences in lesson 1. Then I would focus 
on lessons 8–12, 13–16, 25–26, 28–29, and 32.
4. Even-handed logic: a course purely in logic, but that gives equal treat­
ment to the logic of all three acts of the mind. You might focus on lessons 8, 
11–12, 13–16, 23–29, and 32. 
5. Logic of argumentation: a course for good to excellent students that 
concentrates on increasing skills in argument through extensive engagement 
with the more difficult problems probably would begin with lesson 13. You 
would want to reserve a lot of time to do a large number of problems in les­
sons 26 to 33, something I have never succeeded in doing to my satisfaction. 
Good luck with using this book. Please do give me your personal out­
comes assessment. 


A Note to the Student
A Note to the Student
A Note to the Student
In the very first chapter of his Politics, Aristotle notes that humans are the 
only animals “endowed with speech.” He makes this point in an interesting 
argument that connects this definition of humans with another of his famous 
definitions of humans:
It is evident that the city-state (polis) is one of the kinds of things that exist by 
nature, and that by nature man is a political animal. . . . The reason why man is 
the kind of being designed for political association, in a higher degree than the 
bees or other gregarious animals ever can associate, is evident. Nature, we say, 
does nothing in vain. But man alone among the animals is endowed with speech. 
Making sounds indicates pleasure and pain, and so belongs to animals in gen­
eral. Their nature enables them to get to the point where they perceive pleasure 
and pain, and they signify these perceptions to one another. But speech declares 
what is useful and what is not, and therefore it serves to declare what is just and 
unjust. It is peculiar to man, in comparison with the rest of the animals, that he 
alone has perception of good and evil, of the just and unjust, and like things. 
And it is association in these things that makes a family and a city-state.1
Other animals—bees and birds and buffaloes—form communities, but 
only humans form genuine families and political communities, because only 
humans have speech. Speech is not only characteristic of humans, it is argu­
ably their greatest invention, because it is the basis for so many others. Au­
1. Aristotle, Politics 1.2, 1253a1–17; translated by R. E. Houser.
xxiii

xxiv  
 A Note to the Student
gustine noted, however, that speech is lost to the past almost as soon as it’s 
produced. So once we got around to inventing writing in order to capture and 
preserve speech, the systematic study of speech gradually developed. 
Consider the following memorable speech by one of the finest orators of 
the twentieth century:
Hitler knows that he will have to break us in this island or lose the war. If we 
can stand up to him, all Europe may be free, and the life of the world may move 
forward into broad, sunlit uplands. But if we fail, then the whole world, includ­
ing the United States, and all that we have known and cared for, will sink into 
the abyss of a new dark age made more sinister, and perhaps more prolonged, 
by the lights of a perverted science. Let us therefore brace ourselves to our duty 
and so bear ourselves that if the British Commonwealth and Europe lasts for a 
thousand years men will still say: This was their finest hour.2
In this passage we find three things that work together. First, Mr. Chur­
chill knows the right form of a word to use, how to put words into sentences, 
and how to put sentences into paragraphs. In short, he had mastered what 
from the time of the Greeks was called “the art (techne) of grammar.” Sec­
ond, he chooses words, sentences, and a paragraph that are effective in per­
suading us that what he says is true, important, even inspiring. During a time 
when Britain was actively trying to avoid impending defeat by Nazi Germany, 
Mr. Churchill’s intention was to persuade the leaders of Great Britain, and 
of the United States and other world leaders, to oppose Hitler. Third, while 
Mr. Churchill’s speech rouses our emotions—even so many years later—it 
also contains an argument, one meant not just to persuade our hearts, but 
to convince our minds, that the task ahead not only needed to be done, but 
could be done. 
In order to make this speech, Mr. Churchill was the beneficiary of a long 
tradition of what is called the study of the “liberal arts.” Three of these arts 
are exhibited in this kind of speech and writing: the liberal arts of grammar, 
rhetoric, and logic. All human discourse—from the loftiest to the most mun­
dane—has grammatical, rhetorical, and logical features. This is why, although 
the ancients distinguished these three arts and generally taught them sepa­
rately, they understood that it is the task of the speaker and writer to use all 
three together in speech and writing. In this book, we shall focus on the art of 
2. Winston Churchill, “Speech in the House of Commons, 18 June 1940,” in Winston S. Churchill: 
His Complete Speeches, 1897–1963 (New York: Chelsea House, 1974), 6:6238. 

A Note to the Student  
 xxv
logic. But since logic is so closely connected in real discourse with grammar 
and rhetoric, we shall start with them. Lesson 1 covers a bit of grammar, and 
Lessons 2–4 present a few central points of rhetoric. The topics developed 
there are important for our study of logic, which will make up the remainder 
of the book. 
The Seven Liberal Arts
Although the Greeks began the process of creating the liberal arts as early 
as the fifth century b.c., it was not until quite late in the ancient period that 
the Roman Martianus Capella (ca. 400 a.d.) limited the “liberal arts” to the 
seven that became standard in the Middle Ages. They cover the basic knowl­
edge and intellectual skills that a “free (liber)” man should understand, a sort 
of minimum for education. They were arranged into two groups: four arts 
in the quadrivium (coming from the Latin words for “four” and “way”) and 
three arts of the trivium (coming from the Latin words for “three” and “way”). 
The quadrivium contained two areas of mathematics—arithmetic and ge­
ometry—and two areas of science—astronomy, which makes use of geometry, 
and music (which meant not so much learning to play a musical instrument 
as understanding and appreciating it through seeing its mathematical charac­
ter)—that uses arithmetic. A memorable example of music in this sense was 
the discovery, attributed to Pythagoras, that shortening the length of a lyre 
string by half produces a note one octave higher, while doubling the length 
produces a note one octave lower.
The trivium, with which we are concerned, consisted in three arts neces­
sary to be an effective speaker and writer—namely, grammar, rhetoric, and 
logic. Knowledge of grammar gives one the skill (ars) to put together words, 
sentences, and paragraphs according to the rules governing each language, 
whether Latin or Greek, English or Spanish, Arabic or Chinese. In fact, the 
art of grammar consisted primarily for the ancient grammarians in learning 
what these rules were, for the rules of correct grammatical usage were only 
implicit in spoken or written language before the development of grammar 
as an art. Grammar was the last of the three arts of the trivium to be system­
atized. The earliest Greek grammarian, whose works still exist, was Dionysius 
Thrax, who taught in Alexandria in the first century b.c. Other major Latin 
grammarians came later, such as Donatus (fourth century a.d.) and Priscian 
(sixth century a.d.). 

xxvi  
 A Note to the Student
It was the great scientist and philosopher Aristotle who invented the art 
of logic. Of course, speakers and writers before Aristotle used logic: witness 
his teacher Plato, one of the great writers of world culture. However, it was 
Aristotle who first created logic as a systematically organized art. He invented 
logic in reply to his beloved teacher Plato, who had held, incorrectly accord­
ing to Aristotle, that knowing the matter and the manner of reasoning about 
some subject, say, politics or human nature, necessarily go together; you can’t 
know one without the other. On the contrary, Aristotle said they could be 
separated. So a thinker can make mistakes about the matter or content of 
what he says while still speaking and writing in a correct manner—that is, 
using correct grammar, rhetoric, and logic. Aristotle also wrote the oldest 
surviving work of rhetoric. But he let us know that he did not invent rheto­
ric—there were earlier rhetoricians, some of whom he named. We will meet 
them in Lesson 2. And, surprisingly enough, books on grammar came last, 
even though it might seem logical that grammar ought to have been written 
down first, since before our discourse can be logical or rhetorically effective, it 
needs first to be grammatically correct in order to be intelligible at all.
Two Approaches to Studying Logic
In the twenty-first century there are basically two ways to study logic. The 
more recent approach was invented in the last part of the nineteenth cen­
tury by the German mathematician Gottlob Frege and popularized in the 
twentieth century by the British philosophers Bertrand Russell and Alfred 
North Whitehead. This approach to logic resulted from Frege’s studies of the 
foundations of arithmetic. He found that mathematics is built on certain ba­
sic logical truths; and because Frege approached logic through mathematics, 
the way that logicians like Russell and Whitehead presented logic itself was 
in a highly symbolic, mathematical format. At the time, it was thought that 
Frege and his followers had discovered something completely new and revo­
lutionary. Further research into the history of logic has since shown that some 
of these “discoveries” were actually known by late medieval (fourteenth- to 
sixteenth-century) logicians. But what was genuinely original in Frege’s ap­
proach was the attempt to present logic using the language of mathematical-
style symbols rather than the verbal language of ordinary discourse. This sym­
bolic approach to logic has proven particularly useful in the study of science, 
where its abstract mathematical-style language is particularly useful, for the 

A Note to the Student  
 xxvii
simple reason that mathematics has become the common language of science 
itself. Mathematical logic and science, then, share the same kind of language, 
the language of abstract mathematical-style symbols. Symbolic logic has also 
been extremely useful for technological advances, for instance, in the devel­
opment of computers. 
Symbolic logic, however, is not without its drawbacks as a means of learn­
ing logic. First, because it uses the language of abstract symbols, it is often 
hard to learn, especially for those people who, for good reasons or bad ones, 
shy away from mathematics. With regard to mathematical proficiency in their 
students, symbolic logicians tend to follow the lead of Plato, who is said, so 
the story goes, to have put a sign in front of his school—the Academy—that 
read, freely translated, “You may not enter without a credit in geometry.” 
The second and greater problem is one of applying logic to real life. Math­
ematical logic focuses on statements of logical relations set out in an abstract 
language of symbols. But when we apply logic to areas of thought outside of 
mathematics and some areas of science, as we do in everyday life, the symbolic 
language of logic has to be applied to ordinary verbal discourse, to everyday 
speech and writing. This “application” of symbolic logic requires an act of 
translating the symbolic language of logic into the ordinary language of ver­
bal speech and writing. Learning how to perform this act of translation turns 
out to be quite difficult, as anyone who has tried to act as an interpreter can 
easily understand. The source of the difficulty is the need to translate from 
the language of mathematics to the everyday language of ordinary discourse, 
somewhat like constantly needing to translate from, say, English into Spanish.
The last and perhaps greatest problem with mathematical logic is that it 
tends to separate the logic we have already learned during our normal intellec­
tual development from the logic we learn in logic class. For the logic present­
ed in this book, or any logic book of whatever sort, is not the first logic you 
will learn. You have been learning logic from the time you started thinking 
and speaking, and then reading and writing, in your own native language, 
and any other “natural” languages you have picked up. This book, then, is not 
designed to teach you something you have never studied. Learning to think 
includes learning logic, though not as a formal course. What this book is de­
signed to do is to improve your success rate in logic, no matter how poor or 
how good your logical skill presently is. Everyone, including your instructor, 
has room to improve.
Because of these difficulties, among others, we will take the other ap­

xxviii  
 A Note to the Student
proach to the study of logic. This approach is to study logic in its “natural” 
setting, much as a scientist might study tropical plants or polar bears in their 
natural habitats. The natural habitat of logic is the verbal and written lan­
guage of ordinary human discourse, including the high-level verbal discourse 
that occurs in university courses. The man who invented this approach to 
logic was Aristotle, who wrote the first textbooks in logic in the fourth cen­
tury b.c. The main reason why this approach is preferable for most people is 
that it avoids the two problems that have plagued the teaching of symbolic 
logic during its heyday and up to the present. First, the verbal approach is 
clearly preferable for those who have math phobia. The problems used in the 
verbal approach are set out in ordinary language, language that often contains 
clues that help us to understand the logic of verbal discourse. Such clues, of 
course, are missing from the mathematical symbols used in symbolic logic. 
Second, the verbal study of logic has the advantage of avoiding the problem 
of needing to translate back and forth between abstract logical symbols and 
the more concrete verbal symbols we call words. While mathematical symbols 
do on occasion help us see logical relations, and we will employ some elemen­
tary symbols from time to time in this book, by using ordinary or “natural” 
language to study logic we can avoid the large headache of translating from 
the language of symbols to ordinary language, and then back again. So we 
content ourselves with the smaller but real headaches involved in searching 
out the logic contained within verbal or “natural” language. 
The Verbal Approach to Logic: Studying Rhetoric 
and Logic Together
The verbal approach to logic has yet another advantage, one not very of­
ten admitted even by its proponents. We can see this one by looking at histo­
ry. The verbal approach to logic and the discipline of rhetoric were invented 
by the Greeks, those early masters of the spoken and written word. In fact, 
rhetoric was invented slightly before Aristotle invented logic. Aristotle con­
ceived of rhetoric and logic as correlative, noting that “rhetoric is the analogue 
of dialectic,” a subfield of logic. (One of Aristotle’s books of logic, the Topics, 
covers dialectical or probable arguments, as we will see in Lesson 5.) If you 
don’t pursue the verbal form of logic, then you probably won’t see the im­
portance of rhetoric, dialectic’s twin. Following the inspiration of Aristotle, 
therefore, we shall begin by reviewing a couple of useful points of grammar 
and then turn to rhetoric before setting out on our journey through logic.

A Note to the Student  
 xxix
How to Use This Book
Each chapter of this textbook is divided into four sections: “The Essen­
tials,” “A Deeper Look,” “Primary Sources,” and a “Problem Set.” Unlike many 
of your other courses, including philosophy courses, the most important 
section is the problem set. You may be tempted to try to do the problems 
before reading the text, but this is not advisable. Look at the topics covered, 
then read “The Essentials” carefully. Then try the problem set. If you get stuck 
there, go back to where your question is taken up, either in “The Essentials” 
or, for more difficult problems, in “A Deeper Look.” 
For those interested in where the main ideas in each chapter come from 
and for a more “philosophical” explanation of them, try the “Primary Sourc­
es” and the footnotes in each lesson. Here you will need to find the works 
cited, all of which are available in printed books and on the internet. A glance 
at the “Chronology of Logicians and Their Logical Works,” at the end of this 
textbook, shows that over the centuries many first-class minds have contribut­
ed to the development of logic. But as often the case in intellectual endeavors, 
it is best to begin with the pioneers, followed by their finest followers. This 
is the reason why, with a few exceptions, I have limited the footnotes and 
“Primary Sources” in each chapter to Aristotle and the man universally ac­
knowledged to be best commentator on his works over the centuries, Thomas 
Aquinas. 


Part 1
Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic 


Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
A Grounding in Grammar
Lesson 1 
A Grounding in Grammar
The Essentials
The Eight Parts of Speech
The ancient grammarians divided grammar into two parts: grammar 
proper, the study of the kinds of words; and syntax, the study of how to put 
words together properly. Both are important for the study of logic. From 
grammar it is understood that words fall into different categories called “the 
parts of speech.” So we first review the parts of speech. Positioning a word 
within the scheme of the eight parts of speech is analogous to determining 
where a term falls within the logical scheme of categories, predicables, and 
causes. Developing our grammatical skill at placing words within the parts of 
speech is excellent practice for learning to analyze terms in logic. If we can’t 
recognize what part of speech a word is, this undermines our understanding 
of the terms, propositions, and arguments we will study in logic.
Syntax studies how to assemble different parts of speech correctly to form 
sentences. One way of learning syntax is to diagram sentences; in fact, it is the 
best way, because diagramming forces us to concentrate on how the words of 
a sentence function in relation to each other. And this skill is invaluable in 
logic when we are learning to recognize different kinds of propositions based 
on how their parts are related to each other. These two skills—diagramming 
sentences and analyzing propositions—are very much analogous to each oth­
3

4  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
er, even though the notions used in grammatical analysis of a sentence and in 
logical analysis of a proposition are not the same. Learning to diagram sen­
tences pays great rewards when we come to analyze propositions and then go 
further to evaluate arguments. The way a grammarian analyzes a sentence is 
not exactly the same way a logician analyzes a proposition, but skill in gram­
mar helps us develop our skills in logic. 
According to the ancient Latin grammarians Donatus and Priscian,1 there 
are eight parts of speech: nouns, pronouns, verbs, adverbs, participles, con­
junctions, prepositions, and interjections. Over the centuries, this list has re­
mained the same apart from one exception. Participles are a verbal form, like 
the present participle “walking” and the past participle “walked.” In many of 
the ancient languages, most words English grammar calls “adjectives” were 
formed from the verb, as participles are. Over time, “adjective” came to re­
place “participle” as one of the eight parts of speech. Grammarians have de­
voted a lot of time to very precise definitions of these parts of speech and have 
come up with different lists. But we shall follow the simple and traditional list 
derived from these two Romans, since it is essential to recognize the different 
parts of speech. Here are very brief descriptions and examples.
Part of Speech
Description
Examples
Noun
person, place, or thing
dog, rabbit, road
Verb
action, passion
barked, was chased, is, were
Adverb
modify verbs or adjectives
certainly, suddenly
Pronoun
stands in for a noun
us, she, we, her, him, they
Adjective
modifies a noun
the, red, fun, little
Preposition
introduces a descriptive phrase
into, down, from
Conjunction
connection
and, or, but
Interjection 
added for emphasis
Oh! Yes! Say,
Here is a sentence that contains every part of speech:
“Well, she and young John walk to school slowly.”
interjection
pron.
conj.
adj.
noun
verb
prep.
noun
adverb
Well,
she
and
young
John
walk
to
school
slowly.
1. Aelius Donatus (ca. 350), Ars grammatica, Ars minor (Eight Parts of Speech); Priscian (ca. 500), 
Institutiones grammaticae.

Definitions of the Parts of Speech
Noun: The word “noun” comes from the Latin word nomen. It is a word 
that describes a subject or object of discourse, something about which we 
are talking. Nouns are the most important part of the subject of a sentence, 
which says what it is that performs the action described in the predicate.
Types of Nouns 
Proper nouns: name a particular thing: Joan, John, America.
“Joan is running to the store.”
“A nation of high ideals describes America.” 
Common nouns: name a class or type of thing: horse, jacket.
“Abe Lincoln, with his jacket buttoned against the cold, rode his 
horse into town.”
Abstract nouns: name a feature of things, apart from individuals: justice, 
humanity, reasonableness.
“The Muslim philosopher Avicenna famously said, ‘Horseness is only 
horseness.’ ”
“Liberty is what most American immigrants seek.”
Collective nouns: name of a group of the same kind: team, jury, flock.
“Our school’s baseball team won the tournament.”
Adjective: A word that modifies a noun, further clarifying the kind of thing 
the noun describes: a fast horse, true justice, a fair jury; this jacket; the team.
The ancient grammarians noted that adjectives often are formed from 
nouns. The Latin grammarian Priscian described adjectives as a subtype of 
noun, the nomen adjectivum or “added noun.” 
“The fast horse won the race.”
“Black is beautiful.” 
Pronoun: a word that stands in for or is a placeholder for a noun: he, she, it, 
who, which.
“She is fast.”
“It seems to be an antelope, but I can’t yet see it clearly.” 
A Grounding in Grammar  
 5

6  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
Verb: The word “verb” comes from the Latin word verbum; a verb is a word 
that describes some action or passion. Verbs are the most important part of 
the predicate of a sentence, which says what the subject does or undergoes.
Types of Verbs
Transitive verbs: verbs that describe an action affecting an object: build, 
destroy.
Intransitive verbs: verbs that describe an action or passion that does not 
require an object: to sleep, to snore.
Some verbs can be either transitive or intransitive: to run, to hide.
“He is running down the street.”
“She runs the Accounting Department.”
“I am hiding from my sister.”
“Writers sometimes hide the true meaning of their words.” 
Adverb: a word that modifies a verb—that is, gives further clarification of 
the kind of action or passion involved or modifies another modifier, like an 
adjective.
“He runs quickly.”
“Your daughter is very vivacious.
Preposition: A word that introduces an explanatory phrase.
“He runs quickly to the store.”
“I hid the book in my room.” 
“Do you take this man, for richer and for poorer, until death you do 
part?”
Conjunction: A word that connects two different parts of a sentence, often 
two different clauses in the sentence: and, or, unless, because.
“We need to study logic because we use it every day.”
“You don’t really know the three angles of a triangle equal two right 
angles, unless you can prove it.”
Interjection: The word “interjection” comes from two Latin words, jacio, 
which means “throw,” and inter, which means “between” or “among” or “in.” 
An interjection is a word that is thrown into a sentence, usually simply to give 
emphasis: Oh! Really! My goodness!

A Grounding in Grammar  
 7
“Oh, my goodness, did the Athenians really execute the first great 
philosopher, Socrates, in 399 b.c.?” 
There are many subdivisions falling under these eight basic parts of 
speech. Some English grammar books add one or two other parts of speech, 
and of course, the parts of speech can vary among languages. But what is im­
portant for the study of logic is to be able to ask yourself what kind of word 
each word in a sentence is, and to get the right answer. This is the first step in 
understanding how it contributes to the meaning of the sentence. 
Syntax and Diagramming Sentences
Syntax is the second, more complicated, and more interesting part of 
grammar. The term comes from the Greek words meaning “with” or “togeth­
er” (syn) and “arrangement” or “order” (taxis). Syntax concerns how words of 
a sentence are related to each other within the sentence. An interesting way 
to test whether you understand the syntax of a sentence is to diagram it. Sen­
tence diagramming was popularized by Alonzo Reed and Brainerd Kellogg, 
in their book Higher Lessons in English, published in 1877. Sentence diagram­
ming has gone in and out of fashion over the years, but it is a fine way to learn 
how to analyze the grammar and syntax of a sentence. And this grammatical 
analysis is an excellent preparation for the logical analysis that is the main 
focus of this book. Let’s start with some basics and learn through examples. 
The different lines in the diagram are designed to indicate different kinds of 
functions the words in a sentence perform. Here are some of the features of 
the Reed-Kellogg system.
!
1. John runs.
This is a simple sentence. The diagram begins with a base line. The subject 
of the sentence is separated from the predicate by a vertical line extending 
through the base. The predicate contains a verb. 
!
John 
 
runs

8  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
2. Students quietly read books.
This sentence adds a direct object of the verb and a modifying adverb.
!
3. Teachers are effective leaders.
This sentence adds a predicate noun to the verb, and a modifying adverb. 
!
4. I heard you were leaving.
This sentence adds a clause as a direct object. 
!
5. Children read books and emails.
This sentence has two direct objects.
!
Students 
 
read 
 
books
                                         quietly
                                                you 
 
were leaving
I 
 
heard
                                                                           books
Children 
 
read 
 
                    and
                                                                           emails
Teachers 
 
are 
 
 leaders
                                                          effective

A Grounding in Grammar  
 9
6. The fact is, you are not ready.
This sentence has a clause as a predicate nominative.
!
7. Give the man your wallet.
This sentence has an understood subject and an indirect object.
!
8. Dawn, my cat, ate her food.
This sentence has an appositive.
!
9. The stunned crowd watched the bridge falling into the river.
This sentence has a participle, a verbal form used as adjective. 
!
	
	
	
you	
are	
	
ready
fact	 	
is	
	
	
not
	
The
(you)	
 Give	 	
	
	
wallet
	
	
(to)	
	
	
	
your
	
	
	
man
	
	
	
	
the 
Dawn	
(cat)		
ate	
food
	
	
my	
	
	
her
	
crowd	
watched	
bridge
The 	
stunned	
	
	
the	
falling
	
	
	
	
	
	
into
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
river
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
the

10  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
10. Studying hard can be profitable.
This sentence has for its subject a gerund, a verbal form used as a noun.
!
11. Pedro hit the ball well, but he ran to the wrong base.
This is a compound sentence, composed of two clauses that could stand 
on their own. In logic, we will learn that, while simpler sentences contain only 
one proposition, a compound sentence contains two (or more) propositions.
!
12. St. Augustine said that sinning is easy.
This is a much-used kind of compound sentence called “indirect dis­
course.” In it, “that” is not a demonstrative adjective (like “that man”) but is a 
conjunction. “That” comes as a translation of the Latin words quod and quia, 
which were used in sentences like this one. “That” functions as an opening 
quotation mark.
!
Pedro	
	 hit	
	
	
	 	
	
ball
	
	 	
well	 	
	 but	
	
	
the
	
he		
	
ran
	
	 	
	
	
to
	
	 	
	
	
	 	
	
base
	
	 	
	
	
	 	
the 	
	
wrong
Studying
	
hard
	
	
can be	
profitable
St. Augustine	
	
said
	
	
	
	
that
	
sinning
	
	
is	 	
	
easy

A Grounding in Grammar  
 11
13. The man whom the grand jury indicted was arrested in Biloxi.
This is a complex sentence, composed of two clauses, but they cannot 
stand on their own, because one is subordinate to the other. 
!
14. I want to meet a man who will treat me well.	 	
	
	
	
	
The direct object is a clause with an infinitive and direct object. The rest of 
the sentence is a subordinate clause explaining what kind of man he should be.
!
15. When the train goes through, the windows rattle noisily, and the whole 
house shakes.
This is a compound-complex sentence. It begins with a subordinate clause 
saying when everything happens. After “through” we have a compound sen­
tence with two independent clauses.
!
man	
	
was arrested
	
	
	
in
	
The	
	
	
Biloxi
	
	
jury	 	
indicted	
whom
	
the	 	
grand
	
	
   to meet	
	
man
I	
want	
	
	
	
a
	
	
	
who	
will treat	
me
	
	
	
	
	
well
	
train	 	
goes through
	
	
the
When
	
	
windows	 	
rattle
	
	
	
the		
	
noisily
	
and
	
	
	
house	
	
shakes
	
	
the	
	
whole

12  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
16. “I really do not know that anything has ever been more exciting than dia­
gramming a sentence.” (Gertrude Stein, 20th cen. English writer)
This sentence in indirect discourse is interesting on its own; but what 
makes it fun is that the author was a very eccentric English lady. She did many 
other things one might think are “more exciting.”
!
It is possible to diagram much more complex sentences.
!
17. We the people of the United States, in order to form a more perfect Union, 
establish justice, insure domestic Tranquility, provide for the common de­
fence, promote the general Welfare, and secure the Blessings of Liberty to 
ourselves and our Posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the 
United States of America.
I	
do	
know
	
really	
	
not	
that 
	
anything	
has	
been	
	
exciting
	
	
	
	
ever	
more	
than
	
	
	
	 	
	
	 diagramming	
sentence
	
	
	
	 	
	
	 	
	
a

                                                                                 ordain
We  (people) 
 
    do 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
              Constitution
                                                                                 establish 
                                 
United States                                                                                     United States
                                                                                                                                                                              America
and
of
the
the
this
for
the
of
in order to
form 
 
Union
establish 
 
justice
insure 
 
tranquility
provide
promote 
 
welfare
secure 
 
blessings
a
perfect
more
domestic
for
defense
the
common
the
general
the
of
to
and
ourselves
posterity
our
liberty
13

14  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
Some Helpful Websites and Webpages about 
Grammar and Syntax
Guide to Grammar and Writing, http://grammar.ccc.commnet.edu/grammar/index.htm.
“Basic Sentence Parts, Phrase Configurations,” Guide to Grammar and Writing, 
http://grammar.ccc.commnet.edu/grammar/diagrams2/diagrams_frames.htm.
“500 Sentence Diagrams: English Grammar and Usage,” German—Latin—English, 
http://www.german-latin-english.com/diagrams.htm.
“Sendraw,” University of Florida Department of English, http://sendraw.ucf.edu/.
“Parts of Speech,” English Club, http://www.englishclub.com/grammar/parts-of-speech
_1.htm.
“How to Diagram a Sentence,” ThoughtCo, http://homeworktips.about.com/od/
englishhomework/ss/diagram.htm.
Problem Set 1: Grammar Review
Identifying the Eight Parts of Speech
Noun
Pronoun
Adjective
Verb
Adverb
Preposition
Conjunction 
Interjection
Instructions 
Identify examples of the parts of speech in ten of the sentences to be di­
agrammed in “Diagramming Sentences,” below. Then take a few sentences 
from Gorgias, Encomium of Helen (from Problem Set 2) and identify each 
word’s part of speech.
Diagramming Sentences
Instructions 	
Using the traditional method of diagramming sentences as introduced 
by A. Reed and B. Kellogg in Higher Lessons in English Grammar (1877) and 
recently popularized by Kitty Burns Florey in Sister Bernadette’s Barking Dog 
(2006), diagram the following sentences:
	 1.	John runs.
	 2.	Students quietly read books.
	 3.	Teachers are effective leaders.

A Grounding in Grammar  
 15
	 4.	I heard you were leaving.
	 5.	Students read books and articles.
	 6.	The fact is, you are not ready.
2. Jon R. Stone, Routledge Book of World Proverbs (Oxfordshire and New York: Routledge, 2006), 92. 
	 7.	Give the man your money.
	 8.	I jumped when he popped the balloon.
	 9.	Eve, my cat, ate her food.
	10.	The dog barked.
	11.	The dog chased the rabbit.
	12.	The dog was tired.
	13.	The dog chased the rabbit into the woods down the road.
	14.	The dog gave us her paw.
	15.	Stop that loud barking!
	16.	The dog is doing what?
	17.	As she chased the rabbit down the road, Mildred wondered why 
she bothered, when she could be home eating dog food from her 
yellow bowl.
	18.	Trotting down the road in a red collar, I spotted the dog.
	19.	Chasing rabbits is fun.
	20.	Tuffy is a good dog, but maybe he needs obedience school or some 
plain old-fashioned discipline.
	21.	“Death is the black camel which kneels at every man’s gate.” (Arab 
proverb)2
	22.	“Time flies like an arrow but fruit flies like a banana.” (Groucho 
Marx, 20th-cen. American comedian)
	23.	“His attention was called to her by the conduct of his dog, who had 
suddenly darted forward with a little volley of shrill barks, in which 
the note of welcome, however, was more sensible than that of defi­
ance.” (Henry James, 19th-cen. American novelist, The Portrait of 
a Lady)
	24.	“It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession 
of a good fortune, must be in want of a wife.” (Jane Austen, 18th cen. 
English novelist, Pride and Prejudice) 
	25.	“So we beat on, boats against the current, borne back ceaselessly into 
the past.” (F. Scott Fitzgerald, 20th-cen. American novelist, The Great 
Gatsby)

	26.	“I could see the achieved sentence standing there, as real, intact, and 
built to stay as the Mississippi State Capitol at the end of my street.” 
(Eudora Welty, 20th-cen. Southern American writer and photogra­
pher, On Writing)
	27.	“Sir Walter Elliot, of Kellynch Hall, in Somersetshire, was a man 
who, for his own amusement, never took up any book but the Bar­
onetage; there he found occupation for an idle hour, and consolation 
in a distressed one; there his faculties were roused into admiration 
and respect, by contemplating the limited remnant of the earliest pat­
ents; there any unwelcome sensations, arising from domestic affairs 
changed naturally into pity and contempt as he turned over the al­
most endless creations of the last century; and there, if every other leaf 
were powerless, he could read his own history with an interest which 
never failed.” (Jane Austen, 18th-cen. English novelist, Persuasion) 
	28.	“The logician does not care particularly about this or that hypothesis 
or its consequences, except so far as these things may throw light upon 
the nature of reasoning.” (Charles Sanders Peirce, 19th-cen. American 
philosopher)
16  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic

Rhetoric: An Introduction
Lesson 2
Rhetoric: An Introduction 
The Essentials 
Historical Setting: The Invention of Rhetoric by the Greeks 
during the Fifth Century b.c.
The way that rhetoric and logic were born tells a lot about what these two 
crafts or arts are like. We will look here at the origins of rhetoric, the first of 
the two to be developed, then in Lesson 5 we will look at the invention of 
logic. 
We begin with a historical fact. In 467 b.c. the people of Syracuse, a 
Greek colony in Sicily, deposed the political strong-man (tyrannos, from 
which we get the term “tyrant”) ruling them, whose name was Hieron I. The 
Syracusans replaced Hieron’s form of one-man rule with democracy, which 
literally means “rule by the common people” or “rule by the many.” Two in­
stitutions central to Greek democracies quickly grew up in Syracuse and oth­
er Greek city-states that followed its lead in developing democratic forms of 
government: a popular assembly (ekklesia) designed to pass laws and make 
political decisions for the community and a law court designed to deal with 
those who broke the laws, where citizens decided guilt or innocence. The way 
decisions were made in both of these new institutions was through discussion 
and majority rule. 
Traditionally Greeks had called a person who was most knowledgeable 
17

18  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
about the most important matter a “wise man” or “sage” (Gk. sophos). To 
be effective in this new political environment, a person needed to be skilled 
in delivering persuasive speeches. So there quickly sprang up a new kind of 
teacher who would teach the skills needed to carry the day in assembly or 
courtroom. Since what such men taught was good speaking (Gk. rheo or ero), 
the craft they taught was called the “art of rhetoric (rhetorike techne)” or just 
“rhetoric.” Aristotle then defined rhetoric as “the art of observing in any given 
case the available means of persuasion.” And to underscore how they were 
teaching this new kind of knowledge for a new kind of political life in a de­
mocracy, the teachers of rhetoric put a new ending on this traditional word 
and called themselves “sophist” (Gk. sophistes), from which we get, among 
other things, the English word “sophisticated.”1
The Three Kinds of Rhetorical Discourse
The first of the Sicilian teachers of rhetoric, or sophists, was named Ko­
rax, and his student was Tisias. Both focused on teaching people how to be 
effective in the law courts and wrote textbooks on rhetoric that used sample 
scenarios to teach effective speaking. These books (called technai—that is, 
“technical manuals”) have been lost, but they seem to have been organized 
around “topics.” This word comes from the Greek word topos which means 
“place.” So a topic in a rhetorical manual was a place in the book where one 
could find examples of the different rhetorical skills one could learn by imi­
tation. In one place you would find examples of engendering the emotion of 
pity in the audience, in another you could see how to produce fear; one place 
would show you how to highlight your own qualities (ethos), while another 
would show how to “turn the tables” on your opponent. 
Aristotle records this argument taken from the manual of Korax: “If an 
accused person is not open to the charge, for example, if a weak man is tried 
for violent assault, the defense is that he was not likely to do such a thing. But 
if he is open to the charge, for example, if he is a strong man, the defense is still 
that he was not likely to do such a thing, since he could be sure people would 
think he was likely to do it. And so with any other charge: the accused must 
be either open or not open to it, and there is in either case an appearance of 
probable innocence.”2 
1. For an introduction to Greek history and culture, see H. D. F. Kitto, The Greeks (New Brunswick, 
N.J.: Aldine, 2007). 
2. Aristotle, Rhetoric 2.24, 1402a3–29.

Rhetoric: An Introduction  
 19
This argument is not designed to show with absolute certainty that the 
accused is innocent, but is designed to point out an argumentative strategy, 
one that argues for innocence based on what is “probable” or “likely (Gk. 
eikos),” because such a “likely story” should be sufficient to have the jury ren­
der a finding of innocent. Familiarity with this scenario allows the student of 
rhetoric to adapt it to other cases. Over the centuries, this focus on probable 
or persuasive arguments that Tisias and Korax gave to legal rhetoric has re­
mained a central technique in the lawyer’s rhetorical arsenal. 
Another Sicilian, a sophist named Gorgias, from the town of Leontini, 
applied rhetoric to a second area, the realm of political debate. In 427 b.c., 
just after the beginning of the Peloponnesian War between Sparta and Ath­
ens, he came to Athens as ambassador from Syracuse and was greatly applaud­
ed for his brilliant speeches He was especially prized by the Athenians for his 
sophisticated and ornate style of speaking. 
In addition to speaking about political matters, Gorgias set up in Athens a 
popular school for teaching rhetoric, where Athenians could learn rhetorical 
skills useful in law court or political assembly. His Encomium of Helen, how­
ever, is not directly about legal or political matters, but concerns a mythical 
character, Helen of Troy, wife of the Spartan king Menelaus and reputedly the 
most beautiful woman in the world. She had left Sparta and her husband with 
a Trojan prince named Paris, and so the Greeks blamed her as the cause of the 
bloody Trojan War. Gorgias seems to have written his Encomium as a kind of 
advertisement for his school, since the implication of his speech is that rhet­
oric powerful enough to convince the Greeks, who hated Helen, of her in­
nocence was certainly rhetoric worth paying good money to learn from him.
With Gorgias’s Encomium of Helen, we complete the number of the kinds 
of rhetoric the Greek rhetoricians recognized. They set out three kinds of 
rhetorical discourse, based on three different kinds of speeches given: 
	
1.	deliberative or political rhetoric, which studies political speech and 
writing; 
	
2.	forensic or legal rhetoric, which studies legal speeches and writing; and
	
3.	display or ceremonial rhetoric (epideiktikos) which studies ceremonial 
speeches and writing, as well as other persuasive discourse that is not 
directly political or legal.

20  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
The Wide Extent of Rhetoric
The Greek rhetoricians knew that these three areas studied by rhetoric do 
not exhaust the wide range of speaking and writing. They recognized poetry 
in many forms, history, and descriptions of the universe that Plato and Aris­
totle came to call “philosophy” (meaning “love of wisdom”) and also called 
“science,” a term we limit to only some of the disciplines one can study, say, in 
college. None of these forms of discourse are directly concerned with speaking 
(or writing) in a way that persuades, or tries to persuade, our fellow humans 
about how to act on a particular matter of practical life. This is why rhetoric as 
the Greeks understood it is a different art from these other studies. However, 
it is true that all discourse—whether written or spoken or just in the mind, 
whether designed directly to persuade someone of something or to narrate a 
tale or tell an abstract truth—does have certain rhetorical features. In a wide 
sense, then, all human discourse has rhetorical characteristics as well as gram­
matical and logical features. Consequently, the essentials of Greek rhetoric, as 
well as the verbal logic the Greeks invented, can help us in all our discourse, 
not just when we are trying to persuade our fellow citizens or the traffic cop 
or our mothers about some pressing practical matter. Aristotle recognized the 
wide scope of both rhetoric and logic. After noting that rhetoric is the coun­
terpart of dialectic, he went on to say, “Both are concerned with things that 
come, more or less, within the general concern of all humans, and they do 
not belong to some limited discipline. Consequently, all humans make use, 
more or less, of both; for to some extent all attempt to discuss statements and 
maintain them [the concern of logic] and to defend themselves and attack 
others [the concern of rhetoric].” 
The Three Rhetorical Appeals
As you read Gorgias’s Encomium of Helen, you can see a second important 
feature of rhetorical discourse. Gorgias introduces his speech with a few gen­
eral truths—the Greeks called them “maxims”—that you can easily accept. By 
beginning with some ideas with which his audience agrees, Gorgias presents 
himself as the kind of person to whom we should be willing to listen. This is a 
way of trying to persuade his audience not based on the content of the speech 
to come, but on the kind of character or skill or knowledge or qualifications 
of the speaker—Gorgias himself. The Greek rhetoricians called this mode of 

Rhetoric: An Introduction  
 21
persuasion “ethical appeal” because it persuades the audience based on the 
qualities (ethos) of the speaker himself. Such ideas dispose us to listen to him. 
Then Gorgias sets out a few facts about Helen, lets us know from the begin­
ning that he will “refute those who rebuke Helen,” and presents four lines of 
reasoning that attempt to prove through reasoning that Helen is innocent. 
This kind of persuasion is called “rational appeal.” Gorgias ends his speech 
by focusing on the powerful emotion of love, which appeals to the emotions 
of those in his audience and so is called an “emotional appeal.” In Gorgias’s 
Encomium, then, not only do we see an example of one of the three kinds of 
speeches the classical rhetoricians recognized, but we also see examples of the 
three appeals they taught. 
So the three modes of rhetorical appeal are:
	
1.	Ethical appeal (ethos)
	
2.	Rational appeal (logos)
	
3.	Emotional appeal (pathos)
In Lesson 3 we will learn how a persuasive speech should be organized, ac­
cording to the ancient Rhetoricians. And in Lesson 4, we will go more thor­
oughly into these three appeals. 
Primary Sources
	1.	Aristotle, Sophistical Refutations, c. 34, 183b17-33: For in the case of all discoveries the 
results of previous labors that have been handed down from other have been advanced bit 
by bit by those who have taken them on, whereas the original discoveries generally make 
an advance that is small at first, though much more useful than the development that later 
springs out of them. For it may be that in everything, as the saying is, the first start is the 
main part: and for this reason also it is the most difficult; for in proportion as it is most 
potent in its influence, so it is smallest in its compass and therefore most difficult to see: 
whereas when this is once discovered, it is easier to add and develop the remainder in con­
nection with it. This is in fact what has happened in regard to rhetorical speeches and to 
practically all the other arts: for those who discovered the beginnings of them advanced 
them in all only a little way, whereas the celebrities of today are the heirs, so to speak, of a 
long succession of men who have advanced them bit by bit, and so have developed them 
to their present form, Tisias coming next after the first founder [that is, Korax], then 
Thrasymachus after Tisias, and Theodorus next to him, while several people have made 
their several contributions to it: and therefore it is not to be wondered at that the art has 
attained considerable dimensions.
	2.	Aristotle, Rhetoric 1.2, 1355b26: Rhetoric may be defined as the art of observing in any 
given case the available means of persuasion.

	3.	Aristotle, Rhetoric 1.3, 1358a36–b11: Rhetoric falls into three divisions, determined by 
the three classes of listeners to speeches. For of the three elements in speech-making—
speaker, subject, and person addressed—it is the last one, the hearer, that determines the 
speech’s end and object. The hearer must be either a judge, with a decision to make about 
things past or future, or an observer. A member of the assembly decides about future 
events, a juryman about past events, while those who merely decide on the orator’s skill 
are observers. From this it follows that there are three divisions of oratory: (a) political, 
(b) forensic, and (c) the ceremonial oratory of display. Political speaking urges us either to 
do or not to do something: one of these two courses is always taken by private counselors, 
as well as by men who address public assemblies. Forensic speaking either attacks or de­
fends somebody: one or the other of these two things must always be done by the parties 
in a law case. The ceremonial oratory of display either praises or censures somebody.
Problem Set 2: Rhetorical Analysis 
Identifying the Rhetoric of Gorgias’s Encomium of Helen 
Instructions 
Read the following speech composed by the sophist and rhetorician Gor­
gias. Then answer the following questions:
	
1.	What kind of oratory is this speech: (a) deliberative or political oratory? 
(b) forensic? (c) display?
	
2.	What is Gorgias’s main conclusion or thesis?
	
3.	Identify the parts of the speech (by using section numbers in paren­
theses) where Gorgias uses each of the three different rhetorical 
appeals: 
a. Ethical appeal 
b. Rational appeal 
c. Emotional appeal 
	
4.	What are the main lines of argument that Gorgias uses to prove his 
main conclusion? How many are there? Simplify each of these argu­
ments, putting Gorgias’s arguments in your own words.
Giorgias, Encomium of Helen
(1) What is becoming (kosmos) to a city is manpower, to a body beauty, to a soul 
wisdom, to an action virtue, to a speech truth, and the opposites of these are 
unbecoming. Man and woman and speech and deed and city and object should 
be honored with praise if praiseworthy and be blamed if blameworthy, for it is 
an equal error and mistake to blame what should be praised and to praise what 
should be blamed. (2) It is the duty of one and the same man both to speak 
22  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic

Rhetoric: An Introduction  
 23
rightly about what is needed and to refute what is not spoken rightly. Thus it is 
right to refute those who rebuke Helen, a woman about whom the testimony of 
inspired poets has become as unanimous as the bad omen of her name, which 
has come to remind us of misfortunes. For myself, by introducing some reason­
ing into my speech, I wish to free the accused of blame and, having reproved 
her detractors as liars and proved the truth, to free her from their ignorance.
(3) Now it is not unclear, not even to a few, that in her nature and race the 
woman who is the subject of this speech is preeminent among humans. For 
it is well-known that her mother was Leda, and her father was actually a god, 
Zeus, but was thought to be a mortal, Tyndareus. (4) Born from such stock, 
her beauty was godlike, which lasted; no mistake about that. In many she 
produced great desire for her love, and her one body was the cause that drove 
off together many bodies of men, thinking great thoughts for great goals. For 
some the greatness of wealth, others the glory of ancient nobility, others the 
vigor of their own skills, and others the power acquired by knowledge. And 
all came because of a passion that loved to conquer and loved unconquer­
able honor. (5) Who it was and why and how he sailed away, taking Helen as 
his love, I shall not say. To tell the knowing what they know seems right but 
brings no delight. 
I shall set forth the causes through which it was likely (eikon) that Helen’s 
voyage to Troy should take place. 
(6) For either by will of Fate and decision of the gods and vote of ne­
cessity did she do what she did, or taken by force, or seduced by words [or 
captured by love]. 
Now if in the first way, it is right for someone responsible to be held re­
sponsible; for a god’s predetermination cannot be stopped by human premed­
itation. For it is the nature of things, not for the strong to be hindered by the 
weak, but for the weaker to be ruled and drawn by the stronger, for the stron­
ger to lead and the weaker to follow. A god has more power than a mortal, in 
strength and mind, and many other ways. So if one must place blame on fate 
and a god, one must free Helen from disgrace. 
(7) But if she was violently abducted or illegally assaulted or victimized 
unjustly, it is clear that the abductor, the assaulter, and the victimizer, did the 
wrong, and she who was abducted, assaulted, and victimized, did the suffer­
ing. So the barbarian abductor deserves to meet with a barbarous response, in 
speech and law and deed: blamed in speech, sentenced in law, and punished 
in deed. She who was forced, and removed from her homeland, and separat­
ed from her friends, is she not to be pitied rather than reviled? For he did 
terrible things; she was the victim; it is accordingly right to pity her and to 
hate him. . . .

(12) Now if speech persuaded her soul, which it moved and compelled 
to believe the things said and to agree to the things done, he who persuaded, 
like an abductor, did wrong; but she who was persuaded, like one abducted, 
is wrongly blamed. (13) Persuasion, when added to speech, shapes the soul at 
will. This we can see: first, in the explanations of those who study nature, who, 
by discarding one opinion in favor of another, make what used to seem un­
believable and obscure become clear to the eyes of opinion; second, in pow­
erful discourse, where a speech, written with art but not spoken with truth, 
delights and persuades the many; and third, in the competing arguments of 
philosophers [lovers of wisdom], in which quick thought is displayed, but 
makes believing an opinion something easy to change.
(14) The effect of speech upon the condition of the soul is comparable to 
the power of drugs over the physiology of the body. For just as different drugs 
draw off different humors from the body, and some kill disease and others kill 
life, the same is true of speeches: some distress, others delight; some cause fear, 
others induce courage; and some drug and bewitch the soul with a kind of evil 
persuasion. (15) This explanation means that if she was persuaded by speech, 
she did no wrong but was not favored by fortune. 
Now I turn to the fourth cause. If it was because of love she did these 
things, there it will not be difficult to escape the charge alleged. For things we 
see do not have the nature we wish them to have, but the nature each one ac­
tually has. Through sight the soul receives an impression, even in its own way. 
(16) When soldiers in war buckle on their martial bronze and steel, some 
for defense, others for attack, when sight sees this, immediately it is alarmed 
and it alarms the soul, so that often men flee, panic-stricken, from future dan­
ger, as though it were present. As strong as the custom of obeying the law is, it 
retreats because of fear that comes from sight, which causes a man no longer 
to care about what is thought honorable because of the law and advantageous 
because of victory. 
(17) And it has happened that after seeing what is terrifying, they have 
lost their presence of mind about the immediate problem. This is how fear ex­
tinguishes and destroys thought. So many have fallen victim to useless deeds 
and frightful diseases and incurable madness. In this way, sight engraves on 
the mind images of things seen; many frightening impressions linger; and 
what lingers is exactly like what is spoken. . . . 
(19) Consequently, if the eye of Helen, pleased by the figure of Alexander 
[Paris], that presented to her soul erotic desire and the embraces of love, what 
is so wondrous in that? If love, as a god, has the divine power found in the 
gods, how could a lesser being reject and refuse it? On the other hand, if love 
is a disease of human origin and a fault of the soul, it should not be blamed as 
an evil, but regarded as an affliction. 
24  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic

Rhetoric: An Introduction  
 25
(20) How then can you think blaming Helen is just, since she did what 
she did from love or was persuaded by speech or abducted by force or because 
of fate? Whatever way, she is completely acquitted. (Gorgias, Encomium of 
Helen)3
3. Gorgias, Encomium of Helen, sec. 1–20, trans. R. E. Houser, in Early Greek Philosophy, ed., trans. 
André Laks and Glenn W. Most (Cambridge, Mass.: Loeb Classical Library, 2016), 8:166–85. 

The “Canon” of Five Rhetorical Skills
Lesson 3 
The Canon of Five Rhetorical Skills 
and the Five Parts of a Classical 
Speech
The Essentials
Rhetoric Concerns Argumentative Discourse
The classical Greeks initiated the idea that the educated person master 
three sets of verbal and writing skills, three “arts,” governing the use of lan­
guage, whether the language be spoken, written, or in the mind: grammar, 
rhetoric, and logic. Grammar is concerned with putting language in the prop­
er form, following the rules for forming words, sentences, and paragraphs cor­
rectly; logic is concerned with formulating language rationally; and rhetoric 
concerns formulating language persuasively, as we have noted. The earliest 
rhetoricians were concerned with speech about practical matters—political 
and legal disputes—that were the focus of attention in the political assemblies 
and law courts of Greek democracies and the Roman republic. In this realm 
of life, knowledge is important because it leads to action. In the practical 
sphere, we do not seek knowledge for its own sake, as we do in the theoretical 
sphere, say, in geometry or poetry or philosophy.
To distinguish these two kinds of knowledge, Aristotle called political 
26

The “Canon” of Five Rhetorical Skills  
 27
and legal knowledge, where it is supposed to lead beyond itself to action, 
“practical knowledge,” which he contrasted with “theoretical” or “speculative” 
or “contemplative” knowledge, where our goal is just to understand some­
thing.1 From the beginning, then, rhetoric was thought of as a kind of practi­
cal knowledge. Once Aristotle invented the discipline of logic, he thought of 
it as an instrument serving theoretical knowledge, and so he said, “Rhetoric 
is the counterpart of logic,” rhetoric being the instrument (organon) we use 
to develop ideas in the practical sphere, while logic is the instrument we use 
in the theoretical sphere. But in fact, Aristotle slightly overemphasized the 
separation between rhetoric and logic, since every form of discourse has rhe­
torical characteristics as well as grammatical and logical ones. All three of the 
language arts work together.
Since they were primarily concerned with the political sphere of life, the 
early rhetoricians focused on the kind of discourse where the speaker’s pur­
pose is practical, trying to convince the audience with a call to action about 
some political or legal matter. Such speeches range from whether the Athe­
nians should send a fleet to attack the people of Syracuse in Sicily, who were 
allies of the Spartans during the Peloponnesian War (they did, but were de­
feated); to George Washington’s “Farewell Address,” which tried to convince 
Americans not to form political parties or alliances with other countries (too 
often ignored); to Winston Churchill’s speeches rallying the British and 
Americans during World War II (successful at the time, but too easily for­
gotten since). Such speeches are examples of what is called “argumentative” 
discourse. Argumentative discourse can be seen in contrast with three other 
forms of discourse.
One of these is narrative, where the author’s purpose is to say what hap­
pened, to narrate a story, whether real or fictional, such as the kind of writing 
found in histories like those of Herodotus and Thucydides or the epic poems 
of Homer. Another is descriptive discourse, whose purpose is to set out the 
facts, as Pausanias did in his Description of Greece, a second-century a.d. tour 
guide of Greece, or Pliny’s Natural History, an early description of the phe­
nomena of nature. A third kind is expository, where one “exposes” the truth 
by giving an explanation of some matter or some position or view one has. 
Expository discourse adds to simple narration of events or description of facts 
an explanation that begins to answer the question why? 
In the highly charged political and legal realm where the Greek and Ro­
1. Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics 1.1.1094a1–17, 6.1–8.1138b18–1142a31.

28  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
man rhetoricians plied their arts, however, simply narrating or describing the 
facts, or even offering an explanation, was not enough; nor is it today. The 
reason is that in this realm there are competing views—Socrates is guilty vs. 
Socrates is innocent; slavery is acceptable vs. slavery is not; the United States 
should attack enemies militarily vs. the United States should not. So argu­
mentative discourse adds attempts to prove both that your view is true and 
that other views are false or that the course of action you propose is the best 
while others are inferior. 
The Canon of Five Rhetorical Skills
The early rhetoricians found that their art incorporates skills in five dif­
ferent but related areas. These skills are essential to delivering a persuasive 
speech in a law court or political assembly, but they are also required to speak 
or write effectively in other areas of life. The term “canon” comes from the 
Greek word kanon, a “straight rod” that masons and carpenters could use as 
a rule or ruler. The canon of rhetorical skills consists in five skills necessary to 
deliver a persuasive speech.
The five skills are:2 
1. invention or discovery, finding what you need to say (Greek: heuresis, 
from which we get “heuristic”; Latin inventio); 
2. disposition or arrangement, organizing the discourse appropriate­
ly (Greek: taxis, from which we get “taxonomy,” the classification of living 
things into genera and species, and “taxidermist,” who arranges the skin of the 
animal to look real; Latin: dispositio); 
3. style, that is, using the best vocabulary and syntax for the audience 
(Greek: lexis, from the word for speaking; Latin: elocutio); 
4. memorization, remembering what you want to say (Greek: mneme; 
Latin: memoria); and 
5. delivery, learning the voice modulation, clarity, and emphasis that dis­
tinguish the good speaker, as well as all the body language that is involved 
(Greek: hypokrisis; Latin: pronuntiatio). The ancient rhetoricians distin­
guished these five skills because they recognized that proficiency in one does 
not ensure proficiency in the other skills, but proficiency in all five is required 
if you want to be a great speaker. 
2. For a fuller treatment, with examples, see Edward P. G. Corbett, Classical Rhetoric for the Mod­
ern Student (New York: Oxford University Press, 1971). 

The “Canon” of Five Rhetorical Skills  
 29
Demosthenes, the great orator who in the fourth century b.c. warned the 
Athenians that Philip of Macedon was preparing to move south to conquer 
them, provides a memorable example of how different these five canonical 
skills really are. As a young man he had mastered the first four skills, but he 
could not overcome a natural stutter that ruined his delivery. His solution to 
this problem was to practice speaking by the seashore, putting a few of the 
smooth pebbles he found there into his mouth, until he could deliver a good 
speech with such “marbles in his mouth.” Sadly, the Athenians did not listen. 
They were conquered by Philip, whose son Alexander then conquered the 
known world and came to be called “the Great.”3
When he wrote his own textbook, which is the oldest one to survive in­
tact, Aristotle organized his Rhetoric around the first three canonical skills—
invention, arrangement, and style. Take a look at the outline of Aristotle’s 
Rhetoric at the end of this chapter. Better yet, go to the library, find a transla­
tion of Aristotle’s Rhetoric, and spend an hour reading the first two chapters, 
then look here and there in the book.
Rhetorical Invention
In the outline of his Rhetoric, you can see that Aristotle emphasizes dis­
covery, to which books I and II are devoted, while book III covers both style 
and arrangement. His treatment is organized by topics. If you read a few chap­
ters of Aristotle’s book you can see that for each topic he offers a number of 
examples illustrating effective rhetorical skills and occasionally showing mis­
takes to avoid. 
Rhetorical Arrangement
After treating discovery in books I and II, Aristotle turned to the style of 
speeches at the beginning of book III, and then he finished his book with the 
arrangement of the parts of a speech. He was familiar with the ideas of the 
earliest rhetoricians that a good speech should contain five parts.4 They are: 
1. Prologue introducing the speaker: (Greek: prooimion; Latin: exordium). 
2. Statement of the topic or case under consideration, which included 
a narration of the relevant facts (Greek: diegesis; Latin: narratio) as well as a 
preliminary statement of the speaker’s thesis (Greek: prothesis). 
3. Plutarch, Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans, “Demosthenes,” sec. 6. 
4. Aristotle, Rhetoric 3.13–19. 

30  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
3. Speaker’s proof or argument (Greek: pistis, which means “persuasion”; 
Latin: confirmatio), which often began with a preliminary outline or division 
of the points to be made (Greek: diairesis; Latin: divisio). 
4. Refutation of the opponent (Latin: confutatio, which could take the 
form of a direct reply to the opponent, in Greek: to pros ton antidokon), or an 
interrogation of the opponent or his ideas (erotesis), or occasionally just some 
sort of Aside.
5. Conclusion (Greek: epilogos; Latin: peroratio). Aristotle recognized 
these five parts of a speech, but in the interests of simplicity he said that only 
two of them are absolutely essential for all kinds of speeches: “You must state 
your case (prothesis), and you must prove it (pistis)”; all the other parts are 
icing on the cake, as it were.
Applications
If you reread Gorgias’s speech in Problem Set 2 entitled Encomium of Hel­
en, you can see how he used the idea of the parts of a speech. Many famous 
later speeches have followed this five-part model. Learning this arrangement 
from classical rhetoric should help you see how discourse is organized. Start 
looking for the organization of everything you read, which will help you or­
ganize your own speech, writing, and thinking. 
A Deeper Look
More on Invention
Aristotle’s use of rhetorical topics reflects earlier rhetoricians, for whom a 
topic is a place in the textbook for memorizing important and striking exam­
ples, what we might call an ancient “sound-bite.” The way to discover some­
thing to say, then, is to remember something memorable someone else said 
and then adapt it to your present speech or writing. In covering discovery, 
Aristotle first presents ideas based on the three kinds of speeches we saw in 
Lesson 2—deliberative, forensic, and display oratory. He calls the topics he 
covers there “special” or “specific” topics because they are specific to each one 
of these three types of speech. The rest of the topics he calls “general” because 
they are generally applicable to all kinds of speech and writing. Some of the 
general topics do not fall within the art (techne) of rhetoric, so Aristotle calls 
them “nontechnical.” These include useful information coming from (1) au­

The “Canon” of Five Rhetorical Skills  
 31
thorities, (2) testimonies, (3) moral maxims, (4) the law, and (5) precedents. 
Such information does not come from knowing the art of rhetoric but from 
elsewhere, but it is important in order to speak persuasively. The rest of the 
topics he covers, which are more important, he calls “technical” because they 
are part of the art (techne) of rhetoric. They are organized according to the 
three appeals. The general topics Aristotle put together were somewhat hap­
hazard and were further organized by later Greek and Roman rhetoricians. 
Many of Aristotle’s general topics in rhetoric overlap with subjects studied by 
later Aristotelian logicians in their treatment of logic. This historical overlap 
shows the close connection between rhetoric and logic.
Look under Primary Sources for a couple of rhetorical topics taken from 
the twenty-eight topics Aristotle lists in his Rhetoric, bk. 2, c. 23. We will learn 
about a number of these general topics when we study the logic of terms. This 
is because rhetoric and logic both cover some of the same material—human 
verbal discourse—which has grammatical, rhetorical, and logical characteris­
tics. It is the task of the three arts of the trivium to distinguish these features 
and study them systematically. Since these three arts all apply to the same 
thing, it is not surprising that they sometimes overlap. Over the centuries, 
this overlap has caused some rhetoricians to try to eliminate logic as a separate 
study, and it has caused many philosophers to dismiss rhetoric as unimport­
ant or even downright harmful. Aristotle’s moderate position was that both 
logic and rhetoric are important, and he explicitly rejected the ideas of both 
Plato and the Greek sophists that one of these disciplines should usurp the 
legitimate territory of the other. 
Primary Sources
Aristotle, Rhetoric: Outline of the Contents
Since we don’t cover the whole of Aristotle’s Rhetoric, look over this out­
line to see its full scope. You can correlate the subdivision under “Discovery” 
with material in this lesson. If you find something especially interesting, use 
the outline to find where to go in Aristotle’s book.
Topic (book/chapter)
	
I.	Introduction: basic definition and scope of rhetoric (I.1–3)	
	
II.	Discovery or invention (Gk. heuresis; Lat. inventio)
	
A.	Special topics useful in one area of rhetoric (I.4–14)	

32  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
1.	in political (deliberative) rhetoric (I.4–8)
2.	in display (epideiktic) rhetoric (I.9)
3.	in forensic (legal) rhetoric (I.10–14) 
	
B.	General topics useful in all areas of rhetoric (I.15–II.26) 
1.	nontechnical means of persuasion (I.15)	
2.	The technical means of persuasion: three appeals 
	
a.	ethical appeal I (II.1) 
	
b.	emotional appeal: rhetorical study of the human emotions 
(II.2–11)
	
c.	 ethical appeal II: rhetorical study of human character 
(II.12–18)
	
d.	rational appeal (II.19–26)
	
(1)	four general topics (II.19)
	
(2)	two general modes of persuasion: example (inductive) and 
enthymeme (deductive) (II.20)
	
(3)	moral maxims: general rules of good conduct (II.21)
	
(4)	using enthymemes (II.22)	
	
(5)	twenty-eight useful types of rational topics (enthymemes) 
(II.23)
	
(6)	nine fallacious enthymemes (II.24)	
	
(7)	enthymemes for refutation: counter-arguments and objec­
tions (II.25) 
	 III.	Style (Gk. lexis, hermeneia, phrasis; Lat. elocutio) (III.1–12)
	
IV.	Arrangement (Gk. taxis; Lat. dispositio) (III.13–19)
	
A.	Introduction (III.14–15)
	
B.	Narration of facts (III.16)
	
C.	Argument: in favor of your thesis and counterargument against 
opponent (III.17)
	
D.	Reply to your opponent (counterargument or interrogation) or 
Aside (III.18)
	
E.	Peroration (III.19)
	
V.	Memorization (Gk. mneme; Lat. memoria) [not in Aristotle’s book]
	 VI.	Delivery (Gk. hypokrisis; Lat. pronuntiatio) [not in Aristotle’s book]

Aristotle, Rhetoric 2.23, 1397a6–11; 1398a3–9. 
Two of many rhetorical topics that help you discover something to say in 
your speech:
1. One topic is based upon looking at the opposite of the thing in question. 
Observe whether that opposite has the opposite quality. If it does not, you re­
fute the original proposition; if it does, you establish this opposite. Example: 
“Temperance is beneficial; for licentiousness is hurtful.” Or, as in the Messinian 
speech: “If war is the cause of our present troubles, peace is what we need to put 
things right again.” 
6. Another topic is to apply to the other speaker what he has said against 
you. It is an excellent reversal to give to a debate. . . . It was employed by Iphi­
crates in his reply to Aristophon. “Would you,” he asked, “take a bribe to betray 
the fleet?” “No,” said Aristophon. And Iphicrates replied, “Very good: if you, 
who are Aristophon, would not betray the fleet, would I, who am Iphicrates?” 
Only we must remember beforehand that the other man is more likely than 
you are to commit the crime in question, otherwise you will make yourself ri­
diculous. 
Problem Set 3: The Rhetoric of Socrates in 
the Apology
The Kind of Rhetoric Socrates Uses 
Instructions
Read Plato, Apology of Socrates (there are many adequate translations you 
can use). Then answer the following questions about this work:
1. What is the primary conclusion for which Socrates is arguing?
2. Assuming that Socrates is using one of the three types of rhetoric out­
lined by the Greek rhetoricians, which of the three fundamentally describes 
his speech: deliberative rhetoric, forensic rhetoric, ceremonial rhetoric?
The Parts of Socrates’ Speech
Instructions
Divide Socrates’ speech into parts, using the Stephanus numbers (the 
page numbers found in most editions of Plato) for dividing the speech. See 
The “Canon” of Five Rhetorical Skills  
 33

34  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
how your parts compare with the five parts of a good speech recognized by 
the Greek rhetoricians: 
a.	introduction 
b.	narration or statement of facts, 
c.	proof or confirmation of the case, 
d.	refutation or aside discrediting the opposition, 
e.	peroration 

The Three Rhetorical Appeals
Lesson 4
The Three Rhetorical Appeals 
The Essentials
All persuasive speech and writing are designed to persuade some audience 
of something. This means that all rhetorical discourse involves three, not just 
two, factors. It involves the speaker and his audience, to be sure, but it also 
involves the subject the speaker addresses. We can envision these three factors 
as the three angles of a rhetorical triangle made up of speaker, topic, and audi­
ence. Each of these three parts of the triangle is an image of a different way of 
trying to convince the audience of something. This is why the core of the art 
of rhetoric is what Aristotle called the “three appeals”—that is, the three ways 
a persuasive speaker or writer appeals in his speech to his audience. A speaker 
skilled in the art of rhetoric can use any of the three. But very good speakers 
(or writers) will use all three, though in different ways. 	
The three types of appeal flow out of the three angles of this triangle.
35
The Triangle of Relations 
Involved in Rhetoric
topic
speaker
audience

36  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
Ethical Appeal (Ethos)
Ethical appeal focuses on the speaker himself. The term “ethical” comes 
from the Greek word ethos, which means “character,” “ability,” “skill,” and, 
above all, the “knowledge” of the speaker. So ethical appeal consists in what­
ever the speaker says—explicitly or implicitly—that tells us something about 
himself. You use ethical appeal to communicate to the audience the qualities 
that you—as speaker (or writer)—have, the qualities that are the reason the 
audience should listen to you and believe what you say. If you are speaking 
about baseball, you might indicate the experiences that make your message 
worthwhile. The same goes for a rock star, a politician, a soldier, a lawyer, 
or simply the man on the street. A good speaker does this self-consciously; 
a great speaker does it spontaneously, because the art or skill of rhetoric is 
so engrained in him that it has become, as it were, second nature to him. 
So said the Roman orator-philosopher Cicero. Sometimes the ethical appeal 
is made very overtly: “When I received the bronze star for service with the 
Tenth Mountain Division in Afghanistan . . . ,” or “In my book about Islam I 
said this about sharia law.” But it is usually better to make the ethical appeal 
in more subtle ways, especially in a democratic society like the United States.
One mistake often made is to think of ethical appeal as only dealing with 
the part of philosophy called “ethics” or “morality.” But this is not correct. It is 
based on confusing two Greek works: ethos and ethikos. The first term refers to 
a person’s skills or habits and is not limited to the topic of morality. The second 
word, however, refers precisely to morality, right and wrong, good and bad 
behavior. So don’t think that ethical appeal is limited to that area. Indicating 
you are an experienced painter has nothing to do with your personal morality, 
but is very important in advertising your house-painting business. This is an 
example of ethical appeal as the term is used in rhetoric. 
Finally, let’s note that ethical appeal is often misused. Over the last couple 
of decades in our increasingly interconnected and celebrity-driven culture, 
it has become fashionable for someone to claim to know something in one 
area—politics is a favorite—based on having become well-known in another. 
This is not something new. In Plato’s Apology, Socrates made exactly this crit­
icism of the Athenian leaders of his day. Movie stars are notorious for doing 
this, and they get away with it because of the increasing gullibility of an in­
creasingly uneducated American public. One can be a fine actor—whose job 
it is to deliver convincingly lines someone else has written—even while being 
completely ignorant about the topic one is addressing.

The Three Rhetorical Appeals  
 37
Emotional Appeal (Pathos)
Emotional appeal concentrates not on the speaker but on the audience, 
and in a very particular way. The members of the audience who listen to the 
speaker have both minds and hearts—intelligence and emotions. The audi­
ence will be impacted by the words of the speaker in both ways. In using emo­
tional appeal, the speaker attempts to say things in a way that will unleash in 
the hearts of the audience the “right” emotions—that is, the emotions that 
go hand in hand with the conclusions the speaker is attempting to have them 
draw. In this way, emotional appeal uses such emotions as the instrument 
or means for attaining conviction in the audience members. Sometimes the 
speaker himself shows emotions in order to elicit emotions in the audience. It 
is not the speaker’s emotions, however, but the audience’s emotions that are 
the focus of an emotional appeal. Such emotions are very effective in getting 
the audience to follow the call to action that the speaker asks for, especially in 
political and forensic oratory. World War II in the twentieth century saw the 
rise of two extraordinary orators—on opposing sides of the conflict—who 
used the new medium of radio to extraordinary effect. Winston Churchill, the 
British prime minister and war leader, was a tremendously effective speaker. 
“Never have so many owed so much to so few,” he said of the pilots who saved 
his homeland during the air “Battle of Britain” early in the war. After the war, 
when the facts about the Jewish Holocaust came out, it became popular to 
think of Adolf Hitler as a madman, a sort of incarnation of the devil. But such 
a caricature makes it impossible to understand his rise to power. Evil though 
he would prove to be, Hitler was an extraordinary speaker. It was based in part 
upon the speeches he gave at the Nuremburg rallies in the 1930s that he took 
the Nazis from a marginal movement to running the German government. 
“One Folk, one Fatherland, one Führer,” was one of Hitler’s many effective slo­
gans. While these two examples of effective rhetoric use more than emotional 
appeal, it is the emotional appeal of patriotism—the love of country—that 
drives them and makes them memorable, even this many years later.
Rational Appeal (Logos)
According to Aristotle, the most important of the three appeals concen­
trates on the message about the topic at hand that the speaker (or writer) is 
trying to deliver. Here the speaker is appealing to the audience again, but to 
the mind of the audience, trying to show that facts and arguments about the 

38  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
topic—its content, not its emotional power or his own qualifications—are 
persuasive. Most of the content of persuasive discourse is concerned with this 
appeal. Here the speaker organizes his facts and makes his arguments. But the 
presentation of facts and the kind of arguments one makes should depend 
upon the audience you have in mind. A physicist will speak very differently to 
a room full of professional physicists at an academic meeting than to his Phys­
ics 1 class. Rational appeal is where rhetoric and logic come together. In fact, 
one could say the logic simply is a major part of rational appeal. Of course, 
for a rational appeal to work, the speaker (or writer) must understand his 
subject—and logic alone cannot produce this understanding. But we have all 
heard very learned scholars talk about fields they know quite well—perhaps 
they are world experts on the topic—but are so rhetorically inept that they 
are not at all convincing, especially when the audience is not other experts 
but the public at large. 
This is a constant problem in our society, where technical expertise has 
the upper hand over broad education in the liberal arts. And it leads to the 
situation we’ve all experienced: you should believe me, or worse, you must 
do what I say, simply because I am the so-called expert in the field and hold a 
position of power in our society. Lawyers, judges, doctors, and yes, professors, 
are especially inclined toward this attitude, which is simply an exercise of the 
powerful over the powerless. 
A Deeper Look
Using and Distinguishing the Three Appeals
Additional points about the three appeals are worth noting. First, quite 
often (though not always), ethical appeal is used at the beginning of a speech 
in order to make the audience receptive to the speaker’s message; a good 
speech usually ends with an emotional appeal that will still be “ringing in 
their ears” as the audience departs the speech or puts down the pamphlet or 
newspaper; rational appeal makes up most of the content and the middle part 
of most good persuasive discourse. It is a shame that over the centuries rhet­
oric often was reduced to concerning itself with emotional appeal and style, 
which is part of the reason it is now studied far too little. But the examples 
of Churchill, Hitler, and modern advertising show how influential rhetorical 
appeals can be. 
Second, in really fine persuasive speaking and writing, a given passage 

The Three Rhetorical Appeals  
 39
will combine two or even all three of these modes of appeal. Very succinct 
speeches—like Lincoln’s Gettysburg Address—always combine appeals in this 
way. With discourse that combines two or three appeals together, however, 
it is always possible to distinguish the three appeals and note which appeal 
is predominant in a particular passage of the speech or writing. In fact, it is 
necessary to do so. For if one does not distinguish different forms of appeal, 
an emotional or ethical appeal can lead us to accept a conclusion and then 
lead us to do a very illogical thing to accept the speaker’s reasoning, even if it 
is wrong, because it is built on bad principles.
This is the way bad ideas can come to be accepted by us and our society 
(much to our detriment), through what I call “the iron rule of logic.” First one 
accepts—perhaps with hesitation—a dubious principle that leads to a much-de­
sired conclusion. Then over time the principle is fully embraced, but leads to 
other conclusions, ones you would have rejected when the principle was first 
hesitantly accepted, but is now accepted as correct, based on embracing that 
very principle. History is rife with examples. Mussolini “made the trains run 
on time,” but involved Italy in wars they could not win on their own, even in 
alliance with Nazi Germany. Hitler himself came to power because he prom­
ised to clean up the terrible economic and political mess created in Germany 
after World War I by the economic punishment handed out to Germany under 
the Treaty of Versailles and by the extreme democracy of the German Weimar 
Republic. But then Hitler’s political principles led directly to World War II 
and the Jewish Holocaust, at a time when “sophisticated” opinion held that 
World War I had been “the war to end all wars.” And the same thing has hap­
pened in the United States. The Supreme Court in Brown v. Board of Education 
struck down segregation—an excellent result; but to do so the Court used the 
principle “separate is inherently unequal” and therefore bad, which in turn pro­
duced many controversial results. For instance, in the field of education, most 
of the women’s colleges that used to exist in the United States have become 
co-ed or have shut down on the grounds that “separate is inherently unequal.” 
Whatever your reaction to these kinds of cases, they clearly show the im­
portance of making distinctions—rhetorical and logical distinctions in addi­
tion to grammatical ones. This is ultimately one of the main reasons for study­
ing rhetoric and logic. If we don’t make such distinctions, then we will swallow 
persuasive discourse whole, say, supporting “change” without knowing what 
kind of change involved, or rejecting “change” as something always bad. And 
such attitudes are the definition not of the liberally education person—the 

40  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
“free” man—but of the slave, a slave first to discourse and then to raw power; 
for the second follows necessarily—that is, logically—from the first.
Primary Sources
Aristotle’s Rhetoric 1.2: Definition of Rhetoric and the Three Appeals 
Rhetoric may be defined as the faculty of observing in any given case the available means 
of persuasion. This is not a function of any other art. Every other art can instruct or 
persuade about its own particular subject-matter: for instance, medicine about what is 
healthy and unhealthy, geometry about the properties of magnitudes, arithmetic about 
numbers; and the same is true of the other arts and sciences. But rhetoric we look upon 
as the power of observing the means of persuasion on almost any subject presented to us; 
and that is why we say that, in its technical character, it is not concerned with any special 
or definite class of subjects. . . . 
Of the modes of persuasion furnished by the spoken word there are three kinds. The 
first kind depends on the personal character (ethos) of the speaker; the second on how it 
affects the audience (pathos); the third on the proof, or apparent proof, provided by the 
words of the speech itself (logos). (Rhetoric 1.2, 1355b26–36, 1356a1–3) 
Three Factors in the Orator’s Character Relevant to Ethical Appeal 
There are three things which inspire confidence in the orator’s own character (ethos) the 
three, namely, that induce us to believe a thing apart from any proof of it: good sense, 
good moral character, and good will. (Rhetoric 2.1, 1378a6–9)
Factors about the Human Condition That Apply to the Speaker (Relevant to Ethical Ap­
peal) or to the Audience (Relevant to Emotional Appeal)
Age: youth, the prime of life; old age. Status: birth; wealth; power. (Rhetoric 2.12–17) 
Aristotle’s List of the Human Emotions That the Good Speaker Must Understand and 
Can Use
Anger and calmness; friendship and hatred; fear and confidence; shame and shamelessness; 
kindness and unkindness; pity and indignation; envy and emulation. (Rhetoric 2.2–11)
Problem Set 4: The Three Appeals
Finding the Predominant Kind of Rhetorical Appeal
Instructions
For each of the following selections, answer these questions:
a.	What is the primary point or conclusion?
b.	Which of the three appeals—ethical, emotional, or rational—is pre­
dominantly used?
c.	Give two reasons for your answer to (b).

The Three Rhetorical Appeals  
 41
1. Benjamin Franklin, Speech in the Constitutional Convention on the Subject 
of Salaries, June 2, 1787
It is with reluctance that I rise to express a disapprobation of any one article of 
the plan, for which we are so much obliged to the honorable gentleman who 
laid it before us. From its first reading, I have borne a good will to it, and, in 
general, wished it success. In this particular of salaries to the executive branch, 
I happen to differ; and, as my opinion may appear new and chimerical, it is 
only from a persuasion that it is right, and from a sense of duty, that I hazard 
it. The Committee will judge of my reasons when they have heard them, and 
their judgment may possibly change mine. I think I see inconvenience in the 
appointment of salaries; I see none in refusing them, but on the contrary great 
advantages.
2. Edmund Burke, Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790)
It is now sixteen or seventeen years since I saw the queen of France, then the 
dauphiness, at Versailles; and surely never lighted on this orb, which she hardly 
seemed to touch, a more delightful vision. I saw her just above the horizon, dec­
orating and cheering the elevated sphere she just began to move in—glittering 
like the morning-star, full of life, and splendor, and joy. Oh! What a revolution! 
And what a heart must I have to contemplate without emotion that elevation 
and that fall! Little did I dream when she added titles of veneration to those of 
enthusiastic, distant, respectful love, that she should ever be obliged to carry the 
sharp antidote against disgrace concealed in that bosom; little did I dream that I 
should have lived to see such disasters fallen upon her in a nation of gallant men, 
in a nation of men of honor and of cavaliers. I thought then a thousand swords 
must have leaped from their scabbards to avenge even a look that threatened 
her with insult. But the age of chivalry is gone. That of sophisters, economists, 
and calculators, has succeeded; and the glory of Europe is extinguished forever. 
Never, never more, shall we behold that generous loyalty to rank and sex, that 
proud submission, that dignified obedience, that subordination of the heart, 
which kept alive, even in servitude itself, the spirit of an exalted freedom. The 
unbought grace of life, the cheap defense of nations, the nurse of manly senti­
ment and heroic enterprise is gone! It is gone, that sensibility of principle, that 
chastity of honor, which felt a stain like a wound, which inspired courage whilst 
it mitigated ferocity, which ennobled whatever it touched, and under which 
vice itself lost half its evil, by losing all its grossness.
3. Arnold Toynbee, Civilization on Trial (1948)
Does history repeat itself? In our Western world in the eighteenth and nine­
teenth centuries, this question used to be debated as an academic exercise. The 

42  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
spell of well-being which our civilization was enjoying at the time had dazzled 
our grandfathers into the quaint pharisaical notion that they were “not as other 
men are”; they had come to believe that our Western society was exempt from 
the possibility of falling into those mistakes and mishaps that have been the ruin 
of certain other civilizations whose history, from beginning to end, is an open 
book. To us, in our generation, the old question has rather suddenly taken on a 
new and very practical significance. We have awakened to the truth (how, one 
wonders, could we ever have been blind to it?) that Western man and his works 
are no more invulnerable than the now extinct civilizations of the Aztecs and 
the Incas, the Sumerians and the Hittites. So today, with some anxiety, we are 
searching the scriptures of the past to find out whether they contain a lesson 
that we can decipher. Does history give us any information about our own pros­
pects? And, if it does, what is the burden of it? Does it spell out for us an inexo­
rable doom, which we can merely await with folded hands, resigning ourselves, 
as best we may, to a fate that we cannot avert or even modify by our own efforts? 
Or does it inform us, not of certainties, but of probabilities, or bare possibilities 
in our own future? The practical difference is vast, for, on this second alterna­
tive, so far from being stunned into passivity, we should be roused to action. On 
this second alternative, the lesson of history would not be like an astrologer’s 
horoscope; it would be like a navigator’s chart, which affords the seafarer who 
has the intelligence to use it a much greater hope of avoiding shipwreck than 
when he was sailing blind, because it gives him the means, if he has the skill and 
courage to use them, of steering a course between charted rocks and reefs. 
4. William Shakespeare, Julius Caesar III.2 (ca. 1599)
Mark Antony’s speech after Julius Caesar has been killed:
You all do know this mantle. I remember
The first time ever Caesar put it on. 
’Twas on a summer’s evening, in his tent,
That day he overcame the Nervii.
Look, in this place ran Cassius’ dagger through.
See what a rent the envious Casca made.
Through this the well-beloved Brutus stabbed, 
And as he plucked his cursed steel away,
Mark how the blood of Caesar followed it,
As rushing out of doors, to be resolved
If Brutus so unkindly knocked, or no.
For Brutus, as you know, was Caesar’s angel.
Judge, O you gods, how dearly Caesar loved him.

The Three Rhetorical Appeals  
 43
This was the most unkindest cut of all, 
For when the noble Caesar saw him stab,
Ingratitude, more strong than traitors’ arms,
Quite vanquished him. Then burst his mighty heart, 
And, in his mantle muffling up his face,
Even at the base of Pompey’s statue,
Which all the while ran blood, great Caesar fell.
5. Leonard S. Spector, Nuclear Proliferation Today (1984)
The spread of nuclear weapons poses one of the greatest threats of our time and 
is among the most likely triggers of a future nuclear holocaust. It is sobering, for 
example, to reflect on how the superpowers might have responded if Israel had 
used nuclear weapons against Soviet-backed Egyptian forces in the 1973 Middle 
East War, a course Israel reportedly considered.
Even if nuclear cataclysm were avoided, the use of nuclear arms in a regional 
war could cause untold devastation. A handful of nuclear weapons could de­
stroy any country in the Middle East as a national entity, cause hundreds of 
thousands of casualties in the densely populated cities of India or Pakistan, or, if 
used against the Persian Gulf oil fields, undermine the economies of the West.
6. Jane Austen, Pride and Prejudice (1813), Chapter 19
In which Mr. Collins proposes marriage to Elizabeth Bennett:
My reasons for marrying are, first, that I think it a right thing for every clergy­
man in easy circumstances, like myself, to set the example of matrimony in his 
parish; secondly, that I am convinced it will add very greatly to my happiness; 
and thirdly—which perhaps I ought to have mentioned earlier—that it is the 
particular advice and recommendation of the very noble lady whom I have the 
honor of calling patroness [Lady Catherine de Burgh]. Twice has she conde­
scended to give me her opinion, unasked too! on this subject: and it was but the 
very Saturday night before I left Huntsford—between our pools at quadrille, 
while Mrs. Jenkinson was arranging Miss de Bourgh’s footstool, that she said, 
“Mr. Collins, you must marry. A clergyman like you must marry. Choose prop­
erly, choose a gentlewoman for my sake; and for your own, let her be an active, 
useful sort of person, not brought up high, but able to make a small income go a 
good way. This is my advice. Find such a woman as soon as you can, bring her to 
Huntsford, and I will visit her.” Allow me, by the way, to observe, my fair cousin, 
that I do not reckon the notice and kindness of Lady Catherine de Bourgh as 
among the least of the advantages in my power to offer. You will find her man­
ners beyond anything I can describe: and your wit and vivacity, I think, must be 
acceptable to her, especially when tempered with the silence and respect which 
her rank will inevitably excite. 

44  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
Thus much for my general intention in favor of matrimony: it remains to be 
told why my views were directed to Longbourn instead of my own neighbour­
hood, where I assure you there are many amiable young women. But the fact is 
that being, as I am, to inherit this estate after the death of your honored father, 
who, however, may live many years longer, I could not satisfy myself without re­
solving to choose a wife from among his daughters, that the loss to them might 
be as little as possible, when the melancholy event takes place, which, however, 
as I have already said, may not be for several years. This has been my motive, 
my fair cousin, and I flatter myself it will not sink me in your esteem. And now 
nothing remains for me but to assure you in the most animated language of the 
violence of my affection. To fortune I am perfectly indifferent, and shall make 
no demand of that nature on your father, since I am well aware that it could not 
be complied with; and that one thousand pounds in the four percents, which 
will not be yours till after your mother’s decease, is all that you may ever be 
entitled to. On that head, therefore, I shall be uniformly silent; and you may 
assure yourself that no ungenerous reproach shall ever pass my lips when we 
are married.
7. Genesis 18–19 (selections): Sodom and Gomorrah, RSV, abridged and 
with emendations.
(18:1) And the lord appeared to Abraham by the oaks of Mamre, as he sat at 
the door of his tent in the heat of the day. (2) He lifted up his eyes and looked, 
and behold, three men stood in front of him. When he saw them, he ran from 
the tent door to meet them, and bowed himself to the earth. . . . (9) They said 
to him, “Where is Sarah your wife?” And he said, “She is in the tent.” (10) The 
lord said, “I will surely return to you in the spring, and Sarah your wife shall 
have a son.” And Sarah was listening at the tent door behind him. (11) Now 
Abraham and Sarah were old, advanced in age; it had ceased to be with Sarah 
after the manner of women. (12) So Sarah laughed to herself, . . . 
(16) Then the men set out from there, and they looked toward Sodom; 
and Abraham went with them to set them on their way. (17) The lord said, 
“Shall I hide from Abraham what I am about to do, (18) seeing that Abraham 
shall become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall 
bless themselves by him? (19) No, for I have chosen him, that he may charge 
his children and his household after him to keep the way of the lord by doing 
righteousness and justice; so that the lord may bring to Abraham what he has 
promised him.” (20) Then the lord said, “Because the outcry against Sodom 
and Gomor’rah is great and their sin is very grave, (21) I will go down to see 
whether they have done altogether according to the outcry which has come 
to me; and if not, I will know.” (22) So the men turned from there, and went 
toward Sodom; but Abraham still stood before the lord. 

The Three Rhetorical Appeals  
 45
(23) Then Abraham drew near, and said, “Wilt thou indeed destroy the 
righteous with the wicked? (24) Suppose there are fifty righteous within the 
city; wilt thou then destroy the place and not spare it for the fifty righteous 
who are in it? (25) Far be it from thee to do such a thing, to slay the righteous 
with the wicked, so that the righteous fare as the wicked! Far be that from thee! 
Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?” (26) And the lord said, “If I 
find at Sodom fifty righteous in the city, I will spare the whole place for their 
sake.” (27) Abraham answered, “Behold, I have taken upon myself to speak to 
the Lord, I who am but dust and ashes. (28) Suppose five of the fifty righteous 
are lacking? Wilt thou destroy the whole city for lack of five?” And he said, “I 
will not destroy it if I find forty-five there.” (29) Again he spoke to him, and 
said, “Suppose forty are found there.” He answered, “For the sake of forty I will 
not do it.” (30) Then he said, “Oh let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak. 
Suppose thirty are found there.” He answered, “I will not do it, if I find thirty 
there.” (31) He said, “Behold, I have taken upon myself to speak to the Lord. 
Suppose twenty are found there.” He answered, “For the sake of twenty I will 
not destroy it.” (32) Then he said, “Oh let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak 
again but this once. Suppose ten are found there.” He answered, “For the sake of 
ten I will not destroy it.” (33) And the lord went his way, when he had finished 
speaking to Abraham; and Abraham returned to his place.
(19:1) The two angels came to Sodom in the evening; and Lot was sitting 
in the gate of Sodom. When Lot [a nephew of Abraham] saw them, he rose 
to meet them, and bowed himself with his face to the earth, (2) and said, “My 
lords, turn aside, I pray you, to your servant’s house and spend the night, and 
wash your feet; then you may rise up early and go on your way.” They said, “No; 
we will spend the night in the street.” (3) But he urged them strongly; so they 
turned aside to him and entered his house; and he made them a feast, and baked 
unleavened bread, and they ate. (4) But before they lay down, the men of the 
city, the men of Sodom, both young and old, all the people to the last man, 
surrounded the house; (5) and they called to Lot, “Where are the men who 
came to you tonight? Bring them out to us, that we may know them.” (6) Lot 
went out of the door to the men, shut the door after him, (7) and said, “I beg 
you, my brothers, do not act so wickedly. (8) Behold, I have two daughters who 
have not known man; let me bring them out to you, and do to them as you 
please; only do nothing to these men, for they have come under the shelter of 
my roof.” (9) But they said, “Stand back!” And they said, “This fellow came to 
sojourn, and he would play the judge! Now we will deal worse with you than 
with them.” . . . (15) When morning dawned, the angels urged Lot, saying, “Arise, 
take your wife and your two daughters who are here, lest you be consumed in 
the punishment of the city.” (16) But he lingered; so the men seized him and his 
wife and his two daughters by the hand, the lord being merciful to him, and 

46  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
they brought him forth and set him outside the city. (17) And when they had 
brought them forth, they said, “Flee for your life; do not look back or stop any­
where in the valley; flee to the hills, lest you be consumed.” . . . (23) The sun had 
risen on the earth when Lot came to Zo’ar. (24) Then the lord rained on Sod­
om and Gomor’rah brimstone and fire from the lord out of heaven; (25) and 
he overthrew those cities, and all the valley, and all the inhabitants of the cities, 
and what grew on the ground. (26) But Lot’s wife behind him looked back, and 
she became a pillar of salt. (27) And Abraham went early in the morning to the 
place where he had stood before the lord; (28) and he looked down toward 
Sodom and Gomor’rah and toward all the land of the valley, and beheld, and lo, 
the smoke of the land went up like the smoke of a furnace.
8. From Sahih Muslim, by Muslim ibn al-Hajjaj al-Nisaburi 
(d. 875), compiler of hadiths, stories and sayings about the prophet Mu­
hammad (d. 632), bk. 1 (on Faith), chapter 1, number 1: 
It is narrated on the authority of Yahya b. Ya’mur that the first man who dis­
cussed about Qadr (= divine predestination) in Basra was Ma’bad al-Juhani. I 
along with Humaid b. ‘Abdur-Rahman Himyari set out for pilgrimage or for 
‘Umrah and said: “Should it so happen that we come into contact with one of 
the Companions of the Messenger of Allah (= Muhammad), peace be upon 
him, we shall ask him about what is said about Taqdir (= predestined fate). 
Accidentally we came across Abdullah ibn Umar ibn al-Khattab (= son of Umar 
ibn Khattab, the second of the first four ‘rightly guided’ caliphs of the Muslims), 
while he was entering the mosque. My companion and I went up to him, one 
of us on his right and the other stood on his left. I expected that my compan­
ion would authorize me to speak. I therefore said: ‘Abu Abdur Rahman, there 
have appeared some people in our land who recite the Holy Qur’an and pursue 
knowledge.’ And then after talking about their affairs, he (=my companion) 
added: ‘They claim that there is no such thing as Qadr (= divine predestination) 
and that events are not predestined.’ He (= Abdullah ibn Umar) said: ‘When 
you happen to meet such people tell them that I have nothing to do with them 
and they have nothing to do with me. And verily they are in no way in accord 
with my (belief ).’ Abdullah ibn Umar swore the Lord: ‘If any one of them had 
with him gold equal to the bulk of Mt. Uhud, then, Allah would not accept it 
unless he affirmed his faith in Qadr (= divine predestination).’ 
“ ‘He further said: ‘My father, Umar ibn al-Khattab told me: 
“ ‘One day we were sitting in the company of Allah’s Apostle (= Muham­
mad), peace be upon him, when there appeared before us a man dressed in pure 
white clothes, his hair extraordinarily black. There were no signs of travel on 
him. None amongst us recognized him. At last he sat with the Apostle, peace be 

The Three Rhetorical Appeals  
 47
upon him. He (= the visitor) knelt before him, placed his palms on his thighs, 
and said: 
“ ‘Muhammad, inform me about al-Islam (= duties required of Muslims; Is­
lam = submission).’ The Messenger of Allah, peace be upon him, said: ‘Al-Islam 
includes that (1) you testify that there is no god but Allah and that Muham­
mad is the messenger of Allah, and (2) you say your daily prayer, (3) pay Zakat 
(= alms), (4) observe the fast of Ramadan, and (5) perform pilgrimage to Mec­
ca, if you are solvent enough for the journey.’ He (= the visitor) said: ‘You have 
told the truth.’ He (Umar ibn al-Khattab) said: ‘We were filled with wonder 
that he would put the question and then he would himself verify the truth.’ 
“ ‘He (= the visitor) said: ‘Inform me about Iman (faith).’ He (= Muham­
mad) replied: ‘That you affirm your faith (1) in Allah, (2) in His angels, (3) in 
His Books, (4) in His Apostles, (5) in the Day of Judgment, and (6) you affirm 
your faith in the Qadr (= divine predestination) about good and evil.’ He (= the 
visitor) said: ‘You have told the truth.’ 
“ ‘He (the visitor) again said: ‘Inform me about al-Ihsan (= performance 
of good deeds).’ He (= Muhammad) said: ‘That you worship Allah as if you 
are seeing Him, for though you don’t see Him, He, verily, sees you.’ He (= the 
visitor) again said: ‘Inform me about the hour (of the end of the world).’ He 
(= Muhammad) remarked: ‘The one who is asked knows no more than the one 
who is inquiring.’ He (the visitor) said: ‘Tell me some of its signs. He (= Muham­
mad) said: ‘That the slave-girl will give birth to her mistress and master, that you 
will find barefooted, destitute goat-herds vying with one another in the construc­
tion of magnificent buildings.’ 
He (the narrator of the story, Umar ibn al-Khattab, second caliph) said: 
“Then he (= the visitor) went on his way but I stayed with him (= Muhammad) 
for a long while. He then, said to me: ‘Umar, do you know who this visitor was?’ 
I replied: ‘Allah and His Apostle knows best.’ He (= Muhammad) remarked: 
He was Jibril (= the angel Gabriel). He came to you in order to instruct you in 
matters of religion.’ ” 
9. Abraham Lincoln, Gettysburg Address (1864)
Four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth, upon this continent, 
a new nation, conceived in Liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all 
men are created equal. 
Now we are engaged in a great civil war, testing whether that nation, or any 
nation so conceived, and so dedicated, can long endure. We are met here on a 
great battlefield of that war. We have come to dedicate a portion of it as a final 
resting place for those who here gave their lives that that nation might live. It is 
altogether fitting and proper that we should do this. 

48  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
But in a larger sense we cannot dedicate—we cannot consecrate—we can­
not hallow this ground. The brave men, living and dead, who struggled here, 
have consecrated it far above our poor power to add or detract. The world will 
little note, nor long remember, what we say here, but can never forget what they 
did here. 
It is for us, the living, rather to be dedicated here to the unfinished work 
which they have, thus far, so nobly carried on. It is rather for us to be here ded­
icated to the great task remaining before us—that from these honored dead 
we take increased devotion to that cause for which they here gave the last full 
measure of devotion—that we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have 
died in vain; that this nation shall have a new birth of freedom; and that this 
government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from 
the earth.
10. Barack H. Obama, “State of the Union Address” (2015)
2014 was the planet’s warmest year on record. Now, one year doesn’t make a 
trend, but this does—fourteen of the fifteen warmest years on record have all 
fallen in the first fifteen years of this century. 
I’ve heard some folks try to dodge the evidence by saying they’re not sci­
entists; that we don’t have enough information to act. Well, I’m not a scientist, 
either. But you know what—I know a lot of really good scientists at NASA, and 
NOAA, and at our major universities. The best scientists in the world are all 
telling us that our activities are changing the climate, and if we do not act force­
fully, we’ll continue to see rising oceans, longer, hotter heat waves, dangerous 
droughts and floods, and massive disruptions that can trigger greater migration, 
conflict, and hunger around the globe. The Pentagon says that climate change 
poses immediate risks to our national security. We should act like it.
That’s why, over the past six years, we’ve done more than ever before to com­
bat climate change, from the way we produce energy, to the way we use it. That’s 
why we’ve set aside more public lands and waters than any administration in 
history. And that’s why I will not let this Congress endanger the health of our 
children by turning back the clock on our efforts. I am determined to make sure 
American leadership drives international action. In Beijing, we made an historic 
announcement—the United States will double the pace at which we cut carbon 
pollution, and China committed, for the first time, to limiting their emissions. 
And because the world’s two largest economies came together, other nations are 
now stepping up, and offering hope that, this year, the world will finally reach an 
agreement to protect the one planet we’ve got.

The Three Rhetorical Appeals  
 49
11. Ivar Giaevar, Nobel Prizewinner in Physics (1973), on Global Warming (2015)
As part of the 62nd Lindau Nobel Laureate Meeting, Giaever referred to agree­
ment with the evidence of climate change as a “religion” and commented on the 
significance of the apparent rise in temperature when he stated, “What does 
it mean that the temperature has gone up 0.8 degrees [in 150 years]? Probably 
nothing.” Referring to the selection of evidence in his presentation, Giaever stat­
ed, “I pick and choose when I give this talk just the way the previous speaker 
(Mario Molina) picked and chose when he gave his talk.” Giaever concluded his 
presentation with a pronouncement: “Is climate change pseudoscience? If I’m 
going to answer the question, the answer is: absolutely.”
12. Teresa of Ávila, from Interior Castle
(d. 1582), Spanish mystic, reformer of the Carmelite Orders of both wom­
en and men, mentor of St. John of the Cross:
There is a secret place. A radiant sanctuary. As real as your own kitchen. More 
real than that. Constructed of the purest elements. Overflowing with the ten 
thousand beautiful things. Worlds within worlds. Forests, rivers. Velvet cover­
lets thrown over featherbeds, fountains bubbling beneath a canopy of stars. 
Bountiful forests, universal libraries. A wine cellar offering an intoxication so 
sweet you will never be sober again. A clarity so complete you will never again 
forget. This magnificent refuge is inside you. Enter. Shatter the darkness that 
shrouds the doorway. . . . Believe the incredible truth that the Beloved has cho­
sen for his dwelling place the core of your own being because that is the single 
most beautiful place in all of creation.

Aristotle Invents Logic—Twice
Lesson 5 
Aristotle Invents Logic—Twice
The Essentials 
Aristotle (d. 323 b.c.) invented logic. This does not mean that he was the 
first man to reason logically. As long as there have been humans on earth they 
have reasoned, and their reasoning has been a combination of logical and illog­
ical reasoning. Nor does it mean that Aristotle was the first man to reason with 
great logical acuity. His teacher Plato (d. 347 b.c.) and before him his teacher 
Socrates (d. 399 b.c.) used logic with a great degree of accuracy, far beyond the 
degree most of us can achieve. And great thinkers in other traditions did so 
as well, such as K’ung Fu-tzu (Confucius; ca. 500 b.c.), who said, “Ignorance 
is the night of the mind, and a night without moon and stars,” and Gautama 
Buddha (d. ca. 410 b.c.), who said, “All that we are is the result of what we have 
thought.” While they used logic; they did not invent logic as a systematically 
organized subject that one could study and write about on its own. To note the 
difference between using logic in our thought, speech, and writing and logic as 
a subject to be studied, much later in history, Western medieval logicians dis­
tinguished logica utens (logic as it is used by thinkers) from logica docens (logic 
as a subject for teaching and studying). It was logica docens—logic as a disci­
pline taught and studied, such as we are doing in this book—that Aristotle, for 
the first time in history, invented. In short, Aristotle invented logic as an “art” 
or skill to be learned from a teacher and a book, which means he wrote the first 
logic textbook. In point of fact, however, even a thinker as brilliant and cre­
50

Aristotle Invents Logic—Twice  
 51
ative as Aristotle did not get everything right on his first try. He had to invent 
logic twice, a fact that is recorded in the textbooks he wrote on the subject. 
Aristotle’s First Try: Topical Logic
In Aristotle’s first attempt at writing a logic textbook, he named the book 
Topics, from the Greek word for “place” (topos), because in his book he col­
lected useful examples of different types of persuasive techniques, which he 
organized into sections or “places.” Earlier rhetoricians used this term to orga­
nize their rhetorical textbooks, so Aristotle used it for his first logic textbook. 
He lined up literally hundreds of examples of effective arguments used by ear­
lier thinkers, as the writers of rhetorical textbooks had done. In this respect, 
his first logic was backward looking: it used memorable arguments of others 
to use as models for one’s own arguments. But his Topics had a different focus 
from his Rhetoric. It left out ethical and emotional appeal and focused only 
on rational appeals, those that were “probable” because they took off from 
the “common opinions” of the time. In his language, such arguments are di­
alectical—that is, they give likely or probable conclusions, but not necessary 
ones. Look at the Primary Sources at the end of the chapter for a brief outline 
of the Topics. There you can see that the book’s organizing principle was the 
sentence, for the Topics is divided into parts based on how the predicate of a 
sentence is logically related to its subject. This relationship is defined by Aris­
totle’s doctrine of the “predicables,” which means “ways things can be predi­
cated” or the different relations possible between the predicate and subject of 
a sentence. We will study this subject in Lesson 9. 
Aristotle’s Second Try: The Logic of Discovery and Proof
Aristotle’s first attempt at organizing logic focused too much on catalog­
ing a set of effective arguments someone else had already devised. But that 
information wouldn’t necessarily help us by ourselves to devise arguments 
and solve problems as yet unsolved. He soon recognized the need for a for­
ward-looking way of organizing logic, one that uses the structure of reasoning 
to solve problems, to find a truth that is new (new at least to the one solv­
ing the problem). This is very different from a database of examples, which is 
helpful only if we already know what we want to say. Since what we can call 
“the logic of discovery” focuses on the structure of our thinking, it is different 
from the other disciplines (or “sciences,” as he used this term) that he set out 

52  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
in his many other books. His other books focus on content, on the truths to 
be found about a particular subject matter, such as arithmetic, which studies 
numbers, biology, which studies living beings, ethics, which studies human 
action, and so on. To develop logic, he no longer concentrated on what we 
think about; he reserved that for the different disciplines. Logic, Aristotle 
said, was not a “science” focused on just one area of knowledge, but only an 
“art” or skill (techne; ars) that focuses on how we reason in using arguments to 
discover the truth. If we can improve how we reason, then we can use those 
improved skills in any and every area of study. Aristotle saw another benefit of 
focusing on the structure of our reasoning. Once we ensure our that reasoning 
is correct in structure and that our conclusions follow necessarily from our 
premises, we have taken the first step to achieving conclusions that are not just 
“likely” or “probable,” like the “dialectical” arguments found in the Topics; we 
make it possible to take a further step and achieve conclusions that are true, 
and necessarily so (reasoning Aristotle called “demonstrative”). 
In order to focus on how we reason—the structure or form our reasoning, 
speaking, and writing should take—Aristotle now realized he had to concen­
trate on three different acts of the mind, ones that produce three different types 
of thought, speech, and writing. The study of these three areas makes up what 
came to be called formal logic because it concentrates on the form or structure 
of our reasoning. (We will look at these three areas of logic more closely in 
Lesson 6.) For the time being, suffice it to say that Aristotle’s second attempt 
at inventing logic focused on logic as a tool for problem solving, for acquiring 
new knowledge. In this way, Aristotle’s logic became a technique for learning 
rather than merely for developing skill at persuading. This is why Aristotle gave 
his logic the name organon, which means “instrument.” (Using the term “logic” 
to describe logic was initiated by the later Greek philosophers, called Stoics.) 
Aristotle now thought of logic as the instrument for solving problems and dis­
covering the truth, analogous to the seamstress’s needle or the carpenter’s saw.
A Deeper Look
The Logic of Discovery: Steps in Logical Problem Solving
Opinion and Knowledge
In the Platonic dialogue that bears his name, Meno was reminded by 
Socrates that there is a great deal of difference between knowing and simply 

Aristotle Invents Logic—Twice  
 53
having an opinion about, say, how to travel the long road from Athens to 
Meno’s hometown of Larisa, far to the north of Athens in Thessaly. (Please 
remember that this road was no interstate highway: no asphalt, no curbs, no 
markers. Knowing this road was more like knowing how to walk through the 
forest, from New York to Lake Huron, in a James Fenimore Cooper novel.) 
Meno had traveled that road to get to Athens, but it is doubtful Socrates ever 
had. Following his sophist teachers, Meno had said that the best the human 
mind can attain is opinion; but in order to show him that true knowledge is 
different from simply having a correct opinion, Socrates uses this example. 
A man like Meno who has traveled that road is much less likely to get lost 
than a man like Socrates, who only has instructions given to him by someone 
else. And Aristotle followed Socrates in saying that opinion is different from 
knowledge and inferior to it.
Ignorance and Wonder
Suppose you were to take the long walk from Athens to Larisa. The dusty 
plains of Thessaly would make you thirsty, and once you became thirsty you 
would be on the lookout for water. If you saw what looked like a well off 
in the distance, you would wonder if it is a well and whether or not there 
was any water in the well. Now philosophy, which literally means “love of 
wisdom,” begins when our experience of the world generates wonder, for we 
wonder when we don’t yet know something, but are capable of knowing it. 
(This is the reason for the saying “animals and God don’t wonder”; animals 
can’t know things as well as humans can, and God’s knowledge is infinitely 
superior to ours.)
Questions
Wonder usually generates questions. Once we recognize our ignorance, 
we can move from a condition of wondering to the next step on the road to 
knowledge—in this case, asking questions about the dimly seen well and the 
water it might contain. Several questions might pop into our mind: Is the 
well something real, or an illusion caused by our exhaustion? Is it really a well? 
Does it have water? Can we drink it? Ever the systematic thinker, Aristotle 
organized the multitude of questions we can ask whenever we wonder about 
something into four general types of questions.1 
1. Aristotle, Posterior Analytics 2.1.89b22–90a4.

54  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
1. In this case, the first question that comes to mind is Aristotle’s question 
“Is it?” Is there something real there? As soon as we are close enough to see it 
is real, we have answered this question. If it still looks like a well, we speed up 
to make sure it is. 
2. Here we ask Aristotle’s question “What is it?” When we are close 
enough to see it clearly, we touch it, look down inside, and perhaps throw a 
few pebbles in, to see if it is deep. We have now answered Aristotle’s second 
question. Now we look down more carefully or throw in some more pebbles 
to hear if they make a splash. 
3. We are now asking if there is water in the well. This is Aristotle’s third 
question: “Whether?” or “Whether it is a fact?” Once we hear the pebbles 
splash, we have good reason to think the well does contain water. So we ask 
another “Whether?” question: “Is the water potable (or drinkable)?” We 
might then test the water by pulling up a bucket, conveniently attached with 
a rope. (Let’s assume we don’t have to climb down into the well. Then we look 
at the water and take a taste on our tongue or use a water-testing kit. Once 
we determine to our satisfaction that the water is potable, we would normally 
stop our questions and just take a nice, long drink.) 
4. If we were really curious we might proceed to the fourth and last of 
Aristotle’s questions: “Why?,” or “Why is it so?,” or “Why is S P?” Here we are 
looking for an explanation or cause to show us, or perhaps reassure us if we 
are very hesitant, by determining the reason why the liquid in the well is water, 
or why the water is potable, or why impure water tastes one way, drinkable 
water another. 
Some of these questions may seem similar. But when analyzed logically 
(that is, with an eye on the differences among terms, propositions, and argu­
ments), we can see that the first two questions deal with a single term. These 
questions could be restated generally as, first, “Does X exist?” and, second, 
“What is the essence or nature of X?” The second two questions deal with 
propositions and consequently involve two terms. These questions could be 
restated as “Is it a fact that X is Y?” and “What is the cause or reason why X is 
Y?” While there are literally an unlimited number of questions we could ask 
about the universe, Aristotle has helped us tremendously by narrowing them 
down to these four general types of questions. (If Aristotle’s conclusion is not 
obvious to you, do what he did. Be empirical and ask yourself some specific 
questions. Then try to see what general types of questions there are. You will 

Aristotle Invents Logic—Twice  
 55
probably come up with the same answer he did, because his four types are 
determined by the structure of the kinds of answers that are possible.) Being 
able to identify the type of question we ask helps us better understand the 
question itself; and this, in turn, helps us answer it.
Answering Questions: Problem Solving
A question is simply an answer turned inside out. So asking a question sets 
up our search for an answer. Some questions are rather easy to answer, some 
are exceedingly hard. But what Aristotle recognized was that searching for 
answers involves reasoning from one point to another. Reasoning first yields 
provisional answers. Further reasoning sometimes shows us how to prove 
that our preliminary guess is correct through coming up with an argument 
that proves the point. There are many kinds of arguments and many levels of 
proof. But what they all have in common is that answers are found through 
argument, argument that weaves together facts (or propositions) to prove a 
conclusion. What made Aristotle the inventor of logic is that he saw there was 
a difference in structure or form between those arguments that prove their 
conclusions and those that don’t. 
To take the first step in learning why logic is problem solving, please turn 
to the problems contained in Problem Set 5 and try to figure out what the 
answers are and how you get to those answers. 
Primary Sources
Aristotle, Posterior Analytics, esp. 2.1.
Plato, Meno. 
Aristotle, Topics: an outline. His first attempt at inventing logic.
	
I.	The nature of dialectical reasoning (bk. I)
	
II.	Topics for finding arguments: built on the structure of categorical 
propositions: “S is/is not P.” 
	
A.	Topics falling under accident (where P is unrelated to S) 
(bk. II-III)
	
B.	Topics falling under genus (where P is the genus of S) (bk. IV)
	
C.	Topics falling under property (where P is a property of S) (bk. V)
	
D.	Topics falling under definition (where P is the species of S) (bks. 
VI–VII)

56  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
(We will cover Aristotle’s “predicables,” which include genus, accident, 
and property, in Lesson 10.)
	 III.	Practice in dialectics
	
A.	How to put questions in debate (bk. VIII, cc. 1–3)
	
B.	How to answer questions in debate (bk. VIII.4–14)
Compare these topics with the topics covered in Aristotle’s Rhetoric, out­
lined in Lesson 3. Then compare them with the organization of Aristotle’s 
second attempt at inventing logic, outlined in Lesson 6.
Problem Set 5: Problem Solving
Finding Conclusions and Arguments
Instructions 
For the following problems:
a.	Put the question in your own words.
b.	What is the answer? Put your reply in the form of a statement.
c.	What is the reason for the answer? Give a reason or argument for your 
answer.
	
1.	Travelers in the tropics often notice that the climate is very hard on 
machinery. In fact, someone touring by taxi is amazed at how suscep­
tible the car is to rust. Why?
	
2.	A stack of magazines tied in a bundle does not burn up very easily. 
Why?
	
3.	Snowshoes or skis help you to walk on snow. Why?
	
4.	Mother Earth contains a great variety of living things—many kinds of 
plants and animals. What feature of the earth’s atmosphere makes this 
possible?
	
5.	A bedroom with a large south window gets very hot. But the glass in 
the window stays cool, so the glass is not the reason the bedroom gets 
hot. Why does it get so hot?
	
6.	Is grass green? Why?
	
7.	Are electrons visible? Why or why not?
	
8.	Aristotle noticed that puncture wounds (like from a spear) heal much 
more slowly than gash wounds (like from a knife or sword). Why? 

Aristotle Invents Logic—Twice  
 57
	
9.	“I was particularly anxious to learn why the Nile, at the beginning 
of the summer solstice, begins to rise and continues to increase for a 
hundred days—and why, as soon as that number is past, it recedes and 
contracts its flow, continuing low during the whole of the winter until 
the summer solstice comes around again. On none of these points 
could I obtain any explanation from the Egyptians. Some of the 
Greeks, however, wishing to get a reputation for cleverness, have of­
fered explanations of the annual flooding of the river. One thinks that 
the Etesian winds [coming from the north] cause the rise of the river 
by preventing the Nile water from running off into the Mediterranean 
Sea. But if the Etesian winds produced the effect, the other rivers 
which flow in a direction opposed to those winds ought to exhibit the 
same floods as the Nile, and more so, as they are all smaller streams 
and have a weaker current. But these rivers, of which there are many, 
both in Syria and Libya, are entirely unlike the Nile in this respect. 
(Herodotus, History, 2.20) 

Aristotle Organizes the Logic of Discovery and Proof
Lesson 6 
Aristotle Organizes the Logic of 
Discovery and Proof
The Essentials
We must define a premise, a term, and a syllogism; the nature of a perfect and 
an imperfect syllogism, including or not including one term in another as in a 
whole; and what we mean by predicating one term of all, or none, of another. 
A premise is a sentence affirming or denying one thing of another; and this 
is either universal or particular or indefinite. . . . 
I call a term that into which a premise is analyzed—that is, both the predi­
cate and that of which it is predicated, and “is” means added and “is not” means 
taken away. 
A syllogism is discourse in which, when certain things have been laid down, 
something other than what was stated follows necessarily from their being so. 
This last point means the premises produce a consequence, in this way, that noth­
ing further is required in addition in order to make the consequence necessary. I 
call that a “perfect syllogism” that needs nothing other than what has been stated 
to make clear what follows necessarily, while a syllogism is imperfect if it needs 
one or more propositions that are necessary consequences of what has been laid 
down, but have not been expressly stated as premises.1 
1. Aristotle, Prior Analytics 1.24a10–24b26, trans. A. J. Jenkinson emended, in The Basic Works of 
Aristotle, ed. Richard McKeon (1941; repr. New York: Modern Library, 2001).
58

Aristotle Organizes the Logic of Discovery and Proof  
 59
Aristotle’s Second Attempt to Invent Logic
We have seen in the previous lesson that Aristotle’s writings contain two 
attempts to organize logic. In his first attempt, where he closely followed the 
approach of organizing rhetoric around topics, he organized a large collection 
of dialectical arguments—that is, arguments from common opinions that rea­
son to “probable” or “likely” conclusions around topics arranged according to 
the different ways the predicate of a proposition can be related to its subject. 
Aristotle himself recognized a significant problem with this work on logic: 
it is too unwieldy to read straight through, in great measure because it’s like 
reading through a telephone directory or a database. You go from one exam­
ple to another to a third.
As we saw, Aristotle’s Topics did spark in his mind how to organize his sec­
ond attempt at logic. First, as we saw in Lesson 5, his second attempt at logic 
focused on problem solving: finding truth that is new (at least new to me). 
Second, Aristotle realized that logic is different from the other disciplines 
he set out in his many other books because it is an absolutely universal “art,” 
useful in all the disciplines. Its scope is wider than any of those disciplines be­
cause logic focuses on the structure or “form” our thinking takes rather than 
on the content.
Logic and the Three Acts of the Mind
Once Aristotle recognized that logic should focus on the structure or 
form our thinking takes rather than its content, the way to organize logic as a 
systematically presented art (ars, techne) followed quite naturally. To see this, 
consider the following three sentences: 
“Socrates is a man. All men are mortal. Therefore, Socrates 
is mortal.”
This argument has been used by teachers of logic for almost two and a half 
millennia. We will put ourselves in that long tradition by beginning with it. 
These three sentences, when taken together, make up a deductive argu­
ment. How does it work? The argument contains the three sentences, two of 
which, when taken together, have the combined impact of leading our mind 
to the conclusion. As quite often happens, there is a verbal marker—“there­
fore”—to help us see that the conclusion is “Socrates is mortal”; he will die. 

60  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
Of course, Socrates is long since dead. But you can use the same argument 
about your classmate or yourself. The claim the argument is making is that it 
is more than just a probability that you, who are presently alive, will die; it is a 
certainty. And, what is more, you know this truth for sure, even though it is a 
truth about a still-living person, one that has not yet happened. 
Aristotle recognized that this form of argument (we will learn to call it 
a “categorical syllogism”) always consists in three propositions; that two are 
premises; and that they lead necessarily to a third proposition, the conclu­
sion. The conclusion, then, flows from the premises. In thinking this way, our 
mind is engaging in what came to be called “the third act of the mind,” the 
acting of reasoning from one point to another. In doing so, our mind produc­
es within itself an argument. And there is more. This argument allows us to 
discover something true about the nature of the world around us, something 
so important that we don’t keep this truth to ourselves. Rather, being natu­
rally social animals, humans have invented languages to express the reasoning 
going on in their minds. The language of argument leads us to discover truths 
about the world.
Aristotle also recognized that the task of producing each of the three 
propositions in our mind that are contained in this argument is quite a differ­
ent task from combining the propositions together to produce the argument 
itself. Here he identified what came to be called “the second act of the mind,” 
the act of making a mental judgment about the way things are in the world. 
Once we make that judgment, in our mind, we formulate that judgment in 
a mental statement or proposition (we’ll learn the difference between state­
ments and propositions later). Each of the three sentences in the problem set 
contains one proposition, so the whole argument contains three propositions. 
If logic, when organized in terms of the structure or form of our thinking, 
studies arguments, it must also study the immediate component parts out of 
which arguments are constructed. These are propositions. So a second part of 
logic is devoted to the study of propositions. 
Finally, Aristotle noted that each of the kinds of propositions in his ar­
gument—we’ll learn to call them categorical propositions—is made up of yet 
smaller parts called terms. While three propositions can contain a total of 
six terms—two terms for each proposition—the three propositions in the 
problem set contain only three terms: “Socrates,” “man” (or “human” in more 
recent English), and “mortal.” This fact is not happenstance; it is necessary for 
a categorical syllogism to be made up of three propositions, and those three 

Aristotle Organizes the Logic of Discovery and Proof  
 61
propositions must contain three and only three terms. But if we are to under­
stand the propositions, and through them the argument, the terms first must 
be understood. The way we think in the process of coming to understand 
terms is again quite different from the way we think in formulating propo­
sitions or in mounting arguments. Here Aristotle had discovered what came 
to be called “the first act of the mind,” the one by which we apprehend what 
things are, by which we formulate in our minds concepts in which we try 
to capture the meaning of our apprehensions, and that allows us to develop 
language to enunciate in spoken or written words the concepts in our minds. 
This “first act of the mind” is the ultimate building block for our reasoning. 
We have just used a logical technique called analysis in which we analyze 
or “break up” some whole into its parts. This kind of mental analysis is similar 
to chemical analysis of compounds in chemistry, or mathematical analysis in 
analytic geometry, or the kind of detective analysis Sherlock Holmes used to 
solve crimes. In this case, the whole is an argument, which we first analyzed 
into three propositions, and then we analyzed each proposition into terms. 
Perfecting our powers of analysis is one of the main goals of studying logic, 
and for this reason Aristotle gave his most famous and important logic book 
the title Analysis. But we can also proceed the other way around, beginning 
with the parts and moving to the whole. This is called synthesis, because we are 
“putting the parts together.” The organization of the side of logic that studies 
the structure of our thinking—what is now called “formal logic”—came quite 
naturally from Aristotle’s discovery of the three acts of the mind. Aristotle 
wrote several logic textbooks; later Aristotelian logicians gave them the or­
ganization we will follow in this book, which follows the synthetic way of 
thinking logically.
In this logic book we will begin with the first act of the mind, apprehen­
sion or conceptualization, and study concepts, terms, and words. Then we will 
cover the way in which we put together concepts or terms to formulate state­
ments or propositions. Finally, we will study the way we put together prop­
ositions into premises and conclusions to form arguments. But we should 
remember that we already perform all of these mental acts and make use of all 
of these kinds of signs. So if we start from our end of the whole, reasoning and 
arguments, we can see that they are composed of judgments and propositions, 
which in turn are composed of acts of conceptualization and concepts, words, 
and terms. 

62  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
Chart of the Three Acts of the Mind
Mental Act
Spoken or Written Discourse
Focus
1. Conceptualization
word, term
definition
2. Judgment
proposition
truth
3. Reasoning
argument
valid proof
A Deeper Look
Aristotle’s Works on Logic
The way Aristotle’s logic books were organized after he died reflects this 
organization. The Categories (probably written by Aristotle but possibly the 
work of one of his students) presents part of the logic of the first act of the 
mind. Aristotle’s On Interpretation gives a fairly full presentation of the logic 
of the second act of the mind. His Prior Analytics (the first half of the book 
Aristotle himself simply called Analytics) gives a comprehensive account of 
the formal logic of the syllogism, the most important kind of argument, in 
Aristotle’s view. 
Aristotle did not stop writing when he had finished his account of formal 
logic. He was even more interested in how logic is used in the various disci­
plines (which he called “sciences,” using this word in a wider sense than we 
now do, where it is limited to the empirical sciences that follow the scientific 
method invented in the early modern period of Western history, about two 
millennia after Aristotle). Aristotle recognized that when we reason correctly 
in a formal sense, though our conclusions follow necessarily from our prem­
ises, there can be several degrees of truth in our conclusions, depending upon 
the degree of truth found in the premises of the arguments we use to prove 
those conclusions. He wrote several important books covering the differenc­
es among reasoning to necessary and certain truths (Posterior Analytics), to 
probable or likely truths (Topics), and to conclusions that only seem to be true 
but are not (On Sophistical Refutations). This second part of logic was called 
“material logic” by his medieval Latin followers because it is not confined to 
studying the “form” of our thinking, but considers how the “matter” or con­
tent of our arguments affects the quality of our conclusions. Aristotle’s most 
influential logic book—Posterior Analytics—is among the books he wrote 
about this area of material logic. Nowadays, this area of logic is often studied 
when taking up a particular subject, going by the name of “methodology.” 

Aristotle Organizes the Logic of Discovery and Proof  
 63
Since study of the methodology of the various disciplines includes logic as 
well as content from the discipline under consideration, it really is part of 
logic. 
The outline in the Primary Sources shows that the various component 
parts of the kind of logic presented do fit into a consistent whole—like seeing 
a mountain from a distance first, before attempting to climb it. 
Primary Sources
Aquinas, Exposition of Aristotle’s On Interpretation, Lesson 1.
Aquinas, Exposition of Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics, Prologue.
Outline of Aristotle’s Works on the “Arts” of Logic and Rhetoric
A. Formal logic: focuses on the form or structure of theoretical dis­
course, where our purpose or “end” is knowledge; but applies to all 
types of human thought.
1. Categories: The first act of the mind; apprehension of terms; defini­
tions of the ten most general terms or “categories.”
2. On Interpretation: The second act of the mind. Judgments that 
produce statements and propositions. “Interpretation” here means 
understanding the meaning of sentences and seeing their truth or 
falsity. 
3. Prior Analytics: The third act of the mind. The structure or form of 
correct human reasoning (valid reasoning), as well as how human 
reason can be wrong or incorrect in its structure (invalid reason­
ing). Concentrates on deductive reasoning using syllogisms, rather 
than inductive reasoning. 
B. Material logic: Called “material,” as distinct from “formal,” because 
it focuses on how certain or uncertain the conclusion derived by rea­
soning is.
1. Posterior Analytics: Demonstrative reasoning: the strongest kind 
of reasoning that produces the necessary and certain deductive 
conclusions found in a “science.” For Aristotle, the “sciences” span 
the full range of theoretical and practical knowledge. He divided 
theoretical knowledge into three areas: the physical sciences, the 
mathematical sciences, and metaphysics, which deals with things 

64  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
beyond the physical realm. Practical knowledge he divided into 
ethics, focused on the individual, economics, focused on the fam­
ily and tribe, and politics, focused on the largest social unit, the 
polis or “city state.” Beginning in the nineteenth century, the term 
“science” has been limited to the physical sciences that employ the 
“experimental method” to draw conclusions.
2. Topics: As noted previously, this early book was Aristotle’s first 
attempt at a logic textbook, but after writing his book on “formal” 
logic he came to recognize that the first book really only covers di­
alectical reasoning, which produces probable or likely conclusions. 
But this reasoning is important, because it is how we reason when 
learning the fundamental principles guiding our study of a disci­
pline or, on Aristotle’s understanding, a “science.” 
3. On Sophistical Refutations: What is wrong with sophistical reason­
ing—that is, the erroneous reasoning of the “sophists.”
4. Poetics: Literature for Aristotle is fundamentally theoretical, 
designed to teach us truths, especially about human life and the 
difference between the morally good and bad, rather than teaching 
us practical skills in how to be good. A study of the structure and 
techniques of poetry, focused on Greek drama. 
5. Rhetoric: A study of what makes practical discourse persuasive, as 
we have seen. Included in this list because Aristotle used the dis­
tinction between the form and content of discourse.
Problem Set 6: Three Acts of the Mind
Identifying Terms, Propositions, and Arguments
Instructions 
In the following passages, identify examples of (a) terms, (b) propositions, 
and (c) arguments. Be sure you distinguish the terms, propositions, and argu­
ments in each passage. Then consider how the differences among these three 
things are important for understanding the passage. 
	
1.	Socrates is a man. All men are mortal. Therefore, at some point Socra­
tes will die.
	
2.	Cars are vehicles for travel. Vehicles for travel are manmade. There­
fore, cars are manmade.

Aristotle Organizes the Logic of Discovery and Proof  
 65
	
3.	“The human soul is immortal. The human soul is not the kind of thing 
subject to destruction by separating it into its parts. All things not 
subject to destruction in this way are immortal.” (Simplified from Pla­
to, Phaedo)
	
4.	“All things that exist, therefore, seeing that the Creator of them all is 
supremely good, are themselves good. But because they are not, like 
their Creator, supremely and unchangeably good, their goodness may 
be diminished and increased.” (Augustine, d. 430, Roman bishop and 
theologian, On the Trinity)
	
5.	The following ad appeared in a London newspaper at the beginning 
of the twentieth century. The next day, 5,000 men answered the ad, 
which was designed to recruit men for an Arctic expedition. It has 
been called one of the most successful ads in history. Indicate how it 
uses the first act of the mind effectively:
men wanted—for dangerous undertaking. Poor working con­
ditions, bad food, long hours, constant and great danger. Survivors, if 
any, are guaranteed lasting fame. Apply. . . . 
	
6.	“Living in society is clearly a necessity of human nature. For all other 
animals, nature has prepared food, hair as a covering, teeth, horns, 
claws as a means of defense or at least speed in flight, while humans 
alone were made without any natural provisions for these things. 
Instead of all these, a human was endowed with reason, by the use of 
which he can procure all these things for himself by the work of his 
hands. Now, one man alone is not able to procure them all for him­
self, for one man could not sufficiently provide for life, unassisted. It 
is therefore natural that humans should live in the society of many.”2 
(Thomas Aquinas, d. 1274, Italian philosopher and theologian)
	
7.	“There are three distinctions in the kinds of bodies, or three states, 
which have more especially claimed the attention of philosophical 
chemists: namely, those which are marked by the terms “elastic fluids,” 
“liquids,” and “solids.” A very familiar instance is exhibited to us in 
water, a body, which, in certain circumstances, is capable of assuming 
all three states. In steam we recognize a perfectly elastic fluid, in water 
a perfect liquid, and in ice a complete solid. These observations have 
tacitly led to the conclusion which seems universally adopted, that all 
2. Aquinas, On Kingship, c. 1. 

66  
 Grammar, Rhetoric, and Logic
bodies of sensible magnitude, whether liquid or solid, are constituted 
of a vast number of extremely small particles.”3 (John Dalton, 
d. 1844, English chemist)
8. “Those who plead their cause in the absence of an opponent can 
invent to their heart’s content, can pontificate without taking into 
account the opposite point of view and keep the best arguments for 
themselves, for aggressors are always quick to attack those who have 
no means of defense.” (Christine de Pizan, d. 1430, French moralist, 
member of the court, and author of “mirror of princes” works such as 
The Book of the City of Ladies)
9. “Then it looks as though this [democracy] is the finest or most beau­
tiful of constitutions, for, like a coat embroidered with every kind of 
ornament, this city-state, embroidered with every kind of character 
type, would seem to be the most beautiful. And many people would 
probably judge it to be so, . . . as do children when they see something 
multicolored. (557c) . . . But if someone tells him [the extreme demo­
crat] that some pleasures belong to fine and good desires, while others 
to evil ones, and that he must pursue and value the first, but restrain 
and enslave the second, he denies all this and declares that all pleasures 
are equal and must be valued equally (561c).” (Plato, d. 347 b.c., Greek 
philosopher; his Republic traces the rise and demise of the city-state 
and the citizen, and here he describes the attractions and also the vices 
of extreme democracy, which leads to tyranny)
3. John Dalton, “Experimental Essays,” Essay 2, in Memoirs of the Literary and Philosophical Society 
of Manchester, 2nd ed. (1802). 

Part 2
The Logic of Terms 


The Logic of Terms
Language, Thought, and Reality
Lesson 7
Language, Thought, and Reality
The Essentials
As spoken words are symbols of perceptions received in the soul, so are written 
words symbols of spoken words. And just as written words are not the same for 
all humans, so likewise spoken words are not the same for all. But the percep­
tions in the soul, of which spoken words are the first signs, are the same for all, 
and likewise the real things, of which the perceptions in the soul are likenesses, 
are also the same for all. 
And just as perceptions received in the soul sometimes are neither true nor 
false, but at other times must be one or the other, the same thing is true about 
spoken words. For false and true require composition and division. So nouns 
and verbs by themselves resemble thoughts without composition or division; 
for example, “man,” or “white,” with nothing added, are neither true nor false. 
Here is a sign of this: “Goat-stag” signifies something, but nothing true or false, 
unless “is” or “is not” is added, in the present or another tense.1
Language Signifies Thought, Which in Turn Signifies Things
We live in two different worlds—the world of facts and that of their sym­
bols. In order to acquire knowledge of ourselves, we utilize both observation 
1. Aristotle, On Interpretation, c. 1., 16a1–18. See also Aquinas, Exposition of Aristotle’s On Interpre­
tation, Lessons 1–3.
69

70  
 The Logic of Terms
and scientific abstractions. But the abstract may be mistaken for the concrete. 
In such an instance, facts are treated as symbols and the individual is likened 
to the human being. Most of the errors made by educators, physicians, and 
sociologists come from such confusion. Scientists, accustomed to the tech­
niques of mechanics, chemistry, physics, and physiology and unfamiliar with 
philosophy and intellectual culture, are liable to mingle the concepts of the 
different disciplines and not to distinguish clearly the general from the par­
ticular. However, in the concept of man, it is important to define exactly that 
part of the human being and that of the individual. Education, medicine, and 
sociology are concerned with the individual. They are guilty of a disastrous 
error when they look upon him only as a symbol, as a human being. Indeed, 
individuality is fundamental in man. It is not merely a certain aspect of the 
organism. But it permeates our entire being. It stamps its mark on the whole 
of body and consciousness and, although remaining indivisible, on each com­
ponent of this whole. It makes the self a unique event in the history of the 
world.2
The world in which we live and act and think is a world made up of indi­
vidual things: this tree, that dog, the other thing, which is a rose, and above 
all, ourselves—individual humans. What we do affects individuals—we help 
our grandmother up the stairs or we clean out our hamster’s cage. But hu­
man actions are guided by human thought, and our thought is communicat­
ed through language—mainly spoken and written language, but even what 
is sometimes called “body language.” What Alexis Carrel is noting in this 
passage is that there is a difference between the world of concrete individual 
things, in the midst of which we live, and the world of symbolic or abstract 
language and thought, which we use to describe our world and ourselves. The 
terms we use—whether mental terms or spoken terms or written terms—sig­
nify the reality we are trying to describe. Most of the terms we use are signs of 
reality; they point to real things and in this way help us to understand them. 
A few of the terms we use signify individuals: Socrates, my black dog, the 
hummingbird now at Miguelito’s bird feeder, the present king of France (a 
philosophical joke—there isn’t one). But most of the terms we use to describe 
reality, terms that point to or signify things, are broad or abstract terms, ones 
that can apply to more than one individual: human, black, dog, humming­
bird, bird feeder, king of France. These are what Alexis Carrel calls “symbols,” 
2. Alexis Carrel, French, Nobel Prize for Medicine (1912), Man, the Unknown (New York and 
London: Harper and Brothers, 1939 [1935]).

Language, Thought, and Reality  
 71
Aristotle calls “perceptions on the soul” (pathemata en psychei) and “likeness­
es” (homoiomata), and philosophers normally call “universal” terms, because 
they are usually general or abstract, covering more than one individual. The 
concepts, terms, and words that we use and will study in this section of log­
ic are, in a broad sense, signs of some sort of reality. In order to understand 
them, we need to understand how they function as signs. 
Concepts, terms, and words are not the only signs we encounter or use. 
Our world is filled with signs. The medieval Franciscan theologian and phi­
losopher St. Bonaventure built his whole understanding of reality around 
signs. And in the twentieth century there developed a philosophical move­
ment devoted to understanding reality in terms of how signs function in the 
world, called “semiotics” from the Greek word for “sign” (semeion). In order 
to understand the logic of mental and linguistic signs, we will start with how 
signs function in nature, beyond the realm of human thought and language. 
This will help us understand what kind of signs human concepts, words, and 
terms are.
Signs in Nature
Signs point to or signify other things. Let’s start with signs in nature. 
There are many such signs, independent of the realm of human thought. 
Smoke is a sign of fire, whether anyone sees the smoke or not. Birds flying 
south is a sign of winter approaching. Such signs, in which one thing “points 
to” another, even if there is no one to recognize they are signs, involve two 
things: the thing that “points,” which is the sign that signifies something (in 
Latin, the signum or significans); and the object or thing “pointed to,” the 
thing signified (significatum). So the first step in understanding signs is to rec­
ognize the difference between the sign that signifies or points to something 
else and the thing signified by the sign. In the case of smoke being a sign of 
fire, the smoke is the sign, and the fire is the thing signified. Here both things 
exist together at the same time, even if an observer first sees the smoke and 
then reasons to the fire, its cause. This is the way the “sign relation” works 
most of the time. Occasionally, however, the signification runs the other way 
around. If you are cooking in the kitchen and notice a grease fire flare up on 
top of the stove, you will see the fire first, not the smoke it gives off. Quite 
often we don’t notice the smoke until we go outside, then return to the house 
and notice how smoky it is. At that point we realize that the fire was a sign of 

72  
 The Logic of Terms
the smoke, even when we hadn’t noticed the smoke. In the case of the birds, 
their flying south is the sign, while winter approaching is the object signified. 
In this case, the object signified does not yet exist; it is in the future. 
A famous use of signs found in nature, but unusual signs, is where Jesus 
prophesies the end of the world:
And there will be signs in sun and moon and stars, and upon the earth distress 
of nations in perplexity at the roaring of the sea and the waves, men fainting 
with fear and with foreboding of what is coming on the world; for the powers 
of the heavens will be shaken. And then they will see the Son of man coming in 
a cloud with power and great glory. Now when these things begin to take place, 
look up and raise your heads, because your redemption is drawing near. 
And he told them a parable: “Look at the fig tree, and all the trees; as soon 
as they come out in leaf, you see for yourselves and know that the summer is 
already near. So also, when you see these things taking place, you know that the 
kingdom of God is near. Truly, I say to you, this generation will not pass away 
till all has taken place. Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not 
pass away.”3
Recognizing Logical Signs: The Semiotic Triangle
While signs in nature exist whether or not someone realizes it, the full 
meaning of “sign” involves more than one thing pointing to another, it in­
volves the realization that one thing is pointing to another. This third factor 
we can call the sign-perceiver or reader or interpreter or “interpretant.” Con­
sider the case of a diploma: a diploma is a sign of education. Here the sign is 
the diploma; what is signified is the fact that the person named on the diplo­
ma has an education. The sign reader is the person who reads the diploma and 
recognizes the sign relationship, as you do when you read the diploma in your 
doctor’s office, which helps give you confidence in his medical knowledge. Be­
ing a sign reader may involve some skill; and it may involve recognition that 
what the sign signifies is not always true. A person who has a diploma ought 
to have knowledge commensurate with that level of education; but we have 
all met people for whom this is not true. And we’ve all met wise people who 
have never been to college. Moreover, there are those people who have bought 
their diploma, or stolen one, or gotten one from a “diploma mill.” The point 
of problem 1 of “Identifying Signs,” in Problem Set 7, is that, while humans are 
3. Luke 21: 25–33 RSV. 

Language, Thought, and Reality  
 73
good sign readers of pictures, dogs are not. They don’t see the picture as a sign. 
This fact about dogs, however, does not mean that animals cannot make 
use of signs, and sometimes even recognize signs.
When a brown hare spots a fox approaching in the open landscape, the hare 
stands bolt upright and signals its presence instead of fleeing. The explanation 
for this behavior, . . . is that a hare can easily escape a fox simply by running—a 
fact the fox seems to “know” (whether by learning or instinct). Apparently, then, 
what is happening in this behavior is that the hare is telling the fox: “I have seen 
you”—and as a result, they can both be spared the effort of running.4
If a brown rabbit tries to hide in the brown dirt of the field until the fox 
gets very near, he will have to run for his life; and the fox will pursue him, at 
least for a while, and maybe even catch him. But since the rabbit “knows” 
he can outrun the fox, he behaves in a different way. He stands up to let the 
fox see him. By doing so, the rabbit is sending the fox a sign: “I’m here. But 
I can outrun you; so what is the use of you coming over here to try to catch 
me?” The fox will send a sign in return: either he’ll continue approaching the 
rabbit, which lets the rabbit know he has to run away; or he’ll veer away in 
another direction, letting the rabbit know he won’t have to run. Most of the 
time, Hoffmeyer tells us, the fox will turn away, unwilling to chase a prey he 
knows he can’t catch. The behaviors of both hare and fox are signs of one to 
the other, signs the other seems able to “read.”
Once we add the reader or interpreter of the sign, we add a third factor 
to the “sign relation.” The three parts of this relation are: (1) the sign; (2) the 
object signified; and (3) the sign-perceiver or “interpretant.” This triple rela­
tion is sometimes called the “semiotic triangle.”5 It can be diagrammed thus:
4. Jesper Hoffmeyer, Biosemiotics: An Examination into the Signs of Life and the Life of Signs 
(Scranton: University of Scranton Press, 2008), xiii.
5. John Deely, The Basics of Semiotics (South Bend, Ind.: St. Augustine’s Press), 88–89.
interpretant
sign
object signified

74  
 The Logic of Terms
Types of Signs
There are two divisions of types of signs that are especially important for 
logic, because they help us pinpoint what kinds of signs the concepts, words, 
and terms we use in logic actually are. The first division is that between nat­
ural signs and conventional signs. Natural signs are signs that do not depend 
upon humans deciding they are signs; they occur independently of human 
choice. The smoke signifies fire, independently of humans. 
Conventional signs, by contrast, are called “conventional” because they de­
pend upon human convention or choice. A stop sign is a conventional sign; 
there is no reason in nature why a red metal octagon should signify that you 
should stop your car. Humans decided this would be the sign for stopping. 
Another good example of conventional signs is the words—both vocal ut­
terances and written signs—found in human languages. Different languages 
have different words for the same thing, as Aristotle points out, because lan­
guages have been created by humans, by human agreement or convention. 
A second division, one that is important for logic, is the distinction be­
tween instrumental signs and formal signs. An instrument is normally a tool 
one uses to perform some task, such as a doctor’s scalpel, a toothbrush, or 
a shovel. Such a tool exhibits two features also found in instrumental signs. 
First, an instrument, say, a toothbrush, is something that exists in its own 
right that you then use in order to do something else, like brush your teeth. 
Second, we see the instrument first, then become aware of what it can be 
used to do. To see the point of the second feature of an instrument, think 
of archeologists who dig up ancient sites in order to try to understand early 
cultures. Often they dig up human artifacts without knowing what they are 
or what they are for. Anyone visiting a museum housing such treasure troves 
can play the fun game of looking at the object first and trying to guess what 
it is before reading the card that explains what it is, where it comes from, and 
when it was made. All instrumental signs have the same characteristics. Now 
some instrumental signs are natural signs, like smoke and fire, while other 
instrumental signs are conventional signs, like a stop sign. 
Formal signs have the opposite characteristics. They are not something 
in their own right first and then, second, a sign of something built on top of 
that. Their fundamental reality is that they are signs of something else. It is 
their nature or form (using a Platonic word) to be signs, which is why they are 
called formal signs. Second, we don’t recognize them as things first and then 

become aware that they signify something else. Rather, our awareness goes in 
the opposite direction. We are first aware of the object signified, not of the 
sign that signifies it. Only afterward, and sometimes through a long process 
of analysis, do we become aware of formal signs. 
Consider a predatory animal like a bear. It sees its prey, say, a salmon, 
only by means of some sensory process that involves its eyes, nervous system, 
and brain. That complex sensory process points to or is a sign of the salmon. 
Without it, the bear could never notice the salmon. But the bear is aware first 
of the salmon; and, in fact, the bear never reflects on his process of perception 
enough to become aware of the signs he uses to become aware of the salmon. 
He uses sensation and even a sense judgment akin to when a human thinks, “I 
want salmon,” but he never recognizes that some operations within him are 
signs. Even the brown rabbit who sends a sign to the fox does not know what 
a sign is or that he is sending a sign, even though he knows he should sit up to 
let the fox see him. (And it doesn’t matter whether he knows how to behave 
by instinct or “learned” behavior.) There are no philosopher-bears or psychol­
ogist-hares, but there are philosopher-humans. And in a way, we all are. 
Linguistic and Mental Signs
There are, then, four possible kinds of signs, three of which actually exist. 
There are natural and instrumental signs, like the birds flying south. There are 
conventional and instrumental signs, like a handshake as a sign of friendship. 
There are natural and formal signs, like the operations of the sense powers 
and our intellectual powers in humans. But there cannot be conventional and 
formal signs, since every conventional sign has to be something on its own 
first before humans can decide it is a sign of something, and its sign value is 
decided by human choice; but formal signs don’t work that way. 
What kind of signs, then, are the linguistic signs—the written and spoken 
languages—humans use? And what kind of signs are the mental signs—the 
concepts, mental “words,” ideas, judgments, and reasonings—that humans use? 
Human languages are sets of conventional signs; witness the multiplicity 
of languages and the need for common agreement about the basic meaning 
of linguistic terms. And human languages are instrumental signs. We hear or 
see a language before we come to know what its words mean. 
By contrast, the mental signs we use—concepts, judgments, reasoning, 
and mental signs related to them, like terms, propositions, and arguments—
Language, Thought, and Reality  
 75

76  
 The Logic of Terms
are quite different. Their fundamental reality is to be a sign pointing to ob­
jects or features of things we are thinking about. We are aware first of what 
they signify, then only later do we come to recognize there must be interior 
and mental signs in our mind that we use in order to know things. Such men­
tal signs are formal signs. And our using such signs is not up to us. We do not 
decide one day, “I’ll use mental signs to signify things.” We use them naturally 
first and only gradually become aware that we are using them at all. Therefore, 
they are natural signs.
In short, a written or spoken term is a conventional and instrumental 
sign; a mental term is a natural and formal sign.
These relations can be summed up in the following diagram:
A Deeper Look
Signs of Individuals, Universals, and Collections
Humans become cognizant of reality at two distinct levels, Alexis Carrel 
has told us. First is the level of sensation. With our five external senses we 
see, hear, smell, touch, and taste individual things in the world: this white 
chair; that black dog; the other odiferous flower. And we can also remember 
and imagine individual things with what are called our “internal” senses, such 
as memory and imagination (internal because they work with what we have 
already sensed). And sometimes we invent words and terms to signify such in­
dividual things. The most prominent of these are the names we give humans, 
like “Ed,” though sometimes we name other individual things, like pets, such 
as the horse “Mr. Ed” on an old television show.
Most human language, however, operates at the general level, pointing 
out the common or universal features of things, such as “white” or “black” 
or “black dog,” or “sunflower” or “flower” or “plant” or “living thing” or just 
“thing.” Such terms are universal terms because they can be said of or predi­
written and 
spoken terms 
mental terms
objects or things 
Spoken Terms, Mental 
Terms, and Things

Language, Thought, and Reality  
 77
cated of many things, as in the propositions “Tuffy was a black dog” and “All 
black dogs are living things.” Here we have to be careful, however, to distin­
guish universals from collections. “This logic class” is not an individual thing, 
but is made up of individuals. But neither is it a universal, because you cannot 
say of any individual in the class that he (or she) is the logic class; each is only 
a member of the group or collection. And the features of the logic class are 
not necessarily true of a given member of the class. The class may be good at 
logic, but it doesn’t follow that a certain member of the good class must be 
good at logic. But everything that falls under the universal “flower” is a flower 
and has the attributes that go along with being a flower. The same thing holds 
for other collections, like a baseball team or the present student body of the 
University of St. Thomas (where I teach).
Primary Sources
Aristotle, On Interpretation, c. 1., 16a1–18. Signification.
Aristotle, Prior Analytics, bk. 1, c. 1, 24a10–24b31. Terms, propositions, arguments.
Thomas Aquinas, Exposition of Aristotle’s On Interpretation, Lessons 1–3. Signification.
Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologiae 1.85.1–2. Universals and particulars. 
Problem Set 7: Signs
Kinds of Signs
Instructions
Identify whether the following signs are: (a) natural or conventional, and 
whether they are (b) formal or instrumental.
	
1.	A diploma is a sign of a college education.
	
2.	Groaning is a sign of pain.
	
3.	A red light is a sign of danger.
	
4.	Dark clouds are a sign of an approaching storm.
	
5.	A word, spoken or written, is a sign of what we are thinking.
	
6.	A footprint in the snow is the sign of the animal that made it.
	
7.	A salute is a sign of respect for a superior.
	
8.	Radioactivity is the sign of uranium or some similar radioactive 
substance.
	
9.	A wedding ring is a sign of marriage.

	 10.	An idea is a sign of what we are thinking about, and a sense image of 
what we are sensing.
Identifying Signs in Prose
Instructions
Analyze the use of signs in the following passages. (a) Be sure you can 
distinguish the sign (signum) from its object or thing signified (significatum). 
(b) Then identify the reader or interpretant of the sign relation. (c) Identify 
what kind of sign it is. (d) If there is more than one sign described in the pas­
sage, answer the three previous questions for each one of the signs you find. 
1. “Beasts do not read symbols; that is why they do not see pictures. We 
are sometimes told that dogs do not react even to the best portraits because 
they live more by smell than by sight, but the behavior of a dog who spies a 
motionless real cat through the window glass belies this explanation. Dogs 
scorn our paintings because they see colored canvases, not pictures. A repre­
sentation of a cat does not make them conceive one.” (Suzanne K. Langer, d. 
1985, American philosopher, Philosophy in a New Key: A Study in the Symbol­
ism of Reason, Rite, and Art)
2. “In the very beginnings of modern physics, in Galileo, we find the met­
aphor that the ‘book of nature’ is written in mathematical ciphers. And since 
then, the entire development of exact natural science shows that every step 
forward in the formulation of its problems and concepts has gone hand in 
hand with the increasing refinement of its system of signs. (Ernst Cassirer, d. 
1945, German philosopher, The Philosophy of Symbolic Forms. Vol 1, Language)
3. “There will be striking phenomena in sun and moon and stars; on the 
earth throes will grip the nations, perplexed by the roar of sea and surge; men 
will faint away from fright and expectation of what is yet to befall the world; 
for the foundations of the universe will rock. At last they will see the Son of 
Man riding upon a cloud with great might and majesty. When these phenom­
ena are well underway, raise your heads and look up, for then your redemp­
tion is close at hand. He also told them a parable: ‘Look at the fig tree, or any 
of the trees: the moment they begin to shoot, you need but open your eyes to 
know that summer is near. Apply this to yourselves: as soon as you see these 
events in progress, you know that the kingdom of God is at hand.’ ” (Luke 
21:25–33 RSV)
78  
 The Logic of Terms

Individuals, Collections, and Universals
Instructions 
Are the following words or phrases signs of (a) individual things, (b) col­
lections of individual things, or (c) universals?
	
1.	John Paul Jones’s Navy
	
2.	the president of the United States from 1992 to 2000
	
3.	dog
	
4.	Gen. Ulysses S. Grant
	
5.	the secretary of the treasury of the United States
	
6.	color
	
7.	our solar system
	
8.	triangle
	
9.	justice
	 10.	the Milky Way
	 11.	the 2015 American Women’s Soccer Team
	 12.	the eastern grey kangaroo
	 13.	pronouns
	 14.	argument
	 15.	Queen Elizabeth II
	 16.	Amazon.com
	 17.	Ford Motor Corporation
	 18.	scientist
	 19.	pickle
	 20.	sweet pickles
Language, Thought, and Reality  
 79

Categories
Lesson 8 
Categories
Working toward Definitions by Answering 
the “What?” Question
The Essentials
The purpose or goal of studying the logic of terms is to be able correctly 
to define the concepts, terms, and words we use in the process of discovering 
and arguing for truths in all the other disciplines we study. In this lesson we 
will encounter Aristotle’s doctrine of the categories. This first step can provide 
us with a way of organizing and understanding the matter or content of our 
definitions. 
Logical categories are the general or universal concepts, terms, and words 
we use to describe things. All the universal terms we use to describe things 
are what the Greeks called “categories.” The term “category” comes from the 
Greek word kategorein, a legal term for making an accusation, whether pos­
itive (“He’s a robber”) or negative (“He did not betray the Athenians”). But 
categories don’t just apply to concepts, terms, and words. We use intellectual 
and verbal categories because they are designed to describe the attributes of 
things in the world, what we can call “ontological” or “real” categories. The 
concept of category describes both the ideas we use to think about things and 
features of the things we are thinking about. There are different levels of cat­
80

Categories  
 81
egories, from the specific categories we use every day to describe things—oak, 
rose, white, round, good, fast, computer—to Aristotle’s ten most general or 
universal categories—substance, quantity, quality, relation, when, where, po­
sition, equipment, action, and passion. 
Using Universals in Descriptions
In Lesson 7, we learned that most of the terms we use to describe things 
are universals, though a few of them are individual terms. Individual terms are 
usually proper names limited to one individual, and we limit proper names 
to very important individual things: humans, human institutions, and some 
animals. Socrates, the name of the famous Greek philosopher who was ex­
ecuted by the Athenians in 399 b.c., is often used in logic as an example of 
such an individual term. Let’s use Socrates as an example. When we try to 
describe Socrates, or anything else, we invariably use universal terms, because 
the essence or “core” of anything, or any feature of anything, is not confined 
to that one thing; it is found in other things of the same sort. Here are some 
examples about Socrates: 
Socrates was (1) a philosopher, (2) ugly, (3) snub-nosed (his nose was 
“smashed in”), and (4) looked to the Greeks like a satyr (look up this interest­
ing word if you don’t already know it).
Socrates also (5) talked to people, (6) he did so in the agora (the market­
place in Athens), (7) though sometimes he was a soldier, (8) on the battlefield, 
(9) where he suffered cold weather, (10) without complaining, and (11) he was 
heroic. 
In addition, Socrates was (12) a husband (his wife was named Xanthippe), 
(13) a father, (14) friendly, (15) old (as portrayed in Plato’s Apology), (16) with 
a bit of gray hair, (17) that was cut short, (18) dressed poorly (as befits a poor 
philosopher), (19) was often stooped over when he walked, (20) though in 
Plato’s Symposium he was lying on a dinner couch, (21) next to the young trag­
ic poet Agathon. (22) In the morning after the drinking party he was standing 
straight up (the only one left standing), and (23) then he walked back to the 
agora to follow his daily routine. 
In describing Socrates, however, we seem to have left out some important 
but fairly obvious points. Socrates was (24) Greek, (25) a human (or man, in 
older English), (26) an animal, (27) a living thing, (28) a physical thing, and 
(29) a substance, (30) a thing, and (31) a being. 

82  
 The Logic of Terms
While a proper noun such as “Socrates” signifies an individual, when we 
use general terms like “old” or “man” or “old man,” we often add the indefi­
nite article “a” (or “an”), such as in the sentence “Socrates is an old man.” The 
indefinite article points out that Socrates is one among many old men, to all 
of whom the universal term “old man” applies. Sometimes we use the defi­
nite article “the” to emphasize individuality, as in “Socrates is the philosopher 
over in the agora.” In this sentence, what “the” points out is that Socrates is 
the single person who is “the philosopher over in the agora.” On the other 
hand, when we say, “The kangaroo is an animal,” usually we are not referring 
to just one kangaroo but to all kangaroos. The whole species of kangaroos are 
animals. In thought and language, we use universals to describe individual 
things through what they have in common with other things of the same sort. 
But such common traits can also be used to distinguish individuals from each 
other by focusing on the traits where they differ from each other. The vast 
majority of thinkers down through the ages have thought that there are such 
natural “sorts” or “kinds” of things; our assertions are true when our minds 
conform to those “kinds” and are false when they don’t. When I think a dog 
really is a dog, my thought is true; but when I think it is a cat, my thought 
is false. (More on truth and falsity in Part 3: “The Logic of Propositions,” 
Lessons 13–22.) 
Specific Categories and General Categories
Aristotle noticed that the universal terms we use cluster together in two 
revealing ways. First, terms cluster into similar groups. In our example, Soc­
rates (5) “talked” and (23) “walked.” These are actions he performed. Socrates 
was (7) “in the battlefield,” but he also spent a lot of time (6) “in the agora.” 
These are places where he was. There are also a large number of terms used 
that are not quite as obviously similar as these examples, yet they do fit to­
gether by describing what kind or quality of man Socrates was: (1), (2), (3), 
(4), (11), (14), (16), (17). 
Especially interesting is the way the most important cluster of traits works: 
Socrates is (23) a “human,” (24) an “animal,” (25) a “living thing,” (26) a “phys­
ical thing,” and (27) a “substance.” All of these traits are similar by telling us 
what Socrates is fundamentally, in the unchanging “core” of the complex real­
ity we call Socrates. They are quite different from things like (21) “walking” or 
(15) “old” or (1) a “philosopher,” traits that come and go and that are, so to 

Categories  
 83
speak, built on top of these core traits. The core traits of Socrates, from “hu­
man” through “physical thing,” all cluster together because they point out 
the fundamental character or nature of Socrates. Consequently, if we want 
to define Socrates—and definition is the goal of the logic of the first act of 
the mind—we would define him using these traits, because definitions are de­
signed to distinguish the fundamental character of something from its addi­
tional traits. Socrates is a physical thing, a living thing, an animal, and a human. 
Socrates or “this human” is an independently existing thing, while walk­
ing is something a substance does and old is something a substance is. Since 
such nonsubstantial traits depend upon substances, Aristotle called them “ac­
cidents.” The etymology of this word tells us they “go along with” or “happen 
to” substances. Just as substance is the widest concept describing the funda­
mental nature of something, Aristotle also discovered nine accidental cate­
gories, the widest concepts that characterize the non-substantial features of 
things. Let’s hear Aristotle himself describe all ten categories, because he gave 
good examples of each:
Of those enunciations [written or spoken terms] that are not composite, each 
signifies either substance or quantity or quality or relation or where or when or pos­
ture or being equipped or acting or undergoing. There is substance in the ordinary 
meaning of the term, for example, man or horse; quantity, for example, being 
two or three cubits large; quality, for example, being white or being grammatical; 
relation to something, for example, double or half or greater; where, for example, 
being in the grove or in the market place; when, for example, tomorrow or the 
day before yesterday; posture, for example, reclining or standing; being equipped, 
for example, wearing shoes or being armed; action, for example, cutting or burn­
ing; passion or undergoing, for example, being cut or being burned.1 
Here is a convenient list of Aristotle’s ten categories:
	
1.	Substance: independently existing things; fundamental natures of 
things. 
[the nine accidental categories]
	
2.	Quantity: how much?
	
3.	Quality: what kind?
	
4.	Relation: what is it like in relation to another?
	
5.	Place: where?
	
6.	Posture: how configured at its place?
1. Aristotle, Categories, c. 4, trans. Houser.

84  
 The Logic of Terms
	
7.	When: at what time?
	
8.	Being equipped, clothing: limited to humans and domesticated 
animals.
	
9.	Action: what is it actively doing?
	 10.	Passion/undergoing: what is it passively receiving? 
Aristotle’s theory of the ten general categories, in sum, is this: every spe­
cific term we use to describe any individual thing in the universe, like “man” 
or “horse” or “grammatical” or “cutting” or “being cut,” ultimately will fall 
under one or another of the ten most general categories, such as substance or 
quality or action or passion, as in these examples. Problem Set 8, in the section 
Terms and their “Aristotelian Categories,” asks you to determine under which 
of the ten categories each more specific term (or category) that is listed falls. 
In order to answer these questions about logical categories correctly, you have 
to base your answer on the real or ontological categories into which the real 
things signified fall. 
A Deeper Look: Some Important Categories
Let’s look a bit closer at some of the more important of Aristotle’s ten 
categories—substance, quantity, quality, and relation. In doing so, we’ll be 
guided by what Aristotle himself said in his book Categories, where he dis­
tinguished different subdivisions of these important categories in order to 
explain them. 
Substance
Substances have three features that are important for logic (other charac­
teristics will take us too far into philosophy). 
First, the substance of a thing describes what it is in its “core” or funda­
mental nature. It answers the question “what is it fundamentally?” or, more 
simply, “what is it?” Though Socrates is “walking” or “old” or even “a philos­
opher,” none of these terms describe his fundamental nature in the way that 
“human” or “animal” or “living thing” does. 
Second, individual substances are the independently existing things in 
the world. The nonsubstantial terms mentioned, like “walking” or “old” or 
“in the agora,” describe traits that depend upon something already being a 
substance. They exist in a substance and depend upon that substance in order 

Categories  
 85
to exist. They do not exist independently of Socrates or some other individual 
substance. This is why Aristotle called them “accidents,” not in the sense of 
something unexpected happening, but in the sense that they are “added to” 
substances. When he is walking to the agora, Socrates remains Socrates, but 
“walking” is “added to” and “exists in” his substance. But “walking” ceases to 
be added when he stops. 
Third, Aristotle lived in a world very close to nature, so most of his exam­
ples of substances come from the natural world. But what about some artifact 
that is manmade, like a house or a statue? Such things are like Socrates and 
unlike his walking in being independently existing things. In this sense they 
are substances. But what makes a statue independently existing? The bronze 
or marble it is made out of. It is a statue, however, because of its shape, which 
is an accident, a kind of quality: it looks like Zeus or the emperor Augustus 
Caesar. It is both a substance and an accident; different features of it fall into 
different categories. But what is it fundamentally? The best answer depends 
upon what question you are asking. If you are asking why it is an independent­
ly existing thing, the reason why is because of the material it is made from, 
say, bronze. But in this sense it is just a bronze thing; that it is a statue of Zeus 
is irrelevant. But if you are asking why it is a statue, why we use this term to 
describe it, that is based upon the shape it has—a quality. Perhaps the best 
answer is that the statue fundamentally falls under the category of quality, but 
it must be made out of some substance in order to be a statue in the first place. 
Quantity
If substance answers the question “what is it?,” quantity answers the 
question “how much of it is there?” Aristotle noted that physical substanc­
es or bodies have size in terms of physical parts spread outside one another. 
They are extended in place (or space) along three dimensions, having height 
(which makes one dimension), width (which makes two dimensions), and 
depth (which makes three dimensions). (It would take over two millennia 
for scientists to come up with the hypothesis that there really might be more 
than three dimensions, but that argues for more quantity, not less.) Aristotle 
recognized that having size in three dimensions is something added onto the 
substance of a thing; size does not determine the kind of substance a thing is, 
so the category “quantity” must be different from “substance.” 
Aristotle also recognized two subdivisions of quantity. The first is the kind 

86  
 The Logic of Terms
of quantity that bodies have, which he called “continuous quantity” because 
the lines, planes, and solids that make up the three dimensions of things are all 
continuous amounts. If we look at a baseball and don’t concern ourselves with 
the stuff it is made of (its substance) or how it is used in playing the game, 
we can focus just on its quantity, which is what we do when we study spheres 
or circles in geometry. The other kind of quantity, according to Aristotle, is 
“discrete quantity,” the discrete numbers we use in counting: 1, 2, 3, 4, and so 
on. This is what arithmetic studies, also without reference to the kind of sub­
stances we are counting. While there have been many developments in math­
ematics since the days of Aristotle, his insight that the quantitative features of 
things are different from their substantial features has stood the test of time.
Quality
The qualities of something answer the question “what is it like?” or “what 
kind is it?” Here we are not talking about the fundamental nature of some­
thing—dog, cat, whale, human—but other, less central features of a substance 
that fill out our view of what it is like. Often these can change without the 
substance of something changing. To give a better view of quality, Aristotle 
subdivided this category into four kinds of qualities. 
(1) First are the qualities of things we can perceive with our five senses: col­
ors, sounds, tastes, odors, textures. Each of these we take in with only one of our 
senses: sight, hearing, taste, smell, and touch, respectively. (2) Figure or shape 
is different. Unlike the first subdivision of quality, shape is a quality we can 
take in using more than one sense, as we can take in quantitative features of 
things with more than one sense. These first two kinds of quality are features 
of things we become aware of by perceiving them with our senses. 
The other two kinds of quality we do not directly perceive on the surface 
of other things, though they exist within other things, as well as ourselves. 
(3) One kind Aristotle called “habit” (hexis) from the verb “to have” (echein), 
because habits are attributes something can come to have through devel­
opment. For humans, here are some examples of habits: skill at bike riding 
(which is different from actually riding a bike); or being good at a game like 
soccer; or at an art like dancing; or having learned geometry or Spanish lit­
erature or chemistry. Also included are moral habits like being a just or cou­
rageous person. What makes all these traits to be habits is that we are born 
with the capacity or power to develop them, but that is different from having 

Categories  
 87
become good (or bad) at them through work, like we can build up our mus­
cles through weight training or running. (4) The last kind of quality Aristotle 
mentions is the innermost, the basic powers or capacities that go along with 
being the kind of substance something is. Dogs, for example, have a better 
basic sense of smell than humans, while we have a better natural capacity to 
think. In sum, powers are what make it possible for us to develop habits, and 
habits are what make it possible for us to act in a proficient and reliable way. 
Relation
The last of the four most important categories is relation. While sub­
stance, quantity, and quality describe something intrinsically or on its own, 
relation contains reference to something else. So being a mother, a child, equal 
to, to the right of, to the left of, being sensible—that is, “able to be sensed,” or 
knowable, “able to be known”—are all relations. In relation, something is 
described in comparison with something else. While important on its own, 
relation has added significance because it forms the basis for the other six cat­
egories Aristotle listed: when (a temporal relation); where (a spatial relation); 
posture (the relation of the parts of a body at the place where it is); equipped 
(the relation between a person and his most immediate environment, his 
clothing or equipment); an action, such as making something with Legos, a 
transient action that produces an effect in the Legos when they become, say, 
a starship, or an immanent action, like thinking, which need not affect any­
thing else; and its opposite, passion, where something else affects us, the thing 
that undergoes the passion, as when we see or hear something.
Some Conclusions
Universals are the normal way of thinking about things; proper names 
limited to one individual are the odd kind of names. We limit proper names 
to very important things: humans, some animals, human institutions. 
In thought, humans use universals to describe things in terms of what they 
have in common with other things of the same sort. There are natural sorts of 
things to which our minds attempt to conform themselves.
For universal terms connected to each other, one universal term fits under 
another, both of which are true of the subject in question. For instance, Socra­
tes is human, animal, living thing, physical thing, and substance. 

88  
 The Logic of Terms
Aristotle found empirically that all things or objects—both real or 
imaginary, actual or merely possible—fall into ten highest or most general 
groups—his ten categories. This is why we recognize both specific categories 
and Aristotle’s ten most general categories.
Aristotle’s ten categories and how he described them:
	
1.	Substance: independently existing things; fundamental natures of 
things [the nine accidents].
	
2.	Quantity: how much?
	
3.	Quality: what kind?
	
4.	Relation: what is it like in relation to another?
	
5.	Place: where?
	
6.	Posture: how configured at its place?
	
7.	When: at what time?
	
8.	Being equipped, clothing: limited to humans and domesticated 
animals.
	
9.	Action: what is it actively doing?
	
10.	Passion/undergoing: what is it passively receiving? 
To understand anything, the first “what” question to ask is, “Which of 
the ten categories does the thing fall into?” Then we can proceed to more and 
more specific or precise categories used to describe it.
Primary Sources
Substance
Aristotle, Categories, c. 5, 2a11–4b19.
Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s Metaphysic, bk. 7, lec. 2, n. 1273–75. 
Accidents
Aristotle, Categories, c. 6–9, 4b20–11b14.
Aquinas, Commentary on Lombard’s Sentences, bk. 1, d. 8.4.3c. 
Quantity
Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s Metaphysics, bk. 5, lec. 15.

Categories  
 89
Quality
Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s Metaphysics, bk. 5, lec. 16.
Relation
Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s Metaphysics, bk. 5, lec. 17.
Problem Set 8: Recognizing and Using Categories
Terms and their Aristotelian Categories 
Instructions about Aristotle’s Categories 
Into which of Aristotle’s ten general categories do the following terms fit?
	
1.	the present millennium
	
2.	leader
	
3.	cat
	
4.	wearing a baseball uniform
	
5.	singing
	
6.	kneeling
	
7.	statue
	
8.	rectangle
	
9.	mile
	 10.	in the desk
	 11.	neutron
	
12.	swimming
	 13.	capable of swimming
	 14.	risible (able to laugh)
	 15.	to be humiliated
	 16.	metal
	 17.	seeing
	 18.	being oval
	 19.	mayor
	 20.	upside-down
	 21.	in the phonebook
	 22.	a laptop computer
	 23.	red
	 25.	a fast runner
	 26.	being categorized
	 27.	thinking
Finding Terms in Prose 
Instructions about using Aristotle’s Categories 
In the following passages, underline the five most important words in 
each passage. Then place each word in one of Aristotle’s ten category. 
1. “The next day he woke up late. Going over the impression of the past, 
what he recalled most vividly was that he was to be presented to the Em­
peror Francis. He remembered the Minister of War, the ceremonious Adju­
tant, Bilibin, and the conversation of the previous evening. He dressed for 
his attendance at court in full court dress, which he had not worn for a long 

90  
 The Logic of Terms
time, and fresh, eager, and handsome, he walked into Bilibin’s room with his 
arm in a sling. Four gentlemen of the diplomatic corps were already there. 
With Prince Ippolit Kuragin, who was a secretary to the embassy, Bolkonsky 
was already acquainted. Bilibin introduced him to the others.” (Leo Tolstoy, 
19th-cen. Russian novelist, War and Peace)
2. “And what did it profit me that when I was barely twenty years old, 
there came into my hands, and I read and understood, alone and unaided, the 
book of Aristotle’s ten Categories, a book I had longed for as for some great 
and divine work, because the master who taught me Rhetoric at Carthage, 
and others held learned, mouthed its name with such evident pride? I com­
pared notes with others, who admitted that they had scarcely managed to 
understand the book even with the most learned masters not merely lecturing 
upon it but making many diagrams in the dust. And they could not tell me 
anything of it that I had not discovered in reading it for myself. For it seemed 
to me clear enough what the book had to say of substances, like man, and of 
the accidents that are in substances, like the figure of a man, and what sort of 
man he is, and of his stature, how many feet high, and of his family relation­
ships, whose brother he is, or where he is placed, or when he was born, or 
whether he is standing or sitting or has his shoes on or is armed, or whether 
he is doing something or having something done to him—and all the other 
countless things that are to be put either in these nine categories of which 
I have given examples, or in the chief category of substance.” (Augustine, 
d. 430, Roman bishop and theologian, Confessions)
3. “I had three chairs in my house: one for solitude, two for friendship, 
three for society. When visitors came in larger and unexpected numbers, there 
was but the third chair for them all; but they generally economized the room 
by standing up. It is surprising how many great men and women a small house 
will contain. I have had twenty-five or thirty souls, with their bodies, at once 
under my roof. And yet we often parted without being aware that we had 
come very near to one another.” (Henry David Thoreau, 19th-cen. American 
essayist, Walden)
4. “The Crow and the Pitcher”
“Once there was a thirsty crow. She had flown a long way looking for wa­
ter to drink. Suddenly she saw a pitcher. She flew down and saw it held a little 
water, but it was so low in the pitcher that she could not reach it.
“ ‘But I must have that water,’ she cried. ‘I am too weary to fly farther. 

Categories  
 91
What shall I do? I know! I’ll tip the pitcher over.’ She beat it with her wings, 
but it was too heavy. She could not move it. The she thought a while. ‘I know 
now! I will break it! Then I will drink the water as it pours out. How good it 
will taste!’ With her beak and claws and wings she threw herself against the 
pitcher. But it was too strong. 
“The poor crow stopped to rest. ‘What shall I do now? I cannot die of 
thirst with water close by. There must be a way, if I only had wit enough to 
find it out.’ 
“After a while the crow had a bright idea. There were many small stones 
lying about. She picked them up one by one and dropped them into the pitch­
er. Slowly the water rose, until at last she could drink it. How good it tasted!
“ ‘There is always a way out of hard places,’ said the crow, ‘if only you have 
the wit to find it.’ ” (Aesop, Greek, ca. 600 b.c., Fables)
Identifying Specific Categories
Instructions 
Consider the following very specific categorical terms. Describe what these 
terms mean by identifying at least two other, broader terms under which they 
fit and that help to describe their nature (whether the two terms are specific 
categories or Aristotle’s most general categories).
	
1.	sky blue
	
2.	Shetland pony
	
3.	ten
	
4.	middle C
	
5.	second cousin
	
6.	running
	 7.	tarantula
	 8.	murder
	 9.	larger than
	10.	being eaten
	11.	Miriam is a pleasant person.
	12.	sea shell

Clarifying Concepts through Division and Collection of Terms
Lesson 9
Clarifying Concepts through Division 
and Collection of Terms
The Essentials
Division and collection of terms are important techniques for analyzing 
the concepts, words, and terms we use, techniques that serve as a preparation 
for accurate definitions. When using terms, in order to find a full answer to 
the “what?” question, we should be able to understand how one term is dif­
ferent from terms that fall under the other nine categories. For instance, in a 
“green hopping toad,” what are the differences among “toad,” and “hopping,” 
and “green”? And we should also understand how a term is related to other 
terms within the category under which it falls. For example, what kind of 
substance is a toad? Or what kind of quality is green? Or what kind of relation 
is being a daughter?
Extension and Comprehension of Terms
To answer questions like these, it helps to understand that each term we 
use has two features that work in tandem with each other: the first is what lo­
gicians call “extension,” and the second is called “comprehension” (or “mean­
ing” or “intension”). Extension is simply how wide the term extends, the range 
of the things to which it applies. We have already seen that “living thing” has 
92

Clarifying Concepts through Division and Collection of Terms  
 93
a much wider extension than does “human.” When we learn the meaning of 
terms, we normally learn their extension first. Aristotle has a memorable ex­
ample: “A child begins by calling all men father, and all women mother, but 
later on distinguishes each of them.” The child in Aristotle’s example initially 
thinks that “mother” has the same extension as the much wider term “wom­
an,” and at first thinks that “father” has the same extension as “man,” but then 
learns better. The comprehension of a term is its meaning; and through ex­
perience, we come to understand or comprehend it. The comprehension of a 
term is the basis for its extension. But we normally learn the comprehension 
of a term by first becoming aware of its extension, as in Aristotle’s example of 
the child. The way to do this is to look at what we might call the term’s “log­
ical inferiors and superiors.” The logical inferiors below it are the narrower 
terms that fall under it, as “red” and “green” and “yellow” fall under “color.” Its 
logical superiors are the wider terms that stand over the term we are trying to 
understand, as “red” falls under the wider term “color,” and “color” falls under 
the wider term “sensible quality,” and sensible quality falls under the category 
“quality.” Problem Set 9 focuses on using the extension of terms to get at their 
meaning by identifying their logical inferiors and superiors.
Logical Inferiors and Superiors
Looking for the logical superiors and inferiors of a term is not a haphaz­
ard business. Even before Aristotle, Plato had identified two techniques for 
this search. When looking for a logical superior, we use the technique of col­
lection, where we collect examples of the logical inferiors of the term we are 
after until they lead us to that term. Moving from “red,” “green,” and “yellow” 
to the term “color” is an example of collection. When moving in the opposite 
direction, from the wider to the narrower term, we use the technique of divi­
sion, dividing the wider term into its parts. If we start with “color,” we can di­
vide it into specific colors, like “red” or “blue” or “orange.” And then we might 
further divide a specific color, say, brown, into what we normally call “shades” 
of brown. Division of concepts or terms is really the fundamental technique 
here, because when we move down we divide our original concept, and when 
we move up we follow the same division, but in the upward direction. 

94  
 The Logic of Terms
How Division of Terms Is Useful
Since Aristotle’s ten categories are the most general terms or categories, 
they are very useful for beginning to understand what something is by ask­
ing, “What category does it fit into?” But fully understanding something 
means you need to find the more specific categories that describe it. Once 
you sort through these, you will be in position to give a good definition of the 
thing; and being able to define something—whether a shoe, a car, a beetle, or 
atomic energy—is the only way to be sure you know what it is. All of us use 
words that we don’t really understand very well; and the clearest sign that our 
knowledge isn’t so good is that we can’t really define them very well. Conse­
quently, the way to improve our logical skills involved with the first act of the 
mind is to improve our ability to define things.
One great aid in defining things—you might say the initial step of devel­
oping good definitions—is to be able to divide the terms related to the term 
being defined: its logical inferiors and superiors, or what we called in Lesson 8 
the “specific categories” falling under the “general category” of the term. There 
we saw a number of features of Socrates that describe what he is fundamen­
tally, in his substance: “human,” “animal,” “living thing,” “physical thing,” and, 
finally, “substance.” But how do we know these terms describe him accurately? 
And how do we discover them? This is where division and collection come 
into play. We try to arrange these fundamental or essential features of Socrates 
in order, going from the narrower or more specific features to the wider or 
more general features, until we arrive at the general category of substance. In 
Lesson 10 we’ll see that a narrower grouping or class is called a “species,” while 
a wider one is a “genus.” 
An Example of Using Division and Collection
Let’s look at how a philosopher explains what a human being is by divid­
ing and collecting concepts, by examining the work of the English philoso­
pher John Locke (d. 1704), whose division we’ll consider here. (In Lesson 10 
we’ll look at an earlier philosopher, Porphyry [d. ca. 300], tackling the same 
problem.) Locke’s thought was influential on the American founding fathers, 
the men who devised the American Constitution. Here Locke reasons using 
the technique of collection, starting with individual humans like Socrates, 
compared with individual horses. He then says:

Clarifying Concepts through Division and Collection of Terms  
 95
General natures are nothing but abstract and partial ideas of more complex ones. 
That this is the way whereby men first formed general ideas, and general names 
to them, I think is so evident, that there needs no other proof of it but the con­
sidering of a man’s self, or others, and the ordinary proceedings of their minds 
in knowledge. . . . For let any one effect, and then tell me, wherein does his idea 
of man differ from that of Peter and Paul, or his idea of horse from that of 
Bucephalus, but in the leaving out something that is peculiar to each individual, 
and retaining so much of those particular complex ideas of several particular 
existences as they are found to agree in? 
Of the complex ideas signified by the names man and horse, leaving out 
but those particulars wherein they differ, and retaining only those wherein they 
agree, and of those making a new distinct complex idea, and giving the name 
animal to it, one has a more general term, that comprehends with man several 
other creatures. Leave out of the idea of animal, sense and spontaneous motion, 
and the remaining complex idea, made up of the remaining simple ones of body, 
life, and nourishment, becomes a more general one, under the more comprehen­
sive term, vivens [living thing]. And, not to dwell longer upon this particular, so 
evident in itself; by the same way the mind proceeds to body, substance, and at 
last to being, thing, and such universal terms, which stand for any of our ideas 
whatsoever.1 
In order to explain the meaning of “man,” Locke uses the technique of 
collection to proceed upward to more and more universal terms that describe 
human nature: from an individual, like Socrates, to “man,” and then on to 
“animal,” “living” thing, “body,” “substance,” and ending with two correlative 
notions that are even more universal than substance: “being” and “thing.” It is 
usually helpful to put a division into a diagram, because most descriptions of 
divisions, including Locke’s, leave out some concepts that help us understand 
the procedure (see p. 96).
Such a diagram helps us to see several things. First, collection and division 
help us arrange these terms in the right order, going from the narrowest in ex­
tension at the bottom to the most universal at the top. Second, these terms fit 
together like the mixing bowls your mother probably has, the kind that “nest 
together” with the smallest bowl fitting inside the next larger one, and so on 
until you get to the largest bowl on the outside. We can see that Socrates is a 
human, and every human is an animal; but there are more animals than hu­
mans, because there are irrational animals. And every animal is a living thing, 
1. John Locke, Essay Concerning Human Understanding, bk. 3, c. 3, sec. 9. 

96  
 The Logic of Terms
but there are living things that are not animals—namely, plants. Third, such 
a division is a good way—but not the only way—to try to define Socrates. 
And fourth, there is a basis for each division. For example, why are humans 
distinct from all the other animals? Because their thinking is rational, whereas 
the thinking of other animals is not based on rational, universal concepts, as 
human thinking is, but “irrational.” See if you can figure out the basis Locke 
had for each of his divisions.
Unfortunately, after all his good logical divisions, Locke’s main conclu­
sion here was wrong: he thought that the “general natures” of things, like 
horse or man, are not real features of real things, but “nothing but abstract 
and partial ideas,” existing only in our minds, not in reality, a conclusion his 
divisions in no way prove. Moreover, if these “natures” aren’t a feature of real 
things in the world, then there is no basis in reality for our “ideas.” 
	
being, thing
	
substance	
[accident]
	
body	
[spirit]
	
living body	
[non-living body]
	
animal	
[plant]
	
man	
[irrational animal]
	
e.g., horse	
[other irrational animals]
	
[Socrates] 	 [Plato]	
[horse 1]	
[horse 2]

Clarifying Concepts through Division and Collection of Terms  
 97
A Deeper Look
Kinds of Divisions
Locke’s division of terms is very important for logic, but it is not the only 
kind of division. In explaining the moral virtues and vices, Thomas Aquinas 
(d. 1274) distinguished three ways we can divide a whole into its parts: “There 
are three kinds of parts, namely, an integral part, such as wall, roof, and foun­
dation are the parts of a house; a subjective part, such as ox and lion are parts of 
animal; and a potential part, such as the nutritive power and the sensory power 
are parts of the soul.”2 The third sense of dividing a whole into parts is not 
directly relevant to our logical concerns here, but it is real. A car, for example, 
has the power to start and the power to stop, and the human soul, according 
to Aquinas, contains several different kinds of powers, including the powers 
of nutrition and growth, as well as the power of sensation, each of which is 
further divided into other powers, like sight and hearing and touch. But the 
other two kinds of wholes and parts are directly relevant to logical divisions. 
Division of an Integral Whole into Its Parts
The word “integral” refers to the parts that must combine to form the 
whole thing. Every independently existing thing in the physical universal is 
this kind of whole, as Aquinas’s example of the house makes clear. The roof, 
walls, and foundation are all required for a house to exist; but it is important 
to note that none of them are the house; they are only parts of the house. 
Looking forward to Problem Set 9, a second example is the republican type 
of government James Madison supported in his essay. It has a federal gov­
ernment divided into three parts we call branches: legislative, executive, and 
judicial. Taken together, these three parts make up the federal government, 
but none of them is that government; they are its separate, integral parts. 
Division of a Universal Whole into Its Subjective Parts
Locke’s division of a more universal concept or whole into its parts is even 
more important for logic, but this kind of division (or collection) is quite 
different from a house or government. Following Locke’s collection of terms 
describing Socrates, we can see that he is a man, every man is an animal, all 
2. Aquinas, Summa Theologiae II-II, q. 2, a. un. 2–2.49, un.c.

98  
 The Logic of Terms
animals are living things and have bodies, which are one kind of substance. 
But if we go in the opposite direction, starting from the category of substance 
and dividing terms, we see that the very meaning or nature of the higher term 
flows down into its subordinate. This is why Aquinas calls these kinds of parts 
“subjective parts,” because each part of this kind is a subject for propositions 
whose predicates are the terms above it. So “Socrates is a man,” and “Socrates 
is an animal,” because “all men are animals.” In addition, at each step of this 
division, for the term divided there is a basis for the division Locke employs. 
These features of Socrates cluster together to make it possible for us to define 
his fundamental nature based on this division. The term “government” also 
provides examples of this kind of division, as when we divide government into 
monarchy, oligarchy (or aristocracy), and democracy. Or we might think of 
triangles as equilateral, isosceles, and scalene. These examples also reveal the 
three distinct “essential predicables” we’ll see in Lesson 10: species, genus, and 
difference.
Rules for Divisions
We can even devise some rough-and-ready rules for divisions. 
Rule 1: A good division must be a real division. This means that each part 
must be narrower (in extension) than the whole. In Locke’s division, the range 
of humans and the range of irrational animals are each less that of animal. 
Rule 2: A good division must be exhaustive. Nothing contained within 
the term being divided should be left out of the parts. When considered to­
gether, the parts must have an extension equal to that of the whole. Here, 
animals and plants exhaust the range of living bodily substances. 
Rule 3: A good division must be exclusive. The parts cannot overlap. This 
is the reason why the basis for the division is often a negative notion, in order 
to separate the concepts divided. For example, we do so in the case of rational 
humans in contrast to all the other animals, which are described as irrational. 
Rule 4: In the case of the division of a universal whole into its subjective 
parts, the parts of each division must fall into the same category. In the case of 
Locke’s division, the category is the most basic one, substance. So all the terms 
arrived at through the division of substance are themselves kinds of substances. 
Finally, collection and division are not limited to defining terms like “hu­
man being” or “animal,” but they can be used in explaining more complicat­
ed concepts. Problem Set 9 is devoted to a famous argument in Federalist 

Clarifying Concepts through Division and Collection of Terms  
 99
No. 10, written by James Madison. It does not concern how to define a term 
like “faction,” but offers an argument for why a “republic,” such as that pro­
posed by the as yet unpassed Constitution, would be the best way of prevent­
ing the problems that factions can cause. Madison’s argument is as relevant to 
American life today as it was when first published in 1790.
Primary Sources
Aristotle: On Interpretation, Prior Analytics 1.31, 2.23–24. 
Aquinas, Summa Theologaie I-II, q. 18, a. 7c, Commentary on Aristotle’s On Interpretation, 
Lesson 3. 
Problem Set 9: Argument Using Division
James Madison’s Argument in Federalist No. 10 
Instructions
The techniques of division and collection of concepts can be employed in 
arguments that use specific categories. Read the essay Federalist No. 10, by 
James Madison. Then answer the following questions to see how division and 
collection of concepts play a part in this work. 
	
1.	What is the subject under discussion?
	
2.	What is Madison’s thesis?
	
3.	 Madison presents his basic argument through a division of the main 
ideas or specific categories in the passage. Diagram this division of 
ideas. Be sure the words and phrases you use to label the ideas are 
clear. But don’t try to repeat in a diagram everything Madison says in 
the text; just concentrate on dividing the main ideas.
	
4.	Write down four of Madison’s most important definitions. Do you 
think his definitions are good ones?
	
5.	Write out your answers in order to turn in this homework in class. 
Federalist No. 10
“The Same Subject Continued”
(The Union as a Safeguard against Domestic Faction and Insurrection)
From the New York Packet
Friday, November 23, 1787
James Madison 

100  
 The Logic of Terms
To the People of the State of New York: 
1. among the numerous advantages promised by a well-constructed 
Union, none deserves to be more accurately developed than its tendency to 
break and control the violence of faction. The friend of popular governments 
never finds himself so much alarmed for their character and fate, as when he 
contemplates their propensity to this dangerous vice. He will not fail, there­
fore, to set a due value on any plan which, without violating the principles to 
which he is attached, provides a proper cure for it. The instability, injustice, 
and confusion introduced into the public councils, have, in truth, been the 
mortal diseases under which popular governments have everywhere perished; 
as they continue to be the favorite and fruitful topics from which the ad­
versaries to liberty derive their most specious declamations. The valuable im­
provements made by the American constitutions on the popular models, both 
ancient and modern, cannot certainly be too much admired; but it would 
be an unwarrantable partiality, to contend that they have as effectually ob­
viated the danger on this side, as was wished and expected. Complaints are 
everywhere heard from our most considerate and virtuous citizens, equally 
the friends of public and private faith, and of public and personal liberty, 
that our governments are too unstable, that the public good is disregarded 
in the conflicts of rival parties, and that measures are too often decided, not 
according to the rules of justice and the rights of the minor party, but by the 
superior force of an interested and overbearing majority. However anxiously 
we may wish that these complaints had no foundation, the evidence of known 
facts will not permit us to deny that they are in some degree true. It will be 
found, indeed, on a candid review of our situation, that some of the distresses 
under which we labor have been erroneously charged on the operation of our 
governments; but it will be found, at the same time, that other causes will 
not alone account for many of our heaviest misfortunes; and, particularly, for 
that prevailing and increasing distrust of public engagements, and alarm for 
private rights, which are echoed from one end of the continent to the other. 
These must be chiefly, if not wholly, effects of the unsteadiness and injustice 
with which a factious spirit has tainted our public administrations. 
2. By a faction, I understand a number of citizens, whether amounting to 
a majority or a minority of the whole, who are united and actuated by some 
common impulse of passion, or of interest, adverse to the rights of other citi­
zens, or to the permanent and aggregate interests of the community. 
3. There are two methods of curing the mischiefs of faction: the one, by 
removing its causes; the other, by controlling its effects. 

Clarifying Concepts through Division and Collection of Terms  
 101
4. There are again two methods of removing the causes of faction: the one, 
by destroying the liberty which is essential to its existence; the other, by giving 
to every citizen the same opinions, the same passions, and the same interests. 
5. It could never be more truly said than of the first remedy, that it was 
worse than the disease. Liberty is to faction what air is to fire, an aliment with­
out which it instantly expires. But it could not be less folly to abolish liberty, 
which is essential to political life, because it nourishes faction, than it would 
be to wish the annihilation of air, which is essential to animal life, because it 
imparts to fire its destructive agency. 
6. The second expedient is as impracticable as the first would be unwise. As 
long as the reason of man continues fallible, and he is at liberty to exercise it, 
different opinions will be formed. As long as the connection subsists between 
his reason and his self-love, his opinions and his passions will have a reciprocal 
influence on each other; and the former will be objects to which the latter 
will attach themselves. The diversity in the faculties of men, from which the 
rights of property originate, is not less an insuperable obstacle to a uniformity 
of interests. The protection of these faculties is the first object of government. 
From the protection of different and unequal faculties of acquiring property, 
the possession of different degrees and kinds of property immediately results; 
and from the influence of these on the sentiments and views of the respective 
proprietors, ensues a division of the society into different interests and parties. 
7. The latent causes of faction are thus sown in the nature of man; and 
we see them everywhere brought into different degrees of activity, according 
to the different circumstances of civil society. A zeal for different opinions 
concerning religion, concerning government, and many other points, as well 
of speculation as of practice; an attachment to different leaders ambitiously 
contending for pre-eminence and power; or to persons of other descriptions 
whose fortunes have been interesting to the human passions, have, in turn, 
divided mankind into parties, inflamed them with mutual animosity, and 
rendered them much more disposed to vex and oppress each other than to 
co-operate for their common good. So strong is this propensity of mankind 
to fall into mutual animosities, that where no substantial occasion presents it­
self, the most frivolous and fanciful distinctions have been sufficient to kindle 
their unfriendly passions and excite their most violent conflicts. But the most 
common and durable source of factions has been the various and unequal 
distribution of property. Those who hold and those who are without property 
have ever formed distinct interests in society. Those who are creditors, and 
those who are debtors, fall under a like discrimination. A landed interest, a 

102  
 The Logic of Terms
manufacturing interest, a mercantile interest, a moneyed interest, with many 
lesser interests, grow up of necessity in civilized nations, and divide them into 
different classes, actuated by different sentiments and views. The regulation 
of these various and interfering interests forms the principal task of modern 
legislation, and involves the spirit of party and faction in the necessary and 
ordinary operations of the government. 
8. No man is allowed to be a judge in his own cause, because his interest 
would certainly bias his judgment, and, not improbably, corrupt his integrity. 
With equal, nay with greater reason, a body of men are unfit to be both judges 
and parties at the same time; yet what are many of the most important acts of 
legislation, but so many judicial determinations, not indeed concerning the 
rights of single persons, but concerning the rights of large bodies of citizens? 
And what are the different classes of legislators but advocates and parties to 
the causes which they determine? Is a law proposed concerning private debts? 
It is a question to which the creditors are parties on one side and the debtors 
on the other. Justice ought to hold the balance between them. Yet the parties 
are, and must be, themselves the judges; and the most numerous party, or, in 
other words, the most powerful faction must be expected to prevail. Shall 
domestic manufactures be encouraged, and in what degree, by restrictions 
on foreign manufactures? are questions which would be differently decided 
by the landed and the manufacturing classes, and probably by neither with 
a sole regard to justice and the public good. The apportionment of taxes on 
the various descriptions of property is an act which seems to require the most 
exact impartiality; yet there is, perhaps, no legislative act in which greater 
opportunity and temptation are given to a predominant party to trample on 
the rules of justice. Every shilling with which they overburden the inferior 
number, is a shilling saved to their own pockets. 
9. It is in vain to say that enlightened statesmen will be able to adjust these 
clashing interests, and render them all subservient to the public good. Enlight­
ened statesmen will not always be at the helm. Nor, in many cases, can such 
an adjustment be made at all without taking into view indirect and remote 
considerations, which will rarely prevail over the immediate interest which one 
party may find in disregarding the rights of another or the good of the whole. 
10. The inference to which we are brought is, that the causes of faction 
cannot be removed, and that relief is only to be sought in the means of con­
trolling its effects. 
11. If a faction consists of less than a majority, relief is supplied by the 

Clarifying Concepts through Division and Collection of Terms  
 103
republican principle, which enables the majority to defeat its sinister views 
by regular vote. It may clog the administration, it may convulse the society; 
but it will be unable to execute and mask its violence under the forms of the 
Constitution. When a majority is included in a faction, the form of popular 
government, on the other hand, enables it to sacrifice to its ruling passion or 
interest both the public good and the rights of other citizens. To secure the 
public good and private rights against the danger of such a faction, and at the 
same time to preserve the spirit and the form of popular government, is then 
the great object to which our inquiries are directed. Let me add that it is the 
great desideratum by which this form of government can be rescued from the 
opprobrium under which it has so long labored, and be recommended to the 
esteem and adoption of mankind. 
12. By what means is this object attainable? Evidently by one of two only. 
Either the existence of the same passion or interest in a majority at the same 
time must be prevented, or the majority, having such coexistent passion or 
interest, must be rendered, by their number and local situation, unable to 
concert and carry into effect schemes of oppression. If the impulse and the 
opportunity be suffered to coincide, we well know that neither moral nor re­
ligious motives can be relied on as an adequate control. They are not found to 
be such on the injustice and violence of individuals, and lose their efficacy in 
proportion to the number combined together, that is, in proportion as their 
efficacy becomes needful. 
13. From this view of the subject it may be concluded that a pure democ­
racy, by which I mean a society consisting of a small number of citizens, who 
assemble and administer the government in person, can admit of no cure for 
the mischiefs of faction. A common passion or interest will, in almost every 
case, be felt by a majority of the whole; a communication and concert result 
from the form of government itself; and there is nothing to check the induce­
ments to sacrifice the weaker party or an obnoxious individual. Hence it is 
that such democracies have ever been spectacles of turbulence and conten­
tion; have ever been found incompatible with personal security or the rights 
of property; and have in general been as short in their lives as they have been 
violent in their deaths. Theoretic politicians, who have patronized this spe­
cies of government, have erroneously supposed that by reducing mankind to 
a perfect equality in their political rights, they would, at the same time, be 
perfectly equalized and assimilated in their possessions, their opinions, and 
their passions. 

104  
 The Logic of Terms
14. A republic, by which I mean a government in which the scheme of 
representation takes place, opens a different prospect, and promises the cure 
for which we are seeking. Let us examine the points in which it varies from 
pure democracy, and we shall comprehend both the nature of the cure and the 
efficacy which it must derive from the Union. 
15. The two great points of difference between a democracy and a repub­
lic are: first, the delegation of the government, in the latter, to a small number 
of citizens elected by the rest; secondly, the greater number of citizens, and 
greater sphere of country, over which the latter may be extended. 
16. The effect of the first difference is, on the one hand, to refine and 
enlarge the public views, by passing them through the medium of a chosen 
body of citizens, whose wisdom may best discern the true interest of their 
country, and whose patriotism and love of justice will be least likely to sacri­
fice it to temporary or partial considerations. Under such a regulation, it may 
well happen that the public voice, pronounced by the representatives of the 
people, will be more consonant to the public good than if pronounced by the 
people themselves, convened for the purpose. On the other hand, the effect 
may be inverted. Men of factious tempers, of local prejudices, or of sinister 
designs, may, by intrigue, by corruption, or by other means, first obtain the 
suffrages, and then betray the interests, of the people. The question resulting 
is, whether small or extensive republics are more favorable to the election of 
proper guardians of the public weal; and it is clearly decided in favor of the 
latter by two obvious considerations: 
17. In the first place, it is to be remarked that, however small the republic 
may be, the representatives must be raised to a certain number, in order to 
guard against the cabals of a few; and that, however large it may be, they must 
be limited to a certain number, in order to guard against the confusion of a 
multitude. Hence, the number of representatives in the two cases not being in 
proportion to that of the two constituents, and being proportionally greater 
in the small republic, it follows that, if the proportion of fit characters be not 
less in the large than in the small republic, the former will present a greater 
option, and consequently a greater probability of a fit choice. 
18. In the next place, as each representative will be chosen by a greater 
number of citizens in the large than in the small republic, it will be more 
difficult for unworthy candidates to practice with success the vicious arts by 
which elections are too often carried; and the suffrages of the people being 
more free, will be more likely to occur in men who possess the most attractive 
merit and the most diffusive and established characters. 

Clarifying Concepts through Division and Collection of Terms  
 105
19. It must be confessed that in this, as in most other cases, there is a 
mean, on both sides of which inconveniences will be found to lie. By enlarg­
ing too much the number of electors, you render the representatives too little 
acquainted with all their local circumstances and lesser interests; as by reduc­
ing it too much, you render him unduly attached to these, and too little fit to 
comprehend and pursue great and national objects. The federal Constitution 
forms a happy combination in this respect; the great and aggregate interests 
being referred to the national, the local and particular to the State legislatures. 
20. The other point of difference is, the greater number of citizens and 
extent of territory which may be brought within the compass of republican 
than of democratic government; and it is this circumstance principally which 
renders factious combinations less to be dreaded in the former than in the 
latter. The smaller the society, the fewer probably will be the distinct parties 
and interests composing it; the fewer the distinct parties and interests, the 
more frequently will a majority be found of the same party; and the smaller 
the number of individuals composing a majority, and the smaller the compass 
within which they are placed, the more easily will they concert and execute 
their plans of oppression. Extend the sphere, and you take in a greater variety 
of parties and interests; you make it less probable that a majority of the whole 
will have a common motive to invade the rights of other citizens; or if such a 
common motive exists, it will be more difficult for all who feel it to discover 
their own strength, and to act in unison with each other. Besides other im­
pediments, it may be remarked that, where there is a consciousness of unjust 
or dishonorable purposes, communication is always checked by distrust in 
proportion to the number whose concurrence is necessary. 
21. Hence, it clearly appears, that the same advantage which a republic has 
over a democracy, in controlling the effects of faction, is enjoyed by a large over 
a small republic, is enjoyed by the Union over the States composing it. Does 
the advantage consist in the substitution of representatives whose enlightened 
views and virtuous sentiments render them superior to local prejudices and 
schemes of injustice? It will not be denied that the representation of the Union 
will be most likely to possess these requisite endowments. Does it consist in the 
greater security afforded by a greater variety of parties, against the event of any 
one party being able to outnumber and oppress the rest? In an equal degree 
does the increased variety of parties comprised within the Union increase this 
security. Does it, in fine, consist in the greater obstacles opposed to the concert 
and accomplishment of the secret wishes of an unjust and interested majority? 
Here, again, the extent of the Union gives it the most palpable advantage. 

106  
 The Logic of Terms
22. The influence of factious leaders may kindle a flame within their par­
ticular States, but will be unable to spread a general conflagration through the 
other States. A religious sect may degenerate into a political faction in a part 
of the Confederacy; but the variety of sects dispersed over the entire face of it 
must secure the national councils against any danger from that source. A rage 
for paper money, for an abolition of debts, for an equal division of property, 
or for any other improper or wicked project, will be less apt to pervade the 
whole body of the Union than a particular member of it; in the same propor­
tion as such a malady is more likely to taint a particular county or district, 
than an entire State. 
23. In the extent and proper structure of the Union, therefore, we behold 
a republican remedy for the diseases most incident to republican government. 
And according to the degree of pleasure and pride we feel in being republi­
cans, ought to be our zeal in cherishing the spirit and supporting the character 
of Federalists. 
—publius.

Aristotle’s Predicables
Lesson 10
Aristotle’s Predicables 
The Essentials
In this lesson we meet Aristotle’s predicables. There are three essential 
predicables—genus, species, and difference—and two nonessential predica­
bles—property and accident.
What “Predicable” Means
The predicables concern the relation of one term to another. The term 
“predicable” is taken from the Latin words praedico, which means “to speak 
publicly,” and praedicatio, a “public speech.” When we speak publicly we are 
trying to convince someone of something by asserting a grammatical “predi­
cate” (praedicamentum) of a grammatical “subject,” as in the proposition “Ar­
istotle was the first great scientist.” (He really was.) In “Socrates is a philoso­
pher,” “Socrates” is the subject of the proposition, while “philosopher” is the 
predicate of the proposition. In a proposition, then, “predicable” refers to how 
one term—a predicate—can be “predicated” or “said of ” another—a subject. 
Aristotle found that while there are literally an unlimited number of concepts 
we might use to describe things, there are a very limited number of ultimate 
or highest terms we can used for describing things—his ten categories. Like­
wise, while there are an unlimited number of “predications” or sentences we 
can formulate, there are a very limited number of ways any given predicate can 
107

108  
 The Logic of Terms
be related to a given subject in a categorical proposition. And we can make 
the same point without worrying about propositions: there are a very limited 
number of ways one thing can be related to another. 
To see how the predicables work, let’s use the example that many of Aris­
totle’s followers (called Aristotelians) over the centuries have used, because it 
is so familiar to us: human (or man in older English, l’homme in French, an­
thropos in Greek, Mensch in German, al-insan in classical Arabic). First, draw 
up a list of terms that accurately describe someone you know, perhaps your 
sister or the person sitting next to you in class. Following a very long tradition 
of logicians, we’ll use some of the examples, used in Lesson 8, of predicates 
asserted of our friend and teacher Socrates. 
Predicates of Socrates
As we have seen, when we try to describe Socrates, we invariably use uni­
versal terms. Here are some of the terms used in Lesson 8 to describe Socrates, 
using the same numbers we used there. He was (1) a philosopher, (2) ugly, 
(3) snub-nosed, (4) looked like a satyr. Socrates also (5) talked to people, 
(6) he did so in the agora, (7) sometimes he was in the battlefield, (8) a sol­
dier, (9) suffered cold weather, (10) without complaint, (11) and he was heroic. 
Socrates was also (12) a husband, (13) father, (14) friendly, (15) old, (16) with a 
bit of gray hair, (17) that was his hair’s color. (18) He dressed poorly (as befits 
a poor philosopher), (19) often stooped over when he walked, (20) was lying 
on a dinner couch, (21) next to the young tragic poet Agathon, (22) was the 
only one left standing the morning after the symposium, and (23) then walked 
back to the agora to follow his daily routine. We also saw that Socrates could 
be described as (24) Greek, (25) a human, (26) an animal, (27) rational, or 
able to reason, (28) a living thing, and (29) a physical thing. 
Essential vs. Nonessential Predicates
Aristotle noted that some terms describe the “essence” or “nature” or 
intelligible core of another term as distinct from terms that describe non­
essential features. In our example of Socrates, (25) human, (26) animal, 
(27) rational, (28) living thing, and (29) physical thing all describe the essence 
or fundamental nature of Socrates, an essence that falls within the category of 
substance. We must be careful to note, however, that essence or fundamental 

Aristotle’s Predicables  
 109
nature is not confined to the category of substance. “Ugly” and “talking” and 
“soldier” and “suffering” and “color” and “lying” and “tragic,” each of these has 
an essence, one outside the category of substance. To understand the essences 
of these traits, then, we can begin by determining which of the ten categories 
they fit in. “Talking” is a kind of action, “suffering” a kind of passion, “color” 
a kind of quality, and “lying” a kind of position or posture. But how do we 
come to understand that these statements are true about Socrates? Aristo­
tle developed his idea of the predicables to answer this question as a kind 
of framework for developing definitions. The very first step toward defining 
something, whether Socrates or his talking or the shape of his snub nose, is 
to try to begin to define its essence by comparing it to other things, which are 
either essential to it or nonessential—that is, “accidental.” Once we distin­
guish the essential from the nonessential traits, then we can look among the 
essential traits to find a definition, as Locke did in his division of concepts 
in Lesson 9. Since substance is the most important category, let’s return to 
Socrates and distinguish essential and nonessential features of him. This time, 
however, we’ll turn back the clock about 1,400 years, to the work of the phi­
losopher Porphyry (d. ca. 300), who was born in the city of Tyre, in what is 
now Lebanon, but spent much of his life in Rome, which was then the center 
of the world. 
The Essential Predicables: Genus, Species, Difference
Porphyry does not reason through collection but through division, mov­
ing downward from the most general term he considers, the category of sub­
stance, to more specific terms subordinated to it, and ending with individuals. 
The picture he draws in words has since become known as “Porphyry’s Tree,” 
because if you make a diagram of what he says, it will look something like a 
pine tree, the kind that grows in Italy. Porphyry’s reasoning is more complete 
than Locke’s, and most importantly he uses distinguishes three parts, so to 
speak, of the essence: genus, species, and difference: 
In each category there are the highest classes, the lowest classes, and some which 
are between the highest and the lowest. There is a highest genus beyond which 
there can be no other superior genus; there is a lowest species after which there 
can be no subordinate species; and between the highest genus and the lowest 
species there are some classes which are genera and species at the same time, 
since they include comparisons with the highest genus and the lowest species.

110  
 The Logic of Terms
Let us make the meaning clear with reference to one category—substance. 
Substance is itself a genus; under this is body; and under body is animate body; 
and under this is animal; under animal is rational animal; and under this is 
man; and under man are Socrates, Plato, and individual men. 
Of all these, substance is the highest genus, and it is only a genus, while man 
is the lowest species, and it is only a species. Body is a species of substance, but 
it is a genus of animate body. Animate body is a species of body, but it is a genus 
of animal. Animal is a species of animate body, but a genus of rational animal. 
Rational animal is a species of animal, but a genus of man. Man is a species of 
rational animal, but it is not also a genus of individual men, it is only a species. 
Every species, which is predicated immediately above individuals, will be only 
a species, never a genus. 
Therefore, just as substance is highest because there is nothing superior to 
substance and is the highest genus, so too man is a species below which there is 
no species nor anything able to be divided into species. Of individuals—Soc­
rates, Plato, and this white thing are individuals—there can only be a species, 
namely, the last species and, as we called it, the lowest species. The intermediate 
classes will be species of higher classes, but genera of lower classes.1
Porphyry’s Tree is a little more complicated than Locke’s description. But 
what is remarkable is how similar the two divisions are, even though written 
at an interval of 1,400 years. To see this, let’s look at the diagram of Porphyry’s 
division (facing page).
The main difference in language between Locke and Porphyry is that 
Porphyry uses terms that Aristotle had invented to describe logical superiors 
and inferiors—genus, species, and difference. You may be familiar with these 
terms from biology, so let’s build on that and focus on how they are used in 
logic. An individual human, like Socrates, has an essence or fundamental na­
ture that causes him to be human, having the same essence as other humans, 
like Plato and Aristotle. Socrates’s essence, however, can be described at dif­
ferent levels of universality, more general or more specific; and this is where 
genus, species, and difference come in. Indeed, the word “general” comes from 
the term “genus,” and the word “specific” comes from the term “species.” The 
terms used for describing the essence—genus, species, and difference—do not 
describe different real parts of the individual thing being defined, such as Soc­
rates. They don’t exist as different features of things in reality. 
Rather, genus and species exist in the mind, so the difference between 
1. Porphyry, Introduction [to Aristotle’s Logic], sec. 2, “Species.” 

Aristotle’s Predicables  
 111
them is a difference in the concepts or terms we use to describe the essence of 
something. Each signifies a distinct feature of one and the same essence. But 
what kind of difference? The distinction is that between what is more deter­
minate or delimited, the species, and the more indeterminate or unlimited, 
the genus, as Thomas Aquinas says in his book On Being and Essence. This 
is a difference among universal concepts we use to understand the essence 
of Socrates. The difference is designed to try to pinpoint the exact basis for 
distinguishing the species falling under the genus (here, “human being” fall­
ing under “animal”), in comparison to other species falling under the same 
genus (here, “animal”). This is why genus and species are relative terms: genus 
always refers to a wider universal term and species to the narrower universal 
term that falls under it. (Please note that while many of us misuse “specific” 
by using it to mean the same thing as “individual,” “specific” describes a lower 
universal term, not a term describing individuals.) Finally, since genus and 
species are relative to each other, speaking logically, each of the steps in this 
series is both a species, in relation to the next higher genus, and a genus in 
relation to the next lower species, as Porphyry says. 
	
substance
	
body	
[spirit]
	
animate body	
[inanimate body	
[God: 	
[created
	
(=living body)	
(= non-living body)]	
the One]	
spirits]
	
animal	
[plant]	
[human 	
[lower 
	
rational animal	
[irrational or 	
soul?]	
gods?]

	
	
brute animal] 	
	
man	
[non-human rational 
	
	
animals: daimones]
	
Socrates	 Plato	 Aristotle

112  
 The Logic of Terms
One final point. You may have noted that Porphyry lists a genus between 
“man” and “animal”—namely, “rational animal”; but Locke does not. The rea­
son why is that Porphyry thought humans are not the only rational animals. 
This is because, as a polytheist and anti-Christian, Porphyry believed in the 
existence of rational beings that were not humans, things he called daimones, 
a term from which the English word “demon” is derived. He was interested 
in the interactions among humans, the daimones, the gods, and the One or 
Highest God. 
Nonessential Predicables: Property and Accident
Nonessential terms divide into two very important groups: property and 
accident. An accident is a predicate term that is wholly disconnected from 
the essence of its subject. Consider “Socrates is talking in the agora (or mar­
ketplace) today.” Actually, talking is wholly disconnected from the essence of 
Socrates; he doesn’t have to be talking in order to be a human being, though 
he can do so. The same thing holds for being “in the agora” and “today.” Such 
terms, therefore, are “predicable accidents” in relation to Socrates’s essence as 
a rational animal. 
The other kind of nonessential predicable is called a “property” or some­
times a “proper accident” or an “essential accident.” These features of things 
are far more important than accident. Consider the following terms in re­
lation to Socrates: social, political, language-using, and the classic example 
in the Aristotelian tradition, risible (which means “able to laugh”). None of 
these terms describe the very essence of Socrates, so they are nonessential in 
relation to him. Yet they all are necessarily connected with him because they all 
necessarily result from his human essence. For every human is by nature social, 
political, a language user, and risible. These traits don’t constitute or cause the 
essence of Socrates, but they flow from it as necessary effects flow from their 
causes. This is why they are called properties. His human nature is the cause of 
these properties. In short, an accident is wholly unconnected with the essence 
of its subject, which is why it must be caused by something other than essence. 
By contrast, while a property is different from that essence, it is necessarily 
connected with it, because it is caused by that essence. 
A property, in short, flows from the essence or nature of the subject, as be­
ing risible flows from Socrates’s essence but “talking in the agora today” does 
not. You can see why if you ask yourself what causes a man like Socrates to be 

Aristotle’s Predicables  
 113
“able to laugh.” In order to laugh you have to be able to sense what is happen­
ing around you, and living things with senses are animals. But not all animals 
laugh. To be able to laugh, you have to have reason in order to understand that 
what you are presently seeing is odd, unusual, not happening as it normally 
does. In short, in order to be able to laugh you need to be a rational animal, 
which is the very definition of a human. So “being able to laugh” (and cry, 
which is just the reverse side of laughing) is a property always present in nor­
mal humans. Actually laughing, however, comes and goes; so it is an accident. 
Let’s take another example: Water is
	
(a)	made of hydrogen and oxygen; 
	
(b)	in this glass; 
	
(c)	in this fountain; 
	
(d)	wet; 
	
(e)	freezes at 0 degrees C, 32 degrees F. 
(a) describes the essence of water; (b) and (c) are predicable accidents of 
water, while (d) and (e) are properties of water. These examples show that 
properties are important for coming to understanding things, especially 
things in the physical world. The task of knowing things in nature is first to 
separate a thing’s permanent properties from the accidents it has, attributes 
that come and go. Then sometimes we can go further and uncover features of 
the essence of a kind of thing by studying its properties. Properties, in short, 
reveal the essences of things.
A Deeper Look
Identifying Genus, Species, and Difference: 
Plato’s Example of Division
To see how using differences helps us divide concepts, consider the follow­
ing passage taken from Plato’s Sophist. Here the two characters (a “Stranger,” 
who is like a stand-in for Socrates, and a young man named Theatetus) are 
dividing “art” (techne; ars) or “skill” in a way that will define the “art of the 
angler”—that is, the fisherman’s skill. 
Stranger: Let us begin by asking whether an angler is a man having an art (a 
developed skill) or not having an art, but some other power.
Theatetus: He is clearly a man having an art. 

114  
 The Logic of Terms
Stranger: And of arts are there two kinds?
Theatetus: What are they? 
Stranger: All arts are either acquisitive or creative, in which class shall we 
place the art of the angler?
Theatetus: Clearly in the acquisitive class.
Stranger: And the acquisitive may be subdivided into two parts: there is 
exchange, which is voluntary, and is produced by gifts, hire, or purchase; and 
the other part of the acquisitive, which takes by force of word or deed, may be 
termed conquest?
Theatetus: That is implied in what has been said.
Stranger: And may not conquest again be subdivided?
Theatetus: How?
Stranger: Open force may be called fighting, and secret force may have the 
general name of hunting?
Theatetus: Yes.
Stranger: And there is no reason why the art of hunting should not be fur­
ther divided.
Theatetus: How would you make the division?
Stranger: Into the hunting of living and lifeless prey.2 
In the dialogue, they go on to further divisions, but already we can see 
that the art of the angler is defined as: (1) an art, that is (2) acquisitive, (3) a 
kind of conquest, (4) taking the form of hunting, (5) of living prey. In this 
definition there are two important things to notice. 
First, the higher and lower terms, the genera and species, all fall into the 
same category. The divisions of Locke and Porphyry all fall into the category 
of substance. Humans are substances, and so too are “rational animals,” “living 
things,” and “bodies.” And in Plato’s division that defines “fishing,” acquisitive 
arts and arts of conquest are both arts; they are different examples of the kind 
of quality we learned to call a “habit.” And “exchange” and “conquest” are 
both kinds of “acquisitive arts.” 
Second, we can see that for each division, there is some criterion used for 
making that division. This means that for each division, there is some dif­
ference. Sometimes the difference is stated explicitly (such as the difference 
between using “open” and “secret” force), but at other times it is only implicit. 
While the species generated by division all fall under the same category—“an­
2. Plato, Sophist 218e–20b. 

Aristotle’s Predicables  
 115
imals” and “humans” are both substances—the differences or criteria to di­
vide the higher genus into species need not fall into the same category. So 
“rational” and “irrational” are not substances but qualities. And while “skill at 
hunting prey” is a quality, the prey hunted are substances, and the difference 
between living and lifeless is a distinct kind of quality. 
Two Kinds of Accident: Predicamental and Predicable
You will probably have noticed that we have followed Aristotle in using 
the term “accident” twice, once in describing the nine categories other than 
substance and here, as one of the five predicables. The two uses of the term 
are not exactly the same, but they are analogous. The nine categories are called 
“accidents” because they do not have to belong to a given substance. This is 
because they fall outside the nature of the substance. They are called “predic­
amental” or “categorical” accidents. Being a categorical accident means that 
the accidental attribute is different from the substance of the thing, but must 
“exist in” that thing; it does not exist independently on its own. The color 
green is like this in relation to the leaves of the substance tree. 
A predicable accident is similar in that it is not essentially connected with 
its subject term, but it is different in that the subject term does not have to 
be a substance; it could be anything. In “the man is white,” therefore, “white” 
is a categorical accident because skin color is a feature of a human that is dif­
ferent from his humanity, and it has to exist in a subject substance, like a hu­
man. There is no white color floating free around the universe. White is also a 
predicable accident because there is no essential connection between human 
nature and the skin color white. But this relation is true, as well, for other sub­
jects, for other substances, as in “the flower is white,” but also for categorical 
accidents, like “the large area is white.” Here “large area” and “white” describe 
two different categorical accidents of some unnamed substance, the first a 
quantity of it, the second a quality of it. Here the quality “white” is an acci­
dent of the quantity “large,” because the quality has no intrinsic and necessary 
connection to the quantity. 
An Example from Contemporary Science
As knowledge of the plant and animal worlds expanded over the centu­
ries, especially after the scientific revolution of the seventeenth century, scien­

116  
 The Logic of Terms
tists did not abandon Aristotle’s predicables, but concentrated on using genus 
and species in order to describe the natures of the different species. As we 
have seen, genus and species in logic are relative terms. In order to avoid the 
ambiguities of reusing “genus” and “species” over and over again in scientific 
classifications, the Swedish biologist Linnaeus (d. 1778) popularized giving 
different names to the levels in the taxonomic ranks (from Greek “taxis,” 
meaning “rank”) of plants and animals. Here is a current list used in biology: 
Taxonomic Ranks
Example: Humans
Life
living things
Domain
eukaryote = cells have nuclei
Kingdom
animalia
Phylum
chordata = with dorsal nerve chord
Subphylum
vertebrata
Class
mammalia
Order
primates = first among mammals
Family
hominidae = “human-like”
Genus
homo
Species
homo sapiens = “rational human”
Primary Sources
Aristotle, Posterior Analytics 1.4, 6, 10.	
Aristotle, Topics 1.1–9.
Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics 1, lesson 10, n. 2–7, lesson 33, n. 4–9.
Aquinas, On Spiritual creatures, art. 11c. On the difference between “accidental” categories 
and the predicable “accident,” see Summa Theologaie I, q. 77, a. 1., ad 5.
Plato, Sophist.
Chart of Aristotle’s Five Predicables
	
	
genus (Y is genus of X)
	
term (Y) is essential to X	
species (Y is species of X)
	
	
difference (Y is difference of X)
term (X)
	
term (Z) is nonessential to X	
property (Z is property of X)
	
	
accident (Z is accident of X)

Aristotle’s Predicables  
 117
Problem Set 10: Recognizing Essence, Property, 
and Accident
From Genus to Species 
Instructions 
The following are names for genera. Name two species under each genus:
	
1.	fish
	
2.	bird
	
3.	triangle
	
4.	rodent
	
5.	number
	
6.	metal 
	
7.	rectangle
	
8.	acid
	
9.	fruit
	 10.	insect
From Species to Genus 
Instructions 
The following are names for species. Name two genera over each species.
	
1.	monkey
	
2.	maple
	
3.	square
	
4.	oxygen
	
5.	tomato
	
6.	skylark
	
7.	gold
	
8.	fifteen
	
9.	wool
	 10.	mosquito
Distinguishing Essence, Property, Accident
Instructions 
In the following examples, state the relation between the italicized pred­
icate and the underlined subject. Is the predicate (a) essential, (b) a property, 
or (c) an accident of the subject? (For essential predicates, see if you can dis­
tinguish genus, species, and difference.)
	
1.	Water is in the street.
	
2.	Water is made up of hydrogen and oxygen.
	
3.	Water is a liquid.
	
4.	Water is necessary for life.
	
5.	Water freezes at 32 degrees F, 0 degrees C.
	
6.	Hydrogen has an affinity to combine with oxygen to form water.
	
7.	A triangle has three sides.
	
8.	Some humans are married.

118  
 The Logic of Terms
	
9.	Humans are animals.
	 10.	Humans are substances.
	 11.	Humans are risible (they can laugh).
	 12.	Humans are laughing.
	 13.	Humans use language.
	 14.	Humans are political.
	 15.	Delicious apples are red.
	 16.	The bobwhite makes a noise that sounds like its name.
	 17.	Bobwhites are an endangered species.
	 18.	Bears have fur.
	 19.	Red is a color.
	 20.	High C is a musical note.
	 21.	America was discovered by Europeans in 1492. 
	 22.	American money does not include any gold coins (although it used to). 
	 23.	2 times 2 = four. 
Analyzing Prose Using the Predicables 
Instructions
The following passages all concern the predicables. Read each passage and 
analyze it using the predicables. Determine what important truths (or what 
errors) about the predicables each passage contains. 
1. “We can understand why a classification founded on any single char­
acter or organ—even an organ so wonderfully complex and important as the 
brain—or in the high development of mental faculties, is almost sure to prove 
unsatisfactory. This principle has indeed been tried with . . . insects, but when 
thus classed by their habits or instincts, the arrangement proved unsatisfac­
tory. Classification may, of course, be based on any character whatever, as on 
size, color, or the element inhabited; but naturalists have long felt a profound 
conviction that there is a natural system. (Charles Darwin, 19th-cen. British 
evolutionary biologist, The Descent of Man, c. 6) 
2. “Although man has many points of resemblance with the brutes, one 
trait is peculiar to himself—he improves: they are incapable of government.” 
(Alexis de Tocqueville, 19th-cen. French writer, Democracy in America, bk. 1, 
c. 8) 
3. “To say, then, that shape and color constitute the animal is an inade­

Aristotle’s Predicables  
 119
quate statement, and is much the same as if a woodcarver were to insist that 
the hand he had cut out was really a hand.” (Aristotle, On the Parts of Animals 
1.1, 641a5–7)
4. “Next: how shall we define the whale, by his obvious externals, so as 
conspicuously to label him for all time to come? To be short, then, a whale is a 
spouting fish with a horizontal tail. There you have him. However contracted, 
that definition is the result of expanded meditation. A walrus spouts much 
like a whale. But the walrus is not a fish, because he is amphibious. But the last 
term of the definition is still more cogent, as coupled with the first. Almost 
any one must have noticed that all the fish familiar to landsmen have not a 
flat, but a vertical, or up and down tail. Whereas, among spouting fish the tail, 
though it may be similarly shaped, invariably assumes a horizontal position.” 
(Herman Melville, 19th-cen. American novelist, Moby-Dick, c. 32)
5. “But finally here I am, having insensibly reverted to the point I desired, 
for, since it is now manifest to me that even bodies are not properly speak­
ing known by the senses or by the faculty of imagination, but by the under­
standing only, and since they are not known from the fact that they are seen 
or touched, but only because they are understood, I see clearly that there is 
nothing which is easier for me to know than my mind.” (Renee Descartes, 
17th-cen. French philosopher, Meditations on First Philosophy, 1)
Describing Things Using the Predicables 
Instructions 
For the following terms, devise at least two other terms that describe (a) its 
essence; (b) its properties; (c) its accidents. 
	
1.	rabbit
	
2.	human (man)
	
3.	oak
	
4.	black widow spider
	
5.	restaurant
	
6.	car
	
7.	country
	
8.	courage
	
9.	fear
	 10.	walking
	 11.	being hit
	 12.	ten feet long
	 13.	sweet
	 14.	Jesus (according to Christian 
theology)
	 15.	Angel Jibril / Gabriel 
(according to Islam)
	 16.	E = mc2 (in physics)

Answering the “Why?” Question
Lesson 11 
Answering the “Why?” Question
Causes
The Essentials
The “Why?” Question—the Most Important Question—
Is a Search for Causes
Let’s think back to Aristotle’s four questions introduced in Lesson 5: 
(1) “Is it?” (Does X exist?), (2) “What is it?” (What is the essence or nature 
of X?), (3) “Whether?” (Is it a fact that X is Y?), and (4) “Why?” (What is 
the cause or reason why X is Y?). Now let’s apply them to Aristotle’s exam­
ple of the child learning to identify her father and mother, who “begins by 
calling all men father, and all women mother, but later on distinguishes each 
of them.”1 The child learns about mother and father far earlier than learning 
names for them. She begins to learn about them by experiencing what they 
do for her. They clean her and hold her and comfort her. Her mother does 
this, but so too do her father and other people besides her mother. Assuming 
she is nursing, however, the most important thing in her young life comes 
only from one person, her mom who feeds her. At this point, our baby has 
begun to answer Aristotle’s first three questions, even though it is long before 
she begins to acquire language, still longer before she can formulate what she 
1. Aristotle, Physics 1.1, 184b11–13. 
120

Answering the “Why?” Question  
 121
knows into grammatical discourse, and yet still longer before she can know 
reflectively what she is sure of and what not. She knows people who do things 
for her (q. 3). She then discerns that they are different from each other and 
that there is one who is special, who provides the food that comes from her 
breasts. This distinct person, her mother, exists (q. 1). And this person is her 
mother (q. 2). So in this way, she has a preliminary—but insufficient—answer 
to the question “What is mother?” It will take her many years to learn the 
true answer to this question. But in the meantime, she will make progress in 
answering it—that is, in developing a definition of “mother,” by asking the 
fourth question: “Why?” Why does this person clean her and hold her and 
comfort her, and above all, feed her? 
The question “Why?” begins the search for the reasons or causes why 
something happens, or why something is as it is. The tradition that acquiring 
the best knowledge involves searching for and finding causes goes back even 
before Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle. Thales (ca. 585 b.c.) of Miletus (a Greek 
city in what is now Turkey) is often accounted the first scientist and first phi­
losopher, because he was the first man recorded in the Greek tradition to ask 
the question “Why?” and look carefully and deeply for an answer. He seemed 
to recognize that knowing the facts (which answer the question “Whether?”), 
while absolutely required to know anything, only gives us second-level knowl­
edge. First-level knowledge comes from knowing the reasons for the facts. Ar­
istotle records a story about Thales on just this point: 
The story goes that when they found fault with him for his poverty, supposing 
that philosophy is useless, he learned from his study of astronomy that there 
would be a large crop of olives. Then, while it was still winter, he obtained a little 
money and made deposits on all the olive presses, both in Miletus and in Chios. 
Since no one bid against him, he rented them cheaply. When the right time 
came, suddenly many people tried to get the presses all at once, and he rented 
them out on whatever terms he wished, and so made a great deal of money. In 
this way he proved that philosophers can easily be wealthy, if they desire to, but 
this is not what interests them.2
Thales observed the facts about the weather patterns during the winter 
and then deduced that such weather would cause a large olive crop. Knowing 
the causes is what made him rich. But asking the question “Why?” did not 
begin with Thales; it seems to be as old as the human race. The evidence is 
2. Aristotle, Politics 1259a9–18.

122  
 The Logic of Terms
that very early on in life, pretty soon after they begin to learn the differences 
among things, children begin to ask the question “Why?” Our little girl, too, 
will ask the question “Why?” She will apply it to her mother, and this will 
open up for her a better definition of “mother,” one that can distinguish her 
own mother from wet nurses and her father.
Identifying the Four Causes through Examples 
Taken from Human Artifacts
Causes are reasons why some event happens or something is as it is. With 
the advent of modern philosophy and science in the sixteenth century, the 
causes of events took predominance over causes of things. In the older view, 
the causes of some thing—why it exists and why it is as it is in the first place—
took predominance. Both are important: the causes of both events and things 
help us understand the world. To understand that there are different kinds of 
causes and just what those causes are, let’s consider some everyday examples. 
We’ll follow Aristotle’s lead and begin with the causes of “artifacts” or man-
made things. They are often easier for us to understand than things in nature, 
because we have made them.3
After our little girl has grown up a bit, her parents may well give her that 
classic American toy—a little red wagon. First she’ll be put in the wagon and 
taken for rides, then she’ll stand using the wagon to lift herself up; afterward 
she’ll put her toys and dolls in the wagon, and finally, when she is walking 
well, she’ll take the position of mom or dad and pull things behind her in the 
wagon, as they pulled her in the wagon. Once she learns to some degree what 
her wagon is, she well may ask, “Why?” What has caused her wagon? Not 
what has caused the wagon to be here or there, not what has caused the wagon 
to be hers, but what has caused the wagon to be a wagon in the first place. A 
wagon, after all, is not a tricycle or a play car or a play kitchen. 
Agent Cause
There are several quite different answers to the question “What caused 
the wagon?” In an earlier age, when more things were handmade, we might 
have been inclined to answer that her father or brother or uncle, or perhaps a 
3. Aristotle, Physics 2.3, 194b16–195a2; Aristotle, Metaphysics 5.2, 1013a24–1014a26. Aquinas, Com­
mentary on Aristotle’s Physics, bk. 2, lessons 5–6; Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s Metaphysics, bk. 5, 
lessons 2–3. 

Answering the “Why?” Question  
 123
clever friend, caused the wagon, because he made it. At present, such things 
are bought at a toy store. But even children realize the clerk there didn’t make 
it; someone somewhere else, perhaps working in a factory, made it. This kind 
of cause goes by several names: the agent (from Latin agere, to do, and agens, 
the one who does), because he performed some actions to make it; or the 
efficient cause (from Latin, facere, “to make,” and effectus, “what is made” or 
the effect), because his actions produced the wagon as an effect; or the mover 
(from Latin movere, “to move,” and movens, “mover”), because the action of 
making a wagon involves motion on the part of the cause, as well as on the 
part of the thing being made. What all these names point to is a craftsman, 
who is a separate reality from the wagon (and therefore called an “extrinsic 
cause”), who causes the wagon by making it. They also point to the tools and 
implements such a craftsman must employ. And above all, they point to the 
actual activities the craftsman performs to produce the wagon: sawing and 
sanding. But just because you have an agent doesn’t mean you automatically 
have a wagon. 
Material Cause
In order to have a wagon, it must be made out of materials. When we 
think of materials, the first thing that comes into our mind is the “stuff ” out 
of which something is made. And if asked for a definition of this “stuff,” we 
note that it is extended in space in three dimensions (or four, if we are scien­
tifically sophisticated and want to add time), it has density and weight, and 
two different pieces of material can’t be in the same place at the same time. 
The reason why we use the term “materials” of these things is because Ar­
istotle called this second kind of cause hyle, which originally meant wood, 
because many artifacts were then made out of wood, though he expanded the 
word to mean any physical stuff out of which something is made. Hyle was 
then translated using one of the Latin words for wood, materia, which in En­
glish became “matter,” the stuff out of which something is made, its “material 
cause.” And another, very important feature of matter that Aristotle noticed, 
in addition to it being the stuff out of which something is made, is that a pile 
of wood on the floor of the craftsman’s shop is not a wagon, though it can 
be. It can be a wagon, but only if the wagon maker does something with the 
wood—namely, puts it together. Consequently, the wood is a wagon, but only 
potentially; by itself, it isn’t yet a wagon, really or actually. 
Other materials, like cloth or sand or leaves from the tree, can never be­

124  
 The Logic of Terms
come a wagon. Their kind of matter doesn’t have the potential to become 
a wagon. In earlier eras, a little red wagon would have been made of wood, 
perhaps with wooden wheels and a few metal nails or screws. Later on, more 
sturdy wagons were made of metal, and the making of them normally took 
place in factories rather than backyards. Nowadays, most wagons are made 
of plastic, a kind of matter so complicated that most of us could not explain 
where the plastic for the wagon comes from. (Look it up online and you may 
be surprised at the answer.) In order to have a wagon we need the kind of 
materials that have a potential to be a wagon; in other words, “no matter, no 
wagon.” 
Formal Cause
The wagon maker must arrange the materials in the right way. A child’s 
little red wagon must be the right size for a child, it must have wheels that 
allow it to roll, the wagon itself normally must be longer than it is wide, it 
must have sides in order to hold things, including children, and it must have 
a handle—preferably connected with the front wheels—by which it can be 
pulled. The materials must be put into this configuration or shape. If the ma­
terials have not yet assumed that shape, they are not yet actually a real wagon. 
It is the arranging of the materials into this wagon shape that produces a real 
and true wagon. And, of course, it’s not a little red wagon until painted the 
right color. Greek had several terms for “figure” or “shape.” They include sche­
ma, which focuses on something having a shape, and morphe, which focuses 
on the outline or shape a physical thing has. But the most important words 
for shape came from the word eidon (“to see”): eidos, which originally meant 
what is seen with your eyes and then was transferred to mean what is known 
with your mind, along with idea, which means the kind or sort of thing that is 
seen or known. The Latin word “to see” is specere, and species originally meant 
what is seen, the physical shape of something. But the most common Latin 
term for physical shape is forma, which became “form” in English. Following 
the Latin philosophers, English thinkers called this kind of cause the “form” 
or “formal cause.” 
In comparing the material and formal causes of things, Aristotle realized 
that the matter out of which something is made gives it the potential to be 
what it is: wood or metal or plastic can become a little red wagon. But it is 
the form of something that makes it actually or really to be what it is, in this 
case, really a little red wagon. Until the wood is given the shape of a wagon by 

Answering the “Why?” Question  
 125
the wagon maker, there is no actual or real little red wagon. The reason why is 
because the matter out of which an artifact is made gives it the potential to be 
what it is; but it is the form of the artifact that gives it the actuality of being 
what it is. The wood of the wagon gives it the potential to be a wagon, but its 
wagon shape makes it actually a wagon. The consideration of matter as poten­
tial and form as actual in human artifacts helped Aristotle to deepen his con­
ception of matter and form; he found a more fundamental sense of each. The 
new senses of form and matter are particularly helpful to understand things 
in nature—flowers and bees and, above all, humans. Since natural things are 
more complicated than artifacts—yes, even including computers—Aristotle’s 
causal explanations had to become more complicated, as well. It would take a 
whole philosophy course to go into all those complications, but using artifacts 
as a model, we can begin to identify the causes of some natural things, as we’ll 
do in the next section. 
Final Cause
But before we turn to natural things, we need to consider the fourth kind 
of cause, the “end” or “final cause.” Thus far, we have identified three kinds of 
causes for the wagon: (1) It requires an agent to bring the potentiality found 
in the matter into the actuality of being a real wagon; (2) It is made from 
matter, which gives it the potential to be a wagon; and (3) It is given a certain 
form (Plato might call it “wagon-ness”), which makes it an actual or real wag­
on. But one more cause is required. The reason why the wagon has the config­
uration or form that it has is because of its purpose. What is that purpose? It is 
to provide a simple vehicle for transportation, by helping little boys and girls 
to have playful fun. Now this “transportation and playful fun” is the purpose 
or goal of the little red wagon, put into it by the craftsmen who made it. The 
Greeks called it the telos, the “end” of a thing. They did not mean “end” in 
the sense of the destruction of a thing, but in the sense of the fulfillment or 
perfection of a thing, because they recognized that most things in the world 
go through a process of development before they reach their full potential. 
Since the Latin word for “end” is finis, this fourth kind of cause is also called 
the final cause. But “final” doesn’t mean “last in time.” In fact, for artifacts, the 
final cause comes first: the wagon maker has to have an idea of the purpose of 
the wagon he will make before he determines its form and picks its materials. 
In this respect, then, the final cause is the first cause. In sum, form follows 
function. 

126  
 The Logic of Terms
The wagon is being used as intended when little girls and boys use it for 
playful transport. If they can’t do so because it was poorly made, we call it a 
poor or bad or defective wagon. Now there is a second sense of final cause, 
built upon the first. If the little girl who owns the wagon can’t get into the 
house, she could step up on the wagon to reach the doorbell, using the wagon 
as a stool. This is a goal she decides upon when she uses it for a purpose be­
yond its normal one, but based upon its normal purpose. If some terrorists or 
gang members steal the wagon in order to use it to transport hand grenades 
or IEDs, they are misusing it. This case would be more complicated still. They 
would be using it as transportation, to be sure. This is a misuse of the wagon. 
It is not in accord with the purpose put in it by the craftsman. It would be like 
someone defacing a statue or an artwork; in addition, it would be morally 
bad, as well, both because killing innocent people is morally bad and because 
teaching our little girl to transport hand grenades in her wagon is bad for the 
little girl. She might draw the lesson that she can do anything she wants with 
her wagon, just because it is hers, even destroy it, which would undercut her 
appreciation for the utility and beauty of things humans make, and of natural 
things, as well.
A Deeper Look
Matter and Form: Similar and Different 
Working from examples like our little red wagon helped Aristotle under­
stand a number of things about the four causes and especially about matter 
and form, considered more broadly. For instance, we don’t have a “little red 
wagon” unless all four causes contribute to its reality. And it must be made 
out of the right kind of matter. You can make a sand castle out of sand, but 
not a real castle. It must be given the right form, by the right agent, and for 
the right purpose. Otherwise, no wagon. The matter and form of such things 
are intrinsic or internal causes of the thing. They must both be present in it for 
the thing to exist; without wood or metal or plastic, or without the form or 
configuration of a wagon, we can’t have a real little red wagon. And form and 
matter can’t be separated from each other except at the cost of destroying the 
wagon. But, while they both need to be present in something like the little red 
wagon for it to exist, they each contribute something different to the effect. 
Three important pairs of features of the wagon are due to its matter and form. 
First, as we have already seen, the matter it is made from—the wood or 

Answering the “Why?” Question  
 127
metal or plastic—gives it the potential to be a little red wagon, but only the 
potential. It is the form that makes it actually a little red wagon. 
Second, the little red wagon can change. It can be moved to a different 
place; it can be given to another little girl; and it can change so much that 
it is destroyed. Matter is the cause of it being changeable and destructible. 
By contrast, as long as the materials of the wagon have the form of a wagon, 
the wagon will remain a wagon. Form, then, is the cause of whatever relative 
permanence and perfection the thing has as a wagon. 
The third pair of features Aristotle pondered for a long time. The little 
red wagon is both this little red wagon, a singular thing distinct from every­
thing else in the universe, and a little red wagon, sharing a set of features, an 
“essence,” in common with all other little red wagons. What causes its dis­
tinct individuality and its common essence? The causes of these two attributes 
must be intrinsic to the wagon, because once the wagon maker has done his 
work, these two features remain part of the wagon. 
What makes the little red wagon a distinct individual thing, different 
from everything else? You might be inclined to say that it is distinct because it 
occupies a different place, perhaps at a different time from all the rest, because 
being in a place is how we know it is an individual different from other things. 
Now it is true that this wagon does occupy a different place from all the others 
at a given moment in time and can exist at a different time from other wagons. 
But is it a distinct individual wagon because it occupies a certain place, or does 
it occupy a certain place because it is already a distinct individual wagon? The 
second choice has to be the right one. It’s already a distinct individual thing; 
this is why it occupies a certain place. The place where it is, because it is ex­
trinsic to the wagon, can’t be the cause making it an individual thing. Rather, 
being in that place already assumes it is a distinct individual thing. But being 
at that particular place does cause our knowing that this wagon is different 
from that one. So what makes it an individual wagon? Here we must look for 
something intrinsic to the wagon. What makes it a distinct individual thing 
is the materials it is made of. While it has the same kind of materials as other 
little red wagons, the actual, real matter in it is different from the matter that 
makes up anything else in the world. In short, the reason why it is this little 
red wagon, not that one, is because of the materials out of which it was made. 
On the other hand, what in it makes it similar in kind to other things of 
the same sort—to other little red wagons? We can understand the cause that 
makes it similar once we see that this cause is the same one that makes it the 

128  
 The Logic of Terms
kind of thing it is in the first place. And this is its form. All little red wagons 
have the same kind of form: they look, feel, sound, and ride in basically the 
same way.
In short, Aristotle found that for artifacts, matter is the cause of potenti­
ality, destructibility, and individuality, while form is the cause of three oppo­
site features of things—actuality, relative permanence, and the essences such 
things have in common with each other. 
The Causes in Nature
It was at this point that Aristotle widened his conception of the four caus­
es—matter, form, agent, and end—and used them to try to understand nat­
ural things, first of all, and then human institutions, human actions, human 
knowledge, and even human nature itself. Since natural things have forms not 
given to them by humans, these forms are more intrinsic to the things and 
less knowable to us than the forms of artifacts. Aristotle’s causal explanations 
had to become more complicated to describe these more fundamental kinds 
of form. The full story of how he did so would take us too far into philoso­
phy, well beyond logic. But in logic we need to see how we can use these four 
causes to understand such things. Since our task in logic is first to be able to 
recognize what other authors are saying and then develop and use the same 
skills that produced those ideas, Problem Set 10 starts with causal analysis of 
artifacts. Then it moves beyond them, into the realms of other, even more 
important things. 
It is helpful to recognize the distinction Aristotle made between form and 
matter that is perceived on the sensible level and form and matter functioning 
on the intelligible level. In understanding the formal cause, it is important to 
recognize that the first kind of form philosophers recognized was physical 
shape or form. Because such forms can be perceived with our senses, we can 
call them “sensible forms.” Colors, shapes, sizes, odors, sounds: all these can 
be sensed. The same thing holds true for the kind of matter out of which the 
wagon is constructed. The wood is “sensible matter.” It takes up space by hav­
ing length and width and depth, it is brown in color, it is hard to the touch, 
and one plank of wood can be placed next to another, but they can’t both be 
in exactly the same place. 
While we begin with sensible traits, we eventually turn our minds to fea­
tures we can know with our minds, but cannot perceive with our senses. We 

Answering the “Why?” Question  
 129
can see this if we look a little more closely at our little red wagon and recog­
nize that its sensible form involves much more than shape; it also includes 
smooth texture, size, weight, ease of pulling, not tipping over too easily. It is 
impossible to make up a list of the exact physical forms a wagon must have; 
but we do recognize with our mind, not with our senses, if an individual phys­
ical thing is or is not a wagon. When doing so, we have used our minds to 
move from sensible causes to intelligible causes. For our wagon, this matter 
includes whatever kind of matter can be made into a wagon, even if we don’t 
understand much about that kind of matter yet; and the form we can under­
stand includes whatever makes the wagon actually and really a wagon, what 
gives it the essence it shares with all other wagons. 
When Aristotle applied to understanding nature these conceptions of 
matter and form that are understood by the intellect, he drew three philo­
sophical conclusions that we should know for logical purposes, even if we 
can’t pursue them as far as Aristotle did in his philosophical studies. Let’s 
begin with intelligible form. We saw earlier that Aristotle had noted the dif­
ference between the category of substance and the nine accidental categories. 
Now if the actual traits of things fall into these ten categories, there must be a 
cause of those traits; and such a cause must be a form, since matter and form 
are the intrinsic causes of things, remaining in them after the efficient cause 
has done its work. So Aristotle distinguished between “substantial form,” 
which gives a thing its fundamental nature or essence—like dog or petunia or 
human—and “accidental form,” which gives a thing an accidental attribute—
like two feet long or hard or courageous. What is important to note is that, 
while we can perceive directly with our senses accidental traits and in a way 
perceive the sensible forms that cause them, we can never perceive with our 
senses the substantial nature of something or the substantial form that causes 
that substantial nature. We come to know the substantial forms of things, 
which is how we come to know their substance, only by using our intellect 
and reasoning our way to the substantial nature or form of a thing. So the 
substantial form of something, whether an artifact or a natural thing, is an 
intelligible form, which we can understand only with our mind. This is the 
basic reason why other animals, even though they can know and learn many 
things, cannot understand things as deeply as humans can. Animals are lim­
ited to the level of the sensible, while humans can dig deeper, all the way to 
the intelligible level. 
The final point concerns matter. Humans come to know matter by using 

130  
 The Logic of Terms
their minds to proceed from the surface inward, reasoning analytically. Over 
and over, scientists and philosophers have discovered deeper and deeper kinds 
or levels of matter; often they have become convinced that they have found 
the deepest level of matter. The ancient Greeks called this level of matter an 
“atom,” which means “unable to be cut” or “indivisible,” and some Greek phi­
losophers said it was the most basic kind of matter, from which all other mat­
ter and all other things are composed. This idea later was resurrected in the 
scientific revolution and has been a staple part of modern physics, as can be 
found on the Periodic Table of the Elements. But a funny thing has happened; 
every time philosophers or scientists think they have discovered the real atom, 
it turns out that later research shows it can be “cut” into smaller particles. 
Aristotle perceptively rejected the atomic theory on the grounds that any ac­
tual body can be cut into smaller and smaller bodies, at least theoretically. He 
concluded that there is a “first” or “prime matter,” but it cannot be a body of 
definite size, shape, and weight. Rather, prime matter is a principle of physical 
things and is understood as pure potentiality, lacking all actuality, in compar­
ison with substantial and accidental forms, which are intrinsic principles of 
actuality. The wood of our wagon is matter, a kind of matter that contains 
potentiality for change and destruction, but it also has certain actual traits. 
It is a second level of matter, more developed and actual than “prime matter,” 
the most basic kind of matter, which in a way we can understand with our 
minds, but never see with our eyes. 
Since we all have been raised in a scientific culture imbued with atomism, 
we might be tempted to think of the matter and form that make up things as 
two different “atoms” that can unite or be separated from each other, or like 
bricks in a wall, which can be pulled out of the wall. But that would be wrong. 
Atoms and bricks can be separated from each other and exist on their own, 
without themselves being changed intrinsically. Matter and form cannot, be­
cause they are intrinsic causes or principles of things, not things in themselves. 
The shape of the wagon cannot be separated from the wagon. If you turn it 
into a table, it is still made of the same matter, but it is no longer a wagon. The 
wagon is destroyed. And neither can the matter of the wagon be separated 
from the wagon. If you take the materials of the wagon and separate them, say, 
into a pile of wood and screws, you no longer have a wagon, even though you 
still have the materials. And if you burn the wood, you no longer even have 
the materials out of which it was made.

Answering the “Why?” Question  
 131
Primary Sources
Aristotle, Physics 2.3 
Having made these distinctions, we now should proceed to consider the causes, 
their nature and number. The purpose of our inquiry is knowledge, and men 
do not think they know a thing until they have attained the why of it, which is 
to attain its primary cause. So it is clear that we, too, must do this concerning 
generation and destruction and every kind of physical change in order that, by 
knowing their principles, we can try to use these principles in solving each of 
our problems. 
In one way, then, (1) that out of which a thing comes to be, and that persists, 
is called the cause—for example, the bronze of the statue, the silver of the bowl, 
and the genera of which bronze and silver are species [metal].
In another way, (2) the form or the paradigm—that is, the formula of the es­
sence and its genera, are called causes. For example, the ratio of 2:1 of the octave, 
and its genus, number. And the parts of the definition.
Moreover, (3) the primary principle of change or of coming to rest. For ex­
ample, the man giving advice is a cause, and the father is the cause of the child. 
And at the level of genus, what makes of what is made, and what causes change 
of what is changed. 
Moreover, (4) in the sense of the end or that for the sake of which a thing is 
done. For example, health is the cause of walking about. “Why is he walking 
about?” We say, “in order to be healthy.” And once we have said this, we think 
we have assigned the cause. The same thing holds concerning all the means 
which are taken, through the action of something else as means toward an end. 
For example, loss of weight, purging, drugs, or using surgical instruments are 
means toward health. All of these things are for the sake of the end, though they 
differ from one another in that some are actions, others are instruments. 
Thomas Aquinas, On the Principles of Nature
C. 1, para. 7. Therefore, in order that there be generation, three things are re­
quired: being in potency, which is matter; non-existence in act, which is priva­
tion; and that through which something comes to be in act, which is form. For 
example, when from bronze a statue comes to be, the bronze which is in potency 
to the form of the statue is its matter; that which is shapeless or undisposed is 
the privation; and the shape from which it is called a statue is the form. But 
this is not a substantial form, because bronze, before the arrival of the form or 
shape, has existence in act, and its existence does not depend upon that shape, 
but it is said to be an accidental form. For all artificial forms are accidental. An 
art operates only on what is already constituted in existence perfected by nature.

132  
 The Logic of Terms
C. 2, para. 16. And one should also understand that even though matter 
does not have in its nature any form or privation—just as in the definition of 
bronze there is neither shaped nor shapeless—nonetheless, matter is never de­
nuded of form or privation, because sometimes it is under one form, sometimes 
under another. But through itself it can never exist, because, since in its own 
definition it does not have any form, it does not have existence in act, since 
existence in act is only from form, but it is only in potency. Therefore, whatever 
is in act cannot be called prime matter.
C. 3, para. 17. From what has been said, therefore, it is plain that there are 
three principles of nature; matter, form, and privation. But these are not suffi­
cient for generation. What is in potency cannot reduce itself to act, as bronze 
which is in potency to being a statue cannot make itself a statue, but it needs 
an agent which draws the form of a statue from potency to act. But form could 
not draw itself from potency to act—I am speaking of the form of the thing 
generated, which we say is the term of generation—for the form is only in what 
has been made to exist. However, what is made is in the process of coming to 
be—that is, while the thing is coming to be. Therefore, it is necessary that be­
sides matter and form there must be some principle that acts; and this is called 
the efficient cause, mover, or agent, or the principle from which there is motion.
C. 3, para. 18. And as Aristotle says in the second book of the Metaphysics, 
since everything which acts, acts only by intending something, it is necessary 
that there be another, fourth thing—namely, that which is intended by the 
agent; and this is called the end. And one should understand that every agent, 
both natural and voluntary, intends an end, but it does not follow that every 
agent knows its end or deliberates about its end. To know the end is necessary 
for those things whose actions are not determined but can order themselves 
to opposing ends, such as voluntary agents. Therefore, it is necessary that they 
know the end toward which they determine their actions. But in natural agents 
actions are determined; consequently, it is not necessary that they make choices 
about the means, which are for the sake of end.
Problem Set 11: The Four Causes
Identifying All Four Causes of a Thing
Instructions 
Use Aristotle’s doctrine of the four causes—material cause, formal cause, 
agent (or efficient) cause, and end (or final cause)—to identify all four causes 
of the following.

Answering the “Why?” Question  
 133
	
1.	hammer
	
2.	airplane
	
3.	car
	
4.	spider
	
5.	hummingbird
	
6.	human
	
7.	a book review
	
8.	slander
	
9.	education
	 10.	hydrogen
	 11.	the American Revolution
	 12.	the New Deal
	 13.	NASA (National Aeronautics 
and Space Administration)
	 14.	throwing a baseball
	 15.	being hit in the arm by a bat
	 16.	having an upset stomach
	 17.	running to catch a bus
	 18.	being the daughter of your 
mother
	 19.	knowing geometry
Analyzing Prose Using the Causes 
Instructions 
In the following passages, most from the scriptures of some religions, 
first identify the effect produced, and then identify its four causes. Use the 
following model for your answers. There may be more than one example of 
cause-effect in some passages. Where there is more than one, analyze the two 
most important examples. 
Effect produced: __________________________________________
Causes:
Type:	
Example in the passage:
______________  cause: ___________________________________
______________  cause: ___________________________________
______________  cause: ___________________________________
______________  cause: ___________________________________
1. “The Lord God said, ‘It is not right that the man should be alone. I 
shall make him a helper.’ . . . But no helper suitable for the man was found for 
him. Then the Lord God made the man fall into a deep sleep. And, while he 
was asleep, he took one of his ribs and closed the flesh up again forthwith. 
The Lord God fashioned the rib he had taken from the man into a woman, 
and brought her to the man. And the man said: ‘This one at last is bone of 
my bones and flesh of my flesh. She is to be called woman, because she was 

134  
 The Logic of Terms
taken from man.’ This is why a man leaves his father and mother and becomes 
attached to his wife, and they become one flesh.” (Genesis, 2:18–24, New Je­
rusalem with emendations)
2. “When the people saw that Moses delayed to come down from the 
mountain, the people gathered themselves together to Aaron, and said to him, 
‘Up, make us gods, who shall go before us; as for the Moses, the man who 
brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we do not know what has become of 
him.’ And Aaron said to them, ‘Take off the rings of gold which are in the ears 
of your wives, and your sons, and your daughters, and bring them to me.’ So all 
the people took off their rings of gold which were in their ears, and brought 
them to Aaron. And he received the gold at their hand, and fashioned it with 
a graving tool, and made a golden calf; and they said, ‘These are your gods, O 
Israel, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt!’ ” (Exodus, 32:1–4 RSV) 
3. When the angels said: O Mary, surely Allah give thee good news with a 
word from Him (of one) whose name is the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, wor­
thy of regard in this world and the Hereafter, and of those who are drawn nigh 
(to Allah). And he will speak to the people when in the cradle and when of old 
age, and (he will be one of the good ones). She said: My Lord, how can I have 
a son and man has not yet touched me? He said: Even so; Allah creates what 
He pleases. When He decrees a matter, He only says to it Be, and it is. And He 
will teach him the Book and the Wisdom and the Torah and the Gospel. And 
(make him) a messenger to the Children of Israel (saying): I have come to you 
with a sign from your Lord, that I determine for you out of dust the form of 
a bird with Allah’s permission, and I heal the blind and the leprous, and bring 
the dead to life with Allah’s permission; and I inform you of what you should 
eat and what you should store in your houses. Surely there is a sign in this for 
you, if you are believers.” (Qur’an, 3.41–48, trans. Maulana M. Ali) 
4. “Jesus took Peter, James, and his brother, John, and led them up a high 
mountain by themselves. And he was transfigured before them; his face shone 
like the sun and his clothes became white as light. And behold, Moses and 
Elijah appeared to them, conversing with him. Then Peter said to Jesus in re­
ply, ‘Lord, it is good that we are here. If you wish, I will make three tents here, 
one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.’ While he was still speaking, 
behold, a bright cloud cast a shadow over them, then from the cloud came a 
voice that said, ‘This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased; listen 
to him.’ When the disciples heard this, they fell prostrate and were very much 
afraid. But Jesus came and touched them, saying, ‘Rise, and do not be afraid.’ 

Answering the “Why?” Question  
 135
And when the disciples raised their eyes, they saw no one else but Jesus alone. 
As they were coming down from the mountain, Jesus charged them, ‘Do not 
tell the vision to anyone until the Son of Man has been raised from the dead.’ ” 
(Matthew, 1–9, RSV) 
5. “Americans combine to give fêtes, found seminaries, build churches, 
distribute books, and send missionaries to the antipodes. Hospitals, prisons, 
and schools take shape in that way. Finally, if they want to proclaim a truth or 
propagate some feeling by the encouragement of a great example, they form 
an association. In every case, at the head of any new undertaking, where in 
France you would find the government or in England some territorial mag­
nate, in the United States you are sure to find an association. I have come 
across several types of association in America of which, I confess, I had not 
previously the slightest conception, and I have often admired the extreme skill 
they show in proposing a common object for the exertions of very many and 
in inducing them voluntarily to pursue it.” (Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy 
in America, vol. 2, part 2, chapter 5)
6. “In certain remote corners of the Old World, you may still sometimes 
stumble upon a small district which seems to have been forgotten amidst the 
general tumult, and to have remained stationary while everything around it 
was in motion. The inhabitants are, for the most part, extremely ignorant and 
poor, they take no part in the business of the country, and are frequently op­
pressed by the government; yet their countenances are generally placid, and 
their spirits light. 
“In America, I saw the freest and most enlightened men placed in the hap­
piest circumstances which the world affords; yet it seemed to me as if a cloud 
habitually hung upon their brows, and I thought them serious, and almost 
sad, even in their pleasures. 
“The chief reason for this contrast is, that the former do not think of the 
ills they endure, while the latter are forever brooding over advantages they do 
not possess. It is strange to see with what feverish ardor the Americans pursue 
their own welfare; and to watch the vague dread that constantly torments 
them lest they should not have chosen the shortest path which may lead to it.
“A native of the United States clings to this world’s goods as if he were 
certain never to die; and he is so hasty in grasping at all within his reach, that 
one would suppose he was constantly afraid of not living long enough to en­
joy them. He clutches everything, but he holds nothing fast, and soon loosens 
his grasp to pursue fresh gratifications. . . . 

136  
 The Logic of Terms
“At first sight, there is something surprising in this strange unrest of so 
many happy men, restless in the midst of abundance. The spectacle itself is, 
however, as old as the world; the novelty is, to see a whole people furnish an 
exemplification of it. . . . 
“In democratic times, enjoyments are more intense than in the ages of 
aristocracy, and the number of those who partake in them is vastly larger: 
but on the other hand, it must be admitted that man’s hopes and desires are 
oftener blasted, the soul is more stricken and perturbed, and care itself more 
keen.” (Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, vol. 2, part 2, chap. 13)
7. “How was she created? I’m not sure if you realize this, but it was in 
God’s image. How can anybody dare to speak ill of something which bears 
such a noble imprint?” (Christine de Pizan, d. 1430, French moralist, member 
of the court, author of “mirror of princes” works such as The Book of the City 
of Ladies)
8. “Having thus emptied and purged the virtues from the soul of the one 
they’ve possessed, and initiated in splendid rites, they proceed to return inso­
lence, anarchy, extravagance, and shamelessness from exile, in a blaze of torch­
light, wreathing them in garlands and accompanying them with a vast chorus 
of followers. They praise the returning exiles and give them fine names: calling 
insolence good breeding, calling anarchy freedom, calling extravagance mag­
nificent generosity, and calling shamelessness courage.” (Plato, Republic 560e, 
on the first step from extreme democracy to tyranny)

Different Kinds of Definitions
Lesson 12
Different Kinds of Definitions 
The Essentials
Terms and Definitions in Logic
In logic, we study the categories, predicables, and causes in order to use 
them in analyzing discourse and in creating our own discourse, whether written 
or spoken. What is primarily important about them, however, is that they are 
used to help us recognize, evaluate, and formulate definitions of terms. But what 
are definitions? Definitions are designed to sum up in a convenient and short 
formula the essence of what it is we are defining. They are not the same as that 
essence. They do not include everything we know about the thing defined. They 
do not even include everything we know about its essence. But they are a way 
of formulating—giving a particular and (we hope) insightful verbal formula to 
what we know about the essence of a thing. A definition, then, we might define 
as “a verbal formula uncovering the essence of the thing defined.” Logic focuses 
on that formula, the structure definitions take. In philosophy and other disci­
plines, some of these same topics are studied, but with a different end in view. 
There the end is to arrive at a true definition and explanation of things, as op­
posed merely to understanding the kinds of definitions they are. This is because, 
as we have seen in Lesson 5, logic focuses on thinking in a correct manner—the 
structure of our reasoning—while the other subjects focus, or should focus, on 
the content of our thinking, on getting at the truth about things.
137

138  
 The Logic of Terms
We all use terms that we only partially understand. I can distinguish de­
ciduous from nondeciduous trees if I recognize that the leaves of deciduous 
trees change color and fall off the tree in the fall. This is the reason why we call 
that season “fall.” But this is just the beginning. I do not know why deciduous 
trees lose their leaves—how losing its leaves might help the overall health of 
the tree, if it does. Nor do I understand the details of how the leaves change 
colors or the mechanism whereby the leaf falls off the tree’s branch. Recog­
nizing what we don’t know should be a spur to producing better definitions 
of things. This is what Socrates tried to achieve in his dialectical questioning 
of men in Plato’s dialogues (for instance, the conversation we saw in Lesson 9 
in which Socrates divides the concept “the art of the angler” as an attempt to 
get to a definition of the art of the angler). A well-cast definition should give 
us important insight into the essence of what we are defining. But definitions 
have an important added benefit. Though definitions are formed through the 
first act of the mind, they play important roles in the two subsequent acts of 
the mind—judgment that produces propositions and reasoning that produc­
es arguments. This is why logicians, beginning with Socrates, have spent a lot 
of effort on definitions. 
Our purpose in this lesson is to learn the different kinds of definitions. 
This is important so we can recognize definitions in what we read. And it is 
also important in speaking and writing, because effective definitions can make 
for effective communication. 
What All Definitions Have in Common
There are no definitions of individuals in their individuality. While we of­
ten pride ourselves on our individuality, the only way to understand that indi­
viduality is to pile up terms that describe how we are different from other peo­
ple; and the only way to do this is to include what we have in common with 
them. Those common characteristics—especially the fundamental ones—are 
more important, in the long run, than what is peculiar about us individually, 
when it comes to understanding things. Both understanding things and living 
with others requires us to focus on what is common. This is why definitions 
are designed to uncover the universal essences of things. 
We arrive at definitions by first coming to understand the extension of 
terms: how widely they apply. Think of Aristotle’s example of the baby: “A 
child begins by calling all men ‘father’ and all women ‘mother,’ but later on 
distinguishes each of them.” This is why, when asked to define things, we often 

Different Kinds of Definitions  
 139
begin with examples, then widen our scope to include all members of that 
class. The first definition attempted in Plato’s dialogues is invariably just an 
example. Examples are good, but they are only a start toward a universal defi­
nition. An accurate definition (definiens) has the same extension as the thing 
being defined (definiendum). This ensures that anytime we use one of these 
two terms in a sentence, we can correctly substitute one for the other. What 
the definition (definiens) is supposed to do is give an accurate description 
of the essence, one showing what every individual thing falling under that 
definition or term has in common. This is why all definitions are universals. 
When we get a definition that is too wide or too narrow, we adjust the defini­
tion to arrive at one with exactly the same extension and meaning as the thing 
defined. This ensures that the definition will apply to all individuals falling 
under the thing defined, but only to them. 
How Definitions Are Different: Some Definitions of 
“Man” or “Human”
If we look at the definitions of “man” (or “human”) in the first section of 
Problem Set 12, we can see how important for understanding definitions are 
the topics we have already studied in the logic of terms—universals, catego­
ries, predicables, and causes. These help us to understand the different kinds 
of definitions. Look over these definitions. Your first reaction may be that 
they are simply sentences all having the same subject, most or all of them 
being true. But when you look a second time you may notice that while the 
thing defined is the same (“man”), the definitions are different. They differ not 
merely in content, but also in structure. Try to see how the definitions—the 
predicates of these propositions—are structured. They are not all the same.
Let’s look at a few examples. (7) is the kind of definition you might find 
in a not-so-good dictionary. It focuses on the term or word “man,” telling 
us when we can use “man”—anytime we are talking about a member of the 
human race. Such a definition is one type of “nominal” definition, a term 
taken from the Latin word nomen, which means “word” or “noun.” This kind 
tells us the extension of the term “man,” but little about its meaning. Anoth­
er type of nominal definition is one that gives us enough knowledge of the 
basic meaning of the word so that we can then search for a better or “real” 
definition, one that gives us knowledge of the kind of “thing” it is, so we then 
can move on to search for a better and deeper definition of the thing. Not all 
dictionary definitions are nominal definitions. But definitions that focus on 

140  
 The Logic of Terms
the extension of the term, which is the first step in understanding its compre­
hension or meaning, are nominal definitions. Neither Aristotle nor Aquinas 
recognized nominal definitions of this kind; they were distinguished from 
real definitions much later. But it is helpful for our study of logic to recognize 
these nominal definitions. 
All the other definitions in the first section of Problem Set 12, are better 
than (7), because they are “real” definitions. “Real” is taken from the Latin 
word res, which means “thing.” Logicians often used the term “nominal defi­
nition” of the preliminary understanding of something we must have to in­
vestigate that kind of thing, even if we aren’t yet sure if it exists. For example, 
if you were to argue for the existence of the soul or of God or that individual 
things have a universal essence or nature, you would have to begin with some 
preliminary understanding of what the word “defined” means. This meaning 
of “nominal definition” is not exactly the same as the one just given, but we 
need to be aware of both senses of this term. While real definitions focus on 
the things defined, nominal definitions offer a preliminary idea of the mean­
ing of a term, so we can search for better, real definitions.
Next, look at (3). Over the last two millennia this has become the classic 
definition of a human being. If you look at the definition “rational animal” 
you see that it falls into two parts, “rational” and “animal.” This is not merely 
because there are two words in the definition. It has two parts because what is 
being defined is a species, the human species, which is a universal. The defini­
tion is composed of the genus (“animal”) immediately superior to the species 
being defined. Finding the genus often takes some amount of intellectual ef­
fort. After you think you have identified the genus, then you can ask, “How 
do I divide the genus into two parts, one of which is “man”? To do so requires, 
as we have seen, finding the “difference” that distinguishes the two groups 
falling under the genus “animal”—men and what are normally called brute 
animals. We can see that this kind of definition is developed by using the 
technique of division that we first saw in Lesson 9 in order to come up with a 
definition that has this structure: species = genus + difference. Because these 
three terms are all logical notions, we’ll call this kind of definition a logical 
definition. (Different logic books use different terms for this kind of defini­
tion, but all recognize this kind of definition.) Because of the tremendous 
influence of Plato on Western thought, this kind of logical definition became 
the ideal kind of definition that other definitions imitate. 
But coming up with the proper genus and the exact difference can be an 

Different Kinds of Definitions  
 141
exceedingly hard task. Other definitions often have the structure of defining a 
species by turning to something else besides genus and difference. This is why 
many of the other definitions of “man” include “animal” in the definition, but 
leave out “rational.” 
If you look at definition (1) you can see that “worrying” is used instead 
of the specific difference “rational.” How does “worrying” compare with 
the logical definition? Do you worry because you are rational, or are you ra­
tional because you worry? Here we’re not interested in which of these two 
traits—“rational” and “worrying”—we become aware of first. Were interested 
in how they compare as two real features of real human beings. Since “worry­
ing” is a combination of “thinking about something troublesome” and “being 
anxious about that thing,” an emotion, we can see that worrying is not the 
same as the human essence, nor is it a cause of the human essence. Rather, 
“worrying” is something we can do that follows upon being human; it flows 
out of the human essence as an effect follows from a cause. In short, described 
in terms of the predicables, the ability to worry is a property of humans, and 
the act of worrying is an action built upon this property, a predicable accident. 
Definition (1), then, works primarily through listing a property of humans. 
Definitions of this sort we’ll call descriptive definitions. In a broad sense of the 
term “descriptive,” every kind of definition describes the thing defined. But 
“descriptive” here is used as a technical term in logic. This kind of definition 
is called descriptive because it doesn’t explain the essence as comprehensively 
as does a logical definition; nor does it uncover the causes of that thing or its 
essence. Rather, in terms of the predicables, a descriptive definition defines 
something using a property or accident of the thing. Good descriptive defini­
tions define things through their properties, poor ones (15–18) do so through 
accidents. 
Finally, consider definition (4). Here the genus “animal” is completely 
missing. Instead, the two parts of this definition give us two of the four causes 
of a human. First comes the human “body.” This is the “matter” out of which 
a human is made. The second half of the definition adds on the form of a hu­
man—that is, the human form as understood by some philosophers (though 
not all), which is the soul. This definition is structured in a very different way 
from the two other definitions. It defines the human species, not by giving the 
essence outright or by giving a property flowing from the essence, but through 
one or another of the causes of the essence of the thing defined. The two causes 
found in definition (4) are the material cause and the formal cause of a human. 

142  
 The Logic of Terms
While logical, causal, and descriptive definitions are developed by looking 
at the essence using different logical notions, all three have the same goal: 
to move our mind from just knowing the extension of the thing defined, to 
achieve comprehension of the concept.
Different Kinds of Definitions
We can now generalize from the results of looking at examples of defini­
tions of humans and set out the main kinds of definitions in a systematic way. 
Nominal definitions: The term “nominal” comes from the Latin nomen, 
meaning “name” or “noun.” For the ancient philosophers a nominal defini­
tion gives us enough preliminary knowledge of the meaning of a term to go 
further and study it in depth. But we also use “nominal definition” to point 
out the kind of definition that focuses merely on using the term or word cor­
rectly, without necessarily getting at the essence of the thing defined. Some 
dictionary definitions are nominal definitions in this sense. 
Real definitions: They focus on the “reality” (res) defined. Properly speak­
ing, there are no definitions of individuals. Individuals are defined by defining 
their species. All real definitions attempt to uncover the common essence of 
the thing defined.
Logical definitions: Logical definitions define the species of things by 
identifying the genus (or genera) under which the species fits and then adding 
the difference that distinguishes this species from other species falling under 
that same genus. This type of definition is the ideal kind of definition, but is 
very difficult to achieve. Many other definitions imitate logical definitions, of­
ten by identifying the genus (or something like it) but substituting something 
else for the specific “difference.”
Causal definitions: Causal definitions identify the essence of the species 
defined, not directly, but by identifying one or more of its causes. Since nor­
mally the best knowledge of something is achieved through understanding it 
as an effect of its causes, causal definitions are quite useful. 
Descriptive definitions: Descriptive definitions define the species of the 
thing defined by using one of its necessary properties. This amounts to de­
fining a cause through its effects. Such definitions are widespread and very 
helpful. The reason why is that it is often difficult to come to understand the 
essence or the causes of something. The normal human approach to under­
standing things is to proceed from effect to cause, rather than cause to ef­

Different Kinds of Definitions  
 143
fect, because effects are normally much more evident to us. A thing can have 
numerous, correct descriptive definitions. This is why the same thing often 
is defined differently in different disciplines, and these different definitions 
don’t have to be consistent with each other. Sometimes these definitions are 
consistent with each other, but sometimes they are not. Aristotle’s definition 
“man is a political animal” is consistent with other definitions, such as “man is 
a rational animal.” It is also more useful if you are studying political science. If 
you were studying communications or literature or linguistics, however, “man 
is an animal that uses and invents language” would be more helpful. But not 
all definitions are equally good or consistent with each other. Descartes’s defi­
nition “man is a thinking thing” or “man is the composite of thinking thing 
and extended thing” is not consistent with other definitions given in the first 
section of Problem Set 12.
A Deeper Look
Looking at the extension that the definition and thing defined have in 
common and the essence the definition should reveal gives us some conve­
nient rules for good definitions.
Rule 1: A definition should have the same extension as the term defined.
Rule 2: A definition should illuminate the universal essence of the thing 
defined. 
Rule 3: The definition should be clearer than the thing defined. 
Rule 4: The definition should have the same comprehension (or mean­
ing) as the thing defined. 
While it might seem that these rules lead to the conclusion that there is 
only one correct definition for each term, in fact they point in the opposite di­
rection, as we can see by using the example of the “human” in Problem Set 12, in 
the section “Kinds of Definitions of Man—That Is, the Human.” Good logical, 
causal, and descriptive definitions complement each other. But when one kind 
of definition conflicts with other definitions of the same thing, the lesson is that 
we still have a long way to go before the definitions are correct. 
There are many other types of definitions identified by logicians and oth­
ers who study definitions. Two others that are helpful for you to know about 
are intensional and stipulative definitions. Intensional definitions are easy 
to understand because the word “intensional” was invented to contrast with 

144  
 The Logic of Terms
the “extension” or width of a term. Intensional definitions try to give the real 
meaning of terms. So “intensional definition” is usually just another way of 
saying “real definition.” 
Stipulative definitions are quite different. These are definitions that are 
stipulated—that is, laid down or simply assumed, without explanation or de­
fense of their truth. There are at least three sorts of stipulative definitions. 
Stipulative definitions are sometimes merely asserted as a way of getting into 
a subject; when used this way they are not harmful. The definitions Euclid 
lays down at the very beginning of his Elements of Geometry are simply listed, 
with no further explanation or support. Stipulative definitions, however, are 
sometimes used in a second way by those who do not think it is possible for 
the human mind to achieve real definitions uncovering the real essences of 
things. Such definitions are arbitrary, a mask for ignorance, and betray an un­
warranted skepticism about the human capacity to know things—all of which 
are bad because they undercut the enterprise of knowing. They lead us quite 
reasonably to ask, “Why should I accept your stipulation about the meaning 
of X, as opposed to someone else’s?” Yet a third way of using stipulative defini­
tions is when they function as preliminary opinions or hypotheses, subject to 
further refinement. This is an acceptable use of stipulative definitions. When 
used this way, stipulative definitions are a work in progress. We can see such 
work in the dialogues of Plato, where Socrates criticizes the definitions of 
his interlocutors, to see if they “come up to the mark,” and also in many defi­
nitions used in politics and other of the so-called social sciences, especially 
those that use some variant of quantitative analysis and surveys of preferences. 
In order to test such stipulative definitions for soundness, it is helpful to be 
able to determine which of the more important types of definitions they are. 
This is one reason why learning how to identify the types of definitions is 
helpful for developing skill in logic.
Problem Set 12: Definitions
Kinds of Definitions of Man—That Is, the Human
Instructions
Identify what kind of definition the following definitions of “man” or 
“human” are. Are the following definitions of a human: (a) nominal or real? 
If real, are they (b) logical, (c) descriptive, or (d) causal? And if the definition 

Different Kinds of Definitions  
 145
is causal, which causes are contained in the definition: material, formal, effi­
cient, or final cause? 
	
1.	Man is a worrying animal. 
	
2.	Man is an animal that can ask itself what it is. 
	
3.	Man is a rational animal. 
	
4.	Man is a composite of body and spiritual soul.
	
5.	Man is a creature whose soul was especially created by God. 
	
6.	Man is a visible creature whose end is happiness. 
	
7.	Man is any member of the human race. 
	
8.	Man is a talking animal.
	
9.	Man is a tool using animal.
	 10.	Man is a religious animal.
	 11.	Man is an argumentative animal.
	 12.	Man is a political animal.
	 13.	Man is an educated animal.
	 14.	Man is an animal who can take care of himself.
	 15.	Man is black.
	 16.	Man is white.
	 17.	Man is Hispanic.
	 18.	Man is Asian. 
Kinds of Definitions
Instructions
Analyze each of the following definitions taken from original sources. 
Note that all definitions here are real definitions; there are no nominal defini­
tions. (a) Underline the thing defined (definiendum). (b) Circle the definition 
itself (definiens). (c) Indicate what kind of definition it is: nominal, logical, 
causal (which kind of cause), or descriptive. (d) If there is more than one defi­
nition in the passage, treat each definition separately.
1. “Rationalization may be defined as faulty thinking which serves to dis­
guise or hide the unconscious motives of behavior and feeling.” (Percival M. 
Symonds, 20th-cen. American psychologist, The Dynamics of Human Adjust­
ment)
2. “Law is whatever is boldly asserted and plausibly maintained.” (Aaron 
Burr, 18th-cen. American politician of dubious character, Memoirs, 2:14)

146  
 The Logic of Terms
3. “All atoms consist of very small solid nuclei (diameter 10–12 cm) and 
extended outer shells (diameter 10–8 cm).” (C. F. von Weizsaecker, 20th-cen. 
German physicist)
4. The extremities of lines are points. (Euclid, ca. 300 b.c., Elements of 
Geometry)
5. “The basic idea that gives to the word ‘democracy’ its original and la­
tent meaning is the idea of a social group organized and directed by all of its 
members for the benefit of all its members.” (Ralph Barton Perry, 20th-cen. 
American philosopher)
6. “Accordingly, when a man is said to have the grace of God, there is sig­
nified something supernatural bestowed on man by God.” (Aquinas, Summa 
Theologiae I-II, q. 110, a. 1.) 
7. “The nucleus of the hydrogen atom is called a proton. This particle 
has a positive charge equal numerically to the negative electric charge of the 
electron and is so small that it takes 2.72 × 1026 to make a pound. The nuclei 
of atoms of other substances contain a number of protons equal to the atomic 
number of the element.” (U.S. Atomic Energy Commission, ca. 1965)
8. “Love is nothing else but an insatiate thirst of enjoying a greedily de­
sired object.” (Michel de Montaigne, 17th-cen. French philosopher, Essays, 
vol. 3)
9. “A friend is a person with whom I may be sincere.” (Ralph Waldo Em­
erson, 19th-cen. American author, Essays: First Series)
10. “The whole of government consists in the art of being honest.” (Thom­
as Jefferson, A Summary View of the Rights of British America, 1774)
11. “Discovery consists of seeing what everybody has seen and thinking 
what nobody has thought.” (Attributed to Albert Szent-Gyorgy, 20th-cen. 
Hungarian scientist, Nobel Prize)
12. “In science, the Apollonian tends to develop established lines to per­
fection, while the Dionysian rather relies on intuition and is more likely to 
open new, unexpected alleys for research. . . . The future of mankind depends 
on the progress of science, and the progress of science depends on the support 
it can find. Support mostly takes the form of grants, and the present methods 
of distributing grants unduly favor the Apollonian.” (What Szent-Gyorgy ac­
tually said, Science, no. 176 [1972]) 
13. “Beauty is an emotional element, a pleasure of ours, which neverthe­
less we regard as a quality of things.” (George Santayana, 20th-cen. Spanish 
philosopher, The Sense of Beauty)

Different Kinds of Definitions  
 147
14. “Compromise used to mean that half a loaf was better than no bread. 
Among modern statesmen it really seems to mean that half a loaf is better 
than a whole loaf.” (G. K. Chesterton, What’s Wrong with the World, 1910, 
chapter 3)
Analyzing More Sophisticated Definitions
Instructions
Consider the following, more difficult passages, which contain defini­
tions. Pick out the definitions (there may be more than one). Then analyze 
them. If there is more than one definition in the passage, treat each definition 
separately. (a) Underline the thing defined (definiendum). (b) Circle the defi­
nition itself (definiens). (c) Indicate what kind of definition it is: nominal, 
logical, causal (be sure to indicate which kind of cause it is), descriptive.
1. “My friend George Bancroft defined democracy, in a lecture which I 
published in my Boston Quarterly Review, to be ‘eternal justice ruling through 
the people.’ I defined it in a series of resolutions adopted by a Democratic 
state convention, to be the ‘supremacy of man over his accidents’—meaning 
thereby that democracy regards the man as more than his possessions, social 
position, or anything separable from his manhood—and got most unmer­
cifully ridiculed for it. But the ridicule did not move me, and I held fast to 
the doctrine that the will of the people is that most direct and authentic ex­
pression of the divine will that can be had or desired.” (Orestes Brownson, 
19th-cen. American Catholic writer, in Seeking the Truth, ed. R. M. Reinsch)
2. “Democracy means government by the uneducated, while aristocracy 
means government by the badly educated.” (G. K. Chesterton, 20th-cen. Brit­
ish author, A Short History of England)
3. “A democracy is a state which recognizes the subjecting of the minority 
to the majority.” (V. I. Lenin, 20th-cen. Russian socialist)
4. “Democracy is only an experiment in government, and it has the obvious 
disadvantage of merely counting votes instead of weighing them.” (Sir William 
Inge, 20th-cen. British Dean of St. Paul’s Cathedral)
5. “Democracy is ‘a charming form of government, full of variety and dis­
order, and dispensing a sort of equality to equals and unequals alike.’ ” (Plato, 
Republic, bk. 8, 558c)
6. “But in practice a citizen is defined to be one of whom both the parents 

148  
 The Logic of Terms
are citizens; others insist on going further back; say to two or three or more 
ancestors. This is a short and practical definition; but there are some who 
raise the further question: How did this third or fourth ancestor come to be 
a citizen? Gorgias of Leontini, partly because he was in a difficulty, partly in 
irony, said: ‘Mortars are what is made by mortarmakers, and the citizens of 
Larissa are those who are made by magistrates: for it is their trade to make 
Larissaeans.’ Yet the question is really simple, for, if according to the definition 
just given they shared in the government, they were citizens. This is a better 
definition than the other. For the words, ‘born of a father or mother who is a 
citizen,’ cannot possibly apply to the first inhabitants or founders of a state.” 
(Aristotle, Politics 3.2, 175b23–33)
7. “When we talk of any particular sum of money, we sometimes mean 
nothing but the metal pieces of which it is composed; and sometimes we in­
clude in our meaning some obscure reference to the goods which can be had 
in exchange for it, or to the power of purchasing which the possession of it 
conveys.” (Adam Smith, 18th-cen. Scots economist, The Wealth of Nations, 
bk. 2, c. 2)
8. “Art may be defined as a singleminded attempt to render the highest 
kind of justice to the visible universe, by bringing to light the truth, manifold 
and one, underlying its every aspect. It is an attempt to find in its forms, in 
its colors, in its light, in its shadows, in the aspects of matter and in the facts 
of life what of each is fundamental, what is enduring and essential—their one 
illuminating and convincing quality—the very truth of their existence. The 
artist, then, like the thinker or scientist, seeks the truth and makes his ap­
peal.” (Joseph Conrad, Polish-British novelist, The Nigger of the Narcissus, 
1897, Preface)
9. “But children were allowed to leave school before that age to enter ben­
eficial employment. Beneficial to whom, we should like to know. The children 
themselves? Or is it the parents, or the employer, or the community at large? 
It really does make a difference, does it not?
“So when we hear of a beneficial or desirable scheme, we should ask ‘to 
whom?’ When we hear of a movement called subversive or revolutionary or 
destructive, we are quite justified in inquiring what it is going to upset, or 
change, or destroy. If precise information is not forthcoming, we should 
probably not be far wrong if we suspected that all the speaker meant was that 
he personally approved of the scheme and disapproved of the movement.” 
(R. W. Jepson, American psychologist, Clear Thinking, 1954)

Different Kinds of Definitions  
 149
10. “Plato having defined man to be a two-legged animal without feath­
ers—a “featherless biped,” Diogenes the Cynic plucked a cock and threw it 
over the wall of the Academy. Then he went in and said: ‘This is Plato’s man.’ 
On which account, this addition was made to the definition, ‘with broad flat 
nails.’ ” (Diogenes Laertius, 3rd cen. Greek philosopher, Lives and Opinions of 
Eminent Philosophers, “Diogenes”)


Part 3
The Logic of Propositions

T

The Logic of Propositions
Statements and Propositions
Lesson 13
Statements and Propositions 
The Essentials
Terms, Statements, and Propositions
In this lesson, we turn from the first to the second act of the mind, often called 
the act of “judgment,” because in it we make mental judgments about the way 
things are. When what we think in our mind (or say or write) corresponds with 
the way things are, then we have attained truth, so our judgment is true. When 
what we think or say or write does not correspond, then we have not attained 
truth, so our judgment is false. If we say, “Socrates was a philosopher,” and he 
really was, then our statement is true. If we say “Socrates was a great general,” 
but in fact he was not, then our statement is false. The same need to correspond 
with reality is true of negative statements. So if we say that “water does not 
contain carbon,” and it does not, then our statement is true. But if we say “water 
does not contain hydrogen,” but it does, then our statement is false. The first act 
of the mind—apprehension of concepts—does not attain truth. Our concepts 
are true or false only when they are put into statements. Attaining truth distin­
guishes the second act of the mind from the first. We can even say that truth is 
the end or purpose of the second act of the mind and the statements we form 
using it.1
Both logic and grammar study statements, but they focus on different 
things. Grammar focuses on whether a statement, normally called by gram­
1. Thomas Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s On Interpretation, Prologue. 
153

154  
 The Logic of Propositions
marians a “sentence,” is grammatically correct—that is, the sentence follows 
the conventional rules of orderly speech of a particular language. When the 
grammarian studies the first act of the mind, he looks to see if the words are 
well-formed—spelled correctly and the right form of the word used at that 
point in a sentence. He asks questions like, “Should one use ‘good’ or ‘well’?” 
And when he studies the second act of the mind, the grammarian is con­
cerned with whether the statement as a whole makes an intelligible point and 
whether it does so following the rules of grammar and syntax—again, the 
rules of the particular language. As we saw earlier, diagramming sentences is 
an excellent way to check our grammar. The logician has different concerns, 
in great part because the primary focus of the logician is not on spoken or 
written languages—which are conventional signs and vary greatly—but on 
the mental thoughts that are the basis for spoken and written language and 
do not vary as much as languages do. The same mental thoughts—sometimes 
imprecisely called “mental language”—can be expressed in many spoken and 
written languages. When the logician studies the first act of the mind, he 
concentrates on terms and their definitions, as we have seen, in order to get to 
the unchanging intelligible content that the words we speak and write signify. 
And when he studies the second act of the mind, there is also a difference 
from the grammarian, for the logician focuses on the mental assertions we are 
making in order to obtain the truth, more than the written and spoken words 
we use to convey that truth. Consequently, while grammar concentrates on 
the written and spoken language we use to convey thought, logic uses written 
and spoken language as a vehicle or instrument to help us get to the mental 
content we try to express. 
This focus on truth helps us distinguish terms from propositions. Prop­
ositions are more complex than terms—not that terms can’t be complex as 
well, but in a different way. Consider the terms “dog” and “white.” We can 
create a more complex term by adding together these two terms, as in “the 
white dog.” Though this phrase is more complex than its component parts, 
adding them together in this way only produces another term, not a state­
ment. We can see this because “the white dog” is neither true nor false. But 
truth and falsity enter the picture when we combine them in a different way, 
by forming the proposition “the dog is white.” When said of a particular dog, 
this proposition is either true or false. What brings truth and falsity into the 
picture is the fact that the statement makes an assertion about the way things 

Statements and Propositions  
 155
really are. By inserting the verb “is,” we are not just piling one concept on top 
of another to form a more complex concept, but asserting that this is the way 
things really are in the world: “the dog is white.” The issue of truth also allows 
us to distinguish statements or sentences, on the one side, from propositions, on 
the other. While all propositions are statements of some sort or other, not all 
statements are propositions. “Statement” is a wider class than “proposition,” 
a wider genus, as it were. The reason why is that, while the vast majority of 
statements are true or false, there are a few that are neither true nor false. On 
the other hand, true and false apply to all propositions. Consequently, we can 
divide the wider class or genus “statement” into two sub-groups or species: 
statements that are not propositions and statements that are propositions. Af­
ter considering a few kinds of nonpropositional statements—so we can learn 
to recognize them—we’ll turn to the logically more important propositional 
statements. 
Nonpropositional Statements
Let’s consider a few statements that are not propositions because they are 
neither true nor false.
Questions
The first kind of nonpropositional statement is a question. In a way, 
questions are just “turned-around” propositions. Consider the question “Is it 
raining outside here today?” A positive answer would be, “Here it is raining 
outside today.” The answer to a question is either true or false. But is the ques­
tion itself either true or false? Well, no, not really. The reason why is that the 
answer makes an assertion about the way things really are. But the question 
makes no assertion. It merely prompts you to search for an assertive answer. 
The question is an intelligible sentence, more than a word or term and less 
than a paragraph or argument; but it is neither true nor false and so is not a 
proposition.
Commands
Commands or requests for someone to do something are also intelligible 
sentences. We understand them and follow the command—at least most of 
the time. Consider examples like these: “Please shut the door.” “Don’t touch 

156  
 The Logic of Propositions
a hot stove!” “Stop!” Here we are telling someone how to act. If we then for­
mulate a proposition describing what they have done, “he stopped” or “she 
didn’t stop,” these propositions are either true or false. But the command itself 
is not true, nor is it false. It is simply a way we have of ordering someone to 
act in a certain way. 
Performative Statements
A kind of statement related to commands is the “performative statement.” 
If a command tells us what to do, a performative statement is a kind of sen­
tence we use actually to do something—to perform an action. Perhaps the 
most well-known kind of performative statement is uttered at a wedding. 
Consider the question, “Do you take this man for your lawful wedded hus­
band?” and the response, “I do.” The clergyman’s question is really a kind of 
command: Tell me whether or not you will to be married to this man. The 
answer—“I do”—means a lot. It means more than “I want to marry him” or 
“I promise to marry him” or “It is true that I want to marry him.” In saying “I 
do” we perform an act through language; we enter into the contract of mar­
riage. This is why we call this use of language a marriage vow. With the vow 
we enter into a new state of life. The same is true of religious vows. And it also 
holds for oaths, like the oath of office government officials take, or the oath 
members of the military take “to protect and defend the Constitution of the 
United States,” or the citizenship oath that all new citizens take. With such 
statements we perform an action, one that puts us in a new state or condition, 
one that may have many moral or legal consequences. 
Different Kinds of Propositions
The vast majority of statements, however, are either true or false, which 
means they are propositions. We can perhaps best define a proposition by 
using Aristotle’s four causes. We have already seen that the purpose or final 
cause of a proposition is to attain the truth. This means a false proposition 
doesn’t live up to its very purpose as a proposition. This is why when we say 
something we don’t think is true, we usually spontaneously give off physical 
indicators that undercut what we are saying and try to hide its falsity in a 
“cloak of truth.” It’s embarrassing to say what is false, not just because we are 
wrong, but also because humans possess thought and language in order to 
know and state what is true, not what is false. This is also the main reason 

Statements and Propositions  
 157
why lying is wrong; it violates the very purpose of propositions. We all lie on 
occasion, to be sure, but that doesn’t make it right. The agent or efficient cause 
of propositions is the human who composes them, using his mind. When we 
look for the matter of propositions, we are not looking for physical stuff, but 
for the component parts that make up propositions. These are concepts and 
terms: in the first instance mental concepts, in the second spoken and written 
words and terms. The form or structure of propositions is closely related to 
their end. Unlike complex concepts, like “flying fish,” propositions like “those 
fish are flying” take the form of an assertion about the way things are. And 
assertions take the form of either affirmations—this is so—or denials—that 
is not so. We’ll learn much more about such affirmative and negative proposi­
tions in subsequent lessons. 
Categorical Propositions
Categorical propositions are the simplest kind of propositions. They are 
direct assertions—either affirmative or negative—about the way things are. 
Such propositions are the staple of human discourse and will form the focus of 
our study of the logic of propositions. Some examples are “Grass is green,” “All 
dogs are animals,” “Cats are not dogs,” and “Some cats are not independent.” 
You can see that each one of these statements is either true or false. The logic 
of categorical propositions is rather simpler than their grammar, for when 
analyzed logically a categorical proposition falls into three parts: the subject 
the proposition is about; the predicate said of or predicated of the subject, 
and the verb “is,” called the copula because it “connects” the predicate with 
the subject, in order to make an assertion—whether affirmative or negative. 
Many categorical propositions do not have an explicit copula, because the 
verb “to be” is contained within all other verbs. Examples are “Grass grows,” 
“Lucienne walks,” and “The dog runs down the street.” We could rewrite these 
three propositions as “Grass is growing,” “Lucienne is walking,” and “The dog 
is running down the street.” We’ll look at the structure of categorical propo­
sitions more carefully in Lesson 13. For now, we just need to realize there are 
two different kinds of categorical propositions.
The four examples in the previous paragraph are all simple or regular cat­
egorical propositions. Such statements are normally just called “categorical 
propositions,” a practice we follow in this book. What makes these statements 
propositions is that they are assertions, taking the form of affirmations or ne­
gations; what makes them simple is that these propositions make definite af­

158  
 The Logic of Propositions
firmations or negations, with no further qualifications. We shall study these 
kinds of propositions in detail, because they are so important in their own 
right and for understanding arguments. The other kind, modal propositions, 
are covered under “A Deeper Look,” later in this chapter. 
Hypothetical Propositions
The term “hypothetical” is sometimes used as a synonym for “condition­
al”; but in fact conditional propositions are only one type of hypothetical 
proposition. Hypothetical propositions are either true or false, which is what 
makes them propositions. But they are more complicated than categorical 
propositions. They are generally formed by taking two (or more) categori­
cal propositions and combining them, based on a certain logical connection 
between the two propositions. For this reason, the different types of hypo­
thetical propositions are determined by the different types of logical con­
nection between the two (or more) categorical propositions used to create 
a hypothetical proposition. The terms that express these logical relations are 
called “syncategorematic” terms because they take two (or more) categorical 
propositions and combine them. The three most important syncategorem­
atic terms in English are “and” (for conjunctions), “or” (for disjunctions), 
and “if . . . then” (for conditions). Since categorical statements are the build­
ing blocks of hypothetical statements, in this book we shall study categorical 
statements first, then hypothetical statements. This order is the reverse of the 
order used in symbolic logic, and it is easier to learn. 
Conjunctions: Perhaps the easiest kind of hypothetical proposition to 
understand is called a conjunctive proposition or, more often, a conjunction. 
In conjunctions, the two categorical propositions are combined. Consider the 
proposition “Ali is a Democrat, and Estella is a Republican.” This proposi­
tion is made up of two categorical propositions added together to form one 
conjunction. For this proposition to be true, it is not enough that Ali is a 
Democrat; Estella must also be a Republican. Here is another example: “A 
university is an institution, and a person is an individual.” If either of the two 
categorical propositions that make up the conjunction is false, then the whole 
conjunctive proposition is false. The normal English verbal sign of the logical 
relation of conjunction is the term “and” or “both . . . and.” 
Disjunctions: A second type of logical connection produces the second 
type of hypothetical proposition. If the two (or more) categorical proposi­
tions are presented as alternatives, the hypothetical proposition is called a 

Statements and Propositions  
 159
disjunctive proposition or disjunction. Some examples are, “Either you are 
coming to the lecture or your roommate is coming” and “Either you are for 
the war on terror or you are against it.”
These examples point out one complication about disjunctions that 
should be mentioned at the outset. In the first example, it is possible that both 
you and your roommate will come to the lecture. This kind of disjunction, 
which includes the possibility of both categorical propositions being true, is 
called an “inclusive disjunction,” because it “includes” the possibility that both 
propositions are true. The other example is what is called an “exclusive disjunc­
tion,” because the proposition means that one or the other, but not both, alter­
natives can be true. For example, “either you are for conducting the war on 
terror or you are against it” means “either you are for conducting the war on 
terror or you are against it, and you cannot be both for the war and against it.” 
Conditions: Conditional propositions, or simply conditions, are the 
most important kind of hypothetical proposition, but also the most difficult. 
In a conditional proposition, the first categorical proposition sets out a “con­
dition” that, if fulfilled, leads to the second categorical proposition. Consider 
this conditional proposition: “If you are in the room, then you came through 
the door.” What it means is that on the condition that you are presently in 
the room, then it follows—that is, it must also be true—that you must have 
come into the room through the door. If we look at the structure of this 
proposition, the first categorical proposition, called the “antecedent” because 
logically it comes “before” (Latin ante) the second categorical proposition, 
which follows the word “if,” then the second categorical proposition, called 
the “consequent” because logically it follows “after” (Latin consequor) the an­
tecedent, is preceded by “then” to let us know that if the condition is fulfilled 
(or the antecedent is true), then the consequent must come about; it will also 
be true. The “before” and “after” here are logical, not temporal. In fact, in 
this case the antecedent—being in the room—actually happened after the 
consequent in time. 
A Deeper Look
Modal Propositions
Modal propositions are more complicated than simple categorical prop­
ositions. They are important, but usually studied in an advanced logic course. 
“Modal” comes from the grammatical term “mood.” Here the copula “is” is 

160  
 The Logic of Propositions
changed, either by having its “mood” strengthened in the direction of necessi­
ty or weakened in the direction of possibility. When combined with the word 
“is,” the copula becomes “is possible,” or “is possibly,” or “is necessary” or “is 
necessarily.” But there are many other words that we use to express the modal­
ities of possibility and necessity. Consider “He may be guilty” and “The earth 
must be round.” The first sentence expresses possibility; it shies away from 
making a definite claim, in the way a simple or regular categorical proposition 
does, one like “He is guilty.” One linguistic opposite of “possible” is “impossi­
ble,” as in the proposition “He cannot be guilty.” Another linguistic opposite 
of “possible” is “necessary,” as in the proposition “He must be guilty.” So here 
we have one regular categorical proposition—“he is guilty”—and three mod­
al propositions— “he may be guilty,” “he cannot be guilty,” and “he must be 
guilty.” The logic of such propositions turns out to be somewhat complicated, 
and we shall not take it up in detail. But we should learn to recognize modal 
propositions. One final point: logicians have noticed that impossibility is just 
necessity in a negative direction. “He cannot be guilty” is the same as “He 
must be innocent.” Since “impossibility” can always be explained as “necessity 
of the opposite,” there are really only two modal operators, not three: possible 
and necessary.
Symbolizing Hypothetical Propositions
Symbolic logicians have been helpful on another point in dealing with 
hypothetical propositions. Their fondness for mathematical-style symbols 
has led them to invent some symbols that help us see the different kinds of 
hypothetical propositions. First, let the lowercase letters p and q stand for 
any categorical proposition, while uppercase letters like P and Q stand for 
particular categorical propositions. For example, the categorical proposition 
“Socrates is a man” can be symbolized by one uppercase letter, say M. “Trees 
are green” could be symbolized by another uppercase letter, like G. Please 
remember, here the letter does not stand for the subject or predicate term of 
a categorical proposition, but it stands for the whole categorical proposition. 
In this system, the mathematical symbol for “not” (~) is used to indicate the 
negation of a proposition, such as ~p or ~M. The structure or logical relation 
or syncategorematic term between the two categorical propositions that are 
combined to create a hypothetical proposition can then be represented by a 
symbol that is not a letter of the alphabet. 

Statements and Propositions  
 161
Symbols for Conjunctions (p and q), (p & q)
The “and” relation is sometimes symbolized using the old-fashioned am­
persand (&), though most logicians prefer a dot (∙). We will use both. The 
symbolic form of a particular conjunction is (P & Q) or (P ∙ Q), while the 
general type of this kind of proposition is symbolized by (p & q) or (p ∙ q). 
The parentheses show that this is one proposition, a conjunctive proposition. 
Each of the three kinds of hypothetical propositions has its own logic, differ­
ent from the other two, and so has its own symbol. 
Symbols for Disjunctions (p or q), (p v q)
The normal English verbal sign of this kind of logical relation is the term 
“or” or “either . . . or.” Since one of the Latin words for “or” is vel, disjunctions 
are symbolized using a small v. (P v Q) stands for some particular disjunctive 
proposition, while (p v q) stands for this type of proposition. Such proposi­
tions are called inclusive disjunctions, because they “include” the possibility 
that both p and q are true. Such a disjunction is often symbolized using a 
small “v,” as in (Y v R). For an exclusive disjunction, the proposition means 
that one alternative or the other, but not both, can be true. Logicians some­
times use a capital “V” to symbolize such an exclusive disjunction, as in 
(W V ~W). In a way, however, the capital V is really unnecessary, because 
the capital V can be explained by combining the inclusive disjunction with a 
denial of the conjunction of the two propositions. For example, “either you 
are for conducting the war on terror or you are against it” means “either you 
are for conducting the war on terror or you are against it and you cannot 
be both for the war and against it.” This proposition could be symbolized as 
follows (where ≡ means “is the same as” or “is identical with”): (W V ~W) ≡ 
[(W v ~W) ∙ ~(W ∙ ~W)]
Symbols for Conditions (If p, Then q) (p → q)
Since the normal verbal indicators of a conditional proposition are “if ” 
and “then,” we can say that conditional propositions always take the general 
form (if p then q). What symbolic logicians have done is invent a symbol for 
the “if . . . then . . .” relation that holds between the antecedent and consequent 
categorical propositions that make up the conditional proposition. In fact, 
they have invented a number of such symbols. We will use the arrow → be­

162  
 The Logic of Propositions
cause it shows clearly that in conditions there is a logical movement from the 
antecedent to the consequent. The “standard form” for any condition propo­
sition will be (p → q), which is normally read “p implies q,” because “implies” 
captures the “if . . . then . . .” relation. The particular conditional proposition we 
started with could be symbolized as (R → C). Such symbols help us to see at a 
glance the logical structure of conditional propositions. 
In real-world thinking, however, we cannot ignore the content of such 
propositions, content normally contained in the verbal language used to 
utter or write them. That content helps us to understand when condition­
al propositions are true and when they are false. Consider the proposition 
“If something is human, then it is an animal,” which we could symbolize as 
(H → A). It is pretty easy to understand about the truth or falsity of this whole 
proposition when the antecedent is true. The proposition means that if the 
antecedent is true, then the consequent must also be true. So, if the anteced­
ent is true and the consequent also is true, then the whole proposition is true, 
as in this case. Now consider “If something is human, then it is a rock.” When 
something is human, it cannot be a rock. In this case, the antecedent is true 
and the consequent is false. This kind of example helps us see that when the 
antecedent is true but the consequent is false, the whole conditional propo­
sition is false. 
But when the antecedent is false, it is harder to determine whether the 
whole proposition is true or false. This is a hard question that we won’t try to 
answer here. But we should know how most symbolic logicians approach this 
point. They simply give a stipulative definition of the conditional relation in 
this case and say that any conditional proposition with a false antecedent is 
true, regardless of whether the consequent is true or false. This result may well 
seem counterintuitive to you. But one of the main reasons for saying this is 
so that the only time that a conditional proposition is false is when the con­
dition is fulfilled, but the consequent does not follow. Another way of saying 
this is that the whole proposition is false only when the antecedent is true 
and the consequent is false. You might want to ponder this point; but it does 
make sense. Think of it this way. If the antecedent condition is not fulfilled, 
then you don’t know what will be true of the consequent—it could be either 
true or false. Consider this example of a condition you might present to a 
child: “If you are good, then you’ll get a lollipop.” Consider if the child is not 
good. Well you won’t give him a lollipop. But since there are other ways to get 
a lollipop, he might get one anyway. An overindulgent grandparent might 

Statements and Propositions  
 163
give him one; or he might steal it from the pantry. So “you are not good” is 
consistent with both his getting and his not getting a lollipop. 
Again, it is important to emphasize that these symbols for propositions 
are no substitute for thinking about the real content of what we think, say, 
and read; but they are very useful for concentrating for the moment of the 
logical form or structure of a given proposition.
Primary Sources
Aristotle, On Interpretation, c. 4–5.
Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s On Interpretation, Prologue. An excellent short presen­
tation of the difference between the first and second acts of the mind.
The books Aristotle wrote in developing the logic of the second act of 
the mind are: On Interpretation, the primary text dealing with the second act 
of the mind and the statements and propositions it creates; Prior Analytics, 
which deals with reasoning, the third act of the mind especially the formal 
logic of arguments; it includes many examples that deal with the logic of 
propositions; and Topics, which deals with the logic of dialectical [probable] 
reasoning, which produces opinion, but not full knowledge. It is organized 
around the predicables, which Aristotle presents as a division of different 
kinds of propositions.
Problem Set 13: Statements and Propositions
Distinguishing Kinds of Propositions
Instructions
Classify the following statements as to type, using the following types of 
statements:
Types of statements
Statement that is not a proposition
Proposition
Categorical
Hypothetical
Conditional
Conjunctive
Disjunctive

164  
 The Logic of Propositions
	
1.	John made a mistake. 
	
2.	Dorothea did not make a mistake.
	
3.	Zebras are like horses, they run.
	
4.	Your solution to the math problem is inaccurate. 
	
5.	If Pedro takes the new job, he will make more money.
	
6.	If Pedro doesn’t take the new job, he won’t make more money.
	
7.	“All things are made of atoms.” (Democritus, Greek philosopher 
[adapted], 5th-cen. b.c.)
	
8.	There once was a woman who lived in a shoe. 
	
9.	She had so many children, she didn’t know what to do.
	 10.	If her children were bad, she whipped them all soundly. 
	 11.	She sent them to bed or occasionally let them stay up to watch 
television.
	 12.	Either you will get an A on the exam or you will get a B. 
	 13.	“In war, resolution; in defeat, defiance; in victory, magnanimity; 
in peace, goodwill.” (Winston Churchill, 20th-cen. British prime 
minister, The Second World War)
	 14.	“We make a ladder of our vices if we trample those same vices 
underfoot.” (St. Augustine, d. 430. Roman bishop, theologian, and 
philosopher) 
	 15.	“Either death is a state of nothingness and utter unconsciousness, 
or . . . there is a change and migration of the soul from this world to 
another.” (Socrates, Greek philosopher, d. 39. b.c., from Plato, Apology 
of Socrates) 
	 16.	“Some books are to be tasted, others to be swallowed, and some few 
to be chewed and digested.” (Francis Bacon, 17th-cen. English philos­
opher and politician, Essays, “On Studies,” 1625) 
	 17.	“If God did not exist, it would be necessary to invent him.” (Voltaire, 
18th-cen. French, philosophe, letter) 
	 18.	“To thine own self be true; and it must follow as the night the day, 
thou canst not then be false to any man.” (Shakespeare, d. 1616. 
Hamlet) 
	 19.	“Abandon hope all ye who enter here.” (Dante, 14th-cen. Italian poet, 
Inferno) 
	 20.	“All power of fancy over reason is a degree of insanity.” (Samuel John­
son, 18th-cen. British compiler of the first English dictionary, Rasselas, 
Prince of Abyssinia: A Tale) 

Statements and Propositions  
 165
	 21.	“Cleopatra’s nose: had it been shorter, the whole configuration of the 
world would have been altered.” (Blaise Pascal, 17th-cen. French au­
thor, Pensées, no. 32)
	 22.	“The Christian ideal has not been tried and found wanting; it has 
been found difficult and left untried.” (G. K. Chesterton, 20th-cen. 
British author, What’s Wrong with the World)
	 23.	“The white man knows how to make everything, but he does not 
know how to distribute it.” (Sitting Bull, 19th-cen. American Indian 
chief, in Bridger, Buffalo Bill and Sitting Bull, 320) 
	 24.	“No one could have questioned Labour’s record in implementing 
socialism. Rather, it was the economic consequences of socialism—
devaluation and a return of inflation—which were the obvious targets 
for attack. Very heavy public spending had kept the standard rate of 
income tax almost at wartime levels—nine shillings in the pound. Far 
from being dismantled, wartime controls had if anything been extend­
ed—for example rationing was extended to bread in 1946 and even 
potatoes a year later.” (Margaret Thatcher, 20th-cen. British prime 
minister, The Path to Power)
Symbolizing Hypothetical Propositions
Instructions
For those statements in the previous sections that are hypothetical, go 
back to the statement, devise your own symbols for each statement, and then 
symbolize the statement. 

Properties of Categorical Propositions
Lesson 14
Properties of Categorical Propositions
The Essentials 
The Three Parts of Categorical Propositions
Before Aristotle, humans had used categorical propositions, and some had 
studied them fairly closely. But no one before Aristotle had noticed that in cat­
egorical propositions we can distinguish their content (the assertions they make 
about reality) from their form (the structure or arrangement the proposition 
takes). As we saw in Lesson 6, this distinction helped Aristotle invent logic; 
let’s see how it works in categorical propositions. The first thing Aristotle no­
ticed is that while the content of categorical propositions is virtually unlimited, 
the structure of all categorical propositions is quite uniform. He saw that each 
categorical proposition has the three parts we introduced in Lesson 12—sub­
ject, predicate, and copula. Let’s now look more carefully at these parts and see 
what they reveal about the nature of categorical propositions. 
Subject
The subject of the proposition is what the proposition is about—whether 
it comes at the beginning of the sentence, the end, or is stuck somewhere in 
the middle. Consider the first four examples in Problem Set 14.
	
1.	All Texans are friendly. 
	
2.	Some Texans are friendly. 
	3.	No Texans are friendly. 
	4.	Some Texans are not friendly. 
166

Properties of Categorical Propositions  
 167
All four propositions have the same subject—“Texans.” The subject—
whether made up of one word or many—is one term, called the “subject 
term.” Spotting the subject of a categorical proposition is the first step in un­
derstanding it. This is often easy, but occasionally difficult, in more complex 
sentences. The fact that these four propositions have the same subject—Tex­
ans—illustrates how logic focuses on the form or structure of propositions. 
This is the reason why many centuries ago, long before the invention of mod­
ern symbolic logic, logicians often resorted to symbols. The general symbol 
for the subject of a categorical proposition is S.
Predicate
The second part of a categorical proposition is called its predicate. It is also 
a term, the predicate term, so called because it is “predicated of ” or “said of ” 
the subject. Our four propositions all have the same predicate term—“friend­
ly.” In general, the predicate term is symbolized by P. Unlike conceiving a 
term using the first act of the mind, when we formulate a proposition, using 
the second act of the mind, we assert something. What is asserted is that the 
predicate “belongs to” or “applies to” or “is said of ” or “is predicated of ” the 
subject. The predicate can be “said of ” the subject in two quite different ways, 
either affirmatively or negatively. With this point we come to the third part of 
a categorical proposition, which is quite different from the first two.
Copula
The third part of a categorical proposition is some form of the verb “to be” 
or “is.” This is the part of the proposition that clearly separates complex terms 
from propositions. Complex terms, like “green grass,” don’t assert anything, so 
this phrase has no “linking verb” or copula. This is why such terms are neither 
true nor false by themselves. But if we link “grass” and “green” together, by 
adding “is,” then we have produced a categorical proposition: “Grass is green.” 
The copula linking directly together the subject and predicate of the propo­
sition is what makes the proposition assert something. In “Grass is green,” 
grass, a substance, is not exactly the same in nature as its color green, a quality. 
But green is united to grass in the sense that they are two aspects of one and 
the same thing—the green grass. So the predicate truly signifies an attribute 
of the subject. 

168  
 The Logic of Propositions
The Logical Structure of Categorical Propositions: 
“Standard Form”
We have already noted that not every categorical proposition has an ex­
plicit copula because some form of the verb “is” is contained implicitly in ev­
ery verb. This is what distinguishes nouns from verbs, “a walk” from “to walk” 
or “walks.” But for the purposes of understanding the logic of propositions, 
we need to recognize that some form of “to be” is present implicitly in every 
verb; this is what makes it a verb. So in analyzing a categorical proposition we 
can always separate “is” from the verb in the predicate of the sentence in order 
to see the three parts of the proposition. If we focus on the form or structure 
of the first four problems in Problem Set 14 by substituting S for the subject 
and P for the predicate and connecting the subject and predicate by “is” or “is 
not,” we can see their different structures, apart from their content:
	
1.	All S is P.
	
2.	Some S is P.
	3.	No S is P.
	4.	Some S is not P.
For the rest of the book, we will call these four structures the “Standard 
Forms” of categorical propositions. And often you will be asked to reformulate 
or restate categorical propositions in this Standard Form.
The way “is” unites S and P is determined by the ten categories. In “grass 
is green,” grass and green form a kind of unity, but not an absolute identity, 
since substances are not the same kinds of things as colors. Since “is” is used 
implicitly or explicitly to unite all subjects and predicates in categorical prop­
ositions and the content found in the subject and predicate terms describes 
things using the categories, the concept of “is” or “being” is even broader or 
more universal than any of the ten categories, since it covers them all, though 
not in exactly the same way. This is the reason why we can say that the verb 
“is” is contained in or implicit in every verb and every verb can be expanded 
into a form that makes “is” explicit. So “The cat runs” can also be expressed as 
“The cat is running.” 
Finally, negative propositions, like “Some Texans are not friendly,” add 
some form of the adverb “not” to the copula of the proposition in order to 
show that the predicate is not united to the subject, but the opposite happens: 
the predicate is separated or denied of the subject. This is the way the predicate 
is “said of ” or “belongs to” the subject in a negative proposition, like “Grass 
is not a tree.”

Properties of Categorical Propositions  
 169
The Quality of Categorical Propositions
The fact that these four propositions all have the same subject and the 
same predicate helps us see how Aristotle saw that the differences among 
them are not based on their content—Texans and friendly people—but on 
their structure or form. These two structural features are called the proposi­
tion’s quantity and quality. 
The quality of a categorical proposition is not determined by its subject or 
predicate, but by its copula. All categorical propositions are either affirmative 
or negative. If the copula is some form of “is,” the proposition is affirmative. 
This means the predicate is affirmed of the subject; the proposition asserts 
the predicate is true of the subject. The first two examples from Problem Set 
14, (1) “All Texans are friendly” and (2) “Some Texans are friendly,” affirm 
the fact that the trait friendly is true of Texans, of all of them in (1) and some 
of them in (2). When the copula is not stated explicitly, as in “Some Texans 
ride horses,” you should remember that some form of “to be” is contained 
implicitly in the verb “ride.” This is why this sentence can be reformulated as 
“Some Texans are riding horses,” which shows that both “riding” and “horses” 
are part of the predicate and that the proposition is affirmative—the Texans 
are riding horses. Even if the content of the predicate contains a negative idea, 
if the predicate is affirmed of the subject, the proposition is affirmative, not 
negative. “Some Texans lie” is an affirmative proposition, even though lying 
has negative connotations. We can see this by expanding the proposition to 
make the copula explicit: “Some Texans are lying” or “Some Texans are liars.”
The other two examples from Problem Set 13, (3) “No Texans are friendly” 
and (4) “Some Texans are not friendly,” are negative propositions. Example 
(4) clearly connects the copula “is” with “not,” showing that the term “not” in 
a negative proposition does not govern the subject or predicate but qualifies 
the copula “is,” for is not is the opposite of is. So (4) clearly says that “Texans 
are not friendly,” some of them, at least. Here the predicate “friendly” is denied 
or removed or separated from the subject Texans. This kind of separation of 
the predicate from the subject is characteristic of all negative propositions. 
Example (3), “No Texans are friendly,” is also a negative proposition. 
What makes it negative is the first word of the sentence: “No.” Here “No” 
performs two functions. Even though “No” is separated from the copula by 
the term “Texans,” in meaning “No” combines with the copula to mean “are 
not.” So the proposition is saying “Texans are not friendly.” But “No” has a 

170  
 The Logic of Propositions
second role. It also functions to determine the quantity of the proposition—
which we’ll learn about next. So don’t be fooled; in this kind of sentence “are” 
does not function by itself, even if it is not standing right next to the negative 
term “No.” 
One might be inclined to reformulate this kind of proposition by using 
the term “all” and putting the negative term right next to “are,” which pro­
duces the sentence “All Texans are not friendly.” But for reasons we’ll see in 
Lesson 15, this formulation is not a good one, because the sentence “All Texans 
are not friendly” is inherently ambiguous. In some contexts it may mean the 
same as “No Texans are friendly,” but in other contexts, and most often, it 
means something quite different: “Some Texans are not friendly.” But we’ll 
consider this issue in the next lesson. 
The Quantity of Categorical Propositions
Next let’s consider the quantity of categorical propositions. Let’s look 
again at our first two propositions:
	
1.	All Texans are friendly.
	
2.	Some Texans are friendly. 
These two propositions have the same subject, the same predicate, and 
the same quality. But the subject of (1) is “all Texans,” absolutely every one 
of them, while the subject of (2) is only “some Texans”—that is, some num­
ber of Texans less than all of them. Logicians call a proposition that is about 
all the members of the subject group or class a “universal proposition,” be­
cause the proposition is asserting some attribute to be true about each and 
every instance of the subject term. The subject term being universal in quan­
tity is what makes the proposition a universal proposition. This meaning of 
the term “universal” is similar to but slightly different from what it meant in 
Lessons 7 and 8. There we were contrasting individual things in the world, 
which we know through our senses, with general or universal concepts, which 
we know through our intellect. When such general concepts are used in cate­
gorical propositions, they can be applied either to all the things that fall under 
them, in a universal proposition like (1), or only to some of them, in a partic­
ular proposition, like (2).
The term “some” is not quite so precise. For the purposes of logic, we 
don’t need to know for sure whether just one Texan is friendly, just a few are 

Properties of Categorical Propositions  
 171
friendly, the vast majority are friendly, or all but one are friendly. All we are 
concerned to say is that some number of Texans—ranging from one to one 
less than all—are friendly; and we leave open the possibility that all of them 
are friendly. Logicians call this kind of proposition a “particular proposition,” 
because the predicate is asserted of some particular part of the whole subject 
class. As before, the quantity of the subject term determines the quantity of 
the proposition. Here we need to be precise about terminology. Sometimes 
writers, especially philosophers, use the term “particular” as a synonym for 
“individual,” meaning just one thing. But this is not what the term “particu­
lar” means here. We can see why if we remember that the word “particular” 
is formed from the word “part.” So the subject of a particular proposition, 
then, includes some part of the whole subject class. We are following the long-
established meaning of “universal” and “particular” as technical terms in log­
ic—as technical as “energy” in physics or “integration” in calculus; we should 
be clear about what “particular” means. 
As you would expect, one of the two other propositions among our four 
examples is universal and one is particular. Proposition (4), “Some Texans are 
not friendly,” is easily recognized as a particular proposition because of the 
word “some.” 
Once again, Proposition (3), “No Texans are friendly,” is a bit odd. As we 
saw, “no” means the proposition is negative in quality. But “no” also governs 
the quantity of the proposition. “No Texans are friendly” is quite the same 
as saying “None of the Texans are friendly.” This second formulation shows 
clearly that we are talking about all the Texans, because the word “none” 
means “no one.” So the proposition “No Texans are friendly” is universal. The 
proposition asserts something about the whole group or class of Texans: “not 
a single one of them is friendly,” or we could say, “each and every one of them 
is not friendly.” 
In English, we usually express a universal affirmation by words like “all” or 
“every,” and we express universal negatives by “no” or “none.” Negative words 
like “no” and “none” perform two functions. They show the proposition is 
both negative in quality and universal in quantity. Such terms do double duty, 
as it were. This is not true of every language, but it is of English. As stated 
before, you might be tempted to state the universal negative by saying, for 
example, “All Texans are not friendly.” But this kind of proposition is really 
ambiguous and in most contexts is not a universal proposition. 

172  
 The Logic of Propositions
The Four Kinds of Categorical Propositions: A, I, E, O
Since these two formal or structural characteristics of propositions—
quantity and quality—each include two possible types, when we look at their 
form or structure we can see there are four and only four kinds of categorical 
propositions: universal affirmative propositions, particular affirmative propo­
sitions, universal negative propositions, and particular negative propositions. 
The first four examples from Problem Set 13 cover all of these four possible 
types. Some clever logician, probably in the early medieval period, decided 
that he didn’t want to repeat the full descriptions of these kinds of propo­
sitions, so he identified each of the four kinds with a letter. The Latin word 
affirmo means “I affirm,” which is what you do in an affirmative proposition. 
So our medieval logician decided to use the first vowel in affirmo, which is 
A, as a marker for a universal affirmative proposition, and he used its second 
vowel, which is I, for a particular affirmative proposition. In Latin nego means 
“I deny,” which is what you do in a negative categorical proposition. So E 
became the sign of a universal negative proposition, and O marked a particular 
negative proposition.
A: universal affirmative	
All S is P	
(affirmo)
I: particular affirmative	
Some S is P	
(affirmo)
E: universal negative 	
No S is P	
(nego)
O: particular negative	
Some S is not P	
(nego) 
A Deeper Look
Analyzing Categorical Propositions
In order to understand each categorical proposition according to its form, 
it is necessary to understand each of its formal features: its subject, predicate, 
quality, and quantity. Where should we start? A useful technique to use is to 
look at the proposition as a whole, recognize its grammatical parts in order to 
try to get the basic sense of the proposition. Then you can analyze it logically. 
The following order usually works pretty well: 
1. Identify the subject, not worrying about whether the subject is universal 
or particular. Just think about the subject as a group or class. And don’t leave 
anything out. The grammatical subject is often just one word, but the logical 
subject includes everything that modifies the grammatical subject. But don’t 

Properties of Categorical Propositions  
 173
worry yet about words that determine the quantity of the subject, which is 
also the quantity of the proposition considered as a whole. 
2. Use the same technique to identify the predicate. At this stage, leave out 
the copula. With normal verbs you will need to distinguish the content of the 
verb, say, “runs,” from the form of the verb “is” that is implicit in such a verb. 
The content of the verb is part of the logical predicate, while the “is” part of 
the verb is the copula. 
3. Determine whether the copula is affirmative or negative. This gives you 
the quality of the proposition. Usually some form of the words “no” and “not” 
indicate a negative copula and therefore a negative proposition; but some­
times other negative words are used to indicate a negative proposition. 
4. Determine the quantity of the proposition—which is the same as the 
quantity of the subject term. Is it universal or particular? (We’ll learn later 
that the predicate term also has a quantity, but don’t worry about that now.) 
Using these four steps, you should be able to determine if a categorical propo­
sition is A, I, E, or O. For many propositions, this question is easy to answer; 
but there are quite a number of propositions for which this question is rather 
more difficult.
5. For the final and most important step, rewrite the proposition as simply 
as you can. Simplifying is designed to make both its meaning and its logical 
type (A, I, E, or O) clear. You simplify its language in order to make sure 
you understand the meaning of the proposition you have read, in your own 
words, and that you understand its logical features: the subject group, predi­
cate group, whether it is affirmative or negative, and whether it is universal or 
particular. In order to make the logical type clear, you should try to restate the 
proposition in Standard Form, making the quantity and quality of the prop­
osition explicit. When we rewrite propositions we normally leave out some of 
the interesting nuances of a good author’s prose, but rewriting and simplifying 
complicated discourse uncovers the logic of the author’s reasoning, which is 
the purpose of logical analysis.
When I say “rewrite” the proposition, I mean literally that. Rewrite it to 
make sure you really understand it. You may not need to do too much rewrit­
ing for Problem Set 14, but try your hand at it here. You’ll definitely need to 
rewrite many, if not all, of the propositions in Problem Sets 15 and 16 and for 
the rest of the book. Develop the habit now! 

174  
 The Logic of Propositions
Problem Set 14: Basic Categorical Propositions
Four Kinds of Categorical Propositions
Instructions 
Determine what kind of categorical proposition the following statements 
are (A, I, E, or O). For all propositions that are not already in Standard Form, 
rewrite them in standard form. 
	
1.	All Texans are friendly.
	
2.	Some Texans are friendly.
	
3.	No Texans are friendly.
	
4.	Some Texans are not friendly.
	
5.	None of the chimpanzees have been fed.
	
6.	All airplanes are human artifacts.
	
7.	Some citizens are uninvolved.
	
8.	Most citizens vote in federal elections.
	
9.	Some of our friends were not at the game.
	 10.	All truck drivers have taken a special course.
	 11.	No business is open on the holiday. 
	 12.	None of the vegetables at dinner tonight tasted like they should.
	 13.	Nothing morally wrong is politically right.
	 14.	Some of your books were lying open on the desk.
	 15.	Some of the students at our table were not complaining about the food.
	 16.	All of the parents of the new students were complaining about the 
costs.
	 17.	Most of Maria’s brothers and sisters were not complaining about her 
going off to college.
	 18.	None of the union leaders in the negotiation are asking for increases 
in salary.
	 19.	All the rabbits we saw are somewhere on that side of the road.
	 20.	Nearly all of us liked the show.
	 21.	“Ah, colonel, all’s fair in love and war, you know.” (Nathan Bedford 
Forrest, 19th-cen. Confederate General, to a Union officer he tricked 
into surrendering)
	 22.	“All legislative Powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of 
the United States, which shall consist of a Senate and House of Repre­
sentatives.” (U.S. Constitution, Art. 1, Sec. 1.)

Recognizing Kinds of Categorical Propositions
Lesson 15 
Recognizing the Kinds of Categorical 
Propositions
The Essentials
In Lesson and Problem Set 14, we covered basic or simpler categorical 
propositions. These propositions are straightforward because their subjects 
and predicates are clearly delineated, they have adjectives modifying the sub­
ject to determine its quantity, those adjectives are rather normal and easy to 
understand, and their predicates are not complicated. Make sure you under­
stand the right answers in Problem Set 14 before moving on to Problem Set 
15. In this lesson, we will look at several kinds of more advanced categorical 
propositions. Let us consider them one type at a time.
Propositions with Normal Verbs
As we have seen, implicit in every verb is some form of the verb “is.” Con­
sequently, we can always expand a normal verb into a verb with two parts, 
the first being a form of the verb “is” and the other some sort of participle of 
the verb expressed in the original sentence. Consider this proposition from 
Problem Set 15: “Some of the boys who skipped school ran across the rail­
road tracks.” Here the subject is “some of the boys who skipped school.” As it 
stands in the sentence, the predicate is “ran across the railroad tracks.” In order 
175

176  
 The Logic of Propositions
to turn this proposition into what we can call Standard Form, with an explicit 
copula, we can change the verb from “ran” to “were running,” which contains 
“were,” the plural past tense form of the verb “is.” This technique helps us 
clearly to identify the proposition as an I proposition. It also helps us see that 
when we split up the verb “ran,” we divide it into the copula and into its con­
tent or meaning, which is part of the logical predicate of the proposition.
Nonstandard Word Order
Now let’s consider the proposition “Blessed are the merciful.” In this 
proposition the copula is explicit; we might at first think that “blessed” is the 
subject and “the merciful” is the predicate. But the subject is what the propo­
sition is about; the predicate is what is said about or attributed to the subject. 
In this case, being blessed is attributed to those here called “the merciful,” not 
the other way around. This proposition promises blessedness or happiness to 
those who are merciful. In this proposition, as it is stated, the predicate comes 
first and the subject second. To analyze this proposition correctly, you may 
wish to change the tense of the verb and, more importantly, the word order: 
The merciful will be blessed. 
Quantity Not Explicit
“Blessed are the merciful” has another important trait. Once we see that 
“the merciful” is the subject of the proposition, not its predicate, then we have 
to wonder whether the subject is universal or particular, because there is no 
quantitative adjective like “all” or “some” that explicitly and obviously indicates 
the quantity of the proposition. Is it an A proposition or an I proposition? The 
answer ultimately resides in its meaning, which we are aware of in our mind. 
But there is also a verbal indicator that helps us, at least in English. This is the 
adjective “the.” (Many other languages, however, will not have such a term in a 
proposition like this; some other languages do not even use an explicit copula, 
which makes them even harder to analyze.) In this case, we have to figure out 
what “the” tells us. In grammar, “the” is more precisely called the “definite” 
article, as opposed to the indefinite article “a.” Sometimes “the” points to a 
definite individual, as in the proposition “The dog ran down the street.” But 
this is not always true; and it is not true in this case. Here “the” points to the 
whole group or class of merciful people. Another example would be “The girls 

Recognizing Kinds of Categorical Propositions  
 177
on the team were unhappy.” Here “the” is used to tell us that it was all the girls 
on the team, not just some of them, who were unhappy. The same is true with 
“Blessed are the merciful.” “The” tells us that all merciful people, not just some 
of them, are promised blessedness. So “Blessed are the merciful” is an A prop­
osition, not an I proposition: “All the merciful will be blessed.”
Subject Placeholder
It is especially popular in English to begin a sentence with a word that 
looks like the subject of the sentence, but really functions merely as a place­
holder for the true subject, which is stated later in the sentence. Consider 
these two sentences from Problem Set 15: “There are some dogs coming down 
the street” and “It is sad to see your team lose.” In these sentences, the words 
“there” and “it” might look at first glance to be the subjects of their sentences, 
because they come just before the verb. But they don’t tell us what the subjects 
of these sentences actually are; they don’t give us any content. What they do is 
“hold the place” for the subject that is stated later in the proposition. You can 
see this if you remember that the subject is what the proposition is about. The 
subject of the first proposition is “some dogs”; and the subject of the second 
proposition is “to see your team lose,” which we can emend slightly to “seeing 
your team lose.” So the first proposition is an I proposition: “some dogs are 
coming down the street.” The other one says, “seeing your team lose is sad.” 
But is it an A or an I proposition? There is no explicit quantity in the original 
sentence, so we have to make our best-informed judgment. The proposition 
predicates “sad” of a certain kind of outcome of a game: “seeing your team 
lose.” The proposition, then, is an A proposition: All seeing your team lose is 
sad. Now this sentence is awkward. But sometimes it helps to revise a sentence 
into an awkward-sounding proposition in order to see its logic. We’re trying 
to analyze normal discourse in order to understand its logic; but this doesn’t 
mean that would should replace normal discourse with “logic-speak.” 
A Deeper Look 
Singular Propositions
Aristotle himself recognized three kinds of propositions: universal and 
particular, but also singular propositions. Singular propositions have singular 
or individual things as their subject. Often the subject of a singular propo­

178  
 The Logic of Propositions
sition is a proper noun: John is a baseball player or Jane Austen is the greatest 
English novelist or London is the most famous city in the world. But often we 
use an adjective that identifies the subject as a single thing: This piece of pie is 
the best I have ever tasted or That possum is the ugliest animal I have ever seen. 
While he recognized singular propositions, Aristotle did not do a lot with 
them in developing his logic. But we do use singular propositions in our syllo­
gistic reasoning. Consider the classic example: “All humans are mortal. Socra­
tes is a man. Therefore, Socrates is mortal.” Here we are drawing a conclusion 
about just one individual man. If we think of an individual, say, Socrates, as 
a class, he is an unusual class, having only one member. In the proposition 
Socrates is brilliant, we are referring to only one person, to be sure, but we are 
referring to all of him, not to part of him, say, his left hand. This is one way to 
see why we should treat singular propositions like Socrates is brilliant in the 
way we treat universal propositions, for the purposes of logic. Such a singular 
proposition is not exactly the same as a universal proposition, like “All men 
are mortal.” But in this case, Socrates, considered as a whole man, is brilliant, 
because he has a brilliant mind. This is how logicians have concluded that, 
in logic, there are only two kinds of categorical propositions, universal and 
particular. A singular proposition is, so to speak, like an odd kind of universal 
proposition. 
This seems to be what Aristotle meant when he drew a parallel between 
universal propositions and singular ones: “Of such corresponding positive 
and negative propositions as refer to universals and have a universal char­
acter,” his examples were “Every man is white” and “No man is white,” and 
“Every man is just” and “No man is just” (A and E propositions), “if one is 
true the other must be false. This is the case also when the reference is to indi­
viduals, as in the propositions ‘Socrates is white’ and ‘Socrates is not white.’ ” 
Here Aristotle is drawing an explicit parallel between universal propositions 
(A and E) and singular propositions. He does not say singular propositions 
are A or E, but they are like A or E.
Tricky O Propositions
Now let’s consider a proposition like (22) in Problem Set 15: “Not every 
Georgian is friendly.” This kind of proposition is an O proposition, but it can 
be confusing because it doesn’t have the standard word order and language of 
an O proposition. Consider the proposition Some Georgians are not friendly. 

Recognizing Kinds of Categorical Propositions  
 179
This is clearly an O proposition. The subject “Georgians” is made particular 
by “some.” And the predicate “friendly” is denied of these Georgians by add­
ing “not” to the copula “is.” Next consider the A proposition Every Georgian 
is friendly. Here “every” makes the proposition universal and “is” makes it 
affirmative. But what happens if we add “not” to the beginning of this sen­
tence? The meaning of the sentence is changed dramatically, and not in the 
way you might at first think. Your first guess might be that Not every Georgian 
is friendly is an I proposition, thinking that when “not” is combined with 
“every” we get “some.” But “not” combines with the rest of the sentence in 
a very different way. Consider this proposition: Not every American will get 
to ride to the planet Mars in a space ship. This proposition does not guarantee 
that some American will get to Mars. It may be that no American will get there. 
And considering the ramping down of the American space program, this is 
probably what will happen. 
The way to understand Not every Georgian is friendly and Not every Amer­
ican will ride to Mars in a space ship is to recognize that the term “not” does 
not affect only the one word “every” that immediately follows it, but it has 
a more interesting effect; it affects every word that comes after it in the sen­
tence. Not every Georgian is friendly really means It is not the case that every 
Georgian is friendly. Now what do we mean when we say this? Here it is better 
to compare Not every Georgian is friendly with the universal negative propo­
sition No Georgian is friendly. Both of these propositions are negative; this 
results from “No” and “Not” in each sentence. But No Georgian is friendly is 
a universal proposition, while Not every Georgian is friendly is also negative, 
but particular. If It is not the case that every Georgian is friendly, then it must be 
true that Some Georgians are not friendly. Comparing it with Every Georgian 
is friendly tells us Not every Georgian is friendly must be negative; and compar­
ing it with No Georgian is friendly tells us Not every Georgian is friendly must 
be particular. And a particular negative proposition is an O proposition. So 
based on this analysis, we can correctly rewrite Not every Georgian is friendly 
in standard form as Some Georgians are not friendly.
A practical example helps to understand the point. Suppose you are flying 
from Europe to Houston. This is your first time in Texas, but you have heard 
stories that Texans wear cowboy hats and boots, have rough manners, smell 
of hard life on the range, carry guns, and use them, too. In short, as a sophisti­
cated European you expect to find that All Texans are barbarians. After your 
ten-hour flight, you are weighed down by your carry-on baggage, trip as you 

180  
 The Logic of Propositions
exit the walkway into the terminal, and your bags go everywhere. Immediately 
two people wearing cowboy hats and shirts that say “Welcome to Houston” 
pick you off the ground, corral your bags, and help you on your way. At this 
point, you have enough information to know it is true that Not every Texan 
is a barbarian. You are not in a position to know All Texans are barbarians, 
though we will find in Lesson 20 that you are in position to know that this 
proposition is false, or to know that No Texans are barbarians. You don’t even 
have the information to know that Some Texans are barbarians. But you do 
know enough to say Not every Texan is a barbarian, because you can say that 
at least Some Texans are not barbarians. In short, you know the O proposition 
is true, but you don’t yet know the I, E, or A propositions are true.
All S Is Not P
When introducing the universal negative proposition we used the form 
No S is P, we learned that there are some modifying adjectives, like “no,” 
which affect both the quantity and the quality of the proposition. Consider 
the E proposition No oranges are apples. Here “no” tells us two things: First, 
the proposition is universal; it is about all oranges. Second, it is negative; “no” 
means the oranges are not apples. Another formulation you might use is All 
S is not P; in this case All the oranges are not apples. This formulation might 
seem advantageous, since “all” seems to make the subject “oranges” universal, 
and putting “not” next to the copula seems to make the proposition negative. 
And sometimes a proposition of this form is intended to be a universal neg­
ative proposition, as in this case. But consider the previous cases. What if we 
moved the “not” from being the first word in the sentence to placing it next to 
“are”? Every Texan is not a barbarian or Every Georgian is not friendly. Based 
on the previous analysis, you probably can see that these two propositions are 
not universal negative but particular negative, O propositions. Propositions 
of the form All (or every) S is not P will vary in meaning, depending upon 
context. Sometimes a proposition with this structure will be an E proposition, 
as is true of All the oranges are not apples. But at other times, a proposition 
with this structure will be an O proposition, as is true of Every Texan is not 
a barbarian. 
So be careful! There is no substitute for your intelligent thought and judg­
ment about the meaning of propositions. And there is no verbal formula you 
can memorize to give you the right answer 100 percent of the time about the 

Recognizing Kinds of Categorical Propositions  
 181
meaning of a proposition or about logical reasoning generally. The underlying 
reason why is that logic is primarily about thought in your mind, only second­
arily about the words you speak or write. 
Negative Modifiers
Some languages allow double negatives, but English does not. One re­
sult of this grammatical rule affects the logic of a small number of negative 
modifiers, the most important being the word “few.” Now “few” means some 
number, but a small number, smaller than “many.” To express an affirmative 
proposition about some small number of things, in English we add on a de­
monstrative adjective to “few”: normally “a few,” but sometimes “the few.” 
Consider A few of the explorers were saved or The few who were saved gave 
thanks to their rescuers and to God. The first proposition is affirmative and 
particular (I); the second proposition is affirmative and universal (A), for all 
of the few who were saved did give thanks.
Things are different, however, when “few” is used by itself to modify a 
subject. Consider propositions like Few of Marco Polo’s band of explorers made 
it to China and back to Italy or Few of those who take the GRE score 800 on the 
verbal or math sections of the test. In these two cases, the negativity of the term 
“few” does two things. First and foremost, it affects the copula, making these 
negative propositions. Second, it reduces drastically the number of the sub­
ject class who actually achieve the predicate, so that it increases the number of 
the subject class who did not achieve the predicate. What the first proposition 
actually means is that Most of Marco Polo’s band of explorers did not make it to 
China and back to Italy, a particular and negative proposition (O). Likewise, 
the second proposition means that Most of those who take the GRE do not score 
800 on the verbal or math sections of the test. Once again, this is a particular 
and negative proposition (O). In both of these propositions, it is reasonable 
to assume the correlative I is true. Marco Polo himself, for instance, wrote his 
book about the expedition after he returned. But are you sure that somebody 
scored 800 on the GRE? Probably not, if 800 means answering all the ques­
tions correctly. 
The general result of this look at more advanced categorical propositions 
is that we should realize that the meaning of the spoken or written proposi­
tion is determined by the mental proposition in our mind. And sometimes we 
mean one thing and say another. So one goal of logic is to bring into harmony 

182  
 The Logic of Propositions
what we think and what we say. Of course, sometimes what we think is also 
wrong. But it is the intellectual disciplines or subjects that have primary re­
sponsibility in this area. Here, a very old bit of wisdom is relevant: Mean what 
you say and say what you mean.
Finally, you should try to rewrite in Standard form most of the propo­
sitions in Problem Set 15. You want to get to the point where you can do so 
easily. 
Problem Set 15: Advanced Categorical Propositions
Recognizing More Difficult Categorical Propositions
Instructions 
Please identfy the following categorical propositions as A, I, E, or O. Sim­
plify and rewrite all propositions in Standard Form. 
	
1.	Some of the boys who skipped class ran across the railroad tracks.
	
2.	Most of the boys did not run across the tracks.
	
3.	All elephants love dust baths. 
	
4.	Most Democrats follow the liberal political philosophy.
	
5.	Dear to us are all the people who love us.
	
6.	Foolhardy is the man who riots without cause.
	
7.	Blessed are the merciful.
	
8.	There are some dogs coming down the street. 
	
9.	It is sad to see your team lose. 
	 10.	There are five hundred thirty-two parts in this washing machine. 
	 11.	Blue jays are birds.
	 12.	The animals in that part of the zoo have not been fed.
	 13.	Socrates was a philosopher.
	 14.	Alcibiades was a charming man.
	 15.	Bananas contain a considerable amount of potassium.
	 16.	Cavalier King Charles spaniels are beautiful dogs.
	 17.	Pit bulls are not.
	 18.	He who is not with me is against me.
	 19.	None of the potatoes have been peeled. 
	 20.	Many revolutionaries have perished in their revolutions.
	 21.	No Georgian is friendly.
	 22.	Not every Georgian is friendly.

Recognizing Kinds of Categorical Propositions  
 183
	 23.	Not all of us are fools.
	 24.	Snakes are not all harmful.
	 25.	Not all that glitters is gold. 
	 26.	A few of the explorers were saved.
	 27.	Very few people say all they mean. 
	 28.	Few if any politicians say what they mean. 
	 29.	Margaret came home late last night.
	 30.	Irving is not unfriendly.
	 31.	Not all the tires on my car are worn.
	 32.	Poets are not all wise.
	 33.	It is not polite to blow your nose at the table.
	 34.	He will perish by the sword who lives by the sword.
	 35.	Few mobsters live on to the age of retirement.
	 36.	Many are called, but few are chosen. (Treat this as one proposition.)
	 37.	Whoever laughs last laughs best.
	 38.	No good tree bears evil fruit.
	 39.	He that is his own lawyer has a fool for a client.
	 40.	“That woman is a woman!” (Shakespeare in Love [movie])
	 41.	“Beauty draws more than oxen.” (George Herbert, 17th-cen. English 
author, English Poems of George Herbert, 244)
	 42.	“The only biography that is really possible is autobiography.” 
(G. K. Chesterton, 20th-cen. English author, The Autobiography)
	 43.	“Time is the moving image of eternity.” (Plato, d. 349 b.c., Greek phi­
losopher, Timaeus, 37d)
	 44.	“Some people will never learn anything for this reason that they learn 
everything too soon.” (Alexander Pope, 18th-cen. British author, Mis­
cellanies in Prose and Verse)
	 45.	“All the gold in California is in a bank in the middle of Beverly 
Hills / In somebody else’s name. . . .” (Larry Gatlin, 20th-cen. Ameri­
can songwriter)
	 46.	“All the gold in California is not in a bank in the middle of Beverly 
Hills / In somebody else’s name. . . .” (Gatlin [altered])
	 47.	“There are three kinds of lies: lies, damned lies, and statistics.” (At­
tributed to Benjamin Disraeli, 19th-cen. British prime minister, by 
Mark Twain, in Chapters from My Autobiography) 
	 48.	“The web of our life is of a mingled yarn, good and ill together. Our vir­
tues would be proud, if our faults whipped them not; and our crimes 

184  
 The Logic of Propositions
would despair, if they were not cherished by our virtues.” Analyze the 
first sentence. (Shakespeare, d. 1616, All’s Well That Ends Well)
	 49.	“God is dead; but considering the state the species Man is in, there 
will perhaps be caves, for ages yet, in which his shadow will be shown.” 
(Friederich Nietzsche, 19th-cen. German philosopher, Joyful Wisdom, 
section 108)
	 50.	“In our country the lie has become not just a moral category, but a 
pillar of the State.” (Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, 20th-cen. Russian novel­
ist, Nobel Prize, reported by New York Times, January 22, 1974)
	
51.	“How was she created? I’m not sure if you realize this, but it was in 
God’s image. How can anybody dare to speak ill of something which 
bears such a noble imprint?” (Christine de Pizan, d. 1430, French 
moralist, member of the court, author of “mirror of princes” works 
such as The Book of the City of Ladies)

Categorical Propositions in Context
Lesson 16
Categorical Propositions in Context
The Essentials
Context Is Important
Outside of the classroom, the normal context for statements and prop­
ositions is more extended discourse—for instance, in your personal conver­
sations, reading, writing, and thinking. Considered grammatically, sentenc­
es are made up of words, and in normal prose they fall into paragraphs that 
themselves become parts of larger pieces of our discourse. As you know, there 
are more kinds of propositions than categorical propositions. So most ex­
tended discourse consists in several kinds of propositions. For the purposes 
of learning logic, we are concentrating first on the categorical propositions 
found in extended discourse; then we will consider hypothetical propositions. 
We’ll do the same thing for arguments, treating first those using categorical 
propositions and then those consisting in hypothetical propositions. But our 
goal (or final cause) is improving our skill in understanding all the logical 
components of extended discourse. We will finish this book by putting to­
gether all the topics we have learned in analyzing extended arguments that 
contain different kinds of propositions and arguments. For the purposes of 
improving our logical skills, we will concentrate on mastering each of these 
different topics, one at a time, before we put them all together. 
The context in which a sentence or proposition is placed has a definite im­
185

186  
 The Logic of Propositions
pact on the meaning of the sentence or proposition. In addition, every human 
language is flexible enough so that the categorical propositions contained in, 
say, a paragraph, sometimes can be read straight off the sentences that make 
up the paragraph. But at other times, the most important categorical propo­
sitions a paragraph contains are found in the point or thesis of the paragraph. 
And this thesis, along with other important categorical propositions, may not 
be identical with one or another of the sentences in the paragraph. Import­
ant categorical propositions can make up just part of a sentence. However, 
sometimes an important categorical proposition extends into two or three 
sentences. This phenomenon happens more frequently the better the writer 
or speaker is.
Analysis Uncovers Propositions
The following plan can be used to analyze a passage of moderate length, 
say, a paragraph, in order to find the categorical propositions in it:
1. Read through the whole passage, trying to understand each sentence 
as it stands.
2. Identify those sentences that explicitly are categorical propositions.
3. Identify those parts of sentences that explicitly are categorical propo­
sitions.
4. Identify those categorical propositions that are contained in more than 
one of the sentences in the passage.
5. Identify the categorical proposition that is the basic point, “bottom 
line,” or thesis of the passage. 
6. Create a list of the categorical propositions contained in the passage, 
following the order in which they occur in the passage, numbering them from 
first to last.
7. Rewrite as you write out the propositions. This will help simplify the 
propositions, making their meaning clear and their type easier to identify. 
A Deeper Look 
Existential Import
For Aristotle, logic was a tool to help us understand real things by forming 
propositions about them. Since propositions are about real things, he thought 

Categorical Propositions in Context  
 187
a necessary aspect of all propositions—both universal propositions and par­
ticular propositions—was that each proposition asserts the existence of in­
dividual members of the subject class. “All apples are fruit” asserts that there 
really are apples, in addition to stating that those existing apples are fruit. 
Likewise, “Some apples are green” asserts there really are apples in addition 
to saying that they are green—but only some of them. Centuries later, the 
English mathematician and logician George Boole (1815–64) had some sec­
ond thoughts on this point, which has come to be called “existential import.” 
Concentrating on counterfactuals and imaginary figures, Boole thought, 
contrary to Aristotle, that universal propositions like “All unicorns have one 
horn” and “No unicorns have wings” do not assert the existence of anything 
at all, since unicorns don’t really exist. He reduced the categorical proposition 
“all unicorns have one horn” to the conditional proposition “If something is a 
unicorn, then it will have one horn,” or “if something is a unicorn, then it will 
have no wings.” He then did something very important, but illogical. He gen­
eralized from understanding of propositions about counterfactuals to apply 
it to all A and E propositions. In other words, he reduced universal categor­
ical propositions to conditional propositions. In Boole’s interpretation, “All 
apples are fruit” does not assert the existence of any apples; it merely means 
that “if something is an apple, then it must also be a fruit.” This innovation has 
the consequence that it denies the similarity between universal and particular 
propositions, as far as existential import is concerned. In Boole’s interpreta­
tion, while I and O propositions have existential import, A and E proposi­
tions do not. If you have studied modern symbolic logic, you will know that 
this innovation was carried over into symbolic logic. 
Boole’s interpretation of categorical propositions has had a great influ­
ence on modern symbolic logic and on the teaching of logic. It is no accident 
that this interpretation was created by a mathematician. Ever since Plato said 
the objects of mathematics exist, but among the realm of the separate forms, 
while Aristotle said the objects of mathematics are taken by abstracting them 
from real things, but only exist as mathematical objects in the mind, math­
ematicians have had trouble figuring out the nature of the things they study 
and their relation to the world of our experience. The problem with Boole’s 
interpretation is that in ordinary or “natural” language and thought about the 
real world, we do normally assert the existence of the subject of every categor­
ical proposition, including A and E propositions. All too many contemporary 
logicians are inclined to support Boole by saying that on this point the very 

188  
 The Logic of Propositions
meaning of ordinary or “natural” language is, or should be, decided by the 
dictates of symbolic logic. The problem with this reasoning, however, is that 
it is backward. Logic comes from the logical character of “natural” language, 
not the other way around; and logic captures only a part of the richness of 
“natural” language. The same is true for grammar and rhetoric. To say other­
wise would be like saying that, when we compare things in the real world with 
some theory about them, the real things must follow the theory. But this is 
backward; we judge theories by the things they are designed to explain, not 
the other way around. Human knowledge captures only a small part of the 
amazingly rich reality of the world. The same is true when we compare the 
subtleties of “natural” language with any kind of logic, symbolic, mathemati­
cal, or the kind of verbal, Aristotelian logic we are studying here.
There are two ways to get out of the conundrum posed by Boole and to 
agree that Aristotle was correct to say that A and E propositions do have “exis­
tential import.” “All roses are flowers” assumes that roses exist; “No kangaroos 
are dogs” assumes that kangaroos exist. The first way is to split the difference 
and say that some universal propositions do have existential import—those 
about the real world—while universal propositions about imaginary or unreal 
things do not have existential import. While initially attractive, logicians have 
by and large rejected this answer because it would require two different logics 
for universal propositions—one for propositions about real things, the other 
about unreal or imaginary things. 
A second and better answer to Boole is to remember that existence doesn’t 
always mean the same thing. When we say our dog exists, we mean that it 
exists as a real thing in the natural world. But when we think or talk about 
Achilles or Hamlet—who said, “To be or not to be, that is the question”—
we recognize that we are talking about something that exists in a manner of 
speaking, but not in the way our dog does. These characters exist in the way 
literary characters or folk heroes exist, in our imagination—whether individ­
ual or collective—when we read or hear or think about them. “Harry Potter 
goes to Hogwarts,” is not true of the physical world, but Harry exists in the 
way literary characters exist. And judging from the tremendous role Harry 
has had in shaping for the better the minds of millions, this kind of existence 
can have a tremendous impact on our day-to-day reality. This answer means 
that universal propositions always assert the existence of their subjects—but 
that not all things exist in the same way: some exist in reality, some exist in the 
imagination, some in our thought, and some only in the mind of God. But we 

Categorical Propositions in Context  
 189
couldn’t at all think about something, or be influenced by it, if it did not exist 
in some manner, for then it would be absolutely nothing. 
While at first glance it might seem like this dispute among logicians 
doesn’t involve much, in later lessons we will see that there is a lot involved. 
Look for more about “existential import” in the following three lessons. And 
remember that logic is just “codified common sense”; so don’t leave your com­
mon sense at the door when you walk into logic class.
Problem Set 16: Propositions in Context
Identifying Categorical Propositions in Prose
Instructions 
(a) Pick out at least five categorical propositions from each of the following 
passages. (b) Create a list of the categorical propositions found in each pas­
sage. (c) Rewrite each categorical proposition in Standard Form, cutting out 
all extraneous material. (d) Indicate whether each categorical proposition is 
A, I, E, or O.
1. In short, “I say that as a city we are the school of Hellas; while I doubt 
if the world can produce a man, who where he has only himself to depend 
upon, is equal to so many emergencies and graced by so happy a versatility 
as the Athenian. . . . For Athens alone of her contemporaries is found when 
tested to be greater than her reputation, and alone gives no occasion to her 
assailants to blush at the antagonist by whom they have been worsted, or to 
her subjects to question her title to rule by merit. Rather, the admiration of 
the present and succeeding ages will be ours, since we have not left our power 
without witness, but have shown it by mighty proofs. And far from needing 
a Homer for our eulogist, or others of his craft whose verses might charm for 
the moment only for the impression which they gave, to melt at the touch of 
fact, we have forced every sea and land to be the highway of our daring, and 
everywhere, whether for evil or for good, have left imperishable monuments 
behind us. Such is the Athens for which these men, in the assertion of their 
resolve not to lose her, nobly fought and died; and well may every one of their 
survivors be ready to suffer in her cause.” (Thucydides, The Peloponnesian War 
2.35–46, from Pericles’s “Funeral Oration” to the Athenians)
2. “Sing, O Muse, of the anger of the son of Peleus, Achilles, and the de­
struction that brought pains by the thousands upon the Achaeans [Greeks]. 

190  
 The Logic of Propositions
It threw many strong souls of heroes down into the underworld of Hades, and 
gave their bodies to the feasting of dogs and birds. But the will of Zeus was 
achieved, accomplished since the time of the first conflict between the son of 
Atreus, the lord of men Agamemnon, and brilliant Achilles. So what god was 
it who brought them into bitter conflict? It was Apollo, son of Zeus and Leto, 
whose anger at the king [Agamemnon] drove terrible damage among the host 
of warriors; and men perished because the son of Atreus dishonored Chryses, 
priest of Apollo, when he walked on the seashore by the beached ships of the 
Achaeans, wanting to ransom back his daughter, . . . 
“And he said: ‘Sons of Atreus [Agamemnon and Menelaus], and you oth­
er strong-greaved Achaeans, the gods who live on Olympus grant you plunder 
in the city of Priam [Troy]; and after that, an easy journey home. But please 
return my own daughter [Chryseis] to me. And take this ransom offering, 
which gives honor to the son of Zeus, Apollo, who strikes from afar.’ ” (Ho­
mer, 9th-cen. b.c. Greek poet, Iliad, bk. I, 1–21) 
3. “When the people saw that Moses delayed to come down from the 
mountain, the people gathered themselves together to Aaron, and said to him, 
‘Up, make us gods, who shall go before us; as for this Moses, the man who 
brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we do not know what has become 
of him.’ And Aaron said to them, ‘Take off the rings of gold which are in the 
ears of your wives, your sons, and your daughters, and bring them to me.’ So 
all the people took off the rings of gold which were in their ears, and brought 
them to Aaron. And he received the gold at their hand, and fashioned it with 
a graving tool, and made a molten calf; and they said, ‘These are your gods, O 
Israel, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt!’ When Aaron saw this, 
he built an altar before it; and Aaron made proclamation and said, ‘Tomor­
row shall be a feast to the Lord.’ And they rose up early on the morrow, and 
offered burnt offerings and brought peace offerings; and the people sat down 
to eat and drink, and rose up to play.” (Exodus 32:1–6, trans. RSV) 
4. “Four-score and seven years ago, our fathers brought forth upon this 
continent a new nation, conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition 
that all men are created equal.
“Now we are engaged in a great civil war, testing whether that nation—or 
any nation, so conceived and so dedicated—can long endure. We are met on 
a great battlefield of that war. We have come to dedicate a portion of that 
field as a final resting place for those who here gave their lives that that nation 
might live. It is altogether fitting and proper that we should do this. 

Categorical Propositions in Context  
 191
“But, in a larger sense, we cannot dedicate, we cannot consecrate, we can­
not hallow this ground. The brave men, living and dead, who struggled here 
have consecrated it far above our poor power to add or detract.
“The world will little note, nor long remember what we say here; but it 
can never forget what they did here.
“It is for us, the living, rather, to be dedicated here to the unfinished work 
which they who fought here have thus far so nobly advanced. It is rather for 
us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining before us; that from these 
honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for which they gave 
the last full measure of devotion; that we here highly resolve that these dead 
shall not have died in vain; that this nation, under God, shall have a new birth 
of freedom, and that government of the people, by the people, and for the 
people, shall not perish from the earth.” (Abraham Lincoln, 19th-cen. Amer­
ican president, Gettysburg Address)
5. “To suppose that the eye with all its inimitable contrivances for adjust­
ing the focus to different distances, for admitting different amounts of light, 
and for the correction of spherical and chromatic aberration, could have been 
formed by natural selection, seems, I confess, absurd in the highest degree. . . . 
The difficulty of believing that a perfect and complex eye could be formed 
by natural selection, though insuperable by our imagination, should not be 
considered subversive of the theory.” (Charles Darwin, 19th-cen. English sci­
entist, On the Origin of Species)
6. “How came the bodies of animals to be contrived with so much art, and 
for what ends were their several parts? Was the eye contrived without skill 
in Opticks, and the ear without knowledge of sounds? . . . and these things 
being rightly dispatch’d, does it not appear from phaenomena that there is a 
Being incorporeal, living, intelligent . . . ?” (Isaac Newton, 17th-cen. English 
physicist, Opticks)
7. “With savages, the weak in body or mind are soon eliminated; and 
those that survive commonly exhibit a vigorous state of health. We civilised 
men, on the other hand, do our utmost to check the process of elimination; 
we build asylums for the imbecile, the maimed, and the sick; we institute 
poor-laws; and our medical men exert their utmost skill to save the life of 
every one to the last moment. There is reason to believe that vaccination has 
preserved thousands, who from a weak constitution would formerly have suc­
cumbed to small-pox. Thus the weak members of civilised societies propagate 
their kind. No one who has attended to the breeding of domestic animals will 

192  
 The Logic of Propositions
doubt that this must be highly injurious to the race of man. It is surprising 
how soon a want of care, or care wrongly directed, leads to the degeneration 
of a domestic race; but excepting in the case of man himself, hardly any one 
is so ignorant as to allow his worst animals to breed.” (Charles Darwin, 19th-
cen. English biologist, The Descent of Man)

Euler and Venn Diagrams of Propositions
Lesson 17
Euler and Venn Diagrams of 
Propositions
The Essentials
Over the centuries logicians have developed symbols and diagrams as 
ways of representing logical points. They began to do so long before the in­
vention of modern symbolic logic in the late nineteenth century. We have 
already seen some of the kinds of symbols devised to represent different kinds 
of propositions, such as All S is P and (p → q). In the eighteenth century, 
however, the Swiss mathematician Leonard Euler (1707–83), who spent most 
of his career in Russia and Germany because he failed to obtain the teaching 
post he wanted in his native Switzerland, took another approach to represent­
ing propositions. Rather than use letters to stand for terms or propositions, he 
represented terms and propositions by diagrams. In this lesson, we will look 
first at Euler’s diagrams and then at the way the British logician John Venn 
(1834–1923) adapted them to make them more useful for representing both 
propositions and arguments. 
Using Circles
Using symbols like S for the subject of a categorical proposition or p for 
a whole categorical proposition originally was simply a convenient way of ab­
193

194  
 The Logic of Propositions
breviating a longer word or sentence and generalizing it to signify any term 
or proposition. This practice goes back as far as Aristotle himself. In later cen­
turies, and especially in modern symbolic logic, using such symbols shows 
the influence of mathematics on the practice of teaching logic. Algebra, for 
example, uses letters to stand in for any of a range of numbers. It is no wonder 
that this practice was mainly developed by mathematicians. Using diagrams 
to represent terms and propositions (and arguments, as we shall see) is a bit 
different, for it shows the influence of geometry. 
The secret to the success of Euler and Venn diagrams is that they represent 
what in mathematics is often called a “set” of items by a circle or other curved 
two-dimensional figure. A set is the totality of a group of items included un­
der the set, say, baseball bats. Bats can also be thought of as a “class” of things, 
a number of things that fit into the class because they all have the same char­
acteristics. “Set” and “class” are primarily mathematical concepts, but since 
they represent a group of things, it was quite natural for logicians to think of 
a circle as a visual way to represent a term. 
A circle represents a set or class or term, say, the term “Texan,” to go back 
to our earlier example. Spatially, if the circle represents the “class” of Texans, 
then what is the inside of the circle represents Texans, while what is outside 
the circle represents non-Texans. 
This particular example can then be generalized, so we can let the cir­
cle represent any class or term P. If so, the area outside the circle represents 
non-P:
non-Texans
Texans
non-P
P

Euler and Venn Diagrams of Propositions  
 195
Euler Diagrams
Universal Affirmative Proposition
What Euler recognized is that you can use two circles, one for each term in a 
categorical proposition. Then you can visually represent the four kinds of cate­
gorical propositions with diagrams composed of two circles. Consider a univer­
sal affirmative proposition (A), such as “All Texans are friendly,” or the general 
form of A propositions, “All S is P,” using S for the subject term and P for the 
predicate term. When you assert “All Texans are friendly,” what you are saying is 
that the whole class of Texans falls within the class of friendly people. This prop­
osition can be visually represented by placing the circle of Texans wholly within 
the circle of friendly people. To generalize, the circle that represents the subject 
term (S) must lie wholly within the circle that represents the predicate term (P). 
Universal Negative Proposition
A universal negative proposition (E) does the opposite. Consider “No 
Texans are friendly.” Rather than including all the Texans under the term 
“friendly,” it denies that any Texan falls under the description “friendly.” Since 
the E proposition separates the predicate from the subject, this mental separa­
tion can be represented diagrammatically by separating the two circles. This 
geometrical separation represents the claim that none of the Texans are in­
cluded within the class or term “friendly.” Such an example can be generalized 
to symbolize all E propositions, which takes the form “No S is P.”
P
S
A Proposition
P
S
E Proposition

196  
 The Logic of Propositions
Particular Affirmative and Particular Negative Propositions
The two particular propositions (I and O) work quite differently. When 
we say “Some Texans are friendly” (I), we are saying there are some things that 
are both Texans and friendly. But when we say “Some Texans are not friendly” 
(O), we are saying there are some things that are Texans, but they are not 
friendly. We could also put the negation in the predicate term and say “Some 
Texans are non-friendly” (I). When we get to Lesson 20 and study Obversion, 
we’ll see that “Some Texans are non-friendly” (I) and “Some Texans are not 
friendly” (O) have the same truth value. Euler recognized that an elegant way 
to represent the group of Texans who are friendly is to overlap the two circles. 
The common area represents things that are both Texans and friendly, or, to 
generalize, they are both S and P. The trick is to figure out how to distinguish 
I from O propositions in a diagram, since the basic figure—overlapping cir­
cles—is the same for both. Euler himself did this by setting the interlocking 
circles side by side for a particular affirmative proposition (I) and setting the 
interlocking S circle over the P circle for particular negative propositions (O). 
Another way is to place the name for the subject term inside the common 
area for particular affirmative propositions (I), to indicate that “some S is P”; 
and to diagram a particular negative proposition by placing the name of the 
subject term within the S circle but outside the common area, to indicate that 
“some S is not P.” The following diagram follows the latter convention. 
P
S
I Proposition
P
S
O Proposition

Euler and Venn Diagrams of Propositions  
 197
Whichever way you draw the diagram, Euler’s was not a very happy way to 
distinguish I from O propositions, since the basic geometrical figure—inter­
locking circles—is the same in both cases. Another and more difficult problem 
is that the way Euler distinguished propositions diagrammatically required him 
to change the diagram. He used three different diagrams. This problem becomes 
important when we try to diagram not a single proposition, but an argument. 
As we shall see, the most basic kind of argument is a categorical syllogism, 
which involves three different propositions. Since he was a brilliant mathemati­
cian, Euler did manage to solve this problem; but to do so his diagrams became 
too complicated. About one hundred years later John Venn came to the rescue.
Venn Diagrams
If Euler’s life was typical of the international career of the eighteenth-
century European intellectual, John Venn’s was typical of the British intellec­
tual in the nineteenth century. The son of an Anglican clergyman who had 
been educated at Cambridge University, Venn went to Cambridge as well 
and stayed on there, first on the faculty of and then as president of Gonville 
and Caius College, in whose chapel the stained glass commemorating his life 
contains the Venn diagram of a categorical syllogism. 
Venn simplified the Euler diagrams, thereby making them both more el­
egant and easier to use. His first change was to use the same geometrical fig­
ure to diagram all four categorical propositions. He used the two intersecting 
circles found in Euler’s diagrams of particular propositions. If we say the two 
intersecting circles each represent some class or term, say, Texans and friendly, 
then a diagram with two intersecting circles includes four areas, each repre­
senting a different class. Note that to describe any area you have to describe it 
in relation to both terms found in the proposition. Consider the four areas in 
a diagram using the terms “Texan” and “friendly”:
Area 1 = Non-Texan, nonfriendly.
Area 2 = Texan, but nonfriendly
Area 3 = both Texan and friendly
Area 4 = non-Texan but friendly
area 4
area 2
area 1
area 3

198  
 The Logic of Propositions
In order to distinguish the four kinds of categorical propositions from 
each other, Venn needed to invent some new devices to put in these areas of 
his diagrams. What he did was to invent a way of recording what was true 
about the class or term signified by a particular area. He said that for each area 
there are three possibilities:
	
1.	 If an area is left blank, this signifies possibility, not reality or exis­
tence. There may exist some members of that class or term, or there 
may not. 
	
2.	If an area has either an X or shading, this signifies either existence or 
the denial of existence, that is, non-existence:
	
a.	If an area has an X in it, this signifies that the type of thing represent­
ed by that particular area does exist. 
	
b.	If an area is shaded or colored, this signifies that no such kind of 
thing represented by that area exists. 
Thinking about a proposition in terms of the existence or nonexistence of 
certain kinds or classes of things—as determined by the subject and predicate 
of the proposition—helped Venn to symbolize diagrammatically what a cat­
egorical proposition means. 
A Proposition
Let’s consider a universal affirmative proposition (A), such as “All Texans 
are friendly,” or the general type of an A proposition, “All S is P.” Here is its 
Venn diagram:
The two symbols added to the diagram illustrate the meaning of a propo­
sition like “All Texans are friendly” by making two points. First, this diagram 
shades or colors area (2), which represents things that are S, because inside the 
P
S
X
A Proposition

Euler and Venn Diagrams of Propositions  
 199
S circle, but are not P, because they are outside the P circle. In our example, 
then, area (2) represents things that are Texans but not friendly. The diagram 
shows visually that there do not exist any Texans who are not friendly, which 
is part of what “All Texans are friendly” means. Second, putting an X in area 
(3) represents things that are both S and P, because this area falls within both 
circles. The X in area (3) means that there do exist Texans who also are friend­
ly. The combined effect of these two symbols is to say that there exist things 
that are Texans, and every one of the Texans is also friendly or “all Texans are 
friendly.” 
In this diagram, you can see visualized the issue of “existential import.” 
The existence of Texans is represented by the X in area (3). A logician who 
does not assume the existential import of an A proposition would leave the X 
out of the diagram. The problem with leaving out X, of course, is that a prop­
osition like “All Texans are friendly” is talking about real, existing Texans, not 
some purely imaginary Star Wars type of thing. 
In addition, the diagram makes two other points about A propositions. 
By leaving open area (4), which signifies things that are not Texans but are 
friendly (non-S but P), the diagram leaves open the possibility—but only the 
possibility—that there are things that are friendly but are not Texans, like peo­
ple from New York (where I used to live), or perhaps dogs. It does not say 
there really are such things, but neither does it say there are not such things. 
This point helps us see what we are claiming to know for sure in any given 
proposition and what we are not claiming to be sure about. 
Finally, the diagram lets us see that “All Texans are friendly” makes no 
claim whatsoever about things that are neither Texans nor friendly, which is 
what area (1) represents. 
There are other points one can see in the diagram, if one looks closely. In a 
couple of lessons, we will study conversion, which is reversing the subject and 
predicate of a proposition. Using the diagram, you can see that the converse 
of “All Texans are friendly” cannot be a universal affirmative proposition, but 
is limited to a particular affirmative proposition: “Some friendly people are 
Texans.” The reason why is visible in the proposition, because area (3) has an X 
in it, but area (4) is left open. This means there can be people who are friendly 
but not Texans. 

200  
 The Logic of Propositions
I Proposition
Now let’s turn to a particular affirmative proposition (I). Here is the Venn 
diagram of the general type of I proposition: “Some S is P.” 
This diagram includes the X of the diagram of an A proposition, which 
means there are Texans who are friendly. But it leaves off the hatching out 
or coloring out of area (2), the part of S that is not also P, in our example, a 
Texan who is not also friendly. The result is that the diagram shows that at 
least “some Texans are friendly,” which is the proposition being diagrammed. 
But the diagram leaves open two important possibilities. Unlike the A prop­
osition, the I proposition fails to exclude from existence Texans who are not 
friendly, because area (2) is left open. “Non-friendly Texans” may exist, but 
they may not. Also, like the A proposition, it leaves open the possibility that 
there are friendly people who are not Texans. 
E Proposition
Let’s turn now to the universal negative proposition (E), such as “No Tex­
ans are friendly” or, in general form, “No S is P.”
Like the A proposition, the E proposition has an X in one area and shad­
ing or coloring in another area; but in contrast with A, the areas are reversed. 
P
S
X
I Proposition
P
S
X
E Proposition

Euler and Venn Diagrams of Propositions  
 201
First, it asserts the existence of Texans who are not friendly (S is not P). But 
from this assertion alone we don’t know the quantity of the proposition—
whether it is saying all Texans are not friendly or some Texans are not friendly. 
In order to exclude even the possibility of any Texan also being friendly, area 
(3) is shaded or colored. There cannot exist things that are both Texans and 
friendly people. The E proposition, however, does leave open the possibility of 
friendly people who are not Texans, in area (4). The fact that Texans are not 
friendly does not exclude Iowans, for example, from being friendly. 
O Proposition
Finally, let’s turn to the O proposition. An example is, “Some Texans are 
not friendly,” which has the general form “Some S is not P.”
If we compare the O with the E proposition, the difference is nicely cap­
tured in their two diagrams. The E proposition excludes any possibility of 
finding Texans who are also friendly. The O proposition is different on this 
point. Area (3) is blank, so it is possible that there exist Texans who are friend­
ly. The other feature of the E proposition is retained. The X in area (2) means 
that there do exist Texans who are not friendly. Finally, like the E proposition, 
the O leaves open the possibility that there can be friendly people who are not 
Texans, for area (4) lies wholly outside the circle of Texans.
Primary Sources
John Venn (1834–1923), Symbolic Logic (1881), reprinted 1971.
P
S
X
O Proposition

202  
 The Logic of Propositions
Problem Set 17: Euler and Venn Diagrams of Propositions
P
S
A Proposition
P
S
E Proposition
P
S
I Proposition
P
S
O Proposition
Euler Diagrams

Euler and Venn Diagrams of Propositions  
 203
Venn Diagrams
P
S
X
A Proposition
P
S
X
O Proposition
P
S
X
E Proposition
P
S
X
I Proposition

204  
 The Logic of Propositions
Learning to Draw Diagrams of Propositions
Instructions
Create Euler and Venn diagrams of the following propositions:
	
1.	All Texans are friendly.
	
2.	Some Texans are friendly.
	
3.	No Texans are friendly.
	
4.	Some Texans are not friendly.
	
5.	None of the chimpanzees have been fed.
	
6.	All airplanes are human artifacts.
	
7.	Some citizens are uninvolved.
	
8.	Most citizens vote in federal elections.
	
9.	Some friends of ours were not at the game.
	 10.	All truck drivers have taken a special course.
	 11.	The animals in that part of the zoo have not been fed.
	 12.	Socrates was a philosopher.
	 13.	Not all the tires on my car are worn.
	 14.	It is not polite to blow your nose at the table.
	 15.	He will perish by the sword who lives by the sword.
	 16.	Cavalier King Charles spaniels are beautiful dogs.

Opposition
Lesson 18
Opposition
The Essentials
Opposing Concepts and Opposing Propositions
Consider this ethical proposition: “All just people are honest.” What is 
its opposite? Now opposites are not just different from each other; they are 
directly set off against each other based on some criterion. If you concentrate 
on the content of this proposition, you probably will focus on the two terms of 
the proposition: “just people” and “honest people.” And the reason for doing 
so is that, like many ideas in ethics, both terms have concepts that oppose 
them: “unjust” is opposed to “just” and “dishonest” to “honest. The opposi­
tion between these two pairs of terms is an opposition between concepts that 
are incompatible with each other, like large vs. small, or loud vs. quiet, or black 
vs. white, up to and including the most universal and fundamental opposing 
concepts, is vs. is not. We saw in Lesson 12 that every categorical proposition 
includes content, as found in its two terms or concepts, which is sometimes 
called its “matter,” but also has structure, as found in how the terms are related 
to each other, as an A, I, E, or O proposition, which is sometimes called the 
proposition’s “form.” What is the opposite of our proposition, when we con­
centrate on its content or matter? If we take the opposing terms in “All just 
people are honest” and put them together, the opposing proposition might be 
“All unjust people are dishonest,” a very strong claim. Or perhaps the opposite 
205

206  
 The Logic of Propositions
is “Some unjust people are dishonest.” Which of these two plausible answers is 
correct? Or is there another answer we haven’t even thought of yet? There is 
a definite answer, but we’ll have to wait until Lesson 20 to find out. The rea­
son is that there is a difference between opposing concepts or terms, which we 
covered a bit when treating conceptualization, the first act of the mind, and 
opposing propositions, which is our concern here in considering the second 
act of the mind. The first kind of opposition is that of opposing concepts or terms. 
Unfortunately, focusing only on the terms involved does not give us a direct 
answer to our question about opposing propositions.
Here, however, we are concerned with this second kind of opposition, 
opposing propositions, as distinct from opposing terms; and here we need to 
focus on the structure or form of the proposition, rather than just on the con­
tent of its terms. What is the proposition opposing our A proposition: “All just 
people are honest”? The answer most people give is the E proposition “No just 
people are honest,” because if our original proposition is true, this one must 
be false, and truth is the opposite of falsity. But if “All just people are honest” 
is true, doesn’t the O proposition also have to be false: “Some just people are 
not honest”? Yes! Now we have two opposites of our initial A proposition. 
Which one is really the opposite proposition? The answer to this question is 
that both are opposites, but different kinds of opposites. In fact, if we focus on 
the structure of the propositions, there aren’t just two; there are three oppo­
sites of our original A proposition. Once Aristotle followed his intuition that 
logic concentrates on the form or structure of a proposition, he realized that 
structurally speaking there are three opposites to any categorical proposition.
Opposing Propositions: The Square of Opposition
The reason each categorical proposition has to have three kinds of op­
posites is that, when we look at their structure or form, there are only four 
kinds of propositions, which are determined by their two structural features, 
their quantity and quality, as we saw in Lesson 14. To illustrate these relations, 
logicians devised the “Square of Opposition.” In order to understand it, we 
can start with the four kinds of categorical propositions and then move to 
the three propositions that are opposed to each one of these four types. Since 
there are several kinds of opposing propositions, in order to avoid confusion 
Aristotle and his followers gave each of them a different name.

Opposition  
 207
The Four Kinds of Categorical Propositions
	A: 	All just people are honest.
	I: 	Some just people are honest.
	E: 	No just people are honest.
	O: 	Some just people are not honest.
The Names of the Five Kinds of Opposite Propositions 
Contradictories: A vs. O; E vs. I.
Contraries: A vs. E
Subcontraries: I vs. O.
Subalternates: A to I; E to O.
Subimplicants: I to A; O to E.
Five Different Kinds of Opposition
Let’s now look at each of the five kinds of formally opposed propositions 
in more detail, based on being opposed in quality, in quantity, or in both. For 
each kind, let’s start with an example.
Contradiction and Contradictory Propositions
Consider these two examples:	
 
A vs. O: “All just people are honest” vs. “Some just people are not 
honest.”
E vs. I: “No just people are honest” vs. “Some just people are honest.”
Both of these pairs of propositions are contradictories. Ask yourself these 
two questions: For each pair, if one of the propositions is true, what must the 
Square of Opposition
A
I
E
O

208  
 The Logic of Propositions
other one be: true, false, or you can’t be sure? Then ask: If one of the prop­
ositions is false, what about the other one: true or false or you can’t be sure? 
Contradictory propositions are found at the ends of the two diagonals of the 
square. They are opposites of each other to the maximum degree possible. This 
means they cannot both be true, and they cannot both be false. Therefore, if 
one proposition is true the other must be false; and if one proposition is false 
the other must be true. There is no middle ground between contradictories. 
The reason contradictory propositions are so strongly opposed can be 
seen by looking at the square. All the kinds of opposing propositions have 
the same subject term and the same predicate term. Contradictories differ 
as much as two propositions with the same subject and predicate can differ: 
they are opposed to each other in both quantity and quality. This is the reason 
we can know for sure that if one contradictory is true, the other must be false. 
And we can proceed in the opposite direction: if one is false, the other must 
be true. To make sure you understand this kind of opposition and the others 
to follow and don’t just memorize the point, it is a good idea to take several 
examples and think about them.
In sum, contradictory propositions are opposed in both quantity and quality. 
This is why they are incompatible in truth (they cannot both be true), and they 
are also incompatible in falsity (they cannot both be false).
Contrariety and Contrary Propositions
Ask yourself the same question about these two contrary propositions: If 
one proposition is true, what happens with the other proposition? And if one 
is false, what about the other one? 
A vs. E: “All just people are honest” vs. “No just people are honest.”
Contrary propositions are found along the top of the square. They strong­
ly oppose each other, but not to the maximum degree. If “All just people are 
honest” is true, it is impossible that “No just people are honest,” because we 
started with the assumption that all of them are honest. The contrary E prop­
osition must be false.
But what if “All just people are honest” is false? Is “No just people are 
honest” true or false or undetermined (you just don’t know)? The answer is 
undetermined. Why? All it takes for the A proposition to be false is one coun­
terexample, one just person who is not honest. But it is a long way from “some 
just person is not honest” (O) to “No just people are honest” (E). In fact, if 

Opposition  
 209
“All just people are honest” is false, there are two possibilities for its opposite. 
The first is that “No just people are honest” (E); but it is equally possible that 
“Some just people are honest” (I) and “Some just people are not honest” (O). 
Based solely on the falsity of the A proposition, we can’t know which of these 
two alternatives is correct. So here we must admit our ignorance and say, based 
on the falsity of A, that the truth or falsity of E is undetermined.
Looking at the square of opposition helps us see the reason. Contrary 
propositions are opposed to each other only in quality—affirmative vs. nega­
tive—not in quantity. Opposition in quality—affirmative vs. negative—is the 
reason they cannot both be true. But since they have the same quantity—both 
A and E are universal—they can both be false. If “All just people are honest” 
is false, however, the only thing we know for sure is that the contradictory, 
the particular O proposition “Some just people are not honest,” must be true, 
because this is what makes the A proposition false. To go beyond some just 
people to all just people (the subject of the E proposition) would be to go be­
yond the information we know for sure, based on the A proposition being 
false. 
In sum, contrary propositions are opposed in quality, but not in quantity. 
This is why they are incompatible in truth (they cannot both be true) but they 
are compatible in falsity (they can both be false).	
Subcontrariety, Subcontrary Propositions
Consider the following two subcontrary propositions. Ask yourself the 
same two questions: If one is true, what about the other; and if one is false, 
what about the other? Here you have to be careful. The question is not what 
can the truth status of the other proposition be, but what must its truth 
status be? 
I vs. O: “Some just people are honest” vs. “Some just people are 
not honest.” 
Subcontraries are found along the bottom of the square. Like contraries, 
these propositions are opposed in quality and the same in quantity. But since 
their quantity is particular, their relation to each other is different from con­
traries. Subcontraries can both be true, but they cannot both be false. You 
cannot draw a definite conclusion about one subcontrary based on the truth 
of the other; but if one is false you know for sure the other must be true. 

210  
 The Logic of Propositions
Looking at the square helps to see why. Let’s first consider the conse­
quences of an I proposition being true. If “Some just people are honest” is 
true, it is easy to see that “Some just people are not honest” also might be true. 
And quite often, when we say “some are” we are also thinking “and some are 
not.” But we only think this way because we have independent evidence for 
both propositions being true. But this is not the issue here. What we are con­
cerned with is whether, based only on the truth of the I proposition, you can 
be sure that “Some just people are not honest.” And we cannot be sure. Might 
be so, might not be so. Here the issue is whether we must draw a necessary in­
ference that, because the I proposition is true, and based solely on this point, 
the O proposition must be true. But the answer is that this conclusion isn’t 
necessary; this inference in invalid.
One way to see this point is to ask yourself how you come to know that 
“Some just people are honest.” You determine their honesty by coming to 
know them, one by one, and making the judgment that each is honest. Just 
because they are just doesn’t mean they also are honest; we have to determine 
whether a person has both of these two good traits or virtues—justice and 
honesty—independently of each other. 
Having looked at what happens if the I proposition is true, now let’s look 
at the consequences of the I proposition being false. What if “Some just peo­
ple are honest” is false? Here we need to ask ourselves what set of facts would 
make the proposition “some just people are honest” false. This proposition 
would be true if just one just person were honest. So the only way “Some just 
people are honest” could be false is if its contradictory, “No just people are 
honest,” (E) were true. But if an E proposition is true, then the particular O 
proposition lying under it also must also be true, since the particular propo­
sition is just a special case falling under the universal proposition. The result: 
if it is false that “Some just people are honest” it must be true that “some just 
people are not honest.” 
In sum, subcontraries are opposed in quality, but not in quantity. This is why 
they are compatible in truth (they can both be true) but they are incompatible in 
falsity (they cannot both be false). 
4. Subalternation, Subalternate Propositions 
Now let’s consider the two sides of the square. For contradictories, con­
traries, and subcontraries, it didn’t matter which proposition we start with; 
but for subalternates and subimplicants, the direction we’re going does mat­

Opposition  
 211
ter. Are we going from top to bottom or bottom to top on the square? In sub­
alternation, we are going down, from universal to particular. For the following 
two examples, ask yourself the same two questions as before: If the universal is 
true, what must the particular proposition be like; and if the universal is false, 
what must the particular be like?
A to I: Moving from “All just people are honest” to “Some just 
people are honest.”
E to O: Moving from “No just people are honest” to “Some just 
people are not honest.”
Subalternates and subimplicants are found along the sides of the square. 
Some logic textbooks do not have separate words for subalternates and su­
bimplicants, but it is helpful to use different terms because their logical re­
lations are quite different from each other. And some logic textbooks deny 
subalternation and subimplication to be oppositions, because they limit “op­
position” strictly to one proposition being true and the other being false. But 
if we base ourselves on the square, we can see that these two relations are 
found on the square and do differ based on whether one goes up or down the 
sides of the square. For the first three kinds of opposites, the order in which 
you compare them does not matter; but with subalternates and subimplicants 
the order in which you consider them does affect the truth value of the op­
posing proposition. In subalternate propositions you move from universal to 
particular in quantity, while the two propositions have the same quality. In 
subimplicant propositions, you move in the opposite direction, from partic­
ular to universal. 
For subalternates, if the universal proposition it true, then the particular 
proposition that lies under it on the square must also be true. This is easy to 
see, because the particular proposition is just a special case falling under the 
wider, universal proposition. If “All just people are honest” is true, then it 
clearly must be true that “Some just people are honest,” since some just people 
is just part of the larger group of all just people. 
On the other hand, if the universal is false, no conclusion can be drawn 
about its subalternate. For example, if “All just people are honest” were false, 
we don’t know just from its being false whether “Some just people are honest” 
is true or not. Once again, one of two alternatives must be true, but we don’t 
know which one: either some just people are honest and some are not (the 
most likely scenario); or it could be true that “No just people are honest.” 

212  
 The Logic of Propositions
Based on the falsity of the A proposition and on that alone, we are not be in 
a position to know for sure which of these two alternatives is true. The same 
logic applies to negative subalternates (E to O), though they are sometimes 
harder to analyze simply because they are negative.
In sum, for subalternates, if the universal proposition is true, the particular 
under it must be true; but if the universal is false, the universal is undetermined. 
5. Subimplication, Subimplicant Propositions
Finally, let’s move up the side of the square, from particular to universal; 
and we’ll ask the same question as before. Consider these two pairs. 	
 
I to A: Moving from “Some just people are honest” to “All just 
people are honest.”
O to E: Moving from “Some just people are not honest” to “No just 
people are honest.” 
Here again, the order in which one moves is absolutely important. Sub­
implicants are the reverse of subalternates. While in subordination we went 
downward from the universal to the particular proposition lying under it in 
the Square of Opposition, in subimplication we move upward from a partic­
ular proposition to the universal proposition standing over it, proceeding up 
the side of the square. 
If the particular proposition is true, the universal proposition above it is 
undetermined, because such reasoning moves beyond the information we 
started with, since a particular proposition covers only one or some instances 
of the universal. If it is true that “Some just people are honest,” we cannot 
know for sure, just from that statement, that “All just people are honest.” The 
universal proposition might be true; but then again it might not be. 
On the other hand, if we already know that the particular proposition is 
false, then the universal proposition standing over it also must be false. We 
can understand the reason if we ask ourselves what falsifies a universal propo­
sition. The answer is this: just one counter-example. And the false particular 
proposition provides that counterexample. If it is false that “Some just people 
are honest,” then we already would have enough information to know that it 
is also false that “All just people are honest,” because we already have the coun­
terexample. This example, however, is counterfactual, because there are just 
people who are also honest. Let’s turn to a more realistic example. Suppose 

Opposition  
 213
“Some of the people in the room are over sixty-five years old” is false because 
all of them are under sixty-five. Then what about the universal subimplicant 
“All the people in the room are over sixty-five years old.”? Here it is easy to 
see that the falsity of the particular (I) proposition is enough to falsify the 
universal (A) proposition, because just one person under sixty-five is enough 
to falsify the A proposition.
In sum, for subimplicants, if the particular proposition is true, the universal 
proposition is undetermined; but if the particular proposition is false, the univer­
sal must be false. 
Helpful Tools for Everyday Thinking
Using Counterexamples
If you suspect a universal proposition (A or E) is wrong because it is an 
exaggeration, you don’t have to go all the way to establish that the contrary 
universal proposition (E or A) is right. To show the universal proposition is 
false, all you have to do is show the contradictory particular proposition is 
true. This is called finding a counter-example, since just one case is enough to 
establish the truth of a particular proposition. For example, to show that “All 
just people are honest” is false, you only need to find one just person who is 
not honest. And the same thing is true for the E proposition. 
Using the Truth Values in the Table of Opposites
Truth Values in the Table of Opposites
Type of 
Opposition
If first 
proposition is
Then the second 
proposition is
Contradictories:
T
F
F
T
Contraries:
T
F
F
U
Subcontraries:
T
U
F
T
Subalternation:
T
T
F
U
Subimplication:
T
U
F
F
T = true proposition; F = false proposition; U = undetermined 
proposition, may be T or F.

214  
 The Logic of Propositions
Problem Set 18: Opposition
Definitions
Contradictories: A vs. O; E vs. I.
Contraries: A vs. E
Subcontraries: I vs. O.
Subalternates: A to I; E to O.
Subimplicants: I to A; O to E.
Learning to Recognize Different Kinds of Opposition 
Instructions 
(a) Name the kind of opposition between the first and second proposi­
tions. 
(b) Assume the first proposition is true or false as indicated. Is the second 
true, false, or undetermined?
	
1.	(T) Some tools are saws. Some tools are not saws.
	
2.	(T) All saws are tools. Some saws are not tools.
	
3.	(F) No saws are tools. Some saws are tools.
	
4.	(T) No tools are worthless. All tools are worthless.
	
5.	(F) No lawyers are dishonest. All lawyers are dishonest. 
	
6.	(T) Some axes are sharp. Some axes are not sharp.
	
7.	(F) Some elephants can fly. Some elephants cannot fly.
	
8.	(T) Some mosquitoes carry malaria. All mosquitoes carry malaria.
	
9.	(F) All mosquitoes carry malaria. Some mosquitoes carry malaria. 
	 10.	(T) Some of the Roman emperors were wise. None of the Roman em­
perors were wise.
Classical Square of Opposition
A
I
E
O

Opposition  
 215
	 11.	(T) Some of the Roman emperors were wise. Some of the Roman em­
perors were not wise.
	 12.	(T) Some of the Roman emperors were wise. All the Roman emperors 
were wise.
	 13.	(F) None of the Roman emperors were wise. All the Roman emperors 
were wise. 
	 14.	(T) All scouts know how to tie knots. Some scouts do not know how 
to tie knots.
	 15.	(F) Some scouts know how to tie knots. Some scouts do not know 
how to tie knots. 
	 16.	(T) Some of her scarves have been cleaned. All of her scarves have 
been cleaned.
	 17.	(T) Some of her scarves have been cleaned. Some of her scarves have 
not been cleaned.
	 18.	(F) Some of her scarves have not been cleaned. All of her scarves have 
been cleaned.
	 19.	(T) Some bluebonnets are pretty. All bluebonnets are pretty.
	 20.	(F) Some fish are warm blooded. All fish are warm blooded.
Creating Opposites 
Instructions 
(a) For the following propositions, create the kind of opposites indicated. 
(b) Given that the first proposition is true or false, as indicated, is each of 
the opposites T, F, or U?
1. (T) No hummingbird is slow.	
Contradictory:
	 	
Contrary:
2. (F) Some hummingbirds are large.	
Subimplicant:
	 	
Subcontrary:
3. (T) Some saws have fine teeth.	
Contradictory:
	 	
Subimplicant:
4. (T) Some songs are beautiful.	
Subcontrary:
	 	
Contradictory:
	 	
Subimplicant:

216  
 The Logic of Propositions
5. (T) Some politicians are dishonest.	
Subimplicant:
	 	
Subcontrary:
6. (F) All apples are red.	
Contradictory:	
	
	 	
Contrary:
7. (T) No giraffes are insects.	
Contradictory:
	 	
Subalternate:
8. (F) No computers are outdated.	
Contrary:
	 	
Contradictory:
9. (T) Some economies are changeable.	
Subimplicant:
	 	
Contradictory:
	 	
Subalternate:
10. (T) All apples are fruit.	
Contrary:
	 	
Subalternate:
Inferences Using Opposition 
Instructions
The following passages contain inferences you can analyze using the 
Square of Opposition. Consider valid those inferences that follow, based on 
the Square of Opposition; all the rest are invalid. 
(a) Identify the propositions, in order. Circle and number them, or write 
them out and number them. 
(b) Identify each inference—that is, each reasoning from one proposition 
to another. Number each inference. 
(c) Determine whether the inferences are valid; that is, does the truth sta­
tus given in the passage for the consequent proposition follow from the truth 
status given for the antecedent?
1. If it is true that all plants are living things, then it is false that some 
plants are not living things.
2. If it is true that no neutrons are charged subatomic particles, then it is 
false that some neutrons are charged subatomic particles, and it is also false 
that all neutrons are charged subatomic particles.

Opposition  
 217
3. If it is true that all hydrochloric acid is composed of hydrogen and chlo­
rine, then it is false that no hydrochloric acid is composed of hydrogen and 
chlorine. And from the latter statement it also follows that it is true that some 
hydrochloric acid is composed of hydrogen and chlorine. And further, if it is 
true that some hydrochloric acid is composed of hydrogen and chlorine, then 
it follows that it is true that all hydrochloric acid is composed of hydrogen 
and chlorine, which is where we started.
4. If it is false that some water is made up of hydrogen and chlorine, then 
it is false that all water is made up of hydrogen and chlorine, and it also fol­
lows from the first statement that it is true that no water is made up of hydro­
gen and chlorine. This conclusion also follows from the second statement. 
5. If it is true that all disposable contact lenses allow for natural tear flow, 
then it is false that some disposable contact lenses do not allow for natural 
tear flow. From the first statement, it also follows that it is false that some dis­
posable contact lenses allow for natural tear flow. And from the second state­
ment it is true that some disposable contact lenses allow for natural tear flow. 

Conversion
Lesson 19
Conversion 
Preliminaries
It may look like the exercises in Problem Set 18 are the kind of problems 
of interest only in a logic classroom, with no application to the wider world of 
practical or intellectual life. And the same criticism could be made of Problem 
Sets 19 and 20. But consider two points. First, while we have found several 
kinds of opposing propositions for our original proposition: “All just people 
are honest,” we haven’t solved the question of whether “All unjust people are 
dishonest” is its opposite, or whether its opposite is “Some unjust people are 
dishonest,” or some other proposition. Second, we all recognize that quite 
often we don’t understand the full meaning of what we are reading or saying 
or writing. Opposition helps us understand a proposition by seeing other con­
cepts or other propositions that are opposed to it. Conversion and obversion, 
by contrast, help us uncover that full meaning of a proposition by seeing its 
implications, seeing other propositions that are consistent with the original 
proposition, and other propositions that are inconsistent with the original 
one. 
For example, in Lesson 18 we saw that it is wrong to think that “some col­
lege students are moral” (I) necessarily implies that “some college students are 
not moral” (O), even though some people might think this inference is cor­
rect. And this is just one example among many. Lessons 19 and 20 are designed 
primarily to help us understand what we are saying, what others are saying, 
218

Conversion  
 219
and what we are reading. It is helpful to test the truth of the propositions and 
arguments we (and others) say by looking forward to the consequences of 
those claims and backward to their presuppositions. Opposition, conversion, 
and obversion help us to look in both directions. These techniques go all the 
way back to Socrates as he is presented in Plato’s early dialogues. 
There is a second benefit in becoming proficient in solving these kinds 
of problems, which will become more apparent when we get to the logic of 
the third act of the mind, beginning with Lesson 23. When we argue—that 
is, when we reason—sometimes it is necessary to change the form or struc­
ture of the propositions used as premises or conclusions of an argument, even 
when we keep the same terms. We need to do so in order to make sure the 
arguments we use are valid, because invalid arguments never can insure that 
our conclusions are true. Studying the square of opposition, conversion, and 
obversion is designed to develop our skills at changing around propositions 
to formulate correctly the premises we need for arguments, premises that pro­
duce valid arguments and true conclusions. 
Inferences: Valid and Invalid
The primary focus of logic is on the third act of the mind, the act of rea­
soning, when we use our mind to move from one point to another, especial­
ly when drawing a new conclusion based on information we already have. 
This process is also called “inferring” or “inference,” which comes from the 
Latin verb inferre, which originally meant to carry or bring something to or 
into or against something, as when Roman soldiers would bring their legion’s 
standard against an enemy when attacking them. Then Roman lawyers and 
philosophers (like Cicero) used “infer” to describe carrying a point in law or 
philosophy further, in order to draw a new conclusion. So logical inference 
means a movement of the mind in drawing a conclusion based on evidence. 
Now sometimes such conclusions are logical, when the conclusion follows 
from the premises or evidence. This is called a “valid” inference. But some­
times the conclusion does not follow from the premises, and to say it does is a 
mistake in reasoning. This is called an “invalid” inference. 
Sometimes we use the terms “valid” and “invalid” as synonyms for “true” 
and “false,” especially when we’re not quite sure the statement is true, but we 
think it is. We say, “That’s a valid point,” when what we mean is “I think it 
might be true, but I’m not sure,” or “I’ll consider the point.” But this is not the 

220  
 The Logic of Propositions
precise meaning “valid” has in logic, and can be misleading. “Valid” and “in­
valid,” as well as “true” and “false,” are technical terms with precise meanings. 
“True” and “false” concern propositions, and mean “the proposition does (or 
does not) comport with reality. But “valid” concerns reasoning and argument, 
and it means the conclusion we draw follows logically from the evidence or 
premises we have presented, while “invalid” means it does not. 
Our study of the third act of the mind, the logic of reasoning, will con­
centrate on distinguishing valid from invalid arguments. We will devote a lot 
of space to that subject later. The reason for bringing up the topics of infer­
ence and validity now is that in considering the square of opposition we have 
already begun to make inferences and to judge their validity. There are two 
kinds of inference. Logicians call them “immediate inference” and “mediate 
inference.” The term “mediate” comes from the Latin word medium, which 
means “middle,” which you already know from sizes—small, medium, large. 
A mediate inference is one that needs a middle or linking term in order to 
draw the conclusion. Most inferences are like this, and our study of the logic 
of the third act of the mind will concentrate on mediate inferences. An ex­
ample is this argument: all dogs are animals; and all animals are living things; 
so all dogs are living things. In this case, the common term “animals” is in the 
middle between “dogs” and “living things,” linking them together. If we don’t 
have such a middle term, we cannot draw the conclusion—at least, we cannot 
do so using this kind of reasoning. 
In studying the Square of Opposition, we have encountered a different 
kind of reasoning or inference, an immediate inference, one we can make, and 
make validly, without having to use a middle term. When using the square of 
opposites, our reasoning went directly from one proposition to another; no 
third proposition was involved, and no middle term was involved. The subject 
and predicate terms in the proposition with which we started were the same 
two terms found in the conclusion. We saw that sometimes we could not de­
termine whether the opposite proposition had to be true or had to be false, 
so in these cases no inference could be drawn. But sometimes we could. We 
saw that, if an A proposition is true, such as “all horses are living things,” then 
its contrary E proposition, “no horses are living things,” has to be false. This 
inference is valid, and it is an immediate inference, broadly speaking, one that 
proceeds directly from one proposition to another. 
While a true A proposition, however, implies that its contrary E prop­
osition must be false, this inference is not valid in the technical and precise 

Conversion  
 221
meaning of the term “inference” in logic. Speaking precisely, a valid inference 
is one in which a true conclusion is derived from a true premise. The reason 
logicians use this narrow definition of “inference” is that inferences have a 
purpose: to draw new, true conclusions, since the whole purpose of logic is 
to increase our store of true conclusions, not false or undetermined ones. A 
valid inference, strictly defined, is reasoning in which, if the premises are true, 
then it follows that the conclusion must necessarily be true. On the square 
most of our “inferences” did not go from one true proposition to anther true 
proposition. 
But there was one case on the square of opposition where we do infer a 
new, true proposition directly from another true proposition. Do you know 
which one it is? It is subalternation, which moves from a true A proposition 
to a true I proposition, or from a true E proposition to a true O proposition. 
See if you can figure out why.
The Essentials 
Conversion
In this lesson, we’ll look at conversion, another kind of immediate infer­
ence, then in Lesson 20 obversion. Both involve starting with a single categor­
ical proposition and manipulating it to derive a second proposition validly 
from the first one. If the initial proposition (the premise) is true, the conclu­
sion will have to be true. 
Conversion is interchanging the subject and predicate terms of a propo­
sition in order to form a new proposition. But there is an important proviso 
we must add. The new proposition (we can call it the “conclusion” or the 
“converse”) must follow validly from the first one (we’ll call it the “premise”). 
To convert the premise validly, as we’ll see, we have to take care to get the 
quantity of the converse correct, which means that we need to be careful not 
to claim to know more in the converse than we knew in the premise. For if we 
overstep the bounds of the information contained in the premise, our inference 
will be invalid. 
Since there are four kinds of categorical propositions, we will consider 
the converse of each of them in turn, as we did when beginning our study of 
categorical propositions, in Lesson 13. Let’s look at the first four problems in 
Problem Set 18: 

222  
 The Logic of Propositions
	
1.	All Texans are Americans. (A)
	
2.	Some Texans are friendly. (I)
	
3.	No Texan is a New Yorker. (E)
	
4.	Some animals are not air-breathing. (O)
Converting A Propositions
The task of finding the converse of “All Texans are Americans” requires us 
to keep the same two terms, but interchange them. In the converse, Americans 
will become the subject and Texans will become the predicate. In conversion, 
we are not allowed to change either of the two terms. This also means we can’t 
change the quality of the proposition from affirmative to negative, because 
the new proposition—“No Americans are Texans”—would be false, an inval­
id inference. The converse must be an affirmative proposition. 
Our first try at conversion might well produce this result: “All Americans 
are Texans.” But we can see immediately that this is false, because there are 
Americans in the other forty-nine states. But to be valid, the converse of a true 
proposition must be true. But if we reduce the quantity to “Some Americans 
are Texans,” we get the right answer. But why it is right? 
To understand the reason the converse must be “Some Americans are Tex­
ans,” let’s focus on quantity. The quantity of “All Texans are Americans” is 
universal, because the subject Texans is universal. But how many Americans 
does the proposition include? You might be inclined to say the proposition 
should include all Americans, just like it includes all Texans. But let’s think 
this over carefully. In “All Texans are Americans,” the copula “are” means that 
the Texans referred to are the same as, or identical with the Americans we are 
referring to. They are the very same people, but with two distinct traits—Tex­
an and American. But the Texans who are the same people as Americans do 
not exhaust the number of Americans; there are many more Americans than 
Texans. In “all Texans are Americans,” the Americans must be only some Amer­
icans. Since we started off asserting something only about some Americans, 
when we produce the converse, Americans in the subject must only be “some” 
of them, particular, not universal. Otherwise, we would have stepped beyond 
the limit of our knowledge, since in the original A proposition we only made 
an assertion about some Americans, not all of them. The valid converse of an 
A proposition, then, must be an I proposition.
You can see visually why an A converts to an I if you look at the Venn 
diagram of an A proposition. There is an X only in part of the P circle. This 

Conversion  
 223
means the A proposition asserts that only some P’s exist. So when you reverse 
S and P in the converse proposition, you can see from the X still being in only 
part of the P circle, that the converse can only be about some P’s. 
Conclusion: “All S is P” (A) converts to “some P is S” (I). 
We have learned something else that is very important. Not only does the 
subject term of a categorical proposition have a quantity (which is the quan­
tity of the proposition); but the predicate term has a quantity, as well. So in 
converting any categorical proposition, we will have to take care not to over­
extend the quantity of either of the terms, subject or predicate. 
Converting I Propositions
Converting I propositions is easier. In the proposition “Some Texans are 
friendly,” the subject term is explicitly particular, and our reasoning about the 
quantity of the predicate of an A proposition also applies to I propositions. 
“Some Texans are friendly” identifies some Texans with some friendly people; 
but only with some of the friendly people, since there are many more friendly 
people than Texans. The predicate of an I proposition, then, like that of an A 
proposition, must be particular. The I proposition “Some Texans are friendly” 
converts into another I proposition: “Some friendly people are Texans.”
Conclusion: “Some S is P” (I) converts to “some P is S” (I).
We should also take note of the following consequence, which will be im­
portant when we take up categorical syllogisms: Every affirmative categorical 
proposition has a predicate that is particular in quantity. 
Converting E Propositions
In addressing the conversion of negative propositions, we should begin by 
pausing to think about what a negative proposition is asserting. If affirmative 
propositions bring together to unify or identify their subject and predicate 
terms (there are many ways to describe this connection), negative proposi­
tions, like “no Texan is a New Yorker,” do the opposite. They take apart or 
distinguish or divide off or separate all Texans from New Yorkers. But from 
how many New Yorkers? The answer is: from all of them. The predicate of 
such a negative proposition must be universal in quantity, otherwise we hav­
en’t really asserted a negative proposition at all. 

224  
 The Logic of Propositions
While we can see from examples like this one that the converse of an E 
proposition must be another E proposition, we can also see this if we look 
at the form of an E proposition. Let’s look in particular at how the quality 
of the proposition affects the quantity of the predicate of our E proposition: 
“No Texan is a New Yorker.” We can see that the predicate must be universal, 
since we see that Texans and New Yorkers are two completely separate groups. 
If this proposition didn’t separate all the Texans from all New Yorkers, that 
would mean that the Texans are separate only from some New Yorkers, but 
not from other New Yorkers. But consider these other New Yorkers. If the 
Texans are not separate from them, then you can’t really say, “No Texans are 
New Yorkers,” because the Texans might be the same as these other New York­
ers. This result simply denies the meaning of “No Texans are New Yorkers.” 
The one and only way truly to separate the Texans from the New Yorkers is to 
separate them from all New Yorkers. The negative quality of an E proposition 
simply requires that its predicate must be universal.
When we convert any E proposition, then, like “No Texans are New York­
ers,” the converse must be negative in quality, because we don’t have any in­
formation connecting any Texans with any New Yorkers. The universal subject 
“Texans” must remain universal, and the universal predicate “New Yorkers” 
also must remain universal. The converse must be an E proposition: “No New 
Yorkers are Texans.” 
And we can find additional support if we remember the Euler diagram 
or the Venn diagram of an E proposition: all of S is separated from all of P.
Conclusion: “No S is P” (E) converts into “No P is S.” (E) 
One final word. In seeing why an E proposition converts into another E 
proposition, we can conclude that every negative proposition must have a uni­
versal predicate. The only way any negative proposition can mean what it says 
is for it to separate absolutely all of the predicate class from the subject class, 
whether that subject is particular or universal. In short, the predicate of all 
negative propositions, both I and O propositions, must be universal. 
Converting O Propositions
Problem Set 19 has two problems we can consider when trying to convert 
O propositions, one that looks easy, but isn’t, and the other that looks hard, 
but helps us see the reason for the correct answer. The examples are: “Some 
Texans are not friendly” and “Some animals are not air-breathing.”

Conversion  
 225
Let’s begin with “Some Texans are not friendly.” This is a negative propo­
sition, so the converse will have to be negative. When we reverse subject and 
predicate, an easy answer for the converse would be, “Some friendly people 
are not Texans.” The reason this answer looks easy and correct is that this 
proposition is negative, like the first; we have reversed the subject and predi­
cate, as we must in conversion; it is a particular proposition, like the premise; 
and, above all, it is true, like the premise. We have gone from a true O prop­
osition to another true O proposition. What could be wrong? The problem 
is that coming up with a new, true O proposition is not enough. Conversion 
is a form of inference; so the converse must follow validly from the premise. 
The problem is that from “some Texans are not friendly,” and from this prop­
osition only, you cannot validly derive “Some friendly people are not Texans.” 
Why not?
There are two answers to this question. The first comes from looking at 
the formal structure of O propositions, remembering that the predicate of a 
negative proposition must be universal. When we apply this principle, the 
problem becomes clear. In “Some Texans are not friendly,” “Texans” is par­
ticular and “friendly people” is universal, because all of the predicate friendly 
people have to be separated from or denied of the subject, some Texans. The 
predicate of any negative proposition must be universal in order for the prop­
osition to be negative at all. When we reverse the subject and predicate of 
“some Texans are not friendly,” “friendly people” becomes particular. This is 
fine, because if we know something about all friendly people, then we can 
draw a conclusion about some friendly people. But what about the other term, 
“Texans”? In the original proposition (or premise), we began knowing about 
some Texans, but when we reverse the subject and predicate terms in the con­
verse, we claim to know something about all Texans. Why? Because “Texans” 
has become the predicate of a negative proposition. This inference is impossi­
ble, because we have overstepped the bounds of our knowledge. We started 
with a particular term, “some Texan,” but tried to draw a conclusion about all 
Texans. Our conclusion is invalid. 
The first answer to the question is based upon using the logical principle 
that the predicate of a negative proposition must be universal. The reason for 
turning to the second example, “Some animals are not air-breathing,” is be­
cause we can see that this O proposition cannot be converted without making 
use of this logical principle, though it still holds for this proposition as well 
as the previous one. Here we need to clarify what the proposition “Some an­

226  
 The Logic of Propositions
imals are not air-breathing” means. “Animals” means things that have natural 
bodies, are alive, have senses that make them aware of the world around them, 
and can move from place to place, such as birds and cats, eels, and spiders. 
By “air-breathing” is meant literally, a thing that breathes air directly, which 
requires lungs. With this clarification, you will quickly recognize the origi­
nal proposition, “Some animals are not air-breathing,” is true. Fish are like 
this. They have gills that allow them to take in oxygen from the water, not 
from air. Now what happens when you try to convert “Some animals are not 
air-breathing”? The only possible answer would be “Some air-breathing things 
are not animals.” But this is clearly false, because everything that breathes 
air, where breathing means doing so with lungs, is an animal. The content of 
“Some animals are not air-breathing” shows that this proposition cannot be 
converted.
Looking at the Venn diagram also shows that an O proposition cannot 
be converted. The diagram has an X in the part of the S circle outside the P 
circle. In the premise of this example, the only things that one knows exist are 
animals that do not breathe air. Now look at the P circle. The premise says 
nothing at all about things in the P circle—in this case, things that breathe 
air. But any converse we might try would have to have an X somewhere in the 
P circle, otherwise we would have made no assertion about the subject of the 
converse, P, in this case, things that breathe air. In short, since the premise 
does not assert that any things that breathe air exist, at all, we cannot arbitrari­
ly invent air-breathers that exist for the conclusion. About things that breathe 
air, in sum, “nothing in, so nothing out.” 
Conclusion: “Some S is not P” cannot be converted validly. 
Quantity of Subject and Predicate Terms of Categorical Propositions
Type of proposition
Subject
Predicate
	
A
universal
particular
	
I
particular
particular
	
E
universal
universal
	
O
particular
universal
This chart will become extremely important when we take up categorical 
syllogisms.

Conversion  
 227
Problem Set 19: Conversion 
Converting Categorical Propositions
Instructions 
Convert the following propositions by validly exchanging the subject and 
predicate terms, if possible.
	
1.	All Texans are Americans.
	
2.	Some Texans are friendly.
	
3.	No Texan is a New Yorker.
	
4.	Some Texans are not friendly.
	
5.	Some animals are not air-breathing.
	
6.	No man dies twice.
	
7.	Some cats are pretty.
	
8.	Some dogs are not pretty.
	
9.	No prudent person is reckless.
	 10.	Mesquites are slow-growing trees. 
	 11.	All snow is white.
	 12.	Most snow is not sticky.
	 13.	Some of the plates are broken. 
	 14.	Some parents are not nice to their kids.
	 15.	Gemstones are often used in jewelry.
	 16.	Not all sophists are recognized for what they are.
	 17.	Frogs have powerful hind legs.
	 18.	Flatterers will get nowhere with me.
	 19.	“All science is organized knowledge.” (Attributed to Herbert Spencer, 
19th-cen. American philosopher, proponent of “Social Darwinism”) 
	 20.	“No gifted eye can exhaust the significance of any object.” (Thomas 
Carlyle, 19th-cen. British essayist, On Heroes, “Lecture 3: The Hero 
as Poet”)
	 21.	“All good things which exist are the fruits of originality.” (John 
Stuart Mill, 19th-cen. British philosopher, On Liberty, chapter 3)
	 22.	“What is fitting is honorable, and what is honorable is fitting.” 
(Cicero, 1st-cen. b.c. Roman lawyer and philosopher, On Duties)
	 23.	“Beauty is truth, and truth beauty.” (John Keats, 19th-cen. British 
poet, “Ode on a Grecian Urn”)
	 24.	“All you can say of [an idea] then, either that ‘it is useful because it is 

228  
 The Logic of Propositions
true,’ or that ‘it is true because it is useful.’ Both these phrases mean 
exactly the same thing, namely that here is an idea that gets fulfilled 
and can be verified.” (William James, 19th-cen. American philosopher, 
Pragmatism, Lecture 6) Hint: To understand this argument, rewrite 
the two propositions in quotation marks, removing “because” and 
making each into a categorical proposition. Then ask if James has con­
verted the first proposition successfully in producing the second. 
	 25.	“He [Edmund Burke] referred habitually to principles. He was a sci­
entific statesman; and therefore a seer. For every principle contains 
in itself the germs of a prophecy. And, as the prophetic power is the 
essential privilege of science, so the fulfillment of its oracles supplies 
the outward, and (to men in general) the only test of its claim to the 
title.” [Convert the underlined sentence.] (Samuel Taylor Coleridge, 
19th-cen. English poet, Biographia Literaria, chapter 10)
	 26.	“God helps those who help themselves.” (Mistakenly attributed to the 
Bible, this idea has been expressed by several, including Algernon Syd­
ney, d. 1683, English politician; Ben Franklin, American patriot, from 
Poor Richard’s Almanac (1757); Sophocles and Aesop, Greek writers 
[its oldest sources].)

Obversion
Lesson 20
Obversion
The Essentials	
What Is Obversion?
In Lesson 18, we saw how to convert a proposition validly so that, when 
reversing subject and predicate, the new proposition must be true if the old 
proposition is true. We saw that, in conversion, the quality of the proposition 
remains the same: affirmative propositions convert to affirmative ones, nega­
tive propositions convert to negative ones. But sometimes, when trying to un­
derstand or develop arguments, we need to change the quality of a proposition 
in order to get another proposition that is more useful to the argument we are 
trying to develop. We may need to switch between affirmative and negative 
propositions. This kind of immediate inference is called “obversion.” 
In obversion, changing the quality of a proposition must be done validly. 
If an obversion is invalid, then the truth of the original proposition cannot 
ensure that the obverse is true. And when that happens, if we use the invalid 
obverse in a syllogism, we can’t be sure the conclusion will be true.
Since the purpose of obversion is to change the quality of a proposition 
validly, obversion involves three things: (a) We need to keep the subject of the 
proposition the same. An obverted proposition (also called the obverse) is 
about the same subject as the original proposition. (b) We need to change the 
quality of the proposition to its opposite, from affirmative to negative or from 
229

230  
 The Logic of Propositions
negative to affirmative. (c) Since the subject must remain the same while the 
quality changes, we need to change the predicate to its opposite, from P to ~P, 
to obvert a proposition validly.
Keeping the subject the same is not a problem. And changing the quality 
to its opposite is normally straightforward, since we move from “is” to “is 
not” or the reverse. But in changing P to non-P sometimes we need to be 
careful. The easiest way would be simply to add the prefix “non-” to a positive 
predicate (P to non-P) or the reverse. For example, “mortal” would become 
“non-mortal” or “immortal.” But quite often such a mechanical procedure is 
not accurate. Suppose we are choosing paint colors and decide we don’t want 
the wall in the room to be “white.” There is a wide range of options open to us, 
since black, yellow, and blue are all “non-white.” We need to think about what 
the appropriate and realistic opposite predicate might be. If you are painting 
the living room, you probably don’t want the walls black. The context of the 
proposition often helps to determine the appropriate opposite of the original 
predicate term. 
Since there are four kinds of categorical propositions, we should consider 
each kind, as we did when converting propositions. Let’s consider the following: 
	
1.	All sports are strenuous. (A)
	
2.	No human is perfect. (E)
	
3.	Some Texans are honest. (I)
	
4.	Some Texans are not honest. (O)
Obverting A Propositions
In considering “All sports are strenuous,” the first term we might think 
of is “non-strenuous.” Technically this answer would not be an error; but it 
would not be the most accurate answer, because in standard English, the nor­
mal opposite of “strenuous,” when we just want to negate the word, is “un­
strenuous.” But there is a much better term, one that is expressed positively: 
“easy.” By definition, the obverse must keep the same subject and must be a 
negative proposition, since the original was affirmative. Will the obverse also 
be a universal proposition? Yes. We are looking for a universal, negative prop­
osition, one whose subject is sports. We learned earlier that the standard form 
for universal negative propositions is No S is P. So the first part of the obverse 
should be, “No sports are. . . .” To find the predicate, we need to remember 
that we are trying to reason validly. If we simply were to keep the predicate 

Obversion  
 231
term as it is, then the new proposition would be, “No sports are strenuous,” 
which can’t be correct, since it is the contrary of the original, and therefore 
false, if the original is true. So, we need to change “strenuous” to its opposite. 
We might first think of “No sports are non-strenuous,” but this is not normal 
English, and “non-strenuous” isn’t precise. “No sports are easy” (E) is accurate 
and meaningful, the best answer. 
Conclusion: “All S is P” (A) obverts to “No S is ~P” (E).
Obverting E Propositions
Next let’s consider obverting an E proposition, like “No human is perfect.” 
By definition, the obverse has the same subject and must be affirmative: “All 
humans are. . . .” The predicate can’t be “perfect,” since that would produce a 
contrary proposition, which would have to be false. Since “imperfect” is the 
opposite of “perfect,” the obverse must be “All humans are imperfect.” 
Conclusion: “No S is P” (E) obverts to “All S is ~P” (A).
Obverting I Propositions
Now let’s look for the obverse of an I proposition, such as “Some Texans 
are honest.” Again, by definition, the subject is “Texans,” and the quality must 
be negative: “Some Texans are not. . . .” The predicate term must be the oppo­
site of the original; it must be dishonest. The obverse, then, is “Some Texans 
are not dishonest.” 
It is true that the sentence “Some Texans are not dishonest” has a weaker 
connotation than “Some Texans are honest,” but the logical force of the two 
propositions is the same. You can see this visually by comparing the Venn 
diagrams of the two propositions. 
Conclusion: “Some S is P” converts to “Some S is not ~P” (O). 
Obverting O Propositions
Finally, consider an O proposition, like “Some Texans are not kind.” The 
obverse must have “Texans” as its subject and be a particular affirmative prop­
osition, taking the form “Some Texans are. . . . ” Now the opposite of “kind” 
is “unkind”; the obverse of the original proposition will be “Some Texans are 

232  
 The Logic of Propositions
unkind.” This proposition means exactly the same thing as the original propo­
sition, “Some Texans are not kind.” The only difference is the negative feature 
of the original proposition in the copula (“is not”), but in the obverse it is in 
the predicate (“unkind”). 
Conclusion: “Some S is not P” converts to “Some S is ~P” (I).
Summary: Valid Obversions
	
1.	A proposition obverts to an E proposition.
	
2.	E proposition obverts to an A proposition.
	
3.	I proposition obverts to an O proposition.
	
4.	O proposition obverts to an I proposition. 
A Deeper Look 
Finding the Right ~P
As we have seen, the original predicate term may very well have more than 
one opposite. In this case, we will have to think carefully and choose the most 
appropriate opposite. Consider “All religious people are theists.” Let’s focus 
on its predicate and subject. Now “theist,” found in the predicate, is a word 
favored by philosophers and theologians (and logicians). It comes from the 
Greek word theos, which means “god.” A theist is a person who says that some 
sort of god actually exists. Nowadays, most theists are also monotheists, be­
cause they say only one God exists, but there are several other kinds of theists 
(including polytheists, who say that many gods exist). Let’s simplify the prob­
lem by sticking to the contemporary options: one God or no God. 
The subject of the original proposition is “religious people.” To get a true 
proposition for the obverse we have to change the predicate term, “theist,” to 
its opposite. We might think of “non-theist,” but just adding “non-” to the 
original predicate is usually not the best choice, because it’s not precise. In this 
case there are two realistic choices for the opposite of “theist.” The stronger 
option is claiming there is no God; God does not exist. A person who thinks 
this way is an atheist. This word is formed by adding the Greek privative prefix 
“a” to the Greek word for a god (theos). The weaker option is claiming not to 
say either there is or is not a God. Such a person fundamentally says, “I don’t 
know” or “I don’t think.” One general Greek word for knowing or thinking is 

Obversion  
 233
gnosis; the English term for someone who doesn’t know is “agnostic,” literally 
“not knowing” or “not thinking.” Since the term “theist” concerns the object 
of our thought, not the thinking about that object, the better obverse of “All 
religious people are theists” seems to be “No religious person is an atheist.” 
This is especially true if the way the agnostic lives his life is no different from 
the way an atheist does—that is, without reference to God. 
For a famous argument about these three options—theism, agnosticism, 
atheism—and how you live your life, look at the quotation from Blaise Pascal 
in PS 20, which is known as “Pascal’s Wager.” 
Advanced Manipulations
The kinds of immediate inferences do not have to end with one conver­
sion or obversion. These two manipulations can be combined in sequence 
with each other by alternating conversion and obversion. This produces three 
more kinds of results, called “partial contraposition,” “full contraposition,” 
and “inversion.” While you don’t need to become fully adept at these more 
advanced manipulations, you should know about them. And if you like word 
games, you probably will enjoy playing around with them. 
While you can follow any sequence you want, in order to get all the way 
to what is called the “inverse” of a proposition, you need to alternate obvert­
ing and converting. The sequence varies, depending on whether your initial 
proposition is affirmative or negative. The abbreviations used in the following 
text are: o = obverse and c = converse.
	
1.	For universal affirmative propositions, the sequence is “ococ,” and the 
inferences to the inverse are valid. 
Original proposition:
Obverse: Obvert the original proposition. [o] 
Partial Contraposition: Next, convert the result. [oc]
Full Contraposition: Next, obvert the result again. [oco]
Inversion: Next, convert the result again [ococ]. 
	
2.	For universal negative propositions, the sequence is “coco,” and the 
inferences to the inverse are valid.
Original proposition:
Converse: Convert the original proposition. [c]
Partial Contraposition: Next, obvert the result. [co]

234  
 The Logic of Propositions
Full Contraposition: Next, convert the result again. [coc]
Inversion: Finally, obvert the results. [coco]
Example 1. Starting with a universal affirmative proposition: 
Original proposition: All sports cars are troublesome. (A)
Obverse: No sport cars are untroublesome. (E) [o]
Partial contrapositive: No untroublesome things are sport cars. 
(E) [oc]
Full contrapositive: All untroublesome things are non-sport 
cars. (A) [oco]
Inverse: Some non-sport cars are untroublesome. (I) [ococ]
Example 2. Starting with a universal negative proposition: 
Original proposition: No good people are vicious. (E)
Converse: No vicious people are good people. (E) [c]
Partial contrapositive: All vicious people are bad people. 
(A) [co]
Full contrapositive: Some bad people are vicious people. 
(I) [coc]
Inverse: Some bad people are not virtuous people. (O) [coco]
Every multi-step manipulation must produce a valid immediate inference. 
As you can probably guess, for many propositions you can’t go through the 
whole sequence.
Example 3. Starting with a particular affirmative proposition:
Original proposition: Some trees are beautiful. (I)
Obverse: Some trees are not ugly. (O) [o]
Partial contrapositive: Can’t be done; there is no valid converse 
of an O proposition. [oc]
Example 4. Starting with a particular negative proposition.
Original proposition: Some trees are not beautiful. (O)
Obverse: Some trees are ugly. (I) [o]
Partial contrapositive: Some ugly things are trees. (I) [oc]
Full contrapositive: Some ugly things are not non-trees. 
(O) [oco]
Inverse: Can’t be done; there is no valid converse of an 
O proposition. [ococ]

Obversion  
 235
We can see, therefore, there are no valid inverses for particular proposi­
tions, whether affirmative or negative. But you can go part of the way down 
this sequence. 
The Opposite of “All Just People Are Honest”
We began Lesson 18 by considering the opposite of “All just people are 
honest.” We have seen that there are three propositions that oppose this prop­
osition, since opposing propositions have the same subject term and predicate 
term as the original. The contrary (“No just people are honest”) and contra­
dictory (“Some just people are not honest”) of this proposition must be false. 
But its subalternate (“Some just people are honest”) must be true. 
We also can derive a new proposition whose terms are the opposites of the 
terms contained in the original proposition, one that is consistent with our 
original proposition, because it is derived from it by using conversion and ob­
version. We derive this kind of opposite proposition through devising its in­
verse, in which each term is the opposite of the original term that corresponds 
to it: “just” changing to “unjust” and “honest” changing to “dishonest.” 
Original Proposition: All just people are honest. (A)
Obverse: No just people are dishonest. (E), by o. 
Partial Contrapositive: No dishonest people are just. (E) by oc.
Full Contrapositive: All dishonest people are unjust. (A) by oco.
Inverse: Some unjust people are dishonest. (I) by ococ.
Of course, All unjust people are dishonest (A), would be an invalid infer­
ence from the full contrapositive. 
Problem Set 20: Obversion and Advanced Manipulations
Obversion
Instructions
Obvert the following propositions by changing them to the opposite qual­
ity, while keeping the same subject term. 
	
1.	All sports are strenuous. 
	
2.	No human is perfect.
	
3.	Some Texans are honest.

236  
 The Logic of Propositions
	
4.	Some Texans are not honest.
	
5.	Some legends are not credible.
	
6.	Some caves are habitable.
	
7.	Most solids are not crystals.
	
8.	All games are organized.
	
9.	No humans are immortal.
	 10.	Every tulip is planted.
	 11.	All blue jays are loud.
	 12.	Some hawks are quick. 
	 13.	Every iguana is harmless.
	 14.	Some ants are wingless.
	 15.	All religious people are theists.
	 16.	Purple is a darker color than yellow.
	 17.	Giraffes are taller than humans. 
	 18.	Socrates was wise. 
	 19.	All the battlements of the castle are manned.
	 20.	None of the wagons are non-horse-drawn.
	 21.	“No man is a hero to his valet.” (Madame de Cornuel, 17th-cen. 
French hostess of a famous salon)
	 22.	“All men are weak.” (W. S. Landor, 19th-cen. English poet)
	 23.	“All necessary truths come from clear and distinct ideas.” (After 
Descartes)
	 24.	“All science is organized knowledge.” (Attributed to Herbert Spencer, 
19th-cen. American philosopher, proponent of “Social Darwinism”)
	 25.	“Let us examine this point of view and declare: ‘Either God exists, or 
He does not.’ To which view shall we incline? Reason cannot decide 
for us one way or the other: we are separated by an infinite gulf. At the 
extremity of this infinite distance a game is in progress, where either 
heads or tails may turn up. What will you wager? According to reason 
you cannot bet either way; according to reason you can defend nei­
ther proposition. 
“So do not attribute error to those who have made a choice; for 
you know nothing about it. 
“ ‘No; I will not blame them for having made this choice, but for 
having made one at all; for since he who calls heads and he who calls 
tails are equally at fault, both are in the wrong. The right thing is not 
to wager at all.’ 

Obversion  
 237
“Yes; but a bet must be laid. There is no option: you have joined 
the game. . . . Let us weigh the gain and the loss involved in wagering 
that God exists. Let us estimate these two probabilities; if you win, 
you win all; if you lose, you lose nothing. Wager then, without hesita­
tion, that He does exist. 
“ ‘That is all very fine. Yes, I must wager, but maybe I am wagering 
too much.’ 
“Let us see. Since there is an equal risk of winning and of losing, if 
you had only two lives to win you might still wager; but if there were 
three lives to win, you would still have to play (since you are under the 
necessity of playing); and being thus obliged to play, you would be 
imprudent not to risk your life to win three in a game where there is 
an equal chance of winning and losing. But there is an eternity of life 
and happiness.” (Blaise Pascal, 17th-cen. French mathematician and 
religious thinker, Pensees)
Advanced Manipulations
Instructions
See if you can produce the inverse of some of the previous propositions. 

Hypothetical Propositions
Lesson 21
Hypothetical Propositions
The Essentials
We have already met hypothetical propositions in Lesson 11. Since then 
we have looked rather carefully at categorical propositions; now let’s return 
to hypothetical propositions and look carefully at them. The purpose of this 
lesson is to become skilled at recognizing the different kinds of hypothetical 
propositions used in normal verbal language—what contemporary logicians 
call, somewhat oddly, “natural language.” (The oddity is because all written 
and spoken languages are conventional signs, not natural signs, as we learned 
in Lesson 7. All language is conventional, a human invention; it is not natural. 
But we will use the phrase “natural language” because it is convenient.) Later 
in Lesson 29, we will take up hypothetical arguments. 
Definitions of Logical Symbols
In Lesson 11, we met some of the symbols modern logicians have devised 
in order to symbolize hypothetical propositions. Here is a reminder of what 
was introduced there. 
Propositions: Small case letters, like p, q, or r, stand for any categorical prop­
osition. 
238

Hypothetical Propositions  
 239
Particular propositions: Large case letters, like A, B, or C, stand for some 
definite categorical proposition, such as “the economy is growing” or “you’ll 
have a lollipop.”
Negation: To express the negation of a proposition, modern logicians do not 
worry about exactly what kind of opposite the negative is. Rather, they simply 
put a mathematical symbol for negation, such as (~), before the symbol for 
the proposition negated. The symbol ~p means the denial or negation of the 
proposition p, and ~A means the denial of proposition A. 
Example: If L is “you’ll have a lollipop,” then ~L is “you won’t have a 
lollipop.” 
Parentheses: To clarify where propositions begin and end, you can put paren­
theses (. . .) or brackets [. . .] around propositions.
Example: (~L) points out the proposition “you won’t have 
a lollipop.”
Disjunctions: Disjunctions take the general form (p v q), which means the 
disjunctive proposition “p or q.” The v is used because one Latin word for “or” 
was vel. A specific disjunction takes the form (A v B). Logicians sometimes 
distinguish the symbol for inclusive or weak disjunctions, where both alter­
natives can be true (p v q), from the symbol for exclusive or strong disjunc­
tions, where only one alternative can be true (p V q). However, the symbol for 
strong disjunction is really not needed, since a strong disjunction can also be 
expressed by the conjunction of a weak disjunctive proposition with a prop­
osition denying the conjunction of the two terms. In symbols, (p V q) is the 
same as [(p v q) ∙ ~(p ∙ q)]. 
It is important to remember here that A and B signify categorical propo­
sitions; they do not signify terms, which is what S and P signified in the sym­
bolization of a categorical proposition: “S is P.” 
Example: “Either Augustine was a bishop or Marx was an atheist” 
can be symbolized as (A v M). 
Conjunctions: Conjunctions often include the word and; logicians some­
times use the ampersand (&), a typesetter’s symbol, for “and.” They also use a 
dot (∙) for conjunction.

240  
 The Logic of Propositions
Example: “Socrates was a philosopher, and Aeschylus was a 
playwright” can be symbolized as (S & A) or as (S ∙ A), where S 
signifies “Socrates was a philosopher” and A signifies “Aeschylus 
was a playwright.”
Conditions: For conjunctions and disjunctions, it does not matter which of 
the two propositions comes first. Conditions are a different story. The order 
of the propositions makes all the difference, so logicians have given them dif­
ferent names. The if clause is called the antecedent, from the Latin word that 
means it goes before the other clause, or if you prefer a word derived from 
Greek, the protasis. The then clause is called the consequent, from the Latin 
word meaning follow along, or apodasis in Greek. Before and after here refer to 
their logical relation, not a chronological sequence. The antecedent lays down 
a condition that, when fulfilled, will ensure that the consequent follows. The 
antecedent is like a “promissory note” that guarantees the consequent will 
come about as long as the antecedent condition is realized. To describe the 
relation of moving from antecedent to consequent, logicians often use the 
word “implies,” as in “p implies q.” They also have resorted to symbols that 
move from the antecedent to the consequent, such as an arrow pointing to 
the right (p → q). This proposition can be read “if p, then q” or “p implies q.”
Example: “If the economy grows, then tax revenue will also grow,” 
is (E → R), where E means “the economy grows” and R is “tax 
revenue grows.”
Three Kinds of Hypothetical Propositions
Hypothetical propositions are formed by combining two or more cate­
gorical propositions into one longer proposition, related to each other using 
“syncategorematic” terms. There are three types of hypothetical propositions: 
conditions, disjunctions, and conjunctions. 
Conjunctions
Conjunctions are formed when we combine two categorical propositions, 
often using the word “and” to do so. 
Example: “Socrates was a philosopher, and Aeschylus was a 
playwright.”

Hypothetical Propositions  
 241
This conjunction can be symbolized (S ∙ A), where S means “Socrates was 
a philosopher” and A means “Aeschylus was a playwright.”
However, a proposition can be a conjunction using other words than 
“and.” At the end of this lesson there is a list of other words that can be used 
to create a conjunction.
Example: “Augustus was a Roman Emperor, but Virgil was a 
Roman poet.” 
This conjunction can be symbolized (A ∙ V), where A means “Augustus 
was a Roman emperor” and V means “Virgil was a Roman poet.”
Sometimes a conjunction is formed without using a word at all.
Example: “Winston Churchill was a great speaker, Davey Crockett 
was not.”
This conjunction can be symbolized by (W ∙ D), where W means “Win­
ston Churchill was a great speaker” and D means “Davy Crockett was not a 
great speaker.”
These examples show that, even though different words are used, the logi­
cal notion of conjunction in our mind is the same if we ignore subtle nuances 
in emphasis conveyed by different syncategorematic terms. All three examples 
also show that for a conjunction to be true, both of the categorical proposi­
tions that make it up must be true. If both Churchill and Davey Crockett 
were great speakers, the last example would be false—that is, not true.
Disjunctions
Disjunctions are formed when we put two categorical propositions into 
the same statement, but we set them out as alternatives rather than combining 
them. The most normal way to indicate a disjunction is by using the words 
or . . . or either . . . or. . . .
Example: “Either Augustine was a bishop or Anselm was an atheist.” 
This proposition can be symbolized by (Ag v An), where Ag means “Augus­
tine was a bishop” and An means “Anselm was an atheist.” This particular 
example illustrates the fact that for a disjunctive proposition to be true, one 
or the other of the categorical propositions that make it up must be true, but 
they don’t both have to be true. 
There are other examples, however, of disjunctive propositions where 
both the disjuncts are true.

242  
 The Logic of Propositions
Example: “Either Augustine was a bishop or Marx was an atheist.” 
This proposition can be symbolized by (Ag v M), where Ag means “Augustine 
was a bishop” and M means “Marx was an atheist.” This disjunction is true be­
cause one of the disjuncts is true; but as a matter of fact, both of the disjuncts 
are true. Many disjunctions are like this, where both disjuncts can be true. 
These are called “inclusive” disjunctions. 
There are still other disjunctions that are exclusive, because only one of the 
disjuncts can be true, they cannot both be true.
Example: “Either Louis XIV of France was called ‘the Sun King,’ 
or he was not.” 
Only one of these two alternatives can be true; and in fact, it is the first one. 
One can sometimes have fun with the difference between these two kinds of 
disjunctions. If the waiter asks you whether you want the soup or the salad, 
you can simply say “yes,” meaning you want both. A waiter who knows logic 
will inform you, however, that he was setting out an exclusive rather than an 
inclusive disjunction; you must choose one or the other.
Conditions
Conditional propositions are the most important and the most difficult. 
A sign of their importance is the fact that sometimes logicians use the term 
“hypothetical proposition” to mean “conditional proposition.” But in fact, 
conjunctions and disjunctions are also hypothetical propositions. 
As the name says, conditional propositions are formed by making the an­
tecedent the condition for the consequent. The most normal way of relating 
the two categorical propositions together in English is by using the terms “if ” 
or “if . . . then,” where “if ” introduces the condition or antecedent and “then” 
introduces the consequent. 
Examples: “If the economy grows, then tax revenue will also grow.” 
“If you are over ten years old, you are also over two years old.”
“If you are good, then you’ll get a lollipop.”
These propositions can be symbolized, as follows:
(E → R), where E means “the economy grows,” and R means “tax 
revenue grows.”

Hypothetical Propositions  
 243
(10 → 2), where 10 means “you are over ten years old,” and 2 means 
“you are over two years old.”
(G → L), where G means “you are good,” and L means “you get a 
lollipop.” 
A Deeper Look
What Logical Symbols Mean
One of the important achievements of contemporary symbolic logic has 
been to develop logical symbols that help us see the structure of a hypothet­
ical proposition and so make it easier to distinguish different kinds of hy­
pothetical propositions, especially the many different kinds of conditional 
propositions.
We should note, however, that there are two quite different ways to un­
derstand the relation between these logical symbols and the normal or “natu­
ral” language we speak and write. 
(1) The Aristotelian approach, which we are following, holds that sym­
bols (especially the symbols &, v, and →) are signs capturing part, but only 
part, of the rich meaning of normal written and spoken language (especially 
their correlative words: and, or, and if . . . then). Normal or “natural” language 
consists in signs capturing part, but only part, of the meaning included in 
thoughts in our minds. (All of us have experienced the difficulty of putting 
exactly what we are thinking into words.) Finally, our thoughts are themselves 
signs, capturing part, but only part of the inexhaustible complexity of reality 
itself. (You can refer back to Lesson 7 on this point.) 
(2) The opposite approach, which is taken in most textbooks of symbolic 
logic, is called the “truth-functional” approach. On this approach, the mean­
ing of the logical symbols, for hypothetical propositions especially, is not 
determined by their meaning in “natural” language, but the meaning of the 
symbols as determined by their truth conditions. This is why the approach is 
called “truth functional.” By and large, there are not many important differ­
ences in results when following these two approaches, except when we get to 
conditional propositions, where the differences will be noted. 
Please remember, then, that the main reason for using logical symbols in 
this book is that they help us to focus on the form or structure of hypotheti­
cal propositions, which can become quite complicated in “natural” language. 

244  
 The Logic of Propositions
Once we see that structure, it becomes easier to evaluate the logical coherence 
of arguments in “natural” language. 
Counterfactual Conditions and Material Implication
In comparison with conjunction and disjunction, the truth status of a 
conditional proposition is rather more difficult to pin down and has been 
a subject of debate by logicians, both medieval logicians and contemporary 
symbolic logicians. There are four possible combinations of true and false for 
the antecedent and consequent.
	
1.	Antecedent is true and consequent is true.
	
2.	Antecedent is true, but consequent is false.
	
3.	Antecedent is false, but consequent is true.
	
4.	Antecedent is false and consequent is false. 
The first two combinations are straightforward. Let’s take the proposition 
“If the economy grows, then tax revenue also will grow” (E → R).
1. If it is true that the economy grows, and it is also true that the tax reve­
nue grows, then the conditional statement, considered as a whole, will be true. 
2. On the other hand, if it is true that the economy grows, but it is false 
that tax revenue grows, then the conditional statement is false. Why? Because 
what the conditional proposition means is that the antecedent or condition 
the economy grows was supposed somehow to ensure that the consequent tax 
revenue increases also will be true. But the consequent is false, so the condi­
tional statement, considered as a whole, is false, because the economy growing 
did not ensure that tax revenues would increase.
We should note that the logic of the proposition does not consider how 
the economy growing would increase tax revenues; that is a matter for the 
science of economics to establish. But logic is concerned with the fact that the 
conditional proposition states that the consequent will in fact happen if the 
antecedent is fulfilled, without getting into the exact reasons. 
The third and fourth combinations are more difficult because they are 
counterfactual: they both assume the antecedent is false. In this case, the 
economy is not growing, so the antecedent is not fulfilled. Two possibilities 
are open for the consequent: tax revenue still grows or tax revenue does not 
grow—that is, the consequence is true or the consequence is false. Combina­
tions (3) and (4) capture these two consequences. But this is not the whole 

Hypothetical Propositions  
 245
story. The issue is not just the combinations of truth and falsity in the an­
tecedent and consequent; even more important is this: What does the syncat­
egorematic connective if . . . then (as stated in natural language, or →, as stated 
in symbols), mean when the antecedent is not true? Here, the two approaches 
to understanding conditional propositions part company.
On the Aristotelian approach, the meaning of if . . . then, remains the 
same—namely, that p ensures q, but it no longer applies to the real situation—
namely, the situation where the economy is not growing, to which we have 
applied it. In short, there is no p, so it cannot influence q in any way. The 
result is that q may be true or false—that is, tax revenues may go up or go 
down. This is how to understand what combination (3) and (4) mean in this 
approach. Said otherwise, in these two cases the economy growing cannot 
ensure that tax revenues will increase for the simple reason that the economy 
is not growing in the first place; so it can’t ensure anything. 
The “truth-functional” understanding of the meaning of → is based solely on 
the truth conditions of (p → q). It applies in the same way to all four combina­
tions of truth conditions and is therefore called “material implication,” because 
what “implication” means is determined by the matter—that is, the four truth 
conditions—of the proposition (p → q). In this approach, the meaning of com­
binations (1) and (2) are determined by the truth conditions of combinations 
(1) and (2). Since p is true in both, the meaning of the implication—namely, 
(p → q) follows the “natural language” meaning. On (1), p is true and q is true, so 
(p → q) must be true. On condition (2), p is true and q is false, so (p → q) must be 
false. In our example, the economy grows but tax revenues do not increase, so to 
say a growing economy ensures increasing tax revenues is false. 
An alternative way to describe combination (2), however, is to say: it can­
not be the case that there is a growing economy but no increase in tax revenue, 
or, in general symbols: (~p v q). On the “truth-functional” approach, this 
disjunction is understood to describe the very meaning of the inference →. 
Then what happens in the four combinations listed above? Not only is the 
conditional statement true in combination (1), it is also true in combina-
tions (3) and (4); the only case in which (p → q) is false is combination (2). 
Unfortunately, this way of understanding what if . . . then and → mean 
leads to certain paradoxes of material implication, which are well-recognized 
by symbolic logicians. 
Concerning combination (1): In this scenario, p is true, q is true, and 
(p → q), understood to be equivalent to (~p v q), is also true. Now, if these 

246  
 The Logic of Propositions
truth conditions determine the very meaning of →, then they will hold for any 
two true propositions. What about propositions totally unrelated to each oth­
er? Consider this example: “If zebras are animals, then water is H2O” (Z → W). 
On the “truth-functional” approach, not only would Z be true, and W would 
be true, but the implication would be true, as well. That means that Z would 
really and actually imply W. But it is more accurate to the real or “natural” 
language meaning of if . . . then, to say that Z does not imply W, because impli­
cation just doesn’t apply in this situation, since the realities signified by the two 
propositions simply have nothing to do with one another. 
Concerning combinations (3 and (4): In both these cases, p is taken to be 
false. But this makes ~p true. And a further consequence is that (~p v q) will 
be true, no matter whether q is true or false, since a disjunction is true if only 
one of the disjuncts is true. When p is false, then (~p v q) is true, and so (p 
→ q) is also true, no matter whether q is true or false and no matter whether 
p and q are in reality related to each other. When we then apply material 
implication back to “natural” language, more paradoxes ensue. For example, 
consider a case where p and q are not related to each other: “If donkeys are 
goats, then the U.S. is a country.” Here the implication from p to q is true; the 
false proposition “donkeys are goats” actually and really implies that “the U.S. 
is a country.” In addition, “donkeys are goats” actually and really implies the 
opposite, that “the U.S. is not a country.” And what about the case where there 
is an intrinsic connection between p and q? Consider “If you are outside in 
the rain, then you’ll be wet.” Now suppose ~p—namely, “you are not outside 
in the rain.” This false proposition truly implies both the true proposition 
“you’ll be wet” and the false proposition “you won’t be wet.” 
Contemporary logicians have tried to deal with such paradoxes in a variety 
of clever ways, which we do not have the time or the need to cover. But the par­
adoxes show that for our purposes in studying the logic of normal and “natural” 
language, we will do two things. First, we will use logical symbols only for the 
purpose of understanding the meaning of “natural” language propositions, for 
they do capture much of that meaning. But we will not limit the very meaning of 
“natural” language propositions within the constraints of “material implication.” 
Second, we will make use of the aid symbolic logic provides in under­
standing combinations (1) and (2), as presented previously, without worrying 
about (3) and (4). And we will interpret combinations (3) and (4) to mean 
simply that when the antecedent of a conditional proposition is false, no in­
ference or implication need be drawn, because the antecedent cannot ensure 
that the consequent is either true or false. The false antecedent is consistent 

Hypothetical Propositions  
 247
with the consequent being either true or false. The advantage of this inter­
pretation of combinations (3) and (4) is that it is fully in accord with the 
meaning of if . . . then in “natural” language. 
Practical Advice: Some Verbal Hypotheticals and their Symbols
By this point it should be clear that there are normally many ways to ex­
press a certain kind of hypothetical proposition. The number of logical rela­
tions here is much less than the number of ways to express those logical rela­
tions in English (or any other language). This is another reason logicians have 
so taken to expressing hypothetical propositions and hypothetical arguments 
using symbols. The symbols help us understand what it is we are saying. Since 
the number of expressions in what logicians call “natural language” (in this 
case, English) far surpasses the number of logical relations or types of hypo­
thetical propositions, let’s end this chapter by correlating, in summary form, 
different expressions in English with their logical meaning and symbolization.
Verbal Hypotheticals and Their Symbols
English Expression
English Used with p and q
Symbolic Expression
and	
p and q
(p • q)
both	
both p and q	
(p • q)
but
p but q
(p • q)
although
although p, q	
(p • q)
p although q	
(p • q)
however
p, however q	
(p • q)
nevertheless
p, nevertheless q	
(p • q)
yet
p, yet q
(p • q)
or
p or q
(p v q)
either . . . or
either p or q	
(p v q)
neither . . . nor
neither p nor q	
~(p v q) or (~p • ~q)
if . . . then 
if p, then q	
(p → q)
if
if p, q
(p → q)
if
q, if p
(p → q)
implies
p implies q
(p → q)
is implied by
q is implied by p	
(p → q)
entails
p entails q
(p → q)
is entailed by
q is entailed by p	
(p → q)
in case
in case p, then q	
(p → q)
in the event that
in the event that p, then q	
(p → q)
provided that
provided that p, then q
(p → q)
provided that
q, provided that p	
(p → q)

248  
 The Logic of Propositions
Problem Set 21: Hypothetical Propositions
Learning to Symbolize Hypothetical Propositions 
Instructions 
Use these letters as symbols to symbolize the propositions that follow.
	
Sp	= “Socrates was a philosopher.”
	
Sk	= “Socrates knew a lot.”
	
Pp	= “Plato was a philosopher.”
	
Pk	= “Plato knew a lot.”
	
Ap	= “Aristotle was a philosopher.”
	
Ak	= “Aristotle knew a lot.” 
	
PS	= “Plato was the student of Socrates.”
	
AP	= “Aristotle was the student of Plato.” 
	
1.	Socrates was a philosopher.
	
2.	Plato was the student of Socrates.
	
3.	Aristotle was the student of Plato.
	
4.	Socrates was a philosopher and Plato was a philosopher.
	
5.	Socrates was a philosopher and Plato was, too.
	
6.	If Socrates was a philosopher, then Socrates knew a lot. 
	
7.	If Socrates was a philosopher, then Socrates did not know a lot.
	
8.	Either Socrates was a philosopher or Socrates was not a philosopher.
	
9.	Either Socrates knew a lot or Socrates did not know a lot. 
	 10.	If Plato was the student of Socrates, then Plato did not know a lot. 
	 12.	Plato knew a lot, and so did Aristotle, but Socrates did not. 
	 13.	If Socrates did not know a lot and Plato was the student of Socrates, 
then Plato did not know a lot. 
	 14.	If Socrates did not know a lot, but Plato did know a lot, then Plato 
was not the student of Socrates.
	 15.	Aristotle knew a lot, and so did Plato, so Plato was not the student of 
Socrates, but Aristotle was the student of Plato. 
Symbolizing with Your Own Symbols
Instructions 
Make up your own specific symbols (S, M, F, L, etc.), and symbolize the 
following propositions:

Hypothetical Propositions  
 249
	
1.	If you are good, you will get a lollipop.
	
2.	But if you are not good, you will not get a lollipop.
	
3.	Either you are good or you are not good.
	
4.	Either you will get a lollipop or you will not get a lollipop.
	
5.	If you are good, then you will get a lollipop; but if you are not good, 
you won’t get a lollipop.
	
6.	Socrates was a philosopher, but Aeschylus was not a philosopher.
	
7.	Thomas Aquinas was a philosopher, but he was also a theologian.
	
8.	Thomas Aquinas could not be both a philosopher and a theologian. 
	
9.	If flowers bloom in the spring but not in winter, then May is colorful 
but December is drab.
	 10.	Assuming flowers bloom in the spring but not in winter, May will be 
colorful, December drab.
	 11.	If flowers bloom either in the spring or in the summer, in the spring 
the young will turn their thoughts to love. 
	 12.	If Ramon went swimming, then Maria went dancing.
	 13.	Ramon went swimming, but Maria went dancing. 
	 14.	Ivan does drive a Toyota and Amy does drive a Subaru. 
	 15.	Winston Churchill was a great speaker.
	 16.	Winston Churchill was a great writer.
	 17.	Winston Churchill was a great writer and Churchill was a great speaker.
	 18.	Winston Churchill was a great writer and a great speaker. 
	 19.	If Winston Churchill was a great speaker, then he was not a great 
writer; no one can be great at both.
	 20.	“The Times, Places and Manner of holding Elections for Senators and 
Representatives, shall be prescribed in each State by the Legislature 
thereof; but the Congress may at any time by Law make or alter such 
Regulations, except as to the Place of Chusing Senators.” (U.S. Consti­
tution, Art. 1, Sec. 4)
	 21.	“If any Bill shall not be returned by the President within ten Days 
(Sundays excepted) after it shall have been presented to him, the Same 
shall be a Law, in like Manner as if he had signed it. . . .” (U.S. Consti­
tution, Art. 1, Sec. 7)

Advanced Conditional Propositions
Lesson 22
Advanced Conditional Propositions
A Deeper Look
In comparison with Lesson 21, this whole chapter is really “a deeper look.” 
Here we take up some more advanced conditional propositions by comparing 
how we express them in English and using symbols. Here we will see that sym­
bols can help us to understand the meaning and the logical consequences of 
more advanced conditional propositions. One way they do so is to help us to 
see when different verbal formulations mean the logical relations are different, 
and when the language is different but the logical relations are the same.
Negative Conditions
Often we want to set out a negative condition. The normal way we do this 
in English is by using the word “unless” or by negating the antecedent.
“Unless you come through the door, you can’t get into the room.”
“If you don’t come through the door, you can’t get into the room.”
These two examples show the logical force of “unless” is the same as “if 
not.” This equivalency can also be seen when we try to symbolize negative 
conditions. The second sentence is symbolized (~D → ~R), where D stands 
for “you come through the door” and R stand for “you can get into the room.” 
250

Advanced Conditional Propositions  
 251
And the first sentence is symbolized in exactly the same way, as (~D → ~R), 
for “unless p” means “if not-p.”
Contraposition
Seeing how to symbolize a negative condition gives us a clue that con­
traposition is a valid inference. Contraposition literally means “reversing the 
positions” of the antecedent and consequent of a conditional proposition. 
This “turning around” p and q in a conditional proposition is somewhat sim­
ilar to conversion of the subject and predicate terms of a categorical propo­
sition. When we say “if you don’t come through the door, you can’t get into 
the room,” we can ask ourselves what would follow logically if we tried to turn 
around the antecedent and consequent. Since affirming the antecedent of a 
conditional proposition ensures the predicate will come about, “not coming 
through the door” guarantees you will never “get into the room.” In this ex­
ample, we are assuming that coming through the door is the only way to get 
into the room. If we suppose “you did get into the room,” then based on the 
original negative conditional proposition, what would follow is the opposite 
of the original antecedent—namely, “you came through the door.” In short, 
from “if you don’t come through the door, you can’t get into the room,” it 
would follow that “if you did get into the room, then you must have come 
through the door.” Using the same symbols as before, then, we now see that 
if we suppose (~D → ~R), then it follows that (R → D). The same relation 
works in the opposite way, as well. Contraposition is a useful way to check 
on the meaning of conditional propositions, and it can be generalized in the 
following definition.
Definition of contraposition: (p → q) ≡ (~q → ~p).
Sufficient Condition
Symbolic notation allows us to distinguish sharply three kinds of con­
ditions: “sufficient conditions,” “necessary conditions,” and “necessary and 
sufficient conditions.” In a way, we have already met the first two kinds of 
conditions, in considering the basic meaning of conditional propositions and 
in looking at contraposition. Let’s begin with the easiest of these three to un­
derstand—sufficient conditions.

252  
 The Logic of Propositions
Think back to the basic meaning of a conditional proposition (p → q). 
The “if clause” or antecedent means that if it is realized (or is true), then that 
is enough to guarantee that the consequent will also be realized (or true). In 
short, the antecedent is sufficient, by itself, to ensure the consequent. For this 
reason, another name for a regular conditional proposition is a “sufficient 
condition.” 
Example: “If you are good, then I’ll give you a lollipop.”
If you say this to a child (G → L), she will rightly think you are guarantee­
ing her a lollipop, on the condition that she behaves well (“is good”). And she 
will be upset and rightly feel mistreated if she does behave well, but you don’t 
give her the lollipop. For, as children usually say, you have promised her the 
lollipop as a reward, on the condition that she is a good little girl. 
Definition of Sufficient Condition: p is a sufficient condition of q when 
(p → q).
Necessary Condition
There are other conditional propositions that mean something quite dif­
ferent from regular or sufficient conditions. They involve a different logic. 
These propositions set necessary conditions—that is, conditions that must be 
met before you are even eligible for the reward set out in the consequent. 
Students are very familiar with prerequisites that must be met in order to be 
accepted at a high school or college or graduate or professional school or for 
enrolling in a certain course.
Example: “A high school diploma is required for being accepted at 
a university.”
Here the logical relation between attaining the high school diploma and 
being accepted at a university is not that the high school diploma guarantees 
your being accepted to the university, which would be symbolized (D → U), 
where D means “you have attained a high school diploma” and U means “you 
have been accepted at university.” Quite the contrary; the logical relation is 
one of fulfilling a necessary prerequisite that clears the way for your accep­
tance at the university, but does not guarantee it. There are two ways of ex­
pressing necessary conditions, one negative and the other positive. 

Advanced Conditional Propositions  
 253
Negative Statement of Necessary Condition
Often the most intuitively obvious way to express a necessary condition, 
such as the one mentioned, is to express it negatively: “If you are not a high 
school graduate, then you will not be accepted to the university.” The nega­
tive antecedent (“you are not a high school graduate”) expresses clearly that 
having a high school diploma does not guarantee acceptance to university. 
But there is a guarantee here. Not having a high school diploma guarantees 
that you will not be accepted at the university. This negative way of setting up 
a necessary condition can be expressed as (~D → ~U). 
Definition: negative statement that p is a necessary condition of q: (~p → ~q). 
Teenagers are very familiar with necessary conditions of this sort.
Example: “If you don’t clean up your room, you won’t get the car 
tonight.”
This necessary condition can be symbolized negatively as (~R → ~C), 
where R means “You clean your room” and C means “You get the car to­
night.” While children might not understand that such necessary conditions 
do not guarantee use of the car, teenagers understand this all too well. For 
there may be other factors at work, such as, “Your homework must be done,” 
or “You can’t drive Phyllis in the car, because she’ll want to go to the medical 
marijuana store,” or the all-time favorite, “If you are nasty to mom or dad 
sometime between cleaning the room and the time for you to use the car, you 
still won’t get use of the car.” 
Positive Statement of Necessary Condition
There is a second, positive way to express a necessary condition. We can 
see this way by starting with the negative way of expressing a necessary con­
dition. Take the statement “If you are not good, then I won’t give you a lol­
lipop,” symbolized as (~G → ~L). This proposition is a guarantee that if you 
do not behave well, you will not get a lollipop from me. But if this statement 
and its guarantee are true, then what do we know, if we see you with a lollipop 
given by me? We know you were good, because if you had not been good, you 
would not have the lollipop. We can also express this necessary condition—
namely, that your being good is a necessary condition of you getting a lollipop 
from me—in this positive way: “If you got a lollipop, then you were good.” 

254  
 The Logic of Propositions
This conditional proposition is expressed symbolically as (L → G). Since be­
ing good was a necessary condition of getting a lollipop, then if you got the 
lollipop, you must have been good. At this point, you can see how helpful the 
logical relation of contraposition is, because (L → G) and (~G → ~L) are the 
contrapositives of each other. 
Definition: positive statement that p is a necessary condition of q: (q → p).
Necessary and Sufficient Condition
If you combine a necessary condition with a sufficient condition, then 
what results is a “necessary and sufficient condition.” Logicians often express 
this relation with the phrase “if and only if ” or “iff,” where the first “if ” sets 
out a sufficient condition, while the “only if ” expresses a necessary condition.
Example: “If and only if you are good, you will get a lollipop 
from me.”
While we don’t normally speak this way, the awkward expression “if and 
only if” does describe quite precisely what we mean, which is “If you are good, 
you will get a lollipop from me; and also, if you get a lollipop from me, then 
you were good.” You can see that the “necessary and sufficient condition” is 
simply the conjunction of two conditions, one necessary and the other suf­
ficient. In this case, the one and only way to get a lollipop from me is to be 
good. This proposition is different from the sufficient condition alone, “If you 
are good, you’ll get a lollipop from me,” which does not rule out your getting 
a lollipop in some other way—making one, stealing one, finding one on the 
floor. The necessary and sufficient condition does rule out other ways of get­
ting the lollipop. Since there are two ways to express a necessary condition, 
there are two ways to express a necessary and sufficient condition.
Definitions: 
1. Negative way to express that p is a necessary and sufficient condition 
of q: 
(p → q) ∙ (~p → ~q)
2. Positive way to express that p is a necessary and sufficient condition of q:
(p → q) ∙ (q → p)

Advanced Conditional Propositions  
 255
The positive way of expressing the necessary condition in (2) shows that 
the arrow of inference runs in both directions. Logicians have invented two 
other symbols to express the “necessary and sufficient condition”: (a) what is 
called the bi-conditional (p ←→ q), with an arrow that runs in both directions; 
and (b) logical equivalence, with an equal sign that has three rather than two 
lines (p ≡ q). Both expressions mean the same thing. 
“Only If” Propositions
In our normal conversation and writing, we do not use the expression 
“if and only if.” So how do we express “necessary and sufficient conditions” 
in normal language? In English, the “necessary and sufficient condition” is 
usually expressed by the phrase “only if. . . .” 
Here are some examples: “Only if you are good will I give you a lollipop.” 
Alternatively, holding out the possible reward first, a parent would more likely 
say: “I will give you a lollipop, only if you are good.” 
Both of these sentences express the necessary and sufficient condition: 
(L → G) ∙ (G → L). But there is a problem with the expression “only if.” Some­
times we use it to express not a “necessary and sufficient condition” but mere­
ly a “necessary condition.” 
Example: “Only if you train hard will you run the mile in 
four minutes.”
Many people know that there have been very few humans in track history 
to have run the mile in four minutes or less. It is impossible that training hard 
by itself could ever ensure that a runner could do the mile in four minutes. So 
this proposition cannot possibly have as part of its meaning “if you train hard 
then you will run the mile in four minutes” (T → 4). Here “only if ” is used to 
state a necessary condition, expressed negatively: “If you do not train hard, you 
will not run the mile in four minutes” (~T → ~4); and this is all it means. You 
can also express this necessary condition by contraposing this proposition: “If 
you ran the mile in four minutes, you must have trained hard” (4 → T).
Consequently, when dealing with “only if ” expressions you will have to 
make a judgment about the true meaning of the proposition. It is impossible to 
employ some sort of mechanical rule to interpret “only if ” statements, since 
the expression “only if ” is inherently ambiguous; and symbolizing such state­
ments helps us see the ambiguity they involve. 

256  
 The Logic of Propositions
Combined Propositions
As you have no doubt guessed by now, it is not necessary that a propo­
sition stop at one hypothetical expression. More complicated hypothetical 
propositions can be formed by combining two or more hypothetical expres­
sions. We shall see that such combined statements become much more im­
portant when we turn to hypothetical arguments. And they are a favorite of 
educators who create standardized tests like the LSAT and the GRE. Here we 
should note their existence and be able to recognize them.
Example: “If Gloria learns English well, then she will get a good job 
and make lots of money.”
This sentence is fundamentally a conditional proposition, “if p, then q.” 
What makes it slightly more complicated is that q is itself a hypothetical 
proposition, a conjunction. The full proposition should be symbolized as 
[G → (J ∙ M)], where G is “Gloria learns English well,” J is “Gloria will get a 
good job,” and M is “Gloria will earn a lot of money.” 
Problem Set 22: Advanced Hypothetical Propositions
Advanced Conditional Propositions
Instructions
Create your own symbols and symbolize the propositions for the follow­
ing statements. 
	
1.	Joe goes to the game if and only if Jamal plays quarterback; and 
Andrew kicks field goals.
	
2.	Melinda goes to the game, if and only if Jamal plays quarterback and 
Andrew kicks field goals. 
	
3.	Virginia will run for class president only if Claudio does too.
	
4.	Virginia won’t run unless Claudio does.
	
5.	Only if Claudio runs will Virginia run.
	
6.	Unless Virginia runs, Claudio won’t run.
	
7.	Unless you’re good, you won’t get a lollipop.
	
8.	Being good is a sufficient condition for getting a lollipop.
	
9.	Being good is a necessary condition for getting a lollipop. 
	 10.	Pleasure will increase only if pain doesn’t increase.

Advanced Conditional Propositions  
 257
	 11.	Pleasure will increase unless pain increases. 
	 12.	Unless pleasure increases or pain decreases we’ll fail to reduce mental 
depression. 
	 13.	If Gloria learns to read and write well, she will get a good job and 
make lots of money.
	 14.	If Gloria learns to read and write well, she will get a good job and 
make lots of money, providing she doesn’t waste her time watching 
the Astros in the World Series.
	 15.	Unless Gloria learns to read and write well, she won’t get a good job 
and make lots of money. 
	 16.	If Luis plays violin, then Manuel plays viola, unless Carlos plays 
trumpet. 
	 17.	Nguyen is waiting patiently and Jaime is a nervous wreck, provided 
that either Sandra said she’d be late or Imelda does not plan to come.
	 18.	If Shawna does not write poetry, then Howard writes music; but it is 
not the case that if Shawna writes poetry, then Howard does not 
write music.
	 19.	If the fact that Sarah is a lawyer implies that Clarence cares for com­
puters, then it is not the case that either Mary Therese bakes pies for 
Thanksgiving or Jon builds boats. 
	 20.	If Stephanie catches crickets, then if Baldemar builds beds, then if 
Kyley herds hogs, then Matthew writes for the student newspaper. 
	 21.	The fact that Ian works for MI6 or Darrell works for MI5 is a neces­
sary condition for Daniel to call them in from the cold, in case Philip 
was not part of the plot or Kurt was not caught.
Advanced Conditional Propositions in Prose
Instructions
Create your own symbols and then symbolize these propositions.
	
1.	“None but the brave deserves the fair.” (John Dryden, 17th-cen. Brit­
ish poet, “Alexander’s Feast; or, The Power of Music An Ode, in Hon­
our of St. Cecilia’s Day”)
	
2.	“If ideas are modes of thought, ideas are not images of anything, nor 
do they consist of words.” (Spinoza, 17th-cen. Dutch philosopher, 
Ethics, simplified)

258  
 The Logic of Propositions
	
3.	“If a President shall not have been chosen before the time fixed for 
the beginning of his term, or if the President elect shall have failed 
to qualify, then the Vice President elect shall act as President until a 
President shall have qualified.” (U.S. Constitution, 20th Amendment, 
Sec. 3, ratified 1933)
	
4.	“If he rode across the river with a hard bunch like the Suggses, he 
would be an outlaw, whereas if he stayed, the nesters might try to 
hang him or at least try to jail him in Fort Worth. If that happened, 
he’d soon be on trial for one accident or another.” (Larry McMurtry, 
20th-cen. American writer, Lonesome Dove)
	
5.	“Israel will not have long-term security without the full recognition of 
a viable and proper Palestinian state and a peace accord with all Arab 
nations.” (Jacques Chirac, 20th-cen. president of France)
	
6.	“There are only three possibilities: either your sister is mad, or she is 
telling lies, or she is telling the truth. You know she does not tell lies, 
and she is obviously not mad, so we must conclude she is telling the 
truth.” (C. S. Lewis, 20th-cen. English writer, The Lion, the Witch, and 
the Wardrobe)
	
7.	“When in Rome, live as the Romans do; when elsewhere, live as they 
live elsewhere.” (Attributed to St. Ambrose, as advice to St. Augustine, 
4th-cen. philosopher) [What Augustine actually wrote, in Letter 36, 
c. 14, about the advice Ambrose gave to Augustine for his mother, 
St. Monica, about fasting was: “ ‘When I am here [in Milan] I do not 
fast on Saturday; but when I am at Rome I do; whatever church you 
may come to, conform to its custom, if you would avoid either receiv­
ing or giving offence.’ This reply I reported to my mother, and it satis­
fied her, so that she scrupled not to comply with it; and I have myself 
followed the same rule.”]
	
8.	“You can only find truth with logic if you have already found truth 
without it.” (Attributed to G. K. Chesterton, 20th-cen. British writer, 
but not by him)
	
9.	“So long as men worship the Caesars and Napoleons, Caesars and Na­
poleons will arise to make them miserable.” (Aldous Huxley, 20th-cen. 
British author, Ends and Means, 1937)
	 10.	“A man with wings large enough and duly attached might learn to 
overcome the resistance of the air, and conquering it, succeed in sub­
jugating it and raise himself upon it.” (Leonardo da Vinci, 15th-cen. 
Italian polymath, from The Flight of Birds, 1505)

Advanced Conditional Propositions  
 259
	 11.	“No Person shall be a Representative who shall not have attained to 
the Age of twenty-five Years, and been seven Years a Citizen of the 
United States, and who shall not, when elected, be an Inhabitant of 
that State in which he shall be chosen.” (U.S. Constitution, Art. 1, 
Sec. 2)
	 12.	“Hitler knows that he will have to break us in this island or lose the 
war. If we can stand up to him, all Europe may be free, and the life 
of the world may move forward into broad, sunlit uplands. But if we 
fail, then the whole world, including the United States, and all that 
we have known and cared for, will sink into the abyss of a new dark 
age made more sinister, and perhaps more prolonged, by the lights of 
a perverted science. Let us therefore brace ourselves to our duty and 
so bear ourselves that if the British Commonwealth and Europe lasts 
for a thousand years men will still say: This was their finest hour.” 
(Winston Churchill, British prime minister, June 18, 1940, Speech in 
the House of Commons) [There are several hypothetical propositions 
here. Symbolize the hypothetical proposition contained in each sen­
tence in the quotation.]
	 13.	“But if there is no resurrection of the dead, then Christ has not been 
raised; if Christ has not been raised, then our preaching is in vain and 
your faith is in vain.” (1 Cor 15:13–14 RSV)
	 14.	“You must not build upon foundations of prayer and contemplation 
alone, for, unless you strive after the virtues and practice them, you 
will never grow to be more than dwarfs.” (Teresa of Ávila, d. 1582, 
Spanish mystic, reformer of the Carmelite Orders of both women and 
men, mentor of St. John of the Cross, from Interior Castle)


Part 4
The Logic of Arguments 


The Logic of Arguments
Two Kinds of Reasoning
Lesson 23
Two Kinds of Reasoning
The Essentials
In Lesson 6, we saw that reasoning was one of the three acts our mind 
performs when we are thinking. In the act of reasoning, our mind moves from 
one point to another in order to get to yet a third point. In doing so, our mind 
produces within itself an argument. And arguments are important because 
that is how we use our mind to discover truths we did not know before.1 If we 
couldn’t reason, we would either be like God—who is so intelligent that he 
knows everything already—or we would be like the other animals, who don’t 
reason at all, at least not in the intellectual way we do, using abstract or uni­
versal concepts that extend far beyond our own sense experience. This is why, 
since the time of the Greeks, philosophers have said that humans “live on the 
horizon between the gods and the beasts.”
Taken very broadly, there are two kinds of reasoning. You may already be 
familiar with their names: deductive reasoning and inductive reasoning. Let’s 
turn to the classic example of deductive reasoning that logicians have been 
using since the time of Aristotle, the one we used in Lesson 6:
All men are mortal.
Socrates is a man.	
Therefore, Socrates is mortal. 
1. Aquinas, Commentary on the Posterior Analytics of Aristotle, Prologue.
263

264  
 The Logic of Arguments
This kind of argument is called a categorical syllogism because its three 
parts are categorical propositions. The way it works is that when the two 
premises—the first two sentences—are taken together, they lead necessarily 
to the conclusion—the third sentence. The term “man” (or “human”) is what 
links together the terms “Socrates” and “mortal” in the conclusion. There is 
more than one type of deductive argument, but all deductive arguments have 
this in common: they draw a conclusion by means of a middle term or a series 
of middle terms.
You might ask, “How do we know the two premises are true?” The answer 
is that we use the other type of reasoning—induction. We use induction in 
the first act of the mind in order to develop universal concepts like man by 
abstracting or drawing out the universal man from our experience of partic­
ular men. In the second or minor premise here, we are saying the individual 
we call Socrates fits under the universal concept man. If we already have the 
universal concept man in our mind, then it is easy to establish the truth of the 
minor premise by comparing Socrates with other men and with the content 
of the concept man. We might informally call this using the “duck test”: if it 
looks, acts, and sounds like a duck, then it’s a duck. Here we are seeing if the 
individual we call Socrates fits under a description of man that we have al­
ready developed by studying other men and abstracting the universal concept 
man from them by focusing on the essence the men we have analyzed have in 
common with each other. And how do we develop that universal concept 
in the first place? We start by comparing individual men, seeing what they 
have in common and how they are different. There is a difference between 
inductive reasoning itself and intuition of the concept of the essence—which 
is where inductive reasoning leads; but we’ll take up that issue when we treat 
induction. We can see here that the kind of inductive reasoning that produces 
universal concepts is the foundation for all subsequent acts of the mind.
The major premise of our argument works a bit differently, though, be­
cause it is not limited to one universal concept but involves two concepts, put 
together in the proposition “all men are mortal.” We weren’t born with that 
proposition already in our minds, yet we somehow came to have it. It’s a prop­
osition that we refine over the course of our lives; but once we first attain it, 
we never abandon it completely. We are perfectly willing to use it as the basis 
for applying it to new people we meet, to people long since dead, like Socrates 
himself, and to people we shall never meet, say, our great-great grandchildren. 
If we developed the concepts of men and mortal through abstraction, which 

Two Kinds of Reasoning  
 265
is a process of inductive generalization, then we should use a similar process 
to derive the proposition “all men are mortal.” The main difference is that we 
don’t merely arrive at concepts, but at a universal proposition formed from 
concepts.
Consequently, you can see that we need both deductive and inductive rea­
soning. The most important difference between these two types of reasoning 
is that deductive reasoning proceeds by means of a universal middle term, but 
inductive reasoning does not. In inductive reasoning there is no middle term. 
Our mind proceeds directly from examples of a universal conclusion to that 
conclusion. These two kinds of reasoning complement each other. So it is 
imperative that we learn what they are like, learn to recognize how different 
they are, then see how they can work together.
We will begin our study of the third act of the mind with deductive rea­
soning, because its structure is the focal point of formal logic. Then we will 
take up inductive reasoning as the necessary companion to deduction. Finally, 
we will look at how the two types of reasoning work together.
Primary Sources
Thomas Aquinas, Commentary on the Posterior Analytics of Aristotle, Prologue. Here 
Aquinas sets reasoning and argument in relation to the first two acts of the mind and then 
explains the different levels of knowledge we can attain using syllogistic reasoning. An excel­
lent short overview that helps us see the full range of and importance of reasoning our way 
to true conclusions. 
Problem Set 23: Distinguishing Deductive from Inductive 
Reasoning
Drawing Conclusions Deductively or Inductively
Instructions 
Consider the following propositions. How would you establish whether 
or not they are true? Would you use deduction, induction, or could you do 
it either way?
	
1.	No one in the U.S. Senate is over 100 years old.
	
2.	Salt is made up of NaCl.
	
3.	Humans have an immortal soul.
	
4.	The earth is a sphere.

266  
 The Logic of Arguments
	
5.	Cheetahs run faster than humans
	
6.	Most college graduates succeed in business.
	
7.	The universe had a beginning. 
	
8.	Water boils at 180 degrees F (= 75 degrees C). 
	
9.	When equals are added to equals the results are equal.
	 10.	Euthanasia is morally wrong. 
	 11.	The blood in the human body circulates.
	 12.	All the U.S. presidents been native born.
Distinguishing Deductive from Inductive Arguments
Instructions 
Consider the following arguments: (a) What is the main conclusion? 
(b) Is there one or more than one argument for this conclusion? (c) For each 
argument in the passage, is the argument deductive or inductive?
1. Travelers to the tropics have often remarked that this climate is very 
hard on machinery. In fact, someone touring by car is amazed at the danger 
from rust. Then the natives only smile and wonder why the tourists do not 
notice the amount of moisture in the air.
2. “The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class strug­
gles. Freeman and slave, patrician and plebeian, lord and serf, guild-master 
and journeyman, in a word, oppressor and oppressed, stood in constant op­
position to each other, carried on an uninterrupted, now hidden, now open 
fight.” (Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, 19th-cen. revolutionaries, Communist 
Manifesto, 1848)
3. “The cow, the goat, and the deer are ruminants. The cow, the goat, and 
the deer are horned animals. Therefore, all horned animals are ruminants.” 
(Adapted from Aristotle)
4. Do you know why a stack of magazines tied in a bundle will be very 
difficult to burn up in a trash pile? If you understand about a fire’s need of 
oxygen, you have the answer. As you can see, the magazines have very little 
air, except on the outer surface. That is the reason they are so difficult to burn. 
5. Now it is scarcely possible to conceive how the aggregates of dissimilar 
particles should be so uniformly the same. If some of the particles of water 
were heavier than others; if a parcel of the liquid on any occasion were consti­
tuted principally of these heavier particles, it must be supposed to affect the 

Two Kinds of Reasoning  
 267
specific gravity of the mass, a circumstance not known. Similar observations 
may be made on other substances. Therefore, we may conclude that the ulti­
mate particles of all homogeneous bodies are perfectly alike in weight, figure, 
etc. In other words, every particle of water is like every other particle of water; 
every particle of hydrogen is like every other particle of hydrogen, etc. (John 
Dalton, d. 1844, English chemist, propounded the modern atomic theory)
6. “The chromosomes in our germ cells are not affected by any change that 
takes place within our body cells. What this means is that no change . . . made 
in us in our lifetimes . . . can be passed on to our children through the process 
of biological heredity.” (Amram Scheinfeld, 1939, American journalist, author 
of popular science books, Your Heredity and Environment, 1964)
7. “As the species of the same genus usually have, though by no means 
invariably, much similarity in habits and constitution, and always in structure, 
the struggle will generally be more severe between them, if they come into 
competition with each other, than between the species of distinct genera. We 
see this in the recent extension over parts of the United States of one species 
of swallow, having caused the decrease of another species. The recent increase 
of the missel-thrush in parts of Scotland has caused the decrease of the song-
thrush. How frequently we hear of one species of rat taking the place of an­
other species under the most different climates!” (Charles Darwin, 19th-cen. 
English evolutionist, On the Origin of Species, chap. 3, sec. 6)

The Categorical Syllogism
Lesson 24 
The Categorical Syllogism
The Essentials
There are two kinds of deductive arguments: those based on categorical 
propositions and those based on hypothetical propositions. We will begin 
with categorical arguments, and with the most elementary of them, the cat­
egorical syllogism. From this base we will move on to more complicated cate­
gorical arguments, those that have more than one middle term. These can be 
thought of as a series of connected categorical syllogisms. After that, we will 
take up deductive arguments that use hypothetical propositions, and there­
fore are called hypothetical arguments. This is the most natural way to learn 
about the logic of the third act of the mind, as it mimics the way we gradually 
learned to argue as children. 
Modern symbolic logic, however, follows the reverse order. It starts with 
hypothetical arguments (included in what is called “propositional calculus”) 
and then moves to categorical statements and arguments (in “predicate calcu­
lus”). This order is helpful in mathematical applications of logic, which con­
centrate on proving one symbolic logical proposition from another, rather 
than using symbols to understand the logic of “natural” language, as we have 
been doing. This approach to logic puts off treatment of the most natural 
form of argument—categorical syllogisms—very much to the end of the 
study of logic; but we shall begin our consideration of arguments with cat­
egorical syllogisms. 
268

The Categorical Syllogism  
 269
Arguments: Truth, Validity, Soundness
The categorical syllogism consists in three categorical propositions, two of 
which are used to deduce the third as a conclusion. Thinkers before Aristotle 
certainly used deductive arguments like categorical syllogisms, and they also 
used hypothetical syllogisms. One of the reasons Plato so opposed the sophists 
was because he thought they had plausible arguments for some erroneous ideas. 
Their chief mistake was that they thought—quite like contemporary relativ­
ists—that humans cannot attain true and certain knowledge; the best we can 
do is plausible or probable opinions. The sophist Protagoras, for example, had 
famously said, “Of all things the measure is man—of the things that are, that 
they are, and of the things that are not, that they are not.” Plato thought the 
exact opposite is true; humans are not the “measure” for deciding whether our 
knowledge of things is true, but rather things are the “measure” for deciding 
whether our ideas are true. Our ideas are true when they conform to things and 
false when they do not. So Plato, then, concluded that the sophists were wrong 
and dismissed their conclusions, but he also rejected their ways of arguing. 
When Aristotle came to weigh the claims of the sophists against those 
of his beloved teacher Plato, he tried to give each side its due. He found that 
Plato had better conclusions (though he did not agree with Plato about ev­
erything); but when it came to arguments, he found that the sophists were 
not as bad as Plato had thought. The reason was that in studying arguments, 
Aristotle came to realize that there is a difference between the content of an 
argument—which is contained in the terms that make it up—and the style, 
structure, or form the argument takes. He realized that what makes the con­
clusion “flow necessarily” from the premises of an argument is not what it is 
about—its content—but the form or structure of the argument. In short, there 
is a difference between the truth of the conclusion—which is determined by 
whether it corresponds to reality—and whether the conclusion follows nec­
essarily from the premises of the argument—what is called its validity.1 One 
can have a perfectly valid argument that leads to a false conclusion. Consider 
this silly argument:
All animals with long necks are elephants. 
All giraffes have long necks.
Therefore, all giraffes are elephants.
1. Aristotle, Prior Analytics 1.4–6; Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics, bk. 1, 
lesson 13, no. 3, lesson 36, no. 7. 

270  
 The Logic of Arguments
What makes this argument silly is not its structure or form; in fact, the 
argument is valid. If both premises were true, since the conclusion does fol­
low from the premises, the conclusion also would be true. The reason the 
conclusion is false is because the first premise is false. The only time we can be 
sure that the conclusion must be true is when the argument is not just valid 
but sound. A sound deductive argument is an argument that is (1) valid—its 
premises lead necessarily to its conclusion, and (2) its premises are true. Only 
this combination of truth and validity can ensure a conclusion that must be 
true. 
Let’s repeat this important point. Only propositions are true or false. This is 
so, even though in ordinary speech we sometimes use the term “valid” about 
propositions when we really mean they “might be true” or are “likely to be 
true, but I’m not sure.” And only arguments are valid or invalid. The conclu­
sion of a valid argument follows necessarily from its premises; the conclusion 
of an invalid argument does not. Finally, arguments are sound (its opposite is 
unsound) when the argument is valid and the premises are true, because it is 
the truth of the premises that ensures the truth of the conclusion. 
You probably can see, then, that deductive arguments are a good way to 
expand our knowledge, to discover new truths. Based on what we already 
know, we can draw conclusions that are new truths, ones we didn’t know be­
fore. Sometimes we do this by starting with the premises and discovering in 
the conclusion a truth we did not previously know. This is called arguing “syn­
thetically,” by synthesizing or bringing together the premises. However, quite 
often what we do is proceed from the conclusion back to the premises. If we 
think the conclusion is true, we look around for an argument that will prove 
the conclusion. If we find such an argument, and its premises also are true, 
then we have proven that the conclusion must be true, as well. This is how we 
transform opinions into knowledge. This way of arguing deductively is called 
arguing “analytically,” because we analyze the conclusion into its subject and 
predicate and then look for a “middle term” that shows they must be linked 
together. Since this way of using syllogisms is so important, Aristotle used 
the term “analytics” as the title of his most important logic book, which was 
subsequently divided into the Prior Analytics (which contained his formal 
logic) and the Posterior Analytics (which set out his theory of demonstrative 
arguments, the strongest kind of deductive arguments). 

The Categorical Syllogism  
 271
The Structure of the Categorical Syllogism
Here is a categorical syllogism, already set up in what we’ll call “standard 
logical form.” For example: 
All mammals are animals.
All lions are mammals.
Therefore, all lions are animals. 
The third sentence is the conclusion that is derived from the first two sen­
tences, called premises. Since each categorical proposition has two terms—its 
subject term and its predicate term—the maximum number of terms in three 
categorical propositions is six. But you will notice that these three proposi­
tions do not contain six terms, or five, or four; they contain only three terms. 
Each term is used twice. The reason why a categorical syllogism must have 
three and only three terms is because each term must be repeated in order 
to produce the connections among the terms that ensure that the conclusion 
follows logically from the two premises. 
Since the validity of a syllogism depends upon its structure, not its con­
tent, at this point we need to set out some terminology in order to identify 
different formal features of the syllogism. We’ll begin with the conclusion, 
since deriving a conclusion is the goal of a syllogistic argument. Like all cate­
gorical propositions, this conclusion has a subject term (lions) and a predicate 
term (animals). By convention, the subject term of the conclusion is called the 
“subject term of the syllogism.” Likewise, the predicate term of the conclusion 
is called the “predicate term of the syllogism.” These terms can be symbolized 
by S and P, respectively, as we did for categorical propositions. But remember, 
S and P here are S and P for the whole syllogism, not just the conclusion. In our 
syllogism, “lions” has less extension than “animals,” and “animals” has more 
extension than “lions.” In Latin, the word minor means “less” and the word 
major means “more,” so the S term is called the “minor” term and the P term is 
called the “major” term. (Remember, these are the S and P terms when we are 
dealing with propositions in a syllogism; they don’t apply when we are consid­
ering a proposition by itself.) You will notice that the minor and major terms 
are found in the conclusion, and each one is found in one of the premises. We 
can use the S and P terms to distinguish the two premises. The major premise 
is the one that includes the major term, while the minor premise is the one that 
includes the minor term. In real arguments, the two premises and conclusion 

272  
 The Logic of Arguments
can occur in any order. Indeed, some logic books follow a different order, be­
ginning with the minor premise, rather than the major premise. To show that 
we recognize the logical order of an argument, when we analyze an argument 
in prose, we will put the three propositions in the following traditional and 
standard order:
Major premise
Minor premise
Conclusion 
There is one other term in our sample syllogism: “mammals.” This term 
is not part of the conclusion, though it is the reason for the conclusion; it is 
found only in the premises. In this particular syllogism, the extension of “mam­
mals” falls midway between “lions,” which is narrower, and “animals,” which is 
wider. It is no surprise that it is called the “middle term.” However, there is a 
much more important reason why it is called the middle term. Quite often in 
deductive arguments we are first aware of the conclusion; we think it is true, 
but don’t know for sure. (We do know in this simple example; but ignore that 
for the time being.) If we think the conclusion is true, then the S and P terms 
in the conclusion need to be linked directly together, in order to show they are 
connected. This is the function of the middle term—to connect the S and P 
terms to one another. A traditional image for this connection is to think of 
the S and P terms as links, like links in a chain. Separate links don’t make a 
chain. The only way to produce a small chain is to “link” the S and P terms 
by means of the middle term, which is called “middle” because it provides a 
connection, like a link in a chain. 
If we ignore the content of our syllogism, we can see its structure:
Major premise:	
All M is P.
Minor premise:	 All S is M.
Conclusion:	
Therefore, all S is P.
Aristotle’s main insight, then, was that the validity of the categorical syl­
logism is determined not by the content of the S, M, and P terms, but by the 
form or structure of the syllogism. However, there is more to the form of the 
syllogism than the basic configuration of its S, M, and P terms. The validity of 
a syllogism depends on two precise features of its form—the figure and mood 
of the syllogism.

The Categorical Syllogism  
 273
Figures of the Categorical Syllogism
Once Aristotle realized that the structure of a syllogism determines its 
validity, he noticed that the M and P terms in the major premise can be in 
the order of our example (M is P) or the reverse (P is M). And this is true, 
as well, for the S and M terms in the minor premise. But the conclusion is 
different. By definition, we call the subject of the conclusion the “S term” and 
the predicate of the conclusion the “P term.” If we temporarily leave aside the 
quantity and quality of each proposition, we can determine the figure or ba­
sic structural configuration of a syllogism. Since the conclusion always takes 
the form “S is/is not P,” there are only four figures. (Aristotle himself only 
recognized the first three, because all valid syllogisms in the fourth figure can 
be “reduced” or rewritten as valid syllogisms in one of the first three figures.) 
The figure of a syllogism depends upon whether the S, M, and P terms are the 
subject or predicate in the premises where they occur. In a way, the numbers 
assigned to the figures are arbitrary; but the first figure was called “first” by 
Aristotle, because it is the only figure in which we can draw universal affir­
mative conclusions, as in our sample syllogism earlier. Such syllogisms are the 
heart of deductive reasoning. 
	
	
	
Subject and predicate 
Figure:	
Names	
	
of each proposition	
Figure I:	
Major premise: 	
	
M	
P	
	
Minor premise:	
	
S	
M	
	
Conclusion:	
Therefore,	
S	
P	
Figure II:	
Major premise:	
	
P	
M	
	
Minor premise:	
	
S	
M	
	
Conclusion:	
Therefore,	
S	
P	
Figure III:	
Major premise:	
	
M	
P	
	
Minor premise:	
	
M	
S	
	
Conclusion:	
Therefore,	
S	
P	
Figure IV:	
Major premise:	
	
P	
M	
	
Minor premise:	
	
M	
S	
	
Conclusion:	
Therefore,	
S	
P	

274  
 The Logic of Arguments
In this presentation of the four figures, you should notice that the copula 
(“is” or “is not”) has been omitted. We’ll come back to the copula, which 
determines the quality of the proposition, when we turn to the “mood” of the 
syllogism. For the time being, we are just looking at the relative positions of 
M and P in the major premise and S and M in the minor premise. 
A good way to remember the numbers of the figures is to start with the 
most obvious kind of syllogism, which is the first figure. “All men are mortal. 
Socrates is a man. Therefore, Socrates is mortal.” In the second figure, the 
middle term is the predicate of both premises. The third figure is just the re­
verse of the second; in the third, the middle term is the subject of both prem­
ises. In the fourth figure, the order of the terms in both premises is the reverse 
of the first figure. 
Moods of the Syllogism
The second structural feature that determines whether a categorical syl­
logism is valid or invalid is its “mood.” (Sometimes logicians use the term 
“mode,” because the original Latin word was modus.) To the structure as deter­
mined by the figure of the syllogism, the mood adds the quantity and quality of 
the premises and conclusion. As you will remember, when taken together, the 
quantity and quality of any categorical proposition determine its structure: 
A (universal affirmative), I (particular affirmative), E (universal negative), or 
O (particular negative). Consequently, the mood consists in three letters: the 
first for the kind of proposition the major premise is, the second for the kind 
of proposition the minor premise is, and the third for the kind of proposition 
the conclusion is.
Example: our syllogism showing that “all lions are animals” has the mood 
AAA, because each of three propositions in the syllogism is A. That argument 
is also a first-figure syllogism. Its complete structural description, which deter­
mines whether or not the syllogism is valid, is “First figure, AAA.” 
The figure is determined by the arrangement of the S, M, and P terms 
in the three propositions that make up the syllogism, while the mood is de­
termined by the kind of propositions in the syllogism. And since validity or 
invalidity are determined purely by the form or structure of the syllogism, not 
by its content, all first-figure AAA syllogisms are valid, no matter what their 
content. When treating arguments in logic, we concentrate on the validity 
of the argument. We should remember, however, that acquiring knowledge 

The Categorical Syllogism  
 275
requires arguments to be sound, not just valid. But the truth of the premises is 
not determined by logic; it is studied in all the other disciplines. This is why 
Aristotle called logic the primary “tool” (organon) we use to acquire knowl­
edge in any area.
A Deeper Look 
Valid Arguments
In order to determine which forms of syllogism are valid and which are 
invalid, Aristotle seems to have taken an empirical approach, investigating 
each kind of argument structure. Now there are eight possibilities for the ma­
jor premise—four affirmative propositions and four negative propositions. 
This is because the M and P terms can be either the subject or predicate of the 
major premise, a premise can be universal or particular, and a premise can be 
affirmative or negative (2 × 2 × 2). The same is true of the minor premise. The 
conclusion, however, must have the S term as its subject and the P term as its 
predicate, which means there are only four possibilities there. Now 8 × 8 × 4 = 
256; so there are 256 possible arrangements of figure and mood. Fortunately, 
most of them are invalid, there are only 24 valid combinations of figure and 
mood. 
Since mood is determined by the kinds of propositions involved—A, I, E, 
or O—some clever (but now unknown) medieval logician had the idea that 
he would add some consonants to these vowels in order to come up with a 
name for each of the valid types of syllogism. Then he put them into a mne­
monic verse that students over the centuries have memorized, as a way of re­
membering nineteen of the valid syllogistic forms. 
Barbara, Celarent, Darii, Ferioque prioris;
Cesare, Camestres, Festino, Baroco secundae;
Tertia, Darapti, Disamis, Datisi, Felapton,
Bocardo, Ferison, habet; Quarta in super addit
Bramantip, Camenes, Dimaris, Fesapo, Fresison.
The way to use this verse is to see that there are four valid forms of syl­
logism in the first figure, four in the second, six in the third, and five in the 
fourth. Also, all the valid syllogisms in the second figure draw a negative 
conclusion, while all the valid syllogisms in the third figure draw a particu­
lar conclusion. Look at Barbara, the first one. The three vowels in her name 

276  
 The Logic of Arguments
are AAA, so “Barbara” stands for a first-figure AAA syllogism. Celarent, by 
contrast, stands for a first-figure EAE syllogism. This system continues down 
to Fresison, which stands for a fourth-figure EIO syllogism. These names ac­
tually contain more information. Names that begin with the same consonant 
stand for syllogisms closely related to each other, in this way: a syllogism in 
the second, third, or fourth figures that begins with the letter C, for exam­
ple, can be “reduced” to Celarent in the first figure by manipulating the three 
propositions in it. This reduction shows that a valid first-figure syllogism, like 
Celarent, more basically and more obviously is valid than Cesare, Camestres, 
or Camenes. And some of the other consonants tell us how to perform such 
reductions. The letter “s” tells us to simply convert the proposition it follows. 
If you convert the major E premise of Cesare in the second figure, you will 
get a syllogism in Celarent in the first figure. The letter “p” indicates “acciden­
tal” (per accidens) conversion of the preceding proposition, and the letter “m,” 
standing for “mutation,” tells you to switch the order of the premises. Finally, 
the letter “c” indicates you must perform a more complicated change called 
“contradiction.” 
This mnemonic verse, however, leaves out six other valid types of syllo­
gisms. For example, an I proposition follows validly from an A formed out 
of the same two terms (which we saw is Subalternation in the Square of Op­
posites). Since Barbara is valid, Barbari also is valid. Five valid syllogisms are 
derived through subordination: first-figure AAI and EAO; second-figure 
EAO and AEO; and fourth-figure AEO. Finally, there is one oddity: Baroco 
is reduced to Barbara by contradiction or “reduction to absurdity.” 
Memorizing these names is not the only way to see if a categorical syllo­
gism is valid. After all, Aristotle himself had no verse to consult; he had to 
look at each possible combination, all 256. Over the centuries, many logicians 
have taken a different approach. They have tried to devise rules for determin­
ing whether a syllogism is valid. Logic books vary greatly in the number of 
rules they offer. Part of the fun in logic, as in mathematics, is trying to devise 
a system with the fewest rules. In Lesson 25, I’ll set out my own four rules 
for valid syllogisms. (This is the fewest number of rules I could devise, fewer 
than the number found in other logic textbooks.) We’ll meet them after doing 
Problem Set 24 here, which is designed to give you practice in spotting the 
structure of a categorical syllogism. As is often the case in logic, distinguishing 
the form of a syllogism from its content is an art or skill we have to learn, easier 
for some people, harder for others. Take as much time as you need to become 

The Categorical Syllogism  
 277
proficient at separating the matter from the form of the syllogisms in Problem 
Set 24. Then try to decide if you think each syllogism is valid or invalid. You 
can use the medieval mnemonic to check your work. 
Problem Set 24: Identifying Categorical Syllogisms
Syllogisms in Standard Form
Instructions
For each syllogism, identify (a) minor term and minor premise; (b) ma­
jor term and major premise; (c) middle term; (d) conclusion; (e) figure; and 
(f) mood.
Then try to figure out intuitively whether the syllogism is valid or invalid.
	
1.	All animals are living things.
	
	All cheetahs are animals.
	
	Therefore, all cheetahs are living things.
	
2.	All carpenters are industrious.
	
	All swindlers are industrious.
	
	Therefore, all swindlers are carpenters.
	
3.	Every circle is a geometrical figure.
	
	Every circle is round.
	
	Therefore, some round things are geometrical figures.
	
4.	No stones are soft.
	
	Every pillow is soft.
	
	Therefore, no pillow is a stone.
	
5.	All gang members are rude.
	
	No Boy Scout is a gang member.
	
	Therefore, no Boy Scout is rude.
	
6.	All Frenchmen are wine drinkers.
	
	Some beer drinkers are not wine drinkers.
	
	Therefore, some beer drinkers are not Frenchmen. 
	
7.	All NASA engineers have graduate degrees.
	
	But no one with a graduate degree left school at the age of ten.
Therefore, no one who left school at the age of ten is a NASA 
engineer. 

278  
 The Logic of Arguments
Syllogisms in Normal Prose
Instructions
For each of the following categorical syllogisms, identify: (a) minor term 
and minor premise; (b) major term and major premise; (c) middle term; 
(d) conclusion; (e) figure; (f) mood. Then try to figure out intuitively wheth­
er each syllogism is valid or invalid.
1. Socrates was a man. And all men have souls. So Socrates had a soul.
2. No Roman legionnaires survived the battle of Adrianople. But all the 
Roman heavy cavalry survived that battle. So none of the Roman heavy cav­
alry were Roman legionnaires.
3. Frenchmen are very logical and since Houstonians are not Frenchmen, 
we can conclude that Houstonians are not very logical. 
4. All subatomic particles are invisible to the human eye. We know this 
because all subatomic particles have to be seen with electronic microscopes, 
and most things invisible to the human eye have to be seen with electron 
microscopes.
5. Since some Democrats are socialists, and some socialists are friendly 
guys, we can conclude that some friendly guys are Democrats.
6. All Republicans are capitalists. And no capitalists are friendly guys. So 
it follows that no friendly guys are Republicans. 
7. All patriots are voters. And some citizens are not voters. So some citi­
zens are not patriots.
8. No philosopher is a mathematician. But mathematicians know what 
mathematics is. So no philosopher knows what mathematics is. 

Validity of Categorical Syllogisms
Lesson 25
Validity of Categorical Syllogisms
The Essentials
The Usefulness of Rules to Show Validity
As the initial explorer of the terrain of formal logic, Aristotle contented 
himself with discovering which kinds of categorical syllogisms are valid and 
indicating how each valid type of syllogism worked. At least, he did so for the 
first three figures of the categorical syllogism. He did not recognize the fourth 
as a distinct figure, not because the fourth was completely unknown to him, 
but because it is the inverse of the first figure and therefore can be “reduced” 
to the first figure. Later logicians disagreed and gave the fourth figure its own 
rightful place. As schoolmasters, logicians saw the need to simplify and stan­
dardize Aristotle’s account of what makes syllogisms valid or invalid. One way 
they did this was to invent devices like the poem we saw in Lesson 24. But 
such a mnemonic device cannot explain to curious students why a syllogism is 
valid or invalid. So later, many schoolmaster logicians turned to the technique 
of devising rules for determining the validity of syllogisms. Students could 
memorize the rules, learn to apply them, and perhaps come to see why the 
rules are good ones—how they work to separate the “wheat from the chaff ” 
among categorical syllogisms. 
As I write this chapter I have before me five different texts in Aristotelian 
logic, all written in the twentieth century. It is surprising how different are 
279

280  
 The Logic of Arguments
their accounts of the rules for validity. All agree that to be valid a syllogism 
must follow all the rules; violating any rule is enough to cast a syllogism into 
the outer darkness of invalid arguments, where there is “the weeping and 
gnashing of (logical) teeth.” But about the number, content, and explanation 
of the rules, they differ widely. One book has eight rules. A second book fol­
lows Aristotle in denying the fourth figure and then goes on to list five “gen­
eral rules,” to which it adds six “particular rules for each figure,” for a total of 
eleven rules for only three figures. And three of the books give no rules at 
all, but substitute instructions for how to use Venn diagrams to determine 
validity. 
In order to simplify them as much as I can, I have reduced the rules to 
four. And in order for you to see that these rules are by no means arbitrary, I 
have attempted to show how they flow from the very nature of a syllogism. In 
fact, the rules are just convenient ways of codifying certain formal features 
of a valid syllogism. The first rule concerns the basic structure of the syllo­
gism; the three propositions must contain only three terms, no more and no 
less. The second rule concerns the quantity of the middle term. The third rule 
concerns the quantity of the minor and major terms. And the fourth rule con­
cerns the quality of the three propositions in the syllogism. A good way of 
understanding any rules is to look at the violations of the rules, along with 
the rules themselves. In fact, that most classic of all lists of rules—the Ten 
Commandments—lists mainly the violations of the rules, even though each 
negative commandment implies certain positive injunctions. Violation of a 
logical rule is called a “fallacy” (from the Latin word for deceit), and reason­
ing that violates a logical rule is called “fallacious.” We’ll first look at the four 
rules themselves, then after that, in “A Deeper Look,” we’ll cover the fallacies, 
as well. 
To help us understand the rules, we’ll look at all four rules using a syllo­
gism that we can see easily is valid, because the kind of reasoning is already 
familiar to us. Consider this First Figure, AAA syllogism:
All animals (M) are living things (P).
All leopards (S) are animals (M).
Therefore, all leopards (S) are living things (P).

Validity of Categorical Syllogisms  
 281
Rule One: A Valid Syllogism Must Have Three and Only Three Terms
The description of a syllogism in Lesson 23 actually covers this rule. The 
reason why a basic categorical syllogism must have exactly three terms comes 
from the fact that the syllogism is a way of reasoning from what we already 
know—the two premises—to what we do not yet know—the conclusion. In 
order to move from the premises to the conclusion, each of the two terms in 
the conclusion—the S and P terms—must occur in one of the two premises. 
If this were not true, our conclusion would just be a “stab in the dark”; we 
wouldn’t have a basis in knowledge for drawing a conclusion about S and P. 
At the other extreme, neither of the premises can contain both the S and P 
terms as stated in the conclusion, because then we wouldn’t be gaining any 
new knowledge at all. We would just be saying “because S is P, it follows that 
S is P.” Now this is not an inference that gives us any new knowledge. There 
must be a middle term (M) that justifies our linking together S and P in the 
conclusion. 
In our example, “leopards” is the minor term (S); “living things” is the ma­
jor term (P); and “animals” is the middle term (M) that links together S and P. 
A helpful way to think of the need for a middle term is actually to start 
with the conclusion and ask yourself: what is it that helps us understand that 
S is linked to P? Or why is P “predicated of ” or “said of ” S, as Aristotle would 
put it? What helps us and justifies us in linking S with P is the middle term. 
But if the middle term occurred only in one premise, then it couldn’t link 
together the S and P terms in the conclusion. The only way to attain this 
linkage is for the middle term to be repeated, that is, for it to be found in both 
premises. Then it can serve as a link that connects S and P. You can represent 
how the middle term does this diagrammatically. 
Here are a few examples that illustrate how the middle term helps answer 
a question:
1. Question: Why are all insects (S) living creatures (P)? Answer: because 
insects are a type of animal (M). 
S
is/is not
P
M

282  
 The Logic of Arguments
2. Question: Why does a stack of magazines tied up in a bundle (S) not 
burn up very easily (P)? Answer: because it is hard for oxygen to get to the 
paper sheets when they are compacted tightly (M).
3. Question: Why do snowshoes or skis (S) help you to walk on snow bet­
ter than using just your feet (P)? Answer: they distribute your weight over a 
wider surface area, so there is not as much pressure on each part of the surface 
of the snow (M).
Rule One simply stated: S and P must be “linked” together through M. 
Rule Two: the Middle Term of a Valid Syllogism Must Be Distributed 
at Least Once
In our example, “animals” is the middle term (M) that links together 
“leopards” (S) and “animals” (P). Rule Two states that the middle term, which 
only occurs in the two premises, must be distributed in at least one of them. 
“Distributed” is simply a traditional synonym for “universal,” while its oppo­
site, “undistributed,” is a synonym for “particular.” The word “distributed” was 
used to indicate that the term is applied or “distributed” all the way across its 
full extension, including everything it signifies. Why does the middle term 
have to be universal at least once? The reason is because it is the middle term 
that links the S and P terms in the conclusion. But to have a valid syllogism, 
we must be certain that the linkage between S and P is tight or secure. The 
problem of a loose or undistributed middle term can arise in cases where the 
middle term, when used in the major premise, is particular and so can refer 
only to one part of the class of things it signifies, while when that same middle 
term is used in the minor premise, it is also particular but refers only to an­
other part of the class of things signified by the middle term. In our example, 
“animals” in the major premise (“All animals are living things”) is universal; 
it covers all animals. So the syllogism is in accord with Rule Two. In the mi­
nor premise, however, it is not universal, because only some of the animals in 
existence are leopards. But Rule Two is still followed, in the major premise. 
The only way to ensure that the middle term will actually connect the S and 
P terms in the conclusion is for the middle term to be universal in at least one 
premise. It can be universal in both; that would just make the linkage between 
S and P extra secure or double tight. 
Rule Two simply stated: M must “securely link” S and P. 

Validity of Categorical Syllogisms  
 283
Rule Three: The Minor and Major Terms of a Valid syllogism 
Must Be Properly Extended
In Rule Two we compared the way the middle term was used in the two 
premises. In Rule Three we are looking at the minor term (S), “leopards” in our 
example, and the major term (P), “living things.” In Rule Three we compare the 
two usages of the minor term, in the minor premise and the conclusion, and 
the two usages of the major term, in the major premise and the conclusion. The 
point to remember in these comparisons is that in a syllogism we are proving 
something new—the conclusion—not out of thin air, but based on what we 
already know—the two premises. We can draw a new conclusion validly, but 
not one that goes completely beyond the information with which we started. 
For example, if we start our reasoning by knowing about Oedipus and Jocasta 
and Thebes, we have no basis for drawing a conclusion about George Washing­
ton and Virginia and cherry trees. The same thing holds true for the quantity 
of the terms we are using in a syllogism. If we start out knowing about some of 
the students in our class, say, that they are women, we cannot deduce a conclu­
sion about all the students in the class, say, that they are all women; at least, we 
can’t draw the conclusion just from knowing about only some of the students. 
Rule Three tells us that, for the minor and major terms, we cannot expand our 
conclusion beyond the information base we had in our premises. If the term 
is particular in a premise, it must be particular in the conclusion; we cannot 
expand it to a universal term in the conclusion. That would be like going from 
knowing about some of the people in class to drawing a conclusion about all 
the people in class. On the other hand, if the major or minor term is universal 
in its premise, then it can be either universal or particular in the conclusion. If 
we know, for example, that all the students in class are under thirty years old, 
we can easily deduce that some of them must be under thirty years old. 
In our example, the minor term “leopards” is universal in the minor prem­
iss, and it is universal in the conclusion. And the major term “living things” 
is particular in the major premiss, and particular in the conclusion. So this 
syllogism follows Rule Three. 
There are really two ways to state Rule Three, a positive formulation and 
a negative one.
Rule Three (stated positively): a term that is universal in the conclusion 
must be universal in its premise; but a term that is particular in the conclusion 
can be either particular or universal in its premise. 

284  
 The Logic of Arguments
Rule Three (stated negatively): you cannot go from a particular term in a 
premise to a universal term in the conclusion. 
Rule Three simply stated: don’t go “beyond your information base” about 
S and P.
Rule Four: The Quality of the Conclusion of a Valid Syllogism 
Follows the Quality of the Weaker Premise 
Rule One concerned the basic structure of a syllogism: an argument with 
three propositions but only three terms. Rules Two and Three concerned the 
quantity of the three terms in the syllogism. Rule Four concerns the quality 
of the three propositions that make up the syllogism. The rule is stated us­
ing the concepts of “weaker” and “stronger” premise. To know things we use 
both negative and affirmative propositions: “humans are animals”; “humans 
are not toads.” These two simple examples show that affirmative propositions 
are inherently “stronger” in giving us knowledge of things because they tell 
us something positive and real about things. Negative propositions only tell 
us about what something is not, not what it is. We could multiply negative 
propositions about the subject human indefinitely, and, while we would 
know something in knowing what humans are not, these propositions would 
not amount to nearly as true a knowledge of humans as the one sentence “hu­
mans are rational animals.” In general, negative propositions are weaker than 
affirmative propositions. 
Once we see the relative strength of negative and affirmative propositions, 
it becomes easier to understand Rule Four. Consider the possibilities. 
(1) If both the premises are affirmative and a conclusion follows validly, 
it must be affirmative. The reason why is that two affirmative premises don’t 
open up the possibility of saying anything negative unless we add on a third, 
negative premise. But they can authorize an affirmative conclusion: “If Socra­
tes is a man, and all men are animals,” then this leads to the affirmative conclu­
sion that “Socrates is an animal,” but it doesn’t lead the mind to any negative 
conclusions, like “Socrates is not a god.” In our example, both the premisses 
are affirmative, and so is the conclusion. So our example follows Rule Four.
(2) If one premise is affirmative and the other premise is negative, any 
conclusion validly drawn must be negative. The reason why is that a negative 
proposition separates its subject from its conclusion: “Humans are not centi­
pedes.” If one premise separates the middle term from the S or P term, then 
the only kind of conclusion we can draw will separate S and P. If “humans 

Validity of Categorical Syllogisms  
 285
aren’t centipedes,” we might be able to use “centipedes” to draw a negative 
conclusion about humans; but we are not in any position to draw a positive 
conclusion about humans. 
(3) What about two negative premises? Here no conclusion can be drawn. 
Consider these premises: “No murderers are friendly people” and “No friend­
ly people are drunks.” Can we use the middle term “friendly people” to draw 
any definite conclusion relating murderers and drunks? Definitely not. There 
might be some murderers who are also drunks; but then again they might be 
two completely separate groups. These two negative premises don’t give us 
enough information to be sure even about a negative conclusion.
We can sum up these three possibilities: 
Rule Four: the quality of the conclusion follows the weaker premise.
	1.	From two affirmative premises, only an affirmative conclusion can 
be drawn.
	2.	From one affirmative premise and one negative premise, only a 
negative conclusion can be drawn.
	3.	From two negative premises, no conclusion can be drawn. 
A Deeper Look
Violating Rule One: The Fallacy of Equivocation
It is generally easy to determine if a syllogism follows Rule One. Just make 
sure there are three and only three terms in the syllogism: S, M, and P. 
There are, however, two ways that Rule One can be violated. For easier 
syllogisms, sometimes one of the three terms—while repeating the same lan­
guage—means something different. When the same term is used in different 
sentences, but means something different, this is called “equivocation.” And 
when this happens in a syllogism, the connections that particular term should 
ensure are not made. 
I have an example from raising my children. When she was about eleven, 
one of my daughters and I were walking along South Braeswood Ave., from 
Chimney Rock Blvd. to Hillcroft St., in Houston, where we stopped at our 
favorite donut shop. Upon leaving the shop we split up, but agreed that we 
would “meet at the bank” in thirty minutes. As you might expect, I went into 
the bank building across Hillcroft, while my daughter went to the riverbank 
of Braes Bayou, across South Braeswood Ave.

286  
 The Logic of Arguments
For other syllogisms, something similar but more difficult can happen. 
Sometimes we think we are reading (or hearing) a categorical syllogism, but 
we are having a hard time finding the three terms. For writers and speakers sel­
dom are as careful with the terms they use as they might be. (This is actually a 
good thing, since completely logical language is usually boring. Read British 
philosophers of the fourteenth or the twentieth centuries for evidence.) The 
solution here is to analyze carefully what the author is saying. Remember to 
look through the words to the concepts he or she is trying to express. Here the 
trick is to simplify without distorting, by putting the author’s meaning in your 
own words. This is why learning to put an argument into your own, simplified 
language is absolutely necessary for understanding what you read and for in­
creasing your logical proficiency. 
Violating Rule Two: The Fallacy of the “Undistributed” 
Middle Term
The fallacy that violates Rule Two is called the fallacy of the “undistrib­
uted middle term,” where the middle term is particular in both premises. A 
classic case of an undistributed middle is a second-figure AAA syllogism, as 
in no. 2 in Problem Set 24: 
All dogs are living creatures.
All cats are living creatures.
Therefore, all cats are dogs.
We already know independently from this syllogism that the conclusion 
is false. But remember that we can have a valid syllogism and still derive a false 
conclusion if one of the premises is false. Since both premises are true, on first 
inspection we strongly suspect that this syllogism is invalid. And we can see 
pretty easily that the problem is with the middle term. But what exactly is the 
problem? It comes to light if we systematically go through all the terms and 
determine the quantity for each. Since the major premise, minor premise, and 
conclusion are all A propositions, their subjects are universal, but their pred­
icates are particular. Think about the middle term this way. The major prem­
ise unites all dogs with only some of the living creatures, because the premise 
leaves open at least the possibility that there are other living creatures besides 
dogs. And the same is true of the minor premise: all cats are identical with 
only some of the living creatures. Now are we assured that there is any overlap 

Validity of Categorical Syllogisms  
 287
or identity between the living creatures that are dogs and the living creatures 
that are cats? No, we are not. They are like two quite separate slices of the big 
pie of living creatures. The only way to ensure secure linkage between the S and 
P terms in the predicate, therefore, is when the M term refers to the whole M 
class at least once—that is, when it universal at least once.
Violating Rule Three: The Fallacy of the Overextended Term
“Overextension” of a term means extending the quantity from particular 
to universal. There are two kinds of “overextended” terms. If the minor term is 
overextended, the fallacy is called “Illicit Minor.” The term “licit” comes from 
the Latin word lex, which means “law” or “rule.” So an illicit term is one that 
is illegal or unlawful, according to the rules of logic, because it breaks those 
rules. If the major term is overextended, the fallacy is called “Illicit Major.” 
No. 3 in Problem Set 25 is an example of an overextended term. 
All cops are well-trained.
No firemen are cops.
Therefore, no firemen are well-trained.
As was true for the middle term, the way to determine this argument is 
fallacious is to compare the extension or quantity between the two usages of 
the minor term and between the two usages of the major term. First deter­
mine the quantity for all six usages of the terms in the syllogism.
All cops (universal) are well-trained (particular).
No firemen (universal) are cops (universal).
Therefore, no firemen (universal) are well-trained (universal).
The minor term “firemen” obeys Rule Three, because it goes from univer­
sal in the minor premise to universal in the conclusion. We have not illicitly 
overextended the number of firemen we are talking about, when we move 
from premise to conclusion. But the major term is a different case. Here “well-
trained” is a particular term in the premise, but “well-trained” is a universal 
term in the conclusion. We have gone well beyond the bounds of our infor­
mation base in moving from the major premise to the conclusion. The prob­
lem is this: we don’t start off knowing about all the well-trained people, we 
only know about some of them (cops); and we never learn information about 
the other well-trained people outside the group we started off knowing about 
(firemen). We have extended our conclusion beyond our information base.

288  
 The Logic of Arguments
Violating Rule Four: Not Following the “Weaker” Premise
Over the centuries, logicians have never devised a name for violations of 
Rule Four. This is undoubtedly because this rule is the easiest to understand 
intuitively, so that very seldom do we violate it. 
Rule Four stated simply: 	
a.	“affirmative” plus “affirmative” = “affirmative.”
b.	“affirmative” plus “negative” = “negative.” 
c.	“negative” plus “negative” = nothing. 
Using the Rules
The problems in Problem Set 25 are already set up for you. The first sen­
tence is the major premise; the second sentence is the minor premise; and the 
third sentence is the conclusion. To use the rules, the best technique is to go 
through the rules in order:
a.	Find the three terms: minor term, major term, middle term.
b.	Determine the figure of the syllogism.
c.	Determine the mood of the syllogism. (Remember that validity is 
determined by the combination of figure and mood; however, you can 
use the rules even if you don’t recognize the figure and mood.)
d.	Check the syllogism using Rule 1.
e.	Determine the quantity for each of the six terms in the syllogism.
f.	 Check the middle term using Rule 2.
g.	Check the minor term using Rule 3.
h.	Check the major term using Rule 3.
i.	 Check the quality of the conclusion using Rule 4. 
Some people will find the syllogisms in Problem Set 25 to be quite easy, 
while others will find some of them more difficult. Even if you find them to 
be easier, master this systematic technique for checking validity. If you don’t 
need it for a particular syllogism, fine; but everyone will have to rely on it at 
some point in the course. Everyone should master the technique of using the 
rules now. Please notice that using the rules depends upon your mastering 
material from the logic of terms and from the logic of propositions. Through­
out our treatment of the logic of arguments, we will depend upon the two 

Validity of Categorical Syllogisms  
 289
earlier parts of logic. If there is something you now need but that you didn’t 
quite master earlier (say, distinguishing the four different kinds of categorical 
propositions), go back to the earlier lesson and problem set and practice until 
you perfect your logical habits on that point we covered earlier. Then come 
back to Problem Set 25. 
Problem Set 25: Validity of Categorical Syllogisms
Using the Rules to Determine Validity
Rules for Validity, Briefly Stated
Rule
Fallacy
	1.	Three terms (= link)	
Equivocation
	2.	Universal middle term (= secure link)
Undistributed middle
	3.	Proper extension of major & minor 
	 	(= limit the extension)
Overextension
Illicit minor term
Illicit major term
	4.	Correct quality, quality follows the 
weaker premise
	 	(-) & (-) = no conclusion 
	 	(+) & (-) = (-) conclusion
	 	(+) & (+) = (+) conclusion
Instructions
Determine whether the following syllogisms are valid or invalid, using the 
four rules. First, identify: major term, minor term, middle term, figure, mood, 
and validity, using the following schema for your answer:
Major premise:
Minor premise:
Conclusion: 
Figure:
Mood:
V/I:
Rule violated:
Try to rewrite the propositions, putting them into standard form. This 
will make it easier to test for validity. 

290  
 The Logic of Arguments
A: All S is P.
I: Some S is P.
E: No S is P.
O: Some S is not P.
	
1.	All humans are rational.
	
	None of the people who failed the test were rational
	
	Therefore, none of the people who failed the test are humans.
	
2.	All dogs are living creatures.
	
	All cats are living creatures.
	
	Therefore, all cats are dogs.
	
3.	All cops are well-trained.
	
	No firemen are cops.
	
	Therefore, no firemen are well-trained.
	
4.	No carpenter is a professor of history.
	
	All professors of history love the study of history.
	
	Therefore, no one who loves the study of history is a carpenter.
	
5.	Every fisherman loves the sea.
	
	No drug dealer is a fisherman
	
	Therefore, no drug dealer loves the sea.
	
6.	Every fisherman loves the sea.
	
	Some Texans love the sea.
	
	Therefore, some Texans are fishermen.
	
7.	Every fisherman loves the sea.
	
	Some Houstonians are fishermen.
	
	Therefore, some Houstonians love the sea.
	
8.	Every circle is round.
	
	Every circle is a geometrical figure.
	
	Therefore, some geometrical figures are round.
	
9.	No squares are circles.
	
	All circles are geometrical figures.
	
	Therefore, some geometrical figures are not squares. 
	 10.	All waves obey wave equations.
	
	All matter obeys wave equations.
	
	Therefore, all matter is waves.
	 11.	All patriots are voters.
	
	Some citizens are not voters.
	
	Therefore, some citizens are not patriots.

Validity of Categorical Syllogisms  
 291
	 12.	Everything good is pleasant.
	
	All eating is pleasant.
	
	Therefore, all eating is good.
	 13.	All the dishes were used.
	
	Some of the dishes were also washed.
	
	Therefore, some of the things washed were also used.
	 14.	All rodents have four incisor teeth.
	
	All rats are rodents.
	
	Therefore, all rats have four incisor teeth.
	 15.	Some rodents are rats.
	
	All rodents have four incisor teeth.
	
	Therefore, some animals with four incisor teeth are rats.
	 16.	All rats are rodents.
	
	Every animal with four incisors is a rodent.
	
	Therefore, some animals with four incisors are rats.
	 17.	Every crustacean has a hard outer shell.
	
	Every lobster is a crustacean.
	
	Therefore, every lobster has a hard outer shell.
	 18.	No lobsters are good to eat.
	
	Every lobster is a crustacean.
	
	Therefore, no crustaceans are good to eat. 
	 19.	All Italians are Europeans.
	
	Some artists are Europeans.
	
	Therefore, some artists are Italians.

Categorical Syllogisms in Prose
Lesson 26
Categorical Syllogisms in Prose
The Essentials
In this lesson we take one more step toward the kinds of syllogisms you 
encounter in everyday speech, in more formal and serious speech, in writing, 
and in published works. The main difference between Problem Set 25 and 
Problem Set 26 is that here the problems are set out as prose passages. 
Analyzing Arguments in Prose
The very first thing you have to do here is to determine whether or not 
there is an argument in the passage. The way to do that is first to look for a 
possible conclusion. Quite often there are telltale words that mark a conclu­
sion, just as we learned that there are a variety of words that point out differ­
ent kinds of hypothetical statements. Once you have spotted what you think 
is the conclusion, then search around for premises. In a categorical syllogism, 
the conclusion will be a categorical proposition. And the conclusion will con­
tain two terms—the minor and major terms. Once you have spotted them, 
the search for premises becomes easier, because each of the two premises will 
contain either the minor or major term. In this way you can uncover the mid­
dle term. At this point, you can arrange the syllogism into the order we have 
called its standard form.
292

Categorical Syllogisms in Prose  
 293
major premise
minor premise
conclusion
Now look carefully at the three terms. It is usually very helpful to simpli­
fy each of the three propositions that make up the argument. To clarify the 
terms and what kinds of propositions make up the syllogism, it is usually best 
to try to restate each of the propositions in your own way, to paraphrase the 
argument in a way that makes the terms and propositions more precise. Then 
try to put your formulation of each proposition in standard form. It helps 
to simplify without distorting the subject, predicate, and middle terms. It also 
helps to make explicit the quantity of each proposition. And be sure you are 
clear about whether each proposition is affirmative or negative—the quality 
of the proposition. These points will help you to determine if the proposition 
is A, I, E, or O. Be especially careful about the logical subjects and predicates, 
which need not be the same as grammatical subjects and verbs. In everyday 
arguments we often change back and forth between terms and their oppo­
sites—even in the same arguments. Be sure you express the terms of the syl­
logism consistently. And always remember that the copula is hidden within 
each verb. 
Once you have simplified and clarified the three propositions that make 
up the categorical syllogism, it’s time to test it for validity. You can go imme­
diately to the four rules, or you can determine its figure and mood to help 
decide whether it is valid or invalid. Until you have mastered the rules and 
can use them easily, it is best to rewrite the argument in standard form before 
you test it for validity. 
By the end of this process, in which you are analyzing the argument in 
prose, you should know major term, minor term, middle term, major prem­
ise, minor premise, conclusion, figure, mood, and validity (and if it is invalid, 
which rule is violated). These are the points upon which you will be quizzed 
and tested. 
A Deeper Look
Steps in Analyzing Categorical Syllogisms in Prose
	
1.	Determine if there is an argument at all. If so, make a preliminary 
guess about whether it is valid. 

294  
 The Logic of Arguments
	
2.	In your analysis, look first for the conclusion.
	
3.	Identify the S and P terms in the conclusion.
	
4.	If the conclusion is a categorical proposition, look for premises to see 
if the argument is a categorical syllogism. 
	
5.	Use the S and P terms to find premises that contain them. 
	
6.	The premises will help you discover the M term.
	
7.	Put the argument into standard logical order: major premise; minor 
premise; conclusion.
	
8.	Clarify the argument by restating the two premises and the conclu­
sion as simply as you can, putting all three propositions into standard 
logical form. 
	
9.	Apply the four rules in order.
	 10.	A syllogism is valid only if it obeys all four rules.
Verbal Indicators of Premises and Conclusions
Words That Often Precede Premises
if
since
because
for	  
as, inasmuch as
the reason is 
inferred from
derived from
proven by
Words That Often Precede a Conclusion
therefore
then
hence
so
accordingly
consequently
proves
as a result

Categorical Syllogisms in Prose  
 295
thus
for this reason, [conclusion then stated]
it follows
shows
implies
There are, of course, syllogisms that do not have verbal indicators for 
premises or conclusions. But most arguments do give some kind of verbal 
hint. Another kind of verbal indicator often used is to introduce the language 
of necessity into the conclusion. For example, “X and Y being so, Socrates 
must have been a pious man.” The language of necessity points out the con­
clusion.
Problem Set 26: Categorical Syllogisms in Prose
Using the Rules to Determine Validity
Instructions 
Determine whether the following syllogisms are valid or invalid, using the 
four rules. Identify: major term, minor term, middle term, figure, mood, and 
validity, using standard logical order, as follows:
Major premise:
Minor premise:
Conclusion: 
Figure:
Mood:
V/I:
Rule violated:
Rewrite the propositions, putting them into standard form. The reason 
for doing this is to make sure you understand the logical form of the syllo­
gism—its figure and mood—in order to determine whether it is valid. 
A: All S is P.
I: Some S is P.
E: No S is P.
O: Some S is not P.

296  
 The Logic of Arguments
	
1.	My mother wears army shoes. And everyone who wears army shoes 
was in the army. So can’t you see that my mother was in the army? 
(from W. R. Houser, my father, a World War II veteran)
	
2.	Now you know, John, that raccoons shed their fur at the end of May. 
Since the South American mirana also sheds its fur in May, the mirana 
must be a raccoon.
	
3.	Georgette will learn logic easily because she is interested in it, and in­
terest makes for easy learning.
	
4.	Frenchmen are very logical and, in view of the fact that Texans are not 
Frenchmen, we may conclude that they are not very logical. 
	
5.	You can’t call a baby a rational animal, for a rational animal is able to 
reason and a baby is not able to reason.
	
6.	Granted that no provident person wastes money, and that some prov­
ident persons are generous, it is also true that some generous persons 
do not waste money. 
	
7.	Assuming that he is over forty and that baseball players are too 
old at forty for the major leagues, he will have to be dropped from 
the roster. 
	
8.	Seeing that stocks have been falling in price for several months this 
year, and that a decline in stock prices invariably heralds a recession, 
we may infer that we are in for a lag in the economy.
	
9.	Every religious person goes to church every Sunday. I see that Fr. Miller 
goes to church every Sunday, so I am quite confident that Fr. Miller is a 
religious man.
	 10.	We know that whatever has long claws can be very harmful. We also 
know that black bears have long claws. It is clear, then, that black bears 
can be very harmful. 
	 11.	Every poor mechanic is a menace to society, for every poor mechan-
ic fails in his responsibilities to society. And everyone knows that 
those who are a menace to society fail in their responsibilities to 
society.
	 12.	Since some burrowing mammals are carnivores, and not every raccoon 
is a burrowing mammal, some raccoons are not carnivores.
	 13.	I tell you that fossils are the hardened remains of plant or animal life 
from a previous geological era. The reason is that fossils are preserved 
in rock formations. And some of the things preserved in rock forma­

Categorical Syllogisms in Prose  
 297
tions are the hardened remains of plant or animal life from a previous 
geological period. 
	 14.	Since every parrot has a brightly colored triangular beak and the pel­
ican is not a parrot, we can conclude that the pelican does not have a 
brightly colored triangular beak.
	 15.	Apes are never angels; and philosophers are never apes; therefore phi­
losophers are never angels. 

Venn Diagrams of Categorical Syllogisms
Lesson 27
Venn Diagrams of Categorical 
Syllogisms
The Essentials
Before beginning this lesson, it would be helpful to go back and reread 
Lesson 16. This will refresh your knowledge of how to use Venn diagrams for 
categorical propositions. What you have learned subsequently is that a cate­
gorical syllogism has three parts—major premise, minor premise, and conclu­
sion. You will remember that what makes a valid categorical syllogism work is 
the combined effect of both premises. When taken together, they necessitate 
the conclusion. What is helpful about Venn diagrams of categorical syllogisms 
is that they show how the conclusion follows from the premises in a very 
interesting way. What you do is diagram both premises on the same geomet­
rical figure, this time one made of three, not two, interlocking circles. If the 
argument is valid and you diagram the premises correctly, the conclusion will 
already be found in the diagram. You don’t diagram the conclusion, but you 
see the conclusion in the diagram of the two premises. The fact that the con­
clusion is already there is the sign that the argument is valid. If the conclusion 
is not already there, then the syllogism is invalid. You can see visually why an 
invalid argument is invalid—where it falls down.
298

Venn Diagrams of Categorical Syllogisms  
 299
The Basic Venn Diagram of a Syllogism
A good way to begin diagramming categorical syllogisms is to diagram 
each of the two premises by itself. Then transfer the diagram of each prem­
ise onto the three-circle figure. Putting both premises into the same figure 
shows the combined impact of the premises. But you do have to be careful. 
In the Venn diagram of a syllogism there are three circles, one standing for 
the subject term of the conclusion (the minor term), the second standing for 
the predicate term of the conclusion (the major term), and one standing for 
the middle term that provides the bridge linking the minor and major terms. 
Consider the basic figure for Venn diagrams of syllogisms, before we have 
drawn either premise into it. 
This is the standard and easiest configuration of the Venn diagram of a 
categorical syllogism. The S or minor term is in the lower left circle, the P 
or major term is in the lower right circle, and the M or middle term is in the 
upper circle. When we look for the conclusion we will be looking at the two 
lower circles, in an order that runs from S to P in looking from left to right. 
If your geometrical imagination is good enough, however, you can take any 
circle for any of the three terms.
You will probably have noticed that, since there are three circles instead 
of two, each circle is divided into four parts, not just two, as happened when 
we diagramed categorical propositions. This means you will have to be careful 
when hatching out or shading areas and also when putting an X in an area. 
P
S
Venn Diagram of a Syllogism
M
		S	 =	subject (minor) term of 
syllogism
	M	=	middle term of syllogism
	P	 =	predicate (major) term of 
the syllogism 

300  
 The Logic of Arguments
Quite often you must put an X on the line that divides a common area into 
two parts, because the proposition you are diagramming cannot, by itself, de­
termine on which side of this dividing line the X falls. This will become clear 
as we go through examples. First, let’s divide up the diagram for a syllogism 
into numbered parts, as we did for the Venn diagrams of propositions.
Be sure you understand what each numbered area represents. You need to 
describe each area in relation to all three circles. 
Area 1 = nonhuman, nonanimal, nonliving, or non-S, non-M, non-P.
Area 2 = human, nonanimal, nonliving, or S, non-M, non-P.
Area 3 = human, animal, nonliving, or S, M, non-P.
Area 4 = nonhuman, animal, nonliving, or non-S, M, non-P.
Area 5 = nonhuman, animal, living, or non-S, M, P.
Area 6 = nonhuman, nonanimal, living, or non-S, non-M, P.
Area 7 = human, nonanimal, living, or S, non-M, P. 
Area 8 = human, animal, living, or S, M, P
Venn Diagram of a First-Figure AAA Syllogism
Now let’s diagram a first-figure AAA syllogism.
Major premise:	 All animals are living things.	 All M is P.
Minor premise:	 All humans are animals.	
All S is M.
Conclusion:	
Therefore, all humans are	
So, all S is P.
	
living things.
Areas of a Venn Diagram 
of a Syllogism
P
S
M
4
3
5
8
7
2
6
1

Venn Diagrams of Categorical Syllogisms  
 301
The S circle (human) is made up of areas 2, 3, 7, and 8. The M circle (ani­
mal) is made up of areas 3, 4, 5, and 8. And the P circle (living thing) is made 
up of 5, 6, 7, and 8. 
When we diagram the major premise, we will hatch or shade both areas 3 
and 4, since they fall outside the circle of living things. And we will have to put 
an X somewhere in the area made up of 5 and 8, since they represent things 
that are both animals and living things. But the proposition “All animals are 
living things,” considered just by itself, does not say whether the animals we are 
talking about are human (area 8) or nonhuman (area 5). So we will have to put 
the X on the line between areas 5 and 8. 
When we diagram the minor premise, something similar happens. We 
have to hatch or shade areas 2 and 7, which signify things that would be hu­
man but not animals. We have to put an X into the common area, somewhere 
in area 3 or 8. If we had not already diagrammed the major premise, we would 
put the X on the line between 3 and 8. But we have already diagrammed the 
major premise, and in doing so we hatched or shaded out area 3. The only 
place for the X to go is in area 8.
Can we see the conclusion—“All humans are living things”—already in 
the Venn diagram of the two premises? Yes, we can. What we need to see are 
two things. First, areas 2 and 3 need to be hatched or shaded out; and they 
are. Second, we need to find an X somewhere in the common area between 
“human” and “living thing.” That common area is made up of areas 7 and 8. 
And there is an X in area 8. The two requirements for the conclusion already 
being in the diagram are met, so the syllogism is valid.
Diagram of a Valid 
Affirmative Syllogism
living thing
man
animal
X
X

302  
 The Logic of Arguments
A Deeper Look
Venn Diagram of a Valid Negative Syllogism
Let’s take one more example of a valid syllogism, this time one with a 
negative conclusion. Syllogisms of the first figure EAE are valid. Consider the 
following syllogism:
Major premise:	 No mammal with a trunk	
No M is P.
	
is a kangaroo.
Minor premise:	 All elephants are mammals	
All S is M.
	
with trunks.
Conclusion:	
So, no elephants are kangaroos.	 No S is P.
Again, we will make use of the areas of the diagram as numbered, divided 
into eight areas. We’ll diagram the major premise first. 
The major premise is a universal negative proposition, so areas 5 and 8 
must be hatched or shaded. An X needs to be put somewhere in areas 3 and 4. 
From the major premise alone, we don’t yet know whether the mammals with 
a trunk are elephants (area 3) or not (area 4), so we’ll put the X on the line 
between areas 3 and 4. At this point we know there are some mammals with 
trunks that are not kangaroos, but that is all we know. 
Now let’s add the minor premise to our diagram. This is a universal affir­
mative proposition (A), whose subject is elephants. We know that we need to 
hatch or shade out everything in the S circle that is outside the M circle. These 
are areas 2 and 7. We also know that there exist elephants with trunks, areas 3 
and 8 in the diagram. But area 8 has already been hatched or shaded out when 
we diagrammed the major premise. The only place where the X that is part of 
the minor premise can fall is in area 3. 
Can we see the conclusion “No elephant is a kangaroo” already in the 
diagram? Yes, for two reasons. First, areas 7 and 8 must be hatched or shaded 
out, in this way separating the elephants from the kangaroos; and they are. 
Second, there must be an X somewhere in the elephant circle. Again, there is; 
the X is in area 3. You can see in the diagram that this syllogism is valid (and 
so too are all first-figure EAE syllogisms).

Venn Diagrams of Categorical Syllogisms  
 303
Finally, let’s consider an invalid syllogism. Here is a second-figure AAA 
syllogism.
Major premise:	 All cats are animals.	
All P is M.
Minor premise:	 All dogs are animals.	
All S is M.
Conclusion:	
Therefore, all dogs are cats.	 All S is P.
For this kind of syllogism, diagramming will help us see the undistrib­
uted middle term. But we have to be very careful where we place our X’s. In 
diagramming the major premise we also have to remember that “dogs” is its 
subject, not its predicate. So we’ll diagram the major premise moving from P 
to M, not from M to P (see p. 304). 
As with every A proposition, we have to hatch or shade out things that 
would be cats but not animals, outside the circle of animals—that is, hatch or 
shade areas 6 and 7. We also have to put an X somewhere in the area common 
to “cats” and “animals”—that is, areas 5 and 8. But as before, we don’t know 
just from “all dogs are animals” by itself whether the dogs we are talking about 
are inside the cat circle (area 8) or outside the cat circle (area 5). (Remember, 
this is an easy example. Of course, we know from independent information 
that cats are not dogs; but we’re trying to figure out what we can know from 
these two premises alone.) So what we’ll do, as before, is put the X “on the line” 
between areas 5 and 8. When diagramming the minor premise the same thing 
happens. We have to hatch or shade out areas 2 and 7 and put an X on the line 
between areas 3 and 8. 
kangaroo
elephant
mammal with a trunk
X
X

304  
 The Logic of Arguments
What is the result? If the argument were valid we would have to see two 
things. First, areas 2 and 3 would both have to be hatched or shaded. But they 
are not; only area 2 is hatched or shaded out. Since area 3 is still open, there 
can be a cat that is not a dog. This is one reason the argument is invalid. 
Second, some part of the area common to “cats” and “dogs” (areas 7 and 
8) would have to have an X in it, in order to show that there really are cats that 
are dogs. But this is not true either. Area 7 is shaded; there cannot exist any 
cats that are also dogs in this area. Both the X’s are on the line adjoining area 
8; but this is not enough. There would have to be an X inside area 8 in order to 
know for sure that there exist cats that also are dogs. The argument is invalid. 
This is a typical example of an argument with an undistributed middle term.
If you are having trouble putting both propositions into the diagram with 
three interlocking circles, it sometimes helps to begin by diagramming each 
premise independently. First diagram each premise by itself, using only two 
interlocking circles located outside the final diagram with three circles. Then 
you can transfer the diagram of each premise to the three-circle diagram. 
When you do this, however, make sure you are careful about where to put 
X’s, since often they go on lines.
The problems in Problem Set 26 are taken from Problem Sets 24 and 25. 
So go back to them if you need to remind yourself what you decided about 
the validity of a particular syllogism, when you used the four rules of validity. 
Your answers using the rules and using diagrams should be the same. Use the 
method that you find easier to check the results you get using the method that 
is harder for you. Diagrams are an excellent backup plan, but it is easy to make 
mistakes with them. 
cat
dog
animal
X
X

Venn Diagrams of Categorical Syllogisms  
 305
Problem Set 27: Venn Diagrams of Categorical Syllogisms
Determining Validity Using Venn Diagrams
Instructions
Draw Venn diagrams for each of the following syllogisms. Using your 
Venn diagram, determine whether the syllogism is valid. Check your work 
using the four rules for validity.
	
1.	Every fisherman loves the sea.
	
	Some Houstonians are fishermen.
	
	Therefore, some Houstonians love the sea.
	
2.	Every fisherman loves the sea.
	
	No drug dealer is a fisherman
	
	Therefore, no drug dealer loves the sea.
	
3.	Every fisherman loves the sea.
	
	Some Texans love the sea.
	
	Therefore, some Texans are fishermen.
	
4.	No squares are circles.
	
	All circles are geometrical figures.
	
	Therefore, some geometrical figures are not squares. 
	
5.	All patriots are voters.
	
	Some citizens are not voters.
	
	Therefore, some citizens are not patriots.
	
6.	Everything good is pleasant.
	
	All eating is pleasant.
	
	Therefore, all eating is good.
	
7.	All Italians are Europeans.
	
	Some artists are Europeans.
	
	Therefore, some artists are Italians.
	
8.	Frenchmen are very logical and, in view of the fact the Texans are not 
	
	Frenchmen, we may conclude that they are not very logical. 
	
9.	Every religious person goes to church every Sunday. I see that 
	
	Fr. Miller goes to church every Sunday, so I am quite confident 
	
	that Fr. Miller is a religious man.
	 10.	Since some burrowing mammals are carnivores, and not every raccoon 
	
	is a burrowing mammal, some raccoons are not carnivores.

Enthymemes and Epicheiremas
Lesson 28
Enthymemes and Epicheiremas
The Essentials
What Are Enthymemes and Epicheiremas?
In this lesson we arrive at two kinds of argument we use and encounter in 
everyday discourse, as well as in what we read and write. What we have called 
the “standard categorical syllogism” consists of three propositions (two prem­
ises and one conclusion) and three terms. Humans being what we are, though, 
we often leave out parts of our reasoning process. Sometimes this happens 
because we think the argument so easy to follow that we don’t need to put 
in all three propositions. At other times, we are not quite bright enough to 
figure out an appropriate premise, but we are confident that the premise we 
do know is enough to lead to the conclusion. At still other times, we think we 
have supplied all the premises required, but we have not. 
An argument with a missing premise is called an “enthymeme.” This 
Greek word comes from the two words that make it up. An enthymeme leaves 
part of the argument en, or inside, our thymos, one of many Greek words for 
the soul or one of its parts. An enthymeme is a syllogism with a missing part. 
That part may be in our mind, but it is not down on the page or spoken to 
our audience. In English, we might call an enthymeme a “limping” syllogism, 
because it misses a leg and so just “limps” along.
An epicheirema is the opposite kind of argument. This term has a strange 
306

Enthymemes and Epicheiremas  
 307
history. Aristotle used it to describe an argument where one tries very hard to 
give a demonstrative proof of something, but fails. Much later in the history 
of logic, when in the eighteenth century English logicians were first writing 
their logic books in the English language as opposed to Latin, they tried to 
use a lot of Greek terms, as had become popular during the humanist period. 
“Epicheirema” was one of them, but they changed the meaning of this term 
from what it had meant for Aristotle. The term comes from the Greek words 
epi, which means on or to, and cheir, which means hand, so for these later 
logicians an epicheirema was an argument in which we really put our hand to 
the task of proof, and (unlike what Aristotle himself had said), we often suc­
ceed. We will follow this later understanding of the term “epicheirema.” An 
epicheirema contains the basic syllogism, but offers additional argumentative 
support for one or both of its premises. In English, we might call an epicheire­
ma an “extended argument,” though we will see there are other kinds of ex­
tended arguments.
Definitions: In short, we can think of an enthymeme as a categorical syllogism 
with a basic part missing and an epicheirema as a categorical syllogism with 
an extra part—some sort of evidence supporting one or both of its premises. 
Recognizing and Using Enthymemes
Aristotle recognized that we frequently use enthymemes in oral discourse, 
in speeches and everyday conversation. This is partly because we are lazy, but 
more because deductive arguments set up in an explicit manner, with all their 
parts and premises, are often uninteresting and boring because they spend 
too much time on points that are too easy and too little time on parts that 
are harder for us. In his Rhetoric, Aristotle gave the name “enthymeme” to 
any rhetorical syllogism. We, however, will follow the technical meaning of 
“enthymeme,” as used in logic, where it means any deductive argument with 
part of the basic argument missing. Since there are three primary parts to a 
categorical syllogism—major premise, minor premise, and conclusion—logi­
cians distinguish the first-order enthymeme (which lacks its major premise), 
from a second-order enthymeme (which lacks its minor premise), and from a 
third-order enthymeme (which lacks its conclusion). 
In analyzing enthymemes, the first thing to do is recognize that the ar­
gument is an enthymeme. This is done by first looking for the conclusion—
which gives you the minor and major terms—and then using these two terms 

308  
 The Logic of Arguments
to search for the two premises. When you have searched hard but can’t come 
up with the missing premise (or missing conclusion), you should suspect the 
argument is an enthymeme. 
But in fairness to the author, you can’t stop here and say the argument is 
invalid just because it misses an important piece. A fair-minded and sympa­
thetic reader will go back to the two propositions that are present and try to 
reconstruct the missing premise. To reconstruct a premise, you determine what 
the two terms are that make up the missing proposition. You get these terms 
from the two propositions you do have. Normally you will know the S and 
P terms from the conclusion, and you will know either S or P, along with the 
M term, from the one premise you have. Your job as “reconstructor” or “sym­
pathetic reader” is to create the missing premise based on the terms you do 
have. Most often you will be confronted with two alternative reconstructions, 
say, “All M is P” or “All P is M.” Here you will have to make a judgment about 
what you think the author’s intention was. Normally the author had in mind 
the more obviously true of the possible reconstructed premises, or the one 
you have more reason to believe he was mentally inserting into the argument, 
based on other things the author has said. Once you have reconstructed the 
missing proposition, you need to put together the whole (now reconstructed) 
syllogism. At this point you can test for validity. If the argument turns out 
to be invalid, you may want to go back and try the other formulation of the 
missing premise. However, here is where you need to be careful. It is wrong 
automatically to assume the author meant the premise that makes the syllo­
gism valid; and it is equally wrong always to use the premise that makes the 
syllogism invalid.
Some Examples
As usual, let’s start off with an example from our problem set.
Example 1: Suicide and Wealth
Problem Set 28, number 3: “One can be rich without being happy. The 
proof is the number of rich people who commit suicide.”
This is a good enthymeme on which to practice, since it involves a number 
of steps. The phrase “The proof is” shows us that the second sentence is a prem­
ise. The first sentence should be the conclusion. But when we look carefully at 
the first sentence, we quickly see that, while “one” is the grammatical subject, 

Enthymemes and Epicheiremas  
 309
it is not the logical subject. “One” is just standing in for the logical subject. The 
proposition is really about rich people; this is its logical subject. So set out in 
standard form, the conclusion is “Some rich people are not happy.” (We could 
use “unhappy” as the P term, but the syllogism is easier to understand this way, 
since “happy” actually is used in the conclusion.) The second sentence must 
be a premise, because it is introduced by “the proof is.” But which one? Since 
its subject is rich people, the S term, it must be the minor premise. Once again, 
this proposition is not stated in standard form; we need to interpret what “the 
number of” means. It means some number less than all, which makes the minor 
premise particular. “Some rich people commit suicide.” So thus far we have:
Major premise:	
Minor premise:	 Some rich people (S) commit suicide (M).
Conclusion:	
Some rich people (S) are not happy (P). 
From the minor premise and the conclusion we can see that the M term 
is “people who commit suicide” or “suicides”; while the P term is “happy” or 
“happy people.” At this point we have two possible major premises to try out. 
We know the Major premise must be a negative proposition, because the con­
clusion is negative, and we know it must contain the M and P terms.
Possible Major 1:	 “No people who commit suicide are happy.”
Possible Major 2:	 “No happy people commit suicide.” 
In this case, the choice between the two possible major premises is easy. Both 
mean basically the same thing, and the one converts into the other. The argu­
ment is valid, whatever premise is chosen. The reconstructed syllogism can be: 
Major premise:	 [No people who commit suicide are happy.]
Minor premise:	 Some rich people commit suicide.
Conclusion:	
Some rich people are not happy.	  
A Deeper Look
A Second Enthymeme
Example 2: Islam and Jihad
You should realize, however, that often the possible choices for a missing 
proposition are not equally likely, nor will both be valid. To see this, let’s con­

310  
 The Logic of Arguments
sider Problem Set 28, no. 2: “All the 9/11 attackers were Jihadists. I know this 
because they all were Muslims.” Here we can go through the same process.
The phrase “I know this because” introduces a premise. It looks like “All 
the 9/11 attackers were Jihadists” is the conclusion, and “all the 9/11 attack­
ers were Muslims” is the stated premise. If so, then S is “9/11 attackers,” M is 
“Muslims,” and P is “Jihadists.” If you don’t know much about Islamic religion 
and culture, you might think that “Jihadists” is just another name for “Mus­
lims.” The only way around this mistake is to learn more about Islam. Once 
you see that “Muslim” and “Jihadist” do not mean the same thing, you can 
see that there are two possibilities for the Major premise, the two universal 
affirmative propositions we can form from the M and P terms:
Possible Major 1:	 “All Muslims are Jihadists.”
Possible Major 2:	 “All Jihadists are Muslims.” 
In this case, it is more difficult to choose the Major premise. No. 1, “All Mus­
lims are Jihadists,” would certainly make the syllogism valid. But the propo­
sition isn’t actually true. Even if it is true that Islam, as traditionally under­
stood, includes belief in “jihad” or holy war, at least in some circumstances, 
that would not be enough to make all Muslims “Jihadists”—that is, people 
who advocate jihad or “religious war” against other Muslims or the Western 
world, or the United States in particular. (There are plenty of Muslims who 
understand “jihad” to mean not military war against someone else, but an 
inner struggle with yourself to improve yourself morally.) On the other hand, 
the second possibility (“All Jihadists are Muslims”), which is true, produces 
an invalid syllogism. 
Choosing between the two possibilities is more difficult in this case with­
out other information about the speaker or writer. Let’s look at both options. 
If Major premise 1 is chosen, then the argument would be valid but unsound, 
because the Major premise would be false, even if, as the proponents of Isla­
mism say, “all Muslims should be Jihadists.” If we take possible Major premise 
2, then, while this proposition is true, the argument would be invalid. The 
overall result is that the argument is unsound, because either the Major prem­
ise is untrue or the argument is invalid. 

Enthymemes and Epicheiremas  
 311
Recognizing and Using Epicheiremas
Example 3: Bill Jones
If you look at No. 4 in Problem Set 28, you will see the opposite kind of 
argument. Here there is more to the argument than just the basic syllogism.
Bill Jones is a local contractor who should not be allowed to stay in business. I 
know a lot of people, including myself, who were swindled by this contractor. In 
my own case, I paid him for the cost of both labor and materials for an addition 
to my home, and as it turned out, later received from the lumber company a bill 
for the cost of the materials. Talk about cheating! No contractor who is in the 
habit of swindling people should be allowed to stay in business. So again, I say, 
let’s get rid of people like Bill Jones.
This paragraph begins and ends with what is essentially the same propo­
sition: the conclusion, which is repeated for emphasis. Here we have to state 
the terms of the conclusion precisely in order to find the two premises. A fair 
restatement of the conclusion is, “Bill Jones is not a contractor who should 
be in business.” “Bill Jones” is the S term, and “a contractor who should be in 
business” is the P term. Once we have seen these two terms, then we can see 
that the second sentence states the minor premise. But we can restate it in 
simplified form: “Bill Jones is a swindler.” This lets us see that “swindler” is M. 
Reading down the passage, we see that the third and fourth sentences do not 
give us the major premise, which must be a proposition containing both M 
and P. But the fifth sentence does contain those two terms; it looks like the 
major premise. We can set out the basic syllogism in standard form.
Major premise:	 No swindler is a contractor who should be 
in business.
Minor premise:	 Bill Jones is a swindler.
Conclusion:	
Bill Jones is not a contractor who should be 
in business. 
This basic syllogism is a valid argument—first-figure EAE (or “Celarent”). 
But what about the third sentence? It is not irrelevant to the basic syllogism, 
even though it is not one of its two premises or its conclusion. What the 
third sentence does is offer support for the truth of the Minor premise. To 
show that “Bill Jones is a swindler,” the author offers us his own case. He 
paid Jones for the cost of the materials, but Jones did not use that money 
to pay the lumber company for the materials, as he should. He pocketed 

312  
 The Logic of Arguments
the money designed to cover both the cost of the labor (and profit) and the 
cost of the materials. The lumber company gave the materials to Jones in the 
good-faith expectation he would pay them when he received payment for 
the job by the author. This is a classic swindle: charging the homeowner for 
the materials but not paying the lumber company. Because such information 
gives evidence supporting the truth of the premise, it’s called the “proof ” 
of the premise, in this case, the minor premise. In this example, there is no 
“proof of the Major premise,” because the author thinks it obvious that 
swindling contractors should not be allowed to stay in business. 
In addition to the basic syllogism that draws the overall conclusion, then, 
an epicheirema has either “proof of the major premise” or “proof of the minor 
premise,” or both. In analyzing an epicheirema, you should begin with the 
basic categorical syllogism. Then look to see if there is additional relevant 
information. If it takes the form of a proof of one of the premises, then the 
argument is an epicheirema. Please remember that such proof can take many 
forms: it might be another categorical syllogism, with the major (or minor) 
premise of the basic syllogism as its conclusion. But such proof might just 
as well be some personal experience, recitation of a set of facts, an inductive 
argument, or simply citing some kind of authority. We’ll not worry at this 
stage about determining the exact form of argument the proof might be; it 
is enough to understand that the evidence supports one of the two premises. 
Legal Arguments
A dispute like the one involving Bill Jones might well end up in court. 
And this example can give us insight into how legal arguments work. In its 
basic outline, the legal argument for a case (both for prosecution and defense) 
has one premise (the major premise) that states the relevant law and a second 
premise (the minor premise) that states the facts of the case. To prove his case, 
a lawyer combines the legal premise with the factual premise to produce a 
conclusion—either guilty or not guilty. Looking at legal arguments this way 
shows that in order to arrive at a conclusion of guilty or not guilty, a lawyer 
must address both the facts of this particular case and the law that covers this 
sort of case. This is why lawyers must be prepared to address both matters 
of law and matters of fact in their legal arguments. Their arguments about 
the law that covers the case are like proofs of the major premise. And their 
arguments about the facts of the case are like proofs of the minor premise. In 
short, legal cases cannot be won by addressing merely the law or by address­

Enthymemes and Epicheiremas  
 313
ing merely the facts. Both law and facts have to be brought together to argue 
persuasively and logically in court.
From this brief look at legal arguments, we can learn something import­
ant about other arguments over human behavior. Quite often, people try 
to resolve such disputes by only looking at the facts: “Just give me the facts, 
ma’am.” But by themselves, the “facts” never resolve an argument about hu­
man behavior, arguments where we are evaluating the behavior of others or 
of ourselves. Such arguments always need to address matters of law in a wider 
sense than statutory law or Constitutional law or precedent, the kinds of law 
lawyers treat. These arguments need to address a more fundamental and more 
important kind of law, “moral law,” which is the final court of appeal for all 
moral disputes over how humans behave.
Summary
In analyzing enthymemes and epicheiremas, we employ the techniques 
for analyzing a regular categorical syllogism in order to see if it is valid. What 
makes these arguments a bit harder is figuring out how to deal with the miss­
ing part or the extra parts of the argument. Mastering these techniques is es­
sential to dealing with more difficult deductive arguments. 
Problem Set 28: Enthymemes and Epicheiremas
Identifying and Evaluating Enthymemes and Epicheiremas
Instructions
Determine whether the following arguments are enthymemes, epicheiremas, 
or use both forms of argument. Then test for validity. Set out your work using 
the following schema: 
Type of syllogism: (1) regular, (2) enthymeme, (3) epicheirema, (4) both 
enthymeme and epicheirema
Major premise:
Minor premise:
Conclusion:
Figure:
Mood:
Proof of Major Premise (if present):
Proof of Minor Premise (if present): 

314  
 The Logic of Arguments
V/I (Valid or Invalid):
Rule violated:
1. All gentlemen hold open car doors for ladies. I’m presuming that you 
are a gentleman, Edward. And since you know logic, I’ll let you draw your 
own conclusion. (In memory of my grandmother, Mrs. Josie B. Houser, who 
taught me this lesson)
2. All the 9/11 attackers were Jihadists. I know this because they all were 
Muslims. 
3. One can be rich without being happy. The proof is the number of rich 
people who commit suicide.
4. Bill Jones is a local contractor who should not be allowed to stay in 
business. I know a lot people, including myself, who were swindled by this 
contractor. In my own case, I paid him for the cost of both labor and materi­
als for an addition to my home, and as it turned out, later received from the 
lumber company a bill for the cost of the materials. Talk about cheating! No 
contractor who is in the habit of swindling people should be allowed to stay 
in business. So again, I say, let’s get rid of people like Bill Jones.
5. An economy based on excessive taxation is fundamentally an unsound 
economy. Every government has, of course, the right to tax both individuals 
and corporations, inasmuch as taxation is the only means that a government 
has of maintaining itself in existence. When, however, the costs of taxation 
are so high that they are prejudicial to a free economy, a situation has de­
veloped in which the government is no longer serving the interests of the 
citizenry at large. Is there any doubt about the fact that the economy of our 
government, based as it is on a system of excessive taxation, is fundamentally 
an unsound economy?
6. “It is the party leaders who must be got rid of. For you see, a party leader 
is just like a wolf—like a starving wolf; if he is to exist at all he needs so many 
small beasts a year.” (Henrik Ibsen, 19th-cen. Swedish dramatist, An Enemy 
of the People) 
7. “Consequently, as God is supremely immutable, it belongs to him to be 
eternal.” (Thomas Aquinas, 13th-cen. theologian, Summa Theologiae I, q. 10, 
a. 2)
8. “No man whatever believes, or can believe, exactly what his grandfather 
believed; he enlarges somewhat, by fresh discovery, his view of the universe, 
and consequently his theorem of the universe.” (Thomas Carlyle, 19th-cen. 
author, On Heroes, chapter 4, “Hero as Priest”)

Enthymemes and Epicheiremas  
 315
9. “Men act by a rational judgment, for they deliberate about what is to 
be done.” (Thomas Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s Metaphysics, bk. 1, les-
son 1, n. 11) 
10. “Man is the only animal that laughs and weeps, for he is the only animal 
that is struck by the difference between what things are and what things ought 
to be.” (William Hazlitt, 19th-cen. British essayist, “On Wit and Humor”)
11. “A machine can handle information; it can calculate, conclude and 
choose; it can perform reasonable operations with information. A machine, 
therefore, can think.” (Edmund C. Berkeley, 20th-cen. American pioneering 
computer scientist, Giant Brains or Machines That Think)
12. “As I view the matter, theology in relation to the theistic hypothesis 
swings like a pendulum between two opposite extremes, each of them impos­
sible of acceptance. There is too much evil in Nature for Theism in its tradi­
tional form to be true; and there is too much good in the world for Theism 
in some form not to be true.” (W. P. Montague, mid-20th-cen. prominent 
American philosopher, The Ways of Things, 112–13)
13. In his history The Second World War, vol. 1, entitled The Gathering 
Storm, Winston Churchill recorded the following conversation in 1935, be­
tween M. Pierre Laval, French premier and defense minister, and Russian 
dictator Josef Stalin: 
	“M. Laval now went on a three days’ visit to Moscow, where he was wel­
comed by Stalin. There were lengthy discussions, of which a fragment not 
hitherto published may be recorded. Stalin and Molotov were, of course, anx­
ious to know above all else what was to be the strength of the French Army on 
the Western Front: how many divisions? What period of service? After this 
field had been explored, Laval said: ‘Can’t you do something to encourage 
religion and the Catholic Church in Russia? It would help me so much with 
the Pope.’ ‘Oho!’ said Stalin. ‘The Pope! How many divisions has he got?’ ” 
Stalin’s rhetorical question is really an argument. Can you put it into stan­
dard logical form?
14. “The value of any commodity . . . to the person . . . who wants . . . to ex­
change it for other commodities is equal to the quantity of labor which it 
enables him to purchase or command. Labor, therefore, is the real measure 
of the exchangeable value of all commodities.” (Adam Smith, 18th-cen. Scots 
economist, The Wealth of Nations, bk. 1, chap. 5)
15. “Because Babylon is vile, it does not follow that Jerusalem is vile.” (Eric 
Gill, 20th-cen. English artist, Autobiography, 244)

316  
 The Logic of Arguments
16. “A nation without a conscience is a nation without a soul. A nation 
without a soul is a nation that cannot live.” (Winston Churchill, 20th-cen. 
British prime minister)
17. “Who controls the past controls the future. Who controls the present 
controls the past.” (George Orwell, 20th-cen. British writer, from his novel 
1984)
18. “Logic is a matter of profound human importance precisely because it 
is empirically founded and experimentally applied.” (John Dewey, American 
philosopher, “progressive” educator, Reconstruction in Philosophy, 1920)
19. “Of those who see the essence of God, one sees him more perfectly 
than another. This does not take place as if one had a more perfect likeness of 
God than another, since that vision will not be through any likeness. But it 
will take place because one intellect will have a greater power or faculty to see 
God than another. The faculty of seeing God does not belong to the created 
intellect naturally, but through the light of glory. . . . Hence the intellect which 
has more of the light of glory will see God more perfectly.” (Thomas Aquinas, 
Summa Theologaie I-II, q. 5, a.2)
20. “No subject other than heat has more extensive relations with the 
progress of industry and the natural sciences; for the action of heat is always 
present, it penetrates all bodies and spaces, it influences the processes of 
the arts, and occurs in all the phenomena of the universe.” (Joseph Fourier, 
French physicist and revolutionary, The Analytical Theory of Heat, 1822)
21. “All living things again including ourselves work according to regular 
laws, in just the same way as do non-living things, except that living things are 
much more complicated. . . . Looked at objectively and scientifically, a man is 
an exceedingly complex piece of chemical machinery.” (Attributed to Julian 
Huxley, 20th-cen. British evolutionary biologist)
22. “Solid bodies are related, with respect to their possible dispositions, as 
are bodies in Euclidian geometry of three dimensions. Then the propositions 
of Euclid contain affirmations as to the relations of practically rigid bodies.” 
(Albert Einstein, 20th-cen. German physicist, “Geometry and Experience,” 
January 27, 1921)
23. “A miracle is a violation of the laws of nature; and as a firm and un­
alterable experience has established these laws, the proof against a miracle, 
from the very nature of the fact, is as entire as any argument from experience 
can possibly be imagined.” (David Hume, 18th-cen. Scots philosopher, An 
Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding)

Enthymemes and Epicheiremas  
 317
24. “Metaphysical propositions are neither true nor false because they 
assert nothing.” (Simplified version of Rudolf Carnap, founder of logical pos­
itivism, The Logical Syntax of Language [Full quote: “According to this view, 
the sentences of metaphysics are pseudo-sentences which on logical analysis 
are proved to be either empty phrases or phrases which violate the rules of 
syntax. Of the so-called philosophical problems, the only questions which 
have any meaning are those of the logic of science. To share this view is to 
substitute logical syntax for philosophy.”])
25. “For we can explain nothing but what we can reduce to laws whose ob­
ject can be given in some possible experience. But freedom is a mere idea, the 
objective reality of which can in no way be shown according to natural laws or 
in any possible experience.” (Immanuel Kant, 18th-cen. German philosopher, 
Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics)
26. “The power of gravity is of a different nature from the power of mag­
netism; for the magnetic attraction is not as the matter attracted. Some bod­
ies are attracted more by the magnet; others less; most bodies not at all. The 
power of magnetism in one and the same body may be increased and dimin­
ished; and is sometimes far stronger for the quantity of matter than for the 
power of gravity.” (Isaac Newton, 17th-cen. English physicist, Mathematical 
Principles of Natural Philosophy, bk. 3, prop. 6, cor. 5)
27. “There is a certain moral failure, too, on the part of an educational 
institution that does not allow the student to make his own the treasure of 
the accumulated thoughts of the race. So the failure of the elective system 
was a moral failure. The official historian of Harvard said of President Eliot 
that he had defrauded the Harvard students of their cultural heritage.” (Rob­
ert Hutchins, 20th-cen. president, University of Chicago, founder, “Great 
Books” program)
28. Not all is gold that glitters, for tin glitters sometimes. 
29. “Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore, get wisdom.” (Proverbs 4:7)
30. “Whoever disobeys us [the Laws of Athens] is, as we maintain, three 
times wrong: first, because in disobeying us he is disobeying his parents; sec­
ondly, because we are the authors of his education; thirdly, because he has 
made an agreement with us that he will duly obey our commands.” (Plato, 
d. 348 b.c., Greek philosopher, Crito)
31. “Every man has a property in his own person. This nobody has any 
right to but himself. The labour of his body and the work of his hands, we may 
say, are properly his. Whatsoever, then, he removes out of the state that nature 

318  
 The Logic of Arguments
hath provided and left it in, he hath mixed his labour with it, and joined to it 
something that is his own, and thereby makes it his property.” (John Locke, 
17th-cen. English philosopher, Second Treatise on Government)
32. “When all the prerogatives of birth and fortune are destroyed, when 
all the professions are open to everyone, and when you can reach the summit 
of each one of them on your own, an immense and easy career seems to open 
before the ambition of men, and they readily imagine that they are called to 
great destinies. But that is an erroneous view that experience corrects every 
day. The same equality that allows each citizen to conceive vast hopes makes 
all citizens individually weak. It limits their strengths on all sides, at the same 
time that it allows their desires to expand.
“Not only are they powerless by themselves, but also they find at each step 
immense obstacles that they had not at first noticed.
“They destroyed the annoying privileges of a few of their fellows; they 
encounter the competition of all. The boundary marker has changed form 
rather than place. When men are more or less similar and follow the same 
road, it is very difficult for any one of them to march quickly and cut through 
the uniform crowd that surrounds and crushes him.
“This constant opposition that reigns between the instincts given birth by 
equality and the means that equality provides to satisfy them torments and 
fatigues souls.” (Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, vol. 2, part 2, 
chapter 13)
33. “Dogmatic beliefs are more or less numerous, depending on the times. 
They are born in different ways and can change form and object; but you 
cannot make it so that there are no dogmatic beliefs, that is to say, opinions 
that men receive on trust and without discussion. If each person undertook 
to form all his opinions himself and to pursue truth in isolation, along paths 
opened up by himself alone, it is improbable that a great number of men 
would ever unite together in any common belief.
“Now, it is easy to see that no society is able to prosper without similar 
beliefs, or rather none can continue to exist in such a way; for, without com­
mon ideas, there is no common action, and, without common action, there 
are still men, but not a social body. So for society to exist, and, with even 
more reason, for this society to prosper, all the minds of the citizens must 
always be brought and held together by some principal ideas; and that cannot 
happen without each one of them coming at times to draw his opinions from 
the same source and consenting to receive a certain number of ready-made 
beliefs.” (Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, vol. 2, part 1, chapter 2)

Extended Categorical Arguments
Lesson 29
Extended Categorical Arguments
The Essentials 
In Lesson 28, we encountered the most classic type of longer categorical 
argument, the epicheirema. It contains the basic syllogism deducing the fun­
damental conclusion of the argument, and it adds support for one or both of 
the premises, what medieval logicians called “proof of the major premise” or 
“proof of the minor premise.” Epicheiremas are not the only categorical ar­
guments that extend beyond the basic syllogism. Most of what we might call 
“real-life” categorical syllogisms are longer arguments. In this chapter, we will 
meet a few more. Epicheiremas extend beyond the basic syllogism by moving 
out to the side of it, so to speak, in the sense that when we put them into stan­
dard form we usually set the proofs of major and minor premises to the side of 
those premises. The longer arguments we will consider in this chapter extend 
beyond the basic syllogism by moving down the page, incorporating more 
and more conclusions (we can call them “intermediate conclusions”), until 
we arrive at a final conclusion.
The most obvious among such longer arguments is called a sorites, from 
the Greek word for a “heap” (soros), because we heap up a long syllogism by 
throwing several syllogisms together. If a basic categorical syllogism is like a 
small chain made up of S—M—P, a sorites is a longer chain with more mid­
dle terms, such as: S—M1—M2—M3—P. There are many other—and more 
important—categorical and deductive arguments. These we construct by 
319

320  
 The Logic of Arguments
putting together smaller arguments. Such arguments can take many forms, 
so logicians have not developed names for most of them. We are not without 
resources, however, to help us understand them. We will cover two techniques 
for helping to understand such longer arguments: outlining the argument and 
diagramming the argument. 
We should remember that once we analyze a longer argument into its 
parts, we can always consider each categorical syllogism that makes up the 
longer argument and determine whether that particular syllogism is valid and 
sound. Of course, the whole argument is valid only if all the parts are valid. 
And the same goes for it being sound. 
Sorites
As you can tell from Problem Set 29, the seventeenth-century philosopher 
Leibniz loved the sorites or chain argument. This seems appropriate for the 
man who also invented calculus, which involves stringing together numbers 
in the process called “integration.” (The physicist Isaac Newton independently 
invented calculus about the same time.) To analyze this kind of argument is to 
realize that it simply brings together all the premises of several categorical prop­
ositions, stating only the final conclusion and leaving out all the intermediate 
conclusions. Consider the section “Longer Arguments,” in Problem Set 29: 
Since happiness consists in peace of mind, and since durable peace of mind de­
pends on the confidence we have in the future, and since that confidence is 
based on the knowledge we should have of the nature of God and the soul, it 
follows that knowledge is necessary for true happiness. 
The last proposition is the conclusion: happiness is knowledge of the 
nature of God and soul. And Leibniz presents the premises in a reasonable 
order, though not in what we have called “standard logical order.” We can 
see this if we set out the argument in the order in which it is presented and 
simplify the terms.
Written Order	
Symbolized
(1) Happiness is peace of mind.	
H is P
(2) Peace of mind is confidence in the future.	
P is C
(3) Confidence in the future is knowledge of God and the soul.	 C is K
(4) Therefore, happiness is knowledge of God and the soul.	
H is K

Extended Categorical Arguments  
 321
Premise (1) contains the minor term, happiness; and (3) contains the ma­
jor term, knowledge of God and the soul; and (4) contains the conclusion. So 
we can reorder the premises to make the argument more like standard logical 
order:
Logical Order	
Symbolized
(3) Confidence in the future is knowledge of God and the soul.	 C is K
(2) Peace of mind is confidence in the future.	
P is C
(1) Happiness is peace of mind.	
H is P
(4) Therefore, happiness is knowledge of God and the soul.	
H is K
The logical order of the argument, however, is so similar to the written 
order that we don’t need to reorder it to see the links formed by the two mid­
dle terms, C and P. Following the written order in which Leibniz set out his 
argument leads pretty directly to the logical order of his argument. Leibniz’s 
sorites is our first example of outlining an argument, to which we now turn.
Argument Outlines
Longer arguments can get so involved that it can become too difficult ini­
tially to set up, on its own, each syllogism or smaller argument they contain. 
This is where argument outlines and diagramming arguments become useful, 
especially as a first step in understanding an argument. 
Argument outlines can take many forms, but it is best to keep the process 
as simple as you can. First read through the whole argument. Keep going until 
you get to what you think is the end of the author’s argument, in its written 
(or spoken) order. Then try to locate the most important conclusion. After 
that, locate the intermediary conclusions that lead to that ultimate conclu­
sion. Then bring in whatever premises you can find to support each of the in­
termediate arguments that lead to the ultimate conclusion. The purpose here 
is to identify the logical order of the author’s argument. As you can probably 
tell, we already have our first example of an argument outline in the example 
from Leibniz. For a second example, let’s turn to the section “Short Argu­
ments,” in Problem Set 29: 
There are many movie “remakes” of Dickens’s A Christmas Carol. The one I saw 
on the Hallmark Channel last night was pretty bad. The plot didn’t make sense 
unless you already knew the Dickens story; the script was terrible; the costumes 
were worse, and the acting was not very good.

322  
 The Logic of Arguments
Here is the logical order, as captured in an outline:
(1) The Hallmark show had a poor plot.
(2) The Hallmark show had a terrible script.
(3) The Hallmark show had worse costumes.
(4) The Hallmark show had inferior acting.
(5) Therefore, the Hallmark show was bad.
In the original passage, the conclusion is stated before the premises (which 
often happens). But it is pretty apparent that (5) is the overall conclusion, so 
in setting out the logical order, the conclusion (5) goes last. There is an im­
portant difference, however, between Leibniz’s argument and the Hallmark 
argument. Leibniz’s sorites is one continuous argument, because it proceeds 
step by step, adding new premises to arrive at the conclusion. These points 
function like the premises in a syllogism: they work together with each other. 
But the Hallmark argument doesn’t do that. Premises (1), (2), (3), and 
(4) work independently from each other to lead to the overall conclusion. 
Each of these premises, considered by itself, leads to the conclusion. The ar­
gument is stronger the more such premises we can find to support the con­
clusion. Each stated premises works on its own, alongside the other reasons 
for the conclusion, rather than needing the other reasons in order to get to 
the conclusion in the first place. The outline found in (1) through (5) doesn’t 
really point out the structure or form set out in the argument. This deficiency 
points to the need to use an argument diagram. 
A Deeper Look
Argument Diagrams
Argument diagrams are not designed to capture the details of an argu­
ment, or even its main content, but they are designed to let us see, in an infor­
mal way and as a first step, the basic logical structure of the argument. The idea 
is to take the symbol for a conditional implication, the arrow (which was used 
for this purpose long before the invention of contemporary symbolic logic) 
and plot the logical path, so to speak, found in more complicated reasoning. 
The Hallmark argument is a good example, so we’ll compare the structure of 
the Leibniz argument and the Hallmark argument. 

Extended Categorical Arguments  
 323
These diagrams show how different the reasoning is in the Leibniz and 
Hallmark arguments. Once you see the basic logical structure of such argu­
ments, you then can turn to the details of each of the parts of the argument, 
such as the steps from (1) to (2) to (3) to (4) in the Leibniz article, or step (1) 
to (5), step (2) to (5), step (3) to (5), and step (4) to (5) in the Hallmark article. 
The sections of Problem Set 29 are designed to move from easier to more 
difficult arguments. You should spend some time on problems from each of 
the three sections. Be sure you make it all the way to the classic arguments, be­
cause these are at once the most important and the most difficult, since they 
put you in touch with the reasoning of a few of the greatest thinkers. Though 
difficult, they are also the most interesting and most rewarding.
Problem Set 29: Longer Categorical Arguments
Diagramming Arguments
Instructions
For the following passages, number or alphabetize the propositions in the 
passage, and then develop a diagram showing the overall argument contained 
in the passage. These shorter passages are designed to give you practice in 
diagramming deductive arguments.
Succinct Arguments 
1. There are many movie “remakes” of Dickens’s A Christmas Carol. The 
one I saw on the Hallmark Channel last night was pretty bad. The plot didn’t 
Leibniz argument	
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Hallmark argument 
(1) 
 
 
(2) 
 
 
(3) 
 
 
(4)
	
(5)

324  
 The Logic of Arguments
make sense unless you already knew the Dickens story. The script was terrible. 
The costumes were worse, and the acting was not very good. 
2. I don’t think I’ll take American Philosophy this semester, because it 
conflicts with a required course in English I need to take for my major, and 
taking a science course my schedule would cover more areas, which is good 
for a liberal arts education.
3. Business conditions will improve over the next year (how could they 
get worse!), and when they do then corporate profits will increase. Increasing 
profits will then drive up stock price. So it looks like investing in the stock 
market is a good idea. 
4. Government regulation tends to delay the introduction of new drugs. 
When a harmful drug is introduced, the government regulators get blamed 
for approving it; but when a drug is beneficial, the regulators don’t get a fi­
nancial reward for approving it. So government regulators are inclined to be 
excessively cautious when it comes to approving new drugs. 
5. It is very dangerous to carry a can of gas inside your car. Gas easily bursts 
into flame. And it has terrible explosive power. Just think, when your engine 
burns gas, it can move two thousand pounds of car at speeds up to 140 mph. 
6. Welfare programs are intended to help the poor, but the existing ones 
don’t help. Rather, they encourage the break-up of poor families and discour­
age poor people from seeking jobs. And perhaps the worst aspect of the cur­
rent welfare system is that it creates a habit of dependence on government, 
which tends to trap those on welfare. So the current welfare programs should 
be reformed. 
7. “Robbery had not been the object of the murder, for nothing was tak­
en.” (Arthur Conan Doyle, 19th-cen. British writer, A Study in Scarlet, 1887) 
8. “ ‘How often have I said to you, Dr. Watson, that when you have elim­
inated the impossible, whatever remains, however improbable, must be the 
truth? We know that he did not come through the door, the window, or the 
chimney. We also know that he could not have been concealed in the room, 
as there is no concealment possible. Whence, then, did he come?’
“ ‘He came through the roof.’
“ ‘Of course he did. He must have done so.’ ” (Arthur Conan Doyle, 19th-
cen. British writer, The Sign of the Four, 1890) 

Extended Categorical Arguments  
 325
Instructions
Longer Arguments
For the following longer passages, you should do two things: (1) Produce 
an outline or diagram of the overall argument contained in the passage. Then 
try to determine if the overall argument of the passage is valid or invalid. 
(2) See if the passage contains one primary syllogism. If so, set that syllogism 
out in standard form and test it for validity. 
1. “Put in its simplest form, this Theory of Vanishing Choice rests on a 
crude syllogism. Science and technology have fostered standardization. Sci­
ence and technology will advance, making the future even more standardized 
than the present. Ergo: Man will progressively lose his freedom of choice.” 
(Alvin Toffler, 20th-cen. American “futurist” writer, Future Shock, 1971) 
2. “Since happiness consists in peace of mind, and since durable peace of 
mind depends on the confidence we have in the future, and since that con­
fidence is based on the science we should have of the nature of God and the 
soul, it follows that science is necessary for true happiness.” (Gottfried Wil­
helm Leibniz, d. 1716, German philosopher and mathematician, Felicity, in 
Leibniz: Political Writings, 82–85)
3. “It is clearly evident that marijuana should be legalized and tobacco 
banned. On the one hand, tobacco is detrimental to a person’s health. Look at 
all the evidence. Study after study has indicated a connection between tobac­
co and cancer. Moreover, the Surgeon Generals have repeatedly warned that 
tobacco is injurious to health. Marijuana, on the other hand, is not detrimen­
tal to health, producing only mild euphoria.” (Barrie Wilson, The Anatomy of 
Argument, 1980)
4. “Nor is there anything smart about smoking. A woman who smokes 
is far more likely than her nonsmoking counterpart to suffer from a host of 
disabling conditions, any of which can interfere with her ability to perform at 
home or on the job. . . . Women who smoke have more spontaneous abortions, 
stillbirths, and premature babies than do nonsmokers, and their children’s lat­
er health may be affected.” (Jane E. Brody and Richard Engquist, “Women 
and Smoking,” 1972)
5. “Man, being reasonable, must get drunk Man; The best of life is but 
intoxication.” But whoever gets drunk, sleeps. Now those who sleep do not 
sin. But whoever does not sin goes to Heaven. Therefore, the man who gets 
drunk goes to heaven. (George Gordon, Lord Byron, d. 1824, English poet, 
“Don Juan” [first sentence only; the rest is added])

326  
 The Logic of Arguments
6. “Virtually all large, complex organizations in the U.S., for example, are 
best classified as bureaucracies, though the degree and forms of bureaucrati­
zation vary. Its ‘ideal’ form, however, is never realized for a variety of reasons. 
For one thing, it tries to do what must be (hopefully) forever impossible—to 
eliminate all unwanted extra-organizational influences upon the behavior of 
members. Ideally, members should act only in the organization’s interests. 
The problem is that even if the interest of the organization is unambiguous, 
men do not exist just for organizations. They track all kinds of mud from the 
rest of their lives with them into the organization, and they have all kinds of 
interests that are independent of the organization. The ideal form also falls 
short of realization when rapid changes in some of the organizational tasks 
are required. Bureaucracies are set up to deal with stable, routine tasks; that is 
the basis of organizational efficiency. Without stable tasks there cannot be a 
stable division of labor, the acquisition of skill and experiences, planning and 
co-ordination, and so on. But when changes come along, organizations must 
alter their programs; when such changes are frequent and rapid, the form of 
organization becomes so temporary that the efficiencies of bureaucracy can­
not be realized. . . . Finally, bureaucracy in its ideal form falls short of its expec­
tations because men are only indifferently intelligent, prescient, all-knowing, 
and energetic. All organizations must be designed for the ‘average’ person one 
is likely to find in each position, not the superman.” (Charles Perrow, Complex 
Organizations, 1972)
7. “Many a reader will raise the question whether findings won by the 
observation of individuals can be applied to the psychological understanding 
of groups. Our answer to this question is an emphatic affirmation. Any group 
consists of individuals and nothing but individuals, and psychological mech­
anisms which we find operating in a group can therefore only be mechanisms 
that operate in individuals. In studying individual psychology as a basis for 
the understanding of social psychology, we do something which might be 
compared with studying an object under the microscope. This enables us to 
discover the very details of psychological mechanisms which we find operat­
ing on a large scale in the social process. If our analysis of socio-psychological 
phenomena is not based on the detailed study of human behavior, it lacks em­
pirical character and, therefore, validity.” (Erich Fromm, 20th-cen. German 
psychologist, Escape from Freedom, 1941) 
8. “The human soul is a thing whose activity is thinking. A thing whose 
activity is thinking is one whose activity is immediately apprehended, and 

Extended Categorical Arguments  
 327
without any representation of parts therein. A thing whose activity is imme­
diately apprehended without any representation of parts therein is a thing 
whose activity does not contain parts. A thing whose activity does not con­
tain parts is one whose activity is not motion. A thing whose activity is not 
motion is not a body. What is not a body is not in space. What is not in space 
in insusceptible of motion. What is insusceptible of motion is indissoluble, 
for dissolution is a movement of parts. What is indissoluble is incorruptible. 
What is incorruptible is immortal. Therefore, the human soul is immortal.” 
(Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, d. 1716, German philosopher and mathema­
tician)
9. “It should be abundantly clear that New Testament Christianity rejects 
the immortality of the soul. For one thing, the various writings in the New 
Testament (e.g., 1 Cor 15:13, Rom 8:23, and many other passages) speak only of 
‘resurrection of the dead’ or ‘resurrection of the body,’ not ‘immortality of the 
soul.’ For another thing, the notion of the dead being resurrected is a very dif­
ferent notion from the soul’s being immortal, as can be readily discerned from 
the following considerations. First of all, if the soul were immortal, then it 
could never die, and the person would continue on forever. Yet, for New Tes­
tament Christianity, continuation of life is a conditional matter, condition­
al, that is, upon having entered the New Life made possible by Jesus Christ. 
Secondly it is important to notice that the New Testament never divides the 
nature of man into two distinct types of substances, e.g. soul and body. From 
the New Testament perspective (building upon its Judaic foundations), man 
is a complex unity of willing, thinking, feeling, and doing, and, as such, either 
stands apart from or is united with God as a whole person. Thirdly, notice 
the New Testament attitude towards death. Socrates, in the Greek tradition, 
believing in the immortality of the soul, confronts death calmly, almost as a 
friend. Jesus, on the other hand, confronts death as an enemy to be struggled 
with and finally to be defeated.” (Oscar Cullman, Immortality of the Soul or 
Resurrection of the Dead?, 1958) 
10. “By human standards the number of signals employed by each species 
of animal is severely limited. One of the most curious facts revealed by recent 
field studies is that even the most highly social vertebrates rarely have more 
than 30 or 35 separate displays in their entire repertory. Data compiled by 
Martin H. Moynihan of the Smithsonian Institute indicates that among most 
vertebrates the number of displays varies by a factor of only three or four from 
species to species. The number ranges from a minimum of 10 in certain fishes 

328  
 The Logic of Arguments
to a maximum of 37 in the rhesus monkey, one of the primates closest to man 
in the complexity of their social organization. . . . In the extent of their signal 
diversity the vertebrates are closely approached by social insects, particularly 
honey bees and ants. Analyses by Charles G. Butler at the Rothamsted Ex­
perimental Station in England, by me at Harvard University, and by others, 
have brought the number of individual known signal categories within single 
species of these insects to between 10 and 20.” (E. O. Wilson, 20th-cen. Amer­
ican biologist, “Animal Communication,” 1972)
11. “The diet works because it specifically mobilizes fat, stimulates the 
release of ketones and fat mobilizers, thereby suppressing hunger; causes a 
disproportionately greater loss of fat; helps eliminate excess water; stabilizes 
blood sugar; lowers insulin levels and cortisol levels; and delivers a metabolic 
advantage.” (Robert C. Atkins and Shirley Linde, Dr. Atkins’ Super-Energy 
Diet, 1977)
12. “Samuel Butler’s The Authoress of the Odyssey was first published in 
1897 and is still available in a modern edition. Butler argues on behalf of two 
main theses: first, that the Iliad and Odyssey were composed by two different 
authors approximately two hundred years apart, the Odyssey being the later 
of the poems; second, that the Odyssey was written by a young woman living 
on Sicily. It is this notion that the Odyssey is the work of a woman which con­
cerns the present issue. In order to make his case, Butler first tries to remove 
initial doubts on the part of the reader by showing that there were women 
poets at the time the epic was composed. He then goes on to examine close­
ly internal evidence which the poem itself provides that could lead one to 
suppose that it was the work of a woman. The poet, for example, has made 
numerous errors which Butler tells us no man would make, such as describ­
ing a boat as having a rudder fore and aft. Much of the story is built around 
feminine interests of home and family life. In contrast to the foolish foibles 
of mankind, womankind in the Odyssey is portrayed as something to be taken 
very seriously. Men are consistently placed in the position of needing the sup­
port and wise counsel of women.” (Denis Dutton, “Plausibility and Aesthetic 
Interpretation,” 1977)
13. “For some years the suspicion had existed among the more inspired ge­
neticists that viruses were a form of naked genes. If so, the best way to find out 
what a gene was and how it duplicated was to study the properties of viruses.” 
(James Watson, 20th-cen. American biologist, co-discoverer of DNA in 1953 
with Francis Crick, from The Double Helix, 1968) 

Extended Categorical Arguments  
 329
14. “The existence of biological predispositions [toward crime] means 
that circumstances that activate criminal behavior in one person will not do 
so in another, that social forces cannot deter criminal behavior in 100 percent 
of a population, and that the distributions of crime within and across soci­
eties may, to some extent, reflect underlying distributions of constitutional 
factors.” (James Q. Wilson and Richard Herrnstein, 20th-cen. American po­
litical scientists, from Crime and Human Nature, 1985) 
15. “A foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds, adored by lit­
tle statesmen and philosophers and divines. With consistency a great soul 
has simply nothing to do. He may as well concern himself with his shadow 
on the wall. Speak what you think now in hard words and tomorrow speak 
what tomorrow thinks in hard words again, though it contradict everything 
you said today.” (Ralph Waldo Emerson, 19th-cen. American writer, from 
“Self-Reliance,” 1841) 
16. “Neither parole nor probation are justifiable. . . . They are a demon­
strable failure in reducing inmate recidivism. They undermine the deterrent 
impact of the law on criminals, while demoralizing crime victims with their 
outrageous leniency. Most important, they jeopardize public safety.” (Robert 
James Bidinotto, Criminal Justice: The Legal System vs. Individual Responsi­
bility)
17. “The U.S. Constitution, as amended, is the fundamental law of the 
land. Under it, the powers of the federal government in general and Congress 
in particular are delegated by the people, enumerated in the document, and 
thus limited. The Tenth Amendment, the final member of the Bill of Rights, 
makes that point perfectly clear when it states, ‘The powers not delegated to 
the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are 
reserved to the States respectively, or to the people.’
“Congress may act in any given area or on any given subject, therefore, 
only if it has authority under the Constitution to do so. If not, that area must 
be addressed by state, local, or private action.” (Roger Pilon, “Restoring Con­
stitutional Government,” Cato Institute, 1995)
18. “I’m a sick man . . . a mean man. There’s nothing attractive about me. I 
think there’s something wrong with my liver. . . .
“I’ve been living like this for a long time, twenty years or so. I’m forty now. 
I used to be in government service, but I’m not any more. I was a nasty official. 
I was rude and enjoyed being rude. . . . When petitioners came up to my desk 
for information, I snarled at them and felt indescribably happy whenever I 

330  
 The Logic of Arguments
managed to make one of them feel miserable.” (Fyodor Dostoyevsky, 19th-cen. 
Russian novelist, Notes from Underground, 1864) 
Instructions
Classic Arguments
For these even more substantive arguments, take three steps for your anal­
ysis: (1) Identify the question asked and the author’s final or overall answer. 
(2) Set out an argument diagram for the argument found in the passage. Here 
you usually will start with the author’s written order, but your goal is to arrive 
at the author’s logical order. These two orders may or may not be the same. 
(3) If the author’s final answer depends on points not found in the passage quot­
ed, add these points to the points made explicitly in the author’s argument. If 
the passage includes points that you think are extraneous to the main line of 
the author’s argument, leave these out. The main purpose of this step is to help 
you see the structure or form of the author’s reasoning. In other words, here 
your task is simplifying without falsifying the author’s fundamental argument. 
You can go back and look at details later. 
1. “A question arises [for the Prince]: is it better to loved than feared, or 
feared than loved? One should wish to be both loved and feared, but because 
it is difficult to find them united in one citizen, it is much safer to be feared 
than loved, when of the two one must be dispensed with. Because this is to 
be asserted of all men: they are ungrateful, fickle, false, cowards, covetous. . . . 
The prince who, relying entirely on their promises, has neglected other pre­
cautions, is ruined. For friendships that are obtained with money may indeed 
be earned, but they are not secure, and in time of need cannot be relied upon. 
Men have less scruple in offending one who is loved than one who is feared, 
for love is preserved by the link of obligation, which, owing to the baseness 
of men, is broken at every opportunity for their own advantage. But fear pre­
serves you [the prince] by a dread of punishment which never fails.” (Niccolo 
Machiavelli, 16th-cen. Italian political writer, The Prince, 1532, chapter 17)
2. “All men by nature desire to know. And an indication of this is the de­
light we take in our senses; for even apart from their usefulness, they are loved 
for themselves, and above all the other senses the sense of sight. For not only 
with a concern for action, but even when we are not going to do anything, we 
prefer seeing, one might say, to everything else. The reason is this: most of all 
the senses, sight makes us know and bring to light many differences between 
things.” (Aristotle, Metaphysics 1.1, 980a23–28)

Extended Categorical Arguments  
 331
3. “We must explain, then, that nature belongs to the class of causes which 
act for the sake of something. . . . A difficulty presents itself. Why should not 
nature work, not for the sake of something, nor because this is so, but just as the 
sky rains, not in order to make the corn grow, but of necessity? What is drawn 
upwards must cool, and what has been cooled must become water and descend, 
the result of this being that the corn grows. Likewise, if a man’s crop is spoiled 
on the threshing-floor, the rain did not fall for the sake of this—in order that 
the crop might be spoiled—but this result just followed. Why then should it 
not be the same with the parts in nature, for example, that our teeth should 
come up of necessity—the front teeth sharp, fitting for tearing, the molars 
broad and useful for grinding down the food—since they did not arise for this 
end, but it was merely a coincident result; and so with all other parts in which 
we suppose that there is purpose? Wherever, then, all the parts came about just 
as they would have been if they had come to be for an end, such things survived, 
being organized fortuitously in a fitting way; whereas those which grew other­
wise perished and continue to perish. . . . Such are the arguments, and others of 
this kind, which may cause difficulty on this point. Yet it is impossible that this 
should be the true view. For teeth and all other natural things either invariably 
or normally come about in a given way; but of not one of the results of chance 
or fortune is this true.” (Aristotle, Physics 2.8, 198b10–37)
4. “We see things that lack intelligence, such as natural bodies, act for 
an end, and this is evident from their acting always, or nearly always, in the 
same way, so as to obtain the best result. Consequently, it is plain that not 
fortuitously, but by design, do they achieve their end. Now whatever lacks 
intelligence cannot move toward an end, unless it is directed by some being 
endowed with intelligence and knowledge, as an arrow is shot to the mark 
by the archer. Therefore, some intelligent being exists by whom all natural 
things are directed to their end; and this being we call God.” (Thomas Aqui­
nas, Summa Theologaie I, q. 2, a. 3)
5. “Happiness is the perfect good. But power is imperfect. For as Boethius 
says, ‘The power of a man cannot relieve the gnawings of care, nor can it avoid 
the thorny path of anxiety’; and, further on, he says, ‘Do you think a man is 
powerful who is surrounded by attendants whom he may inspire with fear 
even more than they fear him?’ Therefore, happiness does not consist in pow­
er. Two reasons, in addition, show this is true. First, because power has the 
character of a beginning, but happiness has the nature of an end. Secondly, 
because power is open to either good or evil, while happiness is man’s supreme 
and proper good.” (Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologaie I-II, q. 2, a. 4)

332  
 The Logic of Arguments
6. “It is emphatically the province and duty of the Judicial Department to 
say what the law is. Those who apply the rule to particular cases must, of ne­
cessity, expound and interpret that rule. If two laws conflict with each other, 
the Courts must decide on the operation of each.
“So, if a law be in opposition to the Constitution, if both the law and the 
Constitution apply to a particular case, so that the Court must either decide 
that case conformably to the law, disregarding the Constitution, or conform­
ably to the Constitution, disregarding the law, the Court must determine 
which of these conflicting rules governs the case. This is of the very essence 
of judicial duty.
“If, then, the Courts are to regard the Constitution, and the Constitution 
is superior to any ordinary act of the Legislature, the Constitution, and no 
such ordinary act, must govern the case to which they both apply.
“Those, then, who controvert the principle that the Constitution is to 
be considered in court as a paramount law are reduced to the necessity of 
maintaining that courts must close their eyes on the Constitution, and see 
only the law.
“This doctrine would subvert the very foundation of all written Consti­
tutions. It would declare that an act which, according to the principles and 
theory of our government, is entirely void, is yet, in practice, completely oblig­
atory. It would declare that, if the Legislature shall do what is expressly forbid­
den, such act, notwithstanding the express prohibition, is in reality effectual. 
It would be giving to the Legislature a practical and real omnipotence with the 
same breath which professes to restrict their powers within narrow limits. It is 
prescribing limits, and declaring that those limits may be passed at pleasure.
“That it thus reduces to nothing what we have deemed the greatest im­
provement on political institutions—a written Constitution, would of itself 
be sufficient, in America where written Constitutions have been viewed with 
so much reverence, for rejecting the construction. But the peculiar expres­
sions of the Constitution of the United States furnish additional arguments 
in favour of its rejection.” (John Marshall, 19th-cen. Chief Justice, U.S. Su­
preme Court, Marbury v. Madison, 1803) 
7. “Since, in centuries of equality, no one is obliged to lend his strength to 
his fellow, and no one has the right to expect great support from his fellow, 
each man is independent and weak at the very same time. These two states, 
which must not be either envisaged separately or confused, give the citizen 
of democracies very contradictory instincts. His independence fills him with 

Extended Categorical Arguments  
 333
confidence and pride among his equals, and his debility makes him, from time 
to time, feel the need for outside help which he cannot expect from any of his 
equals, since they are all powerless and cold. In this extreme case, he turns his 
eyes naturally toward this immense being that alone rises up amidst the uni­
versal decline. His needs and, above all, his desires lead him constantly toward 
this being, and he ends by envisaging it as the sole and necessary support for 
individual weakness.
“Democratic centuries are times of experiments, of innovation and of ad­
ventures. A multitude of men is always engaged in a difficult or new enterprise 
that they are pursuing separately without being burdened by their fellows. 
The former very much accept, as a general principle, that the public power 
must not intervene in private affairs, but, by exception, each one of them de­
sires that it helps him in the special matter that preoccupies him and seeks to 
draw the action of the government in his direction, all the while wanting to 
restrain it in all others.
“Since a multitude of men has this particular view at the same time on 
a host of different matters, the sphere of the central power expands imper­
ceptibly in all directions, even though each one of them wishes to limit it. 
So a democratic government increases its attributions by the sole fact that it 
lasts. Time works for it; it profits from all accidents; individual passions help 
it even without their knowing, and you can say that a democratic govern­
ment becomes that much more centralized the older the democratic society 
is.” (Alexis de Tocqueville, Democracy in America, 1835, vol. 2, part 4, chap. 3) 
8. “C. 9: That there is a circulation of the blood, is confirmed.
“Proposition 1: . . . Lest anyone should say the we give them words only, 
and make mere specious assertions without any foundation, and desire to in­
novate without sufficient cause, three things are presented for confirmation 
which, once they have been asserted, I conceive that the truth I contend for 
will flow from them necessarily and appear as a thing manifest to all. First, the 
blood is incessantly transmitted by the action of the heart from the vena cava 
to the arteries in such quantity that it cannot be supplied from the ingesta 
[digested food, the source of blood according to earlier scientists, like Galen, 
2nd cen. a.d.], and in such a manner that the whole must very quickly pass 
through the organ [the heart]. Second, the blood under the influence of the 
arterial pulse enters and is impelled in a continuous, equable, and incessant 
stream through every part and member of the body, in much larger quantity 
than were sufficient for nutrition, or than the whole mass of fluids could sup­

334  
 The Logic of Arguments
ply. Third, the veins in like manner return this blood incessantly to the heart 
from parts and members of the body. Once these points have been proved, 
I think it will be manifest that the blood circulates, revolves, propelled and 
then returning, from the heart to the extremities, from the extremities to the 
heart, and thus that it performs a kind of circular motion. . . . 
“C. 14: Conclusion of the Demonstration of the Circulation
“And now I may be allowed to give in brief my view of the circulation of 
the blood, and to propose it for general adoption.
“Since all things, both argument and visual proof, show that the blood 
passes through the lungs and heart by the force of the ventricles, and is sent 
for distribution to all parts of the body, where it makes its way into the veins 
and porosities of the flesh, and then flows by the veins from the circumference 
on every side to the Centre, from the lesser to the greater veins, and is by them 
finally discharged into the vena cava and right auricle of the heart, and this 
in such quantity or in such a flux and reflux thither by the arteries, hither by 
the veins, as cannot possible be supplied by the ingesta [=food ingested], and 
is much greater than can be required for mere purposes of nutrition; it is ab­
solutely necessary to conclude that the blood in the animal body is impelled 
in a circle, and is in a state of ceaseless motion; that this is the act or function 
which the heart performs by means of its pulse; and that it is the sole and only 
end of the motion and contraction of the heart.” (William Harvey, English 
Physician, On the Motion of the Heart and Blood in Animals, 1628)

Hypothetical Arguments
Lesson 30
Hypothetical Arguments
The Essentials
In this lesson we will turn away from deductive arguments made up of 
categorical propositions and turn to the logic of deductive arguments whose 
parts are hypothetical propositions. You will remember from Lesson 19, when 
we studied hypothetical propositions, that there are three kinds of hypothet­
ical propositions: conjunctions, disjunctions, and conditions. So it makes 
sense that there are three kinds of hypothetical arguments: conjunctive argu­
ments, disjunctive arguments, and conditional arguments. Since condition­
al propositions are the most important kind of hypothetical propositions, it 
stands to reason that conditional arguments will be the most important kind 
of hypothetical arguments. We will look briefly at conjunctive and disjunctive 
arguments, but we will concentrate on conditional arguments. 
Some conditional arguments, also called conditional syllogisms, are hypo­
thetical all the way through; the propositions that make up the premises are 
themselves hypothetical propositions, and the conclusion is a hypothetical 
proposition. An example would be this pure conditional argument: “If tulips 
are plants, then they need water; and if plants need water, then they depend 
upon rain; so if tulips are plants, then they depend upon rain.” But the more 
important hypothetical arguments include some hypothetical propositions, 
but also include categorical propositions. An example would be this classic 
335

336  
 The Logic of Arguments
conditional argument: “If Socrates is a human, then he is mortal; but Socrates 
is a human; therefore, he is mortal.” This kind of hypothetical syllogism is 
more important, because it draws a categorical conclusion, not a hypothetical 
one. You can probably see that this kind of hypothetical argument is very 
close to the categorical syllogism: “All humans are mortal; and Socrates is a 
human; therefore, Socrates is mortal.” Indeed, the interpretation of categori­
cal propositions normally used in symbolic logic says that the meaning of the 
categorical syllogism just is this hypothetical syllogism. While this identifi­
cation goes too far, it does show the close connection between conditional 
syllogisms and categorical syllogisms.
Review of Logical Symbols
In Lesson 19, we found that in order to understand hypothetical propo­
sitions, it is helpful to symbolize them. Our study of hypothetical arguments 
makes use of the same symbols we used earlier. It will help to remind ourselves 
of what some of those symbols mean. If you need a fuller explanation, please 
look back at Lesson 19. 
Definitions of Symbols
p, q, r = any categorical proposition
A, B, C = some definite categorical proposition 
Negative: ~p = denial or negation of p
Conditional statement: (p → q) = “if p, then q.” 
Conjunction: (p ∙ q) = “p and q” or (p & q) = “p and q.”
Disjunction: (p v q) = “p or q.” 
Strong disjunction: (p V q) means [(p or q) and not (p and q)]; [(p v q) & 
~(p & q)]
Weak disjunction: (p v q) means “p or q” and possibly “p and q”
Equivalence: (p = q) means [(p → q) ∙ (q → p)]
Some Important Conditional Relations
Contraposition
“If you are good then you will get a lollipop” also means that “if you didn’t 
get a lollipop then you were not good.” (p → q) = (~q → ~p)

Hypothetical Arguments  
 337
Types of Conditions
Condition (also called sufficient condition): “if p then q,” (p → q)
Necessary Condition: “if not p then not q”; or “if q then p.” (~p → ~q) or 
(q → p)
Necessary and sufficient condition: “if and only if p, then q”; or “if p then 
q, and if q then p”; or “if p then q, and if not p then not q.” [(p → q) ∙ (q → p)] 
or [(p → q) ∙ (~p ⊃ ~q)].
Examples: 
Sufficient Condition: “If you are good you will get a lollipop.” (p → q)
Necessary condition: 
“If you are not good you won’t get a lollipop.” (~p → ~q)
Or “If you got a lollipop you were good.” (q → p)
Necessary and sufficient condition: 
“If and only if you are good will you get a lollipop.” 
Or “If you are good you will get a lollipop, and if you are not 
good you won’t get a lollipop.” [(p → q) ∙ (q → p)]; or [(p → q) ∙ 
(~p → ~q)].
“Only if ” expressions are ambiguous, they can mean either a necessary 
condition or a necessary and sufficient condition, depending upon context:
Examples: 
Necessary condition: “Only if you train hard will you run the mile in four 
minutes.” 
(~T → ~F), or, by contraposition: (F → T)
Necessary and sufficient condition: “You will get a lollipop only if you 
are good.” 
[(~G →~L) ∙ (G → L)] or (G ≡ L)
Conditional Syllogisms
In some conditional arguments, all the propositions that make them up—
both premises and conclusion—are conditional propositions. You can proba­
bly see that the only way to draw a conditional conclusion is if all the premises 
leading to it are themselves conditional propositions. Arguments like this are 
called “pure conditional syllogisms.” 

338  
 The Logic of Arguments
Pure Conditional Syllogisms
Here is an example of a pure conditional syllogism, one that might be 
spoken by a fond aunt to her niece:
If you get a lollipop, then you will be happy.
If you are good, then you will get a lollipop. 
Therefore, if you are good, then you will be happy.
This particular argument can be symbolized as:
(L → H)
(G → L)
Therefore, (G → H)
The argument takes the following general form:
(q → r) 
(p → q) 
Therefore, (p → r)
By symbolizing this conditional syllogism we can see intuitively that it 
is valid. And we can see that it is quite close to a first-figure AAA categorical 
syllogism, which we already know is valid. The main difference is that the 
conclusion here is only a conditional statement, not a categorical statement. 
(You can also probably see that this conditional syllogism is exactly how logi­
cians who deny existential import to A statements interpret first-figure AAA 
categorical syllogisms. They say, erroneously, that such categorical syllogisms 
are in reality only conditional syllogisms.) 
This argument is just one kind of pure conditional syllogism. Such argu­
ments vary in form or structure, depending upon whether they are made up 
of affirmative conditional statements or negative conditional statements and 
how the categorical propositions that make up the conditional propositions 
are arranged. Not all pure conditional syllogisms are valid; but the invalid 
ones are pretty easy to spot. To do so, you can depend upon your mastery of 
categorical syllogisms. 
(Regular) Conditional Syllogisms
Much more important are we might call “regular” conditional syllogisms, 
though they are normally called simply “conditional syllogisms.” Such syllo­

Hypothetical Arguments  
 339
gisms have a definite structure. They have a major premise that is a conditional 
proposition. Their minor premise is a categorical proposition, one that either 
affirms or denies one of the two categorical propositions that make up the 
conditional statement in the major premise. Finally, their conclusion is also a 
categorical proposition, one that affirms or denies the other categorical prop­
osition that makes up the conditional proposition that is the major prem­
ise. While this abstract statement of the structure of a conditional syllogism 
might seem at first glance to be rather hard to understand, when we look at 
the four possible kinds of conditional syllogisms, we can readily understand it. 
If we look at their content, there are innumerable possible conditional syllo­
gisms, but when we look at their form or structure, there are only the following 
four kinds. 
Their names are based on something you already know. For a conditional 
statement like if p, then q (p → q), the categorical proposition p is called the 
“antecedent,” and the categorical proposition q is called the “consequent.” The 
four kinds of conditional syllogisms are called 
(a) affirming (or positing) the antecedent (modus ponens); 
(b) affirming (or positing) the consequent; 
(c) denying the antecedent; 
(d) denying the consequent (modus tollens). 
The reason why the first and last types were given Latin names is that 
these two kinds are valid; but the other two are invalid. We can see this by 
returning to our example of the child and the lollipop.
Affirming the Antecedent (modus ponens)
Here is an example of affirming the antecedent or modus ponens. It is some­
thing an aunt or babysitter might well say to a small child:
Major premise	
If you are good, then you	
(p → q)
	
will get a lollipop.
Minor premise	 You were good.	
p
Conclusion	
Therefore, you get a lollipop.	
Therefore, q 
What the major premise does is promise the child that, if she is good, 
then the speaker guarantees she will get a lollipop. To put the point in logi­
cal terms, if the child fulfills the condition set out in the antecedent p, then 
the consequent q will also happen. This is basically what a conditional state­

340  
 The Logic of Arguments
ment means, as we saw in Lesson 19. Then the minor premise adds that the 
child actually was good, or, in logical terms, the condition is actually fulfilled. 
The reason why the conclusion is valid is that the conditional major premise 
means that if the condition is fulfilled, the consequent will come about. 
Conclusion: Affirming the Antecedent Is Valid 
Affirming the Consequent
If we take the same antecedent and consequent, the same p and q, but 
now affirm the consequent (q), here is what the affirming the consequent syl­
logism would be:
Major premise	
If you are good, then you	
(p → q)
	
will get a lollipop.
Minor premise	 You got a lollipop.	
q
Conclusion	
Therefore, you were good.	
Therefore, p
There is a good reason why this argument is invalid. The major premise 
means that being good is one way to get a lollipop, the one the aunt is telling 
her to follow. But there are other ways to get the lollipop. The child might 
find one in her room, she might make one, she might buy one at the candy 
store, she might steal one from the same store, and it is just conceivable she 
might kill someone for the lollipop. Fulfilling any one of these conditions is 
enough to get a lollipop. So being good is not the only way to get a lollipop. 
Consequently, if you have the lollipop, we know you satisfied one of the con­
ditions for getting the lollipop, one of the ways to get one. But we do not 
know for sure that you fulfilled this particular antecedent and that you got 
your lollipop by being good. So the argument is invalid. In short, “if you are 
good, then you get a lollipop” does not mean the same thing as “if you have a 
lollipop, then you were good.” 
Conclusion: affirming the consequent is invalid. 
Denying the Antecedent
Again using the same p and q, here is what denying the antecedent looks 
like:

Hypothetical Arguments  
 341
Major premise	
If you are good, then you	
(p → q)
	
will get a lollipop.
Minor premise	 You were not good.	
~p
Conclusion	
Therefore, you did not	
Therefore, ~q
	
get a lollipop.
The same reason why affirming the consequent is invalid also comes into 
play here. The major premise means that one, but only one, of the possible 
ways of getting a lollipop is to be good. “If you are good, then you get a lolli­
pop” is very different in meaning from “only if you are good, then you will get 
a lollipop.” Since there are other ways to get a lollipop besides being good, you 
might have followed one of those other ways to obtain your lollipop. 
Conclusion: denying the antecedent is invalid.
Denying the Consequent (modus tollens)
Again using the same p and q, here is what the conditional syllogism de­
nying the consequent looks like:
Major premise	
If you are good, then you	
(p → q)
	
will get a lollipop.
Minor premise	 You did not get a lollipop.	
~q
Conclusion	
Therefore, you were	
Therefore, ~p
	
not good.
To see why this kind of argument is valid, we need to concentrate first on 
the minor premise: “you did not get a lollipop.” What this means is that, how­
ever many ways there are to get a lollipop—and we may not even be aware of 
all of them—you did not successfully pursue any of the many ways to get a 
lollipop. That’s why you don’t have one. But among those many ways is being 
good. Now the major premise guaranteed that if were good, in logical terms, 
if you fulfilled the condition, then would get a lollipop. Since you don’t have 
one, we can conclude that you did not fulfill this one of the many ways of 
obtaining a lollipop. 
Conclusion: denying the consequent is valid. 

342  
 The Logic of Arguments
A Deeper Look
Disjunctive Syllogisms
A second kind of hypothetical syllogism uses a disjunctive proposition as 
its major premise instead of a conditional proposition. Here is an example of 
the kind of disjunctive syllogism you can find in Sherlock Holmes or other 
mystery stories:
Major premise	
Either the killer wore red	
(p v q)
	
gloves or the red cat left a 
	
hair on the carpet.
Minor premise	 The killer did not wear	
~p
	
red gloves.
Conclusion	
Therefore, the red cat left	
Therefore, q 
	
a hair on the carpet.
In this kind of argument, the minor premise states that one of the alterna­
tives is false. So if one of them must be true, which is what the major premise 
means, then the other alternative, the one not denied in the minor premise, 
must be true. So a disjunctive syllogism like this is valid. On the other hand, 
since in an inclusive disjunction the alternatives can both be true, affirming 
one of them in the minor premise would not guarantee anything about the 
other alternative. It might be true or it might be false. 
Conjunctive Syllogisms
The third kind of hypothetical syllogism starts not with a conditional 
proposition or a disjunctive one, but with a conjunctive proposition. The con­
junctive major premise can take two forms, an affirmation of the conjunction 
or a denial of the conjunction.
Positive Conjunctive Syllogism
Here is an example of a positive conjunctive syllogism:
Major Premise	
“Houstonians are good 	
(p ∙ q)
	
and Dallasites are bad 
	
sports fans.”
Conclusion	
“Therefore, Houstonians 	 Therefore, p 
	
are good sports fans.”

Hypothetical Arguments  
 343
Admittedly, this is an odd syllogism. The reason there is no need for a mi­
nor premise is because what a conjunctive proposition means is that both the 
propositions p and q are true, because this is the only way that the conjunc­
tion of the two can be true. So if the conjunction as a whole is true, then one 
part of it, considered on its own, also must be true. As you can imagine, this 
kind of argument is found mainly in logic textbooks, not in the real world.
Negative Conjunctive Syllogism 
Negative conjunctive syllogisms are more important and are truly syllo­
gisms. Here is a typical example: 
Major premise	
You can’t be a citizen of	
~(p ∙ q)
	
Texas and of Oklahoma at 
	
the same time.
Minor premise	 You are a citizen of Texas.	
p
Conclusion	
Therefore, you are not a	
Therefore, ~q
	
citizen of Oklahoma.
The major premise denies that both p and q can be true. What it means is 
that the conjunction is not true; it does not mean that each of the conjuncts 
is not true. That statement would be (~p & ~q). The minor premise then 
affirms p. Since p and q cannot both be true, according to the major premise, 
the conclusion that follows is that the other conjunction cannot be true; it 
must be false. If q were also true, then the major premise would be false; but 
it is laid down to be true.
DeMorgan’s Theorem
DeMorgan’s Theorem, named after a nineteenth-century British logician, 
Augustus de Morgan, lets us see the reason why negative conjunctive syllo­
gisms are valid. This theorem shows we can move back and forth between 
disjunctive and conjunctive propositions as long as we are mindful about ne­
gations, as well as “our p’s and q’s.” The theorem has two halves:
(a) ~(p ∙ q) ≡ (~p v ~q)
(b) ~(p v q) ≡ (~p ∙ ~q)
Remember that the identity sign (≡) means that inferences in both direc­
tions are valid. It’s sometimes written as ←→ (an arrow going in both directions). 

344  
 The Logic of Arguments
In its expanded version, it means [(p → q) ∙ (q → p)]. So we can see what (a) 
means by expanding it:
(a) [ ~(p ∙ q) → (~p v ~q)] ∙ [(~p v ~q) → ~(p ∙ q)] 
Since either half of this conjunction can be separated from the other half, it 
follows that 
~(p ∙ q) → (~p v ~q)
Now let’s put this back into ordinary language, using the previous exam­
ple: “If you can’t be a citizen of both Texas and Oklahoma at the same time, 
then either you’re not a citizen of Texas or you’re not a citizen of Oklahoma.”
It is also possible to develop arguments that combine features of condi­
tional, disjunctive, and conjunctive syllogisms. We’ll call these complex hypo­
thetical arguments and cover a few of them in the next lesson. 
Problem Set 30: Hypothetical Arguments
Conditional Arguments
Instructions
Indicate whether the following conditional arguments, already set up in 
standard form, are valid or invalid by (a) determining specific symbols for the 
two premises and conclusion by symbolizing the argument; and (b) deter­
mining the premises and conclusions’ validity.
	
1.	If a country is in debt then its citizenry will be dissatisfied.
	
	Now the citizenry of the United States are clearly dissatisfied.
	
	Therefore, the United States is in debt.
	
2.	If George practices every day then he will make the team.
	
	Now George is practicing every day.
	
	Therefore, George will make the team.
	
3.	If George does not practice every day, then he will not make the team.
	
	Now George does practice every day.
	
	Therefore, George will make the team.
	
4.	If all the soldiers in this latest military incursion into another country 
	
		
are American, then the exercise will be successful.
	
	Now the exercise was a success.
	
	Therefore, all the soldiers must have been American.

Hypothetical Arguments  
 345
	
5.	If all the soldiers in this latest military incursion into another country 
	
		
are American, then the exercise will be successful.
	
	But not all the soldiers in the present incursion are American.
	
	Therefore, the exercise will not be successful.
	
6.	If the bridge across the river is washed away, you will not be able to get 
	
		
to the other side.
	
	Now the bridge is washed away.
	
	Therefore, you cannot get to the other side.
	
7.	If the bridge across the river is washed away, you will not be able to get 
	
		
to the other side.
	
	Now you could not get to the other side.
	
	Therefore, the bridge must not have washed away.
	
8.	If the bridge across the river is washed away, you will not be able to get 
	
		
to the other side.
	
	You could get to the other side.
	
	Therefore, the bridge was not washed away.
Hypothetical Arguments in Prose
Instructions
Set up the following hypothetical arguments in standard form. Determine 
whether the arguments are conditional syllogisms, disjunctive arguments, or 
conjunctive arguments. Then test for validity.
1. If the theory of evolution is correct, then when it comes to geology, the 
fossils found in lower geological formations will be less complex than those 
found in higher geological formations. Now geologists have found that the 
fossils found in lower geological formations are in fact less complex than those 
found in higher formations. Therefore, the theory of evolution is correct.
2.The moon accompanies the earth in its yearly revolution around the 
sun, if it revolves around the earth once a month. But the moon does accom­
pany the earth in its yearly revolution around the sun. Therefore, the moon 
revolves around the earth once a month.
3. The moon accompanies the earth in its yearly revolution around the 
sun. But the moon accompanies the earth around the sun only if the moon 
revolves around the earth. Therefore, the moon revolves around the earth.
4. If that dog is a poodle it will have the distinctive kind of hair cut poo­

346  
 The Logic of Arguments
dles have. Now you can see that the dog is not a poodle. Consequently, it will 
not have the distinctive poodle cut so adored by poodle lovers. 
5. Money will not draw interest if it is not invested. Now you can see that 
Aunt Alberta’s money was securely invested. So it will certainly make money 
for her. 
6. If the mountain will not come to Muhammed, then Muhammed will 
come to the mountain. Now in point of fact Muhammed did go to the moun­
tain. So the mountain must not have come to Muhammed.
7. “I am deceived. But if I am deceived, then I must exist. Therefore, I 
must exist.” (Augustine, d. 430, Christian bishop, theologian, philosopher; 
adapted from Confessions)
8. Where there is no free choice there can be no morality. Since he is in­
sane, he cannot be blamed. 
9. “Mr. Macawber: ‘Annual income: twenty pounds, annual expenditure: 
19 pounds, 19 shillings, 6 pence; result: happiness.’ Now Mr. Macawber actu­
ally spent less than he earned. Therefore, he must have been happy.” (Charles 
Dickens, 19th-cen. writer, David Copperfield) 
10. “Let us weigh gain and loss in calling heads that God is. Reckon these 
two chances: if you win, you win all; if you lose, you lose nothing. Then do 
not hesitate, wager that He is.” (Blaise Pascal, 17th-cen. philosopher, Pensées)
11. “If the real nature of any creature leads him and is adopted to such 
and such purposes only, or more than to any other; this is reason to believe 
that the author of that nature intended it for those purposes. Thus, there is no 
doubt that the eye was intended for us to see with.” (Joseph Butler, Anglican 
bishop, theologian, and philosopher, The Analogy of Religion, Natural and 
Revealed, to the Constitution and Course of Nature, 1736)
12. “If ideas, meanings, conceptions, notions, theories, systems are instru­
mental to an active reorganization of the given environment, to a removal of 
some specific trouble and perplexity, then the test of their validity and value 
lies in accomplishing this work. If they succeed in their office, they are reli­
able, sound, valid, good, true. If they fail to clear up confusion, to eliminate 
defects, if they increase confusion, uncertainty and evil when they are acted 
upon, they are false. Confirmation, corroboration, verification lie in works, 
consequences. Handsome is that handsome does. By their fruits, ye know 
them.” (John Dewey, 20th-cen. American philosopher and progressive edu­
cator, Reconstruction in Philosophy)
13. “Now with this done, if one should next take up the earth’s position, 

Hypothetical Arguments  
 347
the observed appearances with respect to it could be understood if we put it 
in the middle of the heavens . . . it is once for all clear from the very appear­
ances that the earth is in the middle of the world.” (Ptolemy, 2nd-cen. a.d., 
Greco-Egyptian astronomer, Almagest)
14. “Now if precisely the same effect follows whether the earth is made to 
move and the rest of the universe stay still, or the earth alone remains fixed 
while the whole universe shares one motion, who is going to believe that na­
ture (which by general agreement does not act by means of many things when 
it can do so by means of few) has chosen to make an immense number of 
extremely large bodies move with inconceivable velocities, to achieve what 
could have been done by a moderate movement of one single body around its 
own center?” (Galileo, Italian astronomer and physicist, Dialogue Concerning 
the Two Chief World Systems, 1632)
15. “No man can serve two masters; for either he will hate the one, and 
love the other; or else he will hold to one, and despise the other.” (Matthew 
6:24, trans. RSV)
16. “All conservatism is based upon the idea that if you leave things alone 
you leave them as they are. But you do not. If you leave a thing alone you 
leave it to a torrent of change.” (G. K. Chesterton, 20th-cen. British essayist, 
Orthodoxy, “The Eternal Revolution”)
17. “First of all, we must note that the universe is spherical. The reason 
is that either, of all forms, the sphere is the most perfect, needing no joint 
and being a complete whole, which can be neither increased nor diminished; 
or that it is the most capacious of figures, best suited to enclose and retain 
all things; or also that all the separate parts of the universe, I mean the sun, 
moon, planets, and stars, are seen to be of this shape; or that wholes strive to 
be circumscribed by this boundary, as is apparent in drops of water and other 
fluid bodies when they seek to be self-contained. Consequently, no one will 
question the attribution of this form to the divine bodies.” (Nicholas Coper­
nicus, Polish astronomer, On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres 1.1, 1543)
18. “Between these alternatives there is no middle ground. The constitu­
tion is either a superior paramount law, unchangeable by ordinary means, or 
it is on a level with ordinary legislative acts, and, like other acts, is alterable 
when the legislature shall please to alter it.
“If the former part of the alternative be true, then a legislative act contrary 
to the constitution is not law: if the latter part be true, then written consti­
tutions are absurd attempts, on the part of the people, to limit a power in its 

348  
 The Logic of Arguments
own nature illimitable. (John Marshall, 19th-cen. Chief Justice, U.S. Supreme 
Court, Marbury v. Madison [1803])
19. “This is the way it is, men of Athens, in truth. Wherever someone 
positions himself, thinking it best, or wherever he is positioned by his com­
mander, there he must stay and run the risk, it seems to me, and not take 
into account death or anything else compared to what [28d] is shameful. So 
I would have done terrible things, men of Athens, if, when the commanders 
whom you elected to order me had positioned me, at Potidaea, and Amphi­
polis, and Delium, they positioned me and I ran the risk of dying like anyone 
else, but when the god positioned me, as I have supposed and assumed, order­
ing me to live by philosophizing and examining myself and others, I had then 
left my position because I feared death, or any other thing [29a] whatever, this 
would be terrible. And truly then someone might justly bring me into court, 
saying that I do not believe there are gods, because I would be disobeying the 
divine, and fearing death, and thinking I am wise when I am not. For to fear 
death, men of Athens, is in fact nothing other than to seem to be wise, but not 
to be so. For it is to appear to know what one does not know. No one knows 
if death might not even turn out to be the greatest of all goods for a man; but 
men fear it, as though they knew full well it is the greatest of evils. And how is 
this not this objectionable ignorance: supposing you know what you do not 
know? But men of Athens, I am perhaps different also from many men here 
in this, that if I were to say that I am wiser than anyone in anything, it would 
be in this: that since I do not know enough about the things in Hades, so also 
I acknowledge that I do not know. [29b]
“But I do know this: that it is bad and shameful to do injustice and to 
disobey one’s superior, whether god or human. So compared to the bad things 
which I know are bad, I will never fear or flee the things about which I do not 
know, as they might even happen to be good. So that not even if you let me 
go now and if you disobey Anytus—remember he said that either I should 
not have been brought in here at all, or, since I was brought in, that it is not 
possible not to kill me, for he said before you that if I am acquitted, soon 
your sons, pursuing what Socrates teaches, will all be completely corrupted 
[29c]—if you would say to me with regard to all this: ‘Socrates, this time we 
will not obey Anytus; we will let you go, but on this condition: that you no 
longer spend time in these investigations, or in philosophizing; and if you are 
caught still doing this, you will die—if you would let me go then, as I said, on 
these conditions, I would say to you: “Men of Athens, I salute you, and I love 

Hypothetical Arguments  
 349
you, but I will obey the god rather than you. And as long as I breathe and am 
able to do so, I will certainly not stop philosophizing; and I will exhort you; 
and I will explain this to any of you I happen to meet. And if I stayed then, 
I will speak about just the sorts of things it is my custom to speak about.” ’ ” 
(Plato, d. 348 b.c., Apology of Socrates, from Socrates’s speech to the jury, Gru­
be trans. emended)

Advanced Hypothetical Arguments
Lesson 31
Advanced Hypothetical Arguments
The Essentials
There are many ways to combine the kinds of hypothetical arguments we 
studied in Lesson 30 into longer arguments. Here we will look at two particu­
larly interesting and important hypothetical arguments: reductio ad absurdum 
arguments and dilemmas, sometimes called paradoxes. After that, we will turn 
to the kinds of hypothetical arguments you find in standardized tests, like the 
GRE, LSAT, and MCAT. If you are planning on taking one of these standard­
ized tests, it is good to get one of the many test preparation books on the mar­
ket. These prep books can’t improve your basic intelligence, but they can help 
improve your logical skills if you put in a lot of practice. Spending just a little 
time with one of them can help you in one important area. After using a prep 
book, you should be familiar with the kinds of questions you will encounter on 
the test, and you should be able to take less time to answer the test questions 
involving logic, or what is sometimes called “critical thinking,” more quickly. 
Reductio ad absurdum Arguments
The Latin phrase reductio ad absurdum means “reduction to absurdity.” 
This kind of argument is quite different from what we might call the kind of 
positive arguments supporting a conclusion we have studied up until now. 
The way this argument works is that it assumes some proposition is true (p), 
350

Advanced Hypothetical Arguments  
 351
then argues that if p is true, then another proposition q, which we think is 
false, or know is false, or is just nonsensical, must follow. In structure this kind 
of argument is a modus tollens syllogism, though it may take many steps to get 
all the way to a conclusion. 
(p → q)
~q (because q is absurd)
Therefore, ~p
There are many areas where reductio arguments come in handy. Some­
times it is difficult to come up with a syllogism or other deductive argument 
to prove a conclusion in a positive way. While it is natural to resort to in­
ductive argument in such cases, sometimes an inductive argument is difficult 
to find or is unconvincing. Consider this proposition: “The whole is greater 
than the part.” This statement is obvious, and it is exceedingly difficult, in­
deed impossible, to think of a prior statement we could use to prove it. On 
the other hand, we don’t need a lot of evidence to see it is true. The reason is 
because it is an example of what philosophers call a “principle,” one of those 
basic truths that you assume at the outset of your thinking. In this case, you 
assume this truth when you are thinking about geometry, and actually when 
you are thinking about almost anything. But it is possible to offer arguments 
for basic truths like this one. In such arguments, you begin by assuming the 
principle is false, then derive deductively an “absurd” consequence that fol­
lows from assuming the principle is false. Since the absurd consequence must 
be false, the negation of the principle must be false, as well. And this means 
the principle must be true.
Let’s follow out this line of reasoning with our example: 
If the whole is not greater than the part, then one slice of pie will be 
as large as the whole pie.
But one slice is not as large as the whole pie.
Therefore, the whole is greater than the part.
(~W → P)
~P
W
Since the principles of a discipline are its basic starting points, which 
we must assume are true if we are to prove anything at all in that discipline 

352  
 The Logic of Arguments
(say, in geometry), philosophers often resort to this kind of argument, not to 
demonstrate but to support and defend the principles of a discipline.
Socrates was a great advocate of reductio arguments, though he used them 
in another way in his technique of asking people questions. When the Oracle 
at Delphi said “no one is wiser than Socrates,” he didn’t sit back in a self-
satisfied way, but went around asking people questions. His questions were 
designed to test people’s beliefs, because often we will profess two beliefs that 
are inconsistent with each other. In the early dialogues of Plato, we can see 
Socrates “putting to the test” the views of his interlocutors, especially about 
their ideas concerning good and bad, moral virtue and vice. He would typ­
ically “back you into a corner” by showing that your belief leads to absurd 
consequences. In the Apology, Socrates does this to Meletus when, in defend­
ing himself against the charge of “corrupting the youth,” he got Meletus to say 
that everyone in Athens was a wise teacher of the youth except Socrates, who 
was the only man in the whole of Athens who was corrupting them—an ab­
surdity. This kind of “absurdity” in the Socratic style was called an elenchus or 
“refutation.” Socrates did this to refute bad ideas, but even more to make his 
interlocutor realize his own ignorance. This recognition, Socrates thought, is 
absolutely necessary for each of us to achieve, because recognizing our own 
ignorance is the necessary first step in becoming wise. 
Philosophers and politicians and, in fact, almost everyone, recognize that 
when ideas clash in disagreement, we have to do two things. We need to argue 
for what we think is true. But we also need to argue against what seems to be 
false. This second half of the arguing process is where reductio ad absurdum 
arguments become useful. 
Dilemma or Paradox
There are two kinds of paradoxes. They are not so much the good and the bad, 
nor even the true and the false. Rather they are the fruitful and the barren; 
the paradoxes that produce life and the paradoxes that merely announce death. 
Nearly all modern paradoxes merely announce death. (G. K. Chesterton, Illus­
trated London News, March 11, 1911)
Another kind of argument that is often used in trying to argue against 
another position is the dilemma or paradox. This is where two alternatives are 
set before us, each of which has unhappy consequences. A dilemma is like a 
double reductio because both alternatives lead to a conclusion that is in a way 

Advanced Hypothetical Arguments  
 353
“absurd,” or at least something we don’t like or don’t believe. The two alterna­
tives are called the “horns” of the dilemma. 
Here is a kind of dilemma devised by the medieval logician Jean Buridan 
and called “Buridan’s Ass”: “Asses love hay, and when hungry will always move 
toward hay in order to eat. When more than one bale of hay is offered, since 
the ass is not an intelligent creature like a human, the ass will always go for the 
more delectable bale of hay. Now suppose the farmer sets before an ass two 
bales of hay, equally delectable in every way, and at an equal distance from the 
ass. What will the ass do? Well, he’ll starve, because there is no reason for him 
to prefer one bale of hay over the other.”
For another example, go back to the problem set in Lesson 4, number 6. 
In that passage from Pride and Prejudice, Elizabeth Bennett has received a 
very unflattering proposal of marriage from her cousin Mr. Collins, an offi­
cious Anglican clergyman. She has refused him. Then her mother insists on 
Elizabeth marrying Mr. Collins and brings her to her father. Mr. Bennett says, 
“An unhappy alternative lies before you, Elizabeth. From this day you must be 
a stranger to one of your parents. Your mother will never see you again, if you 
do not marry Mr. Collins, and I will never see you again, if you do.” 
Here is how the dilemma works: 
If Elizabeth marries Mr. Collins, then her father will never see her again; 
and if she does not marry Mr. Collins, then her mother will never see her 
again.
Either Elizabeth marries Mr. Collins or she refuses to marry him. 
Therefore, either she will never see her father again or she will never see 
her mother again.
Here is her argument:
Major premise:	 (C → ~F) & (~C → ~M)
Minor premise:	 (C v ~C)
Conclusion:	
Therefore, (~F v ~M) 
Putting a dilemma into symbols makes it easier to see what kind of dilem­
ma it is. This is one of four kinds of dilemmas. A dilemma is called constructive 
when the minor premise affirms the antecedents of the two conditional state­
ments in the major premise. In Mr. Bennett’s dilemma, the argument is modus 
ponens or affirming the antecedent. A dilemma is called destructive when it de­
nies the consequents of the two conditional statements in the major premise, 
making the argument modus tollens or denying the consequent. A dilemma is 

354  
 The Logic of Arguments
called simple when the conclusion is a categorical proposition; it is called com­
plex when the conclusion is a hypothetical statement—namely, a disjunction. 
Here are the four kinds of dilemmas, in symbolic form:
	(1)	Simple constructive 	
	
(p → q) & (r → q)	
	 	 dilemma:	
	
(p v r)
	 	 	
Therefore,	
	
q
	(2)	Complex constructive	
	
(p → q) & (r → s)	
	 	 dilemma:	
	
(p v r)
	 	 	
Therefore,	
	
(q v s)
	(3)	Simple destructive	
	
(p → q) & (p → r)	
	 	 dilemma:	
	
	
(~q v ~r)
	 	 	
Therefore, 	
~p
	(4)	Complex destructive	
	
(p → q) & (r → s)	
	 	 dilemma:	
	
	
(~q v ~s)
	 	 	
Therefore,	
(~p v ~r)
Can you tell which kind of dilemma is the one put by Mr. Bennettt to 
Elizabeth? 
A Deeper Look
Standardized Test Arguments
Hypothetical arguments have become a regular part of standardized tests 
such as the ACT, SAT, MCAT, LSAT, and GRE. On virtually all of these 
tests, the “critical thinking” (or “logic”) sections use questions that involve hy­
pothetical arguments. By far the best way to try to answer these questions is to 
become skilled at answering questions about hypothetical arguments by using 
symbolic logic. There are many kinds of questions that can be asked. The ques­
tions normally asked take the form of what currently are called “logic games,” 
which are somewhat removed from hypothetical arguments in real-life sit­
uations or in published works, and they are usually more complicated. But 
they are designed to see if you can see the logical implications of groups of 
three or four hypothetical propositions. Problem Set 31 contains two sets of 
questions typical of these standardized tests. The questions about philosophy 

Advanced Hypothetical Arguments  
 355
are followed by consideration of tactics you can follow to determine the an­
swer to the question. If you will be taking one of these standardized tests, it is 
advisable to purchase one of the many practice books available. The other set 
of questions is based on tests given some years ago.
While there are many books available to help you to prepare for stan­
dardized tests, to prepare for the “critical thinking” part of a test, practice 
with the problems in such a book is quite helpful. I would give the following 
book the highest rating: David Killoran, Power Score LSAT Logic Games Bi­
ble (Charleston, S.C.: PowerScore, 2015). 
Problem Set 31: Standardized Test–Style Arguments
Logic Games–Style Questions
Instructions
Read the scenario and the initial conditions set out, which I call “rules.” 
Then try to answer each of the questions. After each question I have set out 
some suggestions, labeled “Tactics,” for answering that question. The format 
follows standardized tests.
Scenario: Plato examines some students in his Academy.
There is a story in the ancient sources that about 380 b.c., Plato decided that 
he should examine the students in his new school, the Academy. The students 
he examined were Isocrates, Xenophon, Aristotle, Theatetus, Speusippus, and 
Eudoxus. In order to make it easier to use logical symbols, from now on, we will 
just use the first letter of each student’s name: Isocrates = I, Xenophon = X, 
Aristotle = A, Theatetus = T, Speusippus = S, and Eudoxus = E. The examina­
tions were rather strenuous. Plato would devote one whole day to examining 
each student, and all six students would be examined on six consecutive days, 
leaving one day of the week to rest. The schedule for the examination must be 
in accord with the following rules:
Rule 1. I is examined either on day 1 or day 6.
Rule 2. T is examined on some day earlier than S is examined.
Rule 3. S is examined on the day immediately before E is examined.
Rule 4. If X is examined on day 3, then S is examined on day 5.
Problem 1. Which of the following orders could be a list of the students, in 
the order of their scheduled examinations, moving from day 1 through day 6? 

356  
 The Logic of Arguments
a.	I, S, E, A, T, X.	
d.	X, T, S, E, I, A.
b.	X, A, T, S, E, I.	
e.	T, A, X, S, E, I.
c.	X, T, S, A, E, I.
Problem 2. Which of the following must be false?
a.	The exam for X is scheduled for Day 4.
b. 	The exam for A is scheduled for Day 6.
c.	The exam for T is scheduled for Day 4.
d.	The exam for S is scheduled for Day 3.
e.	The exam for E is scheduled for Day 2. 
Problem 3. Which student of Plato cannot take his exam on Day 5?
a.	E 	
d.	T
b.	X	
e.	S
c.	A
Problem 4. The examinations for Day 3 and Day 5, in this order, could be 
those of 
a.	X and E	
d.	E and T
b.	X and A	
e.	 E and A
c.	A and X
Tactics for Solving the Problems 
Overall Strategy Before Reading the Questions 
Note any facts or inferences that can be drawn directly from the scenario 
or rules. 
a.	List the 6 days in order:
	 Day 1: ___ , Day 2: ___ , Day 3: ___ , Day 4: ___ , Day 5: ___ , 
	
Day 6: ___. 
b.	Note that A can take the exam on any day.
c.	Write out the rules in a convenient notation.
	 Rule 1. I takes exam on (Day 1 v. Day 6)
	 Rule 2. T → (= precedes) S and
	 Rule 3. S → (= precedes by 1 day) E	
	
Inference: T → S →1 E
	 Rule 4. (X is Day 3) → (S is Day 5)

Advanced Hypothetical Arguments  
 357
Problem 1 Tactics: Look at the rules to see if their logical relations elimi­
nate any of the five choices for the order of the exam.
Rule 1: Since I must be on Day 1 or Day 6, Answer D is immediately elim­
inated. 
Rule 2: Since T must precede S (T → S), Answer A is eliminated.
Rule 3: Since S must precede E by only one day (S → E), Answer C is 
eliminated.
Rule 4: For answer E: Since X is examined on Day 3, Rule 4 says S must be 
examined on Day 5. But this is not true, so Answer E is eliminated.
Correct answer: B, the only answer left open. 
Problem 2 Tactics: The question asks for what must be false or, since think­
ing in terms of truth is usually easier, it also asks for what cannot be true. The 
four rules do not tell us directly anything that cannot be true. But Rules 2 and 
3 taken together mean S precedes E by one day, and T must precede E by at 
least two days. But if E takes the test on Day 2, there is no room for T to take 
it 2 days earlier. Conclusion: E cannot be true.
Correct answer: E. 
Problem 3 Tactics: This question is asking what cannot be true. If you start 
with the possible answers, you can work through them until you find the cor­
rect one. But a quicker way is to start by looking at the implications of the 
rules. T must precede S and S must precede E by one day (T → S →1 E). So the 
latest T could take the exam would be on Day 4. So T cannot take the exam 
on Day 5.
Correct answer: D.
Problem 4 Tactics: As before, look over the rules first. Rule 4 says that if X 
is examined on Day 3, then S must be examined on Day 5. This immediately 
eliminates (A) and (B). Next, (T → S →1 E) means T cannot be examined on 
Day 5, which eliminates answer (D). 
Choosing between answers (C) and (E) requires the opposite approach: 
examining the logical consequences of these answers. In answer (C), A is ex­
amined on Day 3 and X on Day 5, which is consistent with Rule 1, but there is 
no room for the three members of sequence (T → S → E). But on answer (E), 
there is room: (T → S → E) on days 1, 2, and 3. And A can be examined on Day 5. 
Correct answer: E. 

358  
 The Logic of Arguments
GRE/LSAT Hypothetical Arguments (without Comments)
Problem 1. Scenario: If Anita goes swimming, then Bill also goes swimming. 
If Carol and Desiree go swimming, then Ed also goes swimming. But Ed does 
not go swimming. Which of the following, if added to the statements above, 
will allow one properly to conclude that, therefore, Anita does not go swimming?
	
I.	If Bill goes swimming, then Carol goes swimming.
	
II.	Bill goes swimming only if either Carol or Desiree goes swimming.
	
III.	Bill goes swimming only if Carol and Desiree both go swimming.
a.	I only	
d.	II and III only
b.	II only 	
e.	I, II, and III.
c.	III only
Scenario for Problems 2 and 3: A person who does not exercise will not 
be healthy, and a person who is not healthy will not lead a productive life. It 
follows logically that everyone __________.
Problem 2. The best completion of the sentence with the blank is:	
a.	should exercise.
b.	who doesn’t exercise won’t lead a productive life.
c.	should lead a productive life.
d.	who exercises will lead a productive life.
e.	should be healthy.
Problem 3. Which of the following statements, if true, would greatly 
weaken the argument above?
	
I.	There are people who are healthy, although they don’t exercise.
	
II.	There are people who lead productive lives, although they’re not 
healthy.
	
III.	There are people who lead productive lives, although they don’t 
exercise.
a.	I only	
d.	I and II only
b.	II only	
e.	I, II, and III.
c.	III only
Scenario for problems 4 to 8: A doctor has prescribed an exercise program 
for a patient. Choosing from exercises P, Q, R, S, T, U, V, and W, the person 
must perform a routine of exactly five different exercises each day. In any day’s 

Advanced Hypothetical Arguments  
 359
routine, except the first, exactly three of the exercises must be ones that were 
included in the routine done on the previous day, and any permissible routine 
must also satisfy the following conditions:
If P is in a routine, V cannot be done in that routine.
If Q is in a routine, T must be one of the exercises done after Q in that 
routine.
If R is in a routine, V must be one of the exercises done after R in that 
routine.
The fifth exercise of any routine must be either S or U.
Problem 4. Which of the following could be the routine for the first day 
of the program?
a.	P, R, V, S, U	
d.	U, Q, S, T, W
b.	Q, S, R, V, U	
e.	V, Q, R, T, S
c.	T, U, R, V, S
Problem 5. If one day’s routine is P, Q, W, T, U, each of the following 
could be the next day’s routine except:
a.	Q, R, V, T, U	
d.	W, T, U, V, S
b.	Q, T, V, W, S	
e.	W, T, S, P, U
c.	W, R, V, T, U
Problem 6. Which of the following is true of any permissible routine?
a.	P cannot be done third.	
d.	R cannot be done fourth.
b.	Q cannot be done third.	
e.	U cannot be done fourth.
c.	T cannot be done third.
Problem 7. If the patient chooses R and W for the first day’s routine, 
which of the following could be the other three exercises chosen?
a.	P, T, U	
d.	T, S, U	
b.	Q, S, V	
e.	T, S, V
c.	Q, T, V
Problem 8. If R is the third exercise in a routine, which of the following 
cannot be the second exercise in that routine?
a.	Q 	
d.	U
b.	S 	
e.	W
c.	T 

Induction
Lesson 32 
Induction
The Essentials
Why Induction?
We have seen that the Freshman English definition of deduction—going 
from the universal to the particular—does not really capture the essence of 
deduction. For one thing, it is possible to deduce universal conclusions, not 
just particular ones. This definition leaves out the true nature of deductive 
reasoning: drawing a conclusion by using universal middle terms. By contrast, 
the Freshman English definition of induction—going from particular to uni­
versal—is better. But it is still not complete. The most important difference 
between these two types of reasoning is that deductive reasoning proceeds 
by means of a universal middle term, but inductive reasoning does not. In 
inductive reasoning there is no middle term. Our reason proceeds directly from 
examples that fall under the universal conclusion to that conclusion.
We have seen the need for induction while studying deductive syllogisms. 
Let’s return to the classic example logicians love to use:
All men are mortal.
Socrates is a man.
Therefore, Socrates is mortal. 
The conclusion is sound only if the premises are true. 
360

Induction  
 361
As we saw in Lessons 6 and 7, we use induction in the first act of the mind, 
in order to develop universal concepts like man, by “abstracting” the universal 
man from our experience of particular men. In the minor premise here we 
are saying that the individual Socrates fits under the universal concept man. 
If we already have the universal concept man in our mind, then it is easy to 
establish the truth of the minor premise by comparing Socrates with the con­
tent of the concept man. This is sometimes called using “the duck test”: if it 
looks, acts, and sounds like a duck, then it’s a duck. Here we are seeing if the 
individual we call Socrates fits under a description of man that we have al­
ready developed by studying other men and abstracting the universal concept 
man from them by focusing on the essence the men we have analyzed have in 
common with each other. We can see here that the kind of inductive reason­
ing that produces universal concepts is the foundation for all subsequent acts 
of the mind. 
The major premise works a bit differently, because it involves two con­
cepts, put together in the proposition “all men are mortal.” We weren’t born 
with that proposition already in our minds, yet we somehow came to have 
it. It’s a proposition that we refine over the course of our lives; but once we 
first attain it, we never abandon it completely. We are perfectly willing to use 
it as the basis for applying it to new people we meet, to people long since 
dead—like Socrates himself—and to people we shall never meet, say, our 
great-great-grandchildren. If we developed the concepts of men and mortal 
through abstraction, which is a process of inductive generalization, then we 
should use a similar process to derive the proposition “all men are mortal.” The 
main difference is that we don’t arrive at mere concepts, but at a universal 
proposition formed from these concepts.
There are many ways of thinking about what nowadays is described by the 
term “induction.” But let’s start with the core or essence of induction. How do 
we come to know, for example, that “all men are mortal”? The way we do so is 
through experience—either direct or indirect—of individual humans dying. 
We see or hear about people dying, say, our great-grandparents or our grand­
parents; we hear or witness our relatives or the relatives of our friends dying; 
then we begin to read history and literature, where death is a universal theme. 
We aren’t too old before we are in a position for our mind to move from the 
individual people we know who have died to a much larger group of people, 
and then quickly on to every human. In our reasoning, we generalize beyond 
the group of people we know have died to others we infer will die, and then 

362  
 The Logic of Arguments
infer beyond this to all men are mortal. The essence of inductive argument is 
starting with a limited factual base and generalizing or universalizing beyond 
that base. From knowing that “great-grandma died” and “grandfather died” 
and “Tia Maria died” and “my friend’s brother died,” we generalize to the 
universal proposition “all humans die.” 
Three Kinds of Induction
There are three kinds of inductive reasoning that we need to know about 
if we are to understand the nature of induction. Their names were not invent­
ed by Aristotle himself, but by later logicians in the Aristotelian tradition. 
They are: complete enumerative induction; partial enumerative induction; 
and abstractive induction. We’ll consider each in turn. But before we do that, 
it is helpful to have a few examples in mind, since learning is usually facilitated 
by examples. 
There is an ancient story about Plato’s school, the Academy, which says 
that he put a sign over the entrance gate: “No one allowed who has not stud­
ied geometry.” For an example from geometry, let’s pick triangle. Here are 
some helpful propositions about triangles.
(T1) “The triangles she cut out of paper are white.”
(T2) “The three interior angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles 
(180 degrees).”
(T3) “A triangle is a three-sided plane figure.”
(T4) “Triangles do not make good wheels.”
Aristotle studied in Plato’s school for about twenty years, agreed with 
much his teacher said, but disagreed on one important point. Plato had said 
we can have true and certain knowledge only of things that are themselves 
certain, unchanging, and therefore immaterial, what Plato had called “forms.” 
Aristotle agreed that we can have true knowledge of immaterial realities, but 
he added that we can have true and certain knowledge of physical or material 
things, as well, such as water. Here are some propositions about water:
(W1) “Water freezes at 0 degrees C/ 32 degrees F.” 
(W2) “There is water in those four buckets in the corner of the garage.”
(W3) “Water is made up of H2O.”
(W4) “Water cools you off after exercise in hot weather.”

Induction  
 363
Since logic and philosophy are no enemy of religion (though some people 
have said they are), let’s pick one example from religion, the Apostles of Jesus. 
Here are some propositions about the Apostles:
(A1) “There were twelve Apostles of Jesus.”
(A2) “All the Apostles were Jews.”
(A3) “All the Apostles were males.”
(A4) “All the Apostles died as Christian martyrs.”
(A5) “The Apostles were the primary messengers of his evangelization, 
after Jesus’ death.”
(A6) “The Apostles were chosen personally by Jesus.” 
Complete Enumerative Induction
Perhaps the simplest kind of induction to understand is complete enumer­
ative induction. This kind is called enumerative because we simply count up 
instances that fall under a universal concept or proposition. In complete enu­
merative induction we reason from particular things to a universal conclusion 
by counting up all the instances of the universal conclusion. Only a complete 
counting is sufficient to ensure that our induction is correct. 
Our religious concept, Apostle of Jesus, provides a helpful example, A1: 
“There were twelve Apostles of Jesus.” How do we come to know this is true? 
We start by counting the Apostles—hence, “enumeration.” How many Apos­
tles will we have to count? All twelve. Why? The reason here is important, 
since it distinguishes this kind of induction from the other two kinds. The 
reason is that there is no necessary and intrinsic connection between being an 
Apostle of Jesus and the fact that there were twelve of them. 
If you think back to the doctrine of the predicables from Lesson 9, the 
reason becomes clearer. When we compare how the number twelve (in the 
predicate) is related to Apostle of Jesus (the subject) we can see that twelve does 
not describe the essence or definition of Apostle, nor does it describe a property 
of being an Apostle, but is a predicable accident of Apostle. The connection 
between twelve and Apostle is not necessary, but contingent; there could have 
been five or fifty-five, had Jesus so chosen (A6). To see this, it helps to under­
stand the definition of the word “apostle.” The word “apostle” is just a translit­
eration of the Greek word apostolos, which means “messenger,” a man who is 
sent “out” (apo) on a “military journey” (stolos), as in the Trojan war. So A5 is 
a good definition of apostle: “Jesus’s Apostles were the primary messengers of 

364  
 The Logic of Arguments
his evangelization, after his death.” You can see from this definition that there 
is no intrinsic and necessary connection between Apostle of Jesus and twelve. 
A4 is another example requiring complete enumerative induction, be­
cause being an Apostle does not require that one die as a martyr, even though 
it is an ancient tradition of Catholic and Orthodox Christians that all the 
Apostles were martyred. That the twelve Apostles were Jewish males is an even 
stronger Christian tradition, based squarely on their names and activities, as 
recorded in the New Testament. Clearly one can establish this conclusion by 
a complete enumerative induction; and this way of doing so establishes no nec­
essary connection between being an Apostle and being a Jewish male. What 
makes this proposition more difficult, however, is that Jesus personally chose 
the Apostles. Was being a Jewish male a requirement in Jesus’ own mind? If 
so, this fact might open up another way to establish the proposition: “The 
twelve Apostles were Jewish males.” (More of this point later.) 
Far easier to decide are other examples of propositions established 
through complete enumerative induction. There is no intrinsic and necessary 
connection between being cut out of white paper and being a triangle (T1) 
or being contained in the four buckets in the corner of the garage and being 
water (W2). In both of these cases, the predicates are predicable accidents of 
their subjects, and only a full counting is sufficient to establish these inductive 
conclusions. 
In one way, complete enumerative induction doesn’t fulfill the central as­
pect of inductive argument, that generalization moves beyond the data with 
which we start, because the conclusion “all the twelve Apostles were Jewish 
males” is simply a convenient way of summarizing the results of our com­
plete survey of the Apostles. We should end by noting that it is ironic that the 
main reason why some logicians and philosophers over the centuries have dis­
trusted inductive arguments is because they believed—erroneously—that all 
valid inductions really should be inductions by complete enumeration, even 
though such a complete counting is impossible in most cases. If this kind were 
the only type of induction possible, we would all have to be skeptics. But we 
can reject skepticism, because this is not the only kind of induction; there are 
two more.
Partial Enumerative Induction
The second kind of inductive argument is the foundation for science, phi­
losophy, and all the empirical disciplines. It is also enumerative; we proceed 

Induction  
 365
by counting up examples. “All men are mortal” and “All water is composed of 
hydrogen and oxygen” are examples of this kind of induction. In these cases, 
it is impossible to count up all the examples before drawing our inductive 
generalization. This is why it is called partial enumerative induction. The way 
we determine that “all water is H2O” is to do electrolysis on some beakers of 
water. How many? Here is where judgment comes into the picture. We need 
a sufficient number to establish the conclusion. What is a sufficient number? 
We know it is less than all and more than one; but we can’t come up with 
some magic rule stating exactly how many examples are always needed. Why 
not? Because the criterion for a sufficient number is whatever number it takes 
to establish a connection, an intrinsic and necessary connection, between the 
subject “water” and the predicate “H2O.” 
The lack of a definite number drives some logicians, philosophers, and 
scientists crazy. But it shouldn’t. For there is a real difference between the 
terms involved in complete and partial enumerative inductions. We just saw 
that the reason we have to “count up” all the Apostles is because there is no 
intrinsic and necessary connection between being a Jewish male and being an 
Apostle of Jesus. But there is an intrinsic and necessary connection between 
water and H2O. It is the very essence or nature of water to be composed of two 
hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom. Without precisely these two elements 
arranged in a certain physical structure, there is no water. So what we need are 
a sufficient number of examples to rule out other elements, to insure that all 
examples of water examined are made up of H2O, and, most importantly, to 
determine there is an intrinsic and necessary connection between the subject 
and the predicate in the proposition “All water is H2O.” This is what autho­
rizes us to take the step from some water to all water. 
But how do we know there is such an intrinsic and necessary connec­
tion? We do not know it through inductive generalization; nor do we know it 
through some kind of deduction. We know it through the intuitive intellectu­
al insight mentioned earlier. (Its name in Greek is nous; in Latin it is intellec­
tus; in classical Arabic it is ‘aql.) Such thinking gives us in-sight where we see 
into the nature of water enough to know its components are hydrogen and ox­
ygen. Such insight does not come easily; it comes only after long experimental 
results, and often not even then. The same is true for the syllogism with which 
we began this lesson. Inductive generalization produces the proposition all 
men are mortal; but it is only insight into the nature of men that lets us see the 
intrinsic and necessary connection of humans with death. 

366  
 The Logic of Arguments
Now there is a difference between these two cases—complete and par­
tial enumerative induction—which we can describe using the predicables we 
studied in Lesson 8. “All water is H2O” tells us about the essence of water, but 
all men are mortal gives us a property of human animals; it does not describe 
the human essence. The same thing is true if we compare the proposition a 
triangle is a three-sided plain figure with the proposition the three angles of a 
triangle equal two right angles (or 180 degrees). The first statement describes 
the essence of a triangle; the second describes one of its properties, one you 
may have proven is true when you took geometry in secondary school. 
Abstractive Induction
The role of intuitive insight in induction is even more prominent in ab­
stractive induction. This kind of induction is absolutely required for any sort 
of human thought and knowledge. We have already seen it at work in pro­
ducing, through the process of “abstraction,” the universal concepts (first act 
of the mind) we need for all thought and knowledge. Without “abstractive 
induction” we couldn’t know anything at all for sure. It is called “abstractive” 
because this is the kind of inductive reasoning we first use to develop uni­
versal concepts through abstraction from sense experience. We start by ob­
serving Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle and gradually develop the concept of 
man or human being that is so generalized and universal that it applies to 
all humans—past, present, and future. At this point we need to distinguish 
between the universal concept “human” and some particular definition of this 
concept, whether the familiar “rational animal,” or Aristotle’s favorite defini­
tions “animal with speech” and “political animal” or the semiotic definition 
“semiotic animal.” Now we may be mistaken about how to define humans 
correctly. But we are not mistaken that there is some universal concept cov­
ering all humans and that in older English the word signifying this concept 
is “man,” in more recent English it is “human being,” in Latin it is homo, in 
Greek anthropos, and in classical Arabic it is insan.
Thus far, we have not gone beyond what we learned about the abstractive 
induction of concepts in Lessons 6 and 7. What is new about “abstractive in­
duction” is that we also use it in order to establish fundamental propositions 
about reality, truths that form a necessary foundation for all knowledge. Ar­
istotle’s three favorite examples of this kind of principle of knowledge—he 
called them axioms—are: (1) the principle of non-contradiction (“Something 
cannot both be and not be true of a subject at the same time, in the same 

Induction  
 367
place, and in the same respect”); (2) the law of the excluded middle (“An attri­
bute either is or is not true of a subject; there is no middle ground between ‘is’ 
and ‘is not’ ”); and (3) “When equals are subtracted from equals the results are 
equal.” Later Aristotelians added a fourth favorite: (4) “The whole is greater 
than the part.” These four principles are obviously true; at least they are obvi­
ously true once you understand the abstract language in which they are put. 
We need experience to understand these four axioms. But we don’t use 
experience in the way we do with partial enumerative induction. What ex­
perience does in knowing these axioms is inform us of the meaning of the 
words. Once we understand the meaning of the terms, we see at once (through 
intuitive intellectual insight) that, for example, any whole must be larger than 
any part of it, or between is and is not there is no third option, for something 
cannot both be and not be (for example, red) in the same respect and at the 
same time. In a way, the predicates of these propositions are already contained 
in their subjects. So what we need experience for, then, is to let us know the 
meaning of the subject and predicate terms; that is all. This is different from 
partial enumerative induction. In partial enumerative induction, we can know 
what the words “water” and “human being” mean without knowing that wa­
ter has to be made up of H2O or that a human is a rational animal. We have to 
experiment repeatedly to find examples of water being made up of H2O; then 
from those examples we generalize inductively; and finally we see intuitively. 
For a human is a rational animal we also need a lot of experience of individual 
humans as a basis for our induction. And for more sophisticated definitions 
of a human, such as Aristotle’s definition that a human is a substance com­
posed of intellectual soul and organic body, we need much more experience and 
thought. 
Partial enumerative inductions and abstractive inductions both live up to 
the definition of induction as generalizing beyond our experience and in this 
respect are quite different from complete enumerative induction. But they 
are also different from each other, because we use our experience in different 
ways. For some abstractive inductions, we can draw the inductive conclusion 
quickly and easily, because all we need experience for is to tell us the mean­
ing of the words. This is why Aristotle said the common axioms of thought 
are known to all humans, at least implicitly. For other abstractive inductions, 
however, like the definitions of things, we need much more experience and 
often some experimentation. Partial enumerative induction, too, requires a lot 
of effort, because experience needs to provide more than just the meaning of 

368  
 The Logic of Arguments
the terms; it provides us with examples of the connection between the subject 
and predicate of the universal proposition we are trying to establish induc­
tively. So we need many examples to analyze in order to determine whether 
there is a connection and whether the connection between subject and predi­
cate is just happenstance (a predicable accident) or the predicate is connected 
with the subject intrinsically and necessarily (as its essence or a property).
A Deeper Look 
What Is Induction?
Now that we know the three kinds of induction, we are in a better posi­
tion than before to generalize inductively from these three types and try to 
come up with a more universal definition of induction. An inductive argu­
ment is a process of reasoning (third act of the mind), one that produces a 
conclusion that is a proposition (second act of the mind). This conclusion, 
say, “all animals are mortal,” is the pay-off of inductive arguments. And this 
pay-off is huge, because without it we could never acquire the premises from 
which to begin deductive arguments. The two modes of argument—deduc­
tion and induction—work in harmony with each other, or they should. We 
need induction to arrive at many of the premises necessary for deductions; 
and we need deductions to lead us to new conclusions, which in turn lead 
us to search for more inductions, which will further widen the scope of our 
knowledge.
There are two main reasons why, over the centuries, some logicians and 
philosophers have had trouble accepting the results of inductive generaliza­
tion. First, the logicians recognize that an inductive argument is formally in­
valid; that is to say, it is formally invalid if we think of induction as a kind of 
deduction. But it isn’t. There are some fine logicians who have found it dif­
ficult to accept this simple fact. But the inventor of the theory of the syl­
logism—Aristotle—recognized that not everything can be proven through 
syllogisms. That would involve an infinite regress, since every syllogism starts 
with premises we get from prior knowledge of some sort. The only way out of 
this conundrum is to recognize that inductive reasoning is fundamentally dif­
ferent from deductive reasoning and that deductive reasoning depends upon 
inductive reasoning. In induction we must generalize beyond our data base; 
in deductive reasoning we never can. 
The second reason some philosophers have trouble accepting induction is 

Induction  
 369
this: we sometimes make mistakes when reasoning inductively. But in reply 
we should say that we make mistakes in deductive reasoning, as well! That’s 
no reason to “throw the baby out with the bathwater.” The mistakes we make 
with inductions are to think we really know something through induction 
when we don’t, because our base in experience is too narrow or we have not 
been successful in distinguishing what is essential from what is accidental 
about something. This is sometimes called the “black swan problem.” For 
centuries, Europeans were convinced that “all swans are white,” because all 
the swans they had seen were white. But then European explorers discovered 
black swans in Australia. So some philosophers thought the existence of black 
swans undermined inductive reasoning. But they were too hasty. The real an­
swer is that “swan” is a genus, not a species. All the European species of swans 
are white, but some of the Southern Hemisphere species of swans are black. 
The color of a swan is not part of the essence of the swan when considered at 
the level of genus, even though color might be part of the essence of a swan 
considered at the level of species. 
To better understand induction, it is important to add that, considered by 
itself, the process of inductive generalization is incomplete. This is true both 
for abstracting universal concepts and for induction of universal propositions. 
Inductive generalization allows us to reason from particulars to universals and 
from narrower to wider universals. We did this earlier when we studied the 
abstraction of universal concepts by considering Porphyry’s Tree in Lesson 8. 
Moving up Porphyry’s Tree, we proceeded from Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle 
to the species human that they all have in common, to the genus animal that 
is still wider or more universal, and beyond, all the way up to substance. 
Moving up, however, to more universal concepts and propositions is dif­
ferent from knowing they are true. To know rather than just be of the opinion 
that humans are a natural species, and that animal is one of their genera, and 
that all men are mortal requires us to have intuitive intellectual insight into 
the very nature or essence of the human animal. Such intellectual insight is a 
mental act different from the inductive reasoning process and from deduc­
tive reasoning, for that matter. Intellectual insight “caps off ” or completes 
the process of inductive generalization, both in the first act of the mind, when 
we achieve universal concepts, and in the second act of the mind, where we 
achieve universal propositions. Intellectual insight, however, is not automatic, 
precisely because it is a different kind of mental activity from reasoning—ei­
ther inductive or deductive reasoning. So the highest form of mental activity 

370  
 The Logic of Arguments
is not reasoning—either inductive or deductive—but intellectual insight, the 
kind that happens when you have been struggling to see whether a concept 
is accurate or a proposition is true, and then, all of a sudden, you say what 
the great mathematician and physicist Archimedes said, “Eureka !”, “I have 
found it!” 
Archimedes’s insight came when in the public bath. He realized his body 
displaced a volume of water greater than the volume displaced by stone or 
metal of the same weight, but smaller in volume because denser. This insight 
allowed him to answer a problem given him by King Hiero II of Syracuse (d. 
215 b.c.). Hiero had given the royal goldsmith an amount, determined by its 
weight, of pure gold, in order to make a votive crown for the temple of one of 
the gods; but Hiero had been told the goldsmith had diluted the gold with 
silver and taken some of the gold for himself. Since silver is a less dense metal 
than gold, if the crown had been diluted with silver, it would be larger in 
volume than one made of the same weight of pure gold and therefore displace 
more water than the same weight of pure gold. Sure enough, the crown did 
displace more water than the same weight of pure gold, so it had been diluted 
with silver. There is no report of what the tyrannical Hiero did to the gold­
smith, but we can guess. 
Primary Sources
Aristotle and Aquinas focused more on deductive reasoning than on in­
ductive. We need to look at several places in their works in order to under­
stand their views on induction. After the scientific revolution of the seven­
teenth century, many philosophers devoted themselves to studying inductive 
reasoning, but most, like the British empiricists, such as Hume, thought of 
induction as a kind of incomplete deduction, which led them to skepticism. 
Aristotle. Prior Analytics 2.23
———. Posterior Analytics 2.19.
———. Metaphysics 1.1.
———. Topics 1.12–18.
Thomas Aquinas, Commentary on Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics, bk. 2, lesson 20. 
———. Commentary on Aristotle’s Metaphysics, bk. 1, lesson 1. 

Induction  
 371
Problem Set 32: Induction
Distinguishing Inductive from Deductive Arguments 
Instructions
Which of the following questions would be answered by induction alone? 
Which deductively? Which both ways?
	
1.	Do humans have souls?
	
2.	Do most college graduates succeed in business?
	
3.	Did the world have a beginning?
	
4.	Does water boil at 210 degrees F?
	
5.	Is euthanasia morally wrong?
	
6.	Must the blood circulate?
	
7.	Have all the U.S. presidents been native born?
Different Kinds of Inductions
Instructions
What kind of induction is used to establish the following conclusions: 
(1) complete enumerative induction; (2) partial enumerative induction; 
(3) abstractive induction? 
	
1.	All snow is white.
	
2.	Humans are rational.
	
3.	All the Apostles were Jews.
	
4.	Malaria is carried by mosquitoes.
	
5.	All hydrogen is combustible.
	
6.	Electric current is proportional to voltage divided by resistance.
	
7.	Being cannot be nonbeing while it is being.
	
8.	The majority party in Congress usually loses seats in the offyear 
election.
	
9.	All the members of the jury were women.
	 10.	The whole is greater than any of its parts.
	 11.	Penicillin cures pneumonia.
	 12.	Dogs bark.
	 13.	“It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession 
of a good fortune, must be in want of a wife.” (Jane Austen, English 
novelist, Pride and Prejudice, chapter 1, first sentence)

372  
 The Logic of Arguments
Inductive Arguments in Context
Instructions
Find any inductive arguments that are contained in the following passag­
es. (a) State the conclusion of the inductive argument. (b) State the premises 
of the inductive argument that are given in the passage. (c) Identify what kind 
of inductive argument is used. (d) State whether you think the induction is 
valid or invalid. Remember that there are no rules for induction, as there are 
for deduction; so you will have to use your judgment here. 
1. “The cow, the goat, and the deer are ruminants. The cow, the goat, and 
the deer are horned animals. Therefore, all horned animals are ruminants.” 
(Adapted from Aristotle)
2. “The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles. 
“Freeman and slave, patrician and plebeian, lord and serf, guild-master
and journeyman, in a word, oppressor and oppressed, stood in constant op­
position to one another, carried on an uninterrupted, now hidden, now open 
fight, a fight that each time ended, either in a revolutionary reconstitution of 
society at large, or in the common ruin of the contending classes. 
“In the earlier epochs of history, we find almost everywhere a complicat­
ed arrangement of society into various orders, a manifold gradation of social 
rank. In ancient Rome we have patricians, knights, plebeians, slaves; in the 
Middle Ages, feudal lords, vassals, guild-masters, journeymen, apprentices, 
serfs; in almost all of these classes, again, subordinate gradations. 
“The modern bourgeois society that has sprouted from the ruins of feudal 
society has not done away with class antagonisms. It has but established new 
classes, new conditions of oppression, new forms of struggle in place of the 
old ones.
“Our epoch, the epoch of the bourgeoisie, possesses, however, this distinct 
feature: it has simplified class antagonisms. Society as a whole is more and 
more splitting up into two great hostile camps, into two great classes directly 
facing each other—Bourgeoisie and Proletariat.” (Karl Marx and Friedrich. 
Engels, 19th-cen. revolutionaries, Communist Manifesto, 1848)
3. “Now it is scarcely possible to conceive how the aggregates of dissimilar 
particles should be so uniformly the same. If some of the particles of water 
were heavier than others; if a parcel of the liquid on any occasion were con­
stituted principally of these heavier particles, it must be supposed to affect 

Induction  
 373
the specific gravity of the mass, a circumstance not known. Similar obser­
vations may be made on other substances. Therefore, we may conclude that 
the ultimate particles of all homogeneous bodies are perfectly alike in weight, 
figure, etc. In other words, every particle of water is like every other particle 
of water; every particle of hydrogen is like every other particle of hydrogen, 
etc.” (John Dalton, 19th-cen. English chemist who propounded the modern 
atomic theory)
4. “After this I inquired in general into what is essential to the truth and 
certainty of a proposition; for since I had discovered one proposition which I 
knew to be true, I thought that I must likewise be able to discover the ground 
of this certitude. And as I observed that in the words ‘I think, therefore I am,’ 
there is nothing at all which gives me assurance of their truth beyond this, 
which I see very clearly that in order to think it is necessary to exist, I conclud­
ed that I might take, as a general rule, the principle that all the things which 
we very clearly and distinctly conceive are true.” (René Descartes, 1596–1650, 
French philosopher, Discourse on Method, chapter 4)
5. “The chromosomes in our germ cells are not affected by any change that 
takes place within our body cells. What this means is that no change . . . made 
in us in our lifetimes . . . can be passed on to our children through the process 
of biological heredity.” (Amram Scheinfeld, 20th-cen. American popular sci­
ence writer)
6. “As the species of the same genus usually have, though by no means 
invariably, much similarity in habits and constitution, and always in structure, 
the struggle will generally be more severe between them, if they come into 
competition with each other, than between the species of distinct genera. We 
see this in the recent extension over parts of the United States of one species 
of swallow, having caused the decrease of another species. The recent increase 
of the missle-thrush in parts of Scotland has caused the decrease of the song-
thrush. How frequently we hear of one species of rat taking the place of an­
other species under the most different climates!” (Charles Darwin, 19th-cen. 
English evolutionist, On the Origin of Species) 
7. “The . . . study examined 80 first graders at one, five, and eight months 
into the school year. Half attended reading classes stressing letter-sound cor­
respondences and the blending of sounds that make up words [= phonics]; 
the rest attended classes emphasizing mainly the study of whole words within 
relevant stories.
“At all three intervals, children in the phonics group produced fewer er­

374  
 The Logic of Arguments
rors in reading words aloud, both with phonetically regular words, such as 
‘cut’ and ‘but,’ and with exceptions, such as ‘put.’ Their reading performance 
also improved more dramatically over the school year than did that of the oth­
er children.” (Bruce Bower, “Reading the Code, Reading the Whole,” Science 
News, February 29, 1992)
8. “Decoration is not given to hide horrible things, but to decorate things 
already adorable. A mother does not give her child a blue bow because he is 
so ugly without it. A lover does not give a girl a necklace to hide her neck.” 
(G. K. Chesterton, 20th-cen. English essayist, Orthodoxy, “The Flag of the 
World”)

Complex Arguments
Lesson 33 
Complex Arguments
The Essentials
With this lesson we reach the goal toward which we have been proceeding 
throughout this book. Longer and well-developed arguments invariably con­
tain both deductive and inductive reasoning. Considering longer arguments 
that contain both of these kinds of arguments as parts is a natural resting 
point for our consideration of verbal, Aristotelian formal logic.
Sympathetic and Critical Logical Analysis
What we can call “complex arguments” are arguments that combine de­
ductive and inductive reasoning. In order to understand them, we need to 
discern how the deductive and inductive parts of such arguments fit together. 
Here there are no easy rules or mechanical techniques to follow, for a very 
simple reason: in order to see how the deductive and inductive parts of a 
well-developed argument fit together, we first have to determine, through our 
own intellectual judgment, which parts of such an argument are deductive 
and which are inductive. Only then can we see how an author puts these parts 
together. The general advice I can give you is straightforward, accomplished 
in five steps:
1. Look for conclusions. In a longer argument, there will be many of them. 
2. Try to discern how these conclusions are related to each other. Does 
375

376  
 The Logic of Arguments
one conclusion lead to another? Can you find the overall conclusion of the 
longer argument? 
3. Go back to each conclusion and try to determine how the author ar­
gues for each one: deductively or inductively. This step will help you see where 
one conclusion is used as a premise leading to another conclusion, and distin­
guish such cases from those where the two conclusions are totally or widely 
separate from each other.
4. Go through these three steps repeatedly; this will allow you gradual­
ly to widen your vision until you get a grasp of the author’s whole line of 
thought or, alternatively, move from a broad view of the whole to seeing how 
the parts fit into the whole.
5. All along the way, look at the arguments you have distinguished, deter­
mining whether they are deductive or inductive, and whether they are valid 
and sound.
Steps 1 to 5 are what I have called “sympathetic” reading or listening to 
the author (including yourself ). You should be a sympathetic reader first; 
but once you have done that, you should become a critical reader or listener. 
Open-mindedness, followed by critique, of the thought of others or of your­
self is the key to what is now called “critical thinking,” but has since the time 
of the Stoics been called simply “logic” (logos). 
Three Examples
This final step in our journey through logic is not wholly new; we have 
already been walking in this way for some time. 
Example 1
The very first syllogism presented in this book took us directly into the 
logical terrain where we have ended. In Lesson 6 we began with this syllogism 
beloved of logic teachers for centuries: 
All men are mortal.
Socrates is a man.
Therefore, Socrates is mortal.
In considering this example of deductive reasoning, we saw that there 
must be evidence supporting the major and minor premises; evidence abso­

Complex Arguments  
 377
lutely is required if we are to know, not just believe, the conclusion. We have 
seen that evidence is established not by further deductive reasoning, but by 
inductive reasoning. First, we come to know the meaning of the concept or 
term “man” through inductive reasoning by beginning with our experience 
of individual humans. And we also come to know the major premise by be­
ginning with knowing about the mortality of individual humans and gen­
eralizing inductively. Although at that point we did not focus on any of the 
many points we later took up, in going through the three acts of the mind, it 
was clear from the beginning (or should have been) that to understand even 
such a basic syllogism as this one would require both deductive and inductive 
reasoning. 
Example 2
Problem Set 29 introduced a much longer and more complex argument, 
that of the English physician William Harvey, proving that the blood in the 
human body circulates owing to the pumping action of the heart. This tre­
mendously important argument overturned views that physicians and scien­
tists had held for 1,400 years. The argument falls into two parts. The three 
lines of deductive argument that Harvey outlines can be found in Problem 
Set 29. Here in Problem Set 33, no. 5, are found two of the more detailed in­
ductive and experimental arguments Harvey used. His overall argument com­
bines deductive and inductive reasoning, and it cannot be understood cor­
rectly until one sees how these two different kinds of argument fit together. 
Example 3
A third and succinct example is found in Problem Set 33, no. 4: “All birds 
of the same species in every age and country, build their nests alike: In this we 
see the force of instinct. Men, in different times and places, frame their houses 
differently: Here we perceive the influence of reason and custom.” 
Inductive Reasoning
In his customarily clear way, the empiricist philosopher David Hume lays 
out two conclusions reached by inductive reasoning: (1) All birds of the same 
species build their nests alike; and (2) Humans living in different cultures and 
eras build their houses differently. Hume does not present examples support­
ing these two inductive conclusions, because the evidence is so obvious. Those 

378  
 The Logic of Arguments
who know even a bit about bird nests, say, from their youthful explorations, 
and who know a bit about humans living in different cultures, either directly 
or through reports, can see that these two inductive arguments are solid. 
Deductive Reasoning
But Hume was a moral philosopher, more interested in the difference be­
tween the behavior of humans and animals. Birds of the same species building 
their nests in the same way, and doing many other things in the same way, 
is a premise leading deductively to the conclusion that the birds act on the 
basis of instincts that are species-specific, not done on the basis of individual 
or group cultural decisions. The argument is an enthymeme whose missing 
premise asserts that traits or actions that are the same for all members of a 
species do not result from choice. Such traits, like the color, shape, and size 
of individual birds in a given species, are natural. Actions characteristic of 
species, like how they mate and raise their young, what they eat, and how they 
build their nests, are also natural; they do not come from choice. But because 
they are actions rather than traits, they result from instinct. While a biologist 
might go into much more detail, Hume doesn’t pause, because he is interest­
ed in contrasting birds with humans. One group of humans will build their 
houses quite differently from another group; sometimes even one individu­
al human will build his house differently from everyone else. Why? Because 
human house-building is the result of the combined influence of individual 
reasoned choice and the kind of group reasoned choice we call culture.
Structure of Hume’s Reasoning
Birds
Deductive syllogism:
Animals acting in the same way act based on instinct. 
Birds in a species build their nests (and perform other actions) in the 
same way. 
Therefore, birds act based on instinct.
Inductive reasoning (= proof of the minor premise):
Birds in species X build their nests in the same way.
And birds in species Y build their nests in the same way.
And birds in species Z build their nests in the same way. 
Therefore, birds in any species build their nests in the same way. 

Complex Arguments  
 379
Humans
Deductive syllogism:
Animals acting in different ways act based, not on instinct, but on 
“reason and custom.”
Humans build their homes in different ways (either individually or 
culturally).
Therefore, humans act based on “reason and custom.”
Inductive reasoning (= proof of the minor premise):
Greeks build their houses in way G.
Pacific islanders build their houses in way P.
Americans build their houses in way A.
Therefore, humans build their homes in different ways (either 
individually or culturally). 	
Problem Set 33: Complex Arguments
Arguments Including both Deduction and Induction
Instructions
The following arguments may include deduction, induction, or both. An­
alyze. Identify both deductive and inductive arguments. Then check them 
for validity. 
1. “Animals do not possess a language in the true sense of the word. In the 
higher vertebrates, as also in insects, particularly in the socially living species 
of both great groups, every individual has a certain number of innate move­
ments and sounds for expressing feelings. It has also innate ways of reacting to 
these signals whenever it sees or hears them in a fellow member of the species. 
The highly social species of birds such as the jackdaw or the greylag goose, 
have a complicated code of such signals which are uttered and understood by 
every bird without any previous experience. The perfect coordination of so­
cial behaviour which is brought about by these actions and reactions conveys 
to the human observer the impression that the birds are talking and under­
standing a language of their own. Of course, this purely innate signal code of 
an animal species differs fundamentally from human language, every word 
of which must be learned laboriously by the human child. Moreover, being a 
genetically fixed character of the species—just as much as any bodily charac­

380  
 The Logic of Arguments
ter—this socalled language is, for every individual animal species, ubiquitous 
in its distribution.” (Konrad Lorenz, 20th-cen. Austrian zoologist)
2. “It may safely be pronounced, therefore, that population, when un­
checked, goes on doubling itself every twenty-five years, or increases in a geo­
metrical ratio. 
“The rate according to which the productions of the earth may be sup­
posed to increase, will not be so easy to determine. Of this, however, we may 
be perfectly certain, that the ratio of their increase in a limited territory must 
be of a totally different nature from the ratio of the increase of population. 
A thousand millions are just as easily doubled every twenty-five years by the 
power of population as a thousand. But the food to support the increase from 
the greater number will by no means be obtained with the same facility. Man 
is necessarily confined in room. When acre has been added to acre till all the 
fertile land is occupied, the yearly increase of food must depend upon the 
melioration of the land already in possession. This is a fund, which from the 
nature of all soils, instead of increasing, must be gradually diminishing. But 
population, could it be supplied with food, would go on with unexhausted 
vigour; and the increase of one period would furnish the power of a greater 
increase the next, and this without any limit.” (Thomas Malthus, 19th-cen. 
Anglican cleric, political economist, and population studies expert, An Essay 
on the Principle of Population)
3. “Thanks to a vast number of observations, we know that anyone trans­
ported from sea level to a high altitude shows symptoms of mountain sick­
ness. After a few weeks these symptoms disappear; the person has become 
acclimatized. The examination of the blood then shows that the red corpus­
cles have greatly multiplied. It is thus legitimate to deduce that the organism 
adjusts itself to the rarefaction of oxygen in the atmosphere by increasing the 
quantity of hemoglobin capable of stabilizing this gas. This brings to light 
many aspects of the law of adaptation.” (Alexis Carrel, 20th-cen. French sur­
geon and biologist, Nobel Prize, 1923)
4. “All birds of the same species in every age and country, build their nests 
alike: In this we see the force of instinct. Men, in different times and plac­
es, frame their houses differently: Here we perceive the influence of reason 
and custom.” (David Hume, 18th-cen. Scots philosopher, An Enquiry into the 
Principles of Morals, 1751)
5. Introduction: Problem Set 29, no. 4 in the last section, “Classic Argu­
ments,” contains Harvey’s overall conclusion, that the heart is a pump that 

Complex Arguments  
 381
circulates blood through the body, and also his preliminary statement of the 
three lines of argument he proposes to use to prove his conclusion. Here we 
present two of Harvey’s more detailed arguments. 
In order to understand these arguments, it is helpful to know a bit about 
the views of Galen (2nd cen. a.d.), which had been accepted for centuries, 
but Harvey was rejecting. Galen was the first physician to realize that there 
were significant differences between the venal and arterial systems of human 
blood, though he went too far in thinking they were essentially two separate 
systems. He thought that the dark bluish-red blood in the system of veins was 
distinct in nature and function from the bright red blood found in the arterial 
system. The veins contained blood made in the liver, he thought, which was 
combined with air from the lungs, and distributed via the veins in order to 
produce nourishment and growth in the body’s various organs. The blood in 
the arterial system, by contrast, he thought was made in the heart, it did not 
contain air, and it was distributed via the arteries to the organs of the muscu­
lar system, to produce motion. The movement of blood in both systems was 
caused by a kind of ebb and flow like the tides of the sea (Galen’s example), the 
motions of the heart being an effect of the motion of this whole system, not its 
cause. So in both systems, blood flowed in both directions. Recognizing the 
importance of air, which enters the body through the lungs, for nourishment, 
growth, and also motion, Galen posited that in the heart the thick wall of the 
septum that separated the two blood systems was the only place where there 
could be some connection between them, so he hypothesized that air seeped 
across the septum through invisible channels from the venal to the arterial 
system, though in fact, there is no such connection across the septum.” 
Here is Harvey’ argument: 
“Chapter 10: The first thesis. 
“So far our first thesis is confirmed, whether the issue be referred to ar­
gument or to experiment and dissection, namely, that the blood is constantly 
poured into the arteries in larger quantities than it can be supplied by the food 
[the view of Galen]; so that the whole [amount of blood] passing through in 
a short space of time, it is necessary that the blood perform a circuit, that it 
return to where it had set out.
“But if anyone shall here object . . . let us here conclude with a single exam­
ple, confirming all that has been said, and from which everyone may obtain 
conviction through the testimony of his own eyes.
“If a live snake be laid open, the heart will be seen pulsating quietly, dis­

382  
 The Logic of Arguments
tinctly, for more than an hour, moving like a worm, contracting in its longi­
tudinal dimensions (for it is oblong in shape), and propelling its contents. 
It becomes a paler color in the systole [contraction], of a deeper tint in the 
diastole [dilation]; and . . . everything takes place more slowly and is more dis­
tinct [than in higher animals]. This point in particular may be observed more 
clearly than the noonday sun: the vena cava enters the heart at its lower part, 
the artery quits it at the superior part. If the vein is now seized either with 
forceps or between the finger that the thumb, and the course of the blood for 
some space below the heart interrupted, you will perceive the part that inter­
venes between the fingers and the heart almost immediately become empty, 
the blood being exhausted by the action of the heart. At the same time, the 
heart will become of a much paler color, even in its state of dilation, than it 
was before. It is also smaller than at first, from the lack of blood. And then it 
begins to beat more slowly, so that it seems at length as if it were about to die. 
But when the impediment to the flow of blood is removed, instantly the color 
and the size of the heart are restored. 
“If, on the contrary, the artery instead of the vein is compressed or tied, 
you will observe the part between the obstacle and the heart, and the heart 
itself, to become inordinately distended, to assume a deep purple or even grey-
blue color, and at length to be so much oppressed with blood that you will 
believe it about to be choked. But when the obstacle is removed, all things 
immediately return to their natural state and color, size, and impulse.
“Here then we have evidence of two kinds of death: extinction from de­
ficiency, and suffocation from excess. Examples of both have now been set 
before you, and you have had the opportunity of viewing with your own eyes 
the truth about the heart for which I contend.” 
“Chapter 11: The second thesis is demonstrated.
“Now let anyone make an experiment upon the arm of a man, using such 
a band as is employed in blood-letting. . . . Under such circumstances, let a lig­
ature be put around the extremity and drawn as tightly as can be borne. It will 
first be perceived that below the ligature, neither in the wrist nor anywhere 
else, do the arteries pulsate, at the same time that immediately above the liga­
ture the artery begins to rise higher at each diastole, to throb more violently, 
and to swell. . . . After the bandage has been kept on for some short time in this 
way, let it be slackened a little, brought to that state or term of medium tight­
ness which is used in bleeding, and it will be seen that the whole hand and 
arm will instantly become deeply colored and distended, and the veins show 

Complex Arguments  
 383
themselves tumid and knotted. After ten or twelve pulses of the artery, the 
hand will be perceived excessively distended, injected, gorged with blood. . . . 
“From these facts it is easy for every careful observer to learn that the 
blood enters an extremity by the arteries . . . but when the pressure is dimin­
ished, as it is with the band for blood-letting, it is manifest that the blood is 
instantly thrown in with force, for then the hand begins to swell. . . . 
“It therefore plainly appears that the ligature prevents the return of the 
blood through the veins to the parts above it, and maintains those beneath it 
in a state of permanent distension. But the arteries, in spite of its pressure, and 
under the force and impulse of the heart, send on the blood from the inter­
nal parts of the body to the parts below the ligature. And herein consists the 
difference between the tight and the medium ligature: the former not only 
prevents the passage of the blood in the veins, but also in the arteries; the lat­
ter, however, while it does not prevent the force of the pulse [in the arteries] 
from extending below it, and so propelling the blood to the extremities of the 
body, it does compress the veins, and greatly or altogether impedes the return 
of the blood through them. . . .
“Farther, when the ligature goes from extreme tightness to being mod­
erately relaxed, we see the veins below the ligature instantly swell up and 
become gorged, while the arteries continue unaffected. This is an obvious 
indication that the blood passes from the arteries into the veins, and not from 
the veins into the arteries. And it also indicates there is either an anastomosis 
[connection] of the two orders of vessels [arteries and veins], or porosities in 
the flesh and solid parts generally that are permeable to the blood.” (William 
Harvey, On the Motion of the Heart and Blood in Animals, 1628)
	6.	“Are essence and existence the same in God?”
“Response: I answer that God is not just his own essence, as shown in the 
preceding article, but also his own existence. This may be shown in several 
ways. 
“First, whatever a thing has besides its essence must be caused either by 
the constituent principles of that essence, like a property that necessarily ac­
companies a species, as the ability to laugh is a property of a human, and is 
caused by the constituent principles of its species, or it is caused by some ex­
terior agent, as heat is caused in water by fire. Consequently, if the existence 
of a thing is different from its essence, this existence must be caused, either by 
some exterior agent or by its essential principles. Now it is impossible for a 
thing’s existence to be caused by its essential constituent principles, for noth­

384  
 The Logic of Arguments
ing suffices to cause its own existence, if its existence is caused. Therefore that 
thing, whose existence differs from its essence, must have its existence caused 
by another. But this cannot be true of God, since we call God the first efficient 
cause. Therefore, it is impossible that in God existence should differ from es­
sence. 	
“Second, existence is that which makes every form or nature actual, for 
goodness or humanity are said to be actual, only because they are said to exist. 
Therefore, existence must be compared with essence, if the latter is distinct, 
as actuality to potentiality. Therefore, since in God there is no potentiality, 
as shown above, it follows that in him essence does not differ from existence. 
Therefore, his essence is his existence. 
“Third, because, just as that which has fire, but is not itself fire, is on fire 
by participation, so that which has existence but is not existence, is a being 
by participation. But God is his own essence, as shown above. Therefore, if 
he were not his own existence, he would not be a being through himself, but 
he would be a participated being. But then he would not be the first being, 
which is absurd. Consequently, God is his own existence, and not merely his 
own essence.” (Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologaie I, q, 3, a. 4)
	7.	“Among aristocratic peoples, families remain for centuries in the same 
condition, and often in the same place. That, so to speak, makes all genera­
tions contemporaries. A man almost always knows his ancestors and respects 
them; he believes he already sees his grandsons, and he loves them. He will­
ingly assumes his duty toward both, and he often happens to sacrifice his per­
sonal enjoyments for these beings who are no more or who do not yet exist.
“Aristocratic institutions have, moreover, the effect of tying each man 
closely to several of his fellow citizens.
“Since classes are very distinct and unchanging within an aristocratic peo­
ple, each class becomes for the one who is part of it a kind of small country, 
more visible and dearer than the large one.
“Because, in aristocratic societies, all citizens are placed in fixed positions, 
some above others, each citizen always sees above him a man whose protec­
tion he needs, and below he finds another whose help he can claim.
“So men who live in aristocratic centuries are almost always tied in a close 
way to something that is located outside of themselves, and they are often dis­
posed to forget themselves. It is true that, in these same centuries, the general 
notion of fellow is obscure, and that you scarcely think to lay down your life 
for the cause of humanity; but you often sacrifice yourself for certain men.

Complex Arguments  
 385
“In democratic centuries, on the contrary, when the duties of each in­
dividual toward the species are much clearer, devotion toward one man be­
comes more rare; the bond of human affections expands and relaxes.
“Among democratic peoples, new families emerge constantly out of noth­
ing, others constantly fall back into nothing, and all those that remain change 
face; the thread of time is broken at every moment, and the trace of the gener­
ations fades. You easily forget those who preceded you, and you have no idea 
about those who will follow you. Only those closest to you are of interest.
“Since each class is coming closer to the others and is mingling with them, 
its members become indifferent and like strangers to each other. Aristocracy 
had made all citizens into a long chain that went from the peasant up to the 
king; democracy breaks the chain and sets each link apart.
“As conditions become equal, a greater number of individuals will be 
found who, no longer rich enough or powerful enough to exercise a great 
influence over the fate of their fellows, have nonetheless acquired or preserved 
enough enlightenment and wealth to be able to be sufficient for themselves. 
The latter owe nothing to anyone, they expect nothing so to speak from any­
one; they are always accustomed to consider themselves in isolation, and they 
readily imagine that their entire destiny is in their hands.
“Thus, not only does democracy make each man forget his ancestors, but 
it hides his descendants from him and separates him from his contemporar­
ies; it constantly leads him back toward himself alone and threatens finally to 
enclose him entirely within the solitude of his own heart. (Alexis de Tocque­
ville, Democracy in America, volume II, part 2, chapter 2)
	8.	“The condition of England, on which many pamphlets are now in the 
course of publication, and many thoughts unpublished are going on in every 
reflective head, is justly regarded as one of the most ominous, and withal one 
of the strangest, ever seen in this world. England is full of wealth, of multifar­
ious produce, supply for human want in every kind; yet England is dying of 
inanition. 
“With unabated bounty the land of England blooms and grows; waving 
with yellow harvests; thick-studded with workshops, industrial implements, 
with fifteen millions of workers, understood to be the strongest, the cunnin­
gest and the willingest our Earth ever had; these men are here; the work they 
have done, the fruit they have realised is here, abundant, exuberant on every 
hand of us: and behold, some baleful fiat as of Enchantment has gone forth, 
saying, ‘Touch it not, ye workers, ye master-workers, ye master-idlers; none 

386  
 The Logic of Arguments
of you can touch it, no man of you shall be the better for it; this is enchanted 
fruit!’ On the poor workers such fiat falls first, in its rudest shape; but on 
the rich masterworkers too it falls; neither can the rich master-idlers, nor any 
richest or highest man escape, but all are like to be brought low with it, and 
made ‘poor’ enough, in the money-sense or a far fataller one.
“Of these successful skillful workers some two millions, it is now counted, 
sit in Workhouses, Poor-law Prisons; or have ‘out-door relief ’ flung over the 
wall to them,—the workhouse Bastille being filled to bursting, and the strong 
Poor-law broken asunder by a stronger. They sit there, these many months 
now; their hope of deliverance as yet small. In workhouses, pleasantly so 
named, because work cannot be done in them. Twelve hundred thousand 
workers in England alone; their cunning right-hand lamed, lying idle in their 
sorrowful bosom; their hopes, outlooks, share of this fair world, shut in by 
narrow walls. They sit there, pent up, as in a kind of horrid enchantment; glad 
to be imprisoned and enchanted, that they may not perish starved. 
“The picturesque Tourist, in a sunny autumn day, through this bounteous 
realm of England, describes the Union Workhouse on his path. ‘Passing by 
the Workhouse of St. Ives in Huntingdonshire, on a bright day last autumn,’ 
says the picturesque Tourist, ‘I saw sitting on wooden benches, in front of 
their Bastille and within their ringwall and its railings, some half-hundred or 
more of these men. Tall robust figures, young mostly or of middle age; of hon­
est countenance, many of them thoughtful and even intelligent-looking men. 
They sat there, near by one another; but in a kind of torpor, especially in a 
silence, which was very striking. In silence: for, alas, what word was to be said? 
An Earth all lying round, crying, Come and till me, come and reap me;—yet 
we here sit enchanted! In the eyes and brows of these men hung the gloomiest 
expression, not of anger, but of grief and shame and manifold inarticulate 
distress and weariness; they returned my glance with a glance that seemed to 
say, “Do not look at us. We sit enchanted here, we know not why. The Sun 
shines and the Earth calls; and, by the governing Powers and Impotences of 
this England, we are forbidden to obey. It is impossible, they tell us!”’ 
“There was something that reminded me of Dante’s Hell in the look of 
all this; and I rode swiftly away.”(Thomas Carlyle, Past and Present, chapter 1, 
“Midas,” 1843.)

Answers to Selected Problems
Answers to Selected Problems
Answers to Selected Problems
Problem Set 1: Grammar Review
Identifying the Eight Parts of Speech
Parts of speech are identified for some of the problems:
	
4.	I (PN) heard (V) you (PN) were leaving (V).
	
7.	Give (V) the (Adj) man (N) your (Adj) money (N).
	
13.	The (Adj) dog ((N) chased (V) the (Adj) rabbit (N) into (P) the (Adj) 
woods (N) down (P) the (Adj) road (N).
	
18.	Trotting (V) down (Prep) the (Adj) road (N) in (P) a (Adj) red (Adj) collar 
(N), I (PN) spotted (V) the (Adj) dog (N).
	
21.	Death (N) is (V) the (Adj) black (Adj) camel (N), which (PN) stands (V) at 
(P) every (Adj) man’s (N) gate (N). (Arab proverb)
	
24.	It (PN) is (V pt 1) a (Adj) truth (N) universally (Adv) acknowledged (V pt 
2), that (C) a (Adj) single (Adj) man (N) in (P) possession (N) of (P) a (Adj) 
good (Adj) fortune (N), must be (V) in (P) want (N) of (Prep) a (Adj) wife 
(N). (Jane Austen)
387
387

388  
 Answers to Selected Problems
Diagramming Sentences
	
	
you	
were leaving
I	
heard
4.
(you)	
 give	
	
	
	
money
	
	
(to)	
	
	
	
your
	
	
	
man
	
	
	
	
the 
7.
13.
dog	
chased	
rabbit
	
The	
into	
the
	
woods
	
the
	
down
	
road
	
the
I	
spotted	
dog
	
the	
in
	
trotting
	
collar
	
a	
red	
down
	
road
	
the
18.

Answers to Selected Problems  
 389
Problem Set 4: The Three Appeals
1. Benjamin Franklin
Answers
a.	Members of the executive branch of the federal government under the 
US Constitution should not be paid salaries.
b.	Primarily ethical appeal.
2. Edmund Burke
Answers:
a. 	The French Revolution has been a complete disaster, because it ush­
ered in rule of France by inferior, ignorant, and ignoble men.
b.	Primarily emotional appeal, by focusing on Marie Antoinette as Dau­
phiness (wife of the heir to the throne), who was later, when Queen 
of France, dethroned and beheaded at the guillotine, during the 
Revolution.
Death	
is	
camel
	
the	
black
	
which	
kneels
	
at
	
gate
	
’s (= of)
	
man
	
every
21.

390  
 Answers to Selected Problems
5. Leonard Spector
Answers
a.	Proliferation of nuclear weapons should be stopped.
b.	Rational appeal. The topic engenders emotions, but Spector offers 
rational arguments for his conclusion. 
Problem Set 5: Problem Solving
1. 	 a.	In the tropics, why are machines such as taxi-cabs so prone to rust? 
b.	In the tropics, the high humidity of the air makes metal machinery 
such as in taxi-cabs prone to rust. 
c.	The tropics are humid and rain frequently: there is always water in the 
air. Rusting happens when the oxygen in the atmosphere oxidizes the 
iron in the metal of the car, to produce iron oxide or “rust.” The pro­
cess speeds up when there is water (H2O) in the air, and it speeds up 
even more when there is salt in the water, as happens near the ocean. 
4.	 a.	What about the earth’s atmosphere promotes the many life-forms? 
b. The atmosphere of Earth protects life on Earth by acting as a barrier 
protecting the earth and by containing important chemicals necessary 
for life. 
c. The atmosphere acts as a barrier in three ways: (1) by absorbing ultra­
violet solar radiation to prevent it from getting to the earth’s surface; 
(2) by warming the surface through heat retention (greenhouse 
effect); and (3) by reducing temperature extremes between day and 
night (diurnal temperature variation). The atmosphere also contains 
chemicals that are necessary for life, such as carbon dioxide for plants, 
and oxygen for animals. 
Problem Set 6: Three Acts of the Mind
1.	 a.	Terms: (1) Socrates; (2) Man; (3) Mortal/will die
b.	Propositions: (1) Socrates is a man. (2) Men are mortal. (3) Socrates is 
mortal/will die.
c.	Argument: All men are mortal. Socrates is a man. Therefore, Socrates 
is mortal. 

Answers to Selected Problems  
 391
4.	 a.	Terms: (1) Existing (created) things. (2) Creator. (3) Good. (4) Un­
changeably good. (5) Supremely good. (6) Changeably good.
b.	Propositions: (1) Existing (created) things are good. (2) Creator of 
existing things is supremely good. (3) Created things are not supreme­
ly and unchangeably good. (4) Created things are changeably good.
c.	Argument: (1) Creator of existing (created) things is supremely good. 
(2) Existing (created) things are good. (3) Therefore, created things are 
not supremely and unchangeably good. (4) Therefore, created things 
are changeably good. (5) Therefore, goodness of existing (created) 
things is subject to increase and decrease.
Problem Set 7: Signs
Kinds of Signs
	
1.	Conventional, instrumental. 	
7.	Conventional, instrumental.
	
4.	Natural, instrumental.	
10.	Natural, formal.
Identifying Signs in Prose 
	
1.	(a) Sign: picture of a cat; thing signified: cat. (b) “Reader”: dog. 
(c) Conventional, instrumental.
Individuals, Collections, and Universals
	
1.	Collection 
	
4.	Individual
	
8.	Universal 
Problem Set 8: Recognizing and Using Categories
Terms and Their Aristotelian Categories
	
1.	when 	
8.	quality	
15.	passion/undergoing
	
2.	relation	
12.	action	
21.	posture
	
3.	substance	
14.	quality	
27.	action

392  
 Answers to Selected Problems
Identifying Specific Categories 
	
1.	blue—color 
	
4.	sound—quality (1st sense)
	
8.	killing—action 
Problem Set 9: Argument Using Division
James Madison’s Argument in Federalist No. 10
	
1. 	How to control the influence of factions
	
2.	A large, federal republic, with multiple branches at the federal level 
(executive, legislative, judicial), and multiple levels of government 
(federal, state, local) is the best type of government to control fac­
tions. This type of government is better than monarchy, democracy, 
single level republic, single branch republic, or small republic.
3. Madison’s argument begins with two important divisions:
Ways to control influence of factions:
	
I.	 Remove Faction’s Causes
	
A.	Destroy liberty: No, this produces tyranny. 
	
B.	Give citizens the same passions, interests, opinions. Impossible; 
contra human nature.
	 II.	 Control Faction’s Effects
	
A.	In a democracy.
	
B.	In a republic.
See if you can add further subdivisions under II. 
4. The following central terms need definition. Find Madison’s defini­
tions (when he gives one) and then restate them in your own words:
	
1.	Faction	
4.	Liberty
	
2.	Democracy	
5.	Tyranny
	
3.	Republic

Answers to Selected Problems  
 393
Problem Set 10: Recognizing Essence, Property, 
and Accident
From Genus to Species
	
2.	bird: cardinal, eagle
	
5.	number: real (–10, 5/3) vs. imaginary (contains I = square root of –1). 
Real numbers include: rational (5, –4, 4/3) vs. irrational (sq. root of 2, π)
From Species to Genus
	
1.	monkey: primate; animal; living thing.
	
7.	gold: color; quality. 
Distinguishing Essence, Property, Accident
	
1.	accident	
16.	property
	
5.	property	
20.	genus
	
7.	difference
Describing Things Using the Predicables
	
1.	rabbit: (a) animal, (b) hops, (c) in the field.
	
9.	fear: (a) emotion, passion, (b) usually makes us concerned, usually 
makes us act, (c) of my uncle.
	 13.	sweet: (a) quality, sensible, (b) perceived through tongue or nose, 
(c) being tasted by me right now, combined with orange color in my 
popsicle. 
Problem Set 11: The Four Causes
Identifying all Four Causes of a Thing
	
1.	hammer
matter: metal, wood
form: long handle, heavy head or “hammerness” 
agent: craftsman or worker, using tools such as forge, a dye, and a lathe
end/purpose: strike another thing, e.g., nail. 

394  
 Answers to Selected Problems
	
4.	spider
matter: body with exoskeleton, segments, jointed appendages such as 
legs, internal organs
form: air-breathing internal structure, eight legs, fangs for injecting 
venom 
agent: parent spiders: male and female
end/purpose: live like a spider should: hunting, web-spinning, eating, 
growing, reproducing
	 10.	hydrogen
matter: protons, electrons and subatomic particles that make them up
form: structure of one proton and one electron (and maybe a couple 
neutrons)
agent: normally from breakown of compounds, e.g., from water 
through electrolysis 
end/purpose: combination with other elements to form physical 
objects; burns readily
Problem Set 12: Definitions
Kinds of Definition of Man—That Is, the Human 
	
1.	Real, descriptive definition (property). 
	
3.	Real, logical definition.
	
5.	Real, causal definition (efficient cause).	
	
7.	Nominal definition.
	
9.	Real, descriptive definition (property).
	 15.	Real, descriptive definition (accident).
	 18.	Real, descriptive definition (accident).
Kinds of Definitions 
	
1.	Real, causal, final cause.
	
4.	Real, causal, formal cause.
	
5.	Real, causal, efficient and final causes.	
	 10.	Real—descriptive, accident.

Answers to Selected Problems  
 395
Analyzing More Sophisticated Definitions 
	
1.	(a)	Democracy.
	
(b)	1.	“Eternal justice ruling through the people.” 
	
(c)	1.	Causal definition: formal (eternal justice) and efficient 
(“ruling through the people”).
	
(b)	2.	“Supremacy of man over his accidents.” 
	
(c)	2.	Descriptive definition.
	
(b)	3.	“The will of the people.” 
	
(c)	3.	Causal definition: efficient cause.
	
4.	(a) Democracy.
	
(b)	experiment in government; only counts votes, doesn’t weigh them. 
	
(c)	Descriptive (property).
	
7. 	(a)	Money; (b) “Metal pieces”; (c) Causal definition, material.
	
(a)	Money; (b) “Goods that can be had in exchange for it”; 
(c) Causal definition, final cause.
	
(a)	Money; (b) “power of purchasing”; (c) Causal definition, 
formal cause. 
Problem Set 13: Statements and Propositions
Distinguishing Kinds of Propositions
	
1.	Categorical	
13.	Conjunction
	
5.	Conditional	
18.	Conditional
	
9.	Conjunction	
19.	Statement, but not a proposition. 
	 11.	Disjunction 	
21.	Conditional
Problem Set 14: Basic Categorical Propositions
Four Kinds of Categorical Propositions
	
1.	A	
4.	O
	
2.	I	
8.	I
	
3.	E	
12.	E

396  
 Answers to Selected Problems
Problem Set 15: Advanced Categorical Propositions
Recognizing More Difficult Categorical Propositions
	
1.	I
	
3.	A
	
5.	A
	
9.	A
	 13.	A
	 17.	E
	 21.	E
	 22.	O
	 25.	O
	 26.	I
	 27.	O
	 30.	E
	 37.	A
	 44.	O
Problem Set 16: Propositions in Context
Identifying Categorical Propositions in Prose
Propositions are quoted in the form they have in the quotation. Then the 
proposition’s type (A, I, E, or O) is given. Rewriting each categorical proposi­
tion in simplified form is left to you. 
	
1.	“In short, I say . . .”
	
a.	“. . . as a city we are the school of Hellas.”  A
	
b.	“I doubt if the world can produce a man, who where he has only 
himself to depend upon, is equal to so many emergencies and graced 
by so happy a versatility as the Athenian.”  E
	
c.	“Rather, the admiration of the present and succeeding ages will be 
ours.”  A
	
d.	“. . . we have forced every sea and land to be the highway of our dar­
ing, . . .”  A
	
e.	“. . . and everywhere, whether for evil or for good, we have left im­
perishable monuments behind us.”  A
	
5.	“To suppose that the eye. . . .”
	
a.	“To suppose that the eye with all its inimitable contrivances . . . 
seems, I confess, absurd in the highest degree.”  A
	
b.	“The difficulty of believing that a perfect and complex eye . . . should 
not be considered subversive of the theory.”  E
	
7.	“With savages, the weak. . . .”
	
a.	“With savages, the weak in body or mind are soon eliminated.”  A
	
b.	“. . . and those that survive commonly exhibit a vigorous state of 
health.”  I

Answers to Selected Problems  
 397
	
c.	“We civilized men, on the other hand, do our utmost to check the 
process of elimination.”  A
	
d.	“No one who has attended to the breeding of domestic animals will 
doubt that this must be highly injurious to the race of man.”  E
Problem Set 17: Euler and Venn Diagrams of Propositions
Learning to Draw Diagrams of Propositions
	
5.	None of the chimpanzees have been fed.
	
6.	All airplanes are human artifacts.
	 13.	Not all the tires on my car are worn.
fed
chimps
X
artifacts
airplanes
X
worn
tires
X

398  
 Answers to Selected Problems
Problem Set 18: Opposition
Learning to Recognize Different Kinds of Opposition
	
1.	Subcontrary; Undetermined	
8.	Subimplication; Undetermined
	
2.	Contradictory; False	
18.	Contradictory; True
	
5.	Contrary; Undetermined 
Creating Opposites
	
2. 	(a) Subimplicant: All hummingbirds are large. False.
(b) Subcontrary: Some hummingbirds are not large. Undetermined
	
5. 	(a) Subimplicant: All politicians are dishonest. Undetermined.
(b) Subcontrary: Some politicians are not dishonest. Undetermined.
	
6.	(a) Contradictory: Some apples are not red. True.
(b) Contrary: No apples are red. Undetermined. 
Inferences Using Opposition
	
2.	There are two different inferences.
	
a.	If (1) “no neutrons are charged” (T), then (2) “Some neutrons are 
charged” (F). Contradictory; Valid.
	
b.	If (1) “no neutrons are charged” (T), then (3) “All neutrons are 
charged” (F). Contrary; Valid. 
Problem Set 19: Conversion
Converting Categorical Propositions
	
1.	Some Americans are Texans.
	
4.	No converse.
	
7.	Some pretty things are cats. 
	 10.	Some slow-growing trees are mesquite trees.
	 14.	No converse. 
	 17.	Some things with powerful hind legs are frogs. 

Answers to Selected Problems  
 399
	 23.	Rewritten: (a) “Everything beautiful is also true” and (b) “everything 
true is also beautiful.” If Keats meant that (b) follows from (a), this 
immediate inference is invalid. He probably meant each is true inde­
pendently and was not making an inference. 
Problem Set 20: Obversion and Advanced Manipulations
Obversion
	
1.	No sports are unstrenuous (or better: easy).
	
2.	All humans are imperfect.	
	
3.	Some Texans are not dishonest.
	
4.	Some Texans are dishonest.	
	
6.	Some caves are not uninhabitable. (The opposite of “habitable” is not 
“inhabitable” nor “unhabitable.”) 
	
8.	No games are unorganized (or disorganized).	
	 13.	No iguana is harmful.
Advanced Manipulations
	
8.	All games are organized.
	
1.	Obverse: No games are unorganized. (o)
	
2.	Then convert: No unorganized things are games. (c)
	
3.	Then obvert: All unorganized things are non-games. (o)
	
4.	Then convert: Some non-games are unorganized. (c)
Problem Set 21: Hypothetical Propositions
Learning to Symbolize Hypothetical Propositions
	
4.	(Sp ∙ Pp)
	
7.	(Sp → ~Sk)
	 14.	(~Sk ∙ Pk) → ~Ps
Symbolizing with Your Own Symbols
	
1.	(G → L)	
8.	~(Ap ∙ At)	
17.	(Cw ∙ Cs)
	
4.	(L v ~L)	
12.	(Rs → Md)	
21.	(~Rb → Lb)

400  
 Answers to Selected Problems
Problem Set 22: Advanced Hypothetical Propositions
Advanced Conditional Propositions
	
1.	(J = (Jm ∙ A))	
9.	(~G → ~L)
	
3.	(~C → ~V) or (V → C)	
15.	~G → ~(J ∙ M)
	
7.	(~G → ~L)	
20.	S → [B → (K → M)]
	
8.	(G → L)
Advanced Conditional Propositions in Prose 
	
3.	(~Pc v ~Pq) → (Pq v Vp) 
	
	(~Pc v ~Pq) → (~Pq → Vp)
	
6.	Sm v Sl v St
	
	~(Sl v St)
	
	Therefore, St
	 11.	(~25 v ~7c v ~S) → ~R or ~(25 ∙ 7c ∙ S) → ~R
Problem Set 23: Distinguishing Deductive from 
Inductive Reasoning
Drawing Conclusions Deductively or Inductively
	
1.	Induction.	
10.	Deduction.
	
3.	Deduction.	
12.	Both deduction and induction.
	
6.	Induction.
Distinguishing Deductive from Inductive Arguments
	
1.	Rusting machinery in tropics
	
a.	Machinery made of iron, a component of steel, rusts because of 
oxidation from humid air. 
	
b.	two.
	
c.	 (1) inductive: Iron rusts through oxidation, which is accomplished 
by transfer of oxygen from O2 and H2O particles in the air to iron 
(Fe), forming iron oxide or rust; (2) deductive: Machinery in trop­

Answers to Selected Problems  
 401
ics rusts more, because machinery in tropics is in high humidity air, 
the source of oxidation; and high humidity air, the source of oxida­
tion, causes more rusting. 
	
2.	Marx/Engels
	
a.	All human history is a history of class struggles.
	
b.	one
	
c.	inductive
	
6. 	Scheinfeld
	
a.	Bodily changes that happen during our lifetime cannot be inherited 
by our children.
	
b.	one
	
c.	inductive
Problem Set 24: Identifying Categorical Syllogisms
Syllogisms in Standard Form
	
1.	Minor term: cheetahs
Minor premise: All cheetahs are animals.
Major term: living things
Major premise: All animals are living things.
Middle term: animals
Conclusion: All cheetahs are living things. 
Figure: First
Mood: AAA
	
4.	Minor term: pillow
Minor premise: Every pillow is soft.
Major term: stone
Major premise: No stones are soft.
Middle term: soft
Conclusion: No pillow is a stone.
Figure: Second 
Mood: EAE

402  
 Answers to Selected Problems
Syllogisms in Normal Prose
	
3.	Minor term: Houstonians
Minor Premise: No Houstonians are Frenchmen
Major term: logical
Major premise: All Frenchmen are logical.
Middle term: Frenchmen
Conclusion: No Houstonians are logical.
Figure: First
Mood: AEE
	
5.	Minor term: friendly guys
Minor Premise: Some socialists are friendly guys.
Major term: Democrats
Major premise: Some Democrats are socialists.
Middle term: socialists
Conclusion: Some friendly guys are Democrats. 
Figure: Four
Mood: III
Problem Set 25: Validity of Categorical Syllogisms
Using the Rules to Determine Validity
	
1.	Major term: humans
Middle term: rational
Minor term: people who failed the test
Figure: Second
Mood: AEE
V/I: Invalid
Rule violated: Rule 1, Equivocal term: “rational”
	
3.	Major term: well-trained
Middle term: cops
Minor term: firemen
Figure: First
Mood: AEE

Answers to Selected Problems  
 403
V/I: Invalid
Rule violated: Rule 3, illicit major term. 
	
6.	Major term: fishermen
Middle term: sea lover	
	
Minor term: Texan	 	
Figure: Second	 	
	
Mood: AII
V/I: Invalid
Rule violated: Rule 2, Undistributed middle term
	
13.	Major term: used
Middle term: dishes	 	
Minor term: washed
Figure: Third
Mood: AII
V/I: Valid
Rule violated: none
Problem Set 26: Categorical Syllogisms in Prose
Using the Rules to Determine Validity
	
1.	Major premise: Everyone who wears army shoes was in the army.
Minor premise: My mother wears army shoes.
Conclusion: My mother was in the army.
Figure: First
Mood: AAA
V/I: Valid
Rule violated: None
	
4.	Major premise: All Frenchmen are logical.
Minor Premise: No Texans are Frenchmen.
Conclusion: No Texans are logical.
Figure: First
Mood: AEE
V/I: Invalid
Rule violated: Rule 3, Illicit major term.

404  
 Answers to Selected Problems
	
11.	Major premise: All menaces to society are people who fail in their 
obligations to society.
Minor Premise: All poor mechanics are people who fail in their 
obligations to society.
Conclusion: All poor mechanics are menaces to society.
Figure: Second
Mood: 	AAA
V/I: Invalid
Rule violated: Rule 2, Undistributed middle term. 
	
15.	Major premise: No apes are angels.
Minor Premise: No philosophers are apes.
Conclusion: No philosophers are angels.1. 
Figure: First
Mood: EEE
V/I: Invalid
Rule violated: Rule 4
Problem Set 27: Venn Diagrams of Syllogisms
Determining Validity Using Venn Diagrams
1.	Every fisherman loves 
the sea.
	 Some Houstonians 
are fishermen.
	 Therefore, some 
Houstonians love 
the sea.
love sea
Houstonian
fishermen
X
X
Valid

Answers to Selected Problems  
 405
2.	Every fisherman loves 
the sea.
	 No drug dealer is a 
fisherman
	 Therefore, no drug dealer 
loves the sea.
sea lover
drug dealer
fishermen
X
X
patriots
citizens
voters
X
5.	All patriots are voters.
	 Some citizens are not voters.
	 Therefore, some citizens are 
not patriots.
X
8. Frenchmen are very logical 
and, in view of the fact the 
Texans are not Frenchmen, 
we may conclude that they 
are not very logical.  
logical
Texans
Frenchmen
X
X
Invalid
Valid
Invalid

406  
 Answers to Selected Problems
Problem Set 28: Enthymemes and Epicheiremas
Identifying and Evaluating Enthymemes and Epicheiremas
	
1.	Type: Enthymeme (third order)
Major premise: All gentlemen hold open car doors for ladies.
Minor premise: Edward is a gentleman.
Conclusion: [Edward holds open car doors for ladies.]
Figure: First
Mood: AAA
V/I: Valid
	
6. 	Type: Enthymeme and Epicheirema
Major premise: [All people who are like wolves should be removed.]
Minor premise: All the political party leaders are like wolves.
Conclusion: All the political party leaders should be removed. 
Proof of major: None
Proof of minor: Party leaders prey on small beasts (= minor people 
in society).
Figure: First
Mood: AAA
V/I: Valid
	
11.	Type: Enthymeme and Epicheirema
First interpretation:
Major premise: Everything that can handle information can think.
Minor premise: Some machines can handle information.
Conclusion: Some machines can think.
Proof of major: None
Proof of minor: Some machines can calculate, conclude, and choose.
Figure: First
Mood: AAA
V/I: Valid. But the major premise is false.
Second interpretation:
Major premise: Everything that can think can handle information.
Minor premise: Some machines can handle information.
Conclusion: Some machines can think.
Proof of major: None

Answers to Selected Problems  
 407
Proof of minor: Some machines can calculate, conclude, and choose.
Figure: Second
Mood: AAA
V/I: Invalid
Rule: Rule 2, undistributed middle term.
Major premise is true, but argument is invalid. 
Conclusion: In either case, the argument is unsound. 
	
16.	Type: Enthymeme (third order)
Major premise: All nations without souls are nations that cannot live.
Minor premise: All nations without a conscience are nations without 
a soul.
Conclusion: All nations without a conscience are nations that 
cannot live.
Figure: First
Mood: AAA
V/I: Valid 
Written during World War II when Churchill was Prime Minister of 
Great Britain. The conclusion was about Nazi Germany; but Churchill said 
this when the Germans were winning the war and the British were losing. 
Since the premises are true, the syllogism is also sound. 
	
23.	Type: Epicheirema
Major premise: All violations of the laws of nature are impossible.
Minor premise: All miracles are violations of the laws of nature.
Conclusion: All miracles are impossible.
Proof of major premise: Experience has established the laws of nature.
Proof of minor premise: None 
Figure: First
Mood: AAA
V/I: Valid
Sound: Unsound. The first issue is whether or not the major premise 
is true. On Hume’s own principles, we cannot know the major 
premise for sure, since experience cannot give us sure knowledge of 
causality in nature. Experience only gives us conjunction of events; 
we supply the idea of causal connections from our own customary 
ways of thinking. This is the import of his famous billiard ball ex­
ample. The second issue is whether miracles really violate the laws 

408  
 Answers to Selected Problems
of nature. Hume takes the laws of nature to allow no exceptions, 
even though on his principles we can’t know this for sure. Those 
who hold miracles are possible say that the laws of nature hold for 
the most part, but exceptions are possible, at least for God, who 
made the laws of nature. So something cannot really be a horse 
and a rose at the same time, but something can look like a horse 
or a rose, while really being something else. This is the explanation 
of how transubstantiation works. What was bread and still looks 
like bread has been made into a different substance—the body of 
Christ—while retaining the accidental features that make it look 
like bread, even though it isn’t. No human can accomplish this feat, 
but on Catholic doctrine God can. Since Hume didn’t believe God 
exists, quite naturally he denied miracles are possible. 
	
26.	Type: Epicheirema and Enthymeme
Major premise: No power of magnetism is correlative to the mass of 
the thing attracted. 
Minor premise: All the power of gravity is correlative to the mass of 
the thing attracted.
Conclusion: No power of gravity is the [same as the] power of mag­
netism.
Proof of major premise: Magnets do not attract bodies based on their 
mass.
Proof of minor premise: Power of gravity changes with the mass of the 
thing attracted.
Figure: Second
Mood: EAE
V/I: Valid
Problem Set 29: Longer Categorical Arguments
Diagramming Arguments: Succint Arguments
3.	 a.	Business conditions will improve.	
a
	
b.	Corporate profits will increase.
	
	
b
	
c.	Stock prices will increase.
	
	
	
c
	
d.	Therefore, invest in the stock market now.
	 	
d

Answers to Selected Problems  
 409
	
5.	a.	Gas burns easily.	 	
	
	
	 b.	Carrying gas in car is dangerous.	
	
	
	
	 c.	Gas engine moves car very fast.	
	
	
	
	 d.	Gas has terrible explosive power.	
	
	
	
	 e.	Don’t carry a can of gas in your car
Longer Arguments
Instructions
The propositions in these arguments are indicated by letters. The dia­
grams show how they are arranged in the argument.
	
3.	a. Marijuana produces mild euphoria.
	 b.	Marijuana not detrimental to health.
	 c.	Legalize marijuana.	
	
	
	
	
	
	
d.	Tobacco leads to cancer.
	 e.	Surgeon General warnings against tobacco.
	 f.	 Tobacco is detrimental to health.
	 g.	Ban tobacco.
	 h.	Legalize marijuana and ban tobacco.
a
d
c
b
e
a
d
c
b
e
f
g
h

410  
 Answers to Selected Problems
	
7.	a. Human groups are made up of individuals.
	 b.	Psychological traits of groups are caused by traits of individuals.
	 c.	Psychological traits of groups are same traits as those of individuals.
	 d.	Analogy: study of individuals is like studying an object under a 
microscope.
	 e.	Psychology of individual provides details of group psychology.	
	 f.	 Study of individuals give empirical basis for study of groups.	
	 g.	We should study individual psychology in order to understand 
group psychology.
	 10.	a. Moynihan: number of signals used by vertebrates: from 10 in fish 
to 37 in Rhesus monkey.	
	
	 b.	Number of signals in social insects, esp. bees and ants: 10 to 20.
	 c.	Number of “signals” employed by animals is severely limited.
	 d.	Number of “signals” employed by humans is virtually unlimited.
	 e.	Radical difference in communication using “signals” between hu­
mans and animals.
	 f.	 Radical difference in nature between humans and animals.
a
b
c
f
d
e
a
c
e
f
b
d
g

Answers to Selected Problems  
 411
Classic Arguments
Instructions
The propositions in these arguments are indicated by letters. The dia­
grams show how they are arranged in the argument.
	
1.	Machiavelli	
	 a.	Men act out of self-interest, they are “ungrateful, fickle, false, cow­
ards, covetous.
	 b.	Prince relies on love of his subjects for his benefits to them.
	 c.	Prince relies on fear of his subjects about his punishment of them.
	 d.	Citizens obey the Prince when their self-interest and love of the 
Prince coincide.
	 e.	Citizens disobey the Prince when their self-interest and love of the 
Prince differ.
	 f.	 Citizens sometimes disobey the Prince.
	 g.	Citizens obey the prince out of self-interest, to avoid punishment.
	 h.	Citizens never disobey the Prince.	
	 i.	 It is better for the Prince to be feared than loved.
	
6.	Marshall, Marbury v. Madison
	 a.	In a particular case, if there is opposition between a particular law 
and the Constitution, which takes precedence: the particular law 
passed by Congress or the Constitution?
	 b.	If Constitution is superior to “any ordinary act of the Legislature,” 
then Constitution takes precedence.
	 c.	If a court denies this priority of the Constitution, then . . . 
	 d.	An act contrary to the Constitution is obligatory, because following 
a particular law.
b
e
a
c
d
f
i
g
h

412  
 Answers to Selected Problems
	 e.	Legislature can over-ride the Constitution, just as one particular law 
can over-ride a previous law.
	 f.	 Gives the legislative branch “real omnipotence” over the other two 
branches.
	 g.	Constitution prescribes legal limits by Courts but allows those 
limits to be “passed at pleasure.” 
	 h.	The American written Constitution “reduces to nothing.” 
	 i.	 [Therefore, the nature of the Constitution requires the courts give 
Constitution preference over law enacted by the Legislature which 
are contrary to the Constitution itself.]
	 j.	 [The determination of Constitutionality is reserved to the judicial 
branch, not the legislative or executive. The judicial branch alone 
has the right and duty to determine whether or not a particular law 
is Constitutional]
Problem Set 30: Hypothetical Arguments 
Conditional Arguments
	
2.
	
	
G  →  T
	
	
G
	
Therefore	
T
	
Valid
b
e
a
c
d
g
f
OR
h
[i]
[j]

Answers to Selected Problems  
 413
	
7.
	
	
B  →	 ~OS
	
	
	
~OS
	
Therefore	
B
	
Invalid
Hypothetical Arguments in Prose
	
1.	
E = Evolution theory is true
	
LF = lower fossils are less complex than higher fossils	
	
E  →	 LF
	
	
LF
	
Therefore	
E
	
Invalid.
Comment: This is why scientific experiments need to be repeated many 
times. The evidence does not demonstrate the conclusion for sure, but it offers 
evidence that the theory is true. Evidence “validates” the theory; the more 
evidence the greater the support of the theory.  
5.	
Int = money draws interest	
IntA = Aunt Alberta’s money 
draws interest
Inv = money is invested	
InvA = Aunt Alberta’s money 
was invested
	
~Inv 
→ 
~Int
	
	
InvA	 	
  
	
Therefore	
IntA	 	
	
  
	
Invalid
	
7.	
D = I am deceived.
	 	
E = I exist.
	
D 
→ 
E
	
D
	
Therefore	
E

414  
 Answers to Selected Problems
	 15.	
2 = A man serves two masters
	 	
H = hate one
	 	
L = love the other
	
2   →  (H  &  L)
	
~(H & L)
	
Therefore,  ~2
	
Valid
~(H & L) is not stating a fact, since we can hate one and love the other, 
but is stating a moral principle according to Jesus. You ought not to hate, but 
if you try to serve two masters, you will hate one of them. 
Problem Set 31: Standardized Test–Style Argument
Logic Games–Style Question
Explanations and answers given in chapter 31.
Problem Set 32: Induction
Distinguishing Inductive from Deductive Arguments 
	
1.	Deduction	
4.	Induction
	
2.	Induction	
7.	Both ways
Different Kinds of Inductions
	
1.	partial enumerative induction
	
3.	complete enumerative induction
	
7.	abstractive induction
	 10.	abstractive induction

Answers to Selected Problems  
 415
Inductive Arguments in Context
	
2.	Marx and Engels
a.	Inductive conclusion: “The history of all hitherto existing society 
is the history of class struggles. . . . in a word, oppressor and 
oppressed.”
b.	Premises are examples of classes opposed to each other:
	 (1)	freeman and slave.
	
(2)	patrician and plebeian.
	
(3)	lord and serf.
	
(4)	guild-master and journeyman.
c.	Type: partial enumerative induction.
	
5.	Scheinfeld.
a.	Inductive conclusion: “Chromosomes in our germ cells are not 
affected by any change that takes place within our body cells” during 
our lifetime.
b.	Type: partial enumerative induction
c.	Deductive conclusion: “no change . . . made in us in our lifetimes . . . 
can be passed on to our children through the process of biological 
heredity.”
d.	Deductive argument: not given. 
	
7.	Phonics vs. whole-word reading.
a.	Inductive conclusion: Children using phonics learned to read aloud 
better.
b.	Type: Partial enumerative induction.
c.	Deductive conclusion: [Phonics should be used to teach children 
to read.]
d.	Deductive argument: not given
Problem Set 33: Complex Arguments
Three examples are presented and analyzed in the chapter. 


Appendixes
The final part of this book contains two appendixes. First comes a 
chronology of major logicians, along with their works devoted, partly or 
wholly, to logic. The reason for including this appendix is to give a sense of 
the importance and long history of the kind of “verbal” or “Aristotelian” log­
ic presented in this textbook. The second appendix lists a number of logic 
textbooks written over the last century that present such a “verbal” logic in 
textbook form. It is designed to show that, as important as symbolic logic has 
become for advanced studies in many areas, the utility of “verbal” logic for 
teaching a first, undergraduate course in logic is still recognized. Indeed, this 
recognition has grown over the last few decades.


Appendix 1
Appendix 1
Appendix 1
Chronology of Logicians and 
Their Logical Works
Classical Greek Philosophers
Plato (d. 347 b.c.)
Student of Socrates, after whose death in 399 b.c. Plato began writing 
dialogues in defense of Socrates and his kind of “philosophy” or “love of wis­
dom.” He did not distinguish logic as a branch of knowledge, but did separate 
the well-reasoned thought of the “philosopher” from the erroneous thought 
of the “sophist.” 
Logical/Rhetorical Works
Euthydemus (ca. 384 b.c.); Gorgias (ca. 380); Republic (ca. 380), which 
charts the progression from ignorance to wisdom; Theatetus (ca. 369); Sophist 
(ca. 360). 
Aristotle (384–22 b.c.)
Born in Stagira, Macedonia, he moved to Athens and stayed in Plato’s 
Academy for twenty years (367–47), returned home, taught Alexander the 
Great beginning in 343, and then founded the Lyceum, his school in Athens. 
419

420  
 Appendix 1
He distinguished areas of knowledge he called “arts” and “sciences,” each a 
systematic study of a particular subject or topic, designed for classes he taught. 
Logic is an “art,” not a “science,” because it is a set of skills applicable in every 
area of knowledge. Each of his surviving works, completed between 347 and 
322 b.c., set out his thought in one of the different disciplines. His logic is 
contained in six books. The present textbook presents the kind of “verbal” 
logic Aristotle invented.
Logical/Rhetorical Works 
Formal logic: By distinguishing the form of thought and discourse from its 
content, later called its “matter,” Aristotle could distinguish logic from the 
other intellectual disciplines. 
Categories: First act of the mind: conceptualization of terms.
On Interpretation: Second act of the mind: mental judgments producing 
statements and propositions. 	
	
	
	
	
 
Prior Analytics: Third act of the mind, the structure or form of valid and 
invalid deductive reasoning. 
Material logic: Includes logical consideration of content (or matter), focus­
ing on how certain or uncertain the conclusions derived by reasoning are.
Posterior Analytics: Demonstrative reasoning, producing the kind of nec­
essary and certain conclusions proven in an Aristotelian “science.”
Topics: Aristotle’s first attempt at a logic textbook, covering dialectical or 
probable reasoning. Organized on the model of “technical” manuals of earlier 
rhetoricians.
On Sophistical Refutations: The kind of errors found in sophistical rea­
soning.
Rhetorical Works: 
Poetics: The way literature, especially poetry, can lead us to theoretical 
truths, especially about human life. 
Rhetoric: The oldest surviving textbook of rhetoric, which shows how the 
“art” of rhetoric produces practical, persuasive discourse. Rhetorical reasoning 
need not be sophistical, as Plato had thought.

There are many English translations of the works of Plato and Aristotle. 
Greek and English translations in Loeb Classical Library. Greek texts in The­
saurus linguae Graecae, http://stephanus.tlg.uci.edu.
Hellenistic Philosophers and Logicians: The Stoics 
Greek
They raised logic from an “art” to a “science,” by dividing philosophy into 
three areas: physics, ethics, and logic, which concentrated on hypothetical 
rather than categorical syllogisms. Stoicism had begun with three Greek phi­
losophers: Zeno (d. 262 b.c.), Cleanthes (d. 232 b.c.), and Chrysippus (d. 
ca. 206 b.c.), only pieces of whose works still exist. The book of Diogenes 
Laertius (fl. ca. 250 a.d.), The Lives and Views of the Most Eminent Philoso­
phers, is our main source for their doctrines. Greek and English translation, 
Loeb Classical Library.
Roman
Cicero (d. 44 b.c.)
Lawyer and politician; last and greatest of the defenders of the Roman 
Republic. 
Logical/rhetorical works: Rhetoric: On Invention and On the Orator. Phi­
losophy: On the Ends of Good and Evil Deeds and On Duties.
Seneca (d. 65 a.d.): Advisor to the Roman emperor Nero, 
who forced him to commit suicide. 
Logical/rhetorical works: Epistles, universally admired over the centuries, 
for their style and their display of Stoic logic, rhetoric, and ethics.
There are many translations of the works of Cicero and Seneca. Latin and 
English translations in Loeb Classical Library.
Commentators on Aristotle
In the ancient Western world there were two major centers of philosoph­
ical study, Athens and Alexandria, Egypt. From the time of Socrates, Athens 
attracted philosophers from throughout the world. In 176, Emperor Marcus 
Appendix 1  
 421

422  
 Appendix 1
Aurelius established chairs in Athens for the four traditional philosophical 
schools: Platonic, Peripatetic (Aristotelian), Stoic, and Epicurean.
In 332 b.c., Alexander the Great had founded a city named after himself 
in Egypt, Alexandria, which became a second center of Greek learning, with 
its great library, under the Ptolemaic dynasty, begun by Ptolemy I Soter, one 
of the three Greek generals of Alexander who divided among themselves the 
vast territories he had conquered. Alexandrian philosophers organized the 
works of Plato and Aristotle into a sequence of courses. First came systematic 
study of the works of Aristotle, in this order: logic, mathematics, physical 
sciences, ethics, and metaphysics. Second came reading various dialogues of 
Plato. Most of the works of these Greek commentators have not survived.
The schools in Athens lasted until 529, when they were closed for religious 
reasons, by the Roman emperor Justinian, a Christian. At that point some 
philosophers from Athens and Alexandria migrated to the school of Gunde­
shapur, in the Persian Sasanian Empire, east of the confluence of the Tigris 
and Euphrates rivers, invited by Emperor Khosraw (Chosroes) I (r. 531–79). 
There the Greek philosophers mixed with Nestorian Christians, Persian Zo­
roastrians, Manichaeans, and Indian scholars. Even when the armies of the 
Muslim Caliph Umar defeated the Sasanians in 638, the school at Gunde­
shapur lasted and became the model for the “House of Wisdom” created by 
Caliph Ma’mun (r. 813–33) at the Abbasid capital, the new “round city” of 
Baghdad, upstream the Tigris from Gundeshapur.
Greek Commentators on Aristotle, before Plotinus (d. 270 a.d.), 
Founder of neo-Platonism 
Greek texts of commentators: H. Diels (general editor), Commentaria 
in Aristotelem Graeca (Berlin: 1882–1909); and Thesaurus Linguae Grecae: 
http://stephanus.tlg.uci.edu. English translations are now available in the 
series Ancient Commentators on Aristotle, http://www.ancientcommentators
.org.uk/, general editor Sir Richard Sorabji. 
Andronicus of Rhodes (fl. ca. 60 b.c.). 
Organized the entire corpus of Aristotle’s works into the form we have now.

Appendix 1  
 423
Alexander of Aphrodisias (d. 220)
Studied and taught in Athens. The only major commentator whose work 
preceded the influence of neo-Platonism, he interpreted Aristoteles ex Aristotele.
Logical/rhetorical works: Commentaries on Prior Analytics, bk. 1; Topics; 
Sophistical Refutations. 
Greek Neo-Platonic Commentators on Aristotle
Porphyry (d. 305)
Studied in Athens, then in Rome with Plotinus. Student and biographer 
of Plotinus, he preserved and organized the writings of Plotinus. 
Logical works: Introduction to Aristotle’s Logic; Commentary on the Cat­
egories
Iamblichus (d. 320):Studied under Porphyry, taught in Syria.
Themistius (d. ca. 350).Constantinople. Orator and philosopher, supported 
by Emperor Julian the Apostate (r. 361-3). 
Logical work: Epitome of the Posterior Analytics. 
Syrianus (d. 435). 
Athens. 
Proclus (d. 485) 
Studied in Alexandria, taught in Athens. 
Systematic work: Elements of Theology
Ammonius (d. 520)
Studied in Athens, taught in Alexandria.
Logical works: commentaries on Categories and On Interpretation
Simplicius (d. ca. 560)
Studied in Alexandria under Ammonius and in Athens under Damascius. 
Taught likely in Alexandria until banished from the Roman Empire by Justin­

424  
 Appendix 1
ian in 529 for his paganism, whence he fled to the patronage of King Choes­
roes in Persia.
Logical work: commentary on Categories.
John Philoponus (d. 570)
Studied in Alexandria under Ammonius and taught there. As a Christian, 
he was not banned from the empire.
Logical works: commentaries on Categories and Posterior Analytics. 
The works in this section were translated into Latin and influenced the 
Christian Scholastic thinkers, listed below. 
Latin Neo-Platonic Commentator on Aristotle
Boethius (d. 526)
Roman patrician who lived after the death of the last Roman emperor 
in the West, Romulus Augustulus (d. 476), while the Ostrogoth King Odo­
acer ruled Italy (r. 493–526). Since Romans no longer knew Greek, he con­
ceived the idea of translating the works of Plato and Aristotle into Latin, but 
managed to get no further than Aristotle’s logic. These translations were the 
only Aristotelian works known in the Latin West until the twelfth century 
translations of the works of Aristotle and the Muslim Aristotelian Avicenna. 
Odoacer appointed Boethius to the high post of “master of the offices,” but 
eventually put him in prison, where he managed to compose his masterful 
Consolation of Philosophy before being executed. 
Logical works: Boethius translated all of Aristotle’s logical works, except 
for the Posterior Analytics, composed commentaries on them, and also wrote 
his own works on their contents. They quickly became available in the Latin 
West. Available at Christian Latin Texts: http://www.brepolis.net/.
Medieval Arabic and Jewish Philosophers
Al-Farabi (d. 980–81)
Called the “second Master,” after Aristotle, because devoted to presenting 
accurately the thought of Aristotle to the Islamic world. He wrote numerous 
commentaries and treatises on logic, only two of which are currently available 
in English. In line with the “Alexandrian” school, he thought the views of Pla­

Appendix 1  
 425
to and Aristotle complemented each other. He organized his synthetic works 
covering the whole of reality, however, using the traditional neo-Platonic cir­
cle of things emanating from, and then returning to, the one God. 
Logical/rhetorical works: Al-Fârâbî (ca. 870–950), Al-mantiq ‘inda al-
Fârâbî, ed. al-’Ajam, Rafîq and Majid Fakhry, 4 vols. (Beirut: Dar al-Mashriq, 
1985–87); Al-Fârâbî, al-mantiqiyyât lil-Fârâbî, ed. Dânishpazuh Muhammad 
Taqî, 3 vols. (Qumm: Matba’at Bahman, 1987–89); Lahcen E. Ezzaher, ed., 
“Alfarabi’s Book of Rhetoric: An Arabic-English translation of Alfarabi’s Com­
mentary on Aristotle’s Rhetoric,” Rhetorica 26, no. 4 (2008): 347–91; Joep 
Lameer, Al-Fârâbî and Aristotelian Syllogistics: Greek Theory and Islamic Prac­
tice (Leiden: Brill, 1994). 
Synthetic philosophical works, available in English translation: Views of 
the Inhabitants of the Perfect State; The Political Regime, also called On the 
Principles of Being; Harmony of the Views of the Divine Plato and Aristotle. 
Ibn Sina (Avicenna) (d. 1037)
If al-Farabi was the master of the details of Aristotle’s philosophy and log­
ic, Avicenna was the first philosopher since Aristotle himself to write synthet­
ic works incorporating the full range of philosophy; and he did this not once 
but four times. Each of these works is arranged to cover all four parts of the 
Alexandrian course of Aristotelian philosophy: logic, physics, mathematics, 
and metaphysics. And the logic parts contain all eight sections of Alexandrian 
logic: Porphyry’s Introduction; Categories; Propositions; Syllogism; Demonstra­
tion; Dialectic; Sophistic; Rhetoric; and Poetics. But Avicenna refused merely to 
comment on Aristotle; instead he offered his own thought, heavily influenced 
by Aristotle, but on some central points quite different. 
His four synthetic works: The Book of Healing (Shifâ’ ), translated into Lat­
in in the twelfth century and heavily influential on the Christian scholastic 
thinkers beginning in the thirteenth century; The Deliverance (Najât); Philoso­
phy for Ala-al-Dawla; and Pointers and Reminders (Al-Ishârât wa-al-Tanbîhât).
Logical works available in English translation: Ibn Sina, Avicenna’s De­
liverance: Logic (from al-Najât), trans., ed. Asad Q. Ahmed (Karachi: Oxford 
University Press, 2011); Ibn Sina, The Metaphysics of “The Healing” (al-Shifâ’ ), 
trans. M. Marmura (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University, 2005; Ibn Sina, 
Remarks and Admonitions, part 1, Logic, trans. Shams C. Inati (Toronto: Pon­
tifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1984).

426  
 Appendix 1
Ibn Rushd (Averroes) (d. 1198)
While al-Farabi and Avicenna lived in the Middle East, Averroes lived in 
Spain, which had been conquered by Muslim warriors in 711. By profession 
a judge of Islamic law (fiqh and sharia), he was by avocation a philosopher. 
He thought Avicenna’s philosophy had been infected by introducing religious 
ideas into philosophy, so in order to rectify this mistake he composed a series 
of line-by-line commentaries on almost all the works of Aristotle. This task 
was important, because in his view, along with most Arabic philosophers, re­
ligious ideas contained “truth for the unintelligent masses,” while philosophy 
offered truth for the intellectual and moral elite. In logic, he wrote commen­
taries on all the logical works of Aristotle. His commentaries were translated 
into Latin and heavily influenced the Christian scholastic thinkers. 
Logical/rhetorical works: line-by-line commentaries on Aristotle’s Cate­
gories, On Interpretation, Prior Analytics, Posterior Analytics, Topics, Sophistical 
Refutations, Rhetoric, and Poetics. 
Commentaries on Aristotle available in Latin translation: Aristotelis opera 
cum Averrois commentariis, 12 vols. (Venetiis: Apud Junctas, 1562–74). 
Maimonides (d. 1204)
Moses ben Maimon, called Maimonides, was a contemporary of Aver­
roes. Born in 1138, his family lost their legal status as “people of the book” 
(dhimmi) and eventually left Spain, settling in Egypt around 1168. He was a 
physician who wrote medical works; as a Jewish leader he wrote the Mishna 
Torah, a comprehensive code of Jewish law; and as a philosopher he wrote the 
Guide for the Perplexed—that is, those struggling to reconcile religious faith 
with philosophy, which was translated into Latin and read by the Christian 
scholastics. 
Logical work: The Words of Logic, which explains the technical terminol­
ogy used in logic, following al-Farabi. 
Medieval Christian Scholastics 
The works of Aristotle himself, along with the writings of the Greek com­
mentators and the commentaries and original works of Avicenna, Averroes, 
and Maimonides, were translated into Latin in the hundred years from 1150 

Appendix 1  
 427
to 1250. Their effect was nothing short of revolutionary in the sciences, phi­
losophy, the liberal arts, especially logic, and even in theology. 
The university as we now know it was created in Western Europe toward 
the end of the twelfth century, and early in the thirteenth came to be called a 
“university of masters and students” (universitas magistrorum et scholarium): 
“university” because one corporate entity, like a guild of craftsmen, whose 
teachers were called “masters,” on the same model, while students were like 
apprentices and were called “scholars,” from schola or “school.” Then, as now, 
university education was divided into two levels. Undergraduate education in 
the “school of arts” originally focused on the seven “liberal arts”: the trivium 
of grammar, logic, and rhetoric, and the quadrivium of geometry and astron­
omy, arithmetic and music. But with the translation of the works of Aristotle 
and his Greek and Arabic commentators, his many “sciences” were added to 
this curriculum. The medieval universities had graduate schools in three ar­
eas: theology, medicine, and law. The approach to learning in all faculties was 
called “scholastic,” originally a term of praise, but in the hands of Renaissance 
humanists, followed by “Enlightenment” thinkers, it was gradually turned 
into one of disapprobation. 
Peter Abelard (1079–1142)
The major logician of the twelfth century. First taught logic and then the­
ology in Paris during the period of Cathedral schools, before the creation of 
universities. Attempted to change theological writing from commentary on 
Scripture to theological treatises applying logic to understanding the truths 
of revelation. Unfortunately, his knowledge of Aristotle was limited to the 
works translated by Boethius; but he was a forerunner of the “scholastic” 
thought to come. 
Petrus Hispanus (Peter of Spain) (Thirteenth Century)
Summulae logicales, written 1220–50. Scholastic logic textbook, widely 
used from the thirteenth to seventeenth centuries. Divided into two parts: 
“the logic of the ancients” or Aristotelian logic, which focuses on reasoning, 
the third act of the mind; and secondly “the logic of the moderns” [= medi­
eval logicians], which focuses on the properties of “terms,” the first act of the 
mind, and is now called “terminist logic.” This second part contains the be-

428  
 Appendix 1
ginnings of numerous medieval innovations, some of which anticipate devel­
opments in contemporary logic. Widely used in universities until replaced by 
the Port Royal Logic: Peter of Spain, Summaries of Logic, Text, trans., intro­
duction, and notes Brian P. Copenhaver, with Calvin Normore and Terence 
Parsons (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014).
The major logicians in the Scholastic period, however, were Masters of 
Theology or of Arts in the university. 
Thomas Aquinas, OP (1224/5–74)
Along with Plato, Aristotle, and Avicenna, one of the supreme philoso­
phers of world culture, by profession he was a Master of Theology. But he 
embraced the rediscovered works of Aristotle, and is arguably the best of all 
of the commentators on Aristotle. 
Logical Works: Commentaries on Aristotle’s On Interpretation and Pos­
terior Analytics.
Many English translations; also available at website: Past Masters. Latin 
works available at corpus thomisticum: http://www.corpusthomisticum.org
John Duns Scotus, OFM (ca. 1266–1308)
The major Franciscan philosopher of the thirteenth and early fourteenth 
centuries. 
Logical Works: Questions on Porphyry’s Introduction, on Aristotle’s Cat­
egories, On Interpretation, and Sophistical Refutations. Latin texts, Wadding 
edition, online: http://www.sydneypenner.ca/os/scotus.shtml
William Ockham, OFM (ca. 1285–1347)
His nominalism or conceptualism, the metaphysical and epistemological 
view that universals are merely terms or concepts in the mind, led Ockham to 
concentrate on logic more than previous scholastic philosophers.
Logical Works: Expositions of Porphyry, Introduction (Isagoge), and of 
Aristotle, Categories, On Interpretation, and Sophistic Refutations (written 
1321–24); Summa of Logic (written 1323–25). His masterwork, a systematic 
treatment of logic and semantics, arranged following the traditional order, but 
with many innovations: part 1, Logic of terms; part 2, Logic of propositions, 
focusing on “supposition” or the way the subject “stands under” the predicate; 

Appendix 1  
 429
part 3: Logic of arguments, divided into 3.1, syllogisms, both assertoric and 
modal, 3.2, demonstrative syllogisms, 3.3, consequences: which covers impli­
cations found in both propositions and arguments, 3.4: fallacies. Latin works: 
William of Ockham, Opera philosophica et theologica, ed. Gedeon Gál, et al., 
17 vols. (St. Bonaventure, N.Y.: The Franciscan Institute, 1967–88). Various 
sections of the Summa of Logic have been translated by Alfred Freddoso, John 
Longaway, Michael Loux, and Henry Schurman. 
Jean Buridan (before 1300–ca. 1358)
Remained a Master of Arts at the University of Paris for his whole career, 
unlike most scholastic philosophers who proceeded to become theologians. 
But this did not prevent him from twice becoming rector of the whole Uni­
versity of Paris. He wrote commentaries on most of the works of Aristotle, 
but his most important work was the Summulae de dialectica, which began as 
a commentary on Peter of Spain’s Summulae logicales. 
Logical work: Summulae de dialectica, a comprehensive work designed to 
show that the logical works of Aristotle are consistent with the via moderna 
or “terminist logic”: Treatise I: propositions; Treatises II–IV: terms—their 
signification, supposition, and use in propositions; Treatise V: syllogisms; 
Treatise VI: topics or probable arguments; Treatise VII: fallacious arguments; 
and Treatise VIII: demonstrative arguments. English translation: Gyula Kli­
ma, trans., John Buridan: “Summulae de Dialectica” (New Haven and Lon­
don: Yale University Press: 2001).
Renaissance
Lorenzo Valla (ca. 1407–57)
Humanist, the title of whose book Repastinatio dialecticae et philosophiae 
(Digging up again the fields of dialectic and philosophy), shows his rejection 
of philosophy, and its scholastic logic, and his preference for dialectical and 
rhetorical argumentation. 
Petrus Ramus (1515–72)
Aristotelice animadversiones, dialecticae institutiones (Attacks on Aristot­
le, Promotion of Dialectic) (1543). Humanist and anti-scholastic who rejected 

430  
 Appendix 1
logic in favor of rhetoric. Fought to remove from the university curriculum 
Peter of Spain’s Summulae logicales, saying it failed to make him “more judi­
cious in my studies of history and antiquity, nor more skilled in disputation, 
nor more competent at writing poetry, nor indeed more competent at any­
thing at all” (Scholae in liberales artes, Basel, 1569).
Giacomo Zabarella (1533–89)
Opera logica, Venice 1578. Main representative of a thriving Renaissance 
Aristotelianism at the University of Padua. Especially concerned with the ap­
plication of logic to natural science. 
Modern (1650 to 1850)
Antoine Arnauld and Pierre Nicole
La Logique ou l’art de penser, usually called the Port-Royal Logic. English 
translation: Arnauld and Nicole, Logic or the Art of Thinking, trans. Jill V. 
Buroker (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996). Follows Aristotle’s 
organization of logic based on the three acts of the mind: concepts, judg­
ments, arguments, but, following Descartes, adds a fourth part on “method.” 
Limits sound arguments to rationalistic deductions, independent of sense 
experience. 
Richard Whately
Elements of Logic (1826) and Elements of Rhetoric (1828). Following the 
Aristotelian tradition, and the Port Royal Logic in particular, Whately held 
that deductive argument was the sounder mode of reasoning than induction. 
J. S. Mill (1806–73)
A System of Logic. 1834. Reply to Whately, Mill’s empiricist philosophy 
led him to embrace inductive reasoning, for which he set out five “rules of 
thumb” to guide inductions, later called “Mill’s Methods.” But he abandoned 
the intuitive insight traditionally thought necessary to perfect inductive rea­
soning and achieve certain knowledge. He denied that syllogistic reasoning 
produces new knowledge: “Nothing ever was, or can be proved by syllogism 

Appendix 1  
 431
which was not known, or assumed to be known, before” (System VII:183). So 
we gain no new knowledge using standard syllogistic inferences, such as “All 
men are mortal; Socrates is a man; therefore, Socrates is mortal,” because the 
conclusion has already been asserted in the major premise.
Contemporary Symbolic Logic (1850 to Present)
George Boole (1815–64)
Mathematical Analysis of Logic (1847), The Laws of Thought (1854). First 
logician to move logic from its verbal language to a mathematical style lan­
guage, that of algebra.
Augustus de Morgan (1806–71)
On the Syllogism and Other Writings, ed. Peter Heath, 1966. Works orig­
inally published 1846–62. Further developed the algebraic language of logic. 
John Venn (1834–1923)
Symbolic Logic (1881), reprinted 1971. Took a second step toward mathe­
matical logic, beyond Boole and de Morgan. Invented “Venn diagrams” in or­
der to set the logic of verbal language into a second mathematical “language,” 
that of geometric forms—namely, circles that represent classes of things. In­
tersecting circles are used to represent geometrically the language of verbal 
terms, propositions, and deductive arguments. 
Gottlob Frege (1848–1925)
Rechnungsmethoden, die sich auf eine Erweiterung des Grössenbegriffes 
gründen. Jena: Friedrich Frommann, 1874. Translation by H. Kaal, Methods 
of Calculation Based on an Extension of the Concept of Quantity, in Gottlob 
Frege, Collected Papers on Mathematics, Logic, and Philosophy, ed. B. McGuin­
ness (Oxford: 1984), 56–92.
In the following crucial passage, Frege separates arithmetic from the quan­
tities of real things and bases it on logic; and then, following Kant, Frege claims 
logic is based purely in the mind, not taken from the contours of reality: 	
According to the old conception, length appears as something material which 
fills the straight line between its end points and at the same time prevents an­

432  
 Appendix 1
other thing from penetrating into its space by its rigidity. In adding quantities, 
we are therefore forced to place one quantity against another. Something similar 
holds for surfaces and solid contents. The introduction of negative quantities 
made a dent in this conception, and imaginary quantities made it completely 
impossible. Now all that matters is the point of origin and the end point—the 
idea of filling the space has been completely lost. All that has remained is certain 
general properties of addition, which now emerge as the essential characteristic 
marks of quantity. The concept has thus gradually freed itself from intuition [= 
sense experience] and made itself independent. This is quite unobjectionable, 
especially since its earlier intuitive character was at bottom mere appearance. 
Bounded straight lines and planes enclosed by curves can certainly be intuited, 
but what is quantitative about them, what is common to lengths and surfaces, 
escapes our intuition. . . . There is accordingly a noteworthy difference between 
geometry and arithmetic in the way in which their fundamental principles are 
grounded. The elements of all geometrical constructions are intuitions, and ge­
ometry refers to intuition as the source of its axioms. Since the object of arith­
metic does not have an intuitive character, its fundamental propositions cannot 
stem from intuition. (Frege, Collected Papers, 56)
Alfred North Whitehead (1861–1947) and Bertrand Russell (1872–1970)
Principia Mathematica, 3 vols. (1910, 1912, 1913). Pioneering work that for 
the first time set out the content of symbolic logic in systematic order. In­
spired by Frege’s insight that mathematical truths are a subset of logical truths, 
Whitehead and Russell then proved the theorems of mathematical logic 
through logical deduction from a set of fundamental axioms, thus creating 
an “axiomatic system.” This system was designed to show that mathematical 
truths have a secure foundation in logic, rather than the quantitative features 
of reality, as Aristotle had affirmed; and further, that the truths of logic itself 
are independent of the reality we experience empirically. 

Appendix 2
Appendix 2 
A Selection of English-Language 
Textbooks in Logic
This selection of textbooks is weighted toward Verbal or Aristotelian log­
ic. Textbooks are classified as treating: Verbal logic, Symbolic logic, or Both.
Byerly, T. Ryan. Introducing Logic and Critical Thinking. Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker Aca­
demic, 2017. Both.
Clarke, Richard F., SJ. Logic. London: Green, 1921. Verbal. 
Coffey, Peter. The Science of Logic: An Inquiry into the Principles of Accurate Thought and 
Scientific Method. 2 vols. New York: P. Smith, 1938. Verbal. 
Connell, Richard J. Logical Analysis. Winona, Minn.: St. Mary’s College Press, 1981. Verbal. 
Copi, I. M., and C. Cohen. Introduction to Logic. 11th ed. London and New York: Rout­
ledge, 2002. Both. 
Corbett, Edward P. J. Classical Rhetoric for the Modern Student. 3rd ed. New York: Oxford, 
1999. Verbal.
Cotter, Anthony Charles, SJ. “Logic.” In The ABC of Scholastic Philosophy, Heusenstamm: 
Editiones Scholasticae, 1947. Reprinted, New Brunswick: Transaction, 2012. 43–122. Verbal.
Dewey, John. Logic: The Theory of Enquiry. New York: Holt, 1938. Verbal. 
Gensler, Harry J. Introduction to Logic. London and New York: Routledge, 2002. Both. 
Hurley, Patrick J. A Concise Introduction to Logic. Stamford, CN: Cengage Learning, 2008. 
Both.
Joseph, H. W. B. An Introduction to Logic. Oxford: Clarendon, 1916. Verbal. 
433

434  
 Appendix 2
Kelley, David. The Art of Reasoning. 3rd ed. New York and London: Norton,1998. Both. 
Kreeft, Peter. Socratic Logic: Socratic Method Platonic Questions. South Bend, Ind.: St. Au­
gustine’s Press, 2005. Verbal. 
Kreyche, Robert. Logic for Undergraduates. New York: Holt, Rinehart, Winston, 1970. 
Both. 
Maritain, Jacques. Formal Logic. Translated by Imelda Choquette. New York: Sheed and 
Ward, 1937. Verbal. 
Oesterle, John A. Logic: The Art of Defining and Reasoning. New York: Prentice Hall, 1952. 
Verbal. 
Parry, William, and Edward Hacker. Aristotelian Logic. Albany, N.Y.: SUNY Press, 1991. 
Verbal. 
Sider, Theodore. Logic for Philosophy. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2010. 
Symbolic.
Smith, Vincent E. The Elements of Logic. Milwaukee: Bruce, 1957. Verbal. 
Sommers, Fred. The Logic of Natural Language. Oxford: Clarendon, 1982. Verbal.
Spangler, Mary Michael. Logic: An Aristotelian Approach. 2nd ed. Lanham, Md.: University 
Press of America, 1993. Verbal. 
Sullivan, Daniel J. Fundamentals of Logic. New York: Macmillan, 1963. Verbal. 
Sullivan, Scott M. An Introduction to Traditional Logic: Classical Reasoning for Contempo­
rary Minds. North Charleston, S.C.: Booksurge, 2005. Verbal.
Weston, Anthony. A Rulebook for Arguments. 5th ed. Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett, 2017. 
Verbal.

Bibliography
Bibliography
Bibliography 
Aesop. The Complete Fables. Translated by Olivia Temple and Robert Temple. London: 
Penguin, 2003.
al-Qushayrī, Muslim ibn al-H. ajjāj. S. ah. ih.  Muslim: Being Traditions of the Sayings and Doings 
of the Prophet Muhammad as Narrated by His Companions and Compiled under the Title 
al-Jāmi‘-us. -s. ah. īh. . Translated by Abdul Hameed Siddiqui. 4 vols. Lahore: Sh. Muhammad 
Ashraf, 1971–75.
Aquinas, Thomas. Latin texts of all works available at Corpus thomisticum: 
http://www.corpusthomisticum.org. 
———. Aquinas on Matter and Form and the Elements: A Translation and Interpretation of 
the De principiis naturae and the De mixtione elementorum of St. Thomas Aquinas. Translat­
ed by Joseph Bobik. Notre Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press, 1998. [Electronic 
resource.]
———. Aristotle: On Interpretation; Commentary by St. Thomas and Cajetan. Translated by 
Jean T. Oesterle. Milwaukee, Wisc.: Marquette University Press, 1962.
———. Commentary on Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics. Translated by C. I. Litzinger. Notre 
Dame, Ind.: Dumb Ox, 1993.
———. Commentary on Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics: A Translation of Aquinas’s Commen­
tary and of the Latin Text of Aristotle. Translated by Richard Berquist. Notre Dame, Ind.: 
Dumb Ox, 2007.
———. Commentary on Aristotle’s Physics. Translated by Richard J. Blackwell, Richard J. 
Spath, and W. Edmund Thirlkel. Notre Dame, Ind.: Dumb Ox, 1999.
———. The Division and Methods of the Sciences: Questions V and VI of his Commentary 
on the De Trinitate of Boethius. Translated, with introduction and notes by Armand Maurer. 
Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1986.
Aristotle. Greek text of all works available at Thesaurus Linguae Graecae: 
http://stephanus.tlg.uci.edu.
435

———. The Basic Works of Aristotle. Edited by Richard McKeon. New York: Random 
House, 1941. By arrangement with Oxford University Press. Reprint: New York: Modern 
Library, 2001. Contains selected works in the first Oxford translation, ed. W. D. Ross. 
———. The Complete Works of Aristotle: The Revised Oxford Translation. Edited by Jona­
than Barnes. Bollingen 71. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1995. Contains trans­
lations of all the works of Aristotle, mainly from the first Oxford translation, ed. W. D. Ross.
———. Metaphysics. Translated by W. D. Ross. In McKeon, Basic Works of Aristotle, 681–
926. Also in Barnes, Complete Works of Aristotle, translated by W. D. Ross, 2:1552–1728.
———. Nicomachean Ethics. Translated by W. D. Ross. In McKeon, Basic Works of Aristot­
le, 927–1112, and in Barnes, Complete Works of Aristotle, 2:1729–1867.
———. On Interpretation. Translated by E. M. Edghill. In McKeon, Basic Works of Aristot­
le, 38–61, and in Barnes, Complete Works of Aristotle, translated by J. L. Ackrill, 1:25–38.
———. On the Soul. Translated by J. A. Smith. In McKeon, Basic Works of Aristotle, 533–
603, and in Barnes, Complete Works of Aristotle, translated by J. A. Smith, 1:641–92.
———. Physics. Translated by R. P. Hardie and R. K. Gaye. In McKeon, Basic Works of 
Aristotle, 213–394, and in Barnes, Complete Works of Aristotle, translated by R. P. Hardie and 
R. K. Gaye, 1:315–446.
———. Politics. Translated by Benjamin Jowett. In McKeon, Basic Works of Aristotle, 1113–
16, and in Barnes, Complete Works of Aristotle, translated by Benjamin Jowett, 2:1986–2129.
———. Posterior Analytics. Translated by G. R. G. Mure. In McKeon, Basic Works of Ar­
istotle, 213–394, and in Barnes, Complete Works of Aristotle, translated by Jonathan Barnes, 
1:114–66.
———. Prior Analytics. Translated by A. J. Jenkinson. In McKeon, Basic Works of Aristotle, 
62–107, and in Barnes, Complete Works of Aristotle, translated by A. J. Jenkinson, 1:39–113.
———. Rhetoric. Translated by W. Rhys Roberts. In McKeon, Basic Works of Aristotle, 
1317–1451, and in Barnes, Complete Works of Aristotle, translated by W. Rhys Roberts, 
2:2152–2269.
Atkins, Robert C., and Shirley Linde. Dr. Atkins’ Super-Energy Diet. New York: Bantam, 
1977.
Augustine. Confessions. Translated by F. J. Sheed. 2nd ed. Indianapolis: Hackett, 2007. 
———. On the Trinity. Translated by Edmund Hill. Brooklyn, N.Y.: New City Press, 2002. 
Austen, Jane. Persuasion. Edited, with an introduction and notes by Gillian Beer. London: 
Penguin, 2006.
———. Pride and Prejudice. Edited, with an introduction and notes by Vivien Jones. Lon­
don: Penguin, 2006.
Averroes [Ibn Rushd]. Aristotelis opera cum Averrois comentariis [Works of Aristotle with 
the Commentaries of Averroes]. Venetiis apud Junctas: 1562–74. Translated from the Arabic 
into Latin in 12 volumes. Reprint. Frankfurt: Minerva, 1962. Latin translation from the 
Arabic. 
Avicenna [Ibn Sina]. Remarks and Admonitions [Ishârât wa-al-tanbîhât]. Part 1, Logic. Trans­
lated by Shams Constantine Inati. Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1984.
———. Avicenna’s Deliverance: Logic [al-Najât: al-Mantiq]. Translation and Notes by 
Asad Q. Ahmed. Studies in Islamic Philosophy. Oxford and New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2011. 
436  
 Bibliography

Berkeley, Edmund C. Giant Brains or Machines That Think. New York: Wiley; London: 
Chapman and Hall, 1949.
Bidinoto, Robert James, ed. Criminal Justice? The Legal System versus Individual Responsibil­
ity. 2nd ed. Irvington, N.Y.: Foundation for Economic Education, 1995. 
Bridger, Bobby. Buffalo Bill and Sitting Bull: Inventing the Wild West. Austin: University of 
Texas Press; Chesham: Combined Academic, 2003. 
Burke, Edmund. Reflections on the Revolution in France. Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 1999.
Burr, Aaron. Memoirs of Aaron Burr. Edited by Matthew L. Davis. 2 vols. New York: Harp­
er, 1837.
Byerly, T. Ryan. Introducing Logic and Critical Thinking. Grand Rapids, Mich.: Baker, 2017.
Byron, George Gordon. The Complete Poetical Works. Edited by Jerome J. McGann. 7 vols. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press; New York: Oxford University Press, 1991.
Carlyle, Thomas. Past and Present. In Complete Works of Thomas Carlyle. New York: Collier, 
1901. 	
———. On Heroes, Hero-Worship, and the Heroic in History. Notes and introduction by 
Michael K. Goldberg; text established by Michael K. Goldberg, Joel J. Brattin, and Mark 
Engel. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993.
Carnap, Rudolph. Logical Syntax of Language. Translated by Amethe Smeaton (Countess 
von Zepplin). Oxford: Routledge, 2001. Originally published in 1937. 
Carrel, Alexis. Man, the Unknown [L’Homme, cet inconnu]. New York: Harper and Broth­
ers, 1939.
Cassirer, Ernst. The Philosophy of Symbolic Forms. Vol. 1, Language [Philosophie der symbo­
lischen Formen. Erster Teil, Die Sprache]. Translated by Ralph Manheim. New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 1955.
Chesterton, G. K. What’s Wrong with the World. London: Sheed and Ward, 1956.
———. The Autobiography. San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 2005. 
Christine de Pizan. The Book of the City of Ladies. Translated by Rosalind Brown-Grant. 
London: Penguin Books, 1999.
Churchill, Winston. The Second World War. 6 vols. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1948–53. 
———. Winston S. Churchill: His Complete Speeches, 1897–1963. 8 vols. Edited by Robert R. 
James. New York: Chelsea House, 1974. 
Clarke, Richard F., SJ. Logic. London: Green, 1921.
Coffey, Peter. The Science of Logic: An Inquiry into the Principles of Accurate Thought and 
Scientific Method. 2 vols. New York: P. Smith, 1938.
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor. The Collected Works of Samuel Taylor Coleridge. Vol. 7, Biographia 
literaria. Edited by J. Engell and W. J. Bate. Bollingen series. London: Routledge; Princeton, 
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1969–87.
Connell, Richard J. Logical Analysis. 2nd ed. Winona, Minn.: St. Mary’s College Press, 1981.
Conrad, Josef. The Nigger of the “Narcissus” and Other Stories. Edited by J. H. Stape and 
Allan H. Simmons. Penguin Classics. London: Penguin, 2007.
Copi, Irving M., and Carl Cohen. Introduction to Logic. 11th ed. New York: Routledge, 
2002. 
Bibliography  
 437

438  
 Bibliography
Corbett, Edward P. J. Classical Rhetoric for the Modern Student. 3rd ed. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1990.
Cotter, Anthony Charles, SJ. “Logic.” In The ABC of Scholastic Philosophy, 43–122. Heusen­
stamm: Editiones Scholasticae, 2012. Originally published in 1947.
Cullman, Oscar. Immortality of the Soul or Resurrection of the Dead. London: Epworth Press, 
1958.
Dalton, John. “Experimental Essays: Essays 1–4.” In Memoirs of the Literary and Philosophi­
cal Society of Manchester. 2nd ed., 1802, 5:535–602. 
———. A New System of Chemical Philosophy. Vol. 1. London: Bickerstaff, 1808.
Darwin, Charles. On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection; The Descent of Man 
and Selection in Relation to Sex. 2nd ed. Great Books of the Western World. Chicago: Ency­
clopaedia Britannica, 1990.
Deely, John. The Basics of Semiotics. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1990.
de Montaigne, Michel. The Complete Works: Essays, Travel Journal, Letters. Translated by 
Donald M. Frame. New York: Knopf, 2003.
Desmet, Ronald, and Andrew David Irvine. “Alfred North Whitehead.” In The 
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2018 edition), edited by Edward N. Zalta. 
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2018/entries/whitehead/.
Descartes, Renée. Discourse on Method and Meditations on First Philosophy. Translated by 
Donald Cress. 4th ed. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1998. 
de Tocqueville, Alexis. Democracy in America. Edited by Eduardo Nolla. Translated by James 
T. Schleifer. Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 2012.
Dewey, John. Logic, the Theory of Enquiry. New York, H. Holt, 1938.
———. Reconstruction in Philosophy. Boston: Beacon Press, 1957.
Dostoevsky, Fyodor. Notes from Underground. Translated and annotated by Richard Pevear 
and Larissa Volokhonsky. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1993.
Dutton, Denis. “Plausibility and Aesthetic Interpretation.” Canadian Journal of Philoso­-
phy 7 (1977): 327–40.
Einstein, Albert. “Geometry and Experience.” In The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein. 
Vol. 7, The Berlin Years: Writings, 1918–1921, translated by Alfred Engel. Princeton, N.J.: 
Princeton University Press, 2002. 
Emerson, Ralph Waldo. Essays and Lectures. New York: Literary Classics of the United 
States, 1983.
Fitzgerald, F. Scott. The Great Gatsby. New York: Scribner’s, 1925. 
Florey, Kitty Burns. Sister Bernadette’s Barking Dog. New York: Houghton Mifflin, 2006.
Fourier, Jean Baptiste Joseph. Analytical Theory of Heat [1878]. Translated by Alexander 
Freeman. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009. Originally published in 1878.
Faraday, Michael. Experimental Researches in Electricity. Great Books of the Western 
World 45. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1955.
Frege, Gottlob. “Methods of Calculation Based on an Extension of the Concept of Quan­
tity” [Rechnungsmethoden, die sich auf eine Erweiterung des Grössenbegriffes gründen]. 

Translated by H. Kaal. In Collected Papers on Mathematics, Logic, and Philosophy, edited by 
B. McGuinness, 56–92. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1984.
Fromm, Erich. Escape from Freedom. New York: Farrar and Rinehart, 1941.
Gensler, Harry J. Introduction to Logic. 3rd ed. New York: Routledge, 2017. 
Giaever, Ivar. “Global Warming Revisited.” Lecture, 65th Lindau Nobel Laureate Confer­
ence, July 1, 2015. In Great Books of the Western World 6. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britan­
nica, 2015.
Gill, Eric. Autobiography. New York: Devin-Adair, 1941.
Hamilton, Alexander, James Madison, and John Jay. The Federalist Papers. Edited and with 
an introduction by Ian Shapiro; with essays by John Dunn, Donald L. Horowitz, and Eileen 
Hunt Botting. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2009.
Harvey, William. On the Motion of the Heart and Blood in Animals. Translated by Robert 
Willis (1844). Great Books of the Western World. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Brittanica, 1952. 
Hazlitt, William. “On Wit and Humor.” In Lectures on the English Comic Writers. Every­
man’s Library. London: Dent; New York: Dutton, 1967.
Herbert, George. English Poems of George Herbert. London: Longmans Green, 1902. 
Herodotus. The History of Herodotus. Translated by George Rawlinson. Great Books of the 
Western World 6. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1955.
Hoffmeyer, Jesper. Biosemiotics. Scranton, Pa.: University of Scranton, 2008.
Homer. The Iliad. Translated by E. V. Rieu. Penguin Classics. London: Penguin, 1950. 
Hume, David. An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals. Edited by Tom L. Beau­
champ. The Clarendon edition of the Works of David Hume. Oxford: Clarendon Press; 
Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1998.
———. An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. Edited by Stephen Buckle. Cam­
bridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Hurley, Patrick J. A Concise Introduction to Logic. 10th ed. Belmont, Calif.: Thomson Wad­
sworth, 2008.
Hutchins, Robert. “Morals, Religion, and Higher Education.” In The University of Chicago 
Round Table, January 15, 1950, 29. 
Huxley, Aldous. Ends and Means. New York: Routledge, 2017. 
James, Henry. The Portrait of a Lady. Oxford: World’s Classics, 1981.
Johnson, Samuel. The History of Rasselas, Prince of Abissinia. Edited, with an introduction 
and notes by Paul Goring. Penguin Classics. London: Penguin, 2007.
Joseph, H. W. B. An Introduction to Logic. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1916. 
Kant, Immanuel. Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics. Translated by James W. Ellington. 
2nd ed. Indianapolis: Hackett, 2002. 
Kelley, David. The Art of Reasoning. 4th ed. New York: Norton, 2014.
Kitto, H. D. F. The Greeks. New York: Routledge, 2017. 
Kreeft, Peter. Socratic Logic: Socratic Method Platonic Questions. South Bend, Ind.: 
St. Augustine’s Press, 2005. 
Bibliography  
 439

440  
 Bibliography
Kreyche, Robert. Logic for Undergraduates. New York: Holt, Rinehart, Winston, 1970. 
Laks, André, and Glenn Most. “Gorgias.” In Early Greek Philosophy, vol. 8, Sophists, edited 
and translated by André Laks and Glenn Most. Cambridge, Mass.: Loeb Classical Library, 
2014. 
Langer, Suzanne K. Philosophy in a New Key: A Study in the Symbolism of Reason, Rite, and 
Art. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1979.
Lavoisier, Antoine Laurent. Elements of Chemistry. Translated by Robert Kerr. New York: 
Dover, 1965.
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm. Leibniz: Political Writings. Edited by Patrick Riley. Cam­
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988. 
Locke, John. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding. Edited, with a foreword by 
Peter H. Nidditch. Oxford: Clarendon Press; New York: Oxford University Press, 1979.
Machiavelli, Niccolo. The Prince and the Discourses. The Prince translated by Luigi Ricci, 
revised by E. R. P. Vincent. The Discourses translated by Christian E. Detmold. New York: 
Modern Library, 1940.
Madison, James. The Constitutional Convention: A Narrative History; From the Notes of 
James Madison. Edited by Edward J. Larson and Michael P. Winship. New York: Modern 
Library, 2005.
Malthus, Thomas Robert. An Essay on the Principle of Population, or, a View of Its Past and 
Present Effects on Human Happiness: With an Inquiry into Our Prospects Respecting the Fu­
ture Removal or Mitigation of the Evils Which It Occasions [1803]. Cambridge and New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1989.
Maritain, Jacques. Formal Logic [Petite logique]. Translated by Imelda Choquette. 
New York: Sheed and Ward, 1946.
Marx, Karl, and Friedrich Engels. Manifesto of the Communist Party. Authorized English 
Translation. Edited and annotated by Friedrich Engels. Chicago: Charles H. Kerr, 1888.
Montague, W. P. The Ways of Things: A Philosophy of Knowledge, Nature, and Value. New 
York: Prentice Hall, 1940. 
Newton, Isaac. Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy: Optics. Translated by Silvanus 
P. Thompson. Great Books of the Western World. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 
1990.
Nietzsche, Friederich. Joyful Wisdom. Translated by Thomas Common. Poetry versions by 
Paul V. Cohn and Maude D. Petre. New York: Ungar, 1960. 
Oesterle, John A. Logic: The Art of Defining and Reasoning. New York: Prentice-Hall, 1952. 
Orwell, George. 1984. New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1949. 
Parry, William, and Edward Hacker. Aristotelian Logic. Albany: State University of 
New York Press, 1991. 
Perrow, Charles. Complex Organizations: A Critical Essay. 3rd ed. Battleboro, Vt.: Echo 
Point, 2014.
Pilon, Roger. “Restoring Constitutional Government.” Cato Institute. Cato’s Letters, no. 9 
(1995).
Plato. Greek texts of all works available at Thesaurus Linguae Graecae: 
http://stephanus.tlg.uci.edu.

Bibliography  
 441
———. Complete Works. Edited by John M. Cooper and D. S. Hutchinson. Indianapolis: 
Hackett, 1994. 
———. Five Dialogues. “Euthyphro,” “Apology,” “Crito,” “Meno,” “Phaedo.” 2nd ed. Trans­
lated by G. M. A. Grube. Revised by John M. Cooper. Indianapolis: Hackett, 2002.
Pope, Alexander. Miscellanies in Verse and Prose. London: Printed for John Thomas, 1744. 
http://name.umdl.umich.edu/004898469.0001.000.
Reed, Alonzo, and Brainerd Kellogg. Higher Lessons in English. 1877. Now available elec­
tronically at https://manybooks.net/titles/reedalonetext04hiles10.html.
Plutarch. Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans. Greek with English translation by Berna­
dotte Perrin. 11 vols. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 
1914–28. 
Porphyry. Isagoge [Introduction] / Porphyry the Phoenician. Translated by Edward W. War­
ren. Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1975. 
Riegel, Jeffrey. “Confucius.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2013 Edi­
tion). Edited by Edward N. Zalta. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2013/entries/
confucius/. 
Russell, Bertrand, and Alfred North Whitehead. Principia Mathematica. 3 vols. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1910, 1912, 1913.
Santayana, George. The Sense of Beauty. New York: Scribner’s, 1896.
Shakespeare, William. The Arden Shakespeare Complete Works. Edited by Richard Proud­
foot, Ann Thompson, and David Scott Kastan. London: Arden Shakespeare, 2001.
Scheinfeld, Amram. Your Heredity and Environment. Philadelphia: Lippencott, 1964. 
Sider, Theodore. Logic for Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010.
Siderits, Mark. “Buddha.” The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Spring 2015 Edition. 
Edited by Edward N. Zalta. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2015/entries/buddha/.
Smith, Adam. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. Great Books 
of the Western World 39. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1955.
Smith, Vincent E. The Elements of Logic. Milwaukee: Bruce, 1957.
Sommers, Fred. The Logic of Natural Language. Oxford: Clarendon Press; New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1982.
Spangler, Mary Michael. Logic: An Aristotelian Approach. 2nd ed. Lanham, Md.: University 
Press of America, 1986. 
Stone, Jon R. Routledge Book of World Proverbs. New York: Routledge, 2006.
Sullivan, Daniel J. Fundamentals of Logic. New York: McGraw Hill, 1963. 
Sullivan, Scott M. An Introduction to Traditional Logic: Classical Reasoning for Contempo­
rary Minds. 2nd ed. North Charleston, S.C.: Booksurge, 2006.
Symonds, Percival M. The Dynamics of Human Adjustment. New York: Praeger, 1946. 
Teresa of Ávila. Collected Works of St. Teresa of Ávila. Translated by Kieran Kavanaugh and 
Otilio Rodriguez. 2 vols. Washington, D.C.: ICS Publications, 1980, 2012.
Thoreau, Henry David. Walden, and Other Writings. New York: Modern Library, 1992. 

442  
 Bibliography
Thucydides. The Landmark Thucydides: A Comprehensive Guide to “The Peloponnesian War.” 
Edited by Robert Strassler. Introduction by Victor Davis Hanson. Rev. translation of Rich­
ard Crawley. New York: Free Press, 2008. 
Tolstoy, Leo. War and Peace. Translated by Louise Maude and Aylmer Maude. Great Books 
of the Western World 15. Chicago: Encyclopaedia Britannica, 1990.
Toynbee, Arnold. Civilization on Trial. New York: Oxford University Press, 1948.
Tkacz, Michael, and George Watson. The Art of Reasoning: An Interactive Introduction to 
Traditional Logic. 2nd ed. Dubuque, Iowa: Kendall Hunt, 2008.
Watson, James D. The Double Helix: A Personal Account of the Discovery of the Structure of 
DNA. New York: Atheneum, 1968.
Welty, Eudora. On Writing. New York: Modern Library, 2002. 
Weston, Anthony. A Rulebook for Arguments. 5th ed. Indianapolis: Hackett, 2017.
Wilson, E. O. “Animal Communication.” Scientific American, September 1972, 53–60.
Wilson, James Q., and Richard J. Herrnstein. Crime and Human Nature. New York: Simon 
and Schuster, 1985. 

Index of Names
Index of Names
Index of Names 
443
Abelard, Peter, 427
Abraham (prophet), 44
Aesop, 91, 228
Alexander (the Great), 29, 419, 422
Alexander of Aphrodisias, 423 
Al-Farabi, 424
Ammonius, 423
Aquinas, Thomas. See Thomas Aquinas
Archimedes, 370
Aristotle, xvii, xxii, xxvi, xxviii, 18, 21nn1–2, 
22n3, 26, 27n1, 29–33, 40 50–55, 58–63, 
93, 107, 120–32, 148, 177–8, 269n1, 307, 
330–31, 362, 366–70, 419–21
Arnauld, Antoine, 430
Atkins, Robert C, 328
Augustine, 10, 65, 90, 164, 239, 258, 346
Austen, Jane, 15–16, 43, 178, 371
Averroes (Ibn Rushd), 426
Avicenna (Ibn Sina), 5, 424–25
Bacon, Francis, 164
Berkeley, Edmund C, 315
Bidinotto, Robert James, 329
Boethius, 331, 424, 427
Boole, George, 187–88, 431
Bower, Bruce, 373–74
Bridger, Bobby, 165
Brody, Jane E, 325
Brownson, Orestes, 147
Buddha (Siddhartha Gautama), 50
Buridan, John, 353, 429
Burke, Edmund, 41, 227
Burr, Aaron, 145
Butler, Joseph, 346
Byron, George Gordon, 325
Carl, Bryan, xv
Carlyle, Thomas, 227, 314, 385–86
Carnap, Rudolph, 317
Carrel, Alexis, 70, 76, 380
Cassirer, Ernst, 78
Chesterton, G. K., 147, 165, 183, 258, 347, 
352, 374
Chirac, Jacques, 258
Christine de Pizan, 136, 184
Chrysippus, 421
Churchill, Winston, xxiv, 27, 37–38, 164, 
241, 259, 315–16
Cicero, 219, 22
Cleanthes, 421
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, 228
Confucius, 50
Conrad, Joseph, 148
Copernicus, Nicholas, 347

444  
 Index of Names
Cornuel, Anne-Marie Bigot de, Madame, 
236
Cullman, Oscar, 327
Dalton, John, 66, 267, 373
Dante, 164
Darwin, Charles, 118, 191–92, 267, 373
Deely, John, 73n1
DeMorgan, Augustus, 343
Descartes, Renée, 119, 143, 236, 373, 430
Dewey, John, 316, 346
Dickens, Charles, 346
Diogenes Laertius, 149, 421
Disraeli, Benjamin, 183
Dostoyevsky, Fyodor, 330
Doyle, Arthur Conan, 324
Dryden, John, 257
Dutton, Denis, 328
Einstein, Albert, 316
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 146, 329
Engels, Frederick, 266, 372
Engquist, Richard, 325
Euclid, xiii, 144, 146
Fitzgerald, F. Scott, 15
Florey, Kitty Burns, 14
Forrest, Nathan Bedford, 174
Fourier, Jean Baptiste Joseph, 316
Franklin, Benjamin, 41
Frege, Gottlob, xvii, xxvi, 431–32
Fromm, Erich, 326
Galileo Galilei, 347
Gatlin, Larry, 183
Giaevar, Ivar, 49
Gill, Eric, 315
Gorgias, 14, 19, 22–25
Harvey, William, 333–34, 377, 380–83
Hazlitt, William, 315
Helen (of Troy), 19, 22–25
Herbert, George, 183
Herodotus, 27, 57
Herrnstein, Richard, 329
Hoffmeyer, Jesper, 73
Homer, 27, 189–90
Hume, David, 316, 370, 377–78, 380, 407
Hutchins, Robert, 317
Huxley, Aldous, 258
Huxley, Julian, 316
Iamblichus, 423
Ibn Rushd. See Averroes
Ibn Sina. See Avicenna
Ibsen, Henrik, 314
Inge, William, 147
James, Henry, 15
James, William, 227
Jefferson, Thomas, 146
Jepson, R. W., 148
Jesus (the Christ), 72, 134–35, 259, 327, 
363–65, 408
John Duns Scotus, 428
John Philoponus, 424
Johnson, Samuel, 164
Kant, Immanuel, xvii, 317, 431
Keats, John, 227
Kellogg, Brainerd, 7, 14
Kitto, H. D. F., 18n1
Laks, A., 25n3
Langer, Suzanne K., 78
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm von, 320–25, 
325, 327
Leonardo da Vinci, 258
Lenin, V. I., 147
Lewis, C. S., 258
Lincoln, Abraham, 47, 191
Linde, Shirley, 328
Locke, John, 94–98, 109–14, 318
Lorenz, Konrad, 379–80
Lot, 45
Luke (evangelist), 78
Machiavelli, Niccolo, 330
Madison, James, 97–106
Maimonides (Moses ben Maimon), 426
Malthus, Thomas Robert, 380
Marshall, John, 332, 347–48
Marx, Groucho, 15
Marx, Karl, 239, 242, 266, 372
Mary (mother of Jesus), 134
Matthew (evangelist), 134–35, 347

Index of Names  
 445
McMurtry, Larry, 258
Melville, Herman, 119
Mill, John Stuart, 227, 430
Montague, W. P., 315
Montaigne, Michel de, 146
Moses (prophet), 134, 190
Moses ben Maimon. See Maimonides
Muhammad (prophet), 46–7 
Muslim ibn al-H. ajjāj al-Qushayrī, 46–47
Newton, Isaac, xvii, 191, 317, 320
Nicol, Pierre, 430
Nietzsche, Friederich, 184
Obama, Barack, 48
Ockham, William. See William of Ockham
Orwell, George, 316
Pascal, Blaise, 165, 236–37, 346
Paul (apostle), 95, 259
Peirce, Charles Sanders, 16
Perrow, Charles, 326
Perry, Ralph Barton, 146
Peter (apostle), 95, 135
Peter Abelard. See Abelard, Peter
Peter of Spain (Petrus Hispanus), 427
Petrus Ramus, 429
Pilon, Roger, 329
Plato, xx, xxvi, xxvii, 20, 31, 33, 36, 50, 55, 65, 
74, 81, 93, 96, 110–11, 113–16, 121, 125, 144, 
147, 149, 164, 183, 187, 219, 248, 269, 317, 
347–49, 352, 355–56, 362, 366, 369, 419
Plutarch, 29n3 
Pope, Alexander, 183
Porphyry, 94, 109–14, 369, 423
Proclus, 423
Ptolemy, 347
Publius (James Madison), 106
Reed, Alonzo, 7, 14 
Russell, Bertrand, xvii, xviii, xxvi, 432
Santayana, George, 146
Sarah (wife of Abraham), 44
Scheinfeld, Amram, 267, 373
Scotus, John Duns. See John Duns Scotus
Seneca, 421
Shakespeare, William, 42, 164, 183–84
Simplicius, 423–24
Smith, Adam, 148, 315
Smith, Vincent E., 434
Solzhenitsyn, Aleksandr, 184
Spector, Leonard, 43
Spencer, Herbert, 227, 236
Spinoza, Baruch, 257
Stone, Jon R., 15n2
Symonds, Percival M., 145
Szent-Gyorty, Albert, 146
Syrianus, 423
Teresa of Ávila, 49, 259
Thales, 121
Thatcher, Margaret, 165
Themistius, 423
Thomas Aquinas, xxix, 63, 65, 69n1, 77, 
88–89, 97–99, 111, 116, 122n3, 131, 140, 
146, 153n1, 163, 249, 263n1, 265, 269n1, 
314–16, 331, 370, 383–84, 428
Thoreau, Henry David, 90
Thucydides, 27, 189
Tocqueville, Alexis de, 118, 135–36, 318, 333, 
384–85
Toffler, Alvin, 325
Tolstoy, Leo, 90
Toynbee, Arnold, 46
Twain, Mark, 183
Valla, Lorenzo, 429
Venn, John, 193–204, 222, 224, 226, 231, 
280, 298–305, 431
Voltaire (Francois-Marie Arouet), vii, 164
Watson, James D, 328
Weizsaecker, C. F., 146
Welty, Eudora, 16
Whatley, Richard, 430
Whitehead, Alfred North, xvii–xix, xxvi, 
432
William of Ockham, 428–29
Wilson, Barrie, 325
Wilson, E. O., 328
Wilson, James Q., 329
Zabarella, Giacomo, 430
Zeno, 421


Index of Subjects
Index of Subjects
Index of Subjects
accident: categorical, 83–4, 88–91; predica­
ble, 108–9, 112–13, 115–19
action, 6, 26, 83–88, 156, 391. See also category
acts of the mind: first act (conceptualiza­
tion), 55–58, 61–63, 83, 94, 138, 153–54, 
167, 206, 264, 361, 366, 369, 420; second 
act (judgment), xvii, 60, 62, 75, 111–25, 
153–54, 167, 177, 206, 210, 255, 315, 365, 
368–69, 372, 375, 420; third act (reason­
ing), 21, 51, 55, 60–63, 75, 129, 137–38, 178, 
212, 219–21, 263–65, 268, 273, 280–81, 
306, 322–23, 330, 360, 368–70, 375–79, 
420
Apology of Socrates, 33, 36, 81, 164, 349, 352
argument: advanced hypothetical, 350–59; 
categorical, 263–65, 268–70; complex, 
375–86; diagram of, 322–23; extended 
categorical, 319–34; hypothetical, 335–
49; outline of, 321–22; sorites, 320–21; 
sound vs. unsound, 269–70; standard­
ized test style, 354–59; valid vs. invalid, 
275–77, 279–89, 338–44. See also cate­
gorical syllogism; conditional syllogism; 
hypothetical syllogism; reasoning
arithmetic, xvii, xxv–xxvi, 40, 52, 86, 427. 
See also liberal arts
astronomy, xxv, 121, 427. See also liberal arts
categorical proposition, 60, 108, 157, 174; 
in context, 185–92; conversion of, 
218–28; copula, 167; kinds of, 172; with 
negative modifiers, 181–82; in non-
standard word order, 176; with normal 
verb, 175–76; obversion of, 229–37; op­
posing, 205–17; particular affirma-
tive (I), 172, 174, 182–84, 189–92; par­
ticular negative (O), 172, 174, 182–84, 
189–92; predicate, 167; quality, 169–70; 
quantity, 170–72; quantity implicit, 176–
77; regular vs. modal, 159–60; singular, 
177–78; standard form, 168; structure vs. 
content, 51–52, 153–55, 166; subject of, 
166–67; with subject placeholder, 177; 
tricky O, 178–81; true vs. false, 52–57, 
59–62, 153–55; universal affirmative (A), 
172, 174, 182–84, 189–92; universal neg­
ative (E), 172, 174, 182–84, 189–92. See 
also proposition
categorical syllogism, 60–1, 268–72; con­
clusion, 271–74; figure, 273–74; major 
premise of, 272–74; major term of, 
272–74; middle term of, 272–74; minor 
premise of, 272–74; minor term of, 272–
74; mood, 274–75; sound vs. unsound, 
269–71; standard order, 272; structure vs. 
447

448  
 Index of Subjects
categorical syllogism (cont.)
content, 268–74, 277–78; valid vs. inval­
id, 269–71, 275–77, 279–91
categorical syllogism, validity of, 269–71, 
275–77, 279–91; in prose, 292–97; Rule 
One (three terms), 281–82, 285–86, 
288–91; Rule Two (middle term), 282, 
286–87, 288–91; Rule Three (major and 
minor terms), 283–84, 287–91; Rule Four 
(quality of conclusion), 284–85, 288–91
category, xvii, 62–63, 80–91; accidental, 
83–84, 88–91; action, 88; Aristotle’s ten 
general, 82–91; definition of, 80–82; 
equipped, 88; passion (undergoing), 
88; place (where), 88; posture (config­
uration), 88; quality, 86–87; quantity, 
85–86; relation, 87; specific, 82–84, 91; 
substance, 84–85; when (time), 88
cause, 120–2; agent (efficient), 122–23, 157, 
383–84; end (final), 22, 125–26, 132, 137, 
145, 153, 156, 185, 191, 331; form (formal), 
17, 26, 62, 75, 103, 114, 124–28, 134, 141, 
157, 168, 187, 201, 256, 324, 326, 328, 332, 
347, 362; four, 120–36, 156; in knowledge, 
120–22; matter (material), xxvi, 52, 123, 
130–31, 141, 157, 205, 317, 333 123–24, 
126–28; in nature, 128–32
classical speech, 21, 26–34; conclusion, 30; 
parts of, 29–32; proof, 30; prologue, 29; 
refutation, 30; statement of topic, 29
collection: and division of terms, 92–106, 
109–12; vs. universal: 76–77, 79
conceptualization. See acts of the mind 
conditional proposition, 242–59; contrapo­
sition, 251; necessary condition, 252–54; 
necessary and sufficient condition, 254–
55; negative condition, 250–51; sufficient 
condition, 251–52
conditional syllogism, 335–41, 344–49; 
affirming the antecedent (modus ponens), 
339–40, 353; affirming the consequent, 
340; denying the antecedent, 340–41; 
denying the consequent (modus tollens), 
339, 341, 351–54; pure, 338; regular, 
338–89. See also argument; hypothetical 
argument
Constitution, U.S., 12, 41, 94, 99–106, 156, 
174, 249, 258–59, 313, 329, 332, 346–47, 
158–62, 187, 335, 337–39, 342
context, 170–71, 180, 185–89
counterfactual, 187, 212, 244
definition, xxi, xxiii, 4–5, 39, 55, 62, 80, 83, 
92, 94, 109, 114, 131, 137–49, 363–64, 
366–68; causal, 121–22, 142; descriptive, 
142–43; and essence: 137–39; of the hu­
man (man), 113, 139–42, 145; logical, 142; 
nominal, 142; real, 142; rules for, 143–44
democracy, 17–8, 39, 98, 103–5, 146–47, 385
diagrams. See Euler diagram; sentence dia­
gram; Venn diagram
division, 92–97, 109–12; Plato’s example 
of, 113–15; rules for, 98–9; of whole into 
parts, 97–98. See also collection; predi­
cables
enthymeme, 32, 306–18, 378
epicheirema, 306–19
equipped, 81–4, 87–88. See also category 
essence (nature), 54, 81, 108–13, 117–19, 120, 
127–31, 214, 361, 363–39; and definition, 
137–39
Euler diagram, 193–204
existential import, 186–89, 199, 338
faction, 99–106
geometry, xiii, xxv, xxviii, 26, 40, 61, 86, 
144, 194, 316, 351–52, 362, 427. See also 
liberal arts
grammar, xx, xxiv–xxviii, 3–16, 26, 153–54, 
157, 176, 188. See also diagram; liberal arts; 
parts of speech; sentence
human (man), xxi, xxiii, xxv–xxvi, 6, 15, 20, 
24, 36, 40, 50, 59, 60, 65, 69, 70, 75, 81, 
84, 93–95, 110–11, 133–34, 139–42, 145, 
149, 156, 160, 162, 178, 182, 184, 189, 192, 
230, 236, 258, 263–64, 274, 278, 284, 290, 
300, 313–15, 325, 327, 347, 361, 366, 371, 
380
hypothetical argument, 335–59; advanced, 
350–59; conditional syllogism, 337–41; 
conjunctive syllogism, 342–43; De­

Index of Subjects  
 449
Morgan’s theorem, 343–44; dilemma, 
352–44; disjunctive syllogism, 342; par­
adox, 352–54; reductio ad absurdum, 352; 
standardized test arguments, 354–59. See 
also conditional syllogism
hypothetical proposition, 158–59, 238–49; 
advanced, 250–59; condition, 242–43; 
conjunction, 240–41; disjunction, 
241–42; symbols of, 160–63. See also 
conditional proposition
induction, 32, 63, 264–67, 312, 351, 360–74; 
abstractive induction, 366–68; complete 
enumerative induction, 363–64; and 
insight, 366–70; partial enumerative 
induction, 364–66
inference, 102, 210, 245, 281; immediate, 
216, 229–35, 399; indicator, 161, 176, 295; 
mediate, 220, 281; valid vs. invalid, 210, 
219–21
judgment, xvii, 41, 60–63, 75, 102, 138, 153, 
180, 210, 255, 308, 315, 365. See also acts of 
the mind; proposition; statement
liberal arts, xiv, xxiv–xxv, 38, 324, 427, 430; 
arithmetic, xvii, xxv–xxvi, 40, 52, 86, 427; 
astronomy, xxv, 121, 427; geometry, xiii, 
xxv, xxviii, 26, 40, 61, 86, 144, 194, 316, 
351–2, 362, 427; grammar, xx, xxiv–xx­
viii, 3–16, 26, 153–54, 157, 176, 188; logic, 
xvii–xx, xxv–xxviii, 50–5, 58–64, 419–32; 
music, xxvi, 118, 257, 427; quadrivium, 
xiv, xxv, 427; rhetoric, xxiv–xxvi, 20–21, 
26–29, 31–32, 35, 40; trivium, xiv, xx, xxv, 
31, 427
logic: Aristotelian, xix, 188, 279, 417; devel­
opment of, xvii–xx, xxv–xxviii, 50–55, 
58–64, 419–32; formal, 63; material, 
63–64; mathematical, xxvii, 431–32; sym­
bolic, xviii–xx, xxvii, 158, 167, 187–88, 195, 
201, 243–46, 268, 322; topical, 51; verbal, 
xix, 188, 279, 417. See also liberal arts 
logica docens and utens, 50
logical symbols, 160–63, 238–43, 247, 
336–37
logic of discovery and proof, 51–57; answers, 
55; ignorance, 53; problem solving, 55–57; 
questions, 53–55; wonder, 53
man. See human
material implication, 244–47
modus ponens, 339–40, 353. See also condi­
tional syllogism
modus tollens, 339, 341, 351–54. See also con­
ditional syllogism
music, xxvi, 118, 257, 427. See also liberal arts
object: of an action, 146, 324; of cognition, 
72–73, 75, 78, 233, 318, 326; direct, 6, 8; 
indirect, 9; of a preposition, 6, 10; and 
thing, 71, 76, 88, 187, 227, 317, 326
opposition, 205–17, 232–35; of concepts: 
205–6, 232–35; contradictory, 207–8; 
contrary, 208–9; of propositions, 205–17; 
square of, 205–6, 214–15; subalternate, 
210–12; subcontrary, 209–10; subimpli­
cant, 212–13
parts of speech, 3–4, 14–6; adjective, 5; 
adverb, 6; conjunction, 6; interjection, 
6–7; noun, 5; preposition, 6; pronoun, 
5; verb, 6 
passion, 6, 100–103, 109, 333. See also cat­
egory
place (where), 4, 18, 30, 42, 44, 91, 123–24, 
226, 258. See also category
posture (configuration), 124, 165, 273, 299. 
See also category
predicables, xxi, 3, 51, 107–19, 139; accident, 
112–13; and definition, 141; difference, 
109–16; essential vs. non-essential, 
108–9; five, 107; genus, 109–16; and 
induction, 363–68; property, 112–13; 
species, 109–16
predicate, 5–7, 51, 58, 98; adjective, 8–10; 
nominative, 8–9; term of proposition, 58, 
107–9, 166–68. See also term 
proposition: and act of the mind, 153–55; 
categorical, 157–58; conditional, 161–
63; conjunctive, 161; disjunctive, 161; 
hypothetical, 158–59; and statements: 
153–55; true vs. false, 153–55. See also acts 
of the mind; categorical proposition; 

450  
 Index of Subjects
proposition (cont.)
conditional proposition; hypothetical 
proposition; statement
quadrivium, xiv, xxv, 427. See also liberal 
arts
quality, 33, 62, 93, 109, 114–15, 148, 167, 169, 
172, 209, 285. See also category
quantity, 114–15, 172, 169–70, 222, 283, 315, 
317, 333. See also category
questions, Aristotle’s four: Is it?, 7; What is 
it?, 7; Whether?, 14; Why?, 7, 14, 22, 27, 
53–55, 120–32
reasoning, xxvi, 16, 21, 50–55, 62–64, 75, 
129–30, 137–38, 163, 173, 178, 212, 216, 
219–21, 280; deductive and inductive, 63, 
263–67. See also acts of the mind; argu­
ment; categorical syllogism; conditional 
syllogism; enthymeme; epicheirema; 
hypothetical argument; induction
relation, xix, 3, 35, 51, 72, 76, 90, 92, 111, 158, 
161, 197, 300, 315–16. See also category
rhetoric, xxiv–xxvi, 20–21, 26–29, 31–32, 35, 
40; appeals (emotional, ethical, rational), 
20–21; development of, 17–20; kinds 
(deliberative, display, forensic), 18–20, 
35–49; skills (disposition, delivery, in­
vention, memorization, style), 28–34. 
See also liberal arts
sentence diagram, 7–16
signs, 69–79; animal use of, 73; cognitional 
(mental), 69–71, 75–76; of collections, 
75–76; conventional, 74–76; formal, 
74–75; human use of, 69–71, 73–76; of 
individuals, 76; natural, 71–72; in semi­
otic triangle, 72–73; of universals, 76–77; 
verbal (linguistic), 75–76
sorites, 320–21
statement, 153–55; command, 155–56; 
non-propositional, 155–56; performative, 
156; propositional, 156–60; and proposi­
tions, 153–63; question, 155
subject: matter, xxvi, 35, 50, 99, 316, 365; of 
proposition (logic), 87, 107, 157, 166–72, 
181, 189, 226, 273; of sentence (grammar), 
5, 107, 115; and thing, 65, 316, 365
substance, xix, 85, 90, 94, 96, 111, 146, 167, 
267, 327, 367, 369, 373. See also category
term: definition of, 58–61; distributed 
and undistributed, 282; division and 
collection, 92–106; extension and com­
prehension, 92; Locke’s division of being, 
94–97; logical inferiors and superiors, 
93; major, middle, minor, 271–74; men­
tal, spoken, written, 69–77; particular, 
singular, universal, 76–77, 170–72; Por­
phyry’s Tree, 109–12; in a proposition, 
153–55; rules for division, 98–99; in a 
syllogism, 271–74, 281–82. See also acts of 
the mind; categorical proposition; cate­
gorical syllogism; collection; definition; 
predicables
trivium, xiv, xx, xxv, 31, 427. See also liberal 
arts
true vs. false. See proposition
truth, 15, 20, 51–52, 60, 62, 80, 137, 153–55, 
186, 208–13, 243–45, 263–65, 269–70
universal. See term
valid vs. invalid. See argument 
Venn diagram: of proposition, 193–204; of 
syllogism, 298–305, 404–5
verb, 4, 6–13; gerund, 10; intransitive, 6; 
participle, 4, 9, 175; transitive, 6
when (time), xviii, xxiv, 11, 24, 39, 42, 53, 71, 
73, 100, 102, 134, 136, 146, 183, 190, 249. 
See also category
whole. See division
woman, 19, 22–23, 39, 43–45, 90, 93, 120, 
133, 139, 164, 183, 283, 325, 328
wonder. See logic of discovery and proof
word: in mind (mental), 20, 26, 110, 187–88; 
spoken, 20, 40, 69, 154; written, xxviii, 
20, 61, 154, 157

