The
Educated
Mind


KIERAN
EGAN
The Educated Mind
How Cognitive Tools Shape Our Understanding
THE UNIVERSITY OF CHICAGO PRESS
Chicago
&
London

The University of Chicago Press gratefully acknowledges the 
assistance of the Exxon Foundation in the publication of this book. 
The University of Chicago Press. Chicago 60637 
The University of Chicago Press. Ltd .. London 
© 1997 by Thc University of Chicago 
All rights resel"\·cd. Published 1997 
Paperback edition 1998 
Printed in Ihe United States of America 
13121110 
678 
ISBN: 0-226- 19036-6 (cloth) 
ISBN: 0-226·19039-0 (paperback) 
Library of Congress Cawloging-in.Pubhcalion Data 
Egan. Kieran. 
The educated mind : how cognltivc tools shape our understanding I 
Kieran Egan. 
p. em. 
Includes bibliogmphical references and index. 
ISBN 0-226-19036-6 (alk. paper) 
I. Education-Philosophy. 
2. Cognnion and culture. 
3. Civilization. Western-History. 4. Educational anthropology. 
5. Educational sociology. 
6. learning. Psychology of. 
7. Teaching. 
8. Ps)"cholinguiSlics. 
I. Title. 
LBI4.7.E53 
1997 
370'.I---dc20 
96-42208 
CIP 
§ The paper used in this publicalion meets Ihe minimum requirements of 
the American National Standard for Information $ciences-Pumanence of 
Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39.4S-1992. 

o beloved kids
Michael, Catherine, and David


contents
Acknowledgments
ix
Introduction
1
Part One
1
Three Old Ideas and a New One
9
2
Mythic Understanding
33
3
Romantic Understanding
71
4
Philosophic Understanding
104
5
Ironic Understanding and Somatic Understanding
137
6
Some Questions and Answers
172
Part Two
7
Some Implications for the Curriculum
205
8
Some Implications for Teaching
239
Afterword
277
Bibliography
281
Index
293
vii


acknowledgments
I am most grateful to the many kind people who have read parts or all of this
book in manuscript, whose suggestions, criticisms, abuse, and corrections
have made this book better than it would otherwise have been. In particular
I am grateful toJohn Willinsky of the University of British Columbia; Wendy
Strachan of the Department of English at Simon Fraser University; Richard
Wilkins of the Association for Christian Teachers in Great Britain; Hunter
McEwan of the University of Hawaii; Joanne Buckley of the Department of
English at University of Western Ontario; Merlin Donald of the Psychology
Department at Queen's University; Avril Chalmers, Jennifer Jenson, and
David Hammond, Ph.D. students in the Faculty of Education at Simon
Fraser University; and Susanna Egan of the English Department at the Uni-
versity of British Columbia.
I have also benefited from comments on parts of the book from Alan
Rudrum of the Department of English, Jerry Zaslove of the Institute for the
Humanities, Sen Campbell and Peter Cole, Ph.D. students in the Faculty
of Education, and Stephen Smith and Heesoon Bai of the Faculty of Edu-
cation, all at Simon Fraser University I am grateful to Miranda and Christo-
pher Armstrong for permission to reprint the conversation that appears in
chapter 4.
Eileen Mallory has typed the whole manuscript with her everyday su-
pernatural speed, accuracy, and kindly good cheer. John Tryneski of the Uni-
versity ofChicago Press has been supportive and challenging, and the source
of numerous inSightful suggestions that have improved the book signifi-
cantly; the compleat editor. I am also indebted to the editorial skills of Leslie
Keros, which she applied to the manuscript with grace and wit, clarifying it
conSiderably One of the Press's reviewers, I discovered, was Howard Gard-
ner of Harvard University; his incisive suggestions have had a significant ef-
fect on the manuscript, and I am pleased to be able to acknowledge his
generosity and help.
Some paragraphs from chapters 1,2,3,4, and 5 appeared in "The devel-
ix

x
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
opment of understanding," my article in The Handbook ofEducation and Hu-
man Development (David R. Olson and Nancy Torrance, eds.), Oxford: Black-
well Publishers, Ltd., 1966. I am grateful to the editors and publisher for
permission to use these paragraphs here. During the writing of this book I
have been the grateful beneficiary of a research grant from the Social Sci-
ences and Humanities Research Council of Canada.

Introduction
Those ofus who were around during the economic crisis of the late sixteenth
century in Europe find some features of the current educational crisis oddly
familiar. There is a major social puzzle, which touches and irritates nearly
everyone, and lashings ofblame fly in all directions. Today we are puzzled by
the schools' difficulty in providing even the most rudimentary education to
so many students, despite a decade or more of effort by expensive profes-
sionals. The costs of our educational crisis, in terms ofsocial alienation, psy-
chological rootlessness, and ignorance of the world and the possibilities of
human experience within it, are incalculable and heartbreaking.
In the sixteenth century, average citizens saw prices for all commodities
begin to rise rapidly. Most obvious were the increased amounts they had to
pay for necessities like clothes. The citizens blamed the clothiers for greedily
raising prices. The clothiers protested, blaming the merchants who were
greedily demanding more for their cloth; the merchants in turn blamed the
weavers, who blamed the wool merchants, who blamed the sheep farmers.
The sheep farmers said they had to raise their prices to be able to buy the
increasingly expensive clothes. And so it went round. Who was to blame?
It took some time, and much blaming, before]ean Bodin (1530-1596)
worked out that none of the obvious candidates was at fault. Rather, the gen-
eral rise in prices was connected with the import into Europe of Central and
South American gold and silver and with the European monarchs' use of this
bullion through their royal mints. That is, the monarchs increased the

INTRODUCTION
money supply and thus stimulated inflation. A development in economic
theory resolved the central puzzle and laid a tenuous foundation for greater
understanding and practical control of economic matters.
So who is responsible for our modern social puzzle, the educational in-
effectiveness ofour schools? (By "modern" I mean the period beginning with
the late-nineteenth-century development of mass schooling.) For media
pundits and profeSSional educators, there is no shortage of blameworthy
candidates: in'adequately educated teachers, the absence of market incen-
tives, the inequities of capitalist societies, the lack of local control over
schools, the genetic intellectual incapacity of 85 percent of the population to
benefit from instruction in more than basic literacy and skills, drugs, the
breakdown of the nuclear family and family values, an irrelevant academic
curriculum, a trivial curriculum filled only with the immediately relevant,
short-sighted politicians demanding hopelessly crude achievement tests
while grossly underfunding the education system, a lack of commitment to
excellence, vacuous schools of education, mindless TV and other mass me-
dia, the failure to attend to some specific research results.
Along with the cacophony of blame comes a panoply of prescriptions:
introduce market incentives, make the curriculum more "relevant" or more
academic, reform teacher training, ensure students' active involvement in
their learning, and so on. Back in the sixteenth century, a litany of cures for
inflation also was proposed: restrain merchants' profits, introduce price con-
trols, restrict the export of wool, introduce tariffs on imported cloth, and so
on. We can now look back indulgently at those prescriptions and see that
they were irrelevant to the real cause of the problem: They would have been
ineffective in slowing inflation and would in most cases have brought about
further economic damage. Similarly, we are likely to look back on the cur-
rent list of prescriptions to cure education's ills as irrelevant because they,
too, fail to identify the real cause of the problem.
The trouble is not caused by any of the usual suspects. Instead, as I in-
tend to show, it stems from a fundamentally incoherent conception ofeduca-
tion. Iwill try, first and briefly, to show the lack ofcoherence that marks most
people's notions of what schools ought to be doing, and, second and less
briefly, to propose an educational theory that can enable schools to become
more effective-a theory that lays a foundation for greater understanding
and practical control of educational matters.
Oh, dear-the problem has to do with one educational theory and the
solution with another one? The comparison with sixteenth-century inflation
suggested something more richly tangible, like gold from Eldorado. The
promise ofa new educational theory, however, has the magnetism of a news-
2
paper headline like "Small Earthquake in Chile: Few Hurt."

INTRODUCTION
Educational theorizing is generally dreary because we have only three
significant educational ideas: that we must shape the young to the current
norms and conventions ofadult society, that we must teach them the knowl-
edge that will ensure their thinking conforms with what is real and true
about the world, and that we must encourage the development of each stu-
dent's individual potential. These ideas have rolled together over the centu-
ries into our currently dominant conception of education. There are just so
many variants that one can play with so few ideas before terminal staleness
sets in, and matters are made worse by most people~s unawareness of the
fundameI1tal ideas that shape their thinking about education.
The good news, I suppose, is that there are indeed only three ideas to
grasp. The bad news is that the three ideas are mutually incompatible-and
this is the primary cause of our long-continuing educational crisis. My first
task in chapter 1 is to elaborate those ideas a little, to show in what ways they
are mutually incompatible and to show that this incompatibility is the root
of our practical difficulties in education today. My second task in chapter 1 is
to introduce the new educational theory and indicate why it might be a bet-
ter bet than any other, or any combination of others, currently around.
One unfamiliar feature of this new theory is that it describes education
in terms of a sequence of kinds of understanding. A further oddity is that it
conceives of education as so intricately tied in with the life of society and its
culture that it is also a theory about Western cultural development and its
relationship to education in modern multicultural societies. I characterize
Western cultural history, and education today, in terms of an unfolding se-
quence of somewhat distinctive kinds of understanding.
What kind of category is a "kind of understanding"? Perhaps by reflect-
ing on the follOWing piece of information, you will gain a preliminary sense
of what I mean.
In 1949, at EI Quantara railway station in the Suez Canal Zone, there
were ten lavatories. Three were for officers-one for Europeans, one for
Asiatics, and one for Coloreds; three were for warrant officers and sergeants,
divided by race as for the senior officers; three were for other ranks, also
divided like the others by race; and one was for women, regardless of rank,
class, or race. One might respond with outrage to the injustice of such ar-
rangements and to the injustice inherent in the society that these arrange-
ments reflect. One might feel a simple tug of delight at accumulating such a
piece of exotica. If one considers social class a prime determiner of con-
sciousness, such lavatory arrangements will have a particular resonance; if
race, another; and if gender, yet another. One might fit this information into
a narrative of social amelioration between earlier unjust authoritarian re-
gimes and later democratic systems. One might consider it dispassionately
3

INTRODUCTION
as reflecting one among a kaleidoscopic variety of social systems human be-
ings have devised and those lavatory arrangements as no more or less bizarre
than whatever today would be considered more just, proper, or "normal."
One might consider the arrangements with relief, taking the perspective of
the officers, or with resentment, taking that ofthe other ranks, or with mixed
feelings, taking that of the women.
In each of these responses the information is understood in a somewhat
different way Today a response will rarely involve just one of these ways of
understanding the
facts~ we commonly adopt a number of such perspec-
tives, understanding the information as complex, polysemous.
My primary aim in this book is to unravel some of the major strands or
layers of our typically polysemous understanding. I try to separate out a set
of general and distinctive kinds of understanding and characterize each of
them in detail~ I distinguish five, which I call Somatic, Mythic, Romantic,
Philosophic, and Ironic. I try to show, furthermore, that these kinds of un-
derstanding have developed in evolution and cultural history in a particular
sequence, coalescing to a large extent (but not completely) as each succes-
sive kind has emerged. The modem mind thus is represented as a compos-
ite. This conception of the mind is a bit messy, but it tries to adhere to what
systems theorists call the principle of requisite variety: that the model con-
form with the complexity of what it represents.
My second and related aim is to show that education can best be con-
ceived as the individual's acquiring each of these kinds of understanding as
fully as possible in the sequence in which each developed historically. Thus I
construct a new recapitulation theory, distinct from those articulated in the
late nineteenth century mainly in terms ofwhat is identified as being recapitu-
lated.
I try to show that each kind of understanding results from the develop-
ment of particular intellectual tools that we acquire from the societies we
grow up in. While these tools are varied, I will focus largely on those evident
in language: the successive development of oral language, literacy, theoretic
abstractions, and the extreme lingUistic reflexiveness that yields irony. I ex-
plore the implications ofbeing an oral-language user for the kind of(Mythic)
understanding one can form ofthe world, and the kind of (Romantic) under-
standing that is an implication of growing into a particular literacy, and the
kind of (Philosophic) understanding that is an implication of fitting into
communities that use theoretic abstractions, and the kind of (Ironic) under-
standing that is an implication of self-conscious reflection about the lan-
guage one uses.
Now "tools" is obViously an awkward word~ I mean something like the
4
"mediational means" the Russian psychologist, Lev Vygotsky (1896-1934),

INTRODUCTION
describes as the shapers of the kind ofsense we make of the world. Vygotsky
argued that intellectual development cannot adequately be understood in
epistemological terms that focus on the kinds and quantities of knowledge
accumulated or' in psychological terms that focus on some supposed inner
and spontaneous developmental process. Rather, he understood intellectual
development in terms of the intellectual tools, like language, that we accu-
mulate as we grow up in a society and that mediate the kind of understand-
ing we can form or construct. In chapter 1 I try to show how the focus on
mediating intellectual tools, rather than on forms of knowledge or on psy-
chological processes, enables construction ofa new educational idea. So, my
gold from Eldorado that is designed to carry us past our present educational
problem and transcend the ideological logjam at its core is a set of language-
based intellectual tools that generate Somatic, MythiC, Romantic, Philo-
sophic, and Ironic kinds of understanding.
By "language based" I mean that my focus is on more general cultural
phenomena that nevertheless are fairly distinctly reflected in language use,
and in each discussion it is with the language forms that I begin. Merlin Don-
ald notes that "the uniqueness of humanity could be said to rest not so much
in language as in our capacity for rapid cultural change.... [W]hat humans
evolved was primarily a generalized capacity for cultural innovation" (1991,
p. 10). The kinds of understanding are attempts to characterize a basic level
of significant innovative changes in human cultural life, historically and in
individual experience.
A working title for this book had been "The Body's Mind." Given my
references to language, intellectual tools, and cultural innovations, one may
ask why the body figures so prominently. We had, as a species, and have, as
individuals, bodies before language. Language emerges from the body in the
process ofevolutionary and individual development, and it bears the ineluc-
table stamp of the body: Phrases and sentences, for example, are tied to the
time we take to inhale and exhale-though when we speak we take in quick
breaths and release them steadily (in a process Steven Pinker describes as
syntax overriding carbon dioxide [1994, p. 164]); similarly, we use language
to represent the world as it is disclosed by our particular scale and kind of
organs of perception. In other words, our body is the most fundamental me-
diating tool that shapes our understanding. This is obvious, of course, and
Somatic understanding refers to the understanding of the world that is pos-
sible for human beings given the kind of body we have. In the theory to be
elaborated in the follOWing chapters, each kind of understanding does not
fade away to be replaced by the next, but rather each properly coalesces in
significant degree with its predecessor. The developments in language uses
and their intellectual implications that I explore are, then, always tied in
5

INTRODUCTION
some degree to this embodied core of understanding. This becomes espe-
cia.lly important when I sketch my conception of Ironic understanding and
confront some common assumptions of postmodernism.
In chapters 2 through 5 I describe both the minting in Western cultural
history ofthe five kinds ofunderstanding and the forms they commonly take
among students today. I also attempt to show that education can best be con-
ceived as the process of developing each of these kinds of understanding as
fully as possible. The first kind of understanding, the Somatic, I discuss in
chapter 5 after the Ironic, for reasons that will be given there. Apart from
that, in each chapter I characterize one kind of understanding, shoWing its
emergence in Western cultural history, giving examples of its occurrence in
various historical periods, and indicating perhaps surprising parallels be-
tween these historical occurrences and the lives and activities of students
today. Among other things, these accounts offer new explanations of the na-
ture of fantasy and why four- and five-year-olds commonly find it so engag-
ing, of ten-year-olds' interest in the contents of The Guinness Book ofRecords,
of eleven- and twelve-year-olds' emotional associations with pop singers or
sports heroes, of academic sixteen-year-olds' interest in general ideas, meta-
physical schemes, or ideologies, and so on. The unfamiliar category of
"kinds of understanding" has at least the virtue of bringing into focus fea-
tures of students' thinking and learning that are prominent and powerful in
their lives but have been somewhat neglected in educational writing.
I realize that this talk of Western cultural development, intellectual
tools, and kinds ofunderstanding may not exactly qUicken the pulse of those
hoping to discover better ways of preparing our children for productive
work and satisfying leisure. And the references to Western culture, along
with the announcement I now warily make-that I will be constantly dis-
cussing and quoting ancient Greeks-may add a seal of hopelessness to this
enterprise for more radical spirits. I think neither group should feel disap-
pointed. One simple aim of this book is to show that the occasionally de-
rided "basics" of education may be much more effectively attained than is
now common; another is to establish as the appropriate aim of education a
kind of Ironic understanding that is quite distinct from the traditionalist
conception of the educated person.
Chapter 6 provides a chance to reflect on the theory and to clarify its
unfamiliar features. This chapter deals with a range of political, ideological,
pedagogical, methodological, moral, and other issues raised by the presenta-
tion of the theory to that point. I pretend there that I am answering questions
from a varied and critical audience that has had the preternatural patience to
sit through the preceding chapters; despite my best efforts at evenhan-
6
dedess, the skeptical questioners may come off as waspish, bad tempered,

INTRODUCTION
obtuse, evil minded, and perhaps somewhat drunk, and the answerer as the
essence of sweet reason. (Mind you, this Western "reason" is another promi-
nent issue to be dealt with.)
Chapters 7 and 8 then explore the theory's implications for the curricu-
lum and the classroom. The overall shape of the book, then, is a funnel that
begins with general theoretical issues, moves through more concrete theory
construction, and concludes with a somewhat detailed look at practical
implications. Readers whose primary interest is in the theory's practical im-
plications might find the earlier chapters hard going, so I sketch the implica-
tions fairly thoroughly in chapter 2 and, to a lesser degree, in the succeeding
chapters, hoping that such readers will be able to manage the trek through
to chapters 7 and 8 without further oxygen.
I have organized the book into two parts. The first deals primarily with
modern people's recapitulation of the kinds of understanding developed in
their cultural history The second looks at implications of the theory for the
curriculum and for teaching practice. This division is deSigned to alert the
reader to the rather different styles of the two groups of chapters. It is not
pOSSible to discuss the social studies curriculum in eighth grade or the sci-
ence curriculum in third grade in quite the same style as one can layout the
theoretical argument. In addition, I try to relate the theory's implications as
closely as possible to current curricula and to everyday classroom practice. It
might seem less glamorous than what the earlier discussion prepares one for,
but I hope nevertheless that the genuine practical improvements that follow
from the theory will be clear.
Unusually for a developmental scheme, the gains that come with each
newset ofintellectual tools are represented as entailingsome loss ofthe under-
standing associated with the prior set. For example, when we become literate
we do not cease to be oral-language users, but we do commonly lose some of
the understanding that is a part of being exclusively an oral-language user.
While this theory identifies cumulative aspects ofunderstanding, it also rep-
resents education, and culturalhistory, as processes inwhichwe canlose more
by way ofalienation and emotional as well as intellectual desiccation than we
gain by way of understanding and aesthetic delight. Stand outside a public
high school at the end ofthe school dayand you will see this only too painfully
The educational trick is to maximize the gains while minimizing the losses. If
we are unaware of the potential losses, we do little to minimize them.
This is not a book of new discoveries or of new knowledge generated by
research. Rather, it Simply reorganizes long-known ideas into a coherent
scheme. My aim is not to present some exotic new conception of education,
but rather to articulate a theory that is more adequate to what has long been
meant by the word. We have lived with important but inadequate and mutu-
7

8
INTRODUCTION
ally incompatible educational ideas for such a long time, and have even be-
come comfortable with the discomforts they have caused and cause, that a
theory aiming to remove the discomforts must itself seem rather a nuisance.
In his own work in economics, john Maynard Keynes expressed the problem
succinctly:
The composition of this book has been for the author a long struggle of escape, and so
must the reading of it be for most readers if the author's assault upon them is to be
successful,-a struggle of escape from habitual modes of thought and expression. The
ideas which are here expressed so laboriously are extremely Simple and should be ob-
vious. The difficulty lies, not in the new ideas, but in escaping from the old ones, which
ramify, for those brought up as most of us have been, into every corner of our minds.
(1936, p. xxiii)

Part
One
chapter 1
Three Old Ideas and aNew One
INTRODUCTION
Education is one of the greatest consumers of public money in the Western
world, and it employs a larger workforce than almost any other social agency
The goals of the education system-to enhance the competitiveness of na-
tions and the self-fulfillment of citizens-are supposed to justify the im-
mense investment of money and energy. School-that business of sitting
at a desk among thirty or so others, being talked at, mostly boringly, and
doing exercises, tests, and worksheets, mostly boring, for years and years
and years-is the instrument designed to deliver these expensive benefits.
Despite, or because of, the vast expenditures of money and energy, finding
anyone inside or outside the education system who is content with its per-
formance is difficult. Many task forces, commissions, and reports have docu-
mented the inadequacies ofschools throughout the Western world and have
proposed even more numerous remedies. The diagnoses of illness are so
many and the recommended remedies so varied that politicians and educa-
tional authorities cannot address the evident deficiencies with much confi-
dence of success or of general support.
Consider the community school along with other major institutions that
developed into theirmodem forms in the latter part ofthe nineteenth century.
The factory, the hospital, the prison, and the school have become prominent
and integral components of twentieth century societies in the West. The fac-
9

ONE
tory and the hospital are generally accepted as successful institutions. There
may be arguments about whetherAmerican, Scandinavian, orJapanese styles
of manufacturing are more efficient or socially desirable, or about iatrogenic
diseases and "spiraling health care costs," but generally these institutions are
viewed as being well designed to achieve their proper aims. Prisons are more
problematic. They were developed in the West to achieve two aims-to pun-
ish and to rehabilitate. The problem is, these aims are not entirely compatible;
the more a conscientious civil servant tries to achieve one, the more difficult it
is to do the other.
In the case of the modern school, three distinctive aims have attended its
development. It is expected to serve as a significant agency in socializing the
young, to teach particular forms of knowledge that will bring about a realis-
tic and rational view of the world, and to help realize the unique potential of
each child. These goals are generally taken to be consistent with one another,
somewhat overlapping, and mutually supportive. As shown later in this
chapter, however, each of these aims is incompatible in profound ways with
the other two. As with prisons' aims to punish and to rehabilitate, the more
we work to achieve one of the schools' aims, the more difficult it becomes to
achieve the others.
THE THREE OLD IDEAS
The First Idea: Socialization
Central to any educational scheme is initiation of the young into the knowl-
edge, skills, values, and commitments common to the adult members of the
society. Oral cultures long ago invented techniques to ensure that the young
would efficiently learn and remember the social group's store of knowledge
and would also take on the values that sustain the structure of the society
and establish the sense of identity of its individual members.
Prominent among these techniques was the use of rhyme, rhythm, me-
ter, and vivid images. Perhaps the most powerful technique invented, and
the greatest ofall social inventions, was the "coding" oflore into stories. This
had the dual effect ofmaking the contents more easily remembered-crucial
in cultures where all knowledge had to be preserved in living memories-
and of shaping the hearers' emotional commitment to those contents. One
could ensure greater cohesiveness within the social group by coding the lore
that was vital to one's society into stories-be it proper kinship relations and
appropriate behavior, economic activities, property rights, class status, or
10
medical knowledge and its application.

THREE OLD IDEAS AND A NEW ONE
The young have a remarkable plasticity to adapt to an indeterminate
range of cultural forms, beliefs, and patterns of behavior. The central task of
socialization is to inculcate a restricted set of norms and beliefs--the set that
constitutes the adult society the child will grow into. Societies can survive
and maintain their sense ofidentity only if a certain degree ofhomogeneity is
achieved in shaping its members; "education perpetuates and reinforces this
homogeneity by fixing in the child, from the beginning, the essential sim-
ilarities that collective life demands" (Durkheim, 1956, p. 70).
Whoever governs the initiation process-the storytellers or the minis-
try of education and the school board-acts to promote the norms and
values that are dominant in the society at large. Their job is to perform the
homogenizing task Durkheim refers to. If a school today in Cuba or Iran
routinely graduated liberal, capitalist entrepreneurs, it would be considered
a disaster. In Winnipeg, Wigan, Wabash, or Wollongong, this would not be
considered so bad. Indeed, what would be considered outrageous in Iran is a
deliberate aim of Wollongong schools.
The process of socialization is central to the mandate of schools today.
Our schools have the duty to ensure that students graduate with an under-
standing of their society and of their place and possibilities within it, that
they have the skills required for its perpetuation, and that they hold its
values and commitments. While we might not feel comfortable with the
term, we accept that a prominent aim of schools is the homogenization of
children.
The spokespersons of governments, taxpayers, and businesses that re-
quire the schools to produce a skilled workforce of good citizens today echo
those who learned long ago the techniques for reproducing in the young the
values and beliefs, the skills and lore, that best contribute to the untroubled
perpetuation of the tribe. The public voices that associate education primar-
ily with jobs, the economy, and the production of good citizens reflect a pre-
dominantly socializing emphasis.
The very structure of modern schools in the West, with its age cohorts,
class groupings, team sports, and so on, encourages conformity to modern
Western social norms. Such structures can accommodate only a very limited
range of nonconformity Students learn, more or less, to fit in for their own
good. We need not see this process of socialization and homogenization as
the de-humanizing, right-wing conspiracy it was ~~exposed" to be by 1960s
romantic radical writers on education (e.g.) Goodman, 1962~ Kozol, 1967~
Roszak, 1969; Young, 1971). Of course, pushed to extremes--which is
where the radicals consider the typical public school to be---the socially
necessary homogenizing process can become totalitarian in its demands for
conformity But most pluralistiC Western societies try to build defences
11

ONE
against those who are most eager to censor children's reading or restrict their
behavior and shape their beliefs excessively.
The socialization of the young is also evident in the efforts to promote
"useful" knowledge and skills through courses on consumer education, anti-
drug use, and automobile maintenance. Sometimes the proponents argue
that schools graduate students only when they are equipped to do a job. I
have kept an old letter, published in an Ann Landers column, from someone
who signed, sadly, as Too SOON OLD-TOO LATE SMART. The letter expresses
frustration with schools in which "our children are subjected to 12 years of
'education' without learning how to conduct themselves in real-life situa-
tions" and suggests that schools introduce a course on the consequences of
shoplifting, that several days a week be devoted to the subject of the hazards
of cigarette smoke, that there be instruction in the dangers of alcoholism,
that sex education be a "must" in every school, and that there be courses on
"life," with how-to instructions on settling arguments, expressing anger and
hostility, handling competitive feelings involving brothers and sisters, cop-
ing with alcoholic parents, and dealing with "funny uncles" and passes made
by homosexual peers. The writer acknowledges the importance of algebra
and geometry in the curriculum but argues that information on how to han-
dle one's life should take precedence.
Too SOON OLD-TOO LATE SMART expresses very clearly how the curric-
ulum would be changed if socializing were made more prominent in the
schools' mandate. Those who share this view see the school as primarily a
social agency that should accommodate society's changing needs. Recently
their voices have been prominent in demands that students become familiar
with computers and their range of applications. They support counseling
programs and like to see school counselors working along with parents to
help students adjust to the strains and challenges of modern society. Sports,
travel, exchanges, visits to monuments and courts and government build-
ings, and social studies activities that help students understand their local
environment all tend to be supported as helping to socialize the young. The
teacher is seen as an important social worker, primarily valuable as a role
model who exemplifies the values, beliefs, and norms of the dominant soci-
ety; knowledge of subject matter cannot substitute for "character," whole-
someness, and easy and open communication with students.
The Second Idea: Plato and the Truth about Reality
Plato (c. 428-347 B.C.E.) had a radically different idea about how people
should be educated. He wrote The Republic as a kind ofelaborate prospectus
12
for his Academy. Not conforming with the best modern advertising practice,

THREE OLD
IDEAS AND
A NEW ONE
he laid out his ideas in a manner that involved constantly arguing the inade-
quacy of the forms of education offered by his competitors. Plato wanted to
show that the worldly wise, well-socialized, practical person equipped with
all the skills of a good and effective citizen was not only an educationally
inadequate ideal but actually a contemptible one. The assertive and confi-
dent Thrasymachus of The Republic and the worldly wise Callicles of the
Gorgias are shown to be other than the masters of affairs they seem; in fact,
they are slaves of conventional ideas. In contrast, the ability to reflect on
ideas, to pull them this way and that until some bedrock of truth and cer-
tainty is established, was the promised result of the curriculum described in
The Republic and offered in Plato's Academy. Plato certainly wanted the grad-
uates of his school to be politically active and to change the world, but first
they had to understand it.
Plato's revolutionary idea was that education should not be concerned
primarily with equipping students to develop the knowledge and skills best
suited to ensuring their success as citizens and sharing the norms and values
of their peers. Rather, education was to be a process of learning those forms
of knowledge that would give students a privileged, rational view of reality.
Only by disciplined study of increasingly abstract forms of knowledge,
guided by a kind of spiritual commitment, could the mind transcend the
conventional beliefs, prejudices, and stereotypes of the time and come to see
reality clearly.
Now this hasn't been everyone's cup of tea by any means. But Plato suc-
ceeded in expressing his central idea with such clarity, force, vividness, and
imaginative wit that everyone who has written about education in the West
has been profoundly influenced by it. Who, after all, wants to live and die a
prisoner to conventional prejudices and stereotypes, never seeing the world
as it really is? And how can one know when one is dealing with reality rather
than with illusions and stereotypes? Plato's claim that his "academic" curric-
ulum alone can carry the mind to rationality and a secure access to reality has
been so influential that we can hardly imagine a conception of education
without it.
Indeed, nearly everyone today takes it for granted that schools should
attend to the intellectual cultivation of the young in ways that are not justi-
fied simply in terms of social utility. We include in the curriculum a range of
subject matter that we assume will do something valuable for students'
minds and give them a more realistic grasp of the world. We consider it im-
portant to teach them that Saturn is a planet that orbits the sun rather than
have them believe it is a wandering star erratically orbiting the earth and
influencing their daily fortune by its association with other stars. We teach
division of fractions, algebra, drama, ancient history, and much else for
13

ONE
which most students will never have a practical need. The place of such
topics in the curriculum is usually justified in vague terms such as "educa-
tional value." In Plato's idea, the mind is what it learns, so selecting the con-
tent of the curriculum is vital.
How, then, is the Platonic idea of education represented today? One
prominent conception can be introduced through an image suggested by as-
tronomer Carl Sagan. Sagan has been a prominent organizer of the search for
signs of extraterrestrial intelligence with radio telescopes. This program as-
sumes a vividly romantic picture of a conversation among intelligent beings
in our galaxy, which we are just now developing the technology to enter. By
plugging in, we might suddenly have access to a conversation of unimagin-
able richness and wonder. In a more immediately possible sense, modern
proponents of the Platonic idea of education suggest that accessing a tran-
scendent conversation is precisely what education does for the individual.
Michael Oakeshott (1991), for example, represents education as entry into a
conversation that began long ago in the jungles and plains ofAfrica, gathered
further voices, perspectives, and varied experience in the ancient kingdoms
of the East, added distinctive voices and experience in ancient Greece and
Rome, and continues to accumulate value to the present. The conversation is
now one of immense richness, wonder, and diversity.
An individual can live and die happily, be socialized harmoniously in
her or, his special milieu, but remain almost entirely ignorant of this great
cultural conversation as we will likely do with regard to Sagan's imagined
galactiC interchange. But if it were really there in radio waves across the gal-
axy and we had the means to join it, would we not be foolish to ignore it?
Would we not be impoverishing our experience? The task of education, in
this view, is to connect children with the great cultural conversation that very
definitely is there and that transcends politics, special milieus, local experi-
ences, and conventional sets of norms and values. To pass up the chance to
engage in this conversation is to be like Proust's dog in the library-possibly
content, but ignorant of the potential riches around us.
Those who want the schools to connect children to this great cultural
conversation, and to serve as bastions of civilization against the cretinizing
mindlessness ofpop culture (these are the kind ofterms they like), who want
students to be engaged by the disinterested pursuit of truth through the hard
academic disciplines that will make them knowledgeable, discriminating,
and skeptical, give new voice to the idea Plato bequeathed to us. These are
people who value Plato's idea more highly than the other two ideas. For these
people, school is properly a place apart from society: a place dedicated to
14
knowledge, skills, and activities that are of "persisting value," transcending

THREE
OLD
IDEAS
AND
A NEW
ONE
the requirements of current social life. Indeed, what students learn is to es-
tablish the grounds from which they can judge the appropriateness of the
values, norms, beliefs, and practices of society. Schools dominated by this
idea consequently tend to be called elitist. Knowledge is valued less for its
social utility than for its presumed benefit to the mind of the student; thus,
Latin has a higher status than automobile maintenance. Modern, neoconser-
vative promoters of the Platonic idea (whose slogan is "excellence in educa-
tion") direct their outrage particularly at students' ignorance of their cultural
heritage (cf. the British Black Papers on Education during the 1960s and
1970s~ Hirsch, 1987; Ravitch and Finn, 1987) and downplay programs that
do not serve a specific academic purpose. Teachers tend to occupy a more
distant, authoritative, and even authoritarian role because they properly em-
body the authority that comes from being an expert in the relevant subject
matter.
The Third Idea: Rousseau and Nature's Guidance
Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712-1778) viewed current educational practice as
disastrous. He was happy to acknowledge that Plato's Republic "is the finest
treatise on education ever written," but he concluded that when dull ped-
agogues took hold of Plato's idea, they took the forms of knowledge that
made up the curriculum, organized those into what seemed the best logical
order, then beat them into the students. The typical result was misery, vio-
lence, and frustration: a syndrome not unknown today, though we may
mark some success, influenced by Rousseau, at reduCing the physical vio-
lence inflicted on children in the name of education.
Pedagogues, Rousseau observed, "are always looking for the man in the
child, without considering what he is before he becomes a man" (Rousseau,
1911, p. 1). In Emile, he focused attention instead on the nature of the devel-
oping child, concentrating less on what ought to be learned and more on
what children at different ages are capable of learning and on how learning
might proceed most effectively. He saw his book, Emile, as a kind ofsupple-
ment to The Republic, rectifying its major omission and updating the master's
work. But, as we'll see, Emile was built on assumptions profoundly at odds
with Plato's.
"The internal development of our faculties and organs is the education
ofnature," Rousseau wrote. "The use we learn to make of this development is
the education of men" (p. 11). So, to be able to educate, we must first under-
stand that internal development process. The most important area of educa-
tional study, then, is the nature of students' development, learning, and
15

ONE
motivation. The more we know about these, the more efficient and humane
we can make the educational process. The key is that underlying natural de-
velopment: "Fix your eye on nature, follow the path traced by her" (p. 14).
As nature was to be our gUide, and Rousseau clearly believed the nature
of males and females to be significantly different, nature dictated a quite
different education for Sophie from that of Emile-an education that en-
couraged the "domination and violation ofwomen" (Darling and Van de Pij-
pekamp, 1994).)
Emile, published in 1762, was promptly ordered to be burned in Paris
and Geneva. This no doubt helped sales considerably, as it went from print-
ing to printing. The sentimental image of the child likely helped the book's
popularity, too (Warner, 1940), even while Rousseau himself was dispatch-
ing his own unwanted children to foundling hospitals. But the rhetorical
force of Emile carried Rousseau's ideas across Europe. In more recent times,
John Dewey andJean Piaget have been profoundly influenced by Rousseau,
and the degree to which their ideas have affected practice is one index of his
continuing influence.
Careful observation and study ofstudents, recognition of the distinctive
forms of learning and sense-making that characterize different ages, con-
struction of methods of teaching that engage students' distinctive forms of
learning, emphasis on individual differences among learners, the encourage-
ment of active rather than passive learning, the insistence that a student's
own discovery is vastly more effective than the tutor's "words, words,
words," are all features of Rousseau's educational scheme. While it would be
false to claim him as the originator of all these ideas, he did bring them to-
gether into a powerful and coherent conception of education.
These are ideas that have become a part of the "common sense," taken-
for-granted folklore ofso many educators today. It would now be considered
strange not to recognize the importance of students' varying learning styles,
the value ofmethods ofteaching that encourage students' active inquiry, and
the significant differences among students at different ages.
The modern voices that encourage schools to focus on fulfilling the indi-
vidual potential of each student, that emphasize that students should "learn
how to learn" as a higher priority than amassing academic knowledge, that
support programs in "critical thinking," that evaluate educational success
not in terms of what knowledge students have acquired so much as in terms
ofwhat they can do with what they know, reflect this third educational idea.
Here, the focus of education is the experience of the child. The construction
of a common core curriculum for all children therefore is not simply unde-
sirable but actually impossible. Each child's experience, even of the same
16
curriculum content, is necessarily different. We should recognize this, and

THREE
OLD
IDEAS AND
A NEW ONE
let the unique experience and needs of each child be the determiner of the
curriculum, even to the radical point of making the curriculum a response to
the questions students raise (Postman and Weingartner, 1969). The educa-
tor's attention should be focused on the individual development of each
child and on the provision of the experiences that can optimally further this
development.
The commonest expression of this idea today combines the variously
interpreted progressivism ofJohn Dewey (Kleibard, 1986) with Piaget's de-
velopmentalism and the psychologizing of the study ofchildren-the mod-
ern form of discovering their "nature" that Rousseau recommended. In the
classroom, and outside it, "discovery learning" is valued, manipulables and
museums are recommended for students' exploration, discussion is encour-
aged, project work by individuals or groups is provided for. Careful atten-
tion is given to the results of empirical studies of children's learning,
development, and motivation, and teaching and curricula are adjusted to
conform with such "research findings." Teachers are not authorities so much
as facilitators, providers of the best resources, shapers of the environment in
which students will learn.
INCOMPATIBILITIES
Are these three ideas really incompatible? Can we not find a way of address-
ing these somewhat distinct aims for education without having them under-
mine one another? Why can we not socialize students to prevailing norms
and values, ensure that they accumulate the kind ofknowledge that will give
a truer view of the world, and help them to fulfill their potential at each stage
of development? A rigorous academic program surely does not conflict with
society's needs, and facts about learning, development, and motivation
surely can help us better implement both the academic program and social-
ization. At least, Plato's concern with the what of education does not seem to
be at war with Rousseau's concern with the how. Don't they properly comple-
ment one another?
Looked at in sufficiently general and vague a manner, it may indeed
seem that these distinctive ideas are not as incompatible as I have been sug-
gesting. The everyday business of schooling in Western societies has been
going ahead on the assumption that evident problems are caused by im-
proper management, poor teaching, genetic constraints on students' abilities
to learn, or flawed curriculum organization, not to some profound theoreti-
cal incompatibility. But I think the incompatibility is there, and it is at the
17

ONE
root of our practical problems. Let us consider each idea in turn with the
others.
Plato and Socializing
The homogenizing aim of socialization, which is to reproduce in each stu-
dent a particular set of beliefs, conventions, commitments, norms ofbehav-
ior, and values, is necessarily at odds with a process that aims to show their
hollowness and inadequacy. They do, after all, form the glue that holds soci-
ety's foundations in place. If Socrates was Plato's ideal of the educated per-
son, it is evident why the democratic citizens of Athens condemned him to
death: the radical skepticism that his kind of education engendered threat-
ened the foundations of society. He was condemned for corrupting the
youth. What he was corrupting, or corroding, was their acceptance of the
tenets of society. His fellow citizens saw his behavior as a kind of treason.
No one now believes that Plato's ideal aim of direct knowledge of the
real, the true, the good, and the beautiful is attainable. What is attainable,
though, is the skeptical, philosophical, informed mind that energetically in-
quires into the nature and meaning of things, that is unsatisfied by conven-
tional answers, that repudiates belief in whatever cannot be adequately
supported by good arguments or evidence, and that embodies the good-
humored corrosive of Socratic irony. This kind of consciousness has not of-
ten been greatly valued by those who govern societies because it is a disrup-
tive force. Everyday social life, particularly in complex modern economic
systems, proceeds more smoothly and blandly without the irritant created
by following Plato's educational prescription too closely. If people continu-
ally ask themselves "Is this really the best way to live?," they simply can't get
on with day-to-day business in a single-minded, efficient manner.
Of course, we want the promised benefits ofboth educational ideas. We
want the social harmony and the psychological stability that successful so-
cialization encourages, but we also want the cultivation of the mind, the
skepticism, and the dedication to rationality that Plato's program calls for.
Designing schools to achieve either one is difficult. But our schools today are
supposed to do both.
Rousseau and Plato
If we see Plato as dealing with the what of education and Rousseau with the
how, then must the two ideas be considered incompatible? This common res-
olution of apparent conflicts would be fine were it not the case that it falsely
18
represents both ideas. The above compromise, leaving Plato's descendants

THREE
OLD
IDEAS AND
A NEW
ONE
with the content and aims of education and Rousseau's with the methods,
appeals to many as a neat division of labor. The educational philosophers
can deal with content and aims, drawing on the knowledge generated by the
educational psychologists about learning and development. It seems ob-
vious that facts about students' development can blend with philosophers'
research into the nature and structure of knowledge to yield a more easily
understood math or history curriculum. It seems obvious that such collab-
oration should be common; the fact that we see so little ofit suggests there is
something preventing it from taking place.
One problem for the neat compromise is that, in the Rousseauian and
Deweyan view, the means and ends of education are tied together. The
means used in Rousseauian and Deweyan instruction are parts of their edu-
cational ends. They favor discovery procedures, for example, not because
they are more efficient means to some distinct educational ends, but because
they are a component of their educational ends. For example, in Rousseau's
terms discovery procedures disclose nature and in so doing stimulate the
development of a pure, uninfected reason. Or, as Dewey adapted the idea,
discovery procedures mirror the scientific method whose acquisition by stu-
dents is a crucial component of their education. We have incorporated this
idea ofintertwined means and ends into our currently dominant conception
of education. Put crudely, we recognize the inappropriateness of beating
children who have failed to memorize a text on compassion; we feel a bit
uncomfortable about compelling attendance at institutions that try to teach
the values ofliberty and democracy; and it is increasingly clear that choice of
teaching method is not a Simple strategic matter disconnected from our edu-
cational ends. In our educational means are our ends; in our educational
ends are our means.
Another problem follows from Plato and his descendants' having their
own conception of educational development. Students progress, in Plato's
scheme, from the stages of eikasia, to pistis, to dianoia, to noesis. But these
stages are interestingly different from Rousseau's and Piaget's. Plato's stages
represent greater clarity in understanding. Education, in Plato's view and in
that ofmodern proponents ofthe academic idea, is marked by students' abil-
ity to master increasingly sophisticated knowledge, regardless of their sup-
posed psychological development. For Rousseau and Piaget, the stages of
psychological development are precisely what mark education and deter-
mine what kind of knowledge the student needs; as the development of the
body proceeds almost regardless of the particular food it eats, so the mind
will develop almost regardless of the particular knowledge it learns. For the
Platonists, the only development of educational interest is the particular
knowledge learned; the mind is not much else.
19

ONE
So Rousseau and his modern followers are not simply making meth-
odological or procedural recommendations that might allow us to do the
Platonic academic job more efficiently. They are actually recommending a
different job. Rousseau's idea is not one that yields an easy accommodation
with Plato's. These ideas conflict-most profoundly in identifying the cause
and dynamic of the educational process. In the Platonic idea, learning partic-
ular forms ofknowledge carries the educational process forward; knowledge
drives development. In the Rousseauian idea, education results from an
internal, developmental process unfolding within a supportive environ-
ment; development drives knowledge, determining what knowledge is
learnable, meaningful, and relevant. For Plato education is a time-related,
epistemological process; for Rousseau it is an age-related, psychological pro-
cess.
We could deSign schools to implement either of these conceptions of
education, but instead we require our schools to implement both. Our prac-
tical difficulties arise from accepting that both the Platonic and the Rous-
seauian ideas are necessary for education, but the more we try to implement
one, the more we undermine the other.
The conflict between these two ideas has been the basis of the continu-
ing struggles between "traditionalists" and "progressivists" during this cen-
tury. One sees them at odds in almost every media account of educational
issues-the Platonic forces argue for "basics" and a solid academic curricu-
lum, and the Rousseauians argue for "relevance" and space for students' ex-
ploration and discovery. A key battleground now is the elementary social
studies curriculum in North America. The progressivists are defending the
"relevant" focus on families, neighborhoods, communities, and interactions
among communities, and the traditionalists are pressuring for a reintroduc-
tion ofhistory and geography as mainstays ofthe curriculum. The progressi-
vist forces argue that history and geography require abstract concepts and
are not "developmentally appropriate" for young children; the traditionalists
respond that any content can be made comprehenSible if presented sensibly.
Socializing and Rousseau
When socialization is the primary aim of education, we derive our priorities
from society's norms and values. In the Rousseauian view, however, we
should keep the child from contact with society's norms and values as long as
pOSSible because they are "one mass of folly and contradiction" (Rousseau,
1911, p. 46). If we want to let the nature of the child develop as fully as
possible, we will constantly defend her or him against the shaping pressures
20
of society. An aspect of this conflict is apparent today in many educators'

THREE OLD
IDEAS AND A NEW ONE
attitudes to the general influence of television on children. TV is a powerful
instrument in shaping a set of prominent social norms and values, but edu-
cators resist much of this shaping in favor of activities that seem to them less
likely to distort proper or "natural" development. "Natural" is not, ofcourse,
the term much used today, but it lurks around the various ways the Rous-
seauian position is restated, as in a number of books that appeal to a con-
ception of a more natural kind of childhood that is being distorted or
suppressed by current forms of socialization (e.g., Elkind, 1981; Postman,
1982). Some of the 1960s radicals were even plainer-Paul Goodman put it
this way: "The purpose of elementary pedagogy, through age twelve, should
be to delay socialization, to protect children's free growth.... We must
drastically cut back formal schooling because the present extended tutelage
is against nature and arrests growth" (1970, p. 86).
No one, of course, is simply on the side of Rousseau against socializa-
tion, or vice versa. We all recognize that any developmental process has to be
shaped by a particular society. Our problem originates with the attraction of
Rousseau's ideas about a kind of development that honors something within
each individual, something uninfected, by the compromises, corruptions,
and constrictions that social life so commonly brings with it. We do not have
to share Rousseau's own disgust with society (which returned him high re-
gard and money) to recognize the attraction of his ideas.
There doesn't seem room for much compromise here. We can't sensibly
aim to shape a child's development half from nature and half from society To
try to do so creates the same problems as half punishing and half rehabilitat-
ing a prisoner. Such treatments interfere with each other; by trying to com-
promise, we ensure only that neither is effective.
There are, ofcourse, a number ofways ofseeing this conflict that do not
lead to the conclusion of incompatibility I am arguing. We can "solve" the
problem by observing that our nature is indeterminately plastic in our early
years and socialization is a condition of our nature being realized. We are,
after all, social animals; there is no natural form that we will develop toward
ifwe are kept apart from society. We can "solve" this conflict also by seeing it
not as one between nature and society but, much more simply, as the kind of
disagreement one must expect in a pluralistiC society. But the incompatibility
I am concerned with arises only within the conception of education, and
seems to me unavoidable so long as people conceive of children as going
through some regular, spontaneous process of intellectual development that
can be optimized if we shape their learning environment to suit it. One can-
not derive one's educational prinCiples both from some conception of an
ideal developmental process and from some current norms and values of
adult society; they are bound to be incompatible unless one lives in a perfect
21

ONE
society. They are incompatible because socializing has a distinct end in view
and is a shaping, homogenizing, narrowing process toward that end,
whereas supporting the fullest development of student potential involves
releasing students to explore and discover their uniqueness~ this is an indi-
vidualizing process that encourages distinctiveness even to the point of ec-
centricity, if necessary, and is expansive without predetermined ends.
TIDYING Up
Some readers might consider "tidying up" a particularly unsuitable subhead-
ing on the grounds that the scheme presented so far is much too tidy: three
neat ideas and three crisp incompatibilities. What it needs is roughing up;
enormously complex processes cannot adequately be represented by such a
simple scheme. Also it has long been recognized that "tensions" exist among
competing values in education-between, say, the need to socialize and the
academic curriculum. Clearly, when there is a conflict for curriculum time
between consumer education or a new family life curriculum and drama or
Latin, for example, no single criterion ofeducational value can be invoked to
help us make a decision. These are "value issues," necessary tensions that
follow from education's being one of those "essentially contested concepts";
ultimately such issues are reflections of large-scale political conflicts. So per-
haps this talk of profound theoretical incompatibilities is Simply an old tru-
ism dressed up in fancy language and made to look excessively dramatic?
In "tidying up" I mean to address objections like these, even if very
briefly, and to summarize my point about the three ideas before I go on to
introduce the fourth. Also, just before quitting the old ideas for the new, I
will point out that each of the old ideas carries problems ofits own for educa-
tion, even beyond incompatibility.
Now nobody holds exclusively to anyone of these ideas. Educational
discourse during this century has been largely made up of arguments about
which idea should be valued more highly. The persisting "traditionalist" vs.
"progreSSivist," "subject centered" vs. "child centered" disputes may be rein-
terpreted in these terms as representing preferences for Plato's idea over
Rousseau's or vice versa. Conflicts between those promoting vocationally
oriented studies and those promoting more purely academic subjects may
be seen as preferences for socializing over Plato's idea, or vice versa. Radicals,
meanwhile, are identified by their simple solution of discarding two of the
ideas. This does solve the theoretical problem, and does usually mean that
they can speak with a clearer and more urgent voice, and so accumulate dis-
22
ciples, but at a harsh practical cost.

THREE
OLD
IDEAS AND
A
NEW
ONE
At the "chalk face" level of classrooms in the local school, the Plato-
influenced teachers, who want to put in place more rigorous exams and to
"stream" students so that learning disciplined knowledge can be maximized,
come frequently into conflict with the Rousseau-influenced teachers, who
want to remove exams and even grading and focus on opening up the range
ofexploratory opportunities for students. The former argue for a more struc-
tured curriculum, logically sequenced and including the canonical knowl-
edge of Western "high" culture; the latter argue for activities that encourage
students to explore the world around them and, in as far as they are willing
to prespecify curriculum content, they propose knowledge relevant to stu-
dents' present and likely future experience. The former are likely to prefer
desks in neat rows and orderly lessons while the latter are likely to prefer
varied work-centers, circled desks or no desks, and flexible interdisciplinary
lessons.
Clearly few teachers adhere to one position to the exclusion of others;
most teachers try to balance all of them in practice. So, for example, even
Rousseau-inclined teachers tend to acknowledge the importance of the
canonical content of the Plato-influenced curriculum; their compromise be-
tween incompatibles means that they feel it is important to "expose" stu-
dents to the "high culture" curriculum content but they feel no imperative to
persist with it for students who do not take to it. That is, each idea is allowed
scope enough to undercut the other.
Most educational administrators feel pressure from groups who prefer
one or another of the ideas; thus they seek to find a balance among them.
This is the common-sense response to recognizing these competing "values"
and it is the response that has given us the schools we have. They struggle to
ensure a reasonably adequate socialization ofstudents, provide a reasonable
academic program, and enable as many students as seem suited to it to pro-
gress as far as possible, and attend to the different needs and potential ofeach
student, allowing as much flexibility and choice among programs as re-
sources allow.
Apologists for the general performance of schools in the West com-
monly point to the array ofsocial ills that afflict the schools, arguing, reason-
ably, that given the circumstances schools are doing a heroic job. But such
voices tend to be drowned by critics who argue that schools would do a
much betterjob if only they would elevate one of the old ideas in importance
over the others-put greater emphaSiS on developing the basic values and
skills that will lead to good citizenship and economic productivity, or in-
crease the time and conditions that will put greater pressure on students to
master diSCiplined knowledge, or design curricula and teaching practices
that are more relevant to students' experience. From a purely pragmatic
23

ONE
point ofview, it seems extraordinarily unlikely that any of these emphases, or
any combination, or any finer balance among them, will do the trick for us.
The traditional social efficiency, liberal academic, and progressivist pro-
posals have been tried and tried again; continuing to wobble from one to
another will only exacerbate the confusion about schools' roles and perpetu-
ate the blaming and the now stale and futile arguments about how to make
things better. At best, schooling is a set of flaccid compromises among these
three great and powerful ideas.
Great and powerful they undoubtedly are, but each carries baggage that
creates problems for education even before we try sticking them together
into an unworkable system. I want to dispense with some of the baggage
these ideas come with and to reconceive education in a way that preserves
adequate socialization, academic cultivation, and individual development
disconnected from the educational ideas we have inherited. We have to hang
onto the babies while tossing out their dirty old bathwater.
That there is bathwater to be thrown out seems to be generally acknowl-
edged. Socialization to generally agreed norms and values that we have in-
herited is no longer straightforwardly viable in modern multicultural
societies undergoing rapid technology-driven changes. The Platonic pro-
gram comes with ideas about reaching a transcendent truth or privileged
knowledge that is no longer credible. The conception of individual develop-
ment we have inherited is built on a belief in some culture-neutral process
that is no longer sustainable.
Yet a problem for any paradigm-shifting ambition to displace currently
dominant ideas is that the new idea must initially be looked at through the
perspectives it is trying to displace. What I must persuade you to do, if only
provisionally, is to let go of the old ideas and consider what sense of educa-
tion is generated by taking "kinds of understanding" as the primary category
for thinking about education. In viewing education through this lens, chil-
dren may be seen as picking up intellectual tools from society in an effort to
make sense of the world. In the process, children become, willy-nilly, social-
ized. The criterion at work here, however, is not "What does the child need
to learn in order to share the norms, values, and conventions of adult soci-
ety?" but rather "What does the child need to learn to develop most fully
each kind of understanding?" The former question, relatively straightfor-
ward for oral societies long ago and even for more homogeneous, class-
based societies up to the mid-twentieth century, is problematiC for modern
multicultural societies undergOing rapid and seemingly accelerating change.
What are the norms and conventions of adult life today? What are the
values? How does the answer differ if asked of those whose prime educa-
24
tional criterion is the accumulation of disciplined knowledge? Tackling the

THREE
OLD
IDEAS AND
A
NEW
ONE
latter question, however, is relatively straightforward and will involve the
child developing the flexibility and "polysemousness" appropriate for mod-
ern social life. That is, while the old idea of socialization, and the criteria it
brings with it, are dispensed with, adopting the new idea does not mean that
socialization will not occur. If anything, its proper relevance to education
will be exposed.
Now take the old academic disciplines idea. It has involved the belief
that the accumulation ofparticular forms ofknowledge, in sufficient breadth
and depth, shapes the mind in desirable ways. Making "knowledge" the cen-
tral building block of education creates the problem of determining what
knowledge, and how much breadth and depth of that knowledge, is re-
quired to become adequately educated. It also leads to questions such as
Herbert Spencer's "What knowledge is of most worth?," which has remained
unanswered, and unanswerable in general terms, for more than a century.
(The sense of the educated person being distinguished primarily by what the
person knows has been criticized by progressivists as sterile and has been
vulnerable to A. N. Whitehead's withering observation that the person who
has accumulated lots of the appropriate kinds of knowledge may still be
among the greatest bores on God's earth.) By displacing "knowledge" with
the category of "kind of understanding," we will not be throwing knowledge
overboard. The development of the various kinds ofunderstanding requires
particular kinds of knowledge. This new category also provides criteria for
determining depth and breadth of knowledge; it enables us to answer Spen-
cer's question-the knowledge that is of most worth will vary during the
course of the individual's education and may be determined by the kind of
understanding most actively being stimulated and developed. So academic
disCiplines and their knowledge are not being dispensed with; rather, the
traditionalist curriculum-made up of attempts to answer what is the most
privileged knowledge for best forming the rational mind and criteria for edu-
cation derived from some image of an ideal epistemological condition or an
ideally educated person-will disappear. The new category and its criterion
will justify a richer curriculum that will require more knowledge and more
varied forms of knowledge.
Yes, I know: promises, promises. I want only to indicate that pushing
aside these old ideas will not mean that the insights they have brought to the
process ofeducation will be dumped. Some sense ofsocialization will persist
in the process of developing kinds of understanding, but it is not a sense of
socializing that brings along with it criteria that conflict with those that come
from academic disciplines. Similarly, developing kinds of understanding
will obviously involve the individual moving through layers or stages of psy-
chological development. But the sense of development involved in this new
25

ONE
conception of education will yield categories quite different from those that
have been pushed on education by proponents of theories like Piaget's, for
example. And the development implicit in moving from one kind of under-
standing to another will not come into conflict with what remains of social-
ization or academic disciplines.
Again, of course this is too schematic to capture the huge complexity of
educational ideas and practices. But it isn't obviously wrong or meaningless
as a result. I think educational thinking is dominated by the three major
ideas I have identified, and that they are incompatible in the ways I have
indicated, and that these incompatibilities are at the root of many of the
practical difficulties of schooling. The modern school has developed as a
compromise among these three ideas, a compromise that shifts a little in one
direction or another in response to social movements, or in response to par-
ticularly vivid and powerful articulations of the value of one or another of
these ideas: socialization was somewhat more prominent in the 1950s in
much of the Western world, Rousseau in the 1960s and early 1970s, and
Plato made a pale comeback in some areas in the 1980s. The recognition of
"tensions" and "value issues" in education is indeed a truism, but exposing
their source isn't. And exposing their source is an important step to over-
coming them. That is the task for the rest of the book.
So, while hardly providing all one needs to know about education, this
sketch has had some heuristic value in grasping current disputes about edu-
cation. Its value is to indicate why the proposals one sees in public media
and in government reports for "solving the crisis in our schools" are unlikely
to achieve that desirable end. They are captive to the ideas that are the prob-
lem. They propose more socializing and less Plato and Rousseau, or more
Plato and less socializing and Rousseau, or more Rousseau and less socializ-
ing and Plato~ the only difference decade by decade is the preferred terms,
metaphors, and jargon. GiVing a reason to believe that no shuffling of these
ideas is likely to do us much good provides my route to introducing the
new idea.
A NEW IDEA
I mentioned in the introduction that the new conception of education to be
elaborated below draws on nineteenth-century recapitulation theories and
on Vygotsky, who died in 1936, so its main components are not exactly
gleaming fresh from the mint. But blowing the dust off recapitulation theo-
ries and connecting them with an inSight ofVygotsky's can, I think, lead to a
26
new educational idea. The first trick, which earlier theories failed to pull off,

THREE OLD
IDEAS AND
A NEW ONE
is to identify the nature of the connection between cultural development in
the past and educational development in the present. How can one locate a
common element in the two processes and show a causal relationship be-
tween them? Exactly what is recapitulated in education? The second trick is
to show that the theoretical solution implies practical curricula and teaching
methods clearly appropriate to modern social conditions and requirements.
I will try to perform the first trick in this section, and elaborate it, while per-
forming the second trick, in the rest of the book.
In the latter part of the nineteenth century, after publication of Darwin's
The Origin of Species (1859), recapitulation theories were formed to apply
evolutionary ideas to processes other than those Darwin developed his the-
ory to explain. Herbert Spencer (1820-1903) was one of the most energetic
promoters of evolutionary ideas to explain pretty well everything in sight.
He compactly expressed the basis for a cultural recapitulation theory ofedu-
cation in the following claim:
Ifthere be an order in which the human race has mastered its various kinds ofknowledge,
there will arise in every child an aptitude to acquire these kinds ofknowledge in the same
order.... Education should be a repetition of civilization in little. (1861, p. 76)
At a sufficiently general level, all educational theories involve people re-
capitulating, repeating for themselves, the discoveries and inventions that
have accumulated through the history of their culture. The five-year-old
learning to write recapitulates an invention ofa few thousand years ago. The
student learning history recapitulates a kind of thinking, a way of making
sense of experience, whose inventipn by the ancient Greeks we can trace in
some detail. But recapitulation theories go further than this, claiming some
precise causal connection between past cultural development and present
educational development. Such theories propose ways in which the particu-
lar character ofcultural development should shape the process ofeducation.
The appeal of recapitulation to educators in the late nineteenth and
early twentieth century lay in the promise that cultural history could guide
the deSign of much more effective educational programs. G. Stanley Hall en-
thusiastically claimed that recapitulation, "when explored and utilized to its
full extent will reveal pedagogiC possibilities now undreamed of" (1904,
2:222). What it seemed to offer was a way of ordering the curriculum that
corresponded with the way knowledge logically developed and/or with na-
ture's own scheme of human development, both of which were to be ex-
posed by the study of cultural development and either of which would
ensure easier learning and secure understanding.
Two general kinds of recapitulation theories of education developed,
which can be simply called logical and psychological. The first followed
27

ONE
from the observation that knowledge has developed gradually in cultural
history and the "order in which the human race has mastered its various
kinds of knowledge," to repeat Spencer's phrase, exposes a logic that in turn
can be used in designing the curriculum. One only has to repeat that order in
the curriculum and one has laid out a logical path that the mind of the devel-
oping child can follow with maximum ease and a guarantee offinishing up at
the peak of human understanding.
The second, psychologically based recapitulation theories, tended to
draw more directly from evolutionary theory (Gould, 1977). The recapitula-
tion in these theories was assumed to be from the primitive psychological
condition of savages to that of sophisticated Victorian adults. John Dewey
supported such theories, at least to the degree that they broke the hold of the
prevailing conventional schemes and provided "the first systematic attempts
to base a course of study upon the actual unfolding of the psychology of
child nature" (1911, p. 241). A more modern attempt to identify a common
psychological basis to cultural and individual development is made by Hall-
pike (1979), using Piaget's theory
Commonly, aspects of logical and psychological theories were com-
bined, with the usual problems. In Germany in particular, and in the United
States, which was strongly influenced by German ideas, "culture epoch" cur-
ricula were developed with high hopes. These attempted to reflect in the
curriculum the major epochs of cultural history, ensuring that children pass
through them in logical sequence and at a pace suited to their psychologi-
cal development. Dewey, though later dismissive of recapitulationism, ex-
pressed the kinds of observations that had an intuitive appeal for some
people: "There is a sort of natural recurrence of the child mind to the typical
activities of primitive people~ witness the hut which the boy likes to build in
the yard, playing hunt, with bows, arrows, spears and so on" (quoted in
Gould, 1977, p. 154). But the high hopes faded qUickly. The curricula
seemed plausible when dealing with history and literature, beginning with
the study of primitive people and folk tales and myth stories, but no amount
of ingenuity (see, for example, Ziller's ideas in Seeley, 1906) could make re-
capitulation seem sensible when dealing with mathematics or science. If the
logical principle was stumbling over how to avoid confusing children with a
Ptolemaic view of the cosmos, the psychological principle was coming to
grief as recapitulation ideas in biology, on which it had been based, were
being abandoned (Gould, 1977).
One reason recapitulation theories failed and disappeared from the ac-
tive educational scene was their inability to explain, to use Spencer's terms,
how and why there should arise in modern children an aptitude to acquire
28
knowledge in the order it was invented and discovered in cultural history.

THREE OLD
IDEAS AND A NEW ONE
Why not simply and sensibly begin, as the progressivists argued, with the
immediate world around the child?
So, more significant in causing the disappearance of cultural recapitula-
tion theories was the urgent task of equipping children entering the new
mass schools with the basic knowledge, skills, and dispositions required by
the rapidly developing industrial world. This was particularly so in the
United States, where teachers also became the front-line troops in familiariz-
ing huge numbers ofimmigrant children with contemporary American soci-
ety. Educational schemes that were past-oriented and reached the present
day only at the end of schooling could hardly be accommodated to meet
such urgent social needs. Dewey finally dismissed the idea of recapitulation
because its likely effect is "to make the. . . present a more or less futile imita-
tion of the past" (1916, p. 75); as the purpose of progressive education is to
"emancipate the young from the need of dwelling in an outgrown past"
(p. 73), recapitulation has nothing to offer education. And that remains the
most common, almost automatic, response of those educationalists today
who have heard of recapitulation.
Vygotsky's idea can be stated very Simply for present purposes. He ar-
gued that we make sense of the world by use of mediating intellectual tools
that in turn profoundly influence the kind of sense we make. Our intellec-
tual development, then, cannot adequately be understood in terms of the
knowledge we accumulate or in terms of psychological stages like Piaget's
but requires an understanding of the role played by the intellectual tools
available in the society into which a person grows.
Intellectual tools, like oral language, that surround the child are gradu-
ally internalized as the child grows; intellectual tools, or sign systems, begin,
to use Vygotsky's terms, as interpsychic processes and become intrapsychic
within the child. That is, in Vygotsky's view, higher psychological processes
-such as the dialogic question-and-answer structure-begin in interac-
tions with others, as "external" social functions that were themselves in-
vented perhaps long ago in cultural history, and then become internalized
and transformed into psychological functions: "It is through this interioriza-
tion ofhistorically determined and culturally organized ways ofoperating on
information that the social nature of people comes to be their psychological
nature as well" (Luria, 1979, p. 45). The process ofintellectual development,
then, is to be recognized in the individual's degree of mastery of tools and of
sign systems such as language (Vygotsky, 1978). The development of intel-
lectual tools leads to qualitatively different ways of making sense: "The sys-
tem of signs restructures the whole psychological process" (p. 35; emphaSiS in
original). So the set of sign systems one internalizes from interactions with
particular cultural groups, particular communities, will significantly inform
29

ONE
the kind of understanding of the world that one can construct. "Vygotsky
defined development in terms of the emergence or transformation of forms
of mediation" (Wertsch, 1985, p. 15). So the mind is not an isolable thing
like the brain inside its skull~ it extends into and is constituted of its socio-
cultural surroundings, and its kinds of understanding are products of the
intellectual tools forged and used in those surroundings.
How does this help solve our theoretical problem about recapitulation?
Well, we can identify what is recapitulated not in terms ofknowledge or psy-
chological processes but in terms of mediating intellectual tools and the
kinds of understanding they generate. We can see, too, that Spencer posed
the question wrongly~ it is not that something that occurred in cultural his-
tory causes an aptitude in every child to acquire knowledge in the same or-
der, but rather that by acquiring specific intellectual tools, the modern
individual generates similar kinds of understanding as existed for people
using those tools in the past. That is, the mistake of past recapitulation theo-
rists was to look for some x in cultural history that causes some y in educa-
tion today~ rather we should look for some a-the mediating intellectual
tools-that causes both x and y. So we can consider cultural and educational
development as connected by the tools that generate common kinds of un-
derstanding in both processes.
Vygotsky focused largely on oral language in young children to work
out his basic theories ofculturally mediated action and development. I want
to consider degrees of culturally accumulated complexity in language, be-
ginning with oral language, then moving to literacy, then to the development
of systematic, abstract, theoretic, linguistic forms, and finally to habitual
highly reflexive uses of language. Each of these degrees of sophistication in
language development restructures the kind of sense their users make of the
world. I will investigate the implications ofeach of these degrees oflinguistic
development for kinds of understanding. Because the a of intellectual tools
causes kinds of understanding common to the x ofcultural history and the y
of education today, I will consider both cultural and educational develop-
ment together in the following four chapters.
It might reasonably be objected that this attempted marriage of
Vygotsky and recapitulationism is improper as Vygotsky rejected recapitula-
tion on the ground that ontogenesis involves the natural maturation of the
brain, something that plays no part in the course of cultural history
(Wertsch, 1991, p. 23). I have four responses. First, it is far from clear how
the natural maturation of the brain affects individual's understanding com-
pared with the acquisition of mediating tools, and one might reasonably ar-
gue that the influence of the tools is sufficient to explain the evident changes
30
in kinds ofunderstanding without resort to distinct influences from the mat-

THREE
OLD
IDEAS
AND
A
NEW
ONE
uration process. Second, Vygotsky and Luria distinguished between bifur-
cated lines of development in the child, calling one "natural-psychological"
and the other "cultural-psychological" and identifying in the latter the major
reformulations of mental functioning ecL Wertsh, 1985, p. 23), a move com-
patible with the scheme to be outlined here. Third, ontogenesis, particularly
during the early years, involves recapitulating patterns of maturation laid
down in the process of evolutionary development, and while evolutionary
influences diminish a~ the individual grows older, it is improper to suggest a
sharp line at which the brains phYSiological maturation escapes influence by
such past cultural developments as language. Fourth, the conceptions of re-
capitulation Vygotsky had in mind were those nineteenth-century kinds dis-
missed above to which his objection would be destructive in a way that it
isn't to what follows.
Now I could try to address in the abstract the many potential objections
to this proposed project that will no doubt be thronging the minds ofcritical
readers, but the objections and my responses might be made more pointed
and concrete if I show first how one can characterize kinds ofunderstanding
as implications of intellectual tools. So let me put off the inquisition until
chapter 6.
CONCLUSION
Our schools are not, in general, highly regarded today. The sense of their
ineffectiveness is not, I have suggested, any speCific group's fault. Yet when
we have a general social unease, we tend to look for someone to blame. Much
of the popular literature on education in the 1960s blamed the Platonists
and an academic curriculum that was disconnected from students' experi-
ence and irrelevant to their lives. The neoconservative critics of the 1980s
blamed the Rousseauians, particularly John Dewey. The average schooling
experience of students has not shown evident signs of improvement as a re-
sult of these or earlier criticisms and the prescriptions that have followed
from them.
Blaming Rousseau and Dewey for the condition of our schools, as do
Bloom (1987) and Hirsch (1987), is akin to blaming merchants or sheep
farmers for rising prices. Rousseau and Dewey have enriched our conception
of education in important ways. We will not make educational progress by
trying to cut away their contribution. The cause of our difficulties-our
eqUivalent to sixteenth-century bullion imports-is, I have been arguing,
the fact that the components of our conception of education are incompat-
31

32
ONE
ible with one another. The problem is not with the school necessarily but
with the way we conceive what the school is supposed to do.
To practical people, such refined theoretical issues may seem remote
from the activities of the school down the road. But 1 think there is some-
thing in]ohn Maynard Keynes's famous, or infamous, conclusion to his Gen-
eral Theory of Employment, Interest and Money (1936) (1 will change the
words slightly to fit an educational rather than an economic context):
[T]he ideas of educational theorists, both when they are right and when they are wrong,
are more powerful than is commonly understood. Indeed education is ruled by little else.
Practical people, who believe themselves to be quite exempt from any intellectual influ-
ences, are usually the slaves of some defunct educational theorist. Mad people in author-
ity, who hear voices in the air, are distilling their frenzy from some academic scribbler of a
few years back. I am sure that the power ofeducational stakeholders is vastly exaggerated
compared with the gradual encroachment of ideas. Not, indeed, immediately, but after a
certain interval~ for in the field of education there are not many who are influenced by
new theories after they are twenty-five or thirty years of age, so the ideas which adminis-
trators and politicians and even teachers apply to current schooling are not likely to be
the newest. But, soon or late, it is ideas, not "stakeholders," which are dangerous for good
or ill.
What I will do in chapters 2 through 6 is offer one way of reconceiving edu-
cation; in chapters 7 and 8 1 will explore its implications in rather broad
terms, but in sufficient detail, I hope, to show that the indispensable parts of
our current conception of education are preserved. This reconceptualizing
of education will have fairly radical implications for the curriculum and for
teaching, but not so radical, 1suspect, that they will not appear directly prac-
tical. If I do the job reasonably well, 1will not seem to be sketching out some
strange and new landscape, but drawing a picture that will seem recogniz-
able and even familiar.

chapter2
Mythic Understanding
INTRODUCTION
In a relatively brief period of time during the mid-Pleistocene era, evolution-
ary changes in the brain and in the larynx, pharynx, and jaw ofour ancestors
led to the development oflanguage. An apparently universal consequence of
elaborated language development was myth. As there have been no known
mute human groups-having the potential for language but not realizing
it-so there have been no preliterate groups without myth. Why should
these odd stories be cultural universals?
While there is still "no monotony to complain ofas regards the variety of
opinions or the acrimony of the polemics" (Malinowski, 1954, p. 96) about
the nature of mythic thinking, I want nevertheless to identify a set of its dis-
tinctive characteristics and to show that these are inevitable consequences of
language development. I will try to show that they thus occur whenever
people develop language, whether in oral societies throughout the world
and throughout history or by children throughout the world as they grow
into language-using environments.
Certainly the connection between language use in oral societies and
mythic thinking has long been obvious, if puzzling. Herder (1744-1803),
the proto-Romantic admirer of the vigor and purity of folk culture, proto-
33

TWO
evolutionary theorist, and great influence on Goethe, suggested that words
must at first have appeared magical and their potency sacred~ that is why, he
suggested, in so many myths, gods or sacred ancestors created the world by
naming the things in it, one by one, and why things named were thereby
taken to have a numinous quality. The sense of the sacred and supernatural,
too, is a cultural universal (cL Brown, 1991). So it has been argued that the
first languages must have been what the British rationalist Edward B. Tylor
(1832-1917) called "a sounding pantheon," and their wild metaphoric con-
nections and intellectually confused elaboration led to stories about potent
gods born out of the earliest words. Max Muller (1823-1900) offered an
alternative explanation of why "Mythology ... is the power exercised by
language on thought" (1873, p. 355). Muller considered mythology to be an
inevitable "disease of language" resulting from languages' paronymia-their
frequent cognate words, homonyms, similar sounding words borrowed
from other languages, different words from the same root, and so on. He
argued that the "infirm minds" of "primitive" people attempted to describe
straightforward natural phenomena but became entangled in paronymial
slippage, producing as a result those peculiar, irrational stories we call
myths. Careful philological study, he tried to demonstrate, could untangle
the confusions of these stories and so dispel "the dark shadow language
throws upon thought" (353). For example, Muller interprets the Greek myth
about Apollo's pursuit of Daphne, who escapes by turning into a laurel tree,
as a confusion begun long ago in Sanskrit. Primitive people could not give
Simple rational accounts of the world, according to Muller; they expressed
themselves instead in poetic metaphors. Thus, rather than observe that "the
sun rises after the dawn each day" they would say, "Apollo pursues Daphne
across the sky" Now "Daphne," Muller shows, derives from a Sanskrit word,
a homonym whose other meaning is-you guessed it-"laurel tree." Long
after, and far away, the Sanskrit homonym is lost and forgotten, but mythical
elaboration, this disease of language, generates the story of Apollo and
Daphne. All that Greek, Renaissance, and nineteenth-century European
painting and sculpture of the two of them-she sprouting branches and
leaves as he reaches out to touch her-a consequence of a Simple par-
onymial slippage in Sanskrit!
These nineteenth-century attempts to connect language and myth were
often ingenious. But none of the explanations accounted for all, the features
of myths, and their attempts to characterize the Simple origins and evolution
of language, using contemporary "primitive" languages for guidance, in-
volved too much speculation and too little data. More recently it has become
34
clear that there is no such thing as a "primitive" language; all languages give

MYTHIC UNDERSTANDING
evidence of equal complexity. This recognition has led to a new respect for
the intellectual capacity of our earlier language-using ancestors and the so-
phistication of mythic thinking.
With the development of language, the mind "expanded its reach be-
yond the episodic perception of events, beyond the mimetic reconstruction
of episodes, to a comprehensive modeling of the entire human universe.
Causal explanation, prediction, control-myth constitutes an attempt at all
three, and every aspect oflife is permeated by myth.... [M]yth is the proto-
typal, fundamental, integrative mind-tool" (Donald, 1991, pp. 214-15). I
want to consider some of the bits and pieces of this general mind-tool in this
chapter; and because of myth's prototypal, fundamental, and integrative
cognitive role I call this general kind of understanding Mythic.
Vygotsky presents an image of individual development in which "the
beginnings of practical intelligence in the child . . . are independent of
speech" (1978, p. 21). Donald describes prelinguistic "mimetic" thinking as
"baSically a talent for using the whole body as a communication device, for
translating event perceptions into action. . . . It is the most basic human
thought skill, and remains fundamentally independent of our truly lin-
guistic modes of representation" (1993, p. 740). So while my focus in this
chapter will be on the early forms of language use, I recognize that these are
built on and develop alongside modes ofsense-making that are independent
of language.
Reference to a distinctive prelinguistic kind of understanding will ap-
pear odd to some readers, both to those who think of the human mind as
something that comes into being only with the development of language,
and to those who think of the human mind as "languaged" from the begin-
ning. The latter, in particular, are growing in numbers rapidly, as Chomskian
ideas are seen as increasingly compelling. They are impressed by accumulat-
ing evidence that even before birth babies attend to the rhythms of language
and shortly after birth show a preference for the sounds of their mother
tongue (Eimas et aI., 1971; Mehler et aI., 1988); the human baby is clearly a
languaged animal avant la lettre, as it were. Even so, as I argue in chapter 5,
until language is sufficiently deployed to structure our cognition we have a
distinctively human but prelinguistic understanding of the world, and this
Somatic understanding remains fundamental to our grasp on the world
throughout our lives.
Language development in human beings is genetically determined,
even ifmore fragilely so than such Somatic developments as learning to walk
or attending to rhythms. So long as infants are fed and cared for physically
they will develop those Somatic abilities, but language development requires
35

TWO
also the deliberate influence on the young child of a language-using society.
That is, some features ofMythic understanding are evolutionarily coded into
our genes but their adequate development requires deliberate adult inter-
vention. There are endless jokes about how lucky it is that children do not
need to be taught to walk as they need to be taught to read, or we would have
continents full of incompetent staggerers. But we are robustly programmed
to walk and robustly programmed to talk in an appropriately supportive en-
vironment. As we grow, however, we receive less precise genetic help and
have to rely increasingly on a genetically encoded general learning capacity,
which is not well differentiated for learning to read or to do mathematics.
The educational trick is to make those kinds of learning easier and more
effective by making them conform as well as possible to the weakening
genetic dispositions still operative as we grow into childhood. That such ge-
netic dispositions are operative may be inferred from the energetic develop-
ment of language up to the age of seven; because development proceeds at a
rate of word accumulation and sophistication of grammatical usage beyond
what we achieve through teaching at any other period of life, it seems fair to
assume some particular genetic influence is still active. So, the period of
MythiC understanding is one during which weakening genetic influences
merge with the increasing deployment of our undifferentiated learning ca-
pacity; learning consequently ceases to be effortless and begins to require
deliberate work.
My purpose in this chapter, then, is to describe some distinctive charac-
teristics of Mythic understanding and show how they can help make early
education today more easy and effective. They will also help to redefine what
constitutes early education.
Mythic understanding is typically predominant from the time gram-
maticallanguage develops between the ages of two and three until about six,
seven, or eight. The change to a somewhat distinct kind of understanding at
about age seven is a result of the mind's ability to imcorporate literacy among
the tools it deploys (and not a result of some Piagetian-style mental develop-
ment spontaneously occurring, though some such development might be
implicated in it). As Mythic understanding in significant degree incorporates
and transforms some of the tools of Somatic understanding, so those of
Mythic understanding are not things we leave behind as we become literate.
They will remain in significant degree as transformed constituents of all fur-
ther kinds of understanding. In the sense that Kolakowski calls myth "a per-
manent constitutive element of culture" (1989, p. x), MythiC understanding
becomes a permanent constitutive element of our later understanding. It is
36
still deployed, in perhaps transformed ways, by thee and me.

MYTHIC UNDERSTANDING
SOME CHARACTERISTICS OF MYTHIC UNDERSTANDING
As discussed below, each characteristic of Mythic understanding is a direct
consequence of language development, and so can be found in both the
mythic thinking of traditional oral societies and the everyday, spontaneous
discourse of young children in modern literate cultures. Each of the follow-
ing sections begins with a brief account of why language development
should yield such characteristics in human thinking. Not all of these ac-
counts are equally persuasive-in some cases there has been a lot of schol-
arly work to draw on, in others little-but the accumulation ofevidence and
plausibilities should build support for the new recapitulation theory. I have
omitted some characteristics of Mythic understanding, such as lying (whose
social and intellectual uses have been so engagingly explored by David
Nyberg [1993]), because educational implications are perhaps a tad less evi-
dent than are those of, say, stories. Mind you, the inadequate distinction sug-
gested there between lying and stories ("He's telling stories again!") brings to
the fore the fact that the following characteristics overlap and interact intri-
cately.
Binary Structuring
Let us begin by plunging into the "deep end" with binary structuring-
dualisms, oppositions, whatever we choose to call this common proclivity in
human thinking. This is a "deep end" characteristic because it has figured so
prominently in postmodern and feminist writings as a kind of Western dis-
ease of language. Gender theorists, for example, have argued that "male/fe-
male," as the pair has been constructed in Western rationalist thought, are
falsely dichotomous and their association with such further binary sets as
culture/nature, rational/emotional, public/private, active/passive, domi-
nant/subordinate, and so on (cL Fox-Keller, 1986) sets in place a tool of he-
gemonic constructions that has been used to suppress and devalue women
in Western cultures. In the most widely known fairy tales in the West, for
example, the Grimms systematically represent women as exemplifying the
latter of the above binary sets and so introduce young children to stereo-
typed gender roles.
Forming binary oppositions is a necessary consequence of using lan-
guage; it is one tool ofour sense-making. Tools can be used destructively, but
they also can do useful, constructive work. I will return to the ideological
arguments in chapter 6, but want to note here that destructive stereotyping
and the pervasive set of gender associations in Western culture are contin-
37

TWO
gent. As such we can hope to deconstruct them; what we cannot hope to do
is dispense with the use of binary oppositions as long as we use language.
One effective procedure for deconstructing them is not, for example, to ban-
ish the Grimm fairy tales or to rewrite them to suit modern values but rather
to make explicit the destructive associations they set up, leading to a fuller
understanding ofthe tales and the culture that has bred and nourished them,
while preserving their aesthetic (Hoogland, 1994) and psychological (Bet-
telheim, 1976) value.
The prime source of postmodern distrust of binary oppositions was
Friedrich Nietzsche (1844-1900). He persistently attacked peoples generation
of oppositions in their thinking and language, asserting that people see phe-
nomena in terms of oppositions that they invent and then assume the oppo-
sitions are a product of the phenomena rather than of their thinking. "There
are no opposites: only from those of logic do we derive the concept of oppo-
sites-and falsely transfer it to things" (1968a, p. 298). Language, he in-
sistently pointed out, is the source of oppositions whereas reality has only
continua and infinite gradations ofdifference. So language falsifies th~ world
to us, and our main intellectual task is to untangle the inadequate terms in
which we represent the world, from the world itself. Nietzsche is wonder-
fully acute at pointing out "the misleading errors oflanguage (and the funda-
mental fallacies ofreason which have become petrified in it)" (1956, p. 178).
Nietzsche's observations, however, help prove my point: even ifwe regret
particular uses ofbinary structuring and its Simplification and falsification of
un-binary reality, we cannot avoid doing so except by retreating into mute-
ness. The use of fundamental binary oppositions, like male/female, black/
white, natural/cultural, good/bad, is a cultural universal (Brown, 1991).
Associations made with them may vary from culture to culture, but the fact
that these and otherbinaryoppositions are found in everyculture suggest that
they are not products of some particular contingencies of Western thinking
but reflect something profound and common to all human beings.
Why should binary structuring be a necessary consequence of language
development? Because "[1]ogically, we express . . . elementary differentia-
tion in the form of contradictories, A and not-A, and it is certainly true that
the ability to distingUish, together with the ability to perceive resemblances,
is basic to all cognitive processes" (Hallpike, 1979, pp. 224-25). Vygotsky
also notes the use of "elementary differentiation" in young children perform-
ing some basic tasks: "Association by contrast, rather than by similarity,
gUides the child in compiling a collection" (1962, p. 63). Edmund Leach
makes the point similarly to Hallpike: "Binary oppositions are intrinsic to
the process of human thought. Any description of the world must discrimi-
38
nate categories in the form 'p is what not-p is not'" (1967, p. 3). For present

MYTHIC UNDERSTANDING
purposes I would prefer it if Leach's observation were not about opposition-
construction being "intrinsic to. human thought" but about its being an
influence of language on thought, but it does seem that these languaged op-
positions grow out of prior Somatic discriminations like self/other, figure/
ground, face/not-face (cL Banks and Salaparek, 1983).
This is a somewhat tricky topic, in that as soon as one begins looking for
binary oppositions one sees them nearly everywhere. Whether this is a de-
fect of the language we use or of the mind doing the looking seems to matter
little since both support the notion that these logical constructs are at least
very common. They seem to be fundamental to all languages; for example,
categories that correspond to nouns (stasis) and verbs (change) (in whose
differentiation syntax begins to emerge [Pinker, 1994, p. 268]) are found
universally. It is hard to denyJohn Stuart Mill's regretful conclusion that any
distinction tends to become an opposition; even if we don't find this true of
our own thinking, it will no doubt be evident in that of others.
Binary structuring in the myths of traditional oral cultures has been
demonstrated quite dramatically by Claude Levi-Strauss (e.g., 1966, 1970,
1978). His work is controversial in this regard because of the large general
claims he makes based on his somewhat limited data from American Indian
myths. He has argued that binary structuring is basic to all myths and that
the exposure of such a structure is the key to their proper interpretation. He
has further suggested that binary oppositions occur so prominently in
myths, and in modern thinking, because the human brain is innately "hard-
wired" to build understanding on the basis of binary discriminations. An-
thropologists may dispute the generalization ofhis findings beyond the large
corpus of myths he has analyzed in his four-volume Mythology, but the un-
derlying binary structure ofthose myths seems beyond dispute. Levi-Strauss
shows how a complex logical structure, which meaningfully orders the myth
users' environment and lives, is constructed on otherwise arbitrarily op-
posed elements, such as honey and ashes. While Levi-Strauss's is a debatable
demonstration of uses of binary structuring in traditional oral cultures, it
serves here as a slightly qUirky addition to more routine observations about
the universal use of such dualisms as male/female, permitted/forbidden,
natural/cultural, bad/good. But one does find his basic observation about
the ubiquitousness ofoppositions constantly echoed:]oseph"Needham's dis-
cussion of the simplicity of the Chinese Yin and Yang, and analogous opposi-
tions in many cultures, leads]ack Goody to conclude that "such ideas seem
intrinsic to human thought, to the use of language itself" (1977, p. 40).
That binary structuring is prominent in modern young children's think-
ing seems so obvious that it hardly needs pointing out. Anyone who attends
to the structure of young children's thinking can observe what Bruno Bet-
39

TWO
telheim calls the "manner in which [children] can bring some order into
[their] world by dividing everything into opposites" (1976, p. 74). The most
evident structural feature of children's stories or self-generated narratives is
that the surface content very commonly rests on such underlying binary sets
as security/fear, good/bad, brave/cowardly, love/hate, happy/sad, poor/
rich, health/sickness, permitted/forbidden. The story of Hansel and Gretel,
for example, is articulated on a powerful security/fear structure.
Organizing one's conceptual grasp on the physical world by initially
forming binary structures-hot/cold, big/little, soft/hard, crooked/straight,
sweet/sour-allows an initial orientation over a range of otherwise bewil-
deringly complex phenomena: "When once an opposition is established and
its principle understood, then either opposite, or any intermediate term, can
be at once defined by opposition or by degree" (Ogden, 1976, p. 20). These
oppositions are not necessarily, or even often, made up from genuine logical
or empirical opposites~ rather they are set up as opposites for conceptual
purposes of orientation to complex phenomena, bringing them under some
kind of initial conceptual control.
As Ogden points out, once an opposition is established and its principle
understood, children not only grasp the oppositions but also use them to
ascribe meaning to any intermediary terms. In a simple example I have used
before, young children commonly begin conceptually to grasp the tempera-
ture continuum by establishing "hot" and "cold" as opposites. A logical and
empirical necessity seems to underlie this opposition in that the first dis-
criminable temperatures are things hotter than the child's body temperature
and things colder. Intermediate terms, like "warm," thus become meaningful
as a mediation between the oppositions already known. The child can con-
tinue to enlarge conceptual control over temperature by mediating between
"warm" and "cold," for example, and grasping the concept "cooL" Or this
concept can be learned as a further intermediate term closer to "cold" than
to "hot." This process seems to be widely deployed in making sense of the
everyday physical world around the child. As I mentioned in the introduc-
tion, our bodies are our primary "mediators" of meaning, and some of the
earliest discriminations we make are in terms ofour bodies-so "wet" means
wetter than my body and "dry" means drier than my body, "hard" means
harder than my body and "soft" means softer than my body, "big" means big-
ger, "small" means smaller, and so on. These concepts are mediated in a
literal dimension when children learn additional modifiers or comparisons
-sqUishy, soft as a pillow, pretty soft, really soft, flabby, tender, cottony.
They are also extended beyond the body by metaphor into other dimen-
40
sions, so in/out may be extended from the body to a room or a house~

MYTHIC UNDERSTANDING
big/little may be extended by recognition that a small tree is often bigger
than a big person.
There seems room for argument about much of the above: about how
intensive or fundamental binary structuring is in any cultural group and
among children, and about whether it is partly a result of "hard-wiring" in
the brain or ofthe nature oflanguage-not that language/brain is a discrimi-
nation easily to be sorted out. What is beyond argument is the fact that bi-
nary structuring is found universally among human groups and is
commonly used by children today. Ifthis much is granted, what is the educa-
tional point? Why the fuss?
I will later explore detailed educational implications, but it might help
in this chapter to indicate how these rather abstract points can influence ev-
eryday teaching practice and the curriculum. The example of history in the
curriculum should serve the purpose.
The early years of schooling include very little history, and what there is
usually concerns local or regional facts that have affected the child's environ-
ment in some significant way. History has been emptied out of the early cur-
riculum in response to the progressivist doctrine that we must begin
exploring the world with what the child already knows and experiences, and
we must expand understanding gradually from their everyday environ-
ments. Progressivism has also encouraged the removal from the curriculum
of content that children cannot actively engage, because early learning is
most profoundly of "how to do" (Dewey, 1966, p. 184), and practical,
hands-on experience ofhistorical events is clearly impossible. Dewey further
argued that the "true starting point of history is always some present situa-
tion with its problems" (p. 214). The diminution or exclusion of history has
been further supported by Piagetian research, which demonstrated that cer-
tain concepts crucial to historical understanding were "formal operational"
and do not "develop" until the teen years (Elkind,
1976~ Hallam, 1969).
Also, Piaget's account of the young child as a "preoperational" or "concrete
operational" thinker has implied that historical material cannot be very fruit-
fully engaged. The cumulative effect of these influences is a curriculum that
leaves young children largely ignorant of history, because it is assumed that
they cannot understand it on the one hand and on the other that their atten-
tion and activity should be engaged in dealing with and expanding from
their everyday experience and local environments.
"Formal" concepts crucial to historical understanding, such as causality,
do not "develop" out ofthe blue in teen years. And even ifa concept ofhistor-
ical causality is not grasped by young children, they do clearly grasp the
causal principle that moves along stories like Hansel and Gretel, Cinderella, or
41

TWO
Peter Rabbit. Moreover, if teenagers are to develop sophisticated concepts of
historical causality, prerequisite causal concepts must be stimulated and de-
veloped. The "narrative causality" of Peter Rabbit is an obvious logical pre-
cursor of the historical causality of Thucydides. Instead of banishing history
from the curriculum, we could introduce historical content structured on
the kinds of concepts young children obviously do understand. Those con-
cepts can be made accessible not only by orderly expanSion from the practi-
cal, everyday activities ofthe child but also, and perhaps more engagingly, by
use of the binary structuring we find so common in children's thinking.
One might, for example, introduce in the first grade a narrative history
of the world structured on the opposition between freedom and oppression,
knowledge and ignorance, or security and fear. These oppositions are clearly
meaningful to young children because we see them in their favorite stories,
in their own fantasy narratives, and in discussions about how they make
sense of their own experience (Paley, 1981, 1984, 1990). After all, our his-
tory is the greatest story we know, full of drama, incident, vivid characters.
One would, of course, have to simplify historical reality to construct such a
narrative for five-year-olds, but the simplification would be only in degree
different from how the most sophisticated historical writing simplifies real-
ity. Such a narrative would be built upon concepts that are viVidly a part of
children's experience. Whether at home, in their neighborhood, in the class-
room, or in the school yard, children already deal with matters of freedom
and oppression. To use and elaborate those concepts while learning that
their world has gone through great struggles and problems analogous to
their own makes Simple educational sense.
Note, too, that when telling the story of Hansel and Gretel, the narrator
does not expliCitly discuss and explain the concepts of opposition-in this
case, security and fear. We presuppose that in some profound way children
already know those concepts; the narrator is using their familiarity to make
events in some distant forest at some distant time meaningful. Similarly, in a
narrative history of the world we would not be explicitly teaching about op-
pression and freedom or even necessarily using the words; we presuppose
that these underlying concepts are meaningful to children from their experi-
ence of home and school. We use them in our narrative structures to make
historical events meaningful. Binary structuring is a tool that provides the
child with a grasp on new content; we do not teach the structure.
Binary structuring is a feature of language and minds, not of the world,
as Nietzsche so insistently argued. The world is not structured in binary
terms, but our initial grasp on it can effiCiently reduce it to binary terms. The
process of learning involves elaborating the mind's terms to conform more
42
truly with the complexity of reality. The mind's terms-language signifi-

MYTHIC UNDERSTANDING
cantly-are always inadequate to the task of raiding the inarticulate, but the
intolerable wrestle with words and meanings that slip, slide, perish, decay
with imprecision is central to education. So the educational point is not to
teach binary concepts, nor to teach that the world is structured in binary
terms, but always to lead toward mediation, elaboration, and conscious rec-
ognition of the initial structuring concepts. Some initial grasp is required,
however, or there is nothing secure to elaborate, and binary structures are
one kind of effective grasper of new meaning. (This prosaic way of putting it
nevertheless reflects a central theme ofBuddhist thinking and is found in the
earliest Western writings, such as Heraclitus's teaching that wisdom is not
the knowledge of many things but the perception of the underlying unity of
warring opposites.)
But there is still the progressivist principle that, even if we could teach
world history to children, we should not start with it, and it cannot involve
any kind of "active dOing." Take the latter point first. This has been tied to
Dewey's observation that the "[k]nowledge which comes first to persons,
and that remains most deeply ingrained, is knowledge of how to do; how to
walk, talk, read, write, skate, ride a bicycle, and so on indefinitely" (1966,
p. 184). This seems simply wrong. Before we learn to walk and ride a bicycle,
and after we can do neither, we grasp concepts of oppression and free-
dom, love and hate, good and bad, fear and security. Now this comparison is
obviously peculiar because it does not involve eqUivalent kinds of knowl-
edge. As our concern is education, however, these conceptual bases for
sense-making may be more important than how-to-do skills.
It is a commonplace of early education that new knowledge "should be
built on what the child already knows" (Jarolimek, 1982, p. 12)-1 choose a
textbook at random; virtually all of them express the same point as though it
were beyond question. This has been a keystone of progressivist thinking, a
principle that has had enormous influence.
The problem with this truism lies in how it has been interpreted. Young
children are assumed to know the contents of their everyday environment,
so they are taught about mailcarriers, their neighborhood, and families, but
they are not assumed to know freedom and oppression, so they are not
taught about Greeks and the Persian Empire, or West Africans and the slave
trade, or the ancient dynasties of China, or the struggles, triumphs, and di-
sasters of men and women and communities down the ages.
If instead we thought of what children know also in terms of the binary
concepts they use to gain an initial grasp on the world, then we could intro-
duce them to any content, any knowledge, that can be articulated on such
concepts. Accepting that we should start with children's experience and
move from the known to the unknown does not necessarily imply the kind
43

TWO
of early curriculum we have in place today. Children's early experience is of
love and hate, fear and security, oppression and freedom no less than it is ofa
particular set of local conditions and activities. They have imaginative expe-
rience as well as basic pragmatic experience. This experience can serve as a
starting point for a far richer curriculum than what we have today-an intel-
lectually impoverished set of topics focusing on local trivia and "hands-on"
activities at a point when children's imaginations are energetically alive to
grasp the world.
I do not mean to suggest that binary opposites and mediation are the
only ways in which children can learn anything. Rather, they prOVide just a
few of an indeterminate array of procedures children commonly use in
learning. I emphasize them here because their implications vividly disrupt
an enormously influential and restrictive view about how children's learning
proceeds. I consider them not so much dominant in children's learning as
exemplifying a feature of children's learning that is largely ignored, a feature
that teachers can deploy relatively easily to make curriculum content engag-
ing and meaningful to children. Jerome Bruner has been criticized for his
claim that "any subject can be taught effectively in some intellectually honest
form to any child at any stage of development" (Bruner, 1960, p.31). l sup-
pose this section of my discussion could be read as an additional argument
supporting Bruner's claim.
There is something a little odd about trying to point out the prevalence
of binary structuring: this has been obvious throughout most of Western
cultural history, and the obvious educational response has been the use of
dialectic-the logical analysis of arguments based on setting up opposing
positions and supporting one against the other or mediating in the direction
ofa new position. Dialectic seems to have faded with the retreat ofrhetoric in
academic life. Peter Ramus (1515-1572), that enormously influential but
largely unoriginal scholar, reflected the belief that dialectic "supported the
whole fabric of the world's consciousness" (Ong, 1958, p. 3). My conclusion
is somewhat more modest, but the prevalence ofbinary structuring deserves
more attention than it has received in education.
Fantasy
A distinguishing feature of myth stories is their fantasy, their dislocation
from the everyday rules of the waking world we live in. Young children, ap-
parently universally (Brown, 1991), delight in fantasy stories full of talking,
clothed rabbits, bears, or other animals, also dislocated from anything famil-
iar in their everyday waking experience.
44
Some people suggest that children's delight in fantasy results simply

MYTHIC UNDERSTANDING
from adults' telling them that kind of story. I think there are a number of
reasons not to accept this explanation as adequate.
First, audiences are not uninfluential in the stories told to them; chil-
dren's response plays a significant determining role in the stories adults tell
them. If children's understanding were tied to their immediate experience,
local environment, and hands-on activities, as is asserted in so many educa-
tional textbooks, parents would soon give up telling fantasy stories. In sur-
veys of first graders' likes and dislikes in stories, Rogers and Robinson (in
Favat, 1977) found that while a wide array of stories appeal to various chil-
dren, they ranked first in preference fairy-tale stories that include "an animal
who could talk," "a prince and a princess," and "a magic ring." They ranked
last, real-world accounts of "what an astronaut does," "a person on TY," and
"building a bridge."
Second, that fantasy has so much in common with myth stories from
around the world suggests that something more than parental conditioning
is at work.
Third, narratives constructed by very young children, in groups or
alone, very commonly involve transformation of the home and local envi-
ronment into fairylands, pirates' islands, or magic realms. The impulse for
such fantasy seems inadequately accounted for by a few stories they have
heard. Finally, the persistence ofvarious forms of fantasy at every stage of life
suggests that it is not some contingent, accidental invention of a few sto-
rytellers but is somehow tied up with profound features of our mental lives.
Arthur Applebee advances the traditional argument to explain why
young children typically understand and enjoy a story such as Peter Rabbit:
"The sort of familiarity which a child demands in a story is often a social one,
a doing of things which the child expects to have done. Thus Peter Rabbit is a
manageable story for Carol at two years eight months because of its familiar
family setting" (1978, p. 75). This view is pervasive in educational text-
books, and its influence on curriculum is perhaps most clearly evident in
social stud~es: "Thus, kindergarten and first-grade students spend a lot of
social studies time studying self-awareness and families because these two
topics have a sense of relevance and immediacy to young children" (Ellis,
1986, p. 9).
But if it is the familiarity and immediacy to the young child's experience
that make content or stories accessible, meaningful, and manageable, one
must wonder why Peter is a talking, clothed rabbit. One might wonder also
about the wild wood, which is safe, and the cultivated garden, which is dan-
gerous, and the closeness of death, and so on. Why do children so readily
accept such inversion of the normal experience of safe gardens and wild
woods, or so readily take the rabbit's perspective on these matters, scan-
45

TWO
dalously disregarding theorists who emphasize children's "egocentric"
thinking?
That Peter is a rabbit is not incidental; he is simply one of an endless
menagerie of fantasy creatures that fill children's favorite stories. So, where
does the talking rabbit come from? Well, consider the binary opposites: they
help the child to gain a linguistic and conceptual control over a very wide
range of phenomena. After talking with the cat for a while, for example, the
child learns that the animal cannot talk back, it resists wearing clothes, and it
certainly doesn't use a knife and fork when eating. Animals, it becomes clear,
are in some significant way different from human beings. So we have another
binary set-human/animal-constructed. Similarly, children recognize an
important difference between things that have been culturally transformed
and things that are natural. The child will rarely articulate binary terms like
life/death, nature/culture, human/animal, but they are basic discrimina-
tions made at a structural level in constructing a sense of the world.
What do you get when you apply to these binary structures the mediat-
ing procedure that proves so successful in elaborating conceptual control
over temperature? Hot and cold yield warm, wet and dry yield damp, and
life and death yield-well, ghosts, for one thing. Ghosts are to life and death
as warm is to hot and cold or damp is to wet and dry. How about human and
animal? Yeti, mermaids, Sasquatch. And how about nature and culture?
Well, there are talking rabbits like Peter. Peter is a natural creature with the
cultural characteristics of speech and clothing.
Is this the explanation, or a part of the explanation, of fantasy-the
product of a technique for gaining greater linguistic and conceptual control
over the world overgeneralized to inappropriate concepts? Language names
things, sets up categories, conveniently organizes many continuous phe-
nomena in binary structures, elaborates its grasp by mediating between the
binary terms, and, because some basic binary oppositions are discrete and
have no mediating categories in reality, spins a world of fantasy wherein the
technique of conceptual elaboration can play unconfined.
If it is, relatively, so straightforward, what about those immensely elabo-
rate psychoanalytic explanations of fantasy? If we are to wield Ockam's
chainsaw, we will cut away explanations, such as those oflung and Freud, as
unnecessarily complex, and go with the simplest adequate one. But, of
course, none of these explanations escapes a large amount of speculation.
What is significant here is the recognition that we also find this universal
tendency to fantasy and dislocation in the myths of the world. The sugges-
tive explanation of children's fantasy as a mediating category between pro-
found binary discriminations echoes Levi-Strauss's suggestive explanation
46
for the fantasy and dislocation of myths.

MYTHIC UNDERSTANDING
One educational implication of this ready engagement with fantasy and
dislocation reinforces that made in the previous section: children's learning
does not always proceed in logical progression from a known to an associ-
ated unknown content. If such a procedure were dominant, we would have
difficulty explaining why very young children seem to grasp wicked witches,
star warriors, and talking rabbits so readily, whereas this ready engagement
is very simply explained in terms of the binary structuring and mediating
procedure described above. Clearly, we do learn many things by making
content associations. But that we do so has been taken as an exclusive dogma
by curriculum designers. If, to repeat an important point, the binary struc-
turing and mediating procedure is recognized as another route by which
children can access knowledge, then some current restrictions on the early
curriculum can be safely, and beneficially, dispensed with. I am thinking par-
ticularly, again, of the "expanding environments" dogma that has, I believe,
contributed significantly to the educational impoverishment of so many
children.
Abstract Thinking
It is generally accepted in current educational textbooks that young children
are "concrete" thinkers, and teaching practices and curricula throughout the
Western world have been profoundly influenced by this belief (Roldao,
1992). Concrete and abstract are, of course, odd terms to use about the con-
tents of the mind; it isn't a place one would look for concrete, and everything
in the mind is in some sense abstract. But we use the terms to signify relative
degrees of generality or particularity, and young children are represented as
able to deal intellectually with the particular, with what is more immediate to
the senses.
My point is that the development of language inevitably involves the use
of abstractions, and that abstract thinking-in the everyday, rather vague
sense of the term-is no less common in young children than is concrete
thinking.
"Language creates distance between the self and the object; language
generalizes, transferring a unique perception into a common one; language
transmutes realities into abstractions" (Coe, 1984, p. 253). That is the sense
in which language necessarily involves the mind in dealing with abstrac-
tions. More profoundly, it has been argued that abstract ideas do not grow as
a result of encountering concrete objects; rather, only by the deployment of
abstractions do concrete objects become recognizable:
[I]n our conscious experience, or introspectively, concrete particulars occupy a central
place and the abstractions appear to be derived from them. But this subjective experience
47

TWO
appears to me to be the source of the error with which I am concerned, the appearance
which prevents us from recognizing that these concrete particulars are the product of
abstractions which the mind must possess in order that it should be able to experience
particular sensations, perceptions, or images. (Hayek, 1970, p. 311)
Afeature ofyoung children's fairy stories, as noted above, is that they are
structured on binary opposites. An evident feature of these binary opposites
is that they are immensely abstract concepts. Further, children's access to
particulars like Darth Vader, wicked monsters, or talking rabbits comes by
means of the abstract concepts they "body forth" or give concrete form to, a
point that seems to illustrate Hayek's argument.
The prevalence of the view that young children are concrete thinkers
has obscured the sense in which they are also obviously abstract thinkers.
For example, ifabstractions like oppression/resentment/revolt, and their re-
lationships, were not in place in some form by age four, the typical child
would be unable to understand the story of Robin Hood and the Sheriff of
Nottingham or Luke Skywalker and Darth Vader. This does not mean that
the child typically articulates the words "oppression," "resentment," and "re-
volt" or even could define them. But such concepts have to be a part of the
child's understanding of events whose meaning turns on grasping them and
their relational dynamics. They need not be conscious, or even sub-
conscious, but may be better thought of in Hayek's sense as "super-
conscious" "because they govern the conscious processes without appearing
in them" (1970, p. 319).
Hayek suggests that what we mean by abstractions might be better
thought of as "operations of the mind" rather than as concepts. Abstractions
become conscious, become concepts, as a result of the mind's reflecting on
itself. The formation of abstract concepts, then, is not the outcome of some
conscious process but rather the discovery of something that already has
guided the mind's operations. So the absence of awareness of abstractions in
young children, or their lack of articulation of, or ability to manipulate, ab-
stractions, is not a sign that abstractions are not at work in their thinking any
less than in the typical adult's. The absence signifies only that they have not
reflected on their thinking, or are not aware of their thinking in such a way
that they consciously deal with the abstractions they use all the time. So the
later appearance of abstractions in our language development is not a result
of genetically following the concrete but represents discoveries of our long
active mental operations by reflection on them.
If we look to the evolutionary, archeological, and historical record, we
find similar conclusions. Earlier it had been believed that language must
have developed and been elaborated in aboriginal cultures around practical,
48
concrete activities, like tool-making and food preparation, and then gradu-

MYTHIC UNDERSTANDING
ally was found useful in more elaborate forms of social discourse, leading in
relatively recent times to the complexity of myth. But as Donald has per-
suasively argued (1991, ch. 7), practical skills are passed on largely by ap-
prenticeship, in which language is typically of little importance. In tribal
societies, and from what we can infer from Upper Paleolithic cultures,
[the] most elevated use of language ... is in the area of mythic invention-in the con-
struction of conceptual "models" of the human universe. Even in the most primitive hu-
man societies, where technology has remained essentially unchanged for tens of
thousands of years, there are always myths ofcreation and death and stories that serve to
encapsulate tribally held ideas oforigin and world structure.... These uses were not late
developments, after language had proven itself in concrete, practical applications~ they
were among the first. (p. 213)
What Donald writes about aboriginal human cultures seems to me re-
flected in children's development of language today. His characterization of
"mythic" peoples, and consequently all who come after them, is that they are
"constantly modeling the world and storing the results" (p. 256). So, too, do
children. The integrative, symbolic, mythic models that are being constantly
constructed drive the development of linguistic forms to express them. The
driving force in this process is not concrete particulars but a new kind of
understanding, "a new, much more powerful method of thinking" (p. 216).
We still know very little about how human beings developed, and each
of us individually develops, language, but neither process can sensibly be
described in terms of moving from the concrete to the abstract. It seems, as
Donald also notes, that it is more likely to be analogous to our perceptual
processes that begin with some holistic impression within which concrete
details are then located; on entering a room, for example, we do not build up
an impression of it by composition of all the particulars into some whole,
rather we initially form an impression of the whole and then we locate par-
ticulars within it. Whether we describe children's early conceptualisations as
abstractions or the "superconscious" or "integrative myth" (p. 267) or as
"Gestalts," the kind of thinking is fundamentally tied into the symbolic
models ofthe world children constantly construct and reconstruct. Concrete
particulars have meaning only within these models; that children do not ex-
press the background symbolic models does not mean that the symbolism is
not there or that it is not primary in the children's understanding. Given the
looseness of match between these complex conceptual processes and the
crude terms we use to refer to them, it seems reasonable to keep the term
"abstract" to refer to a fundamental part of children's everyday thinking.
It is useful to note in passing that "developmental researchers have been
accruing impressive evidence that even toddlers can appreciate quite ab-
stract qualities in the world (ranging from numerosity to animateness to var-
49

TWO
ious kinds of causality)" (Gardner, 1993, p. 182). Gardner cites Carey and
Gelman's work (1990), his own study of"the unschooled mind" (1991), and
Keil's (1989) study shoWing that very young children will sometimes over-
ride strong perceptual or concrete cues in favor of abstract properties.
A major support for the view ofyoung children as concrete thinkers has
come from Piagel's developmental theory. There are many grounds on which
the validity of Piagel's position might be questioned (e.g., Brainerd, 1978;
Donaldson, 1978; Egan, 1983; Gardner, 1991; Siegel and Brainerd, 1978),
but regardless of how persuasive such arguments may be, a much stronger
point is relevant here. Piaget's theory, and its extensions in more recent neo-
Piagetian research (e.g., Case, 1985, 1991; Fischer, 1980), deals only with a
limited range of children's thinking. It focuses on what has been called
logico-mathematical thinking, or essentially numerical competence. Even
when the object of study is dreams, play, or more recently, emotions or art,
the researchers locate their central concern "in the human sensitivity to
number, numbers, and numerical relations" (Gardner, 1991, p. 28). Gard-
ner goes as far as to conclude-he admits slightly exaggeratedly-that Pi-
agel's major achievement "was the development of a deep understanding of
what it means for a creature to be numerate and ... his view of human de-
velopment centered upon the capacity of our species to achieve sophisti-
cated knowledge about numbers-or Number" (p. 26).
The problem for education has come from the generally uncritical ac-
ceptance of Piaget's theory as a description of the totality of children's think-
ing. There is no good reason to believe that what may be true about the
development of number competence is also true of metaphorical compe-
tence, or that what may be the case about logico-mathematical thinking is
also true of the imagination. Indeed, there are goodreasons to believe other-
wise (Gardner, 1991, ch. 2). Sensitive attention to children's thinking makes
clear that their thinking routinely includes metaphysical speculation and
philosophical reflection of a highly abstract kind (Ashton, 1993; Matthews,
1980,1984; Paley, 1990).
So, while notions of "abstractness" and "concreteness" in thinking are
imprecise, the currently prevailing view that young children's thinking is re-
stricted to the "concrete" is clearly inadequate. Children's patent deployment
of powerful abstractions calls aloud for us to reconsider claims about the
concreteness of children's thinking and to reconsider the influence such
claims have had on teaching and curricula for young children. The belief
that young children are generally concrete thinkers has meant shunning
content that seems to involve abstractions, instead focusing on "active do-
ing" and practical manipulation that has made the typical elementary class-
50
room less intellectually rich than it should be.

MYTHIC UNDERSTANDING
Children can have ready access to all kinds of knowledge, provided it is
articulated on the kinds ofpowerful abstractions that they clearly use, even if
they do so "superconsciously" Peter Rabbit, we can see, is engaging and
meaningful to young children not only because of the family setting but also
because of a narrative structured on abstract binary concepts of security/
danger, wildness/cultivation, life/death, nature/culture, obedience/disobe-
dience, and also on "abstract" motives, intentions, hopes, and fears familiar
to children.
The emphasis on "active manipulation" is, of course, important in cer-
tain areas of learning, but its current overemphasis results from, and further
encourages, the underestimating of young children's ability to grasp mean-
ing by other than logico-mathematical means.
Consider a simple example in mathematics, in which one might expect
views derived from Piaget to be more valid. Let us draw on the observations
above to teach the concept of place value or decimalization to young chil-
dren. How might we go about this task ifwe believe that children can readily
grasp new knowledge when it is structured on powerful abstract binary con-
cepts?
Once upon a time a king and queen wanted to count their army They
had six counselors, five ofwhom were pompous and unimaginative, and one
of whom was humble but ingenious. (We have, then, our binary structure:
unimaginative/ingenious. These are chosen because they are familiar to chil-
dren, and we want them to associate the ingenuity of mathematics with
something they recognize within themselves.)
The army is milling around on a plain, as armies do, before going off to
battle. Each of the unimaginative counselors recommends an ineffective
method of counting the army Eventually the royal pair turns to the inge-
nious counselor. He has the king and queen order each of the unimaginative
counselors to pick up ten stones. The unimaginative counselors are then re-
quired to stand behind a table side by side, each with a bowl in front of him.
The army then marches in line past the table. As each soldier goes by, the
counselor at the end of the table puts a stone in his bowl. When ten soldiers
have gone by, and all his stones are in the bowl, he picks up the ten stones,
and again puts one stone back in the bowl for each soldier who goes by. The
counselor next to him has only to watch the first counselor. Each time the
first counselor picks up his ten stones, the second unimaginative counselor
puts one stone into his bowl. When the second counselor has put all ten of
his stones into the bowl, he picks them up and starts again. The third coun-
selor's job is simply to watch the second counselor's bowl. Each time the
second counselor picks his ten stones out of the full bowl, the third coun-
selor puts one stone into his bowl. And so on. After some time, when the
51

TWO
army has gone by, the fifth counselor has one stone in his bowl, the fourth
counselor has three stones in his bowl, the third counselor has seven stones
in his bowl, the second counselor has eight stones, and the first counselor
has two. So the ingenious counselor is able to tell the king and queen that
they have exactly 13,782 soldiers in their army.
After the story, which teachers can elaborate, the children might be in-
vited to use this method to count each other, with two "counters" and the
rest as "soldiers" marching by, or to count other more numerous objects.
They could then try to use this method with bases other than ten, and so on.
Having used this example in the past, I have sometimes had teachers
respond that they are glad that I have the children involve themselves in
using this method "hands-on," because it is that "active doing" that makes it
meaningful to them and "drives home the lesson." One teacher recently elab-
orated the point, saying that she had studied the U.S. Civil War when at
school, learned the importance of the Battle of Gettysburg, learned Lincoln's
address by heart, but it wasn't until recently when she visited the battlefield
that it all became meaningful to her, and the hairs on the back of her neck
had tingled. It was being there, being physically involved with the place, that
made all the book-learning meaningful.
I suggested that Gettysburg is a field like other fields; what made it neck-
tingling for this teacher was the book-learned history she had remembered,
the significance it held for her in the story of America's formation. What
makes place value meaningful to the children is the story of the counselor's
ingenuity with which children can associate. The practical activities later
clarify, extend, and reinforce what they have gathered from the story. Each
feeds the other. Current dogma asserts that the practical activity is crucial, to
the point that other intellectual capacities that children have for grasping
meaning are depreciated. I think the practical activity is certainly useful, but
it can best support meaningful learning in a context of powerful abstrac-
tions; it is within the abstract context that the concrete content makes sense.
The story structure allows the children to associate emotionally with the
ingenuity ofthe clever counselor's successful strategy. The mathematical skill
is thus not learned as an alien algorithm; it becomes in some significant sense
theirs. The emotional tie to the cleverness of mathematics is another crucial
feature of learning, little regarded in current early educational orthodoxy.
More generally, the pervasive influence of the ideas of the young child as
learning best and first "how to do," and of being a "concrete thinker," along
with the considerable focus on logico-mathematical thinking, has had a pe-
culiar and destructive effect on early education. Enormous emphasis has
52
been placed on those intellectual skills that young children manage least

MYTHIC UNDERSTANDING
well and develop only slowly-computational, logico-mathematical skills
-with an equivalent neglect of what children do best-metaphoric, imag-
inative thinking. The result is a curriculum and teaching practices aimed at
and draWing on what are taken as young children's poor intellectual abilities
rather than on their early development ofcapacities that come with learning
language. We should focus our pedagogical attention, that is, on those areas
in which young humans are evolutionarily predisposed to rapid and power-
fullearning, where-to put it in terms of theorists I find increasingly per-
suasive-specific mental "modules" are operative (cf. e.g., Fodor, 1983;
Pinker, 1994).
So while "concrete thinking" is what is especially evident in young chil-
dren if we focus on the explicit content of their conscious articulation, this
content seems meaningful to young children in the degree to which it is tied
to some powerful abstractions. Without connection to some abstract under-
pinnings-or superconscious operations-the concrete content or practical
manipulations remain contextless and more generally meaningless. This
seems the common fate of so much early classroom activity: children com-
monly, in T. S. Eliot's line, "had the experience, but missed the meaning."
In teaching and curriculum planning, then, we might still hold to the
principle that our understanding moves "from the known to the unknown,"
but we would do well to think of the "known" in terms of powerful abstrac-
tions and the "unknown" as anything that can be tied to them. When we
begin to think of telling or teaching children something, we might sensibly
begin with what set of binary abstractions it can be built on. This will likely
be-espeCially after nearly a century of emphaSizing children's intellectual
incapacity, their "concreteness," and the necessity for practical manipula-
tions-rather difficult for some.
Metaphor
Metaphor, like myth, has long been a puzzle to scholars. Those ofa positivist
inclination have tended to sweep it under the academic rug, deeming it a
linguistic frill that can always be reduced to the kind of literal language with
which they are more at home. This last sentence is, of course, awash with
metaphors-inclination, sweeping under rugs, frills, reduction, literal, at
home with, all involve metaphor. I could have written: "Positivists ignored
metaphor because it entailed no features not reducible to literal language."
That would reduce, but certainly not eliminate, the metaphoriC load. Does it
say the same thing? How would one reduce Yeats's reference to "the rag and
bone shop ofthe heart"? Could one produce a literal eqUivalent, in which the
53

TWO
cluttered, discarded, disjointed, rubbishy features of a rag and bone shop
refer to the condition ofhis emotional life in old age? Ifwe could reduce such
phrases to literal eqUivalents, why is metaphor so pervasive?
Let us begin with the claim that metaphor is a product of language de-
velopment and will therefore be evident in mythic thinking and in young
children. Ernst Cassirer has pointed to the relationship of myth and lan-
guage, arguing that "no matter how widely the contents of myth and lan-
guage may differ, yet the same form of mental conception is operative in
both. It is the form which one may denote as metaphOrical thinking" (1946,
p. 84). He points out that since the time of the Roman grammarian Quin-
tillian it has been taken for granted that all mythic thinking is permeated by
metaphor. Levi-Strauss has suggested that "metaphor ... is not a later em-
bellishment of language but is one of its fundamental modes-a primary
form of discoursive thought" (1964, p. 102).
Whatever we make of the somewhat speculative claims about meta-
phor's being a visible expression of a kind of root of language, the promi-
nence of metaphor in mythiC thinking is undeniable. Do we see anything
similar in young children as they develop language? Consider the follOWing
scenario. A five-year-old boy has been sellingjuice at the front step on a hot
day, along with his four-year-old sister and three-year-old brother. Their last
customer, a telephone repairman, after gratefully downing his ten cent glass
of orange juice, asked jokingly whether they didn't have any beer or scotch.
After he left, the five-year-old went into the house and asked his mother
whether he could have some beer and scotch for the stand. He emerged a
minute or so later, shrugged, and told his siblings, "Mom killed that idea."
The three-year-old has no more difficulty interpreting the meaning of
the sentence than the four-year-old. Both know that they cannot have beer
and scotch. Whether they have heard or used the metaphor ofkilling an idea
before, they know it now without any explanation, and they understand this
kind of metaphoric usage as an entirely normal form of speech.
Such naturalistic observations do not seem to require empirical studies
to support the conclusion that very young children use metaphor easily and
frequently, but empirical studies can perhaps help clarify the process of met-
aphoric development. Winner (1988) has reported an extensive series of
studies of the genesis and growth of metaphoric competence. Among the
early and, to the experimenters, more unexpected findings was the prodigal
production of metaphors by some very young children. Also, in compara-
tive tests of recognizing appropriate metaphors, it was discovered that the
"highest number of appropriate metaphors was secured from the pre-school
54
children, who even exceeded college students~ moreover, these three- and

MYTHIC UNDERSTANDING
four-year-olds fashioned significantly more appropriate metaphors than did
children aged seven or eleven" (Gardner and Winner, 1979, p. 130). Most
intriguing was "the capacity ofat least some children to perform this game at
an astonishingly high level. Not only do such youngsters frequently contrive
clever names for the very objects which have stumped our adult pilot sub-
jects~ more dramatically, some of them can nearly effortlessly come up with a
whole series of appropriate and appealing metaphoric meanings" (p. 133).
Metaphor in its grossest appearance involves talking about something in
terms derived from something quite different. It is a "deviant naming" or
"peculiar predication" (Ricoeur, 1991, p. 8) and establishes a new relation-
ship between heterogeneous ideas in a way that adds something to, or
throws new light on, the thing talked about. Metaphors do not so much
work by recognizing similarities between things~ rather "it would be more
illuminating . . . to say that metaphor creates the similarity than to say it
formulates some similarity antecedently existing" (Black, 1962, p. 83).
It is the generative power evident in metaphor that makes it particularly
interesting to this educational scheme. The ready use of metaphor gives evi-
dence of the human generativity that is central to learning~ consequently,
young children's fluency in and recognition of metaphor is something edu-
cators should find centrally important. Expansion of understanding seems
often to ride on the kind of generative grasp one finds exemplified in
metaphor-and that, again, follows a logiC quite different from the content
associations so prominent in educational textbooks. As Nelson Goodman
puts it, ~'Far from being a mere matter of ornament, [metaphor] participates
fully in the progress of knowledge: in replacing some stale 'natural' kinds
with novel and illuminating categories, in contriving facts, in revising theory,
and in bringing us new worlds" (1979, p. 175).
In the beginning, metaphor "governs both the growth of language and
our acquisition of it" (Quine, 1979, p. 160), and "[m]etaphorical use of lan-
guage differs in Significant ways from literal use but is no less comprehensi-
ble, no more recondite, no less practical, and no more independent of truth
and falsity than is literal use" (Goodman, 1979, p. 175). We might add to
this Max Black's perhaps overly neat claim that all sciences begin in meta-
phor and end in algebra.
So for any "maker," whether poet or scientist, it would seem that Aris-
totle's observation is just: "The greatest thing by far is to have a command of
metaphor" (The Poetics, 1459a). The generative side of metaphor is crucial to
recognize because "ordinary words convey only what we know already~ it is
from metaphor that we can best get hold ofson1ething fresh" (Aristotle, Rhet-
oric, 1410b). The social and educational importance of developing the ca-
55

TWO
pacity for metaphor relies both on the empowerment of the individual and
on the notion that "the quality ofany culture is in large part the quality of the
metaphorists that it creates and sustains" (Booth, 1979, p. 70).
My urge to pile up authorities on the importance of metaphor is caused
by the paucity of attention currently paid to it in educational research and
educational writing, compared to that given to logico-mathematical forms of
thinking. Perhaps metaphor is less a simple consequence of language and
more a cognitive capacity implicated in language development itself. This
claim, essentially Cassirer's, is somewhat speculative; what is not speculative
is the pervasiveness of metaphor in all language use, its prominence in the
linguistic behavior of very young children, and its centrality to the genera-
tive functions of the human mind. Especially if one holds a constructivist
view of learning-a view of the child's mind as not simply copying impres-
sions from the world but as constantly constructing and reconstructing an
individual conception of the world-then metaphor becomes a key tool in
aiding flexible, productive learning.
Metaphor is sometimes represented as a kind of opposite to logic, but it
is perhaps worth emphasizing that the two are far from discrete in our think-
ing. Cassirer makes the point that metaphor is one implication of language
development, but that language carries with it the further implication of
logic. As we become increasingly conscious of language-and the most po-
tent instrument for increasing awareness of language has been writing-
logic becomes more prominent. We see the network of logical relationships
implicit in language and can begin to make them explicit, because by under-
standing them we can gain more secure pragmatic control over the world
that language tries to grasp.
Metaphor develops earlier and more easily than logic, both historically
and in our individual experience. Metaphor and logic represent points on a
continuum of language uses~ in any productive, generative thinking, we are
likely to find the two at their somewhat distinct, but properly cooperative,
work. Lakoff and Johnson's assertion that metaphor "unites reason and
imagination" and "[m]etaphor is thus imaginative rationality" (Lakoff and
Johnson, 1980, p. 193) may be somewhat arcane; it does, however, capture
the sense in which metaphor is not some logic-less rambling but a vitally
productive feature of our constructive thinking. It also echoes Wordsworth's
observation ofnearly two centuries earlier, that imagination "is Reason in her
most exalted mood" (The Prelude, XlV, line 192).
These observations about metaphor, along with the findings-surpris-
ing to some-that young children's production and grasp of metaphor are
commonly superior to that of older children and adults, points again to a
56
neglected conclusion about young children's thinking. In the past, children's

MYTHIC UNDERSTANDING
thinking has been assumed, even presupposed, to be unqualifiedly inferior
to that of adults. All the theories of intellectual development we have-and
most influentially Piaget's-take current adult forms of thinking as a kind of
ideal, with children's development being measured according to the degree
that it approximates the adult forms. In Piaget's case, this reflected the bio-
logical metaphor undergirding his psychological theorizing; thus, the adult
was taken as the completed form and the earlier immature forms were sim-
ply stages toward it. Such theories as Piaget's are "hierarchically integrative"
-that is, later stages encompass the achievements ofthe earlier stages. They
recognize only gains in cognitive competence, not losses. In particular, they
do not recognize that in recapitulating the process of Western intellectual
development, children might be paying an intellectual cost that we as a civi-
lization have paid. But so long as this cost goes unrecognized, we can't ask
whether it is worthwhile or necessary.
Metaphoric capacity, in some respects, declines as children become
older. Synapse development peaks in humans between nine months and two
years, at which point the child has 50 percent more synapses than the adult.
Metabolic activity in the brain reaches adult levels by nine or ten months and
soon exceeds it, peaking around age four. Massive numbers ofneurons die in
utero, and the dying continues during the early years, leveling off at about
seven years. Synapses wither from the age of two through the rest of child-
hood and into adolescence, when the brain's metabolic rate falls back to
adult levels. Pinker infers from such observations that "[l]anguage develop-
ment, then, could be on a maturational timetable, like teeth" (1994, p. 289).
Given the close connection between language development and metaphor,
and the importance of fluent and flexible metaphoric control for nearly all
forms of thinking, it would be prudent to emphasize support for metaphoric
fluency in early education.
If we could devise a developmental profile of individuals' metaphoric
capacities in Western societies, it would certainly not follow the trium-
phantly progressive pattern of current theories of psychological develop-
ment. So we might wisely recognize that Western intellectual development
has involved, and involves for us individually, some losses; that in some re-
gards young children's intelligences are less constrained and are more com-
petent than those of their typical adult teachers.
What we need to sort out, then, if we are to get a clear grasp of Mythic
understanding, is those important intellectual functions in which children
are typically superior to adults. Then, we must decide what on earth we are
to do about them. If, for an overly crude example, some degree of meta-
phoriC fluency and imaginative vivacity is necessarily to be sacrificed for lit-
eracy' what should be done? Well, this is too gross and dramatic an example,
57

TWO
of course, but it brings out precisely the kind of trade-off that I think is a part
ofeducation. We will always want to preserve as much as possible and lose as
little as possible, but the current bland and comfortable belief that any skill
gain comes at no cost, at no potential loss, just cannot any longer be sus-
tained. If we fail to recognize potential or actual intellectual losses, we will
certainly be able to do nothing to minimize them. And this is, I think, pre-
cisely the situation we are in, losing much more than we need because we do
not recognize what is at risk.
A further constituent of Mythic understanding, then, is metaphor, and
the richer and more flexible the metaphoric capacity, the greater its potential
contribution to early understanding. Metaphor is one of our cognitive grap-
pling tools; it enables us to see the world in multiple perspectives and to
engage with the world fleXibly. Metaphor is much more profoundly a feature
of human sense-making than the largely ornamental and redundant poetic
trope some have taken it to be.
"Thought is metaphoric, and proceeds by comparison [seeing one thing
in terms of another], and the metaphors of language derive therefrom"
(Richards, 1936, p. 940). The connection between the apparently distinct
topics ofbinary structuring and metaphor, however, tends, like any analysis,
to suggest inappropriate divisions in something that is better conceived as an
organic whole.
Rhythm and Narrative
In traditional oral cultures, people know only what they can remember.
Once something is forgotten by a tribe, it is generally gone forever. To com-
bat this, oral cultures have exploited language to aid memory. They discov-
ered, for example, that ideas or lore put into a rhythmic or rhyming form
were more easily remembered. Sacred stories thus were recited to the tap-
ping of a drum or strumming of a stringed instrument. Patterning sound
helped to embed the tales in the minds of the hearers.
Rhyme and rhythm have commonly been used by young children in
literate Western cultures as well. Because of writing, there is no longer the
social urgency to ensure memorization of the lore of our wayward tribe; yet
rhyme and rhythm are constantly exploited, and enjoyed, by children today.
We find them used to make abuse more telling in rhyming nicknames, in
riddles, in games, and in the treasury of the lore and language of school-
children collected by observant scholars of childhood, such as the Opies
(1959, 1969, 1985), Paley (1981, 1984, 1990), the Knapps (1976), and
58
Sutton-Smith (1981). The prevalence of rhyme and rhythm in TV ads, on

MYTHIC UNDERSTANDING
shows like Sesame Street, in nursery rhymes, and in children's stories testifies
to their persisting appeal.
The larger trick is attaching the rhythms inherent in languages to the
more general, peripatetic pattern of everyday life-hope and despair, fear
and relief, oppression, resentment, and revolt, youth and age, the rising
emotions of comedy and the pity and fear of tragedy, and on and on. The
elaboration of linguistic rhythms to match the patterns of our lives results in
those larger forms we call narratives. "Human life has a determinate form,
the form of a certain kind of story It is not just that poems and sagas narrate
what happens to men and women, but that in their narrative form poems
and sagas capture a form that was already present in the lives they relate"
(MacIntyre, 1981, p. 117).
Another consequence of language, then, and another constituent of
Mythic understanding, and another cultural universal (cf. Brown, 1991), is
the ready deployment ofrhythm, especially in narrative clothing, in trying to
make sense of the world and of experience. This supports the conclusion
that the mind is, among other things, "a narrative concern" (Sutton-Smith,
1988, p. 22). (The mind is also a logico-mathematical concern, and an aes-
thetic concern, and so on.) It is well to remember Barbara Hardy's celebrated
observation: "We dream in narrative, daydream in narrative, remember, an-
ticipate, hope, despair, believe, doubt, plan, revise, criticize, construct, gos-
sip, learn, hate and live by narrative" (1968, p. 5).
Narratives-those linguistic patterns that give body to, or "body forth,"
emotional rhythms-can provide a powerfully engaging access to knowl-
edge ofall kinds. Narrative was in the past generally neglected in educational
research, though of late it has attracted quite a lot of attention. But there has
still been relatively little ingenuity expended on working out how to turn its
obvious engaging power to practical educational advantage. This would
seem particularly worth exploring in a situation where so many children are
functionally illiterate. Narrative is accessible to the literate and illiterate
alike, to the logico-mathematically sophisticated and unsophisticated. We
might wisely develop "a respect for narrative as everyone's rock-bottom
capacity, but also as the universal gift, to be shared with others" (Coles,
1989, p. 30).
These observations about rhythm and narrative have some significant
implications for teaching and the curriculum. They would, for example,
support my earlier suggestion that a rich and dramatic world history pro-
gram be introduced in the early years, and they suggest additional reasons
why such a program is educationally important. The rhythmic patterns of
our emotional lives find analogs in history: an action "becomes intelligible
59

TWO
by finding its place in a narrative" (MacIntyre, 1981, p. 196). Our lives have
a place in larger narratives, prominent among which is human history "The
defining characteristic of narrative is that the whole gives meaning to the
parts" (Hicks, 1993, pp. 131-132). Any rhythm derives its identity not from
the individual elements that make it up but from the sets of relations among
them. This suggests yet another reason for abandoning the currently domi-
nant expanding horizons curriculum in early childhood. We come to know
ourselves and our environment in contexts. As St. Francis of Assisi con-
stantly reminded his followers, it is through attending to others and in
forgetting ourselves that we can come to know ourselves. And as T. S. Eliot
similarly reminds us, the end "of all our exploring will be to arrive where we
started / And know the place for the first time" (Little Gidding).
These might seem like mystical extravagances as against the common
sense of assuming that children's exploration of the world must start with
themselves, perhaps modifying their sense of self and the meaning of their
local environment as learning proceeds. More commonly, however, the
schooled exploration of the self and its locality leads to local and immediate
experience being impressed on the child as the norm, as the proper, as the
given, as "natural," and the different and distant and the "other" as knowable
or acceptable to the degree that it conforms with the first known locality and
self. Such a procedure ofearly education is, that is to say, a recipe for provin-
cialism, for inflexibility, for ignorance. My point is that if meaning is estab-
lished in rhythm and narrative by first grasping the whole and then making
sense of its parts, we would do better to begin with general accounts of the
world, its place in the cosmos, the variety of forms of life,·and so on, than
with the routines ofthe local world. Those will, after all, be learned by simple
everyday experience; their meaning can be exposed by placing them in
larger contexts.
Images
One curious consequence of the development of language was the discovery
that words can be used to evoke images in the minds of their hearers, and
that these images can have as powerful an emotional effect as the real events
themselves. These mental images are unlike anything else we are familiar
with. Mental images are, after all, even at their closest to quasi-pictures, quite
unlike what we see with our eyes. They are also enormously varied in kind,
from those quasi-pictorial mental images we think of as like real images-
even to the point of"scanning" with closed eyes in search ofdetails (Shepard,
1975)-to "images" of smells or sounds which evoke nothing like a picture
60
in the mind.

MYTHIC UNDERSTANDING
Like rhythm, images performed in traditional oral cultures the crucial
social role of aiding memorization. Myths are replete with vivid, often bi-
zarre images that give them what we might call a powerful "literary" impact.
Images achieved this end by stimulating a range of psychological effects,
which continue today in quite different circumstances, long outliving the
social purpose for which they were developed. Similarly, language develop-
ment in children leads to the capacity to evoke mental images of what is not
present and to feel about them as though they are real and present.
It is hard to discuss mental images without bringing in the imagination
in general, but I do want to consider images by themselves as far as that is
possible. One perhaps inevitable feature of the images we construct from
words is that they carry some affective component, however small (Egan,
1992). This capacity to think and feel in terms of images has important, and
somewhat neglected, implications for early education.
In professional development programs, considerable time is spent on
equipping teachers with techniques for organizing content and helping
them to clarify concepts. Very little time is spent discussing the power of
images in communicating and teaching, and there are few techniques for
systematically using images in teaching. Guided Imagery is one such. This
usually involves the teacher, or a cassette-taped voice, taking the students
verbally to some different time and place and describing the Sights, sounds,
smells, and other sensations. Guided Imagery can be a powerfully effective
technique in many circumstances. What I mean by the use of images here,
however, is on a much smaller scale. It does not require relatively elaborate
preparations or set-piece performances. Rather it requires the teacher to be
more consistently conscious of the vivid images that are a part of every topic
and to draw on them consistently in viVifying knowledge and concepts.
When teaching about the earthworm, for example, the instructor can
augment the facts about its senses and structure by evoking for students im-
ages of what it would be like to slither and push through the soil, hesitantly
exploring in one direction then another, looking for easier passages, contrac-
ting and expanding our sequence of muscles segment by segment, and sen-
sing moisture, scents, grubs, or whatever. As we learn about the anatomy of
earthworms we can also feel something of their existence by means ofimages
that evoke analogs of their senses; it is not so much a matter of seeing the
earthworm in terms ofour senses as performing the imaginative act of recog-
nizing earthwormness in ourselves. The task is imaginatively to incorporate
the world rather than Simply learn facts about something "out there." Sim-
ilarly, when teaching about flowers, one could imagine emerging from the
cold ground, pushing toward the light, bursting with a kind of ecstasy in the
warmer air, turning with passion toward the sun, feeling the rush of sap,
61

TWO
then experiencing the horror of the returning cold, and shriveling back un-
derground. Constantly bringing to mind affective images helps to make the
content memorable and, relatedly, meaningful in terms with which children
are familiar.
Images allow us in a limited but very real sense to extend our grasp on
the world. Affective images do not need to reduce the content being taught;
rather, they provide a means for the child to "incorporate" it. This helps them
to see that mathematics, history, and science are not made up ofalien knowl-
edge, something out there apart from them. By imaginatively grasping
knowledge, children make it, reciprocally, become a part of them. So children
discover that they are mathematical, historical, and scientific beings.
Mythic understanding, then, is significantly more imagistic than is com-
mon for forms of understanding built on literacy. Because of the affective
charge associated with images, they are in some ways more vivid and more
closely tied in with emotions. When teaching young children, we should
bear in mind their potentially rich imagistic and emotional mental activity,
and we should design programs that will support and develop those ca-
pacities.
Stories and Their Meaning
The discovery that certain kinds of narratives could generate quite precise
emotional states in their hearers was one of the most momentous in the de-
velopment ofhuman cultures. They had two crucial powers. First, they were
the most effective aid to memorization; important lore coded within a story
structure thus became much easier to preserve. Second, they could orient
hearers' emotions to their contents. If the contents specified appropriate so-
cial status for various groups of people, for various families, and specified
proper status, economic relationships, and behavior within and among kin-
ship groups, they could serve as a social charter for the tribe. (Malinowski
[1954] has emphasized this "social charter" function of myths, somewhat at
the expense of other features.)
While the memorization function of stories is much less significant in
modern literate cultures, and their "social charter" role is similarly dimin-
ished, the psychological effects of stories ensure that they continue to playa
prominent role in our lives. Perhaps it is better to say that the memorization
and charter functions have been transformed and added to rather than di-
minished. We continue to tell children "cautionary tales" in order to shape
their behavior; TV and movie stories often combine the attempt to entertain
62
with messages of self-improvement or social tolerance, or the opposites.

MYTHIC UNDERSTANDING
Family stories we shape and retell serve to establish and reinforce a sense of
identity (Rosenbluth, 1990).
So, again, the development of language in traditional oral cultures and
in the intellectual lives ofyoung children leads to the discovery of the varied
uses and delights of the story form. Like the sentence writ large, the story is a
particular linguistic unit that conveys a particular kind of meaning (Egan,
1978b). What kind? And what is a story, anyway?
If you are told that Dick shot Tom, you will have no particular or precise
emotional response (unless, perhaps, your name is Tom). You might feel re-
gret that anyone would shoot anyone else, but ifyou know this is an event in
a story you do not, crucially, know whether to feel glad or sorry that Dick
shot Tom. If further events and characters are added such that you learn that
Dick was a handsome, well-groomed young man who loved his grand-
mother, and that Tom was generally scruffy, picked his nose in public, and
used foul language in front of children, you may begin to feel glad that Dick
shot Tom-given the conventions of fiction today. But if the story is elabo-
rated further, telling you that Dick and his grandmother were leaders of a
drug-pushing operation who specialized in selling to children outside
schools, and that his love for his grandmother was clearly ofa kind that indi-
cates an unspeakable relationship, and that, despite his unprepossessing ex-
terior, Tom has a heart of gold and is taking terrible risks to stop the
grandmother's and her grandson's nefarious operation ... well, you will
properly begin to feel sorry that Dick shot Tom.
The good storyteller plays with our affective responses to events, and we
often take a peculiar delight in the unexpected twists and turns of the plot.
We know we have reached the end of a story, however, when we know how
to feel about the events that make it up. (Sometimes, through incompetence
or experiment, a story ends in such a way that we are left uncertain how to
feel, and our typical response is one of disappointment and dissatisfaction.)
There are no neat logical formulas for determining how to construct a story~
no program exists that would allow a computer to distinguish between a
successful story and another kind of narrative made up of characters and
events. The refined instrument we have is our emotional response and the
recognition of that peculiar satisfaction that tells us a story has ended,
whether as comedy or tragedy. We may feel glad or sorry, elated or distressed,
but we know when the story has ended.
The crucial feature of stories is that they end (Kermode, 1966). Life and
history are inconvenient in this regard. Because we are "in the middest" of
them we cannot ascribe determinate meaning to them. If we knew that the
world would end tomorrow and that we would all die in a catastrophic envi-
63

TWO
ronmental disaster about which we had had many warnings, our concept of
human history to date would be significantly different from what it would be
ifwe knew that human life and civilizations would go on for billions ofyears
of moral and social improvement and benign technological developments
that would greatly lengthen and increase the enjoyment of human life. We
constantly revise our conception of the significance of events in our own
lives in light of new events. These different conceptions of our lives and his-
tory are not simply logical calculations; they are perhaps better seen as affec-
tive evaluations that ascribe affective meaning to events.
Mythic understanding, then, finds a prominent place for the story. Nor
is the structure of the story confined to fictional events and characters. Once
we grasp the conventions ofthe story and the kind of affective meaning it can
confer on events, we seem to become prodigal in applying it to events in the
world, in history, and in our own lives. We try to give to our lives, and to
history, the kind of determinate meaning stories provide, in order to make
more secure sense ofthem, ifonly provisionally. We "storify" events, whether
fictional, real, or mixed as in daydreams, in order to understand them in a
particular way. Mythic understanding involves considerable story-shaping
ofexperience so that events, facts, ideas, and people may be made affectively
meaningful.
We tend to see the curriculum as a body of knowledge-knowledge
about science, history, mathematics, geography, and so on-and we tend to
see teaching as the skilled communication of this knowledge to children. If
we begin instead to think of young children deploying Mythic understand-
ing flexibly in getting an initial grasp on the world and on experience, and
we recognize story-structuring as a prominent feature ofMythic understand-
ing, then we are led to reconceive the curriculum as the set ofgreat stories we
have to tell children, and reconceive (recognize?) elementary school teachers
as the storytellers of our culture (a recognition already in place in Waldorf
schools).
This move need in no way diminish the content of the curriculum, but it
allows us to see it somewhat differently. Instead of seeing math and science,
for example, in terms of particular skills, knowledge, and manipulations, we
would see them as among the greatest of human adventures, full of drama,
hopes and disappointments, discoveries and inventions, and of people in
whose lives mathematics and science played important roles. By seeing math
and science not as disembodied pieces of knowledge or skill but as the in-
ventions and discoveries of particular people, as products of their hopes and
disappointments, their struggles and problems, we can begin to re-embed
those subjects again in their proper human contexts, in which they initially
64
had affective, as well as purely cognitive, meaning. And that affective mean-

MYTHIC UNDERSTANDING
ing can be the route to the more purely cognitive meaning that tends to be
the main concern in most classrooms today.
One kind of story not much mentioned in education is the joke. No
doubt humor has a Somatic genesis, but language alone allows one creature
to tell another ajoke.Jokes are culturally universal, and laughing atjokes is a
behavior specific to the human species. There is, to some minds anyway,
something vaguely funny about language at the most basic level; the act of
interpreting another's meaning from his or her words allows the liberty al-
ways to misinterpret them consciously or unconsciously. Pinker observes
that "[m]etaphor and humor are useful ways to summarize the two mental
performances that go into understanding a sentence" (1994, p. 230).
The terrible danger in writing about humor is to go drearily on and on
about it. Here I want only to observe that humor is a universal consequence
of language development and that its development seems crucial for ade-
quate understanding. In this theory of education it will have an important
role, developing with each kind of understanding and taking a complex,
central role in Ironic understanding.
CONCLUSION
Clearly the development of language led, and leads, to forms of oral dis-
course that have characteristics other than the set I have outlined here.
Whether living in traditional oral cultures or modern cities, we develop rep-
ertoires of discourse forms that are shaped by the particular actions and
settings of the communities to which we belong. We learn appropriate forms
of discourse for greetings and farewells, for formal meals, for talking with
parents, for chatting with friends on the way to a monkey hunt or a squash
game, for gossiping during routine work, for sharing intimacies with close
friends, for speaking in public, and so on: "Our repertoire oforal ... speech
genres is rich" (Bakhtin, 1986, p. 78). Many of these genres do not involve
much in the way of binary opposites or story-structuring.
Children learn to adapt their uses oflanguage to the demands ofparticu-
lar settings and social activities. Because their language environments and
activities-especially in middle-class families-are often profoundly and
pervasively influenced by literacy and its intellectual consequences, the dis-
course forms children pick up and use to think with are also influenced by
literacy. So the neatness ofa scheme that claims that children today recapitu-
late forms of oral-language use common in traditional oral cultures is, at
best, somewhat muddied. The cultural and institutional settings in which
65

TWO
children learn language today are profoundly different from those in which
language was initially developed in our species.
I mention these potential objections to some of my general claims to
indicate at least that I am aware of them. I need to show that my scheme is
not at odds with the findings of, say, Basil Bernstein (1975) nor, perhaps
more pertinently, with those of Shirley Brice Heath (1983). I will discuss
these complex objections later, but should at least hint here at the direction
of my responses. First I selected the particular set of characteristics, or
genres, above for the same reasons that those characteristics are universally
selected-privileged-in oral cultures around the world and throughout
history: for purposes of initiation of the young into the forms ofunderstand-
ing that define membership of the social group. They are the best tools that
have been discovered for the job. For the tasks of education, all forms of
discourse are not equal.
The second objection is more problematic, and I find it hard even to hint
at my twofold response without raising a troubled host of issues. The objec-
tion is that children today grow into and absorb discourse forms that are
influenced by literacy, so they cannot Simply recapitulate "orality."
This objection is likely to occur most keenly to those who are critical of
psychological research that has focused on individuals' development, think-
ing skills, or cognitive processes largely in isolation from cultural contexts.
Such critics recognize that one cannot build an image of the human mind
from the products of this kind of research because the human mind is not an
isolated phenomenon; it is not sharply divided from its cultural context the
way the phYSical brain is divided from the outside world by the skull. The
nature ofindividuals' minds is shaped by and coalesces with its cultural con-
texts, and so it can be adequately explored only by forms of res~arch that
incorporate cultural context in what is being studied.
These inSights, which seem to me undeniable, have been expressed
most emphatically by critics whose ideological commitments sharpened
their sensitivity to the shaping role of society in the formation of individ-
uals' minds. Their corrective to an excessive focus on the individual apart
from cultural contexts is potentially fruitful, espeCially for psychology-as
Wertsch (1991) argues. I consider this ideological dimension relevant be-
cause it could lead us to replace one excess with another. It would be a pity to
replace the isolating focus on individuals with its binary opposite, ascribing
total responsibility for the formation of the mind to cultural context. We
might be better with an interactionist mediation.
I can now indicate the two responses I will make to this second objec-
tion. First, the development of language is not to be understood simply in
66
terms of the discourse of the community. The mine! is also an active organ; it

MYTHIC UNDERSTANDING
selects from the environment those elements that can best serve, to use Pi-
agel's term, as "aliments" to its development. A three-year-old in a highly
academic environment, in which finely nuanced irony in sophisticated
grammatical structures is the normal form of discourse, will not Simply
adopt this discourse form. Of course the child's linguistic development will
be influenced in particular ways, but the child will not be shaped into a
grammatically sophisticated speaker employing subtle irony There are con-
straints on the shaping role of the culture, constraints determined by the
program governing our acquisition oflanguage. That program selects certain
features of the linguistic environment preferentially, attending intently to
some features but remaining largely uninfluenced by others. The fact that
the child's linguistic environment is heavily influenced by literate forms of
discourse does not mean that these will have an equal impact on the child, or
be selected equally by the child, as those "oral" features I have "privileged"
above.
The second response concerns the pervasiveness of "literate" discourse
forms. Such forms tend to be tied to particular activities in particular circum-
stances; when those conditions do not hold, literate discourse forms relax
their hold on the mind, too. Even while you drive your enormously sophisti-
cated automobile through a modern city, your thinking about your life, your
daydreaming while sitting at traffic lights, is imagistic, story-shaped, and
shifts along metaphoriC connections. People live in highly literate environ-
ments, and children engage media that are permeated by literate forms of
discourse, but that does not mean they wholly pick up literate forms of dis-
course.
Ours is, for much of the time, a peculiar languaged understanding of the
world. "A defining property of higher mental functioning, one which is
unique to humans, is the fact that it is mediated by tools and by sign systems
such as a natural language" (Wertsch, 1991, p. 21). While we are, willy nilly,
committed to languaged understanding, it seems to involve some loss of the
instinctive, vivid, intimately participatory involvement with the natural
world that characterizes our fellow mammals' understanding. The educa-
tional task is to make languaged understanding as rich as possible while los-
ing as little as possible of the "oneness with nature" that is our birthright as
animals.
Each of us is born with a unique consciousness, with a unique "take" on
reality Language is a conventional, shared, limiting shaper of our conscious-
ness. The first educational task, then, is to ensure that children learn fluid
and flexible language use so that it can become a means of expressing their
unique perceptions and consciousness. The associated first educational dan-
67

TWO
ger is that the conventionalizing influence of language can become pre-
dominant, restricting and suppressing the uniqueness of perceptions and
consciousness. The repertoire of discourse forms available to the child is al-
ways both enabling and constraining at the same time.
The second educational task is to ensure not only that language serve as
a tool for expressing one's perceptions and consciousness, or for communi-
cating them, or for reflecting reality, but that the child recognize that lan-
guage has a distinct, dynamic life of its own. It is not only a medium into
which or through which our experience can be expressed, but is itself an
extension and enlargement ofour experience. It may have begun as a utilitar-
ian tool, but it has far-reaching potential for enlarging our understanding
and aesthetic delight.
The third educational task is to teach children the varied conventions
for using language successfully as a means ofcommunication with other iso-
lated, unique consciousnesses similar to but not the same as their own.
Learning language, like literacy, rests on a fine educational balance, in which
the discipline required to learn the conventions of language needs to be
weighed against the freedom to play with and explore the limits ofthese con-
ventions. The sensitive teacher recognizes that children can learn the con-
ventions and rules best if they are encouraged to play with them. and
recognize their contingency.
"The earliest education is most important," Rousseau argued (1911,
p. 5), echOing Plato's conclusion that "The beginning, as you know, is always
the most important part" (Cornford, 1941, p. 68). Every major educational
thinker has emphaSized the crucial importance of the early years of educa-
tion. And yet, if we consider our schools today, it is hard to believe that the
predominantly provincial trivia of the curriculum and the worksheet-
oriented or "hands-on" activities of common teaching practice are adequate
responses to the importance of the task.
My scheme of introductory education offers as an alternative a recapitu-
lation of the human construction of language and the kind ofunderstanding
of the world and experience that stimulation and development of language
capacities entail. Some level of language development occurs Hnaturally" by
children being brought up in a language-using environment, but fuller de-
velopment of language and its associated intellectual capacities requires de-
liberate teaching. The most important, dramatic, and vivid stories of our
world and of human experience can provide an appropriate curriculum for
the earliest years.
The first educational implication of Mythic understanding, then, is that
young children be encouraged to become fluent and effective users ofvaried
68
language~ this is accomplished through evoking, stimulating, and develop-

MYTHIC UNDERSTANDING
ing the capacities for forming binary oppositions and mediating them, for
abstract thinking, metaphor, rhythm and narrative, images, stories and af-
fective meaning, humor, and no doubt a number of other capacities lan-
guage development implies. This is not to deny that young children also can
attain some grasp on the world aesthetically, by quantification, logically, con-
cretely, by hands-on experience, and so on.
These capacities might be seen as organs of the imagination. The rela-
tionship between the imaginative worlds we spin out of the pOSSibilities cre-
ated by language and reality is, of course, endlessly complex. HUizinga has
called our capacity to imagine in childhood as creating "a second, poetic
world alongSide the world of nature" (1949, p. 23). This poetic world-
emotional, imaginative, metaphoric-is the foundation of our cultural life,
as a species and individually. Logico-mathematical forms of thinking, or ra-
tionality, do not properly displace the poetic world, but rather grow out of
and develop along with it; they are among its implications. The language and
lore, fantasy narratives, metaphoric play, and games of young children con-
stitute an oral culture that persists from generation to generation, sustained
by the techniques of the poetic imagination and the psychological capacities
evoked, stimulated, an.d developed initially by the need to remember and
increaSingly by the satisfaction the enlargement of our power over language
gives us.
The characteristics of Mythic understanding describe some of the major
tools of the poet. It seems to me not fanciful to observe that young children's
main tools for grasping the world and expressing their sense of it are poetic.
This conclusion echoes Vico's conclusion of his study of myths: the main
insight on which he based The New Science (1744) was the realization that
myth was a product not of some intellectual incapacity, rational confusion,
or disease of language but of the mind working in its poetic mode. Myth
makers, he declared, were "poets who spoke in poetic characters. This dis-
covery . . . has cost us the persistent research of almost all our literary life
because with our civilized natures we cannot at all imagine and can under-
stand only by great toil the poetic nature of these first [peoplel" (Vico, 1970,
p. 5). Much the same, I think, might be said about our own childhood un-
derstanding~ its poetic nature has made it difficult to understand by those
who approach it looking only for the origins of rational or logico-
mathematical thinking.
There are, of course, dangers of misunderstanding what we mean when
we call young children's thinking "poetic." The word conjures up too general
and, therefore, absurd comparisons with the more celebrated modern poets,
and it furthers for some a tendency to sentimentalize childhood. If we re-
strict what is meant by "poet" here to those capacities discussed above, we
69

70
TWO
can avoid the overgeneralization and recognize the sense in which the term
is appropriate.
The sentimentalizing is another matter. The notion of the child as poetic
clearly suggests to some that their expressions should therefore be valued as
we value those ofadult poets, painters, and musicians. It connects, too, with
the sentimental notion of the child as innocent, unsullied. I recall from my
distant Catholic past the first Holy Communion ceremony of my school
class. Ancient Father O'Brien, perhaps forty-five I now calculate, talked over
the heads ofus children to the adults behind us in the church. He spoke very
movingly, as I recall, of the innocence of childhood. I remember very clearly
thinking then that Father O'Brien was so ancient that he had clearly forgot-
ten what it was like to be a child. Though, I reflected, perhaps, having ended
up a priest, he actually had been an innocent child, of a kind entirely unlike
me and my angelic-looking friends seated in the pews. It seemed obvious
then that Father O'Brien was much more innocent than we, and that our
varying degrees of villainy and deviousness changed over the years only in
the outlets through which they were expressed.

chapter3
Romantic Understanding
INTRODUCTION
If you tell a typical five-year-old the story of Cinderella, you are not likely to
be asked "What means oflocomotion does the Fairy Godmother use?" nor to
be quizzed about where she is and what she does when she isn't active in the
story But ifyou tell a typical ten-year-old the equally fantastic story ofSuper-
man, you will need to explain his supernatural powers by reference to his
birth on the planet Krypton and to the different molecular structure of our
sun from that of his home star, and so on. (Alas, I've forgotten the details,
and, lamentably, none of the reference books I have at hand is able to help.)
For the younger audience, magic is entirely unobjectionable so long as it
moves the story along. Peter Rabbit's world does not make the kind of ac-
commodations with reality that are necessary for the rabbits Hazel and Big-
wig in the world of Richard Adams's Watership Down; Hazel could not bring
Bigwig a nice cup ofchamomile tea, for instance-his paws wouldn't be able
to hold it.
What happens between age five and ten that causes this difference?
Common sense suggests simply that accumulated experience informs the
child's understanding of which regularities tend to be more reliable. It takes
some time to grasp the conditions of reality that exclude Jack Frost and the
Tooth Fairy but include computer programmers and monks, that exclude
magic but include its anxious relation, fiction. Children typically cease to
71

THREE
believe in Santa Claus, ghosts, and other denizens of magicland during these
years; they begin the trek out of Eden to adults' more prosaic world. This
gradual accommodation with prosaic reality cannot be a sufficient explana-
tion, because the accommodation itself needs to be explained. In some cul-
tures this transition from a world in which fantasy and magic perform
explanatory work does not take place in anything like the form that is com-
mon in the West. And one can easily overestimate how common this transi-
tion is in the West. Acursory glance over the widely selling tabloids available
at supermarket checkouts suggests caution in making strong claims about
how participants in literate Western societies make some marked transition
from the ready acceptance of fantasy and magic in understanding the world.
Another thing that commonly happens during these years in school,
that may help explain the change in stories, is that we teach children to move
from perceptually based discriminations like "hot" and "cold" to abstract
means of referring to the world. In the case of temperature, we teach them to
connect it with the arbitrary numbers of the thermometer. Once students
understand thermometric terms, they can deal easily with temperatures be-
yond their direct experience. So they will understand that one million de-
grees celsius is different from one million and twenty degrees as ten degrees
celsius is different from thirty degrees. But they will still, in everyday life,
refer to ten degrees as "cool" or ~~cold" and thirty degrees as "warm" or "hot."
It is fairly useless to describe the center of the sun as "hot," but ~~hot" can be a
useful term to shout upstairs to one's son or daughter about the temperature
of the bath.
So learning the abstract, "objective" ways of referring to the world does
not displace the perception-based ways. One could shout upstairs that the
bath is "about seventy-four degrees Celsius" or that it is "hot." The two live
on in our minds together. The trick is to learn both systems fluently and be
able to apply the appropriate one in the relevant context. Easier said than
done, and easier with temperature than with morality.
Learning abstract systems of reference to things like temperature, space,
and movement, relies largely on grasping numbers and their relationships.
The related symbol system for abstracting language from the body is writing.
Oral-language use is a bodily activity, involving "the whole person"; writing
is language transported outside the body, involving the eye and mind.
Schools' failures to inculcate fluent ease in dealing with these "disem-
bodied," "decontextualized," "literate" techniques is a source of much noisy
dissatisfaction. To the schools' paymasters, an unacceptably small propor-
tion of students develops adequate literacy skills. To educational thinkers,
72
an even greater frustration is the fact that even those students who "test out"

ROMANTIC UNDERSTANDING
as successes commonly exemplify only the most superficial mastery of the
techniques of literacy.
Touted as the transformer of thought, the golden road to the accumu-
lated treasure store of indirect experience, the great enhancer ofunderstand-
ing of ourselves and of our world, the privileged access to reality, literacy
seems to do little for most people beyond the pragmatic functions for which
it is required in theirjobs or for reading instructions or the newspaper. Such,
anyway, is the representation of many frustrated educators. Providing the
means isn't even half the battle, they say~ most people apparently need to be
goaded, cajoled, pushed, seduced, compelled toward their culture's intellec-
tual delights. Plato's grim solution was that fifty-year curriculum designed to
compel literate minds to develop their full potential as thinkers, as he saw it.
Rousseau admonished dull pedagogues who measured educational success
in terms ofcrude skill mastery: "The apparent ease with which children learn
is their ruin. You fail to see that this very facility proves that they are not
learning. Their shining, polished brain reflects, as in a mirror, the things you
show them, but nothing sinks in" (Rousseau, 1911, p. 71). More recently,
research with honors students in college-level physics courses has shown
that they are commonly unable to solve the most basic physics problems if
posed in a context even slightly different from the ones in which they were
formally instructed. Typically, they display exactly the same confusions and
misconceptions that one encounters in primary school children (Gardner,
1991, ch. 1). Such students are very successful at learning particular skills
and knowledge, but skills and knowledge fail to transform their understand-
ing of physics. Gardner shows that similar misconceptions, confusions, and
stereotypes, formed early in life, remain in most students stubbornly resis-
tant to education. "Successful" students, as measured by standardized tests,
when moved even slightly from the supporting formal contexts of their
studies, respond to problems with no greater understanding than is shown
by "the unschooled mind" of the young child.
Education, I am proposing, can best be understood as a process in
which the individual recapitulates the kinds of understanding developed in
the culture's history. Such a view implies that we can learn something of
practical value for education by studying how this transition was made his-
torically, and we might also understand why the transition is so problematic
for many and only superficially attained by many more. Ifwe find that in our
cultural history the transition from "prescholastic" to "scholastic" ways of
knowing (to use Gardner's terms) has been problematiC, we may be less sur-
prised at students' difficulties, and by analyzing how the historical process of
development occurred we may be able to devise a curriculum and methods
73

THREE
of teaching better suited than current forms to supporting that development
in students today.
The development of understanding we want to encourage in students
has to do with ... well, look at the words for it in this brief introduction-
"schooled," "theoretic," "disembodied," "decontextualized," "abstract," "for-
mal," "disciplined," "objective" thinking. The shift from learning the first
symbol system of oral language to the second symbol systems of written
numbers and the alphabet occurred gradually and in distinguishable stages
in our cultural history, and it can best be recapitulated in similar distinct
stages in education today. The first major step leads to what 1call Romantic
understanding.
REASON, REALITY, AND WRITING
Ifyou, noble reader of this text, were faced by what is now a celebrated prob-
lem once posed by A. R. Luria to illiterate villagers in central Asia, you would
have no difficulty giving the right answer: "In the far north, where there is
snow, all bears are white. Novaya Zemlya is in the far north. What c?lor are
the bears there7" If you learn that due to a curiosity of evolution on the sev-
enth planet orbiting Sirius, all the flowers are blue and, further, that one of
the planets' more spectacular flowers, called by its Irish discoverer the Flow-
ering Shamrock, grows more than fifty feet in height, and should you also be
asked what color the Flowering Shamrock is, you will have no difficulty an-
swering correctly that it is blue. If you are told that all the cats in a room are
black, and that one of the cats is called Snowy, and you are asked what color
Snowy is, you will be easily able to deduce that Snowy is black, and deduce
also that its namer probably has a qUirky sense of humor.
If, being patient of endless daft questions, you are further asked what
smaller word can be abstracted from the word "window," you would easily
answer "win." Ifyou were asked to say what word is formed when you delete
the hard "c" sound from "cat," or when the "I" is removed from "flat," you
would have no difficulty giving the correct answers. You could also easily
identify the two smaller words that can be derived from such compound
words as "stopwatch" or "lighthouse" or "daytime."
You may be fairly unimpressed by your prowess in dealing successfully
with these problems. But answering such questions prove difficult if not im-
possible for illiterate people in traditional oral cultures. The syllogisms in the
first paragraph can be successfully answered if one attends to their internal
74
logic. They are examples of a language/logic game at which we Western

ROMANTIC UNDERSTANDING
high-literates become very efficient. The villagers to whom Luria posed the
first problem were no doubt no less intelligent than you or I, but their re-
sponses suggested a total unfamiliarity with this conditional, "decontex-
tualized" use of language. They would, to be polite, answer that they had
never been to Novaya Zemlya, and that if Luria wanted to know about bears
there, he should either go himself or ask people who had been there. The
second problem is easy ifone ignores all the elaboration and invention about
Flowering Shamrocks and concentrates on the logic of the syllogism. We
high literates are unlikely to be thrown by the black cat's name being Snowy
because we follow the logic of the syllogism rather than refer outside the text
to our experience and pragmatic expectations (cf. Cole and Scribner, 1974;
Luria, 1976, 1979; Tulviste, 1979).
These tasks cannot be managed easily or at all by people who cannot
read alphabetic script; this includes young English-speaking prereaders,
people who can read but whose orthography is not alphabetic, and adult
illiterates (Bertelson and DeGelder, 1988; Scholes and Willis, 1991). As
Olson has convincingly argued, "Writing systems create the categories in
terms of which we become conscious of speech" (1993, p. 15). That is, the
particular graphic script people use serves as a model for how they think
about language. The Greek alphabet, from which all alphabetic systems are
derived, has particular characteristics for making us conscious of our lan-
guage, or, rather, for determining the kind of consciousness of language that
we develop. The alphabet, for example, ensures that we hear our speech as
made up of elements that can be broken into phonemiC segments. So we can
perform the tasks I have outlined easily. Chinese readers of traditional char-
acters do not detect such phonemic segments, but Chinese readers of the
alphabetic Pinyin script do (Read et al., 1986).
Eric Havelock writes about "the superior technology of the Greek alpha-
bet," which remains the "sole instrument of full literacy to the present day"
(1991, pp. 24 and 26). That technology was superior to other scripts and to
oral modes ofcommunication, in Havelock's account, because it led to a con-
ceptual revolution in ancient Greece in which "a reflexive syntax of defini-
tion, description, and analysis" was exploited by Plato, Aristotle, and other
ancient Greeks and all their alphabetic successors. They generated the philo-
sophic, scientific, historical, descriptive, legal, and moral forms of discourse
that make up what we call the modern mind.
As my interest i~ the transition to "the modern mind" and the kinds of
understanding that constitute it, and as literacy seems so tangled up in that
transition, whether as cause, cata.lyst, or result, then some attention to the
recent research on literacy is appropriate~ In particular 1am interested, as a
75

THREE
result of the clue that the changing character of children's stories seems to
give, in the development of a conception of reality, access to which seems to
become problematic for literates.
Within a relatively short time in ancient Greece, the peculiar cultural
development that seems tied up with what we mean by education was given
a decisive kick forward. At the end of the archaic period, the Greek city-
states enjoyed and suffered a cultural and social life not markedly dissimilar
from that of their neighbors. Their material culture was not obviously differ-
ent, their heroic ballads of war were of a common genre, and their myths'
vividness and power did not clearly mark theirs from others'. (Perhaps I
should not be so cavalier with such assertions, as much scholarly activity has
been spent on detecting the seeds of the developments to come in distinctive
features of archaic Greek life, and particularly in their political and social
institutions [Lloyd, 1988, 1990; Vernant, 1982].) But accelerating during
the sixth century and roaring through the fifth comes something culturally
dramatic that now, for good and ill, influences nearly all human experience.
Much ingenious attention has focused on the causal or catalytic role of
alphabetic literacy. While many of their neighbors were using writing sys-
tems to mark pots of grain, wine, and olives, list kings and priests, and cele-
brate in stylized form victories over traditional enemies, the Greeks began to
explOit their writing system in ways none of its inventors could have imag-
ined. Writing, after all, was simply a device for helping the memory with
quantities or with activities that were becoming too numerous or too com-
plicated. Many tools not only permit us to perform more efficiently the task
for which they were deSigned but also open up new possibilities. In this
regard there has been no tool within the historical period like alphabetic
writing. Among much else, it opened up what we call the historical period.
Fluent literacy is not simply a matter of thinking and then writing the prod-
uct of one's thoughts; the writing, rather, becomes a part of the process
of thinking. Extended discursive writing is not an external copy of a kind of
thinking that goes on in the head; it represents a distinctive kind of literate
thinking.
Over the past thirty years, a number ofscholars have argued with signifi-
cant success that the fifth-century developments that had in the earlier part of
this century been romantically referred to as the "Greek miracle"-giving
birth to democracy, logic, philosophy, history, drama, reflective introspection,
and so on so suddenly-were explainable in large part as an implication ofthe
development and spread ofalphabetic literacy (Havelock, 1963, 1982, 1986;
Goody, 1977, 1987; Goody and Watt, 1963; Olson, 1977;Ong, 1977, 1982).
Plausible accounts of how the generation, elaboration, accumulation, and
76
interpretation of texts led to these intellectual developments have been given

ROMANTIC UNDERSTANDING
by the scholars mentioned above, and by others, during the 1980s and 1990s
(see Olson and Torrance, 1991 for an excellent description of this energetic
and engaging area of study). The developments were not simply in the new
kinds oftexts beingproduced in ancient Greece, suchas Herodotus's Histories,
but were somehow in the kind ofthinking that went into writing and reading
such texts, or listening to such texts being read or performed.
If the development ofalphabetic literacy in ancient Greece caused these
new kinds of thinking, then perhaps simply being schooled into literacy to-
day causes the kind of thinking we call "modern." In one important regard,
this looked like a liberating conclusion. What had been taken as the greater
practical efficiency of modern Western thinking over that of traditional oral
cultures could now be seen as the result not ofsome assumed genetic superi-
ority in Europeans' brains but of the technological advantage accruing from
the trick of alphabetic literacy. Scholars thus could study differences be-
tween "modern" and "traditional" thinking without becoming entangled in
racist or ethnocentric assumptions or conclusions.
There are two problems with this. First, past ethnocentricity, which was
framed in terms of Caucasian genetic superiority, is now disguised in the
seemingly neutral and contingent technological trick of literacy. However
scholars try to suggest that orality and literacy involve alternative technolo-
gies, each with its distinct advantages and disadvantages, invariably the
superiority of literacy is asserted by associating illiteracy with "poverty, mal-
nutrition, lack of education and health care" (Pattanayak, 1991, p. 105).
These ~~oppressive theorizations" are much harder to combat and dislodge
than the simple racism of the past because superiority/inferiority associated
with literacy seems so obvious and becomes a "problem" amenable to solu-
tion by programs of universal literacy. Thus, in order to make their lives and
forms of thinking more satisfactory, the world's 800 million illiterates are
seen to be in need of the Greek cure.
The second problem is that inducing literacy does not always stimulate
the cognitive changes or social transformations that have been linked to its
development in ancient Greece and in medieval Europe (Stock, 1983).
Scribner and Cole's report of their studies among the Vai people of Liberia
suggested that they could detect no "general cognitive consequences of liter-
acy among the Vai" (1981, p. 158; but see their co-authored chapter and the
discussion in Goody, 1987, chs. 9 and 10). Further, the remarkable story of
the rapid spread of a syllabic script invented by a Methodist minister, James
Evans, for the Cree language in Canada in or around 1840, is suggestive of
the limited effects literacy can have. The script spread far and fast among the
Cree, quickly outpacing missionaries' activities, and virtually universal liter-
acy was achieved within a decade, despite the Cree's lack of paper, pens, and
77

THREE
formal schooling. The Cree seem to have used the script almost exclusively
for writing notes and letters, keeping journals and records, and other "pri-
vate" activities. The script seems to have served as a social convenience and
gives no evidence of having stimulated any of the dramatic cultural changes
or cognitive effects associated with the Greek alphabet. Similarly, Narasim-
han has pointed out that in India, "in spite of the availability of a textual
tradition involved in active textual literacy practices, the kinds of scientific
and technological developments at the social level, and cognitive develop-
ments at the individual level, that a textual tradition is supposed to result in
did not materialize" (1991, p. 179). Despite India's long literate tradition, a
systematic distinction between myth and history or between supernatural
explanations and rational ones was not developed. Being literate clearly does
not compel the mind to such distinctions. Muddying further the implica-
tions ofearlier claims about the causal relationship between literacy and cog-
nitive activity, Feldman has argued that certain forms of thinking considered
distinctively modern, Western, and a product of literacy can be found in a
number of traditional oral societies. She shows that particular artful uses of
language, distinct from everyday discourse, in Ilongot oratory, Wana Kiyori,
and Indian mythic poems invite reflection and interpretation. She argues
that "it is genre rather than writing that permits the separation of text and
interpretation, and the development of reflectivity" (1988, p. 210).
These and other inconveniences compel one to observe that "what is
cognitively innovative about literacy is not universally explOited by all cul-
tures with writing" (Kittay, 1991, p. 169). Educators make a related observa-
tion, of course: what is cognitively innovative about literacy is not
universally explOited by all children who pass as literate in our schools. They
will generally manage the syllogisms and phoneme deletion tasks above, but
disciplined thinking of the kind some ancient Greeks took to such a refined
pitch seems much less commonly recapitulated.
We might divide the debate about the cultural and cognitive conse-
quences of literacy into two parts: what must happen as a result of develop-
ing literacy and what can happen. It seems that nothing much must happen
either culturally or cognitively, though there remain doughty arguments that
some cognitive consequences follow from externalizing a part of one's bodily
activity-language-and making it visible in graphiC form. But at a social
level, literacy seems to be absorbable into a variety of patterns of living and
thinking, playing a minor role of casual utility (Heath, 1983~ Street, 1984).
What can happen is all that "Greek miracle" stuff-prOViding fluent access
to the treasure house of stored experience, ideas, and dreams and fulfilling
the promise of making our lives more abllndant. We must recognize, how-
78
ever, that with this potential abundance comes a twofold cost: first, the time

ROMANTIC UNDERSTANDING
and discipline-moral as well as intellectual-required properly to access
and benefit from the experience stored in writing; second, the losses in forms
of thinking that consequently become less clear, less accessible, less life-
enhanCing.
How can we optimize the gifts reserved for the literate while minimizing
the losses? What is the first big step into a new kind ofunderstanding (which
I call Romantic) that literacy can help us to take? One of the key features of
this understanding is the generation ofa new consciousness ofsomething we
call reality, access to which becomes problematic but can be achieved by de-
veloping what we call reason. These terms and our sense of them owe much
to Plato and Aristotle, but we can trace steps in the development of this un-
derstanding during the centuries preceding their systematizing of it. It is
possible to see a clear recapitulation of the process as children develop liter-
acy today. As Bruner puts it, "literacy comes into its full powers as a goad to
the redefinition of reality" (1988, p. 205).
Early prose-writing Greeks such as Thales, Anaximander, and Anax-
imines, all of whom lived in Miletus, began to treat the natural world as an
object for detached, systematic investigation (historia) and aimed to provide
a comprehensive, accurate view of how things really are (theoria). Our no-
tion of "myth" as something false is inherited from these early literate Greeks
who dismissed the sacred stories of their predecessors as useless: "the stories
of the Greeks are many and in my opinion ridiculous" wrote Hecataeus, an-
other Miletan. The recent scholars of Greek alphabetic literacy, cited earlier,
have given plausible models of how the ability to gather and inspect texts
invited and supported, ifnot compelled, this new kind of inquiry that aimed
to uncover what is real and true. The nature of things, which had been
largely unproblematic to minds governed by mythic thinking, became an
object ofwonder, exploration and of inquiries that now seem ceaseless. Near
its literate beginning was the discovery that "reality is no longer something
that is simply given. The meaningful no longer impresses itself as incon-
trovertible fact, and appearances have ceased to reveal their significance di-
rectly to man. All this really means that myth has.come to an end" (Snell,
1960, p. Ill).
Well, perhaps Snell overstates things. Thales, at the fountainhead of this
new rational tradition, concluded that everything was made of water. Why
would anyone reach such an odd conclusion? Indeed, why would anyone
conclude that everything is made ofsome ultimate material in the first place?
We can give fairly clear answers to these two questions, thanks to F M. Corn-
ford. He showed that to understand the odd claims of Thales, and of Anaxi-
mander and Anaximines, we have to be familiar with the a priori forms of
thought, the "scheme of unchallenged and unsuspecting presuppositions"
79

THREE
(1907, p. viii) that those Miletans worked with. Comford (1912) shows that
the kind of questions that guided their rational inquiries were questions
about the nature of things that had shaped the earlier answers given in
myths. That is, what we see in these early Greek inquirers is a rational form
of inquiry, but one still profoundly influenced by mythic elements.
The sharpness of the break from mythic to rational inquiries in ancient
Greece is somewhat illusory, then, as Cornford showed earlier in this century
and others have elaborated since (e.g., Dodds, 1951; Lloyd, 1990). What
was dramatic was the eradication of magic and gods as explanatory devices
and the new focus on an autonomous reality; what has tended to receive
much less attention is the persistence ofmyth at a "subterranean," or, at what
we might today call a structural, level. So, for example, the authors of the
Hippocratic canon concluded that health was crucially bound up with
achieving a balance between the four humors. Why? Because this repre-
sented a "rational," real-world theory reflecting nevertheless the Greeks' cos-
mogonic myth, in which the world was divided between Zeus, Hades, and
Neptune while the earth was common to all (Iliad, Xv, 187ff.); this view
yielded or reflected the divisions among sky, underworld, sea, and earth that
had to be preserved in balance for harmony to prevail (Cochrane, 1929;
Cornford, 1912). The precise observations of the Hippocratics, that is, still
carried a considerable burden from the proto-speculation of myth. Even the
austere historical writing of Thucydides can be seen to rest on "unsuspected
presuppositions" derived from myths (Cornford, 1907; Egan, 1978a).
Whatever may remain debatable about Thomas Kuhn's theory of scien-
tific revolutions (1962), he has shown convincingly how each "paradigm
generation" tends to rewrite and reinterpret the conclusions of its prede-
cessors as though their concerns, questions, methods, and viewpoints were
similar. Rational scholars have tended to emphasize the rational elements in
ancient Greek inquiries at the expense of the persisting mythic elements.
Sophisticated rationality did not emerge full grown, like Athena from the
head of Zeus. It developed bit by bit, carrying its mythic origins well into the
modern period. Romantic understanding represents crucial elements of ra-
tionality developing along with persisting features of myth-in both cul-
tural history and in education today.
Recapitulation of the move from myth and magic to rationality and real-
ity can be seen at many levels. David Olson (1994) describes some of the
developments ofwriting in the ancient Near East. He notes, for example, the
significant move from signs representing things to signs representing words
for things. In the earliest scripts, four sheep might be represented by the sign
80
for "sheep" made four times. It is a significant development to represent four

ROMANTIC UNDERSTANDING
sheep by two signs, one representing sheep and the other the number. Such
a move allows economy and encourages generativity in the writing system
(Harris, 1986). It also represents a new kind of abstraction. As this develop-
ment ofsigns for words rather than for things becomes increasingly sophisti-
cated' it in turn generates new ways of thinking about the language it
represents: "a new understanding of language as consisting ofwords also has
conceptual implications. It spells the death of word magic.... When the
word is thought ofas representing a thing rather than an intrinsic property of
the thing, word magic loses its power. An action on the name, as in a hex,
does not affect the named because the word, unlike the name, is not a·.part of
the thing; it is just a word" (Olson, 1993, p. 7).
In passing, Olson writes:
It is interesting to note that in learning to read and write children go through just such a
shift in understanding. Ifnon-reading pre-school children are given a pencil and asked to
write "cat'~ they may write a short string of letter-like forms. If then asked to write" three
cats" they repeat the same initial string three times. Conversely, if such pre-reading chil-
dren are shown a text which reads: "Three little pigs" and the text is then read to them
while the words are pointed out they tend to take each word as a representation, an em-
blem~ of a pig. Consequently, if the final word is erased and children are asked~ "Now
what does it say?" they may reply "Two little pigs." Alternatively, ifeach of the three words
is pointed to in turn and the child is asked what each says, they reply, "One little pig;
another little pig; and another little pig." (Olson, 1993, p. 8)
He notes a number of precise recapitulations of this kind between the
development of writing systems and children's development of literacy to-
day. What I want to go on to now are more general recapitulations-of a
complex kind of understanding that is influenced partly by detailed recapit-
ulations ofalphabetic literacy within institutions trying to encourage literacy
development so as to exploit its potential for abstract, decontextualized
thinking. What I will try to be sensitive to, and what is usually ignored, is the
persistence of mythic elements in this initial foray into rationality. The mix-
ture of the mythic with the rational constitutes the central defining feature of
Romantic understanding.
SOME CHARACTERISTICS OF ROMANTIC UNDERSTANDING
An early and quite clear expression of Romantic understanding is found in
The Histories of Herodotus, written when literacy was becoming integrated
into ancient Greek social life. It is also a work that enjoyed a wide and enthu-
siastic audience in ancient Greece, and has remained one of the most engag-
ing texts still enjoyed from the ancient world. I will try to show surprising
81

THREE
parallels between The Histories of Herodotus and forms of thinking com-
monly evident in students today during the years when literacy becomes
integrated into their daily activities and when they are learning the "abstract-
ing," "decontextualizing" skills that go with rationality.
Herodotus, "the father of history," was born in Halicarnassus, on the
coast of Asia Minor, south of Miletus, sometime between 490 and 480
S.C.E.The Histories describe the Persian Empire, its neighbors, and its great
war against the Greek states. The rational prose writers who had turned their
attention to the past before him (including Hecataeus, who began his
Genealogies with the personal judgment that the Greeks' stories were ridicu-
lous), seem to have compiled inscriptions, local records, family histories,
traditional accounts, and whatever else they could find that seemed to give
some more reliable information than the myths (Pearson, 1939; Fornara,
1983). The Histories had in common with them the mixing of ethnographic
material, anecdotes, and geographical information, as well as what we tend
to think of as more straightforward history. But nothing written previously
could compare with the scope of Herodotus's work or with his organization
of material into a coherent epic account. Much of it dealt with relatively
long-past and long-distant events. Among Greeks who closely associated
"knowing" and "seeing" (Snell, 1960, ch. 7), Herodotus's method of describ-
ing what he could not have witnessed or reliably known earned him also the
title "father of lies" (Momigliano, 1966).
The Histories remains a fascinating read, full of the exotic, strange, and
wonderful, of stirring events and an epic conflict between the awesome Per-
sian Empire and the tiny, quarreling Greek states. It would be no wonder if
Herodotus had been paid in Athens to read parts of it aloud to appreciative
audiences, as was later claimed. He would have been an odd kind of latter-
day bard-reading prose rather than reciting poetry Open up the first four
books at random, as I do now, and learn about the black pygmies who at-
tacked and carried off a group of Lybian explorers; about why Egyptians
were reluctant to let the embalmers have the bodies of beautiful or promi-
nent women until three or four days after death; about the twenty-two tons
of gold used in building the figure of Bel (the Biblical Baal) in Babylon; about
how the Egyptian women attended market and did business while the men
stayed home and wove and how the women stood up to urinate whereas the
men squatted down; about how to catch crocodiles; about how Amazon
women came to settle with a detachment of Scythian young men but pre-
served such customs as not marrying until after killing an enemy in battle;
about how the Persian king built a dam on the Aces river and the problems it
82
caused the tribes who had relied on the lower branches of the river; and

ROMANTIC UNDERSTANDING
about the endless stories of outstanding cunning, daring, cruelty, revenge,
murder, thieving, and sexual misbehavior. Much of the text bears more than
a passing resemblance to those papers at the supermarket check-out.
The remaining five books are more focused on the Persian attacks on the
Greeks, detailing the amazing size of the Persian armies and navies. The
small, independent Greek states, and particularly freedom-loving Athens,
despite terrible setbacks, constant bickering, impossible odds, and cliff-
hanging decisions, nevertheless finally managed to defeat the tyrannical
Eastern empire.
The Histories reads like an ancient Guinness Book of Records, crammed
with stories about the brave and noble, descriptions of the exotic and bi-
zarre, and expressions of wonder at amazing achievements and huge and
strange buildings. The kind of understanding it displays is not easily sus-
tained without writing. We may see it recur, sometimes more energetically
than others-as during the Romantic period in modern Europe, to which 1
will also make occasional reference.
The Limits of Reality, the Extremes of Experience,
the Context of Our Lives
Herodotus begins his narrative by telling us that what he "has learnt by in-
quiry [histone] is here set forth: in order that the memory of the past may not
be blotted out from among men by time, and that great and marvellous
things done [erga] by the Greeks and Barbarians and especially the reason
why they warred against each other may not cease to be recounted." The
emphasis throughout the work is on the mega ergon, the great achievement.
The odd shape of the work is partly the product of Herodotus's desire to
record whatever great erga he has learned about: "1 am about to lengthen
my logos on Egypt because Egypt has the largest numbers of wonders, more
than all the rest of the world. And of all the countries of the world, it is
Egypt which contains erga which actually surpass their reputation" (The His-
tories, 11,35).
It is perhaps hard for us to imagine the dramatic impact in ancient Greece
of this narrative born ofinquiry. Herodotus's invention created a way ofmak-
ing the reader or hearer a kind of witness, vicariously present at the great
events described. The technique drew something from drama and from epic
poetry but it dealt with reality, with real people and real events as they really
happened-or so it represented itself as doing. You are there, a witness to
Croesus's conversations, to Xerxes' planning, to the great battles themselves.
It has also all the delights of gossip with the justification ofhigh seriousness.
83

THREE
Herodotus was accused of creating a disproportionate work because of
his seeming inability to leave out a vivid story or odd custom, however slen-
der its relevance to his narrative thread. But the thread is not lost; rather,
what we read is a typically romantic description of the world. Such an
approach obviously does not provide a full understanding of events, but it
provides a kind of understanding-indeed, a romantic kind of understand-
ing. And while Herodotus is my chosen example here, it is clear that these
characteristics are prominent in, and in part definitive of, all appearances of
romance in Western history. European Romanticism is notoriously the ob-
ject of rather disparate descriptions, but no one can omit its "preoccupation
with otherness, with what is different, remote, mysterious, inaccessible, ex-
otic, even bizarre" (Ong, 1971, p. 255).
The preservation of great events, of the memory of the outstanding, has
been central to romantic history writing from Herodotus's time to our own. A
medieval historical text puts the sentiment ideally, echoing Herodotus:
The stream of Time, irresistible, ever moving, carries off and bears away all things that
come to birth and plunges them into utter darkness, both deeds of no account and deeds
which are mighty and worthy of commemoration.... Nevertheless, the science of His-
tory is a great bulwark against this stream ofTime; in a way it checks this irresistible flood,
it holds in a tight grasp whatever it can seize floating on the surface and will not allow it to
slip away into the depths of oblivion. (Comnena, 1969, p. 17)
Referring to Herodotus's work as The Guinness Book ofAncient World Re-
cords is a joke whose point turns on the very real similarity between the two
works. The modern work strives, with a slightly comic earnestness, to apply
rational modes of inquiry to discovering precisely who really was the big-
gest, the smallest, the fastest, the slowest, the hairiest, the oldest, and so on.
It seeks to sweep away myths and wild claims and to establish the limits of
reality and the extremes ofexperience. Herodotus's text is similarly crammed
with details whose onlyjustification is that they represent a record. We learn,
for example, that King Psammetichus of Egypt was engaged in a siege
around Azotus in Syria for twenty-nine years. There are no strategic implica-
tions of this; the siege is mentioned only because "it was the longest of any in
history" (The Histories, II, p. 157). (I am delighted to discover that this is also
included in The Guinness Book of Records, 1992, p. 241.)
Why are the contents of The Guinness Book of Records so much more
engaging than the typical math or geography textbook to the average ten-
year-old? Why is the average ten-year-old so interested in who was the tallest
person who ever lived? (The average ten-year-old male slightly, but only
slightly, more interested than the average ten-year-old female, according to
my informal surveys.) One answer is that such facts are more romantic; they
84
tell about the wonders of the world, the most extreme experiences, the limits

ROMANTIC
UNDERSTANDING
of reality, the greatest achievements, the most exotic forms of life, the most
amazing events. The Guinness Book of Records is one of the most accessible
collections of erga for children. For the literate student faced with a seem-
ingly infinite autonomous reality, the records provide a very neat summary
of the range and extent of reality, with the associated security that reality isn't
infinite in all regards.
If this autonomous reality were infinitely extensive, we would be infi-
nitely insignificant. By discovering the real limits of the world and of human
experience, we form a context that enables us to establish some security and
to establish proportionate meaning within it. Knowing about the biggest and
smallest people allows us, on the one hand, to wonder at their extreme sizes,
but, on the other, to be reassured about our own scale. Once we have some
sense of context, we can begin to develop some sense of the proportionate
meaning of things.
It is a little odd that the eight- to fifteen-year-olds' enjoyment of books,
TV shows, and films that deal with the exotic and the extreme has had so
little impact on learning theories and curriculum planning. To pick up a
thread from the previous chapter: still by far the most common learning
principle urged on teachers is that children's learning moves "from the
known to the unknown," and that, to engage their interest and make new
knowledge meaningful, one must begin with something relevant to their ev-
eryday experience and connect the new knowledge to that. If this indeed is
how children learn most effectively, one must wonder what does the fattest
person who ever lived have to do with their everyday experience, or the most
expensive postage stamp, or the longest beard?
While I will take up implications for teaching later, it is worth pausing
briefly to consider how this first characteristic of Romantic understanding
leads us to think rather differently about children's learning during these
years. The "romantic" principle inclines us to an alternative observation
about the logic of human intellectual exploration and discovery-of learn-
ing new knowledge-from that currently dominant in education. Suppose
you were placed in a hill town somewhere and invited to explore it. You
would be foolish to begin by concentrating in detail on the familiar features
of the hotel room around you and gradually working out from there, con-
stantly connecting what you were discovering with your familiar material
culture and experience. More sensibly, you would begin by trying to find out
how extensive the town is, where its walls or limits are, what the major
buildings and open spaces are, what kind of activities people engage in, and
so on. That is, you would get some sense of the context, the limits, the major
erga, the exotic features, and so on. This would be very much an Herodotean
approach, in which one makes sense of the different, the strange, by estab-
85

THREE
lishing the context within which it exists, not by some gradual extension
from what is already familiar.
Now, clearly both strategies are available to us (and so is an indetermi-
nate number of others). My concern is that the currently dominant attempt
to build understanding by gradual extension from the familiar is only part of
the story~ it is not particularly effective in developing Romantic understand-
ing and, indeed, by itself it is ineffective. The traditional conception repre-
sents learning as building understanding by composing it bit by bit, rather
the way a jigsaw puts together a picture of something. The "romantic" alter-
native conception represents learning as building understanding by gradu-
ally clarifying a picture the way the pieces ofa holographic plate work. If one
takes a piece of a smashed holographic plate and shines a laser through it,
one will generate a blurred image of the whole picture. As further pieces of
the plate are added, the image becomes clearer.
Ofcourse, we use both the holograph andjigsawproceduresin construct-
ing understanding: we learn by making associations between the familiar and
new knowledge and by fitting new knowledge into overall, vaguely grasped
contexts that the new knowledge in turn helps to clarify. The holograph proc;:e-
dure seems particularly important for establishing meaning, by building the
new knowledge into sets of relationships stretched across the contexts we
more or less tentatively hold in place. The principle oflearning implied by the
holograph metaphor, however, has received very little attention in education
even though it coheres with much of our experience.
With their literacy-supported discovery of autonomous reality, students
begin to lose their ready engagement with giants who were a mile high and
midgets no bigger than your thumbnail. They turn intellectually to discover
who was really the biggest and smallest person who ever lived. Myth gives
way to reality while also persisting in providing a template for the questions
and interests that drive our inquiries. The Simple binary structures ofmythiC
understanding begin to fall away as we grasp an increasingly complex real-
ity: "Such [binary] relationships are good for thinking, but reality does not
always follow
suit~ a certain stubbornness of the facts remains" (Burkert,
1985, p. 217). We see in the move from giants to the tallest person really, the
gradual accommodation between the mind and reality. The stubborn facts
are the objects to which we try to make our ideas conform~ theories are men-
tal constructs that try to represent stubborn reality. But between the myths
that shape the world to the requirements of mental structures and theories
that try to conform with the actual structure of the world, we have romance.
Romance deals with reality, but it does so with persisting mythic interests. It
86
is a compromise with, rather than a capitulation to, reality.

ROMANTIC UNDERSTANDING
I have mentioned only The Guinness Book of Records as an example of
students' sharing with Herodotus a ready engagement with the extreme and
the exotic. It would be easy to elaborate examples at length, but I assume that
the interest in these features of reality is so obvious during these years, and
thereafter, that elaboration is not necessary. Engagement by the wonderful
and different is so taken for granted that it seems not to invite inquiry.
One other distinctive characteristic ofstudents' intellectual activity dur-
ing these years is the obsession with hobbies or with collecting. I discuss
these at greater length elsewhere (Egan, 1990), but here we might note the
often passionate drive to complete a set or to enlarge and organize, or con-
stantly reorganize, a collection. The collection may be of stones, shells,
stamps, dolls' outfits, comics-almost anything. The hobbies may be
equally varied. This drive in Western culture typically begins with literacy,
peaks at about age eleven, and fades away by about fifteen.
What is going on here? Well, we can recognize collecting and hobbies as
an engagement with reality that is in one regard like the pursuit of the exotic
and extreme. By collecting the set, or by mastering in great detail some area
of the world, one gains the assurance that reality is not limitless, that one can
grasp it. By learning about something exhaustively, one gains the security that
the world is in principle knowable. 50 one reduces the threat that one is
insignificant or at the mercy of an unknowably vast reality Of course, many
people do not gain this security, but it is one of the important contributions
of a developed Romantic understanding.
All this talk of the exotic and the bizarre will no doubt raise warning
Signals for many It smacks ofentertainment and trivia rather than the impor-
tant skills required by the practical world the student has to inhabit. It sug-
gests a curriculum focused on the extremes of reality and the limits of
experience rather than on the students' own environments. Those are all rea-
sonable inferences, but I should make a few qUick qualifiers. First, the focus
on the exotic and the bizarre is not the only characteristic of Romantic un-
derstanding, and each of the others will have its implications, so we will not
expect students' time to be spent entirely on the exotic and bizarre. Second,
by learning about the limits of reality and the extremes of experience, stu-
dents are also learning something profound about the everyday world
around them; such limits help to set the everyday in context and hence es-
tablish its meaning. Third, anything in the world may be made an object of
romantic engagement ifonly we see it in the appropriate way The fattest and
hairiest person who ever lived may have an easy dramatic appeal, but by
showing students the romantic aspect of an old Styrofoam cup or a building
lot or the desks they sit in or the air they breathe one can engage and enlarge
87

THREE
students' Romantic understanding. Fourth, while education and entertain-
ment are concepts with some important distinguishing characteristics, the
need to acknowledge the distinctions should not make us exaggerate them.
Learning can be fun, and during these years in particular romantic engage-
ment is an enemy of dullness and pervasive boredom.
Put simplistically, literacy generates conceptions of reality, and the mind
explores reality by trying to grasp its limits and extremes; we see the same
process at work in cultural history and in students today. By grasping at the
limits and extremes, we set in place a context that establishes more ample,
clear, and "realistic" meaning to the details and experiences of our everyday
world.
Transcendence within Reality
The archetypical romantic figure is the hero. The hero lives, like the rest of
us, within the constraints of the everyday world but, unlike the rest of us,
manages somehow to transcend the constraints that hem us in. The mythic
gods who transcended the constraints of nature at will were swept away by
the rational drive to represent the world accurately. (Such a romantic image!
"Rationality sweeps away the old gods." It could be a theme-it probably
was-for one of those romantic allegorical paintings of the nineteenth cen-
tury.) But while the gods might have disappeared from early rational narra-
tives, they left a template that gives form to early rational attempts to make
sense ofevents. In the place of the gods and their will, we find heroic figures
and their will.
The trick of rationally representing the world, as one of the great propo-
nents of the method put it, is to keep "the eye steadily fixed upon the facts of
nature and so [receive] their images Simply as they are" (Bacon, 1965,
p. 323). Well, it hasn't proven quite as simple as Bacon suggests; we seem to
find it very difficult not to contribute something to the facts of nature as we
receive them.
If we look at how Herodotus represented causality in his histories, for
example, we see events as the result of the emotions and consequent actions
of important individuals. In sophisticated modern historical texts, we see
causality in social and economic conditions, in complexes ofprior social and
psychological influences. Herodotus's text, however, is full of heroic charac-
ters who are extraordinarily clever or daring or cunning. Their heroic actions
are represented as the causes of events. In modern historical texts, establish-
ing causal conditions will involve an analysis; in Herodotus's text it involves
a story, or many stories.
88
What caused the great war between the Persian Empire and the Greek

ROMANTIC UNDERSTANDING
states? Herodotus sweeps aside earlier stories and locates the initiating cause
in Croesus's greed and his desire for vengeance against Cyrus. Essential to
the story is the background explaining how Croesus came to lead so great
an empire. Lydia, for example, passed into Croesus's family because its pre-
vious ruler, Candaules, thought his wife the most excitingly beautiful of
women and he half-persuaded, half-compelled one of his favorite body-
guards, Gyges, to watch at their bedroom door to see her undress so that he
might confirm Candaules's estimate. The naked, and unnamed, queen saw
Gyges as he slipped away. The next morning she gave Gyges a simple choice:
be killed immediately, or kill Candaules and rule in his place. Poor Gyges
chose the latter, and his great-grandson Croesus thus later inherited the
throne. (Herodotus tells us that, as king, Gyges attacked the Greek Ionian
town of Miletus: "That, however, being his only act of importance during a
reign of thirty-eight years, I will pass on without further comment" [The His-
tories, I, 13]).
Clearly the criteria that rational Herodotus uses in selecting what to in-
clude in his narrative are somewhat different from those that shape typical
modern historical texts. The form ofcausality Herodotus uses is readily com-
prehensible to us, and remains popular in modern films, novels, soap op-
eras, and journalism. His text is full ofindividuals whose emotions cause the
events that make up his narrative. Those emotions are much the same set
that stimulated the old gods to interfere in human affairs-greed, revenge,
lust, the will to power, compassion, love (perhaps not in that order). He-
rodotus's text is full of characters who can no longer transcend reality the
way the magical gods used to, but they share with those gods some qualities
that are only vestigial in the mundane world. The heroic transcends not just
the bounds of reality or the laws ofnature but inner constraints, too, and the
everyday constraints ofconventional institutions, behaviors, physical attain-
ments, and so on.
Two observations seem appropriate here. First, heroes engage our inter-
est because they "body forth" in unusual degree a human virtue that enables
them to transcend conventional constraints. Our engagement with heroes
and their achievements comes through our association with their transcen-
dent human qualities; we all share those qualities, though, alas, in more lim-
ited degrees.
Second, the archetypical hero in the Western tradition has been a male
power-oriented doer of usually violent deeds. There is, however, a wide
range of qualities that we associate with in any hero-sanctity, compassion,
selflessness, elegance, wit, ingenuity, patience, or whatever, equally as well
as testosteronic violence. So we can see a saint, a nurse, a scientist as heroic,
no less than the debased successors of Ulysses and Sir Galahad.
89

THREE
When we are ten, facing that more or less and increasingly autonomous
reality, we need to establish some kind of intellectual and psychological se-
curity The past security of Mythic understanding-which did not have to
deal with an autonomous and alien world but which involved an unreflec-
tive, Eden-like acceptance of it-is no longer available. Romantic associa-
tion offers one prominent technique for forging a new security in the face of
this threatening
reality~ both Herodotus and the modern newly literate
explorer associate with those features of reality that seem best able to tran-
scend the threats of the everyday world. By associating with whomever or
whatever in the world seems best able to transcend those threats, we too feel
some security against such threats, some confidence that we might tran-
scend them.
When we are ten, we are very much at the mercy ofthe world around us.
We are typically subject to endless rules and regulations-parental, societal,
and, not least, natural. The person, institution, or team that the child associ-
ates with usually gives clear clues to the constraints found most problematic.
The immensely rich, decadent, dirty rock star offers one kind of hero, the
skillful soccer player another, and likewise the successful writer, the outra-
geous singer or actor, the powerful hockey or football team. The tension
characteristic of romance comes from the desire to transcend a threatening
reality while seeking to secure one's identity within it.
A characteristic of Romantic understanding, then, is its ready associa-
tion with transcendent human qualities, or human qualities exercised to
transcendent degree. This observation is important for the education ofchil-
dren from about eight to fifteen because almost any curriculum material can
be made understandable if students can associate "romantically" with such
qualities within it. This is, I might note in passing, not a matter of manipu-
lating students to learn the knowledge we "privilege," but rather a matter
of having the courtesy to attend to how they can best make sense of any
knowledge.
So we can come to understand important features of, for example, the
Industrial Revolution by associating with the energy and ingenuity of its he-
roes, such as Isambard Kingdom BruneI or James Watt. Though that does
not put it quite right. The trick is to show the Industrial Revolution-the
inventions, the statistics of population growth, farm production, and so
on-as an expression of an energy and ingenuity the students can associate
with~ or to show it as an attempt to subjugate nature so transcendingly arro-
gant and impious that it threatens now to destroy all life on earth.
Similarly we can understand the movement to emancipate slaves by as-
sociating with the courage, compassion, and persistence of those who
90
struggled and suffered, and struggle and suffer still, in this cause. Or we can

ROMANTIC UNDERSTANDING
understand the life cycle of eels by associating with the patient ingenuity of
Johannes Schmidt, who spent twenty years pursuing eel larvae, gradually
uncovering detail after detail about their lives and astounding migrations.
Or we can understand rock formations, Latin conjugations, chemical pro-
cesses, grammatical structures, and anything else, by locating within it a
human quality in transcendent degree with which students can associate.
Anything can be made the object of a romantic association if we see it in the
appropriate light, and doing so is the key to successful teaching and learning
during this period.
The kind of understanding these romantic associations allow is clearly
limited. But so is all understanding. Understanding is not an on/off condi-
tion; it is, as the holograph metaphor suggests, amenable to ever-increasing
clarity. It may reasonably be called an immature form of understanding, but
immaturity is not something to complain about in the immature. While
nineteenth- and early twentieth- century critics analyzed Herodotus's con-
ception of historical causality, and his very conception of history, as inade-
quate and immature compared with more modern conceptions, theirs is a
limited criticism. In part it derives from seeing his work exclusively in terms
of their own, and judging his as a failure to conform with their criteria of
proper historical writing. This is a reasonable judgment only if the critic also
shows sensitivity to the criteria by which Herodotus worked and by which
his history remains a triumphant success.
A. N. Whitehead characterizes romance as an "excitement" following on
the "vividness of novelty" and the "unexplored connections with possi-
bilities half-disclosed by glimpses and half-concealed by the wealth of mate-
rial. . . . Romantic emotion is essentially the excitement consequent on the
transition from the bare facts to the first realisations of the import of their
unexplored relationships" (1967, pp. 17-18). He adds that this "great ro-
mance is the flood which bears on the child towards the life of the spirit"
(p. 22). While my interest is purely secular, one cannot talk casually about
transcendence without acknowledging the spiritual role that the idea has
played in the Western tradition. Romantic transcendence, even if we wish to
avoid its mystical associations, does have an affective component. In addi-
tion, successfully associating with transcendent expressions or embodi-
ments of such qualities as compassion, courage, pity, and so on, involves a
recognition within others of the autonomy one recognizes in oneself. This
ability to associate with transcendence in others leads at a simple level to
recognizing virtue in one's enemy, as does Herodotus. Early in the Western
literate tradition, this ability was reckoned rare and strange. Saxo Gram-
maticus wrote in his Gesta Danorum: "The men of Thule [Iceland] are very
fond of learning and of recording the history of all peoples and they are
91

THREE
equally pleased to reveal the excellences of others or of themselves" (Borges,
1968, p. 170). One is not far, at this point, from deconstructing the concept
of "enemy" and reaching the insight of the literateJesus of Nazareth that one
should love one's enemies and indeed see in them a transcendence we can all
share.
Well, I think it is reasonable to see the ability to form "romantic" associa-
tions with human qualities in transcendent degree as one aspect of what has
traditionally been called "spiritual development." One may prefer to avoid
such terms, but even so one may recognize in them an expansion of one's
range of human sympathies. Inevitably we are associating with the external
world by means ofqualities we recognize in ourselves, and we properly elab-
orate them in ourselves by continually associating with varied features of the
world. In turn, we begin to conform our understanding to the features of the
real world, and this requires courage; it requires that mystical ability to
forget the self and acknowledge difference and autonomy in the other. The
journey out of Eden is also a freedom from the all-encompassing ego, to use
Freud's metaphor.
Humanized Knowledge
The author of an earlier and more troublingly potent Superman than Clarke
Kent's alter ego insisted that we must ever love and honor great individual
human beings, and that the task of scholarly study of the past was to bring
such people constantly to the forefront of our minds (Nietzsche, 1962, pref-
ace). Herodotus's history certainly exemplifies this principle. Each mega er-
gon is shown as the product of some person's or some people's actions. The
frequent accounts of battles focus on the few outstanding fighters and, com-
monly, their motives for distinguishing themselves. Worthy of record after
the description of each battle are the names of those soldiers who acquitted
themselves best. So the name of the Spartan Philocyon will be remembered
forever because he was brave in transcendent degree. As your eye passes over
the name, you might wonder what kind of reward this is.
This focus on individuals, and the emotions that stimulate them to act,
is characteristic of the romantic way of understanding the world. One can
give an account of the world as an accumulation of the products of individ-
uals' acts, made further comprehensible in terms of the emotions that gener-
ated them-emotions that we all share. All knowledge, after all, is human
knowledge. Everything we know is knowable through the lives of its inven-
tors, discoverers, or users, and we can have access to that knowledge
through the hopes, fears, or intentions that drove them. Access to Pythag-
92
oras's theorem, for example, can come most easily during this period if the

ROMANTIC UNDERSTANDING
student sees the theorem in the context of Pythagoras's life and as a product
of Pythagoras's hopes and fears (see Egan, 1990, pp. 267-70).
Another way of making this point is to draw on R. G. Collingwood's
(1946) argument that all history is the history of thought. That is, the under-
standing we can construct from any historical event, document, ruin, or arti-
fact is constrained by the degree to which we can infer the human thoughts
that brought it about or were involved with it. Romantic understanding in
particular is constructed by seeing the object ofstudy in the context ofsome-
one's or some people's thoughts, intentions, hopes, or fears. Where Colling-
wood writes of "thought," we might, in the case of Romantic understand-
ing, interpret that in the sense that would clearly include emotions. What
Collingwood argues about historical understanding may be thus extended
to Romantic understanding of any knowledge of the world. It is not, of
course, impossible to construct some understanding of earthquakes or alge-
bra or Milton's Paradise Lost by means other than the emotions of the people
involved~ during the early adolescent years in our culture, however, the
most ready and engaging access to understanding is achieved through the
emotions and thoughts most intimately tied in with the phenomena to be
studied.
Journalists and teachers recognize that knowledge can be effectively
communicated if it is put into an engaging context for readers or students.
Journalists commonly refer to finding "a human interest angle." Teachers
know that an illustrative anecdote, particularly if it is rich in emotional
motivation, can have a remarkable effect on engaging interest. The usual
problem in teaching is that such anecdotes are thought of as "hooks" to at-
tract students' interest as a prelude to the real work of the lesson or unit. The
trick is to expand through the lesson or unit the principle that makes the
hook work.
As discussed earlier, one of the incidental products of literacy has been
the compilation of dictionaries, encyclopedias, and textbooks for storing
knowledge. "Storing knowledge" is how we rather innocently put it, forget-
ting the metaphorical sense of "knowledge" in such a phrase. When we test
students' educational achievement in terms of what they remember of the
knowledge taught them-which remains by far the commonest form of
evaluation-we reinforce the image of the textbook, encyclopedia, or dictio-
nary as the paradigm of the successful knower (de Castell, Luke, and Luke,
1989). It becomes important in such a climate of opinion to emphasize that
books do not store knowledge. They contain symbolic codes that can serve
us as external mnemonics for knowledge. Knowledge can exist only in living
human minds.
No sensible aim of education can include making human minds mimic
93

THREE
textbooks, yet we see constant examples ofjust this. The alternative educa-
tional task is to teach students how to revivify the symbolic codes by trans-
muting them into human understanding, reconstituting the inert codes as
living human knowledge. We can encourage such reconstitution by showing
the knowledge within the life of its inventor, discoverer, user, sufferer, or
author, and this can be made readily comprehensible if we connect such
knowledge with the students' emotions.
If, for example, we wish to teach the geography ofthe Americas, we might
introduce it in the context ofthe emotions ofthe first discoverers and settlers.
It is not just that we will see the landscape and climate, the flora and fauna,
through the eyes of those who first came across the Bering Strait land-bridge,
but we willfeel those features through their emotional responses (as we can
reasonably infer them). We can learn about mountains and rivers through
the expectations, hopes, and fears of people as they traveled east and south.
The landscape becomeshumanized in termsofthe challenges it presented, the
food sources it provided, and the material culture it supported. With more
detailed authenticity we can feel the "new" world through the written words
-the diaries, letters, official documents, poetry-of those Europeans who
spread through the Americas.
Everything we know was discovered or invented or authored by some-
body We have taken some pride in abstracting the hard-won fragments of
knowledge from the lives of its makers and laying them out in textbooks,
encyclopedias, atlases, and dictionaries. These are wonderfully convenient
devices for retrieval purposes. But for first access to knowledge during this
layer of educational development, we would do better to re-embed it in the
lives of its makers. That way students can also feel why someone might care
about the structure of the universe, the behavior of insects, the interactions
of chemicals, and so on.
Romantic Rationality
These emphases on the exotic, transcendence, and human emotion will no
doubt continue to set offwarning signals in many minds. Are we to turn over
the intermediate years of schooling to sensationalist material and activities?
Stimulating students' imaginations may be all very well, but there is also the
serious business of kitting them out with the practical knowledge and skills
they are going to need in order to deal with the social, political, and eco-
nomic worlds out there. My general argument is that attending to the charac-
teristics of Romantic understanding will provide the most effective means of
ensuring that students master whatever knowledge and skills they need in
94
order to deal successfully with the world.

ROMANTIC UNDERSTANDING
Our cultural development and that of students today does not involve
moving from mythic thinking to a more or less discrete, better, and more
practically efficacious kind of thinking we call rational. Rather, these two
kinds of thinking share a great deal more than what distinguishes them, and
the dramatic difference between them masks a significant continuity under-
neath. It seems useful at this point to indicate in what sense the earlier form
of rationality that characterizes Romantic understanding is distinctively ra-
tional and distinctively nonmythic-apart from its lack of magic.
Let us return to the example of Herodotus, father ofa distinctive form of
rational inquiry. Unlike his successor, Thucydides, Herodotus does not for-
mulate a theory ofhistory; he is too intent on describing remarkable erga and
constructing an engaging narrative. But neither does he simply tell a story
like the earlier writers of myths or the poets. Homer told the story of an ear-
lier war, and used factual material in the telling (Gomme, 1954; Wood,
1985), but Homer's account is primarily loyal to poetic criteria rather than to
describing precisely what happened: the vividness and emotional impact of
his story are paramount; its need to convey universal truths about human
life in general is uppermost. While Herodotus also shapes his account into a
narrative, his determination to represent what really happened and what re-
ally is the case generated a new form of expression.
We have become very sensitive to the ways in which the shapes ofnarra-
tives tell more than the simple facts they purport to represent. Herodotus's
narrative is shaped by his desire not only to represent reality but also to tell a
good story and to affect his audience's emotions. His selection of the great
conflict with the Persians, and of events to "body forth" this conflict, is not
innocent of the storyteller's art. Even so, we recognize that he is constrained,
unlike the fictional storyteller and Homer, by what really happened. He
might select the most interesting war and events to narrate, but he does not
make up wars or events in order to create a particular emotional response in
his readers or audience.
Herodotus generated a new kind of narrative-a compromise between
the poet's desire to evoke an emotional response and the rational desire to
describe the world as it really is. We can describe it as a compromise because
we know about the scientific method that is yet to come. Herodotus's ratio-
nal inquiry mixes elements of poetry or myth and elements of science; it is
post-oral but prescientific or pretheoretic. Now this description results from
our fitting his work into one of our narratives of historical development. His
work is a distinctive and autonomous form of inquiry by itself; it yields a
particular kind of understanding and prefigures endless forms that have de-
veloped since. Most journalists today, for example, aim to tell a dramatic
story while adhering, more or less, to what really is the case, but they are
95

THREE
selective in the stories they choose to tell and the incidents they think will be
interesting. The Romantic movement shares the commitment to the ex-
tremes of reality, the limits ofexperience, the fascination with the mysterious
and the mega ergon. We may recognize this form of understanding in our-
selves.
"We all know by now that many scientific and mathematical hypotheses
start their lives as little stories or metaphors, but they reach their scientific
maturity by a process of conversion into verifiability, formal and empirical,
and their power at maturity does not rest on their dramatic origins" (Bruner,
1986, p. 12). This distinction between stories and theories, what Bruner set-
tles for calling "narrative" and "paradigmatic" forms of thought, marks off
starting and ending points of some developmental process but attends little
to their distinctive forms of thought. During middle school years we are
dealing with forms of thought that are not shaped by stories in the sense that
Mythic understanding tends to be, nor have they yet reached "maturity"
They are nevertheless typically rational in their attempts to conform with
reality, exclude magic, recognize the importance of noncontradiction, and
handle the kinds of syllogisms with which this chapter began.
The vulgar notion of romance tends to highlight the exotic and wonder-
ful, and not recognize that these as the margins of reality are crucially distinc-
tive of a romantic view. It is well to remember that reality was the main
discovery of Romanticism in European cultural history, as far as its partici-
pants were concerned. They saw their great achievement as a sweeping away
of the clutter of artificiality that prevented people from engaging directly
with nature in all its uniqueness and particularity. The excitement ofRoman-
ticism was not simply a product of the sense of the imagination being free,
but of being free to explore afresh the reality of human experience and the
natural world. Blake expressed this engagement with reality in terms of
cleansing the gates of perception, Shelley as the lifting of a veil from the hid-
den beauty of the world. The romantic perception is focused on the details of
the world: "Romantic art, then, is not 'romantic' in the vulgar sense, but 'real-
istic' in the sense of concrete, full of particulars" (Barzun, 1961, p. 26).
This is very much the world Herodotus and his near-contemporary log-
ographoi, philosophers, and proto-scientists present to us. Once one can
write, one can try to describe in various extensive forms the concrete partiC-
ularity of the world. Subsequent inquirers can observe the world and pre-
vious descriptions of the world and then match their observations against
those descriptions. They can then construct their descriptions to match
more closely their sense of reality (Gombrich, 1960). The making/matching
process can lead to increasingly precise representations of reality, in pictures,
96
maps, and written descriptions. It is a rational process that can be quite un-

ROMANTIC UNDERSTANDING
theoretic or nonscientific. It is a form of "romantic" rational activity that is
common, focused on the particular, and also prerequisite to theoretic scien-
tific thinking. When Darwin wondered at the diversity of species of finch on
the Galapagos Islands he exhibited a romantic engagement and romantic ra-
tional inquiry without which his reflective theoretical inquiry could not have
successfully gone to work. Without the initial wonder, it is hard to see how
more systematic theoretical inquiry can get fruitfully under way.
Thus we might want to see whether certain forms ofrational inquiry can
be devised for the middle school years that stimulate and develop Romantic
understanding and do not prematurely try to exercise a kind of theoretic
thinking for which the prerequisites are not developed. Much of our failure
in encouraging mathematical and scientific understanding in schools may
stem from the general failure to distinguish Romantic understanding and its
distinctive ways of engaging and making rational sense of the world as pre-
requisite to theoretic thinking.
WHAT Is IN DANGER OF BEING LOST
I believe it is a serious mistake to view education as an inevitably progressive
process, as an enterprise in which we succeed to the degree that children
learn more, become more skilled in literacy and numeracy, give evidence of
higher stages of psychological development, and so on, while ignoring or
neglecting the losses associated with each gain. To beleaguered schools and
teachers, I recognize that this may seem a somewhat exotic new complaint.
And while so many students seem to acquire so marginal a degree of basic
literacy and numeracy, the idea that even these meager successes might be
snatched away can be very depressing. Depressing or not, it needs to be
faced. I think the result of facing it can, in the context of the discussion of
Romantic understanding, be liberating rather than the opposite because
then we can see better how education might go forward during these years.
Literacy, for example, not only stimulates and supports Romantic un-
derstanding but at the same time supports an alienation from characteristics
of Mythic understanding. At a cultural level we can see this in the incom-
prehension literacy created about nonliterate societies. The literate Heca-
taeus's dismissal of his predecessors' myths as ridiculous strikes a chord that
echoes again and again through Western cultural history "The primitive
mind" is made mysterious, even though it is our inheritance~Mythic under-
standing becomes alien and unrecapturable after the "paradigm shift" to lit-
erate rationality. An insistent theme of Western consciousness is that one
cannot go home again, one cannot return to Eden or comprehend the heart
97

THREE
of darkness. These images are so potent because they capture, however im-
precisely, the sense ofloss that is a part of literate rationality's heritage. "More
than any other factor in human experience, it is the use of rational language
which destroys the child's 'inituitive' relationship with the world" (Cae,
1984, p. 253). In developing more realistic and practically efficacious intel-
lectual tools we run the danger, in Wordsworth's terms, of giving "our hearts
away." The sense of alienation that comes with the recognition of an autono-
mous reality is largely an alienation from the earlier sense of participating in
nature. After that break, "little we see in Nature that is ours," as Wordsworth
put it. This sense ofbeing cut off from the natural world by the tools of ratio-
nality has, of course, been a matter of indifference to many people in vyest-
ern cultural history, whose delight rather has been in the practical control
over nature that these tools have given. For others, like Wordsworth, it has
created a sense of being "forlorn" (Sonnet, XXXIII).
Plato had long ago expressed his concerns about the potential losses that
came along with literacy. He puts his caution, significantly, in a story. Socra-
tes tells his young friend Phaedrus the old Egyptian legend about Thoth, the
god-king of ancient Naucratis. Thoth was the inventor of draughts, dice,
arithmetic, astronomy, and much else, including writing. Then Thoth took
his inventions to Thamus, the god-king of all Egypt-perhaps looking for
venture capital to get astronomy off the ground and the dice rolling. Thamus
was impressed with many of them, but he had no time for what Thoth con-
sidered his greatest invention, writing. He expressed his objection thus:
The discovery of the alphabet will create forgetfulness in the learner's souls, because they
will not use their memories; they will trust to the external written characters and not
remember of themselves. Your invention is not an aid to memory.... You give your dis-
ciples not truth, but only the semblance of truth; they will be hearers of many things and
will have learned nothing. (Plato, Phaedrus)
Thoth might reasonably have complained that the point of writing was to
release a burden from memory and free the mind for other kinds of more
productive activity. But Thamus had a deeper insight: by replaCing the imag-
istic, story-shaped, and story-shaping world of mythic consciousness, one
did not Simply gain a release from a burden. Literacy has not been a pure
gain. One also lost the intensity of participatory experience in an immediate
life-world, in which one's store of knowledge and lore was profoundly and
vitally meaningful. As the eye, which derived knowledge efficiently from
writing, replaced the ear as prominent in accessing information, so the par-
ticipatory, emotion-laden message of the speaker no longer enveloped and
produced a direct effect on the body of the learner (Havelock, 1963, 1986;
Ong, 1982). The message was increasingly coded in written symbols, access
98
to which was a more indirect, intellectual matter.

ROMANTIC UNDERSTANDING
At an individual level we can see common losses of mythic capacities as
children are taught literacy and rational skills in modern schools. To take the
example ofmetaphoric fluency, which seems crucial to enriching and enlarg-
ing our language-use and to our imaginative exploration ofthe world, we see
it become constricted in the process of literacy instruction. Winner's re-
search, referred to in chapter 2, concludes that "[c]hildren around the ages of
eight, nine, and ten often reject metaphors addressed to them, insisting, for
instance, that colors cannot be loud, and people cannot be icy," and that
"[t]he incidence ofspontaneous metaphoric speech appears to decline rather
dramatically during the early school years" (1988, p. 103). Consider some of
Winner's observations about the importance of metaphors: they "are eco-
nomical, vivid, and memorable, and sometimes they are the only way we
have to say what we want to say ... The effect of a metaphor is to clarify, to
explain, to reveal-to alter the listener's understanding of the topic. Meta-
phor helps us to acquire knowledge about new domains, and also has the
effect of restructuring our organization of knowledge" (p. 116).
Now, it would obviously be improper to see a simple causal connection
between literacy instruction and the decline of metaphoric fluency We have
a correlation, but we would need to know whether metaphoric fluency did
not also decline about this age with children in oral cultures just to enhance
the correlation, and then we would need to know much more about the pro-
cesses by which our typical modes of literacy instruction affect metaphor
use. The earlier observations about the possible declining influence of a ge-
netic "language module" might better explain the reduction in metaphoric
fluency, of course. But, even so, we can informally observe that this reduc-
tion may be more or less acute depending on whether literacy instruction
encourages and stimulates metaphor production or discourages and sup-
presses it.
Eric Havelock also recognized the importance of building literacy in-
struction on the capacities developed earlier in life and in cultural history:
The mechanisms of modern education place primary emphasis on the speedy mastery of
reading and writing as a preparation for the curriculum of secondary schools and adult
life. Should we not be prepared to consider the pOSSible conditions imposed upon the
management of our educational systems by our oral inheritance? ... The proposition I
would offer is that the developing child should be expected in some sense to relive the
conditions of this inheritance-that the teaching of literacy be conducted on the suppo-
sition that it is to be preceded by a curriculum of say, dance, and recitation and that it be
accompanied by continual instruction in these oral arts. (1991, p. 21)
The idea that we can lose more than we gain in the process of education
is, I realize, an odd notion in a culture that takes even the most superficial
trappings of rationality as constituting vast superiority over traditional
99

THREE
mythic forms of thinking. The "binary opposite" perception that superficial
rationality and literacy provide only a marginal utility at the enormous ex-
pense ofa wisdom and harmony ofmythic consciousness has become a fash-
ionable position. The fashionable alternative also tends to value traditional
oral cultural forms of thinking as superior to even the most sophisticated
Western forms, inescapably enmeshed as they are supposed to be in patri-
archal, racist, or sexist epistemologies. The fashionable alternative does,
however, help to point out that a ·literate intellectual life bounded by sensa-
tionalist papers, TV sports, tourism, Hollywood movies, andjoyless material
consumerism is not an obvious advance in understanding the world and ex-
perience over what is provided in many traditional oral cultures.
The conclusion I want to draw here is that literate rationality can sup-
port a kind of understanding that can enhance our lives and make them
more abundant. Induction into literate rationality supports Romantic under-
standing, and that induction can be managed better or worse. Better involves
preserving, perhaps in a somewhat transformed way, the characteristics of
the prior kind of understanding; worse involves the suppression of charac-
teristics of Mythic understanding. Worse, I fear, is the more common.
CONCLUSION
Romantic understanding, then, is a somewhat distinctive kind of under-
standing supported by an alphabetic literacy bent to the development of ra-
tionality. Central to Romantic understanding is a sense of an autonomous
self and a relatedly autonomous reality. This is, of course, an imprecise and
unsatisfactory way of putting it. Clearly, younger children live and deal with
reality and with an autonomous, external world. But, equally clearly, there is
commonly a shift in children's understanding of that reality around the pe-
riod when literacy becomes internalized. Sandor Ferenczi writes of the slow
growth in children's development of a sense of reality and of the develop-
ment of a notion of objectivity and autonomy resulting from separating the
sense of self from the external world. Freud, too, with an equally unsure use
of metaphors, writes of the ego originally including everything and only
gradually detaching itself from the external world. This very complex
change in the way the mind stands in relation to "external" reality is difficult
to grasp and represent, and I have chosen the metaphors of "mythic" and
"romantic" understanding as the best I can find to point to some important
100
and somewhat neglected features of the change.

ROMANTIC UNDERSTANDING
I have drawn largely on an ancient Greek example to represent a
cultural-historical expression of Romantic understanding. This may seem a
bit perverse when a whole movement in more recent cultural history has
been named "romantic." I have explored connections between Romanticism
and romantic understanding elsewhere (Egan, 1990), but might usefully
draw here on the foremost Romantic poet in English to summarize some
distinctions between Mythic and Romantic understanding.
Wordsworth wrote extensively and insightfully about education, but in
verse, so one doesn't see him much referred to in the professional literature
in education. He characterizes childhood perception and understanding as
vivid, bright, and rich-using terms similar to those used by nearly all who
have written extensive autobiographies of childhood, and who try to recap-
ture in words a sense of intimate participation in a vividly sensed world
(Coe, 1984). That early childhood perception is then disturbed, and the
vividness fades "into the light ofcommon day." He talks ofshades ofthe pris-
onhouse closing on the growing child: "Wordsworth is talking about some-
thing common to us all, the development of the sense of reality" (Trilling,
1950, p. 148).
In Intimations of Immortality Wordsworth makes two responses to this
development of a sense of reality. On the one hand, there is a profound and
irredeemable sense of loss: "But yet I know, where'er I go, / That there hath
passed away a glory from the earth." On the other hand, he recognizes that
something survives after all, something of the early splendor that is "a
master-light of all our seeing" and that can continue to vivify the "years that
bring the philosophic mind." Wordsworth resisted the easy contrast of the
romantic imagination with dull rationality, a theme common among other
romantic writers such as Coleridge. The philosophic mind, in Wordsworth's
developmental theory (and in mine that borrows from him), comprises as far
as possible the freshness of early understanding along with imagination and
rationality Imagination is crucial to preserving the capacities of Mythic un-
derstanding, but imagination is not in any sense in conflict with developing
rationality and its view of reality, seen in the light of common day Rather,
"Imagination is ... Reason in her most exalted mood" (The Prelude, bk. XlV,
line 192). One of the weaker and more mischievous inheritances of Roman-
ticism for twentieth-century thinking has been the easy opposition of reason
and imagination, followingJohn Stuart Mill's observation of how easily dis-
tinctions slide into oppositions. But we need not accept this unfruitful bi-
nary structuring.
Central to Romantic understanding is the growing sense of an autono-
mous reality The sense of reality seems tied in with schooling in literacy and
101

THREE
in the decontextualized thinking techniques that have proven effective in
describing and controlling reality. But while schooling seems commonly
successful at disturbing features of Mythic understanding and stimulating a
sense of an autonomous reality, it seems less successful at engaging students
imaginatively with the aspects of reality that are laid out in the curriculum.
This is the danger ofschooling during the intermediate years: decontex-
tualizing literacy, numeracy, and rationality undermine Mythic understand-
ing but are so inadequately introduced that Romantic understanding does
not develop to the point where it provides a coherence, security, and mean-
ingfulness equal to what has been displaced. Herein lie the roots of aliena-
tion. The better path is to recognize Romantic understanding as a somewhat
distinctive kind of understanding and to shape teaching and the curriculum
during the middle school years in order to stimulate and develop it. Because
this widely recognized transition in our early lives has been posed sim-
plistically as moving from the irrational to the rational, from concrete to ab-
stract thinking, from prescholastic to disciplinary, the distinctive first layer
of rational understanding has been largely neglected; it is properly a media-
tor between those common binary oppositions.
Romantic understanding represents a gradual transition. Students'
forms of thinking gradually accommodate to the shapes ofautonomous real-
ity, but they first make sense of reality in "romantic" terms.
Romantic understanding is lively, energetic, less concerned with sys-
tematic structures than with unexpected connections and the delight they
can bring. (For example, what state in the United States is named for Julius
Caesar? When invading Britain, Caesar quartered his armies on islands off
the coast of Gaul. They become known as Insulae Caesareae. Over the centu-
ries "Caesareae" degenerated into "Jersey." They are now called the Jersey
Islands, and New Jersey might more properly be called New Caesar.)
Readers who did not already know this might like to explore the small fillip
of pleasure such an unexpected connection between disparate pieces of
knowledge can bring. One could learn a great deal ofgeography (and history
and all kinds of other things) through such little anecdotes. It would not
necessarily be systematic, theoretic geographical knowledge, but it would be
knowledge ofa kind that I consider prerequisite to making subsequent theo-
retic knowledge more meaningful.
I have touched on just a few characteristics of Romantic understanding,
ignoring the revolt and idealism, the distinctive boredom and the sensi-
bilities that are features of a romantic sense of the world. I have even ne-
glected the sense of the self that develops as a kind of side effect of the
discovery of autonomous reality; we come to recognize that it is from our
102
"self" that reality is autonomous. But I hope this brief characterization is

ROMANTIC UNDERSTANDING
enough to establish the Romantic as a somewhat distinctive kind of under-
standing. Like the Mythic, it is not something that is properly superceded as
we develop further kinds of understanding. It will in some degree coalesce
with those. Its characteristics should, then, be readily recognizable in our
general understanding of the world.
103

chapter4
Philosophic Understanding
INTRODUCTION
These kinds of understanding are not neat, discrete categories, each in its
distinctive primary color, each marked off definitively from the others. They
do not represent irreconcilable features in the minds of their users~ they do
not represent incommensurable mentalites. In daily life we think, talk, and
communicate using one kind or another, slipping more or less easily from
one to another, combining or coalescing one with another. I have referred to
them as "somewhat distinctive"~ more like different perspectives than differ-
ent mentalites, by means ofwhich particular features ofthe world and experi-
ence are brought into focus and prominence and combination.
Working with the "tools" of oral language leads to the set of character-
istics-the perspective on the world and experience, the style of sense-
making, the kind ofunderstanding-Iam calling Mythic. Oral-language use
is by far the most prominent influence on, or shaper of, that kind of under-
standing. The Romantic layer is a little more complicated~ I have identified it
not simply with the "tool" of alphabetic literacy but with a cluster of further,
related social and cultural developments in ancient Greece. This Philosophic
layer is shaped by an even more diffuse "to01," or "mediational means"~ it
requires not only a sophisticated language and literacy but also a particular
kind of communication that in turn requires particular kinds of commu-
104
nities or institutions to support and sustain it. The central feature of Philo-

PHILOSOPHIC UNDERSTANDING
sophie understanding is systematic theoretic thinking and an insistent belief
that Truth can only be expressed in its terms.
I call this kind of understanding Philosophic primarily because it was
developed in the program that Plato and Aristotle refined and bequeathed to
the world with such an intimidating weight of intellectual authority. They
were magisterial combatants on behalf of "philosophy, or rather a particular
style of philosophizing, as the sole repository of the truth in opposition to all
comers" (Lloyd, 1990, p. 128). This style reached a further distinctive pitch
after ancient Greek texts became again accessible and influential through the
European Renaissance; these texts ih turn stimulated ramifying intellectual
developments, leading to what was unself-consciously called the Enlighten-
ment and giving birth to what we call the modern world on July 15, 1662.
On that day the Royal Society ofLondon was founded (or, rather, on that day
it received a charter from King Charles II), and 1662 makes as useful a
marker as any for the transition to a clear acknowledgment of science as a
central distinguishing element of European civilization.
In the Western rational metanarrative, the kind of thinking promoted by
Plato and Aristotle, and many others, is seen as an inevitable progress from
its predecessors, but we would do well to be wary of the easy patterns of
hindSight. Instead we might focus on the ancient polemical battles in which
that particular form of abstract, generalized, theoretic thinking with its uni-
versal ambitions enjoyed a remarkable victory. It produced a kind of under-
standing that has proven to have its uses, some of them spectacular, and in
educating today we will want to make best use of these. But, like each kind of
understanding, it also has its limitations; it occludes significant features of
other kinds of understanding, and in educating today we will want to be
aware of these, too.
Philosophic understanding is one ofan indeterminate set ofpossible im-
plications of language and literacy development. It is a kind of thinking that
did not gain in other ancient civilizations the dominance it won in Greece.
That is to say, there is no "natural progression" in this direction; the reasons
for its development have to be sought in the particularities of ancient Greek
society and in the aggressive program of a particular group of intellectually
talented people. Certain individual imaginations grasped in this direction
with tools that gained a hold on something, and they worked energetically to
elaborate both the tools and the understanding of the world those tools gen-
erated.
With hindSight we can see some of these preliminary tools developing
within the Greek language. Bruno Snell has tried to trace what he calls The
Discovery of the Mind (1960) in the changes in language from Homer to the
time of Plato and Aristotle, and tries to expose in chapter 10 of that book
105

FOUR
"[t]he origin ofscientific thought." One tool important in the earliest appear-
ance of scientific thinking, he argues, is the development of the definite arti-
cle in Greek. In the oral past, one might refer to a good goat or a good rope or
a good bowl. Literacy made the sounds of language into visible marks which
could be manipulated, juxtaposed, and observed in ways that were less easy
in an oral/aural world. One might, for example, attach the definite article to
an adjective and create a new abstract noun such as "the good." What, one
might then ask, do a goat, rope, and bowl have in common by sharing "good-
ness"? What is the nature of "the good"? Referring to Heraclitus, Snell argues
that "the waxing power of the article is a prerequisite of his abstractions"
(p. 229). Such linguistic developments helped the formation of what we
now, as a result, call philosophical problems.
This theoretic thinking is not easy, nor is it obvious how such an ab-
stracted use of language can be an effective route to dealing with practical
problems. One does see examples of this kind of thinking in other ancient
civilizations and in oral cultures, but unique to ancient Greece are the sys-
tematic cultivation of this level of discourse and the assertion that it is the
only form of language that can capture what is real and true about the world
and experience.
The difficulty of learning and sustaining this theoretic discourse was in
part overcome by communities dedicated to it. Among the earliest was the
Pythagorean community at Crotona in southern Italy. It had political and
religious aims as well as philosophic and proto-scientific interests, a combi-
nation that would have been recognized without any sense of anomaly by
the founders of the Royal Society (though the dietary and hygiene rules
might have seemed a tad alien in seventeenth century Britain, as might such
Pythagorean injunctions as "Touch the earth when it thunders" or "Abstain
from beans").
The diffuse community of Hippocratic practitioners and writers, trying
to forge a rational, proto-scientific approach to medicine, also were promi-
nent in developing theoretic thinking, as were the argumentative law courts
of the Ionian cities and of Athens. In these courts people developed proce-
dures for publicly establishing and verifying the truth about cases~ this dis-
course was carried to and fro between law courts and the disputatious
democratic assemblies, where the work of developing knockdown argu-
ments against opposing positions was carried on with urgency (Lloyd, 1990;
Vernant, 1982).
This new kind of thinking tended to undermine the authority of tradi-
tion and to encourage a rational reassessment of affairs, enlarging the initia-
tive of merchants no less than of politicians and scholars. "When Tom, Dick,
106
and Harry began to call themselves Society and The State and start meddling

PHILOSOPHIC UNDERSTANDING
with the moral deportment of individuals" (Shaw, 1965, p. 257), the author-
ity of the gods or sacred ancestors and tradition lost ground to individuals
analyzing their activities in terms of rational considerations oftheir interests.
Thus Max Weber (1864-1920) sees sophisticated rationality developed as a
tool for analyzing the successors of these early developments in capitalist
economic activity, bourgeois law, and bureaucratic authority~ this rationality
"is capable ofbeing expressed in numerical, calculable terms" (Weber, 1975,
p. 85). Eric Havelock notes as central to the new "conceptual" language de-
veloped in ancient Greece that it is "a counting, calculative use of language
akin to arranging units ofspeech in some new and unrhythmic order, a ratio-
nalized language" (1982, p. 77).
Plato's archetypical academic community required its students to be fa-
miliar with geometry, an abstract, calculative form of knowledge that estab-
lished unequivocal truths that were subject to no knockdown response.
Communities and institutions in the postclassical world have continued to
nurture and develop this kind of theoretical thinking and the philosophic
understanding it produces.
Communities are important to this kind of understanding because it is
carried only in p'art by philosophic texts~ it is "oral discourse about written
texts that provides such fertile ground for modern, skeptical, interpretive
thought" (Olson and Torrance, 1991, p. 1). Talking about such texts helps to
make the abstract language a part of one's everyday thinking, or makes it
fluently available when one is confronted by problems or circumstances
with which it can effectively deal. The isolated scholar, the antodidact, will
often engage this level ofdiscourse energetically but is more likely to become
lost or eccentric as a result of manipulating its abstractions than is the
scholar in a community-not that becoming lost or eccentric is so rare
among the most clubbable navigators of the philosophic realm. Something
about throwing the first stone comes to mind.
ANCIENT GREEK AND MODERN EUROPEAN THEORETIC THINKING
Let us return to the new form of historical narrative Herodotus invented and
see what happened to it, because the developments in history writing exem-
plify a more general development of theoretic thinking. For present pur-
poses, two distinct developments can be charted. First is a continuing
tradition of "romantic" histories like Herodotus's. From his time to today,
histories of this kind have been most popular. They involve a focus on dra-
matic events, preserving the memory of great deeds and outstanding people
from sliding unjustly into the river of forgetfulness and being carried away, as
107

FOUR
Anna Comnena put it. From Xenophon's description ofhis desperate "march
up-country," through Arian's account ofAlexander's life and conquests, up to
modern semi-journalistic books on self-immolating cults or serial killers and
their trails of mayhem, or hagiography-tinged memorials of outstanding fig-
ures or popsingers, the note of "romantic" history writing persists. Such nar-
ratives can be precisely accurate, intricately detailed, and sophisticated in
expression~ their expression of, and appeal to, Romantic understanding is
evident in their interest in the mega ergon and their embodiment ofvarious of
the characteristics sketched in the previous chapter.
The second development was to a significantly different kind of his-
tory, such as that written by Thucydides. He wrote about the Peloponne-
sian War between Athens and Sparta, but, unlike in "romantic" histories,
he focused on establishing a more general truth beyond the particulars~ he
articulated a theory of history as well as a narrative of particular events.
Thucydides' ambition to capture some general truth about the histori-
cal process, though he may have started with the idea of writing a hand-
book on strategy, led to one of the stranger books that has survived from
the ancient world. It is a carefully researched, massively detailed, dispas-
sionate record of a terrible, passionate war. Thucydides, himself an Athe-
nian general, describes briefly his part in the loss of the city of Amphipolis.
He tells us only that he set out as fast as possible with his seven ships, that
it was winter, and that he arrived just too late to prevent the surrender of
the city. Later he notes in passing (to explain how he was able to spend so
much time researching details of the war) that for his part in this action he
was banished for twenty years from his native Athens. There is no exculpa-
tion, no apology, no detail relevant to his case beyond what the narrative of
the war calls for. This is not what we have come to expect from generals'
memoirs of their wars. Thucydides suppresses personal interest in favor of
a greater ambition.
He begins his history by telling us that we should expect a difficult read~
he is not in the business of providing entertainment, like Herodotus, nor
something of simply local and immediate relevance, but rather he is writing
a book whose value will "last for ever" (I, 23). He shows us Athens in her
glory, under the steady hand of far-Sighted Pericles, and then describes her
growing confidence in the certainty of success in, the war and her increasing
conviction that she was immune to fortune and chance. Influence over the
conduct of the war later passes to the unstable Cleon, "the most violent of
citizens," and to the deluded lion, Alcibiades. Thus we follow the city's psy-
chological condition from the richness and confidence of the early years to
108
the unbearable end, prefigured in the greatest and most daring action that

PHILOSOPHIC UNDERSTANDING
culminates in the destruction ofAthens' hopes and the flower of her army in
a stone quarry in Syracuse. Full of pathos and drama, the war is given the
narrative shape of a tragedy (Cornford, 1907; Egan, 1978a).
Thucydides' aim was not to record the great and wonderful deeds that
should be remembered, except insofar as this was incidental to preventing
the whole war from "sliding over into myth" as the Trojan war had, left to
Homer, or into a romantic, audience-gratifying entertainment, as the Persian
wars had at the hands of Herodotus. Both historians had failed to recognize
the proper aim of history, which was to establish the truth, not just about a
particular war, but about war in general. Thucydides seemed to believe that
war was like a disease, and as we can trace the symptoms and course of a
disease, like the Hippocratic writers on medicine, so we can establish how
war occurs in human affairs. He uses an odd phrase, to modern ears, claim-
ing that he is going to describe this war in detail so that "when similar events
recur, as they will, human nature being what it is, people will be able to rec-
ognize them" (1, 23). That is, it is as though the Peloponnesian War is serving
as a paradigm of wars, the underlying structure of which his investigation
exposed. Like Hippocratic medical researchers, Thucydides clearly has a na-
scent scientific ambition-the discovery of a "general law" determining the
course of human affairs.
Thucydides seems to have seen history not as a set of diverse particular
events but rather as a Single complex process whose underlying order, rules,
or laws could be exposed by careful, dispassionate inquiry. His ambition has
been shared by many since. We call them "metahistorians," or "philosophers
of history" in the nineteenth-century sense of those who focus on exposing
some general truth about the historical process as a whole; that it is a tragic
process, or an ameliorating process, or one involving the organic birth, ma-
turity, and death of civilizations.
A more familiar source of theoretic thinking is medicine. The Hippocra-
tic writings certainly aimed to establish general truths about their phenom-
ena of interest, even though some of their prescriptions seem no more likely
to effect cures than those dispensed in the temples by priests according to
gods' diagnoses. The Hippocratic prescription for moving a misplaced
womb, for example, involved the patient crouching alternately over sweet
and foul odors to encourage movement in one direction or another. Lloyd
describes the canon of writings as involving "dogmatism, arbitrariness, and
wild speculation" (1990, p. 32), often indistinguishable from the folk-
medicine they were attempting to displace. But their approach exhibits a
sputtering commitment to something we cannot but recognize as the begin-
nings of rational, scientific medicine. There is, particularly, the appeal to
109

FOUR
what we would call empirical principles-as the author of On Ancient Medi-
cine put it:
Hence I claim that it has no need of empty postulates such as are inevitable in dealing
with insoluble problems beyond the reach of observation, for example, what goes on in
the sky or beneath the earth. If a man pronounces some opinion he has formed on how
these things are, it cannot be clear either to himself or to his hearers whether what he says
is true or not; for there is no test that can be applied so as to yield certain knowledge.
CCornford, 1952)
Certainly the Greeks did not invent medicine, as they did not invent
geometry, or astronomy, but they were, "as far as we know, the first to engage
in self-conscious analysis of the status, methods and foundations of those
inquiries, the first to raise, precisely, the second-order questions" (Lloyd,
1990, p. 58), and they were the first to organize institutions to support and
further this straining, complicated kind ofinquiry. No doubt many folk rem-
edies, or contemporary pharmacopoeia, might contain as good or better
practical help for the sick~ what they did not seek to develop, which the Hip-
pocratics did, was a body of theory.
Another feature of this new method was that it encouraged a disengaged
perspective. More radically than the rationality of Romantic understanding,
this philosophic method encouraged its communities of users to grasp
things not as they impinge on their interests but as they are in reality. We
have become very knowing about the difficulties in achieving such a grasp
on reality, ofcourse, but pursuing it, trying to attain it, has led to a rather odd
program ofinquiry, with surprising results, in which people began to inquire
into all kinds of things that have no pragmatic interest or value, or serve no
one's apparent social purposes. Inquiry was constrained only by what the
available methods of inquiry did not allow. So the swing of the Pleiades or
the behavior of ants became as interesting, or more interesting, to these cal-
culating theory-makers than one's daily cares. An epistemologically omnivo-
rous form of inquiry resulted, one which-its proponents polemically
proclaimed-could deliver the truth about the world.
Plato and, more comprehensively, Aristotle spelled out the conditions
for attaining this new kind of Philosophic understanding. Crucial was the
elimination of "the poetic" from inquiry~ the arts only introduced vagueness
and turned the focus to matters that the new calculative methods could not
grasp. Metaphor, intuition, images, and speculation untied from calculation
and precise observation were declared out of bounds.
Aristotle, like Plato too to some extent before him, was engaged in establishing and vali-
dating a new style of inquiry. They were both concerned to recommend the pursuit of
philosophy, as they each construed it, and in Aristotle's case that would include also his
110
conception of natural science. But this inquiry into nature had, he believed, to be given a

PHILOSOPHIC
UNDERSTANDING
firm foundation. It is for that purpose, especially, that he insists that, at least from the
point of view of his ideal, there can be no room for the metaphorical. Yet this new style of
inquiry not only set itselfhigh standards-impossibly high ones, we might think-but it
also negatively and destructively ruled out much of the competition as failing in precision,
in clarity, in the direct, the literal. (Lloyd, 1990, pp. 22-23)
Indeed, Aristotle's rigor was to rule out significant features of Plato's work,
including the whole theory of Forms. But, even so, their polemical victory
on behalf of philosophy against forms of thinking common in the arts, in
oral cultures, and among competing sophists-all dismissed as "mythic"-
generated a new faith "that was and remains the basis of scientific :thought
... that the visible world conceals a rational and intelligible order" (Guthrie,
1962, p. 29). This victory identified and established the method of discover-
ing that order and the language in which it could be expressed.
What we see through Plato's and Aristotle's promotion of philosophic
thinking is its intense and systematic development and its claim to provide a
privileged view of reality and an exclusive path to truth. Let me leap over
other ancient civilizations, then, including the Roman Empire, pausing at
the renaissance of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries only to note the influ-
ence of the rediscovery ofAristotle's writings, and rumination and commen-
taries on them by Arabic andJewish scholars. Within the Christian West, the
parables of Christ that conveyed the essence of his teaching were reformu-
lated into the abstract, theoretic theology of the medieval schools and uni-
versities. From the illiterate kingdoms of Europe it is possible to trace, as
Vico (1970) argues, a ricorso of the Greek experience, whereby the oral and
mythic gave way to "ratio scientiam quaerens, reason seeking out knowledge"
(Stock, 1972, p. 23; Stock, 1983).
The next definitive clarification and refinement of Philosophic under-
standing is most easily seen in the seventeenth through nineteenth centuries
in Europe. The early and commonly recognized avatars of this development
include Rene Descartes (1596-1650) and the odd Englishman, Francis Ba-
con (1561-1626). Bacon's upbringing by an earnestly Puritan mother and a
father intent on making him every inch a worldly courtier perhaps encour-
aged his enormously flexible and powerful intellect, and perhaps even pre-
pared him for his remarkable rollercoaster career in the treacherous years of
Elizabethan and Jacobean politics. (When compelled to resign the chancel-
lorship in 1621 for accepting bribes, Bacon rather engagingly argued in his
defence that he never let the bribes affect his judgment of cases.) While only
a part-time practical scientist himself, Bacon set out in powerful terms the
program that a new science had to pursue. He used his periods in power to
propose (without much practical success) that scientific research needed to
be organized on a large scale and be lavishly financed.
III

FOUR
Underneath the theorizing of Bacon and Descartes was the continuing
development of the printing press. The print shops, as Elizabeth Eisenstein
(1979,1983) has shown, from the earliest days began to accumulate around
them communities of scholars and stimulated through their subscription
lists a wider "virtual" community around Europe. This "virtual" community
was made up of varied smaller communities, some attached to universities,
some to metropolitan centers and, later, to their coffeehouses, salons, or wine
shops, and some encouraged by monarchs. Few monarchs, though, had
quite the enthusiasm for the new learning as Queen Christina of Sweden.
Her insistent invitations to Descarte~, and then the rigorous schedule she
kept him to in the rough Stockholm climate, managed to kill him. In En-
gland, the most famous of these scholarly groups was given a charter, but no
cash, by Charles II in 1662, and became the Royal Society of London. (The
lack of government cash did mean that the members retained their political
independence. Joseph Addison took some delight in passing on the sugges-
tion that Richelieu had founded the French Academy, in 1634, "to divert the
Men of Genius from meddling with Politicks" [cf. Rawson, 1988, p. 1336].)
The Czech scholar Comenius dedicated his 1668 treatise Via Lucis "to the
torch bearers of this enlightened age, members of the Royal Society of Lon-
don, now bringing real philosophy to a happy birth."
Bishop Thomas Sprat, an early member of the society and its first histo-
rian, noted that its aims were not only the advancement of science but also
the improvement of "the English tongue, particularly for philosophic pur-
poses." What was needed for "real philosophy" to advance was a pure, un-
poetic, simple, unambiguous prose, something close to a mathematical
plainness that would reflect the natural world like a mirror. The society's
overall aim, though many ofthe early members were clerics, was to achieve a
more general truth than religious controversy allowed: "For they openly pro-
fess, not to lay the Foundation ofan English, Scotch, Irish, Popish, or Protestant
Philosophy; but a Philosophy of Mankind" (Sprat, 1958, p. 63). Sprat also
emphasizes the importance of communal activity:
Nor is it the least commendation the Royal Society deserves, that designing a union of
men's Hands and Reasons, it has proceeded so far in uniting their Affections: For there we
behold an unusual Sight to the English Nation, that men ofdisagreeing parties, and ways of
life, have forgotten to hate, and have met in the unanimous advancement of the same
Works. There the Soldier, the Tradesman, the Merchant, the Scholar, the Gentleman, the
Courtier, the Divine, the Presbyterian, the Papist, the Independent, and those of Orthodox
Judgment, have laid aside their names of distinction, and calmly conspir'd in a mutual
agreement of labors and desires: ... For here they do not only endure each others pres-
ence without violence or fear~ but they work and think in company, and confer their help
112
to each other's Inventions. (1958, p. 427~ emphasis in original)

PHILOSOPHIC UNDERSTANDING
While the kind of thinking Plato and Aristotle bequeathed to modern
Europe assumed a somewhat distinctive form in "the real philosophy" ofem-
pirical science, the same impulses to establish the truth about reality with
rigorous theoretic clarity were evident in the humanities generally, and also
in reflection on everyday affairs. Dictionaries-Dr. Johnson's was published
in 1755-and encyclopedias-Ephraim Chambers's appeared in 1728, in-
fluencing the indomitable Denis Diderot and the great French Encyclopedie,
whose philosophes contributors aimed to change the way people thought-
supported the process of clarification, precision, ordering, and accessibility
ofknowledge. (The entry under philosophe in the Encyclopedie notes, "Reason
is to the philosophe what grace is to the Christian.")
During the eighteenth century, a growing community wanted to discuss
topical issues, literature, art, economics, history, and politics in a manner that
more nearly matched the seriousness, precision, and authority of the scien-
tists. Examples of this theoretic philosophic discourse, addressed to a wide
"virtual community" in a style, like Thucydides', written with an eye to a
permanence beyond coffeehouse opinion, found a home in the great reviews
of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. The Analytical Review,
founded by a radical young Scotsman, Thomas Christie, and by]osephJohn-
son, a book dealer ("the father of the booktrade") and publisher, ran from
1788 to 1799. The Edinburgh Review was founded on a stormy night in March
1802 on the third floor of 18, Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh, and the Quarterly
Review followed in 1809. The contributors ofthe last two in particular did not
succeed in calmly conspiring in a mutual agreement like the scientists, as the
two reviews reflected Whig and Tory party interests, respectively. But by
1812 they had an estimated joint readership of around one hundred thou-
sand, each selling more than twelve thousand copies per issue. "To be an
Edinburgh Reviewer is, I suspect, the highest rank in modern literary soci-
ety," wrote Hazlitt (McClure, 1989-90, p. 1436; see also Shattock, 1989).
And around the reviews were communities of talkers, whose conversations
were encouraged to use the 'philosophic' discourse exemplified by the re-
viewers. Perhaps the most brilliant was Sydney Smith, another cleric and a
prime mover of the Edinburgh Review, who moaned loudly when dragged
back to his parishes from the magic square mile around Holland House, and
whose startlingly lively wit was such that people rushed home after convers-
ing with him to write down what he had said-fortunately for us (Pearson,
1948). Smith's clean, sharp, abrupt style seems entirely modern; as do many
of his sentiments. How can we think of as anything other than a contempo-
rary a person who said, "I am not fond ofexpectingcatastrophes, but there are
cracks in the world" (Pearson, 1948, p. 308).
113

FOUR
The philosophic note can be found in all areas of inquiry. Edward Gib-
bon published the first volume of his Decline and Fall ofthe Roman Empire in
1776, to near-universal acclaim (the clergy, notably,were reluctant to see
Christianity treated as a villain of the piece). Gibbon had been influenced by
the philosophes, particularly Montesquieu. Quoting David Womersley's 1989
book on the writing of The Decline and Fall, John Kenyon notes: "The philo-
sophic historian 'hopes to dissolve the surface of historical change and
thereby reveal the unchanging principles governing human society and ac-
tion'" (1989, p. 1380). This philosophic ambition gathers force in the his-
tory writing ofthe nineteenth century. The great figure ofLeopold von Ranke
(1795-1886) reformed historical research, claiming that it was only by me-
ticulous care in uncovering the particulars of past events (Wie es Eigentlich
gewesen) "for their own sake" that "the development of the world in general
will become apparent" (Ranke, 1956, p. 57). If Thucydides' conception of
history was tragic, Ranke's is comic; he presents a general image ofthe histori-
cal process as a God-guaranteed progress of the nation-states toward unity
and harmony.
For the pure Philosophic inquirer of the Enlightenment, all general
questions have a single true answer, these answers are in principle discover-
able and knowable, and each answer will be compatible with all other an-
swers composing a single, correct, coherent view of the cosmos, which we
will share with God.
Through the nineteenth century, communities and institutions sup-
porting philosophic discourse increased: "Not since the genius of the
seventeenth-century virtuosi stirred learned imaginations had so many elo-
quent voices praised the cause of science" (Turner, 1974, p. 9). As Hayden
White observes, "[n]ineteenth century European culture displayed every-
where a rage for a realistic apprehension of the world" (1973, p. 45) that its
"philosophic" forms of inquiry were intent on supplying. SoJohn Stuart Mill
could write:
The supremely important fact [ofour era], the gradual reduction ofall phenomena within
the sphere ofestablished law, which carries as a consequence the rejection of the miracu-
lous, has its determining current in the development of physical science. The great con-
ception of universal regular sequence ... could only grow out of the patient watching of
external fact, and the silencing of preconceived notions, which are urged upon the mind
by the problem of physical science. (Dale, 1989, p. 3)
Mill was influenced by, and repaid by financially supporting, Auguste
Comte (1798-1857), the French philosopher and social theorist who in-
vented the term "sociology" and described the process whereby it was to be
made scientific. Comte also gave an elaborate, programmatic outline of"pos-
114
itivism" in his six-volume Cours de Philosophie Positive (1830-42). He argued

PHILOSOPHIC UNDERSTANDING
that the human mind in cultural history has passed through three inevitable,
irreversible stages: theological, metaphysical, and positive. Positivism is
marked by the final recognition that science provides the only valid form of
knowledge and that facts are the only possible objects of knowledge; philos-
ophy is thus recognized as essentially no different from science except that
its task is to seek more generally for principles common to all sciences and
use these prinCiples to gUide human conduct and the organization ofsociety.
Ethics, politics, social interactions, and all other forms of human life about
which knowledge was possible would eventually be drawn into the orbit of
science, become thereby properly ordered, and so lead to universal human
betterment. Though Comte at age fourteen had announced to his ardently
Catholic family that he had "naturally ceased to believe in God," his image of
the world and the new humanity to be created by the application of positive
science had a considerable romantic and religious tinge and was described
by Thomas Huxley as Catholicism without Christianity.
Nineteenth-century positivism was one direction taken by Philosophic
understanding. The positivists' program for mapping the inexorable and im-
mutable laws of matter and society seemed to allow no greater role for the
contribution of poets than had Plato. The poets, however, had a counter-
claim to make. During the early part of the century they had asserted power-
fully that access to truth and knowledge were far from exclusively achieved
by reason and science. Perhaps the most cogent and comprehensive state-
ment of poetry's claims on truth is Shelley'S Defence of Poetry (written in
1821, and first published in 1840), in which he argues: "Poetry ... is at once
the centre and circumference of knowledge; it is that which comprehends
all science, and that to which all science must be referred" (Brett-Smith,
1921, p. 53). He concludes that poets are the unacknowledged legislators of
the world. These claims, however, are stated in abstract theoretic terms, no
less philosophic than the more prolix claims of Comte, Mill, and Herbert
Spencer. That is, distinctions among Enlightenment, Romanticism, and
post-Romanticism, which have played a large part in categorizing cultural
history, are not very significant from the perspective of these kinds of under-
standing. Certainly we find clear cases of Romantic understanding in Ro-
manticism, but we will also find that the leading Romantic writers routinely
used features of Philosophic understanding, particularly when arguing on
behalf of the propriety of their poetic program of exploration. We will find,
that is to say, all five kinds of understanding interleaved in complex histori-
cal movements, sometimes one kind showing more prominently, sometimes
another.
What Plato represented as the quarrel between philosophy and poetry is
resuscitated in the "two cultures" quarrel of more recent times between the
115

FOUR
humanities and the sciences. Both sides have conducted their quarrel in
"philosophic" terms, both building their arguments rationally and con-
structing theoretic positions. The polemical beginnings of the quarrel were
tied to claims about what kind ofeducation best formed the mind. (After all,
for much of their lives Plato and Aristotle were professional educators.) The
"two cultures" quarrel of recent years continues a debate that has long had as
one of its important implications the appropriate structure of the school and
university curriculum. What deserves greater attention, the sciences or the
humanities? Which is more important for the development of the mind? As
with most educational questions, these have run into a general impasse; "so-
lutions" are compromises that seem to do justice to neither side of the quar-
rel and to satisfy no one. This state of affairs is a result, I think, of our current
incoherent conception of education, which allows no adequate handle on
the quarrel.
The quarrel is seen as a battle for the human soul, or, which is much the
same thing, a battle over how we should educate the young. The scientists'
side of the argument is commonly pressed in a regrettable tone that contains
a regrettable truth, as in this recent example: "Science involves an unnatural
mode of thought which alienates and humiliates those who are ignorant of
it" (Wolpert, 1993, p. 4). It follows that those who are ignorant ofscience can
have nothing ofvalue to contribute. This dismissiveness can easily be read as
a "know-all, imagine-nothing style" (Osborne, 1992, p. 31), and the claims
of imagination and the "shadowy things" inaccessible to the methods of in-
quiry available to scientists are reasserted as central to a full human life and
education.
But it is inappropriate to call Philosophic understanding "unnatural"-
as Wolpert describes the empirical science form of it, echoed in the title of
his 1992 book, The Unnatural Nature ofSCience-any more than it would be
to call Mythic or Romantic or Ironic understanding unnatural. Rather, one
might better say, it is not a kind of thinking or understanding that is usually
developed in any systematic way apart from communities or institutions
dedicated to encouraging it. Like the other kinds ofunderstanding, it is rela-
tively easy to acquire if one is in an environment that insistently uses it; it
requires the "mediational means" ofa consistent and persistent theoretic dis-
course.
SOME CHARACTERISTICS OF PHILOSOPHIC UNDERSTANDING
My general argument is that a proper education today requires that individ-
116
uals accumulate and recapitulate the intellectual capacities represented by

PHILOSOPHIC
UNDERSTANDING
each of these kinds of understanding, and deploy them together-"to-
gether" in some manner yet to be made clear. Philosophic and Romantic un-
derstanding, and no doubt the Mythic kind, too, trumpeted their historical
development by setting themselves up in opposition to their predecessor; or,
at least, that is how some of their more polemical proponents represented
them. I used Hecataeus's dismissal of the stories ofhis ancestors as emblema-
tic of the early rational contempt for Mythic thinking, and Thucydides, the
Hippocratics, Aristotle, Bacon, Descartes, and so on, as decriers of earlier
and contemporary "Romantic" inquiries. This common feature of Western
cultural history is unfortunate for many reasons, not least because it seems to
take most people a long time to recognize that the preceding kind of under-
standing is not simply the pit of villainous confusion represented by its suc-
cessors but in fact forms a foundation to their own preferred kind.
In cases where people have deliberately struggled to extirpate all ves-
tiges of prior kinds ofunderstanding, the result seems to be sterility, desicca-
tion, and a danger of inhumanity in the development of the new kind. It
seems fair to describe positivism and behaviorism as examples of this. As
Charles Taylor puts it:
Once one has broken out from the world view of a very narrow form of naturalism, it
seems almost unbelievable that anyone could ever have taken a theory like behaviorism
seriously. It takes a very powerful metaphysical set of preconceptions for one to ignore or
over-ride so much that is so intuitively obvious about human life, for no valid scientific or
explanatory reason. (1985, p. 5)
The polemical accompaniment to the development of Philosophic un-
derstanding represents the new form as sweeping away the insubstantial folk
knowledge, the emotionalism, the metaphor-induced confusion, the glitter-
ing superficiality of its predecessors, and replacing these with cold, hard fac-
tuality and sharp-edged theoretical truth. This is the stance of the self-
consciously tough-minded.
But cultural development has come, in Ongs phrase, "not in the hollow
of men's minds but in the density of history" (1971, p. 7). The gender refer-
ence in the quotation is notable in that the communities that have supported
Philosophic understanding in the density ofhistorj were, until the twentieth
century, almost exclusively male. All the developers of Philosophic under-
standing mentioned in the previous section were men. Does this mean that
Philosophic understanding, engendered by a gaggle of patriarchs, is a mas-
culine form of thinking? Is my scheme, which will recommend Philosophic
understanding as a necessary acquisition in the process of becoming edu-
cated, simply another of those sexist developmental theories that prescribes
male intellectual norms into which women are Simply supposed to fit? If a
third layer of understanding had been developed in the matrix of women's
117

FOUR
minds and the density of a female-dominated history, would we have seen
something different from the Philosophic kind being characterized here?
That is, is Philosophic understanding only contingently gender-biased or is
it necessarily a male-oriented kind of thinking?
I doubt that any conclusive answer can yet be given, though I suspect
that any gender association of Philosophic understanding will prove to be
almost entirely contingent, to a point of vanishing significance for educa-
tional purposes. Any evident difference in access to and ease in using Philo-
sophic thinking between males and females must be largely a product of
women's lack of access to the communities that formed and supported such
thinking. Their absence from the~e discussions continues to have profound
and pervasive residual effects on the ways they are treated in such commu-
nities today, on the expectations held of them by males, and on their own
expectations of themselves.
That the slant and tone of, and styles of initiation into, the most promi-
nent traditions of Philosophic thinking give evidence of male bias, partic-
ularly in the sciences and mathematics, seems to me a product of the
polemics that have accompanied their development in male-dominated
communities, not something essential to Philosophic thinking itself. A fea-
ture of these polemics, as I suggested above, is that they depreciate kinds of
understanding that are properly foundational to the Philosophic. My ar-
gument is that adequate Philosophic understanding must incorporate the
capacities acqUired while developing Mythic and Romantic understanding.
When we see Philosophic understanding enriched by imagination, meta-
phoriC thinking, romantic associations, and so on, it will, I trust, be less vul-
nerable to claims of gender bias.
Philosophic understanding begins to become prominent today at
roughly age fifteen. Why this should be the case I will address below. But, I
want to emphasize that this is not something that happens routinely as a re-
sult of maturation. Systematic development of Philosophic understanding
seems at present normal for only a smallish proportion of the population-
those who enter and interact with communities that support this kind of
thinking, such as some academic streams in senior high schools and in col-
leges and universities, and who also have adequately accumulated Mythic
and Romantic capacities.
The Craving for Generality
Earlier we saw Snell's argument that developments in the Greek language
were prerequisite to abstract, theoretic thinking. So, too, in early modern
118
Europe we find significant shifts in language preceding and accompanying

PHILOSOPHIC UNDERSTANDING
the period when the philosophes' and scientists' programs were getting un-
derway. Lucien Febvre (1878-1956), co-founder of the French Annales
school ofhistorians, pointed out that the sixteenth-century French language
lacked words for "absolute," "relative," "abstract," "concrete," "intentional,"
"inherent," "transcendental," "causality," "regularity," "concept," "criterion,"
"analysis," "synthesis," "deduction," "induction," "coordination," "classifica-
tion," "system," and a range of terms that the Philosophic programs of the
next century would use prominently. According to the data banks of the
American Research on the Treasury of the French Language, the word "soci-
ete" was used 620 times in the century before 1700 and 7,168 times in the
following two (cL Gordon, 1994). Latin, of course, was still important for
scholarly discourse and was not as impoverished as the vernaculars in this
regard. But beginning in the sixteenth century, and becoming a flood in the
seventeenth, words flowed into the vernaculars; in the process, many of
them seemed to gain a metaphoric extension from a restricted, relatively
concrete meaning in Latin to a more free, flexible, abstracted use in the ver-
naculars.
Take, for example, the word "hierarchy." It comes from the Greek hieros,
meaning "sacred" or "holy," and arkhes, meaning "ruling." It was used to
designate a state ruled by priests. The word later became Latinized and
Christianized to refer to the ninefold rank of angels-the hierarchia of
cherubs, seraphs, and other sadly neglected creatures (oh, very well, if you
insist: seraphim, cherubim, thrones, dominions, virtues, powers, princi-
palities, angels, and archangels). It arrived in Middle English as ierarchie
with its Latin meaning. It commonly occurred with more or less its modern
spelling, and medieval meaning, in the sixteenth century. In the seventeenth
century, the word was extended to apply not only to angels but to the ranks
ofthe clergy, a somewhat different group, and very soon thereafter we find its
metaphoric extension to mean any graded system, much as we use the term
today. Words like "evolution," "concept," "deduction," "causality," and many
of those listed by Febvre follow a roughly similar trail, the Oxford English
Dictionary indicating significantly new and more flexible meanings adopted
through the seventeenth century. The result was an enriched conceptual vo-
cabulary for dealing with the enlarging realm of theory.
Walter Ong relates this development in modern Europe to an effect of
the printing press and the massive accumulation of detailed documented
knowledge. The security and accessibility of constantly enlarging bodies of
knowledge allowed people to generate what he calls "portmanteau" concepts
like culture, civilization, and evolution. Clearly the Greeks managed to de-
velop related concepts without the printing press, but perhaps the peculiar
modern European shape of Philosophic understanding owes much, as Ong
119

FOUR
(1971) and McLuhan (1962) suggest, to the constantly replicating thump of
the press.
The vocabulary of late adolescents engaged in academic work com-
monly begins to sprout "portmanteau" concepts, including many of those
mentioned above. Ong emphasizes that such terms cannot be generated,
however, without a significant accumulation of detailed knowledge (1978).
Sometimes we find words students had long known and could have defined,
such as "society," quite suddenly emerge into their everyday serious dis-
course with energy and prominence. Clearly the word has taken on a new
and more precise meaning; some referent of the word has come into focus.
"Society" is no longer a vague term used by adults to refer to an amorphous,
indistinct concatenation of houses and services and politicians but becomes
the name for the general entity that encompasses all those bits and pieces. It
is as though an object has been discovered-a very complex one, but one
that can be grasped by means of the portmanteau term. We can commonly
note words like "nature," "culture," "the environment," "system," and "pro-
cess" being used to refer to a theoretic world whose abstract inhabitants be-
gin to emerge as clear, definite, real things. "Society" might be an enormous
generalization but, to the Philosophic mind, it refers to something real; not
just something made up ofthe sum ofits parts but something haVing a reality
more intellectually apprehenSible than the sum of its parts. Indeed, the parts
begin to take on meaning in terms of their place in the greater whole.
In the development of the theoretic realm, the new objects that come
into focus are significantly different from those illuminated by the per-
spective ofRomantic understanding. (The slight disjunction ofmetaphors in
the last sentence is deliberate; "bringing into focus," "illuminating," and
"perspective" are somewhat at odds with each other, preventing a simple
image from developing. The visual metaphors we commonly deploy to dis-
cuss ideas can easily displace the slippier realm of concepts with the solid
realm of phYSical objects. The point of this perhaps overly cute observation
is that PhilosophiC understanding, particularly when we initially engage
it, seems prone to this displacement, taking the very general concepts as
though they refer to something tangible. But they will appear so only to
those whose thinking is excessively "Philosophical." As former British Prime
Minister Margaret Thatcher notoriously claimed: "There is no such thing as
'society' !")
The romantic perspective on history or on the social or natural worlds
focused the younger student's mind on the extremes, on the more fascinating
facts, on vivid true stories, dramatic events, heroes, and so on. The Romantic
student recognizes, ofcourse, that all these bright bits and pieces are parts of
120
the one real world, but the connections among them are not particularly in-

PHILOSOPHIC UNDERSTANDING
reresting. The new theoretic language helps to generate, or is a symptom of, a
significantly different perspective in which the bright bits and pieces are
seen increasingly as parts ofgeneral wholes, systems, and processes. History,
for example, is no longer perceived primarily as a set ofvivid events, styles of
living, and heroic characters but rather as a single complex process, a contin-
uum ofstyles, examples of the possible range ofhuman behavior and human
nature. The connections among things come increasingly into prominence,
and the Philosophic students' connection with things comes increasingly
from the realization that they themselves are parts of the complex processes
and systems that make up the world.
This perception gives rise to new questions about the nature of the his-
torical process. Is it an ameliorative one, in which the nasty, brutal, and short
life of our savage ancestors gradually became a harmonious, healthy, intel-
lectually enriched experience? Or perhaps it is a tragedy, in which things
began to fall apart for humans with the invention ofagriculture, which led to
private property, population explOSions and social disruption, surpluses and
hierarchies-as Rousseau and St.-Simon viewed it. Or perhaps the agri-
cultural utopia was destroyed by the discoveries of metallurgy, which led to
hierarchies, hereditary secrets, a primitive bourgeoisie, greed, and war-as
V Gordon Childe presents it. Or perhaps the invention of writing was the
cause of all our woes. What are the laws that determine the natural world?
What is the truth about society? What is natural human behavior? What-
the unsophisticated philosophic mind accepts as a meaningful question-is
the meaning of life?
The Philosophic mind focuses on the connections among things, con-
structing theories, laws, ideologies, and metaphysical schemes to tie to-
gether the facts available to the student. The student then begins to acquire
the knowledge necessary for rounding out the scheme. Take, for example, a
discussion stimulated by local political candidates' lawn and window signs
during a current election campaign. The Romantic child asks whose side
"we" are on, why the different parties use the colors they do, and so on. The
Philosophic fifteen-year-old wants to know details of the process that ac-
counts for the electioneering signs' presence on lawns or in windows. Do the
parties or candidates pay to rent space on the lawns, like advertising, or do
people pay the party to get the signs? Do they have to pay more for a big one
than for a small one? How many people are swayed by such signs? What
kinds of people? Wouldn't the money be better spent on TV ads? Bit by bit,
the fifteen-year-old composes the information reqUired to flesh out an un-
derstanding of the election process.
What I have described here is a development that many people-some
of whom I quote below-have observed and referred to. It is a development
121

FOUR
based on empirical observations of students in contact with Philosophic
communities around this age and on a study of the reading, films, TV shows,
writing, games, and stories that such students identify as most interesting
and important to them. But I will not be citing supporting empirical re-
search, for two related reasons. First, I am not aware ofany; current research
methods in psychology and education would have difficulty grasping, for
example, changes in vocabularies and changes in the use and meaning of
terms over a period of many months to a few years. Second, we have not
hitherto had a sufficiently clear theory of this development to guide re-
searchers to devise empirical tests. The one theory that makes some overlap-
ping observations is Piaget's. His notion of "formal operations," while
problematic and the subject of much controversy (see for example, Modgil
and Modgil, 1982; Siegel and Brainerd, 1978), does reflect a common recog-
nition of the construction of a theoretic realm in academic students in later
adolescence. Piaget focused on a set of internal, spontaneously developing,
logico-mathematical structures that are paradigmatic Philosophic entities:
immensely abstract, largely inaccessible, and containing the truth about the
process of development. What I describe in general terms as a characteristic
of Philosophic understanding-that students increasingly identify the truth
as belonging in this theoretic realm-Inhelder and Piaget described as
follows:
[I1n formal thought there is a reversal in the direction of thinking between reality and
possibility in the Subjects' method ofapproach. Possibility no longer appears merely as an
extension of an empirical situation or of actions actually performed. Instead it is reality
that is now secondary to pOSSibility. ... The most distinctive property offormal thought is
this reversal of direction between reality and pOSSibility; instead of deriving a rudimentary
theory from the empirical data as is done in concrete inferences, formal thought begins
with a theoretical synthesis implying that certain relations are necessary and thus pro-
ceeds in the opposite direction. (1958, p. 251)
This openness to "possibility," which is one feature of what I call general
schemes, can leave students vulnerable. It has long been evident to those
attempting to attract adolescents to some ideological position that intense
commitment can be generated by convincing them of the truth of the view of
the world it represents. Consider the way typical nation states enlist the
commitment of the young by the presentation of their national story; in lib-
eral and pluralist states the result is typically a commitment to liberal plural-
ism, in more determinedly indoctrinating states, such as Nazi Germany, the
result can be a passionate dedication, evident in the fervor ofyoung eyes and
behavior. A few decades ago, it was not uncommon in Western universities
for bright students' minds to be captured by Marxism. "Capturing the mind"
122
is perhaps a slightly dramatic metaphor, but Marxism's appeal lay in its enor-

PHILOSOPHIC UNDERSTANDING
mous generality and its promise to tell the general truth about all the facts,
events, institutions, emotions, consciousness-past, present, and future
~in the interplay of three ideas: the Hegelian thesis, antithesis, and syn-
thesis, each of which takes different forms in different times and circum-
stances but rolls inexorably on. All the disorganized information learned
earlier- about medieval villages, knights and their ladies, monasteries, and
wool production-slide neatly into their true places as part of the overarch-
ing process of conflict between feudalism and a rising bourgeoisie, which
would spawn its own antithetical proletariat, and so on, to the ideal classless
society. Such a general scheme has the added virtues of informing the stu-
dent of his or her own place in the overall process, thereby defining a social
role and re-establishing a secure identity.
Some general schemes act like a powerful magnet, organizing virtually
everything in the student's mind; others are weaker, bringing about a more
diffuse order. Some are very Simple, dividing the world for the student into
two, good and bad, black and white, right and wrong; others may be much
more sophisticated, generating complex and subtle patterns. Once they
emerge in the clutter of the Romantic mind, such schemes seem to reach
definition quite qUicklyand to assert theirmagnetic influence overthe clutter:
"When we begin to believe anything, what we believe is not a Single proposi-
tion, it is a whole system of propositions" (Wittgenstein, 1969, p. 145).
Initial symptoms of Philosophic understanding begin to emerge in Ro-
mantic thinking. Mary Warnock notes how "Imagination can stretch out to-
wards what imagination cannot comprehend" (1976, p. 58). One of the
things it "stretches out towards" is what used to be called, during the Roman-
tic period, the Sublime. The mind was filled with somewhat inchoate but
enticing images of infinite space, endless numbers, and eternal duration. As
Kant argues, this use of imagination leads us beyond what is accessible to the
senses, but also toward the realization that there is something signified by
these concepts that we can express but somehow cannot grasp, though we
can grasp toward them. Romantics' sublime ideas are not so far removed
from the "Enlightenment's tendency to produce vast schema for society on a
universal and historical scale" (Butler, 1981, p. 126). The student today who
becomes engaged by the Gaia hypothesis, or who sees history in Marxist
terms, is recapitulating an intellectual process we can chart in our cultural
history. The move from Romantic to Philosophic understanding follows the
stretch of the imagination and the subsequent construction of the linguistic
and conceptual tools required to secure the mind's hold on what the imag-
ination grasped toward.
Recall my earlier representation of the Romantic exploration of a hill
town as in the fashion of a tourist, first seeking out the main square, the
123

FOUR
walls, and the most dramatic features. The Philosophic exploration might be
represented as that of a map maker, for whom all the features are significant
in the creation of an accurate representation of the whole town.
From Transcendent Players to Social Agents
One constant ofcultural history is the changing sense ofself. The major the-
oretical achievements of the modern world, from Copernicus's new model of
our place in the universe to Darwin's new model of our place in the natural
world, had major impacts on people's sense of their selves. Aristotle's obser-
vation that humans are social animals achieved a new gloss in the growing
cities of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. No one is an island~ our
sociability and interdependence were increasingly recognized as due not
simply to our all being related as "children of God" but to something in our
animal nature. During this period, people become increasingly historical ani-
mals: we may have a nature, but it is an historical one-a cultural nature.
The general cosmological and evolutionary schemes (the latter had been
broached long before Darwin came up with a mechanism that would explain
the sequence of changes in the fossil records) provided new and not always
welcome ways of determining one's sense of self.
As modern students recapitulate such schemes, their sense of self
changes as well. The "romantic" self, sustained by associations with chosen
embodiments of transcendent human qualities (the pop singer, sports
player, social activist, self-sacrificing helper), begins to fade into the back-
ground. Students begin to see that they are connected to the world not via
transcendent associations but by complex causal chains and networks. They
come to realize that they are "born with a past" (MacIntyre, 1981, p. 205)
and that that past not only constitutes the present selfbut begins to shape the
future.
On the one hand this may seem a terrible loss of freedom-a later de-
parture from another Eden-but on the other hand it yields a more adequate
grasp on what is real and true about the world. Students begin to grasp that
what we are does not result from romantic choices and associations but from
laws of nature, human psychology, social interactions, history, and so on,
which apply to our selves as to everyone else. The fading of the importance
of romantic associations, then, can appear more a matter of putting aside
childish things~ having seen as through a glass darkly, students can attain a
fuller, theoretic, consciousness of their place in the world.
The sense ofenlarging consciousness comes to many students as liberat-
ing and energizing. In his autobiography, W H. Hudson describes such a
124
change at age fifteen in these terms: "It was as though I had onlyjust become

PHILOSOPHIC UNDERSTANDING
conscious; I doubt that I had ever been fully-conscious before" (1918,
p. 292). This is something that nearly all educated people I have surveyed
recognize, though some recall it as having more dramatic impact than
others. We do not commonly fall offa horse with the impact ofthe flash ofan
idea capturing our minds, but it is common for people to use a visual meta-
phor to characterize what I am calling the relatively sudden access to Philo-
sophic understanding.
If students perceive themselves to be parts of natural, social, historical,
and other processes, their understanding of themselves and their roles in the
world depends on their knowledge of how these processes work. During the
years from about fifteen to the early twenties, then, students will characteris-
tically search for or attempt to sustain a conception ofthe truth about human
psychology, the laws of historical development, and the truth of how soci-
eties function.
Let us return to Marxism as an example. Here the student is directed to
search out knowledge and perform actions that will point to the contradic-
tions ofcapitalism, hinder the aims of reactionary bourgeois ideas and activ-
ities, and further the cause of the proletariat. (How old-fashioned this
language has rapidly become.) The general scheme, that is, points the mind
precisely toward particular knowledge that can support or challenge it, and
toward behavior that brings it more evidently into reality
Establishing the truth about history, society, and the cosmos is serious
business. When Philosophic understanding dominates the mind, it can
work with powerful intensity The seriousness of Philosophic concerns, and
the focus on knowledge that supports or challenges anyone general scheme,
tends to reduce interest in the extremes and in the dramatic. Romantic
knowledge thus is often dismissed as irrelevant, pointless, a trivial pursuit;
Romantic hobbies and collections lose their interest. The comic collection is
sold, given to the Salvation Army, or stored in the attic to demolish the mort-
gage some decades on. The doll collection gathers dust for awhile before div-
ing into the plastic bag and heading off to the attic or to the infant niece who
cannot believe her luck. A note of earnestness common in modern Philo-
sophic students echoes Victorian high seriousness. Both are engaged in a se-
rious enterprise, after all, and surrounded by so many people unable to see
the truth of their general scheme. The Victorians had missionaries, legisla-
tion, and the Gatling gun to carry their truth to the world; today's Philo-
sophic students have social and political action groups, computer modems,
and the Internet.
That the "expanding horizons" general scheme has had so much influ-
ence on teaching and the curriculum, especially in North America and Aus-
tralia, implies that in the last years of high school the student is able to deal
125

FOUR
with content distant from "the self," knowledge of the self being the educa-
tional starting point of that scheme. (Note the peculiarity of this expectation
about education for students whose private lives in late high school years are
haunted by self-consciousness.) But there is a sense in which Philosophic
understanding represents a new and closer apprehension of the self. Educa-
tional development, I am suggesting, is a process whose focus ofinterest and
intellectual engagement begins with a myth-like construction of the world,
then "romantically" establishes the boundaries and extent ofreality, and then
"philosophically" maps the major features of the world with organizing
grids. In this "philosophic" activity, students recognize themselves as parts of
complex processes~ they set about establishing the truth concerning them
with some psychological urgency because in doing so they will discover the
truth about themselves.
This form ofintellectual activity can easily slip into narcissism; students'
interest in the world is not so much for its own sake as for what the discov-
eries will reveal about themselves. Students become attracted to academic
subjects such as anthropology, psychology, and sociology that seem to prom-
ise direct knowledge about themselves. To the despair of anthropology
teachers, many students' interest in other cultures seems directed largely by
their desire to know what about themselves is determined by culture and
what is their basic human genetic endowment rather than a desire to study
the uniqueness of the people being discussed. The general scheme-the na-
ture of human nature-is what they attend to~ particular information is of
interest only to the degree that it enlightens the scheme. If the teaching of
these subjects, and ofhistory, too, treats the search for general laws and huge
explanatory schemes as misgUided, Philosophic students tend to become
disenchanted and switch off, turning perhaps to such magazines as Psychol-
ogy Today, which deal with the subject in a largely Romantic and occasionally
PhilosophiC manner.
"The story of my life is always embedded in the story of those commu-
nities from which I derive my identity" (MacIntyre, 1981, p. 205). To the
degree that this is so, education seems largely a matter of "having an ade-
quate sense of the traditions to which one belongs or which confront one,"
and having "an adequate sense of tradition manifests itselfin a grasp of those
future possibilities which the past has made available to the present"
(p. 207). This need for "an adequate sense" forms one plank of a platform to
be built in this book about the educational necessity ofsimply knowing a lot.
General schemes, to be at all adequate, need to construct their patterns from
a wide array of particular knowledge. The more diverse and intricate the fac-
126
tual base for a scheme, the more likely it is to reflect the world reliably Build-

PHILOSOPHIC UNDERSTANDING
ing reliable general schemes is necessary for the individual student to be-
come a realistic and sensible agent in the world.
The Lure of Certainty
We have inherited from the Classical period and from the Enlightenment the
belief that Truth-some ultimate, fundamental truth about the world and
our place and purpose in it-is attainable. This belief has mythic and reli-
gious roots. The truths that had earlier been accepted as coming appro-
priately from divine revelation were increasingly accepted as coming from
disciplined inquiry We can see how, during the seventeenth century, early
scientists like "the incomparable Mr. Newton" saw no sharp division be-
tween divine revelation and disciplined inquiry. God has made Truth acces-
sible to the person who studied the divine Word of the Bible or the divine
Work of the physical world. These scientists seemed to believe that God had
made the world and sprinkled it with puzzles, so that solving the puzzles
brought greater understanding of God. To the artist and scholar of the hu-
manities, the capacities earlier associate with the soul were increasingly asso-
ciated with the more secular imagination (McFarland, 1985).
A common feature of Philosophic understanding is a tendency to as-
sume that the patterns, theories, and general schemes used to order the
world are true to the extent that, and in the way that, the particulars from
which they are composed are true. That is, it is assumed that the truth of a
general scheme is a function of the truth of the facts and events themselves
and that the selection and organization of facts and events can be neutral or
"objective" if appropriate care is taken. Failure to recognize that a general
scheme involves reducing the diversity of the world can lead to a common
overestimation of the security of one's general scheme and the nature of the
truth that such schemes can claim.
This tendency to overconfidence in one's own theories has long been
noted. The air of authority cultivated by Edinburgh reviewers, for example,
readily escalated into arrogance. Sydney Smith satirized this excess, suggest-
ing how the typical reviewer might discuss the achievement of constructing
the solar system: "bad light-planets too distant-pestered with comets-
feeble contrivance-could make a better with great ease" (Butler, 1981,
p. 71). Mary Shelley warned against overconfidence in improving the feeble
contrivance of the human being in Frankenstein (1818). Alfred Weber
(1868-1958), Max's younger brother, wrote about the "dogmatic pro-
gressivism" and "dangerous sort of optimism" (1946, p. 49) arising from the
Enlightenment's ideology of science and scholarship and its belief that it
127

FOUR
could secure certainty about the issues they address. To use Freudian terms,
one could say that the assertiveness often shown by proponents of philo-
sophic schemes is due to the suppression of their own hidden doubts.
The inappropriate sense ofcertainty that can come with Philosophic un-
derstanding in individuals' education is observed with disapproval from the
classical period to the present. Plato recognized it as a danger point in his
educational program: "You must have seen how youngsters [late teens],
when they get their first taste of [dialectic and the dianoia curriculum], treat
argument as a form ofsport solely for purposes of contradiction. . . delight-
ing like puppies in tugging and teasing anyone who comes near them" (Re-
public, VII, 539). The distress of overconfident youths is loud through the
Enlightenment: "It is a frequent and growing Folly of our Age, that pert
young DiSCiples soon fancy themselves wiser than those who teach them"
(Watts, 1741, pp. 102-103); "Young people never show their folly and igno-
rance more conspicuously, than by this over-confidence in their own judge-
ment, and this haughty disdain of the opinion of those who have known
more days" (More, 1777, pp. 92-93). In a more psychologically alert age,
like our own, the observation is put into this form: "The tentativeness im-
plicit in the adolescent condition makes youth vulnerable to ideological cer-
tainty" (Spacks, 1981, p. 262). In part this excessive certainty arises because
students are attracted to the power of theoretic ordering concepts without
questioning the security of hold (or lack thereof) theories give over the phe-
nomena to which they are applied. And so the "chief source of human error
is to be found in general and abstract ideas," was Rousseau's related conclu-
sion (1911, p. 236).
Earlier we looked at "hierarchy" as an example ofa term typical of the set
that supported Philosophic thinking. If we consider how hierarchization is
put to work early in students' experience with Philosophic thinking we can
see how the lure of certainty can draw the student toward inappropriate
uses. In their later teens, some students begin to appreciate "classical" music,
for example. Pushed by the Philosophic impulse, they will try to impose or-
der; they will often argue about who is the best composer, and who is the
second best, and so on. In so doing, they tend to search for the most funda-
mental criterion that will allow them to organize all composers (or football
players, saints, actors, automobiles, writers, beers, whatever) by slotting
them into place on some hierarchy. Not uncommonly this leads them to re-
duce the complexity by imposing an inappropriate single criterion.
Of course, it makes little sense to ask who is the best composer, as com-
posers do different things more or less well. But sorting out what one means
128
by that leads to increasingly sophisticated distinctions-and to the related

PHILOSOPHIC
UNDERSTANDING
question, "best for whom?" The notion of best, in terms of a single-criterion
hierarchy, becomes meaningless. It does, however, make sense to ask who is
one's favorite composer. It is common in the early stages of Philosophic un-
derstanding to confuse one's hierarchical scheme with an objective criterion
of truth~ once one has identified the right criterion for ranking composers (or
football players, saints, writers, beers), and once one has found the ideology
that shows the truth about the historical process, one can feel confident in
dealing with particular composers, beers, writers, historical events, or what-
ever~ understanding then becomes a task of slotting them into place in the
scheme or on the hierarchy
The observation that some students are overconfident follows from their
seeming to think that they know the meaning ofeverything. This is an accu-
rate description of many students moving into Philosophic thinking. They
think they do know the true meaning ofeverything, even of things they have
not yet learned. That is, with an established general scheme, an ideology, an
overarching theory, they think that they understand the general principles
from which the meaning of particulars is derived. Since they know the truth
in general, they consider further learning and organizing the particulars
within it as an essentially trivial task, even an unnecessary waste of time.
Why bother with details when one already grasps the general truth?
General Schemes and Anomalies
One reason for bothering with details is that their support of general
schemes is not always reliable. If intellectual security and even one's sense of
identity is tied in with the general schemes one uses to make sense of the
world and ofexperience, then one has a vital stake in ensuring the adequacy,
validity, and truth of one's schemes. The problem is that, however sophisti-
cated one's general scheme, there always seem to be facts around that do not
fit it well at best, and, at worst, challenge it.
Leopold von Ranke composed a general scheme about the development
of modern European history, asdid Thucydides about Greek history and, by
implication, all history. Each considered the truth of his general schemes to
be established by his meticulous accumulation of reliable details, organized
and expressed sine ira et studio, without anger or partiality, as Tacitus admon-
ished. The truth of their general schemes emerged from the details, as might
a mosaic from the precise placement of its component pieces. That the over-
all picture looks nothing like the individual pieces that make it up is simply a
feature of how mosaics are composed; that the kind of knowledge claimed
by a general scheme is not like that claimed by an exhaustively researched
129

FOUR
historical fact is, to the Philosophic inquirer, just an uncontentious feature of
how knowledge is built. (As I will explore in chapter 5, a more ironic view
tends toward suspicion about patterns "emerging" from accumulated facts~
the ironic eye tends to look for what Cornford called "some scheme of un-
suspected presuppositions" that determines the selection of facts to com-
pose a particular image.)
What happens, though, when one turns up facts that do not fit the gen-
eral scheme, or when supporters of some competing general scheme thrust
out such facts? How does a Marxist scheme accommodate the collapse of
Eastern European and Russian economic and political systems and their
adoption of capitalist and Western d8mocratic practices? After all, it was the
capitalist states that were supposed to collapse. Admittedly this is an ex-
treme case of facts and events that are anomalous to a general scheme, but
the daily life of the Philosophic mind is made up of the constant calibration
of general schemes to facts. The movement of scientific research seems to
follow a formally similar process, as theories evolve and are reconstructed in
the face offurther facts. Again, the use ofsomewhat discordant metaphors-
calibration, evolution, construction-is intentional, suggesting that the
workings of the mind have no precise analogs in the world outside them.
The constant interaction between general schemes and particular
knowledge fuels students' development through Philosophic understand-
ing. The general scheme constantly requires further knowledge to support it~
the further knowledge will commonly be somewhat anomalous and require
refinements or revisions of the general scheme, which in turn will require
further knowledge more adequately to support the newly refined or revised
scheme. In the inescapable and irresolvable difference between reality and
our ideas about it lies the fuel of Philosophic inquiry.
A mass of diverse knowledge is necessary to drive the dialectical process
between general scheme and particular knowledge, and a good deal more
knowledge is required to keep it going. When students accumulate only a
relatively small amount of knowledge, or too specialized a knowledge, by
the time they enter communities that stimulate and support Philosophic
thinking, they are able to generate only rather crude and simple general
schemes. The problem is not that a crude, simple scheme does not organize
enough knowledge but that it can comfortably organize anything. Simple
forms of fundamentalist religious beliefs are a common example. If it is
crude enough, everything becomes evidence to support it, and nothing chal-
lenges it.
Contact with other cultures, on the other hand, tends to compel adjust-
130
ment of general schemes, or, as Peter Winch observed, "seriously to study

PHILOSOPHIC UNDERSTANDING
another way oflife is necessarily to extend our own" (1970, p. 99). European
explorations of discovery during the Renaissance generated bundles of
anomalies for the general scheme of Christian cosmology. Why had the
Christian God created these other races who could have no knowledge of
Him until the missionaries arrived? And what were European Christians to
make of the strange gods of the "savages"? One could, in the circumstances,
forgive a sigh of relief in the Vatican when the first Martian landers discov-
ered no clear signs of life on the planet. Flexible minds can adjust general
schemes to accommodate such anomalies, and, of course, C.S. Lewis has
already had a go at the theological problems presented by intelligent life else-
where in the galaxy in Out of the Silent Planet (1938) and Perelandra (1943).
What we have here, incidentally, is a further argument for learning a
lot. Everyone holds that ignorance is incompatible with education, but con-
ventional, traditionalist arguments for mastering certain forms ofknowledge
have an arbitrary note to them. They have tried to tie the meaning of educa-
tion to a liberal tradition of learning a basic amount of a range of disciplines.
The progressivist position, in contrast, seems hard put to justify any particu-
lar curriculum and the learning of any particular knowledge; erudition has
always taken its place behind other more important progressivist objectives
for educational institutions. If the scheme I am composing appears to lean
more to the traditionalist, academic, content-rich curriculum, I should em-
phasize that it also implies significant differences from the canonical content
of the traditionalist curriculum.
To be a teacher of "Philosophic" students requires flexibility, sensitiv-
ity, and tolerance in abundance. The teacher needs to support the students'
developing general schemes, even when those schemes seem simplistic
or, perhaps, offensive. The teacher needs to be sympathetic with students'
occasional overconfidence and must be ready to support them at those
moments of fearful insecurity when the inadequacy of a general scheme
threatens. The teacher must introduce anomalies and dissonance gradually,
to encourage greater sophistication in students' general schemes. (Ofcourse,
one has to wonder what educational institution can afford such a paragon?)
Anyone who has dealings with intellectually energetic students will
readily be able to translate my abstract talk of disturbances to general
schemes into the very real emotional crises and difficulties they encounter;
angst, tears, depression, suicide, pills are among the real world correlates of
the process. It is a lucky student who makes this intellectual journey buoyed
constantly by the excitement of discovery and not dragged down by the dis-
tresses and emotional turmoil attending the recognition ofinadequacy in the
schemes used to make sense of the world.
131

FOUR
The Flexibility of Theory
The reader might very well conclude that Philosophic understanding repre-
sents a regression rather than a development. Thucydides' narrowly focused
inquiry, driven by his desire to lay a plot on the diversity of historical events,
may seem a step backward in some ways from Herodotus's open-minded
exploration of difference and diversity. Ifthis is supposed to be an improving
process of cultural development, we might choose not to recapitulate it. We
might come to agreewith Callicles's wary observation that "too much philos-
ophy is the ruin of human life" (Gorgias, 484).
I did promise a conception of education that involved losses as well as
gains. The losses may be only too evident so far. We are all familiar with
Philosophic thinkers in thrall to general schemes; earnest ideologues, for ex-
ample, who know that history, God, the environment and its natural pro-
cesses, or some other scheme is on their side. Philosophic thinking has given
us those fashionable villains "technical rationality," positivism, behaviorism,
the bomb, genetic engineering, with their ardent promoters reeking of
hubris.
Let me give two examples of Philosophic thinking, chosen seren-
dipitously; one I was reading about a few days before writing the first draft of
this section, for some reason I can't recall now, and the second arrived in the
mail this morning as I was revising. First, I will briefly mention the career of
some of the ideas of Ptolemy, the Egyptian astronomer and geographer (not
the example that came through the mail today), whose major work was done
between about 127 and 148 C.E. While not the originatorofsome ofthe ideas
associated with his name, he was an energetic synthesizer, and his are the
works that have survived. His astronomical writings, now best known under
the title Arabic scholars gave it, The Almagest, dominated astronomical theory
until the sixteenth or, for most people, the seventeenth, century. In Ptolemy'S
scheme, the earth is the center of the universe; the sun and stars circle it, and
the planets spin eccentrically around it. His geographical works also domi-
nated people's sense of the globe for nearly a millennium and a half. Unfor-
tunately,
he
accepted
Posidonius's
underestimation
of
the
earth's
circumference, at 180,000 stades, rather than the remarkably accurate mea-
surement of Eratosthenes, at 250,000 stades. One result of this was a serious
underestimation ofthe distance between longitudinal lines. He also hypothe-
sized the existence ofa southern continent, TerraAustralis, but he imagined it
connecting the east coast ofAfrica with China. The reduced size of the globe
would have been less of a problem if America did not exist. To use the old
adage, travel broadens the mind (that is, it tends to undermine and reform
132
one's general schemes), and the confusion of the early European explorers

PHILOSOPHIC UNDERSTANDING
sailing westward with their Ptolemaic general scheme was quite understand-
able. They assumed they must have hit Asia somewhat sooner than expected,
but after getting a sense ofAmerica's scale and then seeing the Pacific beyond,
they quite reasonably experienced dumb surmise-the sound of a general
scheme crumbling against a major anomaly. Similarly the observations and
calculations of Copernicus (1473-1543), Kepler (1571-1630), and Galileo
(1564-1642) pointed up anomalies in Ptolemy's scheme ofthe cosmos, lead-
ing to the radical revision that displaced the earth from its center.
The second example of Philosophic thinking-the one that arrived in
the mail today-comes from a "Collaborative Newsletter" coordinated by a
remarkable teacher, Miranda Armstrong, at Eltham College, a K-12 private
school north ofMelbourne in Australia. She begins with a discussion she had
with her son, Christopher, over breakfast, in which he suggested that trees
are aliens.
"What do you mean, son, that a tree is an alien being?"
"Not an alien necessarily, but it might not be what we think it is. Take a spider for
instance, an inferior being by comparison to us. When they observe a house, they think of
it as a natural phenomenon. A given. It 'is' and therefore it is 'real.' Right?"
"I suppose. So what?"
"So it isn't, is it? It is man made. They believe it to be natural when in fact it is some-
thing quite different. And take mountains."
"Pardon?"
"Humans think of mountains as natural-but what if they were actually alien arti-
facts? Everything we perceive is defined by what we know, or think we know."
"I know you are going to be late for your train."
"Why do you always do that? Why, when things are just starting to get interesting,
do you tell me my train is coming or my room needs tidying? How can I be late for my
train after all when time is a figment of the human imagination? An invention of the
mind."
The theories and hypotheses generated by Ptolemy and Christopher
Armstrong are odd entities. They are not facts, nor are they generalizations
from facts~ they are guesses, suggestions, or assertions about the nature of
things, about some whole or essence, that are based on facts and generaliza-
tions. The data on which they are based may be few or many, but the result-
ing schemes go beyond the sum ofsupporting data. Between the idea and the
reality, as T. S. Eliot observed, falls the shadow. We can happily leave the
shadow to philosophers, except that we need to remember it is there. Be-
tween secured knowledge and general schemes there is an act of mind, of
imagination, of faith, that generates a conception of things that is different in
kind from the things themselves. In other words, the realm of theoretic
thinking is distinctive not only from things but from our more common
ways of thinking about them.
133

FOUR
Philosophic thinking exercises and develops the capacity to see pat-
terns, search for the recurrent, perceive processes, look for essences, and
make ordering principles and theories. It would perhaps be more accurate to
say that Philosophic thinking generates the patterns, recurrence, processes,
essences, ordinary principles, and theories. They are in shadowy part what
the mind contributes to our knowledge ofthe world in the process ofmaking
sense of it. This is clotted stuff, of no particular interest here except to help
make clear that Philosophic thinking has given us historically, and can give
us individually, increased pragmatic control over the world. The general
schemes of philosophy do not so much reduce the world as set up an addi-
tional "mimic" world made of ideas, concepts, knowledge-mind stuff.
We make reduced representations of reality in mind stuff, in concepts,
but these reduced representations are precisely what we can deal with effec-
tively If we learn to make them well, we can remove all the irrelevant and
confUSing contingencies of reality and focus on a neat representation of the
essence of something, or an underlying process, or a pattern of occurrences.
The person who is skilled at Philosophic thinking often seems the most ef-
fective at getting to the heart of the matter, at being able to think about an
issue clearly and then act on it decisively. Such clarity and decisiveness result
from what is invariably a reduction. And if the reduction ignores some rele-
vant feature of reality, the decisive action that follows can be disastrous. But
the more sophisticated Philosophic thinker generates schemes that are at-
tentive to anomalies and that become increasingly able to reflect relevant fea-
tures of reality for particular purposes. Flexible revision of general schemes
is the appropriate result of education at this point.
In the development of Philosophic understanding, impliCit features of
Mythic and Romantic understanding become explicit, bubbling, as it were,
to the surface of consciousness. Indeed, the recognition of general schemes is
a central feature of Philosophic understanding; they are there all along, now
clearly recognized for what they are (like Hayek's "operations of thought").
What had undergirded Mythic and Romantic thinking but had been a focus
of mental attention only fitfully and vaguely, as through that glass darkly,
now becomes the primary focus of mental activity.
The ability to generate schematic conceptions of reality can liberate us
from the constraints of the conventional ideas, beliefs, general schemes into
which we grow up. Such conventions appear no longer as the unquestion-
able frame ofconventionally perceived reality but, rather, as general schemes
that, like others, are vulnerable to anomalies and revisable. Once students
begin to generate and refine general schemes, they can also recognize and
similarly deal with those undergirding the conventions they inherit. Both
134
Ptolemy'S revisers and Christopher Armstrong exemplify different ways in

PHILOSOPHIC UNDERSTANDING
which inherited general schemes come up for revision-under the compul-
sion of irresistible anomalies or in the play of the exploratory imagination.
The conservative political ideology of parents, which children at first
tend to accept without question, comes to be seen as just one of a number of
schemes that can organize the facts and events ofsocial and political life. For
students who feel irked and constrained by their parents' world view, al-
ternatives such as radical Marxism, feminism, environmentalism, or even
stricter conservatism can be proffered against them as a "truer" account of
reality
It may not seem much of a liberation to be taken over by one's own gen-
eral schemes rather than continuing to accept those one inherits. The inher-
ited schemes usually have, after all, the warrant of tradition and wide
acceptance. One's individually formed schemes may be eccentric; Christo-
pher Armstrong's may seem so. But the generation of schemes is only the
beginning of the process. If the student's Philosophic community is effective
and intellectually energetic, the schemes will quickly begin to be bitten by
anomalies, and will change in response, seeking further support and turning
up further anomalies. Schemes such as those of Christopher Armstrong will
tend to be abandoned because they cannot generate anomalies; no data can
be brought to bear on them, for or against. (Though many a lifelong ideologi-
cal foot soldier lives with this condition without abandoning the general
scheme.) But even eccentric schemes are a symptom ofan energetic imagina-
tion probing around in the early stages of Philosophic thinking. Liberation
and flexibility come from recognizing as a function of the mind what had
been taken as a part of the structure of the world.
CONCLUSION
A plethora of critiques currently focuses on what has been lost in, or sacri-
ficed to the gains of, Philosophic thinking. The past few decades have been
noisy with complaints about the damage done by "(he scientific world view,"
"technical rationality," and so on. The main loss stems from the Philosophic
tendency to embrace a narrow, disembodied rationality, which links itself
with the cognitive but distances itself from the affective. It encourages a divi-
sion between the cognitive and the affective, and the mind and the body, in
which rationality is connected with the former. The imagination is conceived
as playing no significant role in cognition, and the emotions are considered
likely only to infect it with confusion. This rationality is a hard, calculative,
dehumanized, arid form of thought, inhospitable to myth, romance, and the
body. What is lost or suppressed in this form of thought are the characteris-
135

136
FOUR
tics of Mythic and Romantic understanding, as well as of Somatic under-
standing (which we explore in chapter 5).
The initial excitement of Philosophic understanding comes from a belief
that one's general schemes disclose the truth about reality, often in pellucid
and simple forms that draw together everything one knows. It is as though
the dark glass has been drawn away, and at last one really understands. To
inquisitive creatures, this discovery can come with the force of revelation. As
the years go by, we may forget the ardor of early Philosophic understanding,
and, of course, it comes to some only partially, as a feeble glow rather than a
lightning flash. But it can feel like what Faust sold his soul for. We don't see
too much of the lightning flash or Faustian contracts in our schools and
universities-but we do see some, and we could happily see more.
Philosophic understanding is not supported by ubiquitous features of
Western daily life. But Mythic understanding is supported by ubiquitous
oral-language use, and Romantic understanding is supported in the West by
ubiquitous use of alphabetic literacy Neither the Mythic nor Romantic kind
of understanding is optimally developed by routine language and literacy
uses, of course, and educational institutions can be helpful in systematically
developing them. But the case of Philosophic understanding seems rather
different. Without the self-conscious support of educational institutions,
particularly colleges and universities, Philosophic understanding is likely to
develop only fitfully and partially; the media and the general level of public
discourse in the West do not provide the kind of community that can ade-
quately sustain it.
In recent decades, the authority and permanence that PhilosophiC
thinking has aimed at have been much criticized by "sociologists of knowl-
edge" and others in the academic world, even if physical scientists do simply
get on with their work as though the cacophony had nothing to do with
them. My scheme, however, is a cumulative one; it does not chuck over-
board PhilosophiC understanding and its ambitions, its excitement, its ca-
pacity to search out patterns and generate laws, and its distinctive
construction and revision of general schemes. (In a book building a general
scheme, you will not expect that.)
How Philosophic thinking is enfolded into Ironic understanding is the
theme of chapter 5. There we will try to leave nothing behind; the child is
father of the man, the child is mother of the woman.

chapter5
Ironic Understanding and
Somatic Understanding
INTRODUCTION
"All generalizations are false" might sum up the insight that leads to the de-
cay of Philosophic general schemes. But that is a peculiar insight; it refutes
itself. If 1were to write it as a literal claim and argue for its truth, you would
reasonably feel pity for my confusion and lack of reflexiveness. But if it is
written and interpreted ironically, it establishes an odd kind of communica-
tion between us, taking on a somewhat humorous tone. We both understand
that 1do not mean what 1have written literally but that 1do mean something
toward which the literal meaning points. You, subtle and ironic reader, will
recognize my opening phrase as having something in common with, and as
parodying, such assertions as "All meaningful statements are either verifiable
empirical claims or conceptual truths" or "All knowledge is socially con-
structed." They are claims that seem to have a kind ofvalidity but yet manage
to refute themselves at the same time. My opening clause points you to the
recognition that we will be dealing here with modern, and postmodern,
problems concerning language and its referentiality
If that is what I mean, why did 1not simply write that and spare you the
jokey digression? Because our primary topic is irony, and irony involves
more than a perverse disguise ofwhat might be better stated literally. Such an
ironic opening leads to discussion in a number of directions, in all ofwhich 1
would like to gallop at the same time. It leads to a discussion of the kind of
137

FIVE
understanding that results from the breakdown or decay of general schemes.
It leads to the nineteenth-century attempts to come to terms with the grow-
ing recognition that, as Victor Hugo famously pronounced it, "Tous les sys-
temes sont faux." It leads to the accumulating reflexiveness of language and
consciousness and the ramifying consequences of this reflexiveness in mod-
ernism and postmodernism. It leads to Socrates, whom Thrasymachus irri-
tatedly accused of habitual irony (Republic, 1.336).
The story so far has concerned the development of language. Earlyat-
tempts to express the nature of the world disclosed by human senses were
oral, using vocabularies of at most a couple of thousand words. Literacyen-
tailed a further development of language and increased vocabulary. The En-
glish grapholect now has available more than a million and a half words
(Ong, 1977). Literacy promised more precision, complexity, security, and
rationality in capturing experience and the world in words. In communities
supportive oftheoretic thinking, further linguistic developments promised a
more systematic, comprehensive, and true account of reality But the decay
of belief in that promised truth~ and the decay of belief that theoretic sys-
tems, expressed in however refined a language, could represent reality accu-
rately has created problems about how language is supposed to represent
reality at all. And iflanguage doesn't represent reality, what does it do? And if
our languages cannot give us access to reality, what, then, is reality? And if
properly representing reality in language was what was meant by truth, then
what is truth? Well, these are questions that have been asked before.
In the twentieth century, Western intellectual history has grappled with
the recognition that language could not do what had previously been ex-
pected of it. Quite suddenly~ and very widely in the late nineteenth century,
our most intricate tool for grasping reality and truth began to seem in-
adequate for the job, and, worse, it began to seem like a self-generating,
labyrinthine prison that offered no way out to reality
More recently we have been urged to face up to the decay of earlier
hopes that in language we would be able to establish foundations for our
knQwledge claims and secure the truth of our beliefs; instead we are to ac-
cept the "contingency of... our most central beliefs and desires," and aban-
don "the idea that those central beliefs and desires refer back to something
beyond the reach of time and chance" (Rorty, 1989, p. xv). This recognition
of the contingency of things is a requirement for living the undeceived life
Richard Rorty recommends for what he calls "liberal ironists." Not that this
ironic acceptance ofcontingency at the heart of things is a uniquely modern
stance. It is a persistent theme of the Western intellectual tradition, dryly
announced near the beginning of that tradition in Heraclitus's claim that
138
"The cosmos, at best, is like a rubbish heap scattered at random" (Diels, frag-

IRONIC UNDERSTANDING AND SOMATIC UNDERSTANDING
ment 124). And the epitome of irony is expressed in what Vlastos calls "Soc-
rates' renunciation of epistemic certainty" (1991, p. 4).
Amore common theme in the Western intellectual tradition is that with-
out some clear foundation, some bedrock of truth, human life and our sense
of the natural world are chaotic and meaningless. The fear of raw contin-
gency has long driven the pursuit of truth. But in this century, shockingly,
ironic voices have suggested that nothing much happens if we give up look-
ing for foundations to knowledge, and even for meaning; the sky holds in
place, daily life goes on:
"And so," Walter retorted sharply, "you think we ought to do without any meaning in
life?" Ulrich asked him what he really needed a meaning for. One got along all right with-
out it, he commented. (Musil, 1965, I, p. 255)
Such a recognition seems to disinherit the modern Western mind from
the promised benefits of truth and secure knowledge; it suggests that "our
desire for meaningful order may be meaningless; like letters written to a non-
existent address" (Heller, 1959, p. 295). But the gods, or God, had guaran-
teed some kind ofcommensurability between the human world ofmeanings
and the world of nature. So long as people conceived of the world as made
and governed by God, then catastrophes, pain, diseases, death, and so on
could all be accepted as meaningful parts of some design, however inde-
cipherable to mere mortals. For those who contemplated Nietzsche's an-
nouncement of the death of God, the natural world became disturbingly
incommensurable with the human world. What are we to make of our lot in
this "heartless witless nature," as A. E. Housman put it, when "the more the
universe seems comprehensible, the more it seems pointless"? (Weinberg, in
Penrose, 1993, p. 82). What was so disturbing about Darwin's ideas was not
descent from monkeys, with which the British magazine Punch and various
clerics had such fun, but the mechanism of natural selection and its implica-
tion that we owe our precious consciousness not to God, framing our sym-
metry for some high purpose, but to blind chance, to raw contingency
This weighty stuff does seem rather distant from the simple figure of
speech we refer to as irony "Bolingbroke was a holy man" is the example Dr.
johnson gives in his dictionary (1 755) to accompany his definition of irony:
"A mode of speech in which the meaning is contrary to the words." "Holy" is
among the least appropriate descriptions for the brilliant but scheming,
treacherous, abusive, egomaniacal rake Henry St. john, 1st. Viscount Bol-
ingbroke. So why call him holy? johnson's sentence exemplifies irony be-
cause most of Dr. johnson's contemporary readers would have known that
his claim could not be intended literally Rather, it enables that odd commu-
nication that takes place between what is said and what is meant. Certainly
139

FIVE
"an ironic utterance is not merely a statement about reality ... but presup-
poses at least a tacit awareness of the disparity between a statement and the
reality it is supposed to represent" (White, 1978, p. 208). The peculiar plea-
sure of irony seems sometimes to gain from there being readers or hearers
who, knOWing no better, could take the ironic statement at face value.
Muecke also notes colorfully: "The golden eggs of irony could not be laid so
abundantly if we were not knee-deep in geese" (1970b, p. 4), and "Until the
ironic message is interpreted as intended it has only the sound of one hand
clapping" (p. 39). And yet, it is commonly claimed, this odd figure ofspeech
has become "the master trope of our age" (Conway and Seery, 1992, p. 3).
The form of consciousness associated with it lies at the heart of both mod-
ernism and postmodernism.
Irony is notoriously multifaceted, and trying to characterize it has been
likened to "gathering the mist; there is plenty to take hold of if only one
could" (Muecke, 1969, p. 2). Even so, in this chapter I want to describe a
further kind ofunderstanding and explain why I think it is best called Ironic.
It is well to go carefully with such a topic, remembering that "irony's guns
face in all directions" (Enright, 1988, p. 110).
IRONY AND SOCRATES
When Thrasymachus referred to Socrates' habitual irony, he was not intend-
ing a compliment as someone might today. In Socrates and Plato's time, the
most common meaning of eironeia was something like "dissembling,"
"shamming," or "pretending." The eiron was a person with generally unwor-
thy motives, who never talked straight and was intent on deceiving or mak-
ing a fool of someone. The term connotes rebuke and disapproval, reflected
in Swearingen's suggested translation, "dissembling scoundrel" (1991).
Thrasymachus's particular complaint was aimed at Socrates' claim that
he himself had no idea about the nature of justice and that he wished to
question the others only so that he could learn about it from them.
Thrasymachus clearly believed that Socrates did have a preferred conception
ofjustice, which he was keeping to himselfeven as he deconstructed those of
his companions. But, as the argument continued, what infuriated Thrasyma-
chus was "not just [Socrates'] not saying what he means but his refusal to
mean anything at all" (Bruns, 1992, p. 32).
In the early dialogues at least) and in the first book of the Republic, which
houses Thrasymachus's complaint, Socrates lives up to his claim that he
140
"knows nothing and is ignorant of everything" (Symposium, 216); he decon-

IRONIC UNDERSTANDING AND SOMATIC UNDERSTANDING
structs others' claims to knowledge but offers nothing positive of his own in
their place. He solves no problems, shows that all the proffered solutions are
inadequate, and cheerfully leaves us to sort things out as best as we can.
What are we to make of Socrates' claim to know nothing? Clearly he
means it in some sense. At his trial he told the court, "I am not aware ofbeing
wise in anything, great or small" (Apology, 21). And after painstaking argu-
ments with Gorgias, Polus, and Callicles, he asserts, "But as for me, my posi-
tion is always the same: I do not know how these matters stand" (Gorgias,
509). He concludes by observing, "In our present condition we ought not to
give ourselves airs, for even on the most important subjects we are always
changing our minds; so utterly stupid are we" (Gorgias, 527). To Thrasyma~
chus, this is merely a cheap rhetorical ploy, ensuring for Socrates that he is
never vulnerable in argument, that he cannot be caught in the contradictions
in which he delights to catch others; but it is a ploy whose cost is often de-
structive and negative, establishing nothing, and as such is pointless and ir-
ritating.
But to the young men who gathered around Socrates, it was a part of
what was so peculiarly fascinating about him. Alcibiades talks at some length
in the Symposium about the great oddity ofSocrates: "his absolute unlikeness
to any human being that is or ever has been is perfectly astonishing" (Sym-
posium, 221). In the course of this drunken panegyric, Alcibiades refers to
Socrates' "ironical manner which is so characteristic of him" (Symposium,
218). While the claim to know nothing could hardly be taken literally, it
nevertheless captured some genuine feature of Socrates' radical epistemic
doubt that both bewildered and attracted those young men. Vlastos sums it
up, romantically, by suggesting that Socrates was "a previously unknown,
unimagined type of personality, so arresting to his contemporaries and so
memorable for ever after, that the time would come, centuries after his
death, when educated people would hardly be able to think of ironia without
bringing Socrates to mind" (1991, p. 29).
Centuries after his death, the two writers who did most to give new defi-
nition to irony-Cicero and Quintillian-both refer to Socrates in doing
so. The Greek disrepute attached to the term is removed, and it is now rec-
ommended as a subtle and sophisticated form of language connoting intel-
lectual urbanity. This conception of irony carries over into modern Europe,
helped by the finding of a filthy copy of Quintillian's Institutio Oratorica in
1415 in a tower in St. Gall, Switzerland. The Romans' elaborate discussion of
the variety of forms of irony carried with it the echo of Socrates' curious
stance in the world, and their enormous influence justified Kierkegaard's ob-
servation that "tradition has linked the word 'irony' to the existence ofSocra-
141

FIVE
tes" (1965, p. 49). So we may look to Kierkegaard to see how that peculiar
stance of Socrates was reinterpreted in more recent times and again tied to
the concept of irony
Kierkegaard begins his account by arguing that "it is in Socrates that the
concept ofirony has its inception in the world" (p. 47). In making this claim,
Kierkegaard must have had something more in mind than the constant
ironic comments Socrates sprinkles throughout the dialogues: as in, "one
very small difficulty which I am sure that Protagoras will easily explain" (Pro-
tagoras, 328), just as he launches a devastating attack. These little ironies,
sometimes falling into mere sarcasm, did not enter the world with Socrates;
they seem to be a universal feature of language, like lying. Kierkegaard
clearly agrees with Quintillian's observation ofSocrates as the kind of person
who does not use ironic quips just now and then, but who is somehow ironic
through and through: "whoever has essential irony has it all day long"
(Kierkegaard, 1965, p. 23); he sees the world constantly "sub speciae ironiae"
(p. 67). What, then, is the character of this ironic perspective as exemplified
by Socrates, according to Kierkegaard?
Kierkegaard reminds us how Socrates reacted to the Delphic oracle's
pronouncement that he was the wisest of people: Socrates was surprised, as
he thought he didn't know anything much, but concluded that the oracle
might have considered him wisest because he was unique in realiZing how
little he knew. So he took it as a vocation from God, who alone is wise, to
show in what sense the oracle was correct, by making clear that those who
claimed most knowledge and wisdom were in fact ignorant and foolish.
Thereby he would expose that "the wisdom ofmen is worth little or nothing"
(Apology, 23). Socrates, Kierkegaard tells us, "traversed the entire kingdom of
intelligence and discovered the whole realm to be bounded by an Oceanus of
illusory knowledge" (p. 75). The overall result he likens to Samson's final
achievement: "Socrates ... seizes the columns bearing the edifice of know1-
edge and plunges everything down into the nothingness of ignorance"
(p.77).
The epistemological result of "essential irony" is the "infinite absolute
negativity" (p. 278) that Kierkegaard takes from Hegel's commentary on
irony "It is negative because it only negates; it is infinite because it negates
not this or that phenomenon; and it is absolute because it negates by virtue
ofa higher which is not. Irony establishes nothing.... It is a divine madness
which rages like a Tamerlane and leaves not one stone standing upon an-
other in its wake" (p. 278).
Well, this prospect is rather cheerless, not easy to advertise as an attrac-
tive component of a "fun" lifestyle, yet Socrates seems to have been buoy-
142
antly cheerful, even while facing death. If the "first potency of irony lies in

IRONIC UNDERSTANDING AND SOMATIC UNDERSTANDING
formulating a theory of knowledge that annihilates itself" (p. 98), how is it
that the annihilation leaves Socrates so jaunty?
Kierkegaard describes Socrates as a "dialectical vacuum pump" (p. 203)
sucking away all claims to knowledge. We human beings seem instinctively
compelled to construct representations of our world. Our psychological se-
curity seems to depend on our confidence that such representations corre-
spond to reality Socratic irony, therefore, threatens the very basis of our
security, and certainly this is how many of Socrates' victims felt about his
dialectical vacuum. But Kierkegaard argues that Socrates' jaunty self-
confidence is somehow a result ofhis infinite absolute negativity The fruit of
Socratic irony, he tells us, is "merely to feel free" (p. 273).
Recognizing the insecurity of our knowledge and our feebleness and
vacillation as knowers is not, for Socrates, disabling or constraining. Rather,
such inSights are a condition ofgenuine freedom: "it is by means ofirony that
the subject emancipates himself from the constraints upon him by the conti-
nuity of life" (Kierkegaard, 1965, pp. 272, 273). So the ironist can "cut
loose" from the constraints of false knowledge that hold bound in their time
and place those who fancy they have secure knowledge. Their knowledge, to
the ironist, is Simply a shared agreement about representing reality for local
purposes at a particular time. To confuse these contingent forms with secure
representations of reality is to be unable to pull free of local, temporary con-
ditions. Kierkegaard uses numerous terms to indicate how Socrates "hovers"
above the bondage of the nonironic~ he is free, light, buoyant, for all time.
Removing the burden of simplistic beliefs allows the ironic soul to rise
"upward" out of local constraints and achieve autonomy
Plato has been commonly represented of late as the grim, logocentric,
patriarchal metaphysician who invented the kind of epistemology from
which postmodernism is trying to save us. It is well to remember that he is
also the mystical jokester and mythographer who constantly warned about
the unreliability ofwords. Much must remain unsaid, he tells us; words can-
not say what we mean. In the seventh letter, of probable authenticity, he ex-
plains the attraction of politics at Syracuse in preference to a life in which
"[he] feared to see [him]self at last nothing but words." Even as he describes
how the soul can come to perceive the essential forms-his arch-dogma-
he cannot resist the ironist's shrug: "Heaven knows whether it is true; but
this, at any rate, is how it appears to me" (Republic, VII, 517). However
scholars distinguish between Plato and Socrates, the ironic Socrates exists
for us only in Plato's construction ofhim. IfSocrates is the arch-ironist, Plato,
il migliorfabbro, is no less a one.
Plato is the ultimate exemplar of Cicero's urbana dissimulatio, even to the
point of nearly always speaking through others. Recognizing the unrelia-
143

FIVE
bility ofwords, and the double unreliability ofwritten words to others-"He
would be a very simple person ... who should leave in writing or receive in
writing any art under the idea that the written word would be intelligible
or certain" (Phaedrus, 275)-Plato was hardly likely to write with literal
simplicity. His arguments are crowded with jokes, myths, puns, and meta-
phors, and they tantalize with irony. The ironic reader will recognize the in-
adequacy of the literal words and look rather for the meaning they point
toward. What else are these pages before your eyes, reader, but the shadow
wall of Plato's cave? (Seery, 1992). The words, he insists, are uncertain
shadows of meanings. "The point about Socrates"-one might say Plato's
point-"is that we never know how to take him.... [H]is being ... is play-
ful, turning things upside down like a lord of misrule" (Bruns, 1992, p. 32).
The association with Socrates has given us, as part of the meaning of
irony, a pervasive epistemic skepticism on the one hand and a psychological
freedom from the constraints of particular times, places, and their conven-
tions on the other. Whether the freedom leaves one buoyant or bereft may
depend more on hormones than epistemology, but it is a freedom few iron-
ists would swap for the illusory securities of the conventional mind. While
we may seem to have come a long way from the simple irony of "Bolingbroke
was a holy man," the journey helps us to understand why some people prefer
to talk in this odd way. If nothing else, it Signals knowledge of the unre-
liability of words and declares a kind of freedom. This freedom may not
make one as cheerful as Socrates, but it is not insignificant.
"'TIS ALL IN PEECES, ALL COHAERANCE GONE"
Language, that endlessly fertile invention, gave us, among its early gifts,
gods. Inherent in the idea of gods are two perspectives on our behavior and
on the world; there is the everyday perspective from our entrammeled social
lives and also that of the gods looking down on us with amusement, con-
tempt, admiration, horror, or disinterest. Once we try to imagine what we
might look like from a god's perspective-in the discourse of the gods-we
may see any particular event or object as having more than one meaning, as
playing distinctive roles in different narratives. Secular people pay less atten-
tion to the gods' narrative than to their own social narrative; religious people
try to see their lives as far as possible in terms of the gods' narrative.
The ancient Greek theater mimicked a cosmos in which gods look down
on human behavior. On the stage, Oedipus pursued Laius's murderer while
the audience watched and listened from the towering tiers of seats, feeling
144
the events both from Oedipus's perspective and from their own god-like per-

IRONIC UNDERSTANDING AND SOMATIC UNDERSTANDING
spective. Theater stimulated a peculiar consciousness, which one could per-
haps apply to one's silent walk home afterwards, self-consciously feeling ap-
proved of or sneered at by the gods, who are as invisible to the walker as the
walker had been to the Oedipus who had strutted and fretted his hour upon
the stage earlier.
There are, of course, endless ways of dealing with the reflexiveness that
gods' perspectives encouraged people to develop, and endless strategies for
dealing with the threat of incoherence that insinuates itself in seeing events
or objects from different perspectives. Multiple perspectives disclose multi-
ple meanings-one may look at that stand of trees with aesthetic delight, or
with calculations of what its timber would fetch in current markets, or with
religiOUS awe as the sacred resting place of an ancestor's spirit, or with deter-
mination to preserve it as the last sustaining habitat ofan endangered species
of moth, and so on. How are we to deal with a world in which multiple per-
spectives, meanings, and narratives throng for our acqUiescence?
The fluent ironist can slip from perspective to perspective. The essential
humor of irony is incongruity, applying in one perspective modes that are
proper to another. One might take a TV advertisement as a philosophical
proposition and respond accordingly. One might suggest that a wedding
feast follows close upon a funeral for reasons ofthrift with regard to the cater-
ing. One might recommend the eating ofbabies as an economical solution to
a population outgrowing its food supply. One might transpose the kinds of
arguments employed with a shifty used-car dealer about a defunct car to a
pet shop about a dead parrot. But, more fundamentally, ironists' fluency in
shifting among different perspectives opens up doubts about the security of
what is seen from anyone of them.
In premodern languages, to use MacIntyre's (1989) distinction, some
canonical narrative determines which perspective is privileged, and the
canonical narrative serves to suppress the others. In e.arly modern Europe,
Greek, Hebrew, and Roman narratives were made coherent within the ca-
nonical narrative of Christianity by the heroic intellectual activity of St. Au-
gustine, St. Thomas Aquinas, and others (aided by the Inquisition for those
less ready to accept the dominant metanarrative). But as the decades and the
centuries passed, the further "annexation of Chinese, Sanskrit, Mayan, and
old Irish texts, and ... the bestowal of equal status upon texts in European
vernacular languages from the thirteenth to the nineteenth centuries, [and]
... the discovery of a wide array of preliterate cultures" (p. 196), led to an
increasing strain on the canonical Christian narrative. The accumulation of
texts and narratives, and the proliferation of perspectives these offered on
the world, stimulated two general responses: an intensive search for the right
perspective, the true narrative, on the one hand, and irony on the other.
145

FIVE
The modern search for security among proliferating narratives is con-
ventionally taken to begin with Descartes' claim that his thinking, however
misguided, was irrefutable evidence that he existed, and this knowledge
provided a secure foundation on which to build. The Enlightenment scien-
tific project, in addition, seemed to discover a way of penetrating the ca-
cophony of narratives to secure truths about the nature of things. But while
this attempt to build increasingly secure epistemological foundations is one
prolonged note in the Western tradition, it is accompanied by an even more
sustained note made up ofconstant ironic voices saying in various ways that
the search for secure truth is illusory
The suspicion that all was not well with the optimistic Enlightenment
project was voiced with energy even by some of those engaged in its scien-
tific work. By the late eighteenth century, particularly among the German
Romantics, it became commonplace to muse on the correlation between
the increasing number of objective truths being established by the sciences
and the decreasing sense of intellectual security people felt. Erich Heller
summarizes Goethe's explanation of this metanarrative paradox: "every sci-
entific theory is m~rely the surface rationalization of a metaphysical sub-
stratum of beliefs, conscious or unconscious, about the nature of the world"
(1959, p. 26).
In a letter written in 1790, Benjamin Constant (1767-1830) suggested
"God, i.e. the author ofus and our surroundings, died before having finished
his work
[E]verything now finds itself made for a goal which no longer
exists, and
we especially feel destined for something of which we our-
selves have not the slightest idea" (Behler, 1990, p. 91). Such a scenario
would at least explain some thinkers' bewilderment and uncertainty over an
assertive program of positive science and a heterogeneous collection of cul-
tural narratives, all ofwhich in one way or another claim to offer a privileged
perspective on the nature of things. The most insistent promoter of irony as
the solution to this existential plight was Friedrich Schlegel (1772-1829).
He took the limited sense of irony as given, for example, in Dr. Johnson's
dictionary or Diderot's Encyclopedie ("a figure of speech by which one wants
to convey the opposite of what one says," vol. 19, p. 86), along with the way
the term had been developed in the study of rhetoric from the time of Cicero
and Quintillian, and elaborated it into the stance we have since adopted.
"Irony," says Schlegel, "is the clear consciousness ... of an infinitely
teeming chaos" (1991, p. 100). His definition does not hold much hope for
sense-making, but Schlegel's Romantic irony has among its resources a solu-
tion to the problem it recognizes. The ironic mind, especially that of the art-
ist' can transcend the chaos of the world by harnessing together wild
146
imaginativeness and deep seriousness, the artistic passion for life and sober

IRONIC UNDERSTANDING
AND SOMATIC UNDERSTANDING
scientific inquiry. This, anyway, is how Schlegel believed Socrates managed
to be intellectually and psychologically buoyant while maintaining extreme
epistemological agnosticism: "Socratic irony rises out of a union of the sense
of life as an art and the spirit of learning and science" (p. 160). Irony, com-
bining artistic imagination and scientific rationality, can enable us to make
our way, using our artistic creations as stepping stones, beyond the chaos of
this world.
What this transcendence requires in the individual is, in Schlegel's fa-
mous phrase, "transcendental buffoonery." The second half of Victor Hugo's
proclamation about all the systems being false is, "la genie seul est vrai~" So
the Romantics' sense of irony discloses a chaotic world, but individual ge-
nius and its transcendental buffoonery provide a remedy for the distress infi-
nitely teeming chaos might reasonably be expected to cause your average
punter. Kierkegaard concurred at least with this view: Irony "is an excellent
surgeon ... its function ... is of the utmost importance in order for the
personal life to acquire health and truth" (1965, p. 338).
The'trick of Romantic ironists' transcendence was to align their work
with God's. After eloping with Dorothea Mendelssohn, Schlegel converted to
Catholicism, so his sense of infinitely teeming chaos and the freedom of·
irony fall within a theocentric scheme-one influenced significantly, in his
case, by his sometime collaborator, the Protestant theologian, philosopher,
and critic Friedrich Schleiermacher. By exposing, and associating with,
God's work, the Romantic artist or imaginative scholar managed to over-
come the constraints of the conventional world and escape the chaos that
bound up those who could take no part in divine purposes. Whether
through Hegelian philosophy, Rankean philosophic history, or the "primary
imagination" that Coleridge held "to be the living power and prime agent of
all human perception and. . . a repetition in the finite mind of the external
act of creation of the infinite I AM" (Biographia Literaria, XIII), the Romantic
ironist escaped from the threat of meaningless chaos that irony opened up.
The Romantics' sense of the role of "genius," and the association of ge-
nius with God's work, seems a tad overwrought today. Even in the nine-
teenth century more "modern" ironists found the divine connection not
entirely satisfactory: "In our age philosophy has come into such an enor-
mous result that all can scarcely be right with it. Insights not only into man's
secrets but into God's secrets are sold at such a bargain that it all begins to
look suspicious" (Kierkegaard, 1965, pp. 339-340).
The Romantics' contribution to our conception ofirony has been, some-
what ironically, a kind of knowingness about epistemological uncertainty,
perhaps resulting from increasing familiarity with radical doubt. But ro-
mantic irony has lacked the harder edges we will bump into below when
147

FIVE
considering more recent conceptions, and it has been found too often hand-
in-hand with belief in the relatively painless possibility of transcending
irony's destructive implications. The nature of that Romantic transcendence
has been usually expressed in vague terms, more like a hopeful gesture than
a practical gUidebook for the perplexed. That ineffectualness is what has
given "romance" a bad name among the tough-minded to this day.
As I considered examples from historians' work in earlier chapters, it
might be useful very briefly to observe the result of post-Romantic irony
among historians in the later part of the nineteenth century. Hayden White
describes how "the sensed inadequacy of language to the full representation
of its object [came to be] perceived as a problem" (1978, p. 207). A response
to this perception may be seen in the work of Jacob Burckhardt (1818-
1897), one of Ranke's disaffected students. He concluded that the general
schemes common to "philosophic" history writing could not be constructed
from the study of the past alone. The historian cannot simply look at the past
and describe what happened: "we are subject to the prejudices ofour egoism
(at best, to the predilections of our time)" (1965, pp. 27-28). The study of
history, as he conceived it, "lays no claim to system"; it cannot disclose gen-
eral truths about the historical process-it shows "mere reflections of our-
selves" (1955, pp. 74-75). Burckhardt began his revolutionary work, The
Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy, not with a Romantic concern with pre-
venting some mega ergon from slipping away on the stream of Time into
Oblivion, nor with a PhilosophiC desire to establish some metanarrative
about the historical process, but with a more ironic observation:
In the wide ocean on which we venture, the possible ways and directions are many~ and
the same studies which have served for this work might easily, in other hands, not only
receive a wholly different treatment and application, but lead also to essentially different
conclusions. (1960, p. 2)
The Western tradition is commonly represented through the Enlighten-
ment period and the nineteenth century in terms ofan increasingly assertive
rationalism accompanied by an inexorable scientific advance that dispensed
world-changing technologies as its byproduct. The Western tradition also
involves during this period a widening strain of irony that corrodes confi-
dence, dissolves meaning, and undermines all claims to intellectual security.
This epistemological subversion accompanied the self-representation of the
physical sciences as bringing clarity, order, security, and law to our under-
standing of the world. This great scientific enterprise ground forward, un-
perturbed by skeptical or mocking ironic voices. It delivered early the
148
message that the world accessible to our senses, and to those refinements of

IRONIC UNDERSTANDING AND SOMATIC UNDERSTANDING
our senses that made up the tools of much scientific inquiry, is the only
world there is. No gods are needed to explain how the world works, no mys-
terious forces or spirits exist, no transcendent state of affairs is running
things, no Ideas or Forms lie behind the everyday particularity of the world.
This message accompanied laws to account for the behavior of light, heat,
sound, motion, acceleration, falling bodies, gases, fluids, solids, and so on.
In some degree, then, science was an ally of irony, helping to dissolve the
metaphysical realm.
In 1895 Wilhelm Roentgen discovered X-rays. In 1897Joseph Thomp-
son discovered the electron. In 1898 Marie Curie invented the term radioac-
tivity and isolated pure radium in 1910. In 1914 Ernest Rutherford discov-
ered the proton and, with Niels Bohr, proposed models ofa subatomic world
whose behavior required different laws from those earlier considered univer-
sally applicable to the physical world. And Einstein disrupted the common
sense of such foundational notions as time and space. Louis Pasteur mean-
while had exposed a world of micro-organisms whose behavior accounted
for everyday phenomena in souring, fermentation, putrefaction, and dis-
ease. The message of this new science was that the world was really quite
unlike what it seemed to our senses. Our senses provided only a very limited
perspective on a superficial level of reality; who could tell how many levels
the world inaccessible to our senses might dissolve into, or even whether it
might dissolve infinitely? The universe was turning out, as J. B. S. Haldane
put it, not just to be queerer than we imagined, but queerer than we can
imagine. In a formally similar way, Freud suggested that our conscious lives,
our accessible selves, are mere illusions hiding a different but more real life
that goes on in secret and that is the proper source for explanations of our
behavior.
This new science, and its dissolution of so much of the common-sense
framework of understanding that had dominated people's thinking, in-
termingled with and clearly encouraged some features of spreading irony
Presupposed verities were disrupted as, for example, the new geology and
Darwin's new biology put flux and change where earlier there had been sta-
bility For some, science was not dissolving the known world but, rather,
constructing a new and more reliable account of reality But the ironists
doubted this no less than they had doubted the old "reliable accounts." And
worse, as the structures of the new rational, scientific world, and its technol-
ogies, began to take shape, many felt confirmed in their conviction that ra-
tionality was delivering a nightmare.
The assertive confidence that accompanied "philosophic" rationality
seemed to some ironic minds to be leading directly to new and more repres-
149

FIVE
sive societies, marked by the new, rational, totalitarian factories, prisons,
and, some would add, schools. The great prophet of this view was Friedrich
Nietzsche (1844-1900): "For some time now, our whole European culture
has been moving towards a catastrophe, with a tortured tension that is grow-
ing from decade to decade: restlessly, violently, headlong like a river that
wants to reach the end, that no longer reflects, that is afraid to reflect"
(1968a, p. 3).
Whatwasincreasinglydisturbingto some ofthe more agile mindswas not
that abuses ofthe rationallyorganizedsocialsystemswere possible, but rather,
more profoundly, that something inherent in them was at odds with human
interests and aspirations. Alert observers began "risingup against civilization
as a disease, and declaring that it is not our disorder but our order that is
terrible." (Ah, no, that isn't Michel Foucault; it's Bernard Shaw expressing
admiration for the insight of Charles Dickens's Hard Times [Cunningham,
1994, p. 6].) Nietzsche saw this terrible order involved in "our whole attitude
toward nature, our violation of nature with the help of machines and the
heedless ingenuity of technicians and engineers" (1956, p. 248).
Burckhardt's ironic sense of the insecurity, almost the arbitrariness, of
historical knowledge found a more expansive and radical expression in the
work of his admirer, Nietzsche. It was not just the general schemes inferred
from the study ofhistory that Nietzsche dismissed, but pretty well the whole
furniture of the Western mind, from refined science to the "herd's" panoply
of folk wisdom and beliefs. He attacked it all with dismaying plausibility,
seizing, once again, the columns bearing the edifice of knowledge, collaps-
ing everything into nothingness and ignorance. All claims to knowledge and
truth are empty-"That there should be a 'truth' which one could somehow
approach -!"(Nietzsche, 1968a, p. 249)-mere mythologies made up to
comfort the weak and
simple-minded~ people forgot that these modern
myths had been made up, then forgot that they had forgotten.
Nietzsche resolves the ancient quarrel between philosophy and poetry
by pointing out that philosophy is no less fictive than is poetry We are to
discard the old distinctions between fiction and truth and recognize rather
that there are two kinds of fiction: one that masquerades as truth and one
that recognizes itself as fiction. It is that long masquerade that he wants to
show for what it really is. The pretence that there is "an actual drivefor knowl-
edge that, without regard to questions ofusefulness and harm, [goes] blindly
for the truth" (Nietzsche, 1968a, p. 22·7; emphaSiS in original) or that there is
a "will to truth" (p. 249), sickened him. These are nothing other than a mask
for the desire to control, conquer, appropriate; the pursuit of truth is driven
only by "wanting to be superior" (p. 249).
150
What makes the the pretence so difficult for the "herd" to recognize, and

IRONIC UNDERSTANDING AND SOMATIC UNDERSTANDING
for Nietzsche to extirpate, is the way language has developed, taking up and
carrying along even in its very structure a vast mythology of assumptions.
The most basic features of language embody confusions even about cause
and effect: "it is only the snare of language (of the arch-fallacies of reason
petrified in language), presenting all activity as conditioned by an agent-
the 'subject'" (Nietzsche, 1956, p. 178). So a sentence like 'The oak tree
drops its acorns to the ground' falsely suggests a subject performing an ac-
tion~ it represents the world as operating according to sets of causes. Nietz-
sche unpicks causality, the cement of the rationalists' universe, as simply a
product of grammar, not a constituent of the real world~ causality is merely a
part ofone of our perspectives, of one of the stories we impose on reality. It is
the simple-minded acceptance of how the world seems when seen through
language that Nietzsche rails against: "We are not rid of God because we still
have faith in grammar" (1968b, p. 483).
In The Gay Science, Nietzsche explores the kind of life that follows recog-
nition that God is dead and that the intellectual cosmos that He had sus-
tained is dead with Him. Recognition of those deaths is a precondition for
the freedom of the individual and for the existence of the new kind of person
who can live in a world without any guarantees of meaning, or telos. It is, of
course, easier "to think 'I possess the truth' than to see only darkness around
one" (1968a, p. 248). But one must face the abyss rather than accept the
illusory comfort of "knowing the truth." In the face of the empty dark, the
new undeceived superhumans will, like any artist, make their own meaning,
sing their own songs, dance their own dances. Nietzsche wants "fellow re-
vellers" to join him on the "mysterious dancing grounds" (1956, p. 6) and
live human life as an artistic creation. If the meaning oflife cannot be derived
from some story, some narrative, some God's plans, then we must make it up
ourselves. This sounds splendid, of course, and has sounded splendid to
people of widely divergent views (cL Ascheim, 1994), but it has never been
entirely clear just what we should do tomorrow morning to realize Nietz-
sche's somewhat indeterminate vision of regeneration.
If Nietzsche is the archetypal representative of modernist irony, and we
consider postmodernism a "radicalized, intensified version of modernism"
(Behler, 1990, p. 5), it is not obvious what further radicalization of ironic
epistemic doubt is possible for postmodernism. But as the line between
modernism and postmodernism is vague and porous, one common solution
is to enroll Nietzsche as a postmodern.
Since writing the preceding paragraph, I have spent a month lecturing
and visiting schools in Australia and, on the way, Hawaii. At the University of
Hawaii at Manoa I talked with a Scottish colleague who plays the bagpipes.
He described a recent occasion when he had played, among other tunes,
151

FIVE
"Scotland the Brave" and "The 79th's Farewell to Gibraltar," the latter com-
posed, incidentally, by an ancestor ofhis. This particular performance was in
a St. Patrick's day parade, during which the pipers marched along Kalakaua
Avenue by Waikiki beach, in a procession watched mainly by Japanese
tourists.
What sense do we make of this cultural event? Well, there are many
senses, many perspectives, many meanings possible, many discourses into
which it could fit. The Irish claim they gave the bagpipes to the Scots as a
joke, and the Scots haven't seen the joke yet, but the Irish organizers of this
parade clearly wanted the bagpipes for the drama and the note of exaltation
they can provide. What sense would the ancestor who wrote "The 79th's
Farewell to Gibraltar" make of it? It seems unlikely that he could have imag-
ined the circumstances of this performance. (My colleague has since sug-
gested he would have been utterly astonished, not least by witnessing
women playing the pipes.) What did it mean to the honeymooning couples
who took photographs of the event? What would it mean to their friends
who looked at the photographs later in Kyoto? And what did it mean to the
native Hawaiians watching this bunch of "haolis" and listening to the skirl of
their alien pipes?
This event exemplifies an increasingly common experience in the West-
ern world. No cultural metanarrative governs its interpretation; rather, it is
left open to the multiple perspectives of its witnesses. It may variously in-
voke a profound connection with a cultural tradition forged long ago and far
away in Scotland for some of its participants, recreational fun for others, a
momentary amusing diversion, or perhaps even an ugly distraction. This
makes for a mix 'n' match cultural construction, in which no one perspective
has privileged status-though some might feel that the natives' view has a
substance of dislocation, loss, and dispossession that accords it moral privi-
lege. But the event has no true meaning apart from the meanings constructed
by the witnesses or by those who heard or you who read about it.
Recognition that this kind of fragmentation of perspectives constitutes
the only meaning or reality available to us is central to postmodemism. Post-
modern irony is, again, tied up with the belief that the kind of truth long
sought in Western intellectual activity is illusory, though postmodernism
typically involves a playfulness with elements of this tradition for modern
purposes, perhaps partly stimulated by relief at no longer having to carryon
this hugely serious and portentous enterprise, and partly, no doubt, because
the playfulness is tactically and rhetorically useful in breaking up metanarra-
tives that work for some at the cost of others. Looking back, the postmodern
thinker sees millenia of great intellectuals striving all their lives to "get it
152
right," to hammer out a solid foundation on which to build secure knowl-

IRONIC UNDERSTANDING AND SOMATIC UNDERSTANDING
edge, to articulate how the world really works, to mirror reality correctly in
language. The frontispiece of the Encyclopedie is an elaborate engraving de-
picting the unveiling of Truth. This great event seems to be so consistently
postponed that, at last, large numbers of postmodern thinkers have con-
cluded something is fundamentally wrong with the whole enterprise, "that
something (history, Western man, metaphysics-something large enough to
have a destiny) has exhausted its possibilities" (Rorty, 1989, p. 101).
Each past generation has been particularly astute at pointing out the er-
rors and inadequacies ofits predecessors, and its errors and inadequacies are
pointed out in turn by its successors. After endless philosophical work by
the greatest Western thinkers, almost nothing is agreed, nothing is uncon-
tested. If the enterprise were possible, surely something would be secured by
now, and if Plato, Aristotle, Descartes, Kant, and Co. all have failed to get it
right, what hope for thee and me? The idea that the Western intellectual en-
terprise has been a gradually progressive one, closing in on the truth, getting
reality clearer, accumulating a comprehensive and accurate account of the
nature of things, has been definitively given up in postmodernism. (Of
course, pbstmodernism can be seen asjust a slick and lazy way ofclaiming to
have got it right at last.)
Irony is so pervasive in postmodern!sm that it might be easier to charac-
terize postmodern irony by briefly sketching the sophisticated postmodern
person Richard Rorty calls a liberal ironist. Terms that have been important
in the Western intellectual enterprise, such as "truth," "objectivity," "knowl-
edge," and "reality," take on new and somewhat different meanings for the
liberal ironist. Because, as Rorty argues, we cannot get outside our concep-
tual schemes, we cannot reach.a position from which to judge how ade-
quately our conceptual schemes represent reality. Objectivity, in the old
sense, is unattainable because we cannot determine whether our versions of
the world and of experience capture how things are. The liberal ironist con-
ceives of objectivity rather as a term useful to refer to those things about
which it is relatively easy to achieve the widest intersubjective agreement.
Knowledge is not discovered, Descartes-style, by sitting alone, working
something out, and getting it right, but rather is constructed in dialogue and
out of agreement. The old distinction between knowledge and opinion is
redrawn to distinguish between those claims or perspectives about which
wide agreement is easy to achieve and those about which it is hard to
achieve. Truth is reconceived as a commendatory reference to beliefs that are
widely and easily shared, not as corresponding with reality.
Liberal ironists do not construct theories so much as tell stories~ they
value the imagination more highly than the intellectual skills supposedly re-
qUired for accurately representing reality. Rorty suggests there are two prin-
153

FIVE
cipal ways in which reflective people try to make sense of their world and of
their lives in it:
The first is by telling the story of their contribution to a community. This community may
be the actual historical one in which they live, or another actual one, distant in time and
place, or a quite imaginary one, consisting perhaps ofa dozen heroes or heroines selected
from history or fiction, or both. The second way is to describe themselves as standing in
immediate relation to a non-human reality. (1991, p. 3)
The postmodern ironist believes that the second of these is illusory because
it can be achieved only if one can escape the limits of one's community, with
its "vocabulary" of concepts, beliefs, and cultural practices, and this is
impossible-we are "incarnated vocabularies" (Rorty, 1989, p. 80). The first
means that postmodern ironists accept radical and continual doubt about
the reliability of the cultural "vocabulary" they themselves use, and they re-
main open to being "impressed" by other vocabularies-other ways of mak-
ing sense of the world. They accept that arguments expressed in their
present vocabulary cannot dissolve doubts and that their vocabulary is no
closer to reality than are others. This position of radical epistemic doubt
means that postmodern ironists are "never quite able to take themselves seri-
ously because they are always aware that the terms in which they describe
themselves are subject to change" (p. 74). And the ironist "spends her time
worrying about the possibility that she has been initiated into the wrong
tribe, taught to play the wrong language game" (p. 75).
The person still committed to the Enlightenment project of getting it
right, of advanCing rationally toward the truth, tends to question the utility
of the postmodern enterprise. What's the point of making inquiries and ar-
guments, trying to make sense and meaning, if one constantly doubts that
the attempts are anything more than shifting stories? Well, the postmodern
ironist replies, the point is to live well, or as well as possible, within the con-
straints of these contingencies. One can construct meanings, and so "soli-
darity," with others for purposes of living well and not causing pain. This is
hardly a pointless use of intelligence, and it becomes less shocking as an aim
for intellectual activity if only we recognize that this is the best we can hope
for. Pointless, purposeless activity is, after all, how play used to be defined
until its fundamental psychological and social importance became clear, and
postmodernists happily adopt this sense of playfulness.
Postmodern irony is particularly hospitable to those who wish to dis-
rupt some metanarrative by which they have been victimized. Some femi-
nists, for example, recognize that "Irony is a particularly appropriate strategy
for feminism" (Ferguson, 1993, p. 30) both because it disrupts patriarchal,
hegemonic metanarratives and because through "the resources of irony we
154
can think about how we do feminist theory and about what notions ofreality

IRONIC UNDERSTANDING AND SOMATIC UNDERSTANDING
and truth our theories make possible" (p. 35). Irony offers a flexibility and
freedom from metanarratively-determined perspectives that "is an impor-
tant resource for feminists (and others) struggling towards mobile subjec-
tivities" (p. 163).
"And new Philosophy calls all in doubt," is one of John Donne's lines
from "An Anatomy of the World: The First Anniversary," preceding that
which forms the subheading of this section. Ironic philosophers have been
calling all in doubt, since Socrates at least, and their postmodern successors
in this long tradition continue to do likewise. Not that the Western cultural
tradition has required philosophers in order to call all in doubt. Western po-
etry and drama have constantly explored the fragility of our sense-making
and given voice to the anxiety or irony that often accompany it. The recogni-
tion of epistemic fragility has been one of the constants of Western intellec-
tuallife. Irony has been both a traditional product of this recognition in the
West and a changing strategy for dealing with it.
IRONIC UNDERSTANDING AS A MORE INCLUSIVE IRONY
The central constituent of irony is a high degree of reflexiveness on our own
thinking and a refined sensitivity to the limited and crude nature of the con-
ceptual resources we can deploy in trying to make sense of the world. That
is, irony involves sufficient mental flexibility to recognize how inadequately
flexible are our minds, and the languages we use, to the world we try to rep-
resent in them. Ironic, really. When Socrates cheerfully throws up his hands
and says he knows nothing, he is recognizing the inadequacy ofthe language
games we play to the ambitions we have had to know and express what is
true. Ironic understanding involves the further reflexive recognition that our
minds and languages have other games to playas well as trying to represent
reality~ particularly they can play the generative games we call art.
Now if this kernel of reflexiveness is enthroned in Ironic understanding,
affecting everything that comes near it, how can we also take on board the
general schemes of Philosophic understanding? Surely, the corrosive ofirony
is recognized in modern times primarily as it has gone to work dissolving
general schemes and metanarratives? How can characteristics of MythiC and
Romantic understanding also be absorbed into Ironic understanding and
survive? To answer these questions, what we must do now is slog through
some rather condensed, abstract material. So, let us push on into it.
The intellectual capaCities that constitute Philosophic understanding
enable us to bring very complex knowledge into coherent general schemes.
The Philosopher tends to believe that general schemes can mirror reality and
155

FIVE
deliver a true account of the nature of things. What Ironic understanding
will absorb ofPhilosophic understanding are those abstract theoretic capaci-
ties that can bring intellectual order to complex phenomena. What Ironic
understanding will not absorb is the belief that general schemes can uncom-
plicatedly mirror the truth about reality The Ironist can, say, support a neo-
conservative or liberal or radical political initiative for its likely beneficial
effects without becoming a neoconservative or a liberal or a radical~ that is,
without being a believer that one or other of those positions enshrines some
general truth about how societies do and should function.
So far, so (relatively) uncontroversial, though that weasel word "uncom-
plicatedly" will need accounting for. Even a postmodernist will accept the
use of intellectual capacities that generate metanarratives~ the crunch comes
in claims about the epistemological status of their products. What I want to
retain in Ironic understanding is the corrosion not only ofthe belief that gen-
eral schemes reflect the truth about reality but also of the belief that they
cannot. That is, Ironic understanding avoids commitment to the credulity
common in Philosophic understanding but also avoids commitment to the
incredulity common in postmodernism. When a postmodern theorist, such
as Lyotard (1979), expresses incredulity in the face of metanarratives and
frames a theoretically elaborate manifesto ofsystematic incredulity, his work
begins to take the shape of a new metanarrative, running the self-refuting
risks of this chapter's opening sentence. Ironic understanding embraces the
irony of postmodernism but not its dismissive certainties-an issue I will
return to below when discussing the fifth kind ofunderstanding. The weasel
word "uncomplicatedly" is there to mark ironic bemusement about the pos-
Sibility of reflecting the world accurately in words.
Absorbing characteristics of Philosophic understanding, then, means
that Ironic understanders remain open to the possibility that the Enlighten-
ment project might not be exhausted, that rationality might not be the deliv-
erer only of nightmares, that knowledge, truth, and objectivity might not be
confined only to contingent agreements, that Western science and ratio-
nality might be discourses more privileged than some others in terms of ac-
cess to reality.
As reflexiveness is central to Ironic understanding, it might be ironically
appropriate for me to illustrate the claim of the above paragraphs by reflect-
ing on the general scheme of this book, and its Mythic, Romantic, Philo-
sophic, and Ironic kinds of understanding. The overall structure of this
theory is clearly a general scheme of the kind discussed in the chapter on
Philosophic understanding. How, then, can I avoid being convicted of the
inadequacies that Ironic understanders perceive in such general schemes? I
156
have argued that Ironic understanding can absorb into itself the intellectual

IRONIC
UNDERSTANDING AND SOMATIC UNDERSTANDING
capacities generated in the development of Philosophic understanding while
shucking off the disabling belief that such schemes uncomplicatedly reflect
reality. The reflexiveness of irony is focused on the shadow realm between
idea and reality. It makes problematic what had earlier not been considered
problematic, making clear that generalized theoretic accounts of complex
phenomena bear an uneasy relationship to the phenomena they seek to rep-
resent.
The contribution of Ironic understanding is to keep constantly to the
fore the inadequacy ofthe categories and their characterizations to the reality
they try to represent, and the contribution of Philosophic understanding is
to attempt constantly to capture as much of the complexity of that reality
as possible within some coherent general scheme. These two somewhat
distinct perspectives, the one skeptical, the other striving to be ever more
adequate, do not fit entirely clearly together, but they are far from incompat-
ible. The trick is to keep one's irony pervaSively skeptical without letting it
undercut and disable the exercise of Philosophic capacities. Irony without
Philosophic capacities is impotent.
I recognize that the terms and categories I have used, the forms of con-
struction I have drawn on, are tied to a particular tradition and discourse,
and that the language game I am playing, and the tribe I am playing it with,
constrains the sense I can make (or fail to make). But I remain ironically
doubtful about whether these constraints are as absolute as some assert. On
the one hand Ibelieve that my general scheme gives some useful purchase on
the relevant phenomena in the real world out there, while on the other hand
I remain ironically bemused about how such a crude scheme can represent
the infinite complexity of that reality at all, let alone adequately.
Ironic understanding, then, gains the theoretic generalizing capacity of
Philosophic understanding while keeping ironically in check the easy belief
that truth resides in general schemes. Philosophic understanders' charac-
teristic beliefin the truth ofsome particular scheme most commonly leads to
rigidity, making everything conform with the general scheme. Accomplish-
ing this requires enormous intellectual activity, particularly in the face of
increasing anomalies. Ironic understanding involves removing the commit-
ment to the simple truth of general schemes, and so Philosophic capacities
can be deployed by Ironic understanders with greater flexibility. A number
of general schemes might be constructed from a particular body of knowl-
edge, for example, without the Ironic understander's making a commitment
to the truth of any of them, but rather selecting among them on aesthetic,
utilitarian, or other grounds. The general schemes become alternative per-
spectives, some perhaps better or more useful for particular purposes than
others, and no longer the sole residences of truth. Within Ironic understand-
157

FIVE
ing, then, Philosophic capacities survive and gain in flexibility ofapplication
and enlargement of their scope ofoperation.
W H. Auden, in his poem "Numbers and Faces," distinguishes between
lovers of small numbers who go "benignly potty" and lovers of large num-
bers who go "horribly mad." The person who is captive of some general
scheme, lacking the irony that can make it a liberating tool rather than an
enslaver, is constantly at the risk of going "horribly mad."
But what about Romantic understanding? How can romantic associa-
tions with the transcendent qualities ofheroes, fascination with the extremes
of experience and the limits of reality, and pervasive wonder coexist with
irony? Modern and postmodern irony cast a cold eye on such extravagances,
most commonly treating the enthusiasm of romance with condescension if
not contempt. But the conception of irony in Ironic understanding is to in-
corporate romance. How?
To deal with this question, I'm afraid another must first be addressed.
The prior question arises because Romantic understanding does not come
directly to Ironic understanding but arrives "through" Philosophic under-
standing. So the prior question is, how can Romantic characteristics reach an
accommodation with Philosophic understanding? This in turn might seem
an unlikely accommodation when we recall that the characteristics of Philo-
sophic understanding were forged by people who claimed that Philosophic
kinds of thinking could come into being only by displacing Romantic kinds.
Let me try to indicate how an accommodation may be reached by re-
visiting the example of Marxism. Certain relatively simple forms of Marxism
have involved straightforward Philosophic characteristics, in particular a
clear general scheme. The survival of Romantic characteristics may be seen
in the way that the convinced party member viewed Marxism not simply as a
convincing analysis ofsocial and historical processes but also as the object of
a powerful affective commitment. Leading Marxists became imbued with
more or less modified forms of heroic qualities. The idea of Marxism gath-
ered around it in greater or lesser degree a modified sense of the transcen-
dence earlier projected onto football teams or pop singers. But if romantic
capacities are suppressed by, rather than encouraged to coalesce with, devel-
oping Philosophic capacities, the result will more likely be a doctrinaire, cal-
culative, heartless, and arid ideology-as was too often the case.
The blending of Romantic characteristics with Philosophic general
schemes is not confined to the great metanarratives like Marxism, of course.
Nor are inadequately developed or suppressed Romantic characteristics evi-
dent only in grim ideologies. In Middlemarch, Mr. Casaubon, constructing
his "key to all mythologies," perfectly embodies the desiccation, enervation,
158
and impoverishment of life we commonly see when Philosophic capacities

IRONIC UNDERSTANDING AND SOMATIC UNDERSTANDING
are developed at the cost of Romantic ones. The educational task is, of
course, to develop each as fully as possible and to preserve as much as pos-
sible of each in the development of subsequent kinds. The persistence of
Romantic understanding into Philosophic general schemes gives the latter
energy, life, and an extended, affective meaning that the theoretic activity
alone cannot provide. Reciprocally, Philosophic understanding gives direc-
tion, more general purpose, and focus to Romantic capacities.
Well, this is starkly schematic but, I hope, adequate to indicate how the
capacities developed largely within one kind of understanding need not be
simply superceded or suppressed by the capacities of the -next. They can
work together in varying ways and in varying degrees.
To return now to the earlier question: how do Romantic characteristics
persist in Ironic understanding, and how are they modified by it? What kind
of irony can accommodate romance? Consider the capacity to form Roman-
tic associations with transcendent human qualities. Irony will corrode the
enthusiasm of the Romantic association that generates for its object the sense
of transcendence, but what can persist is the capacity to form associations.
Whereas the commonest Romantic associations are formed with the w6n-
derful, the extreme, the transcendent, irony can deploy this capacity to asso-
ciate also with one's struggling neighbor, the person on skid row, the builder
on that site down the street, or on mundane experiences. That is, irony can
greatly enlarge the scope of operations of Romantic capacities by corroding
their connection with characteristic Romantic objects.
The Ironic understander. no less than the Romantic can form an associa-
tion with the excellences of a football team or with exemplary compassion
and dedication to others' needs, but will also be ready to recognize the excel-
lences of opponents and recognize in the recipients of the exemplary com-
passion and dedication their own unique human qualities. So Ironic
understanding can both absorb Romantic capacities and enlarge their scope
of deployment.
The capacity to associate romantically with the heroic qualities that
would best enable us to overcome the constraints that hem in our everyday
lives can persist in Ironic understanding to fulfill much the same role. In
Ironic understanding, that "overcoming" will be modified from the some-
what unfocused sense of transcendence common to the teenager yearning
for the freedom or power of their pop-singing or football-playing heroes.
But, however ironic we become, there persists the need to pull ourselves
over everyday constraints, out of ruts, free from conventional thinking, and
this Romantic capacity, modified by irony, provides the energy and power
continually to haul ourselves up by our intellectual bootstraps.
The range of capacities that constitutes Romantic understanding, then,
159

FIVE
can be absorbed into Ironic understanding. Their contribution is to give that
energy, engagement, life, and affective meaning associated with romance
without which irony is solipsistic and dryly alienating. (Irony's impact on
romance is often assumed to produce cynicism. In this scheme, cynicism is
inadequately developed romance, quite distinct from the richness of Ironic
understanding.)
So let us take the enriching capacities of Romantic understanding on
board the good ship Ironic understanding, ensuring that our Ironic under-
stander will retain a "soul unsubdued with habit, unshackled by custom," as
Coleridge recommended.
Some of the freshness and wonder to be taken on board will come from
preserving and absorbing characteristics of Mythic understanding into
Ironic understanding. How can irony coalesce with story-structuring and
oppositional thinking? But before addressing that question, there is again
the prior question of how Mythic characteristics can survive the develop-
ment of Romantic and Philosophic understanding.
Consider the Mythic capacity for oppositional thinking. The starkness
of those early oppositions, establishing conceptual categories in terms of the
child's feelings, are reduced in Romantic understanding but are still com-
monly used in exploring extremes ofexperience and the limits of reality. The
Mythic oppositions become, as it were, confined within and adapted to the
exploration of the external world. In Philosophic understanding, opposi-
tional thinking is modified further~ it is evident in the dialectical thinking
that is characteristic of Philosophic understanding, and it is adapted also to
the interplay of general schemes and particular anomalies. Even more sche-
matically we can see how Mythic stories become modified to Romantic nar-
ratives, which are further modified to Philosophic metanarratives. For
example, the binary stereotypes of the Grimms' active males and passive fe-
males leads to Romantic stories of heroic males righting wrongs and saving
otherwise helpless damsels in distress, which in turn leads to Philosophic
theories of the natural role of the male as the dominant partner in the human
species.
But, surely, irony undercuts the constantly modifying utility of story-
structuring and oppositional thinking? The reflexiveness of irony ensures
that when some features of the world are represented in story forms or in
terms of oppositions we recognize these as imposed on the world by our
minds~ we know that the world is not story shaped. These structures are
imposed to make events meaningful in particular ways, determining how we
feel about them. It is that construction of meaning that modern and post-
modern ironists deconstruct, showing the role of the perceiving mind in
160
what is perceived. To such ironists, this recognition puts a stop to such self-

IRONIC UNDERSTANDING
AND SOMATIC UNDERSTANDING
deceiving illusions and makes us face the unstoried contingency of things.
Having faced the fact that reality is beyond the grasp of our stories, then, in
Nietzsche's and Rorty's views, we may consciously make up our own contin-
gent stories, constructing meanings that are good to believe for living well,
but we must not suffer the confusion of thinking that these meanings derive
from the reality on which we impose them.
Whether we accept a modern/postmodern view that the structuring and
meaning-construction that stories and oppositions make possible may be
deployed contingently, or whether we believe that some stories and some
oppositions are better than others because they better reflect events, we can
recognize how such Mythic capacities can be modified for continuing use in
Ironic understanding.
Well, again, this is a schematic, somewhat ideal account of how MythiC,
Romantic, and Philosophic characteristics can be incorporated in modified
forms within Ironic understanding. Irony strips away beliefs that the earlier
forms disclose the truth about reality, and it enables their deployment with
greater flexibility than was possible within the constraints of earlier kinds of
understanding. This schematic account is ideal in that it does not attend to
the infinite pathologies that commonly disturb the educational process as
represented by the gradual accumulation of the capacities of each kind of
understanding. Inadequate development of any kind will ricochet through
the educational process, yielding the range of failures, half-failures, and var-
ied achievements we see around and within us.
The success of Ironic understanding is evident in the reflexiveness that
not only yields doubt and "infinite absolute negativity" but also brings along
with it Mythic, Romantic, and Philosophic thinking, thereby enriching
one's ordinary everyday perceptions and transforming pervasive doubt and
negativity into possibility. Elsewhere I have distinguished two responses
to growing irony, which I unsophisticatedly called "alienating irony" and
"sophisticated irony" (1979). The former results from the achievement of
reflexiveness that undercuts and suppresses general schemes, romantic asso-
ciations, and mythic stories. (The common suppression of earlier kinds of
understanding that we recognize in ourselves and in other people echoes-
recapitulates?-the common polemical attacks on intellectual predecessors
in our cultural history; perhaps it is stimulated by a kind of shame at earlier
unsophistication.) This alienating irony rejects the validity of any perspec-
tive, believes in no metanarratives, sees all epistemological schemes as futile;
in short, it doubts everything
Sophisticated irony is different in that it succeeds in achieving reflexive-
ness without suppressing MythiC, Romantic, and Philosophic understand-
ing. By preserving the earlier kinds ofunderstanding as much as possible, we
161

FIVE
may develop a kind of irony that enables its users to recognize validity in all
perspectives, to believe all metanarratives, to accept all epistemological
schemes, to give assent to every belief. Well, that puts it simplistically, of
course. This openness to possibility is not credulity or simplemindedness
but, rather, the result of a flexible, buoyant recognition of a multivocal
world, within and without. Put incautiously, as above, sophisticated Ironic
understanding might seem cheerfully open to self-contradiction: committed
to foundationalism on the one hand and antifoundationalism on the other;
to traditional epistemology and the Enlightenment project as well as to
Nietzschean insights and to the postmodern project. But the sophisticated
ironist enjoys an abundant consciousness of varied ways of understanding,
and can appreciate a varied spectrum of perspectives while concluding that
some are better or more valid or more helpful or more beautiful than others
in particular circumstances and for particular purposes. And if understand-
ing is a primary purpose, some tools are better than others; science trumps
magic, rationality trumps unreason. But, of course, we do have other pur-
poses than understanding, and for some of the more exotic among them
magic will trump science. The sophisticated ironist is adept choosing among
and using the set of understanding tools we have considered.
The product of alienating irony is impotence; sophisticated irony is lib-
erating and empowering. The aim of this educational theory is precisely to
keep alive as much as possible of the earlier kinds of understanding in the
development of irony.
SOMATIC UNDERSTANDING
Now, I have a number of times referred to a further kind of understanding,
one most evident in pre-language-using human experience. The existence of
this kind of understanding and its incorporation into Ironic understanding
further enlarges the inclusiveness of this sense of irony, and seems to set it at
odds both with the more radical forms ofmodern and postmodern irony and
with alienating irony. Calling it Somatic understanding suggests a general
embodied kind of understanding that is somewhat distinct from the lan-
guaged and conceptual kinds discussed so far. While Ihave little to say about
it as a somewhat distinctive kind of understanding, it is important to discuss
at this point because its persisting presence in Ironic understanding further
distinguishes my conception of irony from those sketched earlier, and par-
ticularly from that of some postmodernists.
Somatic understanding is the first kind in the sequence, and persists
162
through each of the other kinds and into the Ironic as well. (Discussing it

IRONIC UNDERSTANDING
AND SOMATIC UNDERSTANDING
here does not mean that it is only a part of Ironic understanding. This is just
another case of the first being last.) The Somatic is a somewhat distinctive
kind ofunderstanding that sequentially precedes the Mythic, coalescing and
accommodating with each subsequent kind of understanding as they de-
velop on the Somatic foundation. Somatic understanding, then, is not some-
thing that exists only prior to language development but rather, like each of
these kinds of understanding, it ideally remains with us throughout our
lives, continuing to develop within, though somewhat modified by, other
kinds of understanding.
Since drafting this book, I have come across Merlin Donald's remarkable
Origins of the Modern Mind. Donald synthesizes a vast amount of data from
anthropology, paleontology, lingUistics, cognitive science, and, especially,
neuropsychology into an articulate account of the major cognitive transi-
tions in hominid prehistory and in the historical period, and of the new ways
of representing reality and the new forms of culture each transition implied.
The three most general tools that have effected these transitions he identifies
as the body's mimetic skills, oral language, and external symbols, and these
produce stages of cultural development which he calls Mimetic, MythiC, and
Theoretic. His characterization of Mimetic culture is so like what I mean by
Somatic understanding, I have junked my relatively impoverished account
and will save space and add richness by referring to his characterization,
summarizing the salient features here.
My recapitulation scheme is, of course, quite different from Donald's
general argument, but it is noteworthy that his account of prehistoric Mime-
tic culture draws readily on the abilities of pre-language-using children to-
day in its composition. He does this because of his argument that earlier
cultural forms and mental characteristics survive into the present either by
evolutionary coding or by fundamental forms of cultural transition. He con-
tends, for example, that
Eibl-Eibesfeldt's evidence demonstrates how the mimetic layer of representation survives
under the surface, in forms that remain universal, not necessarily because they are genet-
ically programmed but because mimesis forms the core of an ancient root-culture that is
distinctly human. No matter how evolved our oral-linguistic culture, and no matter how
sophisticated the rich varieties of symbolic material surrounding us, mimetic scenarios
still form the expressive heart of human social interchange. (1991, p. 189)
He notes further that "the use of patterns ofmimetic representations in mod-
ern human society have remained distinct from the uses of our later cogni-
tive acquisitions [like language and literacy]. In effect, there is still a vestigial
mimetic culture embedded within our modern culture, and a mimetic mind
embedded within the overall architecture of the modern human mind"
(p. 163). Similarly, I argue that Somatic understanding survives both from its
163

164
FiVE
prehistoric forms and from its recapitulated development in infancy into
modern adult Ironic understanding.
Donald clarifies what he means by mimesis by distinguishing it from
mimicry and imitation. Mimicry, he points out, seeks to reproduce exactly
some event or action. It is a literal copying, such as many animals perform,
duplicating expressions or sounds of others, as a parrot copies other birds or
voices. Imitation is less literal, as in an offspring copying its parent's behav-
ior; the offspring follows the general pattern of the parent's behavior but
doesn't mimic it in literal detail. "Mimesis adds a representational dimension
to imitation" (p. 169), as in adopting a gesture like covering the face to indi-
cate grief. Mimesis is distinguished, then, by its involving "the invention of
intentional representation" (p. 169, emphasis in original), and performance
ofsuch acts in front ofan audience communicates intentions beyond what is
possible for apes and other animals. "Mimetic skill or mimesis rests on the
ability to produce conscious, self-initiated, representational acts that are in-
tentional but not linguistic" (p. 168).
Crucial to the development of Mimetic culture, according to Donald, is
"the way the individual's own body, and its movement in space, was repre-
sented in the brain" (p. 189, emphasis in original). The main constituents of
Mimetic culture, which I want to borrow to fill out my characterization of
Somatic understanding, are summarized by Donald as follows:
Intentionality: Within a few months of birth humans can shift their gaze
to align it with that of a parent in a manner that attributes intention to the
parent's gaze (Scaife and Bruner, 1975; Churcher and Scaife, 1982). Slightly
older infants can point in order to draw others' attention to something.
These are skills that chimpanzees lack.
Generativity: Motor actions can be broken down into components and
then recombined for other purposes, either to represent a novel event or to
communicate something new. There is a generative component in this ability
in humans that is lacking in apes. Donald describes it in terms ofyoung chil-
dren's practice, rehearsal, and refinement of actions in play, in which the
same basic actions, like lifting, smiling, hitting, falling, can be recombined
into new sequences to represent events. "Human children routinely re-enact
the events of the day and imitate the actions of their parents and siblings.
They do this very often without any apparent reason other than to reflect on
their representation of the event" (p. 172).
Communicativity: Mimetic acts are usually performed publicly, and even
though communication might not have been their original purpose, they
can be readily adapted to communicate within the social group.
Reference: Humans can very early in life distinguish between play-acting

IRONIC UNDERSTANDING AND SOMATIC UNDERSTANDING
an event, such as a pretend fight, and a real event, a real fight. They can dis-
tinguish readily between representations and their referents.
Unlimited objects: Mimesis is limited to concrete, episode-bound repre-
sentations, but there seem to be no limits on the events that can be repre-
sented or the physical modality of their representation.
Autocueing: "Mimetic acts are reproducible on the basis of internal, self-
generated cues. This permits voluntary recall of mimetic representations,
without the aid of external cues-probably the earliest form of represen-
tational 'thinking'" (p. 173). Exemplified in autocueing are an intellectual
autonomy and generativity that are unique to humans and whose develop-
ment has led to such odd consequences for us among the planet's animal
species.
The social consequences of these skills becoming common in the pre-
historic community would include "collectively invented and maintained
customs, games, skills, and representations" (p. 173). These skills enable the
sharing of knowledge without each member of the social group's having to
reinvent it. Human children model their overall social structure in play, act-
ing out their own roles or parents' or siblings' roles, and so on. Mimetic
games, such as those with sticks and balls, are universal in the culture ~f
young humans, and they commonly help to define .social and gender roles
without the use of language. Deaf-mute children who have not learned to
sign, for example, play such games indistinguishably from other children.
The games exemplify regular patterns of activity that also support ritual, co-
operation in hunting, specialized social organization, toolmaking, and
pedagogy-the Mimetic training of the young in society's repertoire ofskills.
In the human past, Mimetic skills enjoyed considerable pragmatic suc-
cess in socially coordinated activities such as toolmaking and hunting. "But
its greatest importance would have been in the collective modelling, and
hence the structuring, of hominid society itself. Mimetic culture was a suc-
cessful and stable adaptation, a survival strategy for hominids that endured
for over a million years" (p. 200). It is a survival strategy based on a set of
cognitive tools developed and deployed long ago and adopted in somewhat
different ways by young children today Most of these tools develop in young
children as a result ofgenetic action and, once developed, they yield a partic-
ular kind ofdistinctively human, nonlanguaged understanding, whose char-
acteristics are intentionality, generativity, communicativity, reference, and
so on.
Emphasizing the importance of Somatic understanding to this theory is
awkward because it seems to conflict with what is taken almost for granted
by many prominent philosophers. Much modernist and postmodernist the-
165

FIVE
ory is built on the assumption that human understanding is essentially lan-
guaged understanding. As Rorty puts it: "it is essential in [his] view that we
have no prelinguistic consciousness to which language needs to be ade-
quate, no deep sense ofhow things are which it is the duty ofphilosophers to
spell out in language" (1989, p. 21). This is "the current doxa which unites
the various schools" ofadvanced thinking (Norris, 1993, p. 289). It seems to
me (and to many others) that we do have a prelinguistic consciousness and,
worse, that this consciousness is not merely prelinguistic in a temporal sense
but remains with us, as a part ofour understanding, throughout our lives. As
when we become literate we do not cease to be oral-language users, so when
we become oral-language users we do not cease to be prelinguistic sense-
makers. I do not mean that Somatic understanding constitutes some com-
mon "human nature," but simply that we also make sense of the world in a
distinctively human way that is not linguistic.
The view that human experience is "essentially linguistic" (Gadamer,
1976, p. 19), that we are "incarnated vocabularies" (Rorty, 1989, p. 80), has
drawn much from Wittgenstein's arguments about "language games" in his
Philosophical Investigations. Those arguments are central to postmodernism,
even if they do occasionally become scrambled and simplified in the process
ofbeing wrestled into place as foundations-a mixed metaphoric feat which
Rorty accuses Lyotard ofperforming (Rorty, 1991, pp. 215ff.). Wittgenstein's
related arguments support the view that language does not so much capture
or describe reality as prescribe how we can see reality. So, for example, that
short, hollow cylinder, closed at one end and with a ceramic loop on its side,
you see as a coffee cup; you do not see a short, hollow cylinder, closed at one
end with a ceramic loop on one side. We use things, we know things, as they
are constructed for us by our language, by our concepts, by our cultural ex-
perience, by our socialization, by our history.
Now Ironic understanding is made up largely of Mythic, Romantic, and
Philosophic characteristics, which in turn are determined by degrees in the
development of language, so ideas about the importance of language in our
understanding of the world are clearly already on board. What is at issue
now is whether something else is to be taken on board that will require us to
qualify that "essentially linguistic" conception of human experience-
perhaps to something more modest, like "largely linguistic."
Important for my argument is the fact that very young, pre-Ianguage-
using children have an understanding of the world. This is not an "animal"
perception; it is a distinctively human "take" on the world. It is constituted of
how we first make sense with our distinctive human perceptions, our hu-
man brain and mind and heart and whatever else our bodies can deploy in
166
orienting themselves. Bernard Williams has argued against the view that hu-

IRONIC UNDERSTANDING AND SOMATIC UNDERSTANDING
man personhood comes only with language and socialization: "anyone who
has lived with a six-year-old, or a two-year-old, has vivid reasons for think-
ing of them as persons" (1985, p. 114). I would add to this that anyone who
has watched babies grow recognizes that language development does not
mark some distinct beginning of that individual person; rather, language al-
lows each individual a new kind of expression. This new expression is pro-
foundly important, but its deployment by each individual is clearly
continuous with that individual's earlier development; that is, language de-
velopment does not mark some profound discontinuity in the development
of individual personality. Rather, recognizable and distinct individuals adapt
the common language they are initiated into to their distinctive, individual
needs.
And you can see your coffee mug as a short, hollow cylinder, closed at
one end, with a ceramic loop on its side. It takes some effort, but one can
recapture the particularity of the artifact apart from its cultural purpose.
Look for a long time at your coffee mug, or consider this book, not as a mug
or a book but as the elaborately constructed artefact that it is. Consider the
sheets of paper, from pulped wood, cleverly cut to equal sizes, fixed some-
how at one edge and unattached at three, hinged, bearing ink stains in con-
ventional shapes. Look at that "a" until it loses the association with the
alphabet and sound and becomes, or reverts to, merely a shape. Consider the
word "book," and say it aloud again and again until it loses its association
with this artifact and becomes, or reverts to, a curious sound. Try Hamlet's
"words, words, words," but maybe twenty or fifty times, until the odd sound
is stripped of its associations and becomes just a peculiar noise human be-
ings can make.
We are human beings before we are languaged human beings. (1 recog-
nize the Chomskian sense in which we have "from the beginning" a brain
uniquely endowed with a "module" for language, but 1am referring here to
the sense of developed articulateness within a particular society and lan-
guage group.) Beneath the layers of socialization we are each of us a unique
individual consciousness. We are born alone and we die alone, and in the
short interval between, underneath our languages, histories, cultures, and
socialized awareness, we live alone. The sins we do by two and two, as
Rudyard Kipling's devil reminded Tomlinson, we pay for one by one. This
involves a recognition that along with our social being-"Humans are social
animals"-we are also and ultimately alone. Our unique, individual con-
sciousness can be vivid and clear or faint and suppressed.
Now, 1recognize that some readers may want to deny that such an ob-
servation accurately describes their experience. Perhaps some may see this
as a confessional passage and even be considering sending me a postcard of
167

FIVE
condolence. But I am not describing some pathological condition; rather I
am simply pointing to a feature of our existence that our socialized experi-
ence tends to suppress. Waking at night, one may turn and see the outline of
one's spouse's head, and note the shadowed movement ofan eye beneath the
lid. Though one might have shared decades of the details of one's life with
that person, one cannot begin to guess the images and emotions vivid inside
that so well-known head as it lies asleep. And one settles back into the pillow
in the dark and retreats to one's own private world. Our shared experience,
our language, culture, and history constrain and socialize the activity of our
brains, but the dramatic images of our dreams, or better the "hypnagogic
hallucinations" that appear as flickering images that well up at the threshold
of sleep ecf. Alvarez, 1995), are a kind of thinking produced by the brain's
neurons firing away while the control of the perceptions' steadying grasp on
the external world is shut down. This unique and private mental world is
with us from the beginning; its imagistic, concrete, vivid forms of thought
remain throughout our lives, endlessly active without, or "below," language.
When steadied by waking perceptions of the external world, this private
mental activity remains unique and provides us with a unique "take" on the
world that the most energetic poetic intellects try to capture in language,
always recognizing the inadequacy of language to the task. While one can
exaggerate this unique "take" on the world, one can equally, as is currently
fashionable, exaggerate the extent to which language mediates our under-
standing. Given the conc~ption of education in this theory, which requires
the fullest possible development of each kind of understanding, it becomes
important to develop and preserve Somatic understanding, along with its
sense of the uniqueness and loneness of our experience. The educational
scheme requires that we seek ways to make this kind of understanding rich
and vivid to ward off the anesthetizing socialization of the tribe.
The sense of a knowledge from the body, beyond human words, is of
course a commonplace of poetry. It is also a commonplace of religious expe-
rience. As William]ames puts it:
Philosophy lives in words, but truth and fact well up into our lives in ways that exceed
verbal formulation. There is in the living act of perception always something that glim-
mers and twinkles and will not be caught, and for which reflection comes too late. (1902,
pp.446-47)
That human beings have constantly tried to give voice to a conscious-
ness they declare to be beyond language obviously does not refute Rorty's
claim that there is no prelinguistic consciousness to which language needs to
be adequate. But constant references to something people cannot put into
168
words-"Nor mouth had, no nor mind expressed / What heart heard of,

IRONIC UNDERSTANDING AND SOMATIC UNDERSTANDING
ghost-guessed" (Gerard Manley Hopkins, "Spring and Fall")-is in part
what I want to encompass in Somatic understanding. In the case of Hop-
kins's poem, what the heart heard of, ghost-guessed, is the process of getting
older announced in its own inexorable and irrefutable terms within the
body. Consciousness of aging, as of toothache, goes all the way down, past
language, concepts, and history, past multiple, decentered discourses. While
language can indeed "mediate" even the most intractable experience, repre-
senting aging as an achievement, a triumph, or a state of continuing pro-
gress, to conclude that this power of language is indicative of its ultimate
importance in human cognition seems simply to exaggerate. Certainly lan-
guage tends to be given the paramount position in many modern models of
human cognition. As Merlin Donald puts it: "Language is usually placed at
the top of the cognitive pyramid~ but language evolved in, and continues to
be employed in, a wider cultural context. ... In human culture ... lan-
guage is not used equally in all areas of activity, nor is it the only means of
communication and thought. It is possible that language is a 'dedicated' sys-
tem, that is, a specialized system for special applications, rather than a
general-purpose device" (1991, p. 201).
When Vladimir Nabokov was interviewed in his later years, he insisted
on a rather peculiar procedure. The interviewer had to submit in writing and
in advance the questions that would be asked. Nabokov would then write
his responses, and the interview consisted of the interviewer reading the
questions and Nabokov reading his responses. If the interviewer deviated
from the text, the interview was immediately concluded. Now, I am calling
on a distant memory that I have been unable to verify: Robert Robinson in-
terviewed him and the result was published in a British Sunday newspaper
twenty-five or thirty years ago. One of the questions was something like,
"Why do you insist on this peculiar interview procedure?" Nabokov's reply
was something close to, "Because I think like an angel, I write like a compe-
tent craftsman, and I talk like a fool."
Many people clearly believe, most with less evident justification than
Nabokov, that they think like angels~ it'sjust that something goes wrong with
the angelic thoughts as they are converted into language. This common no-
tion that there is an ultralinguistic "angelic" consciousness that our language
should strive to be honest to, to reflect truly, to correspond with, is obviously
not in itself an adequate reason for disputing those who claim it does not
exist. But the belief that we can have access to nothing below language that
can constrain language, as Rorty claims, seems no less vulnerable to reason-
able ironic doubt.
Somatic understanding provides to Ironic understanding something be-
yond language, something foundational to all later understanding. It is not
169

FIVE
the kind of metanarrative foundation sought in Philosophic understanding.
The tension between the Somatic foundation of consciousness and the
Ironic, flexible, linguistic superstructure allows to the Ironic language-user
an understanding ofultralinguistic experience; this Somatic experience pro-
vides us with something below language that our language can strive to be
true to, and that truth can be something more Rortyesque than agreements
with fellow language-users.
In general ... the most crucial issues of irony reside in the area of self-conscious saying
and writing and concern the problems oflinguistic articulation, communication, and un-
derstanding in regard to truth. The ironic manner of expression can be described as
attempting to transcend the restrictions of normal discourse and straightforward speech
by making the ineffable articulate, at least indirectly, through a great number of verbal
strategies, and accomplishing what lies beyond the reach of direct communication. This
attitude, however, automatically constitutes an offense to common reason and under-
standing.... Socrates was the first example for that constellation. (Behler, 1990, p. 112)
The strategies for making the ineffable, including our Somatic under-
standing, articulate are those most popularly recognized as ironic. "Boling-
broke was a holy man"; there remains something mysterious about what
such a simple, absurd assertion generates between speaker and hearer,
writer and reader. It is the sense that there are features of our understanding
that are beyond the possibility of articulating, even as we constantly try to
articulate them, with which the reflexiveness of irony is entrammelled. And,
inCidentally, this crucial feature of irony seems largely lacking in Rorty's lib-
eral ironist, who may be profoundly liberal but, in this crucial regard, seems
to have given up on what the strategies of irony are designed for.
The intellectual tools of Somatic understanding do not go away as lan-
guage develops. As Donald points out, language evolved, and continues to
be employed, in a wider cultural context. A basic element of that wider cul-
tural context for modem humans is the persistence within the architecture
of our minds of a prelinguistic Somatic understanding or Mimetic culture.
From this distinctively human understanding language emerged in the dis-
tant past and emerges every day in the lives of young children; the various
forms of languaged understanding that we develop carry distinctive traces
from this cognitive and cultural source.
CONCLUSION
There are many kinds of irony or, perhaps, many contexts in which the ex-
pression ofirony takes varied forms. Within these kinds or contexts there are
170
continua of degrees ofirony, although I have largely ignored them in favor of

IRONIC UNDERSTANDING AND SOMATIC UNDERSTANDING
reflecting on irony's central reflexiveness. This reflexiveness enables us to ap-
ply to our own sense-making, to our own understanding, to our own beliefs
and opinions, the questions and doubts we may have about those of others.
In this reflexive ability we can recognize, with Schlegel, that irony entails an
ethical no less than an aesthetic and an intellectual dimension (cf. Hand-
werk' 1985). Ironic understanding thus requires expanding our sympathies
and sensitivities even to those who seem quite unlike us. This is an educa-
tional aim shared with Rorty's liberal ironist~ instead of identifying ourselves
in terms of some excluded groups who are unlike "us," and who conse-
quently can be treated with less sympathy, less sensitivity, less humanity, we
will seek to include wider and wider groups within the category of "us."
Our initial understanding, according to this theory so far, is Somatic~
then w~ develop language and a socialized identity, then writing and print,
then abstract, theoretic forms ofexpressing general truths, and then a reflex-
ivity that brings with it pervasive doubts about the representations of th~
world that can be articulated in language. But irony is a general strategy for
putting into language meanings that the literal forms of language cannot
contain~ along with this, Ironic understanding involves abstract, theoretic
capaCities, plus the capacities stimulated by literacy, plus the winged words
of orality, and also our bodily foundation in the natural world.
171

chapter6
Some Questions and Answers
I have suggested that the three main ideas we have inherited about educa-
tion-socializing, Plato's academic program, and Rousseau's developmen-
talism-are neither singly norjointly adequate. Consequently, practical pre-
scriptions for educating derived from them will be inadequate. In their place
I have suggested a novel recapitulation scheme based on the development of
intellectual tools that sustain somewhat distinctive kinds of understanding
-somatic, mythiC, romantic, philosophic, and ironic. How the scheme out-
lined so far can be elaborated into a comprehensive educational program
remains to be explored. Some elaboration will take place in chapters 7 and 8,
but a variety of objections to many features of the scheme may have already
occurred to you. In this chapter, then, I would like to address potential ob-
jections and clarify some parts of the theory
Because this scheme does nibble into a rather extensive acreage of aca-
demic real estate, the range of objections is, I imagine, extensive and varied
as well. Instead of trying to organize a continuous narrative that addresses
questionable features in some neat or rambling order, I will approach this by
pretending that you have been a typically diverse but preternaturally patient
conference audience that has listened to the previous chapters and now has
the opportunity to ask questions, make comments, hurl abuse, or throw
money I will raise the questions for you and try to answer them. I will also
intervene now and then on behalf of an imaginary skeptical reader ("lector")
172
to raise further subSidiary questions to which I (as "auctor") will respond.

SOME
QUESTIONS AND
ANSWERS
This procedure may generate in your mind the image of me running down
into the audience, grabbing the microphone, asking a question, then scram-
bling back to the lectern to deliver the answer. But it provides as good a way
as I can think of to raise a set of diverse questions.
Such a procedure will not be entirely satisfactory, especially to anyone
whose objection is not even raised here because I am too dense or benighted
to recognize it. But perhaps we can consider this chapter a preliminary dis-
cussion among those who find these ideas worth pursuing. We live, after all,
in an electronic age, which is properly undermining the notion of the
printed book as some kind ofcompleted, definitive, authoritative statement.
What we write in books are merely artificially extended parts of a conversa-
tion. Tomorrow or yesterday the author would have written something dif-
ferent. Books provide an inappropriate semi-permanence to the thoughts we
put into words.
So I will put my Internet e-mail address at the end of this sentence, and
invite anyone who wishes to send comments, questions, or related ideas to me
at Kieran_Egan@sfu.ca. I will try to reply to each and also to build a file of
comments and responses and responses to responses, and attach that to my
replies to further messages. Abetter idea, however, is to see further questions
and answers and contribute to the discussion on my World Wide Web home
page. You can find it at http://www.educ.sfu.ca/people/faculty/kegan/.
In the follOWing question-and-answer session, I will begin with easy
questions designed to clarify some general features of the theory, and then I
will move to some more challenging and diverse objections. So, where shall
we begin?
Q: Ah yes. Sorry to jump up so fast. It's just that I've been listening care-
fully, but it's not been easy to take it all in, to see the overall argument and
catch all the details together. What I'd find useful at this point would be a
very short overview of the theory you're proposing. Just a very qUick "reca-
pitulation," you might say.
A: QUite. I begin with the assumption that all human minds everywhere
are pretty much the same. That is, I take the general differences among the
ways people make sense of the world and experience as stemming mainly
from the various intellectual tools they are deploying rather than from their
genetic makeup. MythiC understanding, for example, is not a product of
genetically "primitive" minds or immature minds but a product of some-
what distinctive intellectual tools being deployed by genetically similar
minds.
Lector: Just a moment! We seem to have problems at the very begin-
ning here. First, what does "pretty much" mean? Hardly a precise
173

SIX
technical term, is it? And then there are "general differences" and
"mainly"
Auctor: I am claiming that, given the phenomena of interest to this
theory, the differences we note in people's thinking are sufficiently ac-
counted for by differences in the intellectual tools being used. There
may be differences because of age, gender, race, or whatever, but even
if there were, these seem much less useful in characterizing kinds of
understanding compared with the influence of the cognitive tools I
have been considering.
Lector: I'm not sure you can mean what I think you are saying. You
seem to imply that even age isn't significant in the development of
these kinds of understanding. Do you mean this? You realize that we
have a number of developmental psychologists here who would con-
sider such a claim absurd.
Auctor: Of course one doesn't want to appear eccentric. It's not that I
think that age has no influence but rather that whatever influence it
has is very difficult, perhaps impossible, to assess apart from the socio-
cultural context into which the child grows. Whatever influence age
has on children's developing understanding, I am suggesting, will be
incidentally incorporated within the more comprehensive category of
developing kinds of understanding.
Lector: Ijust can't let that pass. You are saying that age-
maturation-can't be assessed whereas these language developments
and kinds of understanding can? But surely you've got it the wrong
way round; language developments are a function of age, of matu-
ration!
Auctor: Maturation in some cultures does not lead to the language de-
velopments and the intellectual tools I have been describing. So it can't
be a matter of maturation bringing about linguistic developments of
the kind being considered here. What makes this theory interesting is
its elaboration of a category-kinds of understanding-that is distinct
from the psychological and epistemological categories we have been
accustomed to use for cultural and educational development. This new
category incorporates the influences of psychology and epistemology
but does not try to separate them out.
Lector: So you are really claiming that we shouldn't consider matura-
tion as influencing how people understand the world, and that there is
no point studying maturation or psychological development separate
from sociocultural contexts?
Auctor: No. First, I am claiming that if you want to grasp the most
174
prominent differences among people's understanding of the world,

SOME QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
you would be better advised to look at the intellectual tools they use
rather than at their age. To the degree the latter is relevant it will be
incorporated in the former. As for studying some underlying matura-
tional or psychological-developmental process, I am suggesting only
that it will be very difficult to isolate it from sociocultural issues.
Lector: Well, I don't want to stop you from trying to answer the origi-
nal question, so do carry on. But I should give notice of further
questions on this issue.
OK. So, first, similar minds, different tools. Second, different cultures and
environments have stimulated a great variety of intellectual tools to think
with, but the ones that have had the greatest impact on general kinds of
understanding are linguistic. Now I don't mean that all intellectual tools
are linguistic, just that language is so influential that its major develop-
ments are clearly evident in the main distinguishable kinds of under-
standing.
We have seen that oral language develops from Mimetic activities, liter-
acy develops from oral language, theoretic abstractions develop from
literacy, and refined reflexiveness develops from theoretic abstractions.
These developments are largely cumulative, but not entirely so; each cu-
mulative addition seems to entail some loss. Each development is not
simply of a set of skills; rather, each is tied into complexes of social behav-
ior, and one acquires them primarily by growing up into or being initiated
into communities that use them. Learning to use them involves, and re-
quires, in diminished form the generative qualities of the minds of those
people who first invented them. Literacy, theoretic abstraction, and refined
reflexiveness rely on deliberate instruction, whereas somatic/mimetic and
oral-language developments rely largely on evolutionary adaptations.
Each development of these language-based intellectual tools has ram-
ifying implications for how its users can understand the world, and I have
tried to spell out some of these ramifications. The kinds of understanding I
have described have obViously been distingUished in various ways before.
Differences between oral and literate cultures have been drawn many ways;
"romance," for example, has long been recognized as a literary genre and as
a stance in the world distinct from theoretic or scientific thinking. Irony
has been distingUished from other tropes and discussed as a general form
of consciousness. What is novel in my scheme, I think, is that I distinguish
this set of understandings and tie them in with specific developments in
language use.
rhave also tried to show that these language developments stimulate
similar kinds of understanding both in cultural history and in students to-
175

SIX
day As students learn to use the intellectual tools involved in these lan-
guage developments they recapitulate in their education a significant
dimension of their cultural history
I have further suggested that education might more fruitfully be
thought of in terms of the acquisition of these kinds of understanding than
in the traditional terms of some mix of socializing, academics, and psycho-
logical development.
Q: I don't see the connection between these stages and historical periods.
You say they develop one after the other, in history and in the child, but
you skip all over the historical map. You have Greek historians and
nineteenth-century poets tossed together to build the picture of your Ro-
mantic phase, then we skip back to the Greeks again for the Philosophic
layer, and Plato, who represents that one, also pops up representing Irony
in the next stage. Your Philosophic examples come mostly from before the
period of romanticism, yet you use some of the romantics to exemplify
Philosophic thinking and others in describing the development of Irony
This seems a very odd notion of recapitulation. Also, the idea that these
stages accumulate to some modern Ironic understanding just seems pre-
posterous; a trip around your local supermarket should disabuse you of
any fond notion about modern people being generally ironic.
A: The kind of order you recommend-relating historical periods neatly
with students' ages-would conflict with some of the basic principles of
this theory Many nineteenth-century recapitulation theories specified the
kind of orderly relationship between historical periods and students' ages
that you seem to assume is a necessary feature of any recapitulation theory.
But I argued that this theory is significantly different from those in identify-
ing what is recapitulated.
Kinds of understanding are just the ways the mind works when using
particular tools. All the kinds of understanding are potential or embryonic
in all minds, along with an indeterminate range of other kinds of under-
standing that are so little evoked in our cultural environments that we
hardly can recognize them. In oral cultures, for example, people will have
access to Romantic, PhilosophiC, and Ironic ways of thinking because these
are impliCit in language use, but because there is generally little stimulus
among the social practices of most oral cultures to sustain consistently
those kinds of understanding, their use will be fitful and unsystematic.
Once a kind of understanding has been systematically developed and
is sustained by communities using it, that kind of understanding will be
accessible to anyone with adequate reasons or motivation to learn it within
the appropriate community This does not mean that everyone at any par-
176
ticular time in a society will "catch" it and will deploy the same intellectual

SOME QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
tools. Everyone in the supermarket you refer to has probably had some
contact with, some stimulation of, and made some use of, all the kinds of
understanding I have referred to. Probably most of us respond to the su-
permarket in a Somatic or Mythic manner. But running into a parent of a
member of your child's soccer team may stimulate Romantic discussion of
the excellences of your children's play, or a concern about the rising price
of ginger might stimulate Philosophic reflection on world trade and poli-
tics, and so on. Among the people in the supermarket at anyone time may
be minds so consistently stimulated to Philosophic and Ironic thinking
that these kinds of understanding predominate regardless of the task to be
performed, even if such refined thinkers experience significant disadvan-
tages in doing the weekly shopping. Jostling their elbows at the cereal
shelves may be others who very rarely receive that kind of stimulation and
have not acquired the intellectual tools that make Philosophic or Ironic
thinking common or easy
In describing kinds of understanding, I chose examples from the times
in our lives when particular intellectual tools develop most energetically,
and then from any historical periods when they wer~ prominently used.
My examples are supposed to indicate not that a particular kind of under-
standing represented "the spirit of an age" but that some people were using
it for some clear purposes. So the notion that particular periods in general
exemplify particular kinds of understanding is not what I mean.
In the case of children's minds, a parallel set of assumptions informs
this theory. All children's minds in modem cultures will likely have experi-
enced some stimulation of all these kinds of understanding early on. Even
the Somatic peek-a-boo games a parent plays with a baby may include
some irony Kinds of understanding are products of the mind learning and
using particular tools, and I have focused on the typical ages at which the
particular tools are most commonly stimulated and developed.
Q: But if these kinds of understanding are potential in all minds and de-
pendent on particular social forces evoking them, why the sequence? Even
if you are not committed to particular historical periods, you suggest that
the historical sequence of the development of these kinds of understanding
is mirrored by the sequence in which students today can acquire them.
What constrains the sequence? Why can't we just teach ironic understand-
ing right off, and skip the preliminaries?
A: The sequence is determined by logical and psychological constraints
working together. I think the psychological constraints are very hard to get
at apart from the cultural forms in which they are realized. The logical con-
straints are Similarly hard to isolate because they are always mixed with
psychological factors.
177

SIX
Q: I need an example. Take the relationship between Romantic and Philo-
sophic understanding. How do these logical and psychological constraints
determine that one must develop significant Romantic understanding be-
fore one can develop significant Philosophic understanding?
A: Consider a couple of the examples of each that I used earlier. Is the
kind of "Romantic" history written by Herodotus a necessary prerequisite
to the kind of "Philosophic" history written by Thucydides?
The psychological constraints may be seen, a little murkily, in our de-
velopment from a "mythic" and "egocentric" concern with the past as a
means of glorifying oneself, one's family, and one's interests to a "Romantic"
concern with the great achievements and exotic customs of others as well
as of one's own social group, to a "Philosophic" concern with the laws that
operate and determine the general process of historical change to which
one's own group is subject just like others. The murkiness of this sequence
is equaled by that of the constraining force of logic on historical under-
standing: first we note accumulation of information, establishment of
procedures for deCiding the relative reliability of various kinds of records,
and an attempt to structure the information into some chronological
scheme; then we see the "Romantic" coordination of diverse and engaging
bodies of information into complex and coherent narratives; then the
"Philosophic" search for regularities, theories, and laws derived from the
various available narrative accounts.
Neither psychological nor logical constraints can be shown to compel
us to learn history in such a way that significant Romantic understanding
must precede significant Philosophic understanding, or to show compel-
lingly why Herodotean history writing had to precede Thucydidean. But
putting the two together, which is how they act after all, makes the se-
quence more plaUSible, I think. This is not a matter of two unconvincing
explanations adding up to a convincing one, but rather two different kinds
of constraints on a process working together to determine its sequence. So
the sequential unfolding of Somatic, MythiC, Romantic, Philosophic, and
Ironic understanding in cultural history and in the process of education is
shaped by the joint operation of complex logical and psychological forces,
such that significant development of a "later" kind is unlikely to occur un-
less some degree of preceding kinds have been developed. The same logical
and psychological constraints apply to the initial invention and develop-
ment of intellectual tools and to their acquisition by students today
But cultural history cannot be ordered into somatic, mythic, romantic,
philosophic, and ironic ages, as though everyone around "caught" and
used more or less exclusively a particular kind of understanding. Similarly,
178
though there are constraints on the sequence of their acquisition and on

SOME QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
the time students take to develop a kind of understanding adequately to al-
low further kinds to become evoked and stimulated, we cannot talk about
students being exclusively in Mythic or Romantic "stages." Rather a partic-
ular kind of understanding tends to assume prominence at particular
times, and I have tried to indicate roughly the age ranges of the most inten-
sive developments.
My outline suggests that heavy emphasis on a subsequent kind of un-
derstanding before prior kinds are adequately developed will be
pedagogically ineffective. But the fact that preliminary stimulation of later
kinds of understanding can begin very early also means that we would be
unwise to eliminate all interactions that involve later kinds of understand-
ing until students are assumed to be "ready" for them. So we will not try to
eliminate theory and irony from our linguistic interactions with young
children because precisely such interactions begin to evoke these tools for
later development. I suspect that students who are exposed to theoretic
and ironic discourse while most energetically developing their Mythic un-
derstanding will later find access to Philosophic and Ironic understanding
easier.
Q: I don't have a clear image of how these layers or stages or kinds of un-
derstanding are supposed to work. You keep saying they are "somewhat
distinctive." The first part of my question is, how distinctive is "some-
what"? The second part is how is that distinctiveness supposed to fit with
your claim that they, " to some degree," coalesce? To what degree?
A: A problem for understanding intellectual development is that we have
no adequate metaphors for it. You will perhaps recall]onathan Miller's
(1978) claim that it became possible to understand the function of the
heart and the circulation of the blood only after the invention of pumps to
clear mines of water. Everyone since the beginning of our species has felt
that regular thump in the chest and has seen blood spurt when arteries are
cut. Thinking of the heart as a pump enabled us to understand its function.
But we have no Similarly useful metaphor to help us understand intellec-
tual or cultural or educational development. The nearest processes are
biological, and certainly these have been exploited during this century to
try to get some clearer image of what goes on in the intellect as we learn
and experience new things. Piaget's is perhaps the best known elaboration
of a biology-based metaphor of development, and]ohn Dewey elaborated a
conception of education drawing on "growth."
I have tried to adhere to a nonbiological and rather vague use of "de-
velopment." These kinds of understanding are only "somewhat" distinctive
in that they are not wholly different forms of thought, mutually incompre-
hensible; they are not so much like different computer programs as like
179

SIX
modules of a well-integrated program, focusing on different tasks but each
able to comprehend the others. Well, that's not a great metaphor either~
tempting though computer metaphors are for mental operations, theyal-
ways seem to confuse as much as they clarify So I can't be very clear about
how distinctive "somewhat" means. I can only refer you back to the charac-
terizations of the kinds of understanding and say that the differences
described there are what I mean by "somewhat."
The "distinctive" part of my too-frequently used phrase "somewhat
distinctive" constrains the degree of coherence we manage to achieve by
combining the various kinds of understanding, whether they are derived
from evolutionary adaptations or from invention and learning. The notion
of a holistic cognition seems to me an illusion supported by the plasticity
of our mental operations. That is, I think kinds of understanding do retain
some degree of autonomy, and so our thinking in general is more incoher-
ent than we allow ourselves to recognize. Some tasks differentially evoke
and stimulate different kinds of understanding, and we can and do move
from one to another in response to particular challenges. Sometimes two
different kinds of understanding will yield perspectives that create conflicts
about how we should perform a task or how we should behave in particu-
lar situations. The earlier example of taking a Romantic or Philosophic
stance with regard to a forest rather crudely illustrates an aspect of what I
mean. We have, you might say, a fivefold mind, or, more dramatically, we
are a five-minded animal, in whom the different kinds of understanding
jostle together and fold in on one another, to some degree coalescing, to
some degree remaining "somewhat distinct."
I talked earlier of mixed forms, using the example of the Romantic
Marxist, whose thinking mixes a Philosophic general scheme with Roman-
tic "heroizing" of Marx or Lenin. Perhaps an appropriate image for this
limited coalescence is partially scrambled eggs, in which one can "some-
what" distinguish the yoke from the albumen, but in some areas they are
indistingUishably mixed, and one certainly cannot unscramble them. But
coalescence is a concept metaphorically derived from the behavior of gases
and liquids, and perhaps we might better draw images from that source.
Q: Are all your answers going to be this long?
A: No.
Q: Your presentation seems removed from the daily life of the school I
work in. Your notion of clarifying a conception of education that would
give schools a defensible position against the good-Willed but rampantly
inconsistent demands of the various "stakeholders" just seems to me . . .
well, irrelevant. Who pays the piper, calls the tune~ academics' voices are
180
offstage squeaks and bleats when it comes to calling the tune schools must

SOME
QUESTIONS
AND ANSWERS
dance to. Schools are used as societal mop-up institutions-keeping
youths off the streets in times of high unemployment, providing day care
and basic economic training for children of working parents, reproducing
social class distinctions, and so on. Educational ideas don't cut much of a
swath through the urgent economic pressures that drive the demands that
parents, businesses, and politicians make on schools. These contingent re-
alities are the brutal forces that eat general theories for breakfast. You asked
for comments as well as questions.
A: Yes, yes. My meek academic soul trembles before your stark vision of
reality, and I fear you may be right. It may be that the prospect for educa-
tion holds neither joy, nor love, nor light, nor certitude, nor peace, nor
help for pain; education may continue always to be a darkling plain where
ignorant armies clash by night. But I suppose one has to hope there will be
voices who demand of education that it should help people to understand
something of whence our lives come and whither they go. Well, perhaps
Matthew Arnold is not the most popular ally to echo at present, but I won-
der whether your attentiveness to one kind of power doesn't lead you to
underestimate another. I suppose consciousness of your cynical realism
and its occasionally overwhelming plausibility persuaded me early on to
enlist Keynes's observation about the power of ideas. People behave in re-
sponse to what they think is the case.
Q: You have built this theory largely on developments in language use. But
we are now in an electronic age when visual media and oral discourse are
the sources of so much of what students know about the world and experi-
ence. Doesn't this new electronic world, in which one has access to
information via iconic rather than alphabetic symbols, make your ideas
hopelessly old-fashioned, tied into a visibly dying high-literate culture?
The new media are breeding a new kind of consciousness, and perhaps a
new understanding outside your scheme.
A: Writing systems store information, ideas, and experience in coded
forms outside the body in such a way that they can transform how one un-
derstands the world. What the new electronic media, and computers in
particular, can do, and promise to do more of, is give easier and faster ac-
cess to greater stores of coded information, ideas, and experience.
Computers do not access these coded sources in such a way as to eliminate
the need for traditional reading and writing skills, especially as, in the short
term anyway, the information, ideas, and experience are mostly coded in
alphabetic text.
The computer on my desk will read to me, in any of a range of ma-
chine voices, any text I convert into the program that it can recognize and
transfer into sound. The advantages of visual access to text won't be signifi-
181

SIX
cantly undone by the conversion of text back into oral forms. Certainly
some tasks might be managed better and faster orally, but the advantages of
visual access to text for any contemplative task still seem abundant. The
history of cultural developments so far has involved accumulating cogni-
tive tools, not discarding them. The later kinds of understanding are not
alternatives to the earlier; they incorporate the earlier in significant degree.
What makes new visual technologies most potent is carrying into them
what has been gained in older technologies. Literacy was a sterile tool for
keeping records until the oral achievements of Homer and his kin were
added to it. The cyberworld of the cyberjockeys will remain similarly utili-
tarian and sterile until we bring along into it what we have gained through
literacy and begin to expand its possibilities. The fullest use of new tools
comes to those who have most fully developed the earlier ones. I can't see
any reason why we should expect this principle to be changed by elec-
tronic media-but who knows? I should not be so glib, but in my limited
experience, students who spend huge amounts of time with interactive
computing and TV and little time reading seem to be on not a cutting edge
so much as a zonked-out edge. The excited leaders of the expedition into
cyberspace are not going far if they leave the food behind. But, again, who
knows?
Q: You talk about "children" as though there is some generic child that is
the same everywhere in all societies. I don't think this is so. I work with ab-
original children in Australia, and their stories are not at all like "Peter
Rabbit," or the other middle-class English stories you have built your
Mythic stage on. Those are leisured, self-indulgent productions, stimulat-
ing an idle, effete "imagination." You talk also about that self-indulgent
"imagination" as though it, too, is something generic rather than the class-
based, limited thing that it is. The stories my children learn are pragmatic
introductions to important realities of their environments. Their imagina-
tive activity is similarly tough and pragmatic as well as vivid and powerful.
What you have to say about Mythic understanding might have some rele-
vance to the leisured middle classes of wealthy Western countries, but it is
irrelevant to aboriginal children and, I would expect, to immigrant chil-
dren and also to working-class children in the West. The important social
construction of narrative in oral societies has led to their members saying
of Western schooling that "they teach you to read and make you stupid."
A: I do not refer to a generic child but to generic cognitive tools, like oral
language. Languages are indeed different from one another. Perhaps some
are so distinctive that the kinds of understanding they stimulate vary with
regard to the very general implications I have drawn-images, stories, bi-
182
nary opposites, and so on. So much I'll concede to the Whorfian

SOME QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
hypothesis (Wharf, 1956), though I am clearly more impressed by the sim-
ilarities among all languages as argued by Pinker (1994). But I would be
surprised if all the implications drawn in chapter 2, say, were not equally
evident in the children you work with as in the most pampered middle-
class English child. Indeed, I'd be very surprised because the categories of
Mythic understanding were arrived at mainly from studies of children in
cultures other than in the West; the challenge was to find western exem-
plars. And I don't see why middle-class western children should be so
disparaged. It is easy to underestimate how stories like "Peter Rabbit" help
children deal with the pragmatic realities of life and death, nature and cul-
ture, human and animal.
Growing up is rarely without its horrors, whether in the Australian
outback or in north Oxford, in Winnipeg, Wigan, Wabash, or Wollongong.
Also I think this description of Mythic understanding and the transi-
tion to the kind of literacy that supports Romantic understanding can be of
use to teachers of aboriginal, immigrant, and working-class children be-
cause it points up the positive intellectual tools with which these children
commonly come to school. Too often, literacy is taught without much re-
gard for the richness of children's oral-culture background. With this in
mind, the educational task becomes a matter not of ignoring or even sup-
pressing those oral tools but of stimulating and developing them in the first
place, and then of introducing literacy and its associated intellectual tools
in coordination with the oral. The fact that middle-class children, coming
from homes heavy with "literacy-based discourse," learn to read more eas-
ily can deceive teachers about what is being lost in their gain. I hope my
observations about MythiC understanding help improve theeducation of
middle-class children who suffer inadequate development of "oral" intel-
lectual tools as well as immigrant, aboriginal, and working-class children,
whose oral intellectual tools are often suppressed in favor of a narrow liter-
acy (and who are thereby rendered "stupid").
Q: Jerome Bruner talks of two distinct kinds of thinking, which he calls
narrative and paradigmatiC. These reflect, as I understand it, what might be
called story-like and theory-like thinking. There are many such distinc-
tions that recognize an important difference between everyday thinking in
which we make sense of the events that impinge on us and the disciplined,
objective thinking of science. Merlin Donald's account has a mythic stage,
which yields to a theoretic stage resembling your Philosophic understand-
ing. How does your Romantic form fit between these two more readily
recognized forms of thinking? Could your Romantic kind be just a transi-
tion rather than a distinctive kind of understanding itself?
A: How one slices up the developmental continuum is in part a strategic
183

SIX
matter, determined by your particular interest. My sense is that mythic and
theoretical thinking are sufficiently distinctive to merit the separate treat-
ment I have given them. And, of course, I am not the first to recognize a
somewhat distinctive kind of thinking in the process of educational devel-
opment appropriately called Romantic. Elsewhere I have discussed the
similarities and differences between this sense of Romantic understanding
and A. N. Whitehead's category of "romance" in education (Egan, 1990, ch.
8), and acknowledged a debt to Northrop Frye's discussion of the "roman-
tic" among his other mythoi (Egan, 1979, p. 169).
Perhaps my focus on education has brought out the distinctiveness of
Romantic understanding, and that then points up examples of such think-
ing in cultural history I suspect this greater attention to "Romantic"
intellectual tools may be welcomed by those who are only too aware of
how many students seem to lose their way in schooling during the inter-
mediate years. Piaget's theory, for example, deals only with logico-
mathematical tools and has no equivalent between concrete and formal op-
erations. Little is offered to help the teacher recognize the affective
characteristics, the fascination with extremes and the exotic, the formation
of "romantic associations," and so on, that are central to Romantic under-
standing.
Equally important, those characteristics of Romantic understanding
become a part of Philosophic understanding. That is, the usual characteri-
zations of paradigmatic or theoretic thinking represent it as somewhat
desiccated and sterile, lacking the richness that is contributed by the So-
matic, MythiC, and Romantic characteristics from which it emerges. I think
the Romantic element in this continuum should make my scheme attrac-
tive to those who are uncomfortable with the attenuated conception of
abstract theoretic thinking commonly offered as a paradigm of the most so-
phisticated kind of human thought.
Q: I'm still concerned about these binary opposites you began with. I see
them as perpetuating all kinds of stereotypes that we are struggling to over-
come. I thought it exposed something about your scheme that you began
the next chapter casually mentioning telling the story of Cinderella to five-
year-olds. Stories like "Cinderella" perpetuate stereotypes of the good, pas-
sive, housekeeping girl who needs the dashing active prince to make her
life worthwhile. Cinderella is a part of a stereotype of female passivity en-
couraged by a whole history of white male oppression in Western culture,
and you begin with something that supports and perpetuates it.
A: No doubt stories like Cinderella, and Peter Rabbit, embody stereotypes
184
that can be and have been harmful. But the principle underlying the use of

SOME QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
binary opposites in this theory supports your view of the dangers of stereo-
typing. The problem with stories or informal discourse or social practices
that set in place destructive stereotypes is that they are implicit, unex-
amined~ they are represented not as cultural contingencies but as facts of
nature, the way things are. The most basic principle of this theory is that
educational development moves forward by bringing to consciousness
what had earlier been operations of the mind. Particularly this is the case
with forms of language use. The point about binary sets is not that one
teaches them, but they are already in place because of the way our language
works at a fundamental level. What I recommend is two related things:
first, mediating between the opposites, and thereby elaborating them, and
second, making them explicit. That is, instead of such oppositions sliding
into the child's mind under the story or the story-form lesson, they become
explicit and objects of thought and inquiry.
For this reason I don't think we make educational progress by banning
"Cinderella" because it is built on inappropriate stereotypes. And banal re-
writings to reflect current sentiments simply undermine the point of telling
the story at all. "Cinderella" is more than a collection of crude stereotypes.
The educational and aesthetic values of the story can be preserved first by
telling it and then by explicitly considering the stereotypes on which it is
based. This does not mean that the story needs to be followed by an aca-
demic discussion, but that in talking about stories such issues can be
casually raised. One mediates the oppositions by critical discussion of
them and one furthers the process of bringing operations of thought into
consciousness and so under conceptual control (Hoogland, 1994).
"Stereotype" has degenerated into the name we give to concepts we
don't like, but stereotypes are actually necessary for thinking. Indeed, all
concepts are simplifications we make for particular purposes, to fit into
and build particular views of the world. So we can't get rid of stereotypes.
At particular times for particular groups, some stereotypes will seem either
useful or socially destructive ("female passivity," "white male oppression") ~
the educational solution, it seems to me, is not to get rid of all expressions
of those stereotypes from our culture and its historical records, but rather
to bring them explicitly into consciousness for critical examination. One
might well conclude, of course, that new and different stories might be in-
troduced to displace the old canon, but the displacement, I am arguing,
following Hoogland, should involve aesthetic and psychotherapeutic crite-
ria as well as social and ideological ones (recognizing the problems of
distinguishing these).
Q: I am surprised that you have written so much about education without
185

SIX
any mention of morality. It is as though you see education as a purely intel-
lectual process with "intellectual tools" much in evidence but no moral
sensitivity encouraged.
A: I cannot easily distinguish the kinds of understanding I have been deal-
ing with from morality; that is, morality and education seem not to be
discrete categories. One of the things Plato is said to be plainly wrong
about is his belief that virtue and knowledge are tied up together-that the
pursuit of truth is properly a moral enterprise. Plato is supposed to have
made a simple category mistake, which later philosophers have pointed
out, but I have a sneaking sympathy for Plato's view. He sees selfishness
and egotism and various other moral inadequacies breeding illusions and
confusions whose result is the impossibility of attaining episteme. While the
love of truth is perhaps, as A. E. Housman put it, the faintest of human
passions, one can see the kind of connection I mean in Iris Murdoch's ob-
servation that" 'Truth' is not just a collection of facts. Truthfulness, the
search for truth, for a closer connection between thought and reality, de-
mands and affects an exercise of virtues and a purification of desires. . . .
Thought, goodness and reality are thus seen to be connected" (1992, p. 8).
Well, that connection may not be quite so easily seen, especially by an iron-
ist, but its potential suggests why I think this book is about moral
education as much as intellectual education.
Q: Any scheme that requires children today to recapitulate their cultural
history must be essentially conservative, even reactionary. Basil Bernstein
and Michael Apple have written at length about how a society selects, clas-
sifies, distributes, transmits, and evaluates the knowledge it puts into the
school curriculum and how this process reflects the distribution of power
in society. Yours is clearly a very elitist scheme, with your Ironists at the top
determining the curriculum that will ensure their reproduction. I realize
you claim that what is to be recapitulated are intellectual tools, but these
tools are to be stimulated and developed by specific content. Your constant
references to the ancient Greeks, and the high-culture story of Western
"development" you have laid out, make it clear that we are in for a content-
heavy, neoconservative program. Why not say so?
A: It is true that development of these kinds of understanding will require
learning a lot. The assumption that those who require students to learn a
lot are conservative or traditional grows out of the progressivist/tradi-
tionalist dichotomy that this scheme is designed to mediate, or transcend.
You might equally well have observed that people like Vygotsky, Bakhtin,
Kristeva, and Habermas have emphasized the role of the community and
the culture in the formation of individuals' understanding, and so this
186
scheme should be associated with their more radical positions. I think this

SOME QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
scheme doesn't fit well with the old, stale ideological conflicts that center
on the school, but no doubt that blithe claim may be questioned.
You recognize that this scheme describes the intellectual tools as being
recapitulated, not the particular knowledge of the culture associated with
their initial development.
Q: You identify as one of the dysfunctional features of the currently domi-
nant conception of education the conflict within it of the Platonic program
and socializing. But we usually talk about this as a necessary tension be-
tween our educational ideals and everyday social utility. How do you
imagine this tension can be eliminated by your scheme? Surely there will
always be a tension between our everyday social needs and our academic
ideals? I mean, the content of the curriculum will always be in significant
part determined by particular social needs, and these will have to reach an
accommodation with subjects like Latin that may have educational value
but no social utility. Today we consider it more important that all kids be-
come familiar with computers than that they all learn Latin.
A: You are raising a number of complicated issues. My point was that con-
sidering socialization and Plato's academic program as both necessary
components of education creates that particular tension-one can't do
both adequately without their coming into conflict and undermining each
other. In my scheme, what we have is a conception of education in which
we have the clearer task of stimulating and developing the different kinds
of understanding. That is, socialization is no longer a part of education;
Plato's academic program is no longer a part of education; Rousseau's de-
velopmentalism is no longer a part of education.
Lector: Now hang on a minute! I recall your saying that these were all
necessary elements and that you were going to show how we could
preserve the best bits while shucking off the mutually incompatible
and dysfunctional bits.
Auctor: That's right. I am suggesting that educationalists do not have
to wonder how best to socialize children, or decide what knowledge is
of most worth so they can build their curricula from the best that has
been thought and uttered in the world, or work out how to make our
teaching cohere with and support some proper, natural developmental
process. The educationalists now have to work out only how to further
the development of these kinds of understanding. In doing this we will
inCidentally be achieving what is salvageable of the old ideas.
Lector: No, no. You don't seem to understand the question. Societies
will still want to shape children to their needs, values, prejudices, and
stereotypes, and these agendas will sometimes conflict with your ideal
187

SIX
development of some particular kind of understanding. The question
is, how is your scheme supposed to be able to overcome this tension?
Auctor: It isn't. What it does is remove this as a tension within educa-
tion or for educational institutions. We are no longer in doubt how far
we should socialize, how far to pursue an academic program, how far
to attend to individual development, and how much time to allot to
each. Societies socialize~ schools stimulate and develop kinds of under-
standing.
Lector: No, no, no. Look, if the school's development of understand-
ing conflicts with some important social value, or with some social
prejudice, if you will, then the conflict remains between society and
schools dedicated to your conception of education.
Auctor: Yes. This scheme will not solve all society's problems, but it
can, I think, solve some of education's. What it offers to the school is a
greater clarity of purpose and a more manageable task. Compare
schools, for example, with hospitals~ hospitals have a much less con-
tentious conception of "health" than we currently have of "education."
Of course, potential conflicts will remain between society at large and
schools whose purpose is realizing this conception of education. It's
just that if schools do adopt this conception of education, they will
know where they stand, and what they stand for, in such conflicts.
They stand for greater understanding. If societies don't want that, then
they won't fund schools that adhere to this conception of education.
Lector: But that's the point! Most societies, in the form of their politi-
cians at least, are not much interested in Plato's or Rousseau's ideas~
they want to produce kids who can read, write, do mathematics-
students who will be able to do a productive job and not cause
trouble.
Auctor: Yes, and students who are educated according to this scheme
will very likely be able to read, write, do mathematics, and work better
than the "products" of our current systems of schooling. "Not causing
trouble" can mean being a conformist drone or not being a psychotic,
disaffected aggressor. A system dedicated to developing the kinds of
understanding we have been dealing with would not produce many
conformist drones, and its output of psychotic, disaffected aggressors
would likely be low. That is, the things Western multicultural societies
are willing to pay for-their basics, their bottom line-are pretty eas-
ily achieved if we are not constantly embattled over our very aims for
the institutions engaged in the task.
Also, of course, "society" is not exclusively concerned with the
188
crudely utilitarian in education. We hear so much about "basics" be-

SOME QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
cause even the most utilitarian skills and knowledge are achieved at
lower levels than seems reasonable given the time and money ex-
pended. If we can achieve these basics routinely, "society" will
welcome the more refined kinds of understanding this scheme pro-
poses.
The tension between socialization and education will no doubt
survive the imminent galactic implementation of this conception of
education, but it will not survive as a tension within education, con-
fusing its aims and so its practice at every level. The point of a more
coherent theory is better practice.
Q: You argued that Plato and traditional liberal educators see the dynamic
of the educational process primarily in accumulating particular forms of
knowledge, and that Rousseau and progreSSivists see it primarily in some
internal developmental process. You did say that no one holds exclusively
to one position or another, but you also suggested that both of them are
wrong because they identify the dynamic in what you call constraints on
the process. So what about your scheme? What is the dynamic here? And
what happens to accumulating knowledge and psychological develop-
ment?
A: I'm glad you asked me that~ I wrote a chapter about it but then junked
it as too much to the side of the central theme of the book. (It is available
on my home page, under the title "Omitted Chapter," should anyone be in-
terested.) Put Simply, in this scheme the central dynamic is imagination-
that generative feature of the mind involved both in the invention of intel-
lectual tools in cultural history- and in their acquisition in education. What
the imagination can grasp is enabled and constrained by the logic inherent
in the various forms of knowledge and by the psychologic inherent in the
process of human development. So the dynamic of this scheme is a troika
of a generative imagination gUided and constrained by epistemological and
psychological forces.
Lector: That took a chapter?
Auctor: Well, it wasn't a very long chapter.
Q: You have avoided being clear about whether you think these are stages
that represent progress. Is Ironic understanding better than MythiC? You
seem cautious not to commit yourself, constantly pulling back from where
your argument is leading.
Auctor: Which is?
Lector: That this is another of those developmental schemes that co-
vertly assert the superiority of white male Western thinking, that
189

SIX
asserts that Mythic thinkers are inferior to Ironic thinkers, that cul-
tures in which Ironic thinking is emphasized are superior to Mythic
cultures. This is just another cultural imperialist scheme in which
you've tried to make reassuring, patronizing noises about how "orality"
has positive features and how one loses some things when one be-
comes literate. But you obviously think literacy and its sophistication
are better than orality Irony is the aim of your educational process.
Auctor: But I think Mythic understanding is better if you live in a
mythic culture and Ironic is better if you live in a modern high-literate
culture. I don't think there is any point trying to educate someone who
lives in an oral culture to consistent high-literate Ironic understanding.
Lector: That's simply avoiding the issue. In your scheme Romantic un-
derstanding is made up of Somatic understanding plus MythiC
understanding plus the additional characteristics of Romantic under-
standing, and Ironic understanding is made up of all the other kinds
plus the Ironic. That is, each kind is higher, fuller, more sophisticated,
better than those preceding it. The Ironic mind is therefore Simply bet-
ter than the MythiC mind according to this scheme. It's what we call a
hierarchical integrative model, in which later stages include the earlier
and add something new. So, no more fudging. When you say "devel-
opment" don't you mean "progress"?
Auctor: Well, perhaps you'll understand my reluctance to give any
Simple answer here. You may recognize how your question fits into a
curious modem inquisition, such that acknowledging that one sees
"progress" in such a scheme ties one into a vast trail of associated
guilts; immediately one is convicted of privileging Western ways of
knowing and so one is held guilty of endless atrocities performed
throughout history and around the world by Westerners who justified
their actions because of their superior minds. An ideologically nimble
inquisitor denies that there can be any qualitative differences among
minds and so associates with and appropriates the voices of victims of
injustice around the world, and so feels huge moral self-righteousness
in convicting one of. . .
Lector: What are you muttering about?
Auctor: Oh, sorry Just preparing to deal with a sticky question.
Lector: About time!
Auctor: OK. There are two general approaches to the nature of the re-
lationships among the somewhat distinctive kinds of thinking
identified in schemes like this. We can see them as simply hierarchical,
in which the later forms are superior to those that precede them; if
190
they weren't superior, after all, why would we want to try to develop

SOME QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
them? Alternatively, we can see them as somewhat distinctive ways of
thinking, none of which is inherently superior to any other; they are
just heterogeneous, but equally valuable and useful for somewhat dif-
ferent purposes in somewhat heterogeneous social and environmental
conditions. In this alternative view, the later kinds do not provide any
better access to truth or reality, but are Simply fitted, in a Darwinian
sense, for different environments; their value turns on their fitness for
their sociocultural niche. Systematic development of Philosophic un-
derstanding in a traditional oral culture would ensure that the culture
wouldn't remain oral for long, and so we might conclude that Philo-
sophic understanding is maladapted for that sociocultural niche.
Whether we conclude that the hierarchical-progressive conception
is more correct, or better, than the heterogeneity conception turns on,
among other things, whether we think there is something inherent in
the human mind that inclines it toward some particular direction for
greater fulfillment. That is, Ironic understanding is not Simply a con-
tinuation of aimless evolution, no "better" than anything that preceded
it and just better fitted to certain wholly contingent sociocultural con-
ditions. Rather, Ironic understanding provides a fuller realization of
the mind's potential than preceding kinds of understanding. Evolution
might aimlessly have produced human minds, but human minds can
now conSCiously control their own development; they are no longer
subject to the adaptive controls that govern fitness for niches. The de-
velopment of language has taken over from evolution in the driver's
seat of change in human minds. Rather than adapting to our environ-
ment, we change it to suit our mind's wishes and desires. In that sense,
we have broken free of evolutionary pressures. So the question is
whether Ironic understanding allows a richer, more abundant human
experience.
It is now commonplace to condemn earlier hierarchical classifica-
tions of kinds of thinking and minds as racist, sexist, and, more
recently, ageist. That is, the "primitive" thinking of aboriginal peoples
in parts of the world colonized by Europeans was considered con-
fused, SimplistiC, and emotional and was associated with the thinking
of women and children. In place of that earlier dogma, and in signifi-
cant part as a result of shrinking with horror from what it was used to
justify, has come the modern dogma that diverse kinds of thinking
Simply relate to diverse kinds of tasks in diverse sociocultural
environments-and that none is better than any other and none is
worse than any other. This is a comfortable position to hold as it re-
leases one from any association with racist, sexist, and ageist views.
191

SIX
But it is not clear that either dogma helps us sort out how to make
sense of the differences in kinds of thinking we have been considering;
the former is indeed racist, the latter is irresponsible.
Lector: But the Ironic is made up of the other kinds of understanding
plus some additional things, so this scheme must surely favor the hier-
archical rather than the heterogeneity view?
Auctor: There are two things that prevent me from simply saying
"yes." First, there are those losses. As one kind of understanding is par-
tially coalesced with a subsequent kind, it seems that something of the
former is lost. I used Wordsworth's very vivid description of the losses
that commonly come as we move from what I call Mythic to Romantic
understanding. One part of what fades involves a vividness of partici-
pation in the natural world and an enriching imaginative power to
embody that world in our emotional experience; this power seems un-
able to survive in subsequent kinds of understanding as it can exist for
children and in traditional oral cultures. In an ideal education, we
would seek to preserve as much of this as possible in Ironic under-
standing, but what we would preserve seems at best only an ever-
fading vision of what was once so bright. This scheme, then, is not
hierarchical-integrative in the sense that Piaget's is. Rather, this scheme
strives to be hierarchical-integrative, but cannot integrate all of the
characteristics of its previous kinds of understanding. These losses are
not trivial, and, as I suggested earlier, it seems to me quite easy to lose
more in the way of alienation, desiccation, and pedantic rigidity than
one gains in the way of aesthetic delight and insight. One can, in W H.
Auden's words, fairly easily become "horribly mad" or "benignly potty"
Another reason why this scheme can't Simply be fitted into the
hierarchical-progressive slot is the limited coalescence that takes place
as new kinds of understanding develop. Limited coalescence results in
increasing fragmentation as kinds of understanding accumulate. "Frag-
mentation" is perhaps too dramatic a term, but each kind of
understanding deploys somewhat different principles of sense-
making, and even when we develop significant Ironic understanding,
other principles remain constantly in play. Our thinking, I mean, is
more heterogeneous than we seem Willing to recognize. The richness
and abundance that Ironic understanding offers comes at a price, like
many complex systems, of vulnerability to instability and fragmen-
tation.
Is the Ironic mind better than the Mythic? There is perhaps no
sensible general answer. Given the changing world we have in the
192
West, and increasingly everywhere else, the most sophisticated intel-

SOME QUESTION
AND ANSWERS
lectual tools for understanding the world seem, despite their losses
and vulnerabilities, Ironic. This scheme is not one of constant "pro-
gress" to Irony, which is why I want to persist in using a rather vague
nonbiological sense of "development."
Q: I don't think the stages you have sketched exhaust the kinds of under-
standing. You should add a sixth stage, based on spiritual understanding,
beyond Irony.
A: No, no. You should add a sixth. I've done my bit. Perhaps I'd be pru-
dent not to add that most of the candidates I have seen for a further
"spiritual" kind of understanding seem to me straightforwardly Romantic.
Though, I should add, there are other forms of spiritual experience, evident
in Buddhist and Christian meditation traditions, in which one aim is the
suppression of the ego self. The spiritual aims of these traditions connect, it
seems to me, with my discussion of Ironic understanding's ability to see the
coffee cup as a ceramic object stripped of its association with our conven-
tional purposes. Various spiritual traditions teach us to see the world
stripped of our stories, metanarratives, and philosophic schemes and re-
leased from the perspective contructed by the ego self (Bai, 1996). I do not
consider this kind of spiritual experience a distinctive kind of understand-
ing; rather, I see it as a fruit of Ironic understanding when a richly
developed Somatic understanding is preserved within it.
Q: I'm at a loss to express my embarrassment, but I was registered for the
dental technician's conference also scheduled in this hotel, and I seem to
have confused the room. I've a twisted ankle, too, and anyway didn't like to
get up and leave once you'd begun, especially as it would have meant wak-
ing those between me and the aisle. But I did catch various things you said,
between reading the papers from the bicuspid panel. I recall some Greek
who said that if horses had gods, they would look like horses. A bit of a
leap, perhaps, but I thought the model of the ideal educated person you
present looks just like a liberal academic, someone like yourself, perhaps.
You don't think this is just a defensive way of asserting that you and people
like you are the best kind of human being? I mean, I wonder about me and
my colleagues who aren't academics, and don't have these communities
for developing Philosophic and Ironic understanding, and about those
people in oral cultures you keep going on about. Are we inferior to you
people, then?
A: This theory isn't about superiority and inferiority as people; it's about
intellectual tools that affect the ways minds make sense of the world and
experience. Also I don't see why dental technicians should be cut off from
the communities that support Philosophic and Ironic thinking. These com-
193

SIX
munities exist today in the books and journals we read and in media with
which we interact. My experience of academic discourse suggests that
Irony is not much a part of those routine exchanges any more than it prob-
ably is at conferences of dental technicians.
But having made all the appropriate apologetic noises, I am forced to
say that it would be a bit odd if the institutions we have set up and main-
tain at great expense in order to educate didn't provide more hospitable
environments for education than institutions with more limited and utili-
tarian purposes.
Q: You suggested that the educated person in your scheme is the one who
preserves most of the various kinds of understanding as she or he goes
along. But as you point out, each of the pre-Ironic kinds of understanding
has problems. Why should we want to preserve Mythic binary thinking,
which is at the root of simplistiC categorizing and has contributed to racism
and sexism, and why preserve Romantic hero worship, and Philosophic
crazy ideologies? Why should we try to recapitulate these?
A: The fact that a hammer can be used to break vases does not imme-
diately suggest that we should ban hammers as vase-smashing
instruments; they do other things, too. The fact that binary thinking has
been complicit in racist and sexist thinking does not mean that this is its
only and inevitable use. Romantic heroizing may have been used to glorify
aggressive males' being destructive, but it can equally glorify the patient,
the compassionate, the loving, the quietly courageous. In an educational
program we will want to emphaSize each tool's best use.
The preservation of characteristics is, it seems to me, crucial to educa-
tion. The imaginative energy of childhood, the romantic engagements of
early adolescence, the search for regularity and generalizations of later ado-
lescence, are all qualities that enrich the Irony of educated adulthood. This
preservation of characteristics proper to earlier periods of life has been
noted before, of course. G. Stanley Hall observes: "Gifted people seem to
conserve their youth and to be all the more children, and perhaps espe-
cially all the more intensely adolescents, because of their gifts, and it is
certainly one of the marks of genius that the plasticity and spontaneity of
adolescence persists into maturity" (1904, I, p. 547). G. K. Chesterton, ex-
pressing his great admiration for George Wy{ldham, described Wyndham's
most remarkable and admirable quality as being that his "life had left in
him so much of himself; so much of his youth; so much even of his child-
hood" (1937, p. 122). When we suppress Mythic and Romantic
characteristics as "childish things"-a suppression that seems to have been
endemic to traditional academic schooling in the West-the too common
194
result, as described by Hall, is that "we are prematurely old and senile of

SOME QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
heart. ... What we have left is second-hand, bookish, shopworn, and the
heart is parched and bankrupt" (II, p. 59). Rhetorically a tad over the top
perhaps, but expressing the educational disaster of assuming we can some-
how make young children "rational" before furthering the development of
the intellectual characteristics out of which and along with which a rich ra-
tionality properly emerges.
Q: You have been critical of Piaget's theory, or at least of how it has been
applied in education. How is this theory different from his?
A: Piaget claims to have described an underlying process of psychological
development that is genetically programmed into us such that, in interac-
tion with appropriate environments, it will spontaneously develop. I am
claiming that particular kinds of understanding develop as a result of our
learning to deploy particular intellectual tools in societies that support the
development of those tools. Piaget's is a scientific theory aiming to expose
something about the nature of human beings' development~ mine is a criti-
cal study aiming to expose how sociocultural contingencies in combination
with logical and psychological constraints shape the development of kinds
of understanding. As far as education is concerned, Piaget has adopted the
Rousseauian belief that the dynamic of the educationalprocess lies in the
internal psychological developmental process he describes~ the curriculum
must conform to that process if it is to be meaningful to the child and sup-
port the child's "operative" development. If Piaget was correct and his
theory, or the emendations made to it in recent years, did adequately de-
scribe an internal psychological development, it would form one of the
constraints on the development of kinds of understanding I am describing.
Q:
SO what are we to make of the ages you give for each of these kinds of
understanding? Are they the result of the underlying developmental pro-
cess or of the way we teach, or what?
A: As I keep saying, psychological development or maturation clearly in-
fluences the ages at which these kinds of understanding become most
energetic. But so does logic influence the time it takes to acquire the com-
ponent tools that constitute each kind of understanding. At present we can
say that it simply takes a certain amount of time to work through and bring
under conscious control the various forms of language use that are basic to
this scheme. The-ages I indicate are rough estimates based on observations
of how long it typically takes students to develop and become fluent in the
relevant uses of language. Current studies of psychological development
provide no greater precision that I can see than these estimates. The prob-
lem for trying to be more precise is manifold: variety in the extent and kind
of stimulation of the relevant intellectual tools individual students achieve~
the adequacy of development of prior kinds of understanding to support
195

SIX
subsequent kinds~ the adequacy of community support and sensitive
teaching that individual students receive~ and the usual range of individual
differences among students.
Q: OK. I've sat through enough of this earnest, self-satisfied crap. Just look
at the rhetoric if you want to see what this theory's really about. The
pseudo-wit and effete irony and all this frigging lector/auctor shit. You're
up to the elbows in it, in this Greek and Latin and the Western frigging in-
tellectual tradition. What turns your crank are those twittering bits, like a
copy of Quintillian's whatever it was found in a tower in St. Gall whenever
it was. ]eez! That sums it up. Romantic nostalgia over the rotting corpse of
the Western imperial knowledge-industry You're just one of the deodor-
izers, sprinkling "kulture" on the corpse machine, which is in the basic
business of exploiting, disempowering, and devoicing anyone who gets in
the way of its drive for total power. You try to skip around Nietzsche, but
you don't even understand what you quoted. He was talking about people
like you "trying to be superior," trying to get it right, capturing "the truth"!
Ha! As if! Earnestly trying to be clear, not able to recognize that clarity in
this arid rationality tradition is just a part of the business of fascist oppres-
sion. You are an unwitting agent of a nasty cabal in a power struggle.
Academia is complicit in the system of imperialist oppression, providing
the tools and manufacturing the "morality" that enslaves the poor, the illit-
erate' the world's laboring masses, and academia allows the enslavers to
feel good about it. They're spreading "Western enlightenment," after all, to
those they enslave! It's by rejecting this whole frigging discourse, as Nietz-
sche said, that we can become free of its oppression.
A: Ah yes, Nietzsche and freedom. He says, "freedom means that the
manly instinct which delights in war and victory dominates over other in-
stincts, for example, those of 'pleasure.' The human being who has become
free-and how much more the spirit that has become free-spits on the
contemptible type of well-being dreamed of by shopkeepers, Christians,
cows, females, Englishmen and other democrats. The free man is a war-
rior." That's the freedom Nietzsche promotes in TWilight of the Idols (1888).
You overthrow the king-but first you get the Terror and then you get the
emperor. Perhaps Edmund Burke's perspective is unlikely to impress you.
I can't deny you have an argument that is hard to evade, but it is one
that rebounds on you, of course. In the end, I think my frigging discourse
will do less hurt and harm than yours.
Q: I don't think you are off the hook with that response. You might try to
dismiss my colleague's-if I may?-objection by pointing to the Darth
Vader side of Nietzsche, but no part of your answer addresses the concern
196
that has arisen in various ways already Your notion of development is the

SOME QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
old Western-privileging conception of "progress." Irony is trumps, and the
other stages are just more or less cute; Philosophic types are stuck in their
general schemes, Romantics have succumbed to some dream of transcen-
dence, Mythics don't realize their binary stories aren't reality, and the
Somatic types are, what, chaSing butterflies? This is the old story, valorizing
the white male and his position at the peak of evolution with his terrific ra-
tionality, protected by his irony. You can't go on about those Greeks so
much and not give the show away-what about the rest of the world? And
a token paragraph about feminist uses of irony only makes it all the more
blatant.
A: I've tried to show why this scheme seems not to fit the category that
you have sketched again. You ignore my point about the characteristics of
each kind of understanding being preserved in the later ones. If the "So-
matic types" are chaSing butterflies, then so will the Ironist. The male-
privileging seems also unfair, a hangover by association from other devel-
opmental theories. Valorizing rationality makes this no more male oriented
than female oriented. The sense of Philosophic rationality I recommend in-
corporates Somatic, Mythic, and Romantic characteristics that have
commonly been suppressed in the more harsh and calculative kind of ra-
tionality promoted particularly by positivists. My sense seems to cohere
with what Kristeva calls for when she discusses how women may appropri-
ate "the logical, mastering, scientific, theoretical apparatus" in becoming
scientists, but that they run the danger of suppressing thereby "the expres-
sion of the particularity belonging to the individual as a woman. On the
basis of this fact, it seems to [her] that one must try not to deny these two
aspects of linguistic communication, a mastering aspect and the aspect
which is more of the body and of the impulses, but try, in every situation
and for every woman, to find a proper articulation of these two elements"
(1984, p. 123). But I would want to make the same point for men, too, and
I have tried to show in some detail how this articulation (of more than two
elements) can occur.
But haVing responded this way, defenSively, I concede that a privileging
of the Western intellectual tradition remains; from whose tradition of con-
stant self-criticism, of course, your questions come.
Q: I'm interested in the comments you've made about all these kinds of
understanding being somehow implicit in language, and I suppose implicit
in the kind of mind that developed language, and so, I suppose, implicit in
the end in life itself. That is, these unfurl, first evolutionarily and then
somehow they unfurl out of language, so that Irony is somehow impliCit in
language from the beginning. I'm not getting at the teleological issue you
responded to earlier. I was wondering, rather, whether you would agree
197

SIX
with Father Ong when he writes in his Interfaces of the Word (1977, p. 288)
that "Irony is almost as old as speech itself. Perhaps it is in some way even
inherent in speech." I mean, as soon as speech allows one to describe
something, it equally allows one to describe things that are not, and to say
things such that the obvious sense or description or claim is not to be
trusted: "Look out, Urg! Here comes a mastodon!" when no mastodon is in
sight. We recognize irony in that space where an unreliable narrator is ad-
dressing an unknowable reader, playing with the conventions of sincerity. I
often think irony is rich in young children but is short-circuited by
schooling-don't you?-where literalness in various shapes is impressed
on them, often by teachers who assume that's all they can deal with. And
your theory involves the claim that the early evocation of Irony is a prereq-
uisite to its later more abundant unfolding, am I not correct? Also, given
your theory's looking both ways, I mean at children and at cultural history,
I was reminded of Seth Schein's book on The Mortal Hero: An Introduction to
Homer's Iliad, which I do recommend if you aren't familiar with it. He talks
about Homer's style, the mythological context, the heroic themes, and the
values of the poem all being traditional, but that the Iliad "generates its dis-
tinctive meanings as an ironic meditation on those traditional themes and
values" (1986, p. 42). I like your observation that irony is not something
alien that only appears late, in history and in life. It exists sporadically and
sometimes Vividly in childhood and in the earliest records of Western intel-
lectuallife, so it is far from a stranger when it unfurls in the more widely
supported forms we are familiar with today. It is "adumbrated"-I think
that's the fashionable term-earlier in life. I am also reminded of Father
Ong's general view of how the "reflectiveness of writing"-the fact that it
slows language production down by ten times, allows revision, and occurs,
most unnaturally, in isolation-well, all this "encourages growth of con-
sciousness out of the unconscious" (1982, p. 150) in a way that sounds
like your kinds of understanding adding one layer of self-consciousness of
language-or "operations of the mind," as you have called them, drawing
on Hayek-one layer on top of another. Though Father Ong doesn't sug-
gest the losses of consciousness dribbling out the other end that your
theory emphasizes. In his view-perhaps you are aware?-"In its evolu-
tion, consciousness does not slough off its earlier stages but incorporates
them in transmuted form in its later stages" (1977, p. 49). Now you don't
entirely agree with this-do I infer correctly?-but I have noted in Richard
Rorty's discussion of irony. . . well, perhaps this question has gone on
rather longer than I intended. You have a response?
198
A: No, no. I wouldn't presume.

SOME QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
Q: You have said nothing much about kids who might find they can't
achieve, say, Philosophic understanding, to say nothing of Ironic. This
reads like Plato's blithe dismissal of the less able. I know you aren't respon-
sible for the distribution of intellectual ability among the population, but if
you are proposing an educational theory, you owe us an account of the fate
of those who are less "developmentally able" in terms of your scheme. Are
they to be Mythic all their lives, or even, as my colleague put it, just left so-
matically to chase butterflies?
A: I haven't addressed differences in abilities to develop these kinds of un-
derstanding because I'm not sure this theory implies anything particularly
useful about the unequal distribution of intelligenceCs)-whatever is
meant by that word. I would like to make two points. First, current school-
ing tends to place an undue emphasis on the importance of a particular
logico-mathematical facility, and the rewards of our systems go dispropor-
tionately to those children who have this particular ability in high degree.
The kinds of understanding I am outlining, emphaSizing imaginative and
affective capacities, will be more hospitable to a significantly wider range of
children than are the kinds of intellectual activity most rewarded today.
Second, differences in ability to learn will no doubt affect the speed, the de-
gree, and the richness of understanding different children will attain, but
none of this implies dismissal of students who are least able to develop
Ironic understanding. Because these kinds of understanding are not in
some Simple sense hierarchical, and because one can continue to develop
any kind even as subsequent kinds are being marginally stimulated, this
scheme offers some useful guidance for the continuing education of stu-
dents who may have difficulty developing in significant degree the
intellectual tools of Philosophic and Ironic understanding.
Nothing in this scheme can guarantee that everyone will be suc-
cessfully educated in all kinds of understanding. But it does offer some
positive suggestions for how to continue the educational development of
the least able students even if they find PhilosophiC and Ironic understand-
ing largely inaccessible. Also, inCidentally, I don't think Plato was blithely
dismissive; he Simply concluded that the intellectual tasks that constituted
his educational scheme were beyond the majority of students. Our current
systems of schooling draw much the same conclusion, but usually refuse to
acknowledge what in practice they do; thus we have a mealy mouthed
rhetoric whose primary purpose is to disguise the crude practice that dis-
misses most students from any serious educational engagement.
Q: How can one be happy in a condition of sophisticated Irony?
A: As I suggested earlier, I suspect happiness has more to do with hor-
199

SIX
mones than education. The only relevant point that comes to mind is that
Ironic understanding seems to allow one to appreciate more jokes-even
the cosmic ones.
Q: I've been listening carefully, but I have heard you cite no empirical sup-
port for your theory at all. Have you done no research in schools or with
children? How on earth do you expect people to take this theory seriously
if it is totally without empirical research backing?
A: You are raising issues I can't adequately deal with except at book length
(though, by chance, they are issues that I have inadequately dealt with at
book length; see Egan, 1983). This theory is unlike those that commonly
receive empirical research attention in education. It represents a species of
general theory construction that seems to me a necessary part of any vig-
orous area of study, but a species of which we have seen very few examples
in education in recent decades. Assuming that one can run tests that will
produce "empirical research backing" for such a theory suggests a confu-
sion. It is not clear what kind of empirical test you might run to determine
whether this is a better or worse general conception of education than
those it seeks to displace. Perhaps it might help to think of this new theory
of education as more like what T. S. Kuhn (1962) calls a paradigm than the
small-scale theories common in educational research today. Now, this kind
of general theory isn't what Kuhn had in mind, though it might fit one of
the twenty-two different senses of "paradigm" one of his critics identified in
his book. Paradigms and this kind of general theory do present the empiri-
cal researcher with similar problems. The person doing what Kuhn calls
"normal" research is working within a paradigm that determines what
counts as appropriate questions to ask, what will suffice as appropriate
methods of answering questions, what will serve as acceptable answers,
and so on. That is, normal research activity will not affect the paradigm be-
cause the paradigm represents the set of presuppOSitions that are the rules
determining normal research activity. This general theory is aiming to
change the conception of education people hold, and thus affect the set of
presuppositions that determines what kind of research is appropriate.
Lector: Just a moment! You are telling us there is no way we can test
your theory? Are we supposed to accept it on faith?
Auctor: As I said, that is not as easy to answer as you seem to suggest.
The main test you can perform is to accept prOVisionally this general
theory, understand it as clearly as possible, and then look at education
"through" it. The test comes from judging whether the field of educa-
tion makes more sense conceived according to this new theory than
200
according to the old theory. If one tries this test, familiar features of ed-

SOME QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
ucation will appear at unfamiliar angles (like uses of story forms) or in
unfamiliar relationships with other features (like generating anomalies
for students' ideological beliefs); some prominent features will almost
disappear (like the principle of "expanding horizons") and other fea-
tures that were little noticed before will appear very prominent (like
"romance"). To give it a fair test one will have to perform the difficult
feat of giving up, if only provisionally, the assumptions and presup-
positions that go with one's current conception of education. (This is
the feat Keynes thought was rarely achieved by anyone over thirty,
but perhaps he was feeling neglected and pessimistic the day he
wrote that.)
Lector: So basically you are admitting you have no empirical research
backing?
Auctor: Not at all. The book is clogged with the stuff. The theory is
composed from the products of empirical research in education and
critically analyzed empirical observations from history. The problem is
that the question exemplifies an approach to evaluating this theory
that seems to me confused and inappropriate. To look at this theory
through the presuppositions of the current conception of education it
seeks to displace is pointless. It is those criteria, those presuppositions,
the currently dominant conception that I am arguing are inadequate to
the phenomena of education. You can't run some empirical tests to see
which is better because their aims are different, their means are differ-
ent, the phenomena from which they are built are different. I'm afraid
you have to rely on the very hard task of thinking if you want to give
this theory a fair test. Call it a "thought experiment."
Q: My question refers to your opening chapter where you talk about the
three educational ideas. I was brought up, professionally I mean, in the
context ofJohn Dewey's social reconstructionist ideas, in which psycho-
logical development, schooling, and social change are'all linked. I found
your picture of the dominant conception of education to be unlike any-
thing I recognize. The terms you use seem to me fanciful; you seem to have
little idea about current educational discourse and its concerns. Your three
ideas simply don't fit current discussions about key educational issues.
Yours is an eccentric picture, so your "solutions" to the problem of incoher-
ence you identify are simply irrelevant to our real-world concerns.
A: I think my discussion is not irrelevant but may be couched in unfamil-
iar terms. What the unfamiliar terms do, however, in characterizing the
three educational ideas is help to explain why current educational dis-
course has been so unproductive for a long time, and why it seems so arid
201

SIX
to anyone outside it. I think you are right in identifying the dominant form
of educational discourse in North America, and also quite generally in the
West throughout this century, as a mixture of the psychological develop-
mental, the pragmatics of schooling, and a concern with social change. In
my terms, you are describing a conception of education that privileges
Rousseau and socialization at the expense of Plato. I recognize that the so-
cial improvement dimension of progressivism isn't simply socialization;
that's why I gave Rousseau pride of place. Dewey seems to me, despite his
comments on the inadequacy of Rousseau's ideas, to be very much a Rous-
seauian thinker about education. For Dewey the "ultimate problem of
education is to coordinate the psychological and the social factors" (1972,
p. 228). The dominant educational discourse throughout this century has
focused on this task. Its difficulties have been compounded because no
equivalent driving prinCiple has coordinated the academic curriculum with
the psychological and social factors. This coordination has nevertheless
been recognized as a task to be fitted in somehow, even without any ade-
quate principles to guide it.
Q: You have argued that each kind of understanding is susceptible to par-
ticular dangers if it isn't developed properly, yet if developed properly it is
then susceptible to losses of capacities belonging to prior kinds of under-
standing. I'm not clear about either of these problems. As far as I can see,
inadequate Somatic development leaves one susceptible to difficulties con-
structing meaning and seeing patterns and rhythms in events; inadequate
Mythic development leaves one susceptible to uncritical and simplistic be-
liefs; inadequate Romantic development leaves one susceptible to
sentimentality and cynicism; inadequate Philosophic development leaves
one susceptible to know-all, imagine-nothing general schemes; and inade-
quate Ironic development leaves one susceptible to alienation.
In addition, you observed that the early energetic development of each
kind of understanding in cultural history seemed to involve an attack on,
or suppression of, the most prominent characteristics of the previously
dominant kind. You associated this with the way, in individuals, the ener-
getic development of a new kind of understanding led to losses of
characteristics of the previous kind. You didn't mention losses with the de-
velopment of Somatic understanding, but you have implied that the
development of MythiC understanding cut away indeterminable intellec-
tual pOSSibilities. You didn't quote, but you might have made your point
clearer if you had, Robert Graves's poem about the "cool web of language"
that "winds us in" and is responsible for our "Retreat from too much joy or
too much fear" ("The Cool Web"); this web is our first conceptual anesthe-
202
tizer. The development of Romantic understanding, you suggest, implies

SOME QUESTIONS
AND ANSWERS
losses to our sense of magic, our sense of involvement in the natural world,
and creates a barrier between our conceptions and the reality they try to
capture and represent. The development of Philosophic understanding im-
plies a loss of vividness and personal association with knowledge. The
development of Ironic understanding implies loss of a holistic conception
of one's self and of one's universe, some loss of integrating intellectual
power.
I'm summarizing the occasional phrases you use. Can you flesh all this
out more clearly?
A: I don't think so. I've done my best earlier.
Q: Your scheme seems to me just another of those reductive stage theories
you criticized at one point. We have Frazer's magical, religious, and ratio-
nal stages, which you mentioned, or Compte's theologic, metaphYSical, and
positive. Hayden White, drawing on Vico, elaborates a scheme of meta-
phor representing the "age of the gods," metonymy representing an age of
heroes, synecdoche representing integrative thinking of parts to whole,
and irony representing negation and decadence. Then there's Northrop
Frye, on whom you clearly drew at some point, with his mythiC, romantic,
tragic, and ironic stages. Hegel's phases of history are birth and early
growth, maturity, old age, and dissolution or death-like the organic
spring, summer, autumn, and winter seasons. Freud's four mechanisms of
dreamwork provide more echoes-condensation, displacement, represen-
tation, and secondary revision. Then there are Piaget's stages, of course,
and Marx's elementary, extended, generalized, and absurd phases. And
Wunt's
and I should mention Stephen Pepper's world hypotheses of
... and
Well, I could go on. These reductive schemes all share the am-
bition of putting complex, seamless processes into discrete boxes. How is
yours any less inadequate than the worst and most reductive of such
schemes?
A: Well, of course they are reductive and create artificial lines in complex
processes. The trick is to find a way of representing the relevant phenom-
ena adequatelyfor a particular purpose. The breaks between different kinds
of understanding are not represented as discrete in this scheme and the
kinds of understanding are not discrete boxes, but I don't think the process
is seamless. I think there are some periods of greater and faster change than
others-an extension of "punctuated evolution" into the process of cul-
tural development. We can't think without reductionism, as we can't think
without stereotypes. The trick is to reduce and stereotype only in ways that
help illuminate rather than the opposite.
Q: Well, we seem to be out of time. People are hungry and tired, and some
are bored out of their skulls. Any last words?
203

204
SIX
A: I confess that this theory still seems to me like an engine with bits fall-
ing off, steam coming from inappropriate joints, oil dripping, some
gleaming pieces attached insecurely to scavenged old bodywork-but it
does seem to chug forward a bit, better at least than the traditional-
conceptions-of-education engine with its massive crew and smartly uni-
formed technicians, which hums and clangs admirably but doesn't actually
go anywhere, or at best zooms round in ever-diminishing circles. Ah well,
another metaphor out of control. Plato did all this so much better-
prisoners in caves, divided lines, the myth of Er, and funeral pyres
at dawn.

Part
Two
chapter7
Some Implications
for the Curriculum
INTRODUCTION
Theories about the curriculum, as about education in general, can be di-
vided into two categories. Before the middle of the nineteenth century the
theories were largely concerned with the moral virtues, human excellences,
and knowledge that should be inculcated in a small group of males who
would become the social and political elite. After the mid-nineteenth cen-
tury they have been largely about what skills and knowledge are required to
prepare the masses, female and male, for productive work, good citizenship,
and satisfying leisure. The difference between the two categories is tied up
with literacy. In the former period, the masses were illiterate, and the accu-
mulating culture coded in writing was uncomplicatedly seen as irrelevant to
them; they were left to their oral-Mythic-folk cultures. In this century, we,
the masses, have become more or less literate and are eqUipped to access the
accumulated lore of the Western tradition. A crucial problem for the school
curriculum, and increasingly for the college and university curriculum, has
thus become the relevance of that quondam elite culture to the lives of the
masses. Discussion of this problem has been, and continues to be, attended
by intense polemics, particularly when claims for curriculum time to de-
velop this elite culture seem to clash with the time needed to prepare people
for productive roles in the modern economy.
205

SEVEN
And that isjust one ofa number ofcontentious problems with which the
curriculum designer has to deal. It intersects with a multitude ofother social,
ideological, technical, prudential, and moral issues. Each of the three old
educational ideas implies prescriptions for the curriculum that suggest solu-
tions to that impendent array of issues.
The socializing idea implies a curriculum aimed at preparing children as
adequately as possible for the life they are likely to lead; it focuses on devel-
oping the skills and knowledge that are relevant to "real life" outside the
school. This curriculum is responsive to changes in society and addresses
topics such as family life, consumer education, hygiene and diet, sex educa-
tion, and other conspicuous features of the social life students are entering.
Plato's idea today implies a curriculum aimed at initiating students into the
forms of disCiplined knowledge, and into some forms at a significantly
deeper level; it focuses on developing familiarity with the culture that has
accumulated in the Western literate tradition. This curriculum is attentive to
what Matthew Arnold called "the best that has been thought and said in the
world"; the "best" is perceived to be stable, beyond considerations of imme-
diate utility, and likely to change only very slowly as a result of new attain-
ments in the various diSCiplines. Rousseau's idea today implies a curriculum
aimed at the fullest development of each person's potential; it focuses on ex-
tending, elaborating, reorganizing, reconstructing, and transforming the
student's individual experience. This curriculum is more attentive to pro-
cedural skills than to any specific privileged content; the content is selected
largely on the basis of what is reqUired in extending the student's everyday
experience.
The current "common sense" approach to the curriculum, typical of
state-run institutions, tries to balance these three schemes. The trouble is,
each of them has significant problems separately, and together they do not
blend into a coherent curriculum. We are so used to mangled curricula,
however, that their fundamental incoherences are accepted as necessary
"tensions" produced by the competition of "stakeholders." Consider for a
moment how we should resolve competing claims on curriculum time be-
tween Latin and consumer education. A socializing scheme would have no
difficulty resolving this, nor would a Platonic scheme. But when we try to
deploy both, as is commonly the case, the mind can only boggle-and leave
it to a fight between the forces that give greater weight to socializing or aca-
demic criteria. We have come to accept these political fights as the proper
way to compensate for incoherent concepts.
The problems with each of the three ideas with regard to the curriculum
are well documented by proponents of the other two. The socializing curric-
206
ulum attends too much to current social conventions and is consequently

SOME IMPLICATIONS FOR THE CURRICULUM
inclined to narrow-minded provincialism, to accepting the contingent forms
of contemporary society as privileged, and to seeing other societies and
other conventions as inferior to the degree that they are different. The Pla-
tonic curriculum tries too hard to secure for students a reliable image of real-
ity, at the expense ofwisdom, compassion, and skills relevant to managing in
current society. The Rousseauian curriculum is insensitive to how far indi-
vidual development is a social matter and how far intellectual skills are tied
in with disciplined knowledge, and so inclines towards superficiality and ill-
founded confidence.
The alternative offered in this chapter is a curriculum that can develop
the set of intellectual tools discussed earlier. I will have nothing much to say
about the curricula for Somatic understanding and for Ironic understanding,
assuming that the former is constrained in ways that do not leave much
ro~m for curriculum content choices and the latter is unconstrained in ways
that leave so much room that prescription would be pointless. I will focus,
then, on implications for the curriculum that will support developme\lt of
Mythic, Romantic, and Philosophic understanding and restrict my com-
ments mainly to curricula appropriate for typical schools, and for colleges
and universities.
I do not promise to detail and justify a whole curriculum from the early
years to adulthood, all in a Single chapter. What I will do is outline the prin-
ciples that this theory generates for constructing a curriculum that will
encourage development of these kinds of understanding. I will focus on fea-
tures of this curriculum that differentiate it most clearly from those that cur-
rently dominate schools, colleges, and universities. Perhaps elsewhere these
broad brush strokes can be elaborated into a detailed specification of curric-
ulum content. For now, I will consider some content by way of example.
Please prepare, then, for a change of pace from the more theoretical dis-
cussions of the previous chapters. We are now ~eady to explore how the the-
ory might be implemented within current schooling conditions, and to
consider changes that could be made tomorrow without serious disruption.
MYTHIC UNDERSTANDING
The characterization of Mythic understanding identified metaphor, rhyth-
mic language, images generated from words, abstract and affective opposi-
tions, story structures, and so on as among its constituent intellectual tools.
What curriculum content can best stimulate development of these tools?
A couple of general principles will come into play in considering each
kind of understanding; one derives from the requirements of the kind ofun-
207

SEVEN
derstanding, the other from the requirements of the direction in which we
want the student to develop. I will discuss these principles in terms of
Mythic understanding, and leave it as understood that the same points refer
to Romantic and Philosophic understanding, even though I will not repeat
them later. The first general principle that can help our selection of curricu-
lum content involves reflection on the cultural forms common to oral-
language users, as we will be recapitulating the intellectual tools that they
developed. The second principle involves reflection on the direction, toward
Romantic, Philosophic, and Ironic understanding, in which we want the
curriculum to take students.
These might seem conflicting principles, more likely to bemuse than to
help us; reflecting on the kaleidescopically rich variety of cultural forms in
oral societies may seem to draw us in opposite directions from the path of
Western disciplined inquiry toward which our further kinds of understand-
ing beckon us. We can, I think, be attentive to both of these general princi-
ples, looking backward and forward, as it were, and still construct a coherent
curriculum. Being attentive to both means that the Mythic understanding
we will aim to develop will be constrained by our sense of the direction in
which it is to develop, but that we will not be so attentive to the intended
direction that we will neglect the distinctively Mythic forms from which the
later developments must grow. So, for example, Mythic understanding can
be stimulated by any of a large range of kinds of stories referring to the
past-oral cultures suggest rich examples from the most fantastic to very
accurate accounts of past events. These oral stories have a number of com-
mon features that we will draw on. But because we aim to support students'
development of Romantic, Philosophic, and Ironic understanding, we will
select Western-style historical accounts ofthe past for our elementary curric-
ulum, but frame them in Mythic terms. So our two general principles can
work together; the one directing us to the oral foundations of our under-
standing, the other directing us toward the forms of their development we
want to stimulate.
Perhaps I should not leave the example of history hanging. I meant it
only to illustrate that one can draw on both general principles and come up
with a curriculum that honors both. History does not commonly appear in
the elementary curriculum these days, as it has been replaced by social
studies with its outdated "expanding horizons" basis. In chapter 2 and else-
where (Egan, 1988) I have given reasons for abandoning social studies, but I
do not want to replace it with the old-style history that attended not at all to
Mythic principles. So, the question becomes, What kind of history will find
208
a place in the elementary curriculum?

SOME IMPLICATIONS FOR THE CURRICULUM
The first general principle directs us to the oral foundations of any area
of study we want to include in the curriculum. The oral foundation of his-
tory is myth. We need to reflect not only on the endless variety of mythic
references to the past but also on their common features and on the psycho-
logical and social functions they performed. All oral cultures have traditional
tales about the past, some embedded in sacred myths recited as parts of rit-
uals, others more informal and variable in content and in their social uses.
All are in a story form and all serve to fit present experience into an extended
and more generally meaningful context.
Drawing on some of the other characteristics of Mythic understanding,
we could begin our history curriculum with the cosmic story of the struggle
of life against extinction. (Virginia Lee Burton's Life Story [1962] exemplifies
one way to dramatize it.) More recent history can be structured in terms of
the struggle for freedom against oppression, with the dramatic incidents of
that extensive and ongoing story forming the lessons over many weeks. We
can see history also in terms of the struggle for security against the danger of
arbitrary violence. We could devise many such overarching stories that
would serve the psychological and social purposes of myths or traditional
tales in oral cultures, and would use similar structural techniques in their
presentation.
It would be easy, for example, to deSign a yearlong history program
based on the story of the human struggle for freedom against oppression of
various kinds. My brief examples here will be Western-oriented only be-
cause that is what I am familiar with~ in designing such a program in detail
one would select examples of different kinds of oppression and various
struggles for freedom from around the world. One might include slavery in
the ancient world, drawing on vivid incidents such as Spartacus's revolt
against Rome or the struggles of Queen Bouddacea against the invading le-
gions; one could look at the treatment of]ews in medieval and modern Eu-
rope, of captives in early North and Central American cultures. One could
study Gandhi and Martin Luther King, and so on. None of this need involve
falsification. We will simplify, but even the most sophisticated history-
writing involves simplification. The aim is to tell a vital part of the human
story that will help students make sense of the world and the society into
which they are growing. I have already argued that such a curriculum, fo-
cused on the triumphs and defeats of men, women, and communities in var-
ied places down the ages, could be ofmore educational value than the typical
social studies focus on the role of the mailman and the structure of the local
environment. IntrodUCing children to their world in terms of its powerful
and dramatic events, rather than through idealized, ordered routines of their
209

SEVEN
local customs, presents them with images of struggles and accommodations
that are analogous to the struggles and accommodations they are themselves
going through in their early years. History is one of the major tools we have
for making sense of experience in a changing world. Historical understand-
ing does not simply "develop" in later years (as argued by some Piagetians,
see, e.g., Hallam [1969]); its later forms develop on the basis of prior and
prerequisite developments.
With regard to the "languages and literatures" segment of the curricu-
lum, the general aim will be the stimulation and development of the stu-
dent's Mythic language. One of the principles discussed earlier as central to
language development was the growth in consciousness of language, or
"metalinguistic awareness." I would like to begin with something that seems
to me important in this development but that is commonly neglected in edu-
cation: the sense ofhumor. While we may recognize that sophisticated irony
inescapably.involves a kind ofhumor, its prerequisite developments are little
attended to in education.
It is hard not to become grim and dull discussing humor, but its educa-
tional value seems to me considerable, both because of its role in language
development and because of its related role in stimulating and enlarging
these various kinds of understanding. Again, I will not discuss this topic in
the two later sections of this chapter, but, in changing forms, humor will
continue to play an equally important educational role in developing Ro-
mantic and Philosophic understanding as in stimulating Mythic under-
standing.
At the simplest level, jokes can extend vocabulary and begin the crucial
process of making language expliCit and itself an object of reflection. "When
is a door not a door?" "When it's ajar [ajar]." Ho, ho. Getting the point ofthis
simple word-joke, and the hundreds like it, provides mediation between
open/closed, adding a tiny bit to the child's ability to describe the world and
experience more articulately. Even more important, it fosters the realization
that identical sounds can take different forms when written and can mean
different things.
MetaphoriC play can be encouraged byjokes such as those in Bill Keane's
popular "Family Circus" cartoons. The child standing on the lawn observes:
"The grass is flossing my toes," or the frayed shoelace is said to have "lost its
claw," or the approaching storm is announced with "The sky's grumblin'."
Children can be encouraged in class to engage in the deliberate confusion of
categories that makes metaphor work and that makes it funny.
Further consciousness oflanguage,or, in Hayek's terms, bringing opera-
tions of the mind into consciousness, can be encouraged by parody, which
210
children commonly delight in almost as soon as they have learned the con-

SOME IMPLICATIONS FOR THE CURRICULUM
vention being parodied. One sees it in the rather mysterious "You know
what?" "What?" "Thafs what!" which caused my three-year-old daughter
endless mirth, or in "Why did the turtle cross the road?" "1 don't know.
Why?" "Because it was the chicken's day off," which similarly reduced my
four-year-old son to paroxysms of glee ten or twenty times a day
The jokes that Lewis Carroll builds into the Alice books exemplify a
form that increases consciousness of the contingency ofcategories and play-
fully threatens to undermine the normal conventions of reason: "'Take some
more tea,' the March Hare said to Alice, very earnestly 'I've had nothing yet,'
Alice replied in an offended tone, 'so I can't take more.' 'You mean you can't
take less,' said the Hatter: 'it's very easy to take more than nothing.'" (Alice in
Wonderland, ch.
7)~ "They draw all manner of things-everything that be-
gins with an M-.' 'Why an M?' said Alice. 'Why not?' said the March Hare"
(ibid.)~ "'There's nothing like eating hay when you're faint.' ... '1 didn't say
there was nothing better,' the King replied. '1 said there was nothing like it.'"
(Through the Looking Glass, ch. 7).
1don't mean these examples are somehow paradigmatic kinds ofjokes
for stimulating the intellectual tools of MythiC understanding, but rather
that they exemplify ways in which the joke can be a fertile means ofbuilding
awareness of language and of developing increasingly sophisticated lan-
guage use. Another value ofjokes, of course, is that they are fun; they are a
form of language whose use carries an immediate reward.
Language also has its own rhythms, which can give delight apart from
their sense or meaning, as the nonsense verses of Edward Lear or Dr. Seuss
attest. The pervasive pleasure children get from rhythmiC language is evident
from such massive compilations as the Gpies' (1969, 1985). The favorite
"Knock, knock" joke among local preschoolers went: "Knock, knock."
"Who's there?" "Mickey Mouse's underwear." Rolling-on-the-floor mirth fol-
lowed this one, the rhythmiC appeal no doubt reinforced by the hint of ap-
proaching a taboo. Exploration of jokes might sensibly be added to the
elementary language curriculum, not in the sense of meticulous analytic
study, but as encouraging awareness of how language works and how the
students can make it work in their own invention ofjokes. The child devel-
oping language is, at the most basic level, learning to shape sound so that it
can affect others. Response to the child's efforts is crucial~ the teacher or par-
ent has the somewhat delicate task of encouraging what may be chaotic ex-
ploration while also encouraging the selection of meaningful patterns and
the discipline required to refine them.
These activities are developments of somatic explorations and patterns
finding their way beyond the body through language. We can move readily
from this linguistic exploration back to the body, furthering its rhythmic de-
211

SEVEN
velopment, by combining words and music in song. This continuing so-
matic development can be encouraged further in more sophisticated explo-
ration of the varied sounds our bodies can make in addition to those we
shape into words; we can click (incorporated into some languages in South
Africa), squeak, clap, stomp, and, surely sadly neglected, we can whistle. We
are instruments of music and its manner of communicating meaning. Thus
the exploration of how to construct pattern and meaning in human sounds
plays a part in the languages curriculum.
Exuberant word-play in poetry can encourage children's sense of how
words can make meaning and images, and can delight by its sheer sound
even when meaning and images are not easily grasped. I have mentioned the
Edward Lear and Dr. Seuss rhymes. Robert Southey'S "The Cataract of
Lodore" is a perfect example ofverbal exuberance-a challenge for the reci-
ter no less than the listener.
Literatures would include the rich variety of stories from around the
world that incorporate the features characterized in chapter 2. The more
these "folk" tales can be told rather than read the better, probably, and the
more that can be told by people from whose cultures the stories come the
better, especially ifsome cultural context for the story can be provided. More
contentiously, perhaps, there is a class of stories that should also be made
very familiar to children. These are the great mythic or religiOUS stories ofthe
world, and particularly those of the child's own culture and of the dominant
culture(s) into which the child is growing. Without knowledge of such sto-
ries, children will find it harder, maybe impossible, to make sense of the cul-
tural experience that surrounds them. Sometimes these stories will be from a
central religiOUS text, such as theJewish Torah or Christian Bible; sometimes
they will be sets of exemplary social tales, such as the Nasrudin stories in
Islamic cultures; sometimes they are bodies of textualized myths, such as the
Greek or Norse stories of gods and mortals.
The set of foundational Western stories, mainly from the Bible, from
Greek and Norse myths, from those long ago absorbed from Islamic sources,
and from the folk cultures ofwestern Europe, cannot be taken simply as any
other stories in the curriculum. They are important because, first, they have
become intricately connected with Western languages and, second, because
they give rise to literary developments that we want students to absorb.
To pick up that first point, these stories are important because their
rhythms of expectation and satisfaction, of hopes and fears, of courage and
action, of belief and behavior, have helped to shape our categories of under-
standing and our conceptions of virtues and vices; they are implicated in
212
profound ways in the sense of the world delivered to us in our languages.

SOME
IMPLICATIONS
FOR THE
CURRICULUM
Without knowledge of these stories, students will be less equipped to make
sense of the world.
Northrop Frye elaborates the second point when he writes: "If we don't
know the Bible and the central stories of Greek and Roman literature we can
still read books and see plays, but our knowledge ofliterature can't grow, just
as our knowledge of mathematics can't grow ifwe don't learn the multiplica-
tion table" (1963, p. 28). Perhaps he slightly overstates the point, but our
general principle of selecting curriculum content that will direct us toward
subsequent kinds of understanding clearly prescribes this set of stories as
central to our elementary literatures curriculum. I realize this focus raises
problems in a multicultural society, but if our primary concern is education,
the issue to address is the strategic one of how to present these stories in an
acceptable way, not how to negotiate their disappearance from the curricu-
lum. We will sensibly be flexible and sensitive to particular situations, and be
prepared to let our decisions turn on courtesy and kindness rather than on
narrow logic or ideology.
Writing is language made visible, but it allows us to do things with lan-
guage that were not possible in oral cultures. Initiation into writing might
well explore the techniques' it initially made possible. So, along with the
usual early writing activities, we might encourage children to make lists,
draw up tables, make recipes, design flowcharts, and so on.
What kind of introduction to science will we provide in the curriculum
by applying the two general principles? We will probably find it easier to
apply the second principle, of setting in place prerequisites for Romantic,
Philosophic, and Ironic scientific understanding, than to apply the one that
requires us to devise a Mythic form of science. 'Mythic science' sounds like
an oxymoron. Our first principle requires us to ask what is the oral founda-
tion of science. Well, the oral foundation of science seems to be what was
dismissively called magic. Oral cultures certainly observed the world and
formulated schemes of classification as a result, but the schemes are, from a
scientific point of view, idiosyncratic, often weirdly incomprehensible, and
often metaphorically tied to the objects classified rather than to some ratio-
nal abstract scheme that can provide control over them. For example, at the
simplest level, many cultures have no general system of counting. Ifyou ask
members of many oral cultures to count, they will reply "Count what?"
(Goody, 1977). We see the traces of such object-tied counting in English-
twin, brace, pair, deuce, yoke, dual, couple, binary, and mates all refer to
twoness with regard to different things.
When we look at oral cultural inquiry into the natural world we see
something rather different from science, something more intimately partici-
213

SEVEN
patory in the objects of the natural world that seems alien and uncomfort-
able to the scientific mind. How are we to accommodate both of these and
construct an elementary science curriculum? The beginning inquiry, reflect-
ing that of oral cultures, is less an attempt to know about nature as to know it
in some participatory way, to know it as something we are an intimate part
of, not set off from. One component of our early science curriculum might
involve each student "adopting" something in the natural world-say, a tree,
a patch of grass, a spider's web, rain, a dog or cat, or clouds. Students would
be expected and helped simply to observe their adopted piece of the natural
world, not in the sense that is currently common in which students have
checklists, learn the names of the object and those of its parts, have drawing
equipment or make notes, and deliver reports of a kind appropriate to their
ages. In the Mythic curriculum they would observe silently for sustained pe-
riods of time with no other aim than to feel their way into the nature ofwhat
they are observing. They will feel how the tree stretches its leaves out to the
sun, how the rain trickles down it, and how the branches move in the var-
ious winds. Obviously this will require support and training, but perhaps
less than many may assume; this kind ofabsorption occurs quite commonly
and without tutoring in many children. Alittle ingenuity should enable us to
encourage it in many more. The aim is a kind of dreamlike absorption into
the object being observed or rather being participated in. The dreamlike
mind will tie the object into emotions and half-formed stories. I recognize
that this may seem decidedly odd, but I think the decisiveness of our break
with the natural world has given us a science that has forgotten its founda-
tions in full human participation in the natural world. A deliberate introduc-
tion to science of the kind recommended here might go some way toward
encouraging a greater sensitivity to the natural world. We might seek guid-
ance for such a curriculum from cultures that have excelled at combining
absorption with attentive observation. The native cultures of North America,
for example, excelled at this.
Forms of classification of phenomena are also to be encouraged in our
elementary science curriculum. The dominant Piagetian scheme has encour-
aged an image of young children's classification as prerational, with in-
tellectual progress being seen as the gradual "development" of rational
classification. These assumptions direct our attention away from the "con-
fused," "chaotic," or "egocentric" ways young children classify. In this scheme,
however, we are encouraged to see young children's classifications as no less
complex, sophisticated, and orderly than the rational forms that are repre-
sented as correct. But we need to attend to the metaphoric connections that
underlie young children's "confused" ordering schemes; these are often tied
214
in with unsuspected qualities of the objects being classified. Again, a look at

SOME
IMPLICATIONS
FOR THE CURRICULUM
the kinds of schemes common in oral cultures can provide ways of enabling
children to explore variety in the ordering and classifying of phenomena
(see, for example, Levi-Bruhl, 1985).
Where, in these two brief examples, is the influence of the second gen-
eral principle-the sense ofdirection toward rationality and scientific order-
ing? In both cases, intellectual engagement is the necessary precursor of
rational ordering. Most students, especially children who live in the city,
have the rational ordering thrust on them before they have engaged the natu-
ral world in any significant, meaningful way Often the rational ordering dis-
places the meaningful mythic engagement; in the common elementary
science units on The Child as Observer, for instance, the child observes only
to order, classify, and learn in a simplified rational mode. The future direc-
tion is evident in my examples because they introduce a constituent of a
mature scientific understanding that is currently, and destructively, ne-
glected. That is, this sense of intimate participation in the natural world is
not a primitive confusion that rational, positivist science conquered, but is a
foundational constituent of a proper scientific understanding.
And what is the oral foundation of mathematics? Mathematics grows
out of our number sense, which we share with many animals and insects;
our number sense is about as good as that of blackbirds but less good than
that of some species of wasp. How to move from our number sense to the
trick of counting and then to the tricks counting can be elaborated into, is
the challenge with which our two general principles present us. Tobias
Danzig's Number: The Language ofScience (1967), which Albert Einstein de-
scribed as the "best book on mathematics I have ever read," presents us with
some clues for making this early development. Our number sense is evident
in our ability to distinguish the number of things we see at a glance, which
humans can manage up to about six or seven. But this is not adequate to
people who herd cattle or sheep and who need to keep an accurate count. So
what means did people in oral cultures use, and how can we draw on those
while moving in the direction of Western mathematics?
The structure of the current curriculum represents mathematics as a se-
ries of "skills," or as sets of increaSingly complex algorithms, that the child
has to master. This most common approach-however "fun" the lessons are
made-can obliterate the sense of magic that early counting systems re-
flected. Our early mathematics curriculum has to focus on recreating, or re-
capitulating, the magical ingenuity of the inventions and discovery that
make up the subject. We will want to teach counting systems and various
patterns and manipulations evident in mathematics so that children become
competent and confident, recognizing the external manipulations as simply
expressions of their internal human ingenuity. Some of this can be achieved
215

SEVEN
by embedding the "skills" in story structures such as exemplified in chapter
2, whereby the child is encouraged to associate affectively with the clever-
ness of the character who succeeds in calculating what would be impossible
for the number sense to deal with.
Many early counting systems used rhyme and rhythm, and echoes of
these are still heard in the number rhymes that survive from "folk" work
songs. Not only can such rhymes help to teach counting and simple arithme-
tic, but they can also help to embed counting and arithmetic in meaningful
contexts that expose their original purposes. Number-based puzzles and
tricks, magic-number games, and so on encourage the development of the
number sense in the ingenuity and magic of counting. None of these activ-
ities, which are attentive to Mythic understanding, will obviate the need for
some hard work and repetition to ensure fluent mastery of the basic mathe-
matical skills. The development of these skills is not intrinsically difficult if
we bear in mind the intellectual tools the Mythic child brings to them. Ignor-
ing those tools, on the other hand, sets us back on the path of the largely
meaningless accumulation of little understood external algorithms that
buries for most children any sense of the ingenuity and wonder of even ele-
mentary mathematics.
The disciplinary divisions toward which we will be moving in the cur-
riculum are reflected in the manner I have touched on history, languages and
literatures, science, and mathematics here. The first general principle in-
voked above would, however, encourage us not to put very much emphasis
on those divisions. All manner of "interdisciplinary" topics can readily be
incorporated in the Mythic curriculum (see Armstrong, Connolly, and Sav-
ille, 1994). (I recognize that many people think the choice between an inter-
disciplinary curriculum as distinct from one divided up into traditional
disciplines is ofcrucial importance. No doubt it makes some difference, but I
can't get excited about this as an issue of much educational significance.
And, anyway, any sensible curriculum will incorporate both principles at
different times.) An arts segment of the curriculum would focus on encour-
aging students' exploration of the range of sensations and patterning possi-
bilities available to ear, eye, taste, touch, and movement. But that arts
curriculum will clearly overlap considerably with those I have discussed
briefly above, as the exploration of rhyme, rhythm, and counting suggest.
Mathematics, science, language, and music are often taught as having a
nature to which the child has to conform. Educational success is then mea-
sured in terms of the degree of conformity achieved. I am recommending
a rather different approach here, one that seeks an accommodation be-
tween the "nature" of those disciplines and the intellectual tools by means of
216
which the young child can engage them. These tools, in Vygotsky's sense,

SOME IMPLICATIONS FOR THE CURRICULUM
mediate the child's grasp and understanding of them. Designing the Mythic
curriculum, then, is a matter of selecting that content within these disci-
plines that the mediating tools of Mythic understanding make accessible,
meaningful, and engaging.
ROMANTIC UNDERSTANDING
The characterization of Romantic understanding identified engagement by
the extremes of experience and the limits of reality, association with tran-
scendent human qualities, the personalizing of knowledge, and a distinctive
romantic rationality as among its constituent intellectual tools. In what fol-
lows I will look, first, at what kind of curriculum can best stimulate and de-
velop the intellectual tools of Romantic understanding and, second, what
curriculum comes into focus by looking at the world through the mediation
of those tools. I think we should have a distinctive transition-year between
the MythiC and Romantic curriculum, dedicated very largely to stimulating
development of Romantic understanding, but it will be easier to describe the
transition curriculum after outlining what it is a transition to.
Ifstudents are to explore the scale of reality and the limits ofexperience,
the content that will most readily support this kind of inquiry will be the
mega ergon-the great achievements, the most terrible disasters, the most
exotic features of human experience and of the natural world. Taking this
mega ergon as a criterion for selecting curriculum content, we can apply it in
two somewhat distinctive ways. First, whatever topic is being studied, we
will search within it for content with these characteristics. Second, we can
create a slot in the curriculum for the direct exploration of extremes and
limits. We might call it something like Human and Natural Records. It would
not be intended for extensive study, but rather for sharp, intensive, limited
views on varied topics. Such a curriculum slot might be scheduled for two or
three sessions each week, perhaps at the end of the day, and for no more than
ten or fifteen minutes. It would be a kind of Guinness Book of Records seg-
ment, though with somewhat richer elaboration and context and, if avail-
able, illustration. Through the year, students individually or in small groups
could prepare presentations. The accumulation of hundreds of these "re-
cords" over the years, overlapping as they will with topics being studied in
greater depth or in other ways, will provide a significant body of diverse
knowledge about the limits of the world and of human experience.
In chapter 3, the exploration of the scale of reality was related to stu-
dents' fascination with hobbies, collecting, and other activities, which in-
volved exploring something as exhaustively as possible. This in-depth
217

SEVEN
method of inquiry also yields a criterion for selecting a curriculum that has
two uses. First, it encourages the teacher to provide students with some op-
portunity for exhaustive exploration in whatever topic is being studied.
Second, as the previous item advised making room in the curriculum for
brief "records" segments, so this criterion suggests a one- or even two-year
extensive project, in which students indiVidually or in small groups focus on
thoroughly exploring something-eels' life cycles, the mendicant orders in
the Middle Ages, light and its sources, beetles, the contents of the solar sys-
tem, eggs, or whatever they choose. Perhaps, on a monthly basis the stu-
dents could discuss with the class as a whole their ongoing projects.
Forming romantic associations with transcendent human qualities sug-
gests another twofold criterion for selecting curriculum content. First, the
criterion can be used in selecting the content that the teacher will emphasize
in teaching any topic. In studying eels we may foreground the ingenuity, per-
sistence' and heroism ofJohannes Schmidt in tracking down their breeding
grounds in the tangled Sargasso Sea, or in studying the Industrial Revolution
we may foreground the daring and near-reckless drive of an engineer like
Isambard Kingdom BruneI. Second, we can create another brief segment of
curriculum time that will focus directly on transcendent human qualities
and their expression in varied circumstances. Each quarter-hour segment,
two or three times a week, could focus on an exemplification of a particular
transcendent human quality-in the world of sports, in the news, in his-
tory, or in the world of entertainment. We could call it Human Qualities or
Overcoming, and focus in each segment on cases that vividly exemplify
compassion, courage, power, patience, genius, hope, strength, tenacity, per-
sistence, and so on.
Another Romantic characteristic that can be converted into a criterion
for the selection of curriculum content is the ready engagement by whatever
stimulates wonder and awe. As with the characteristics I have already identi-
fied, this crit~rion provides gUidance in two directions. First, it directs us to
select within any topic we might be studying-whether earthworms, divi-
sion of fractions, or the Treaty of Vienna-whatever features of that t~pic
seem best able to stimulate the sense of wonder or generate a feeling of awe.
The clauses of the Treaty of Vienna alone might do little to inspire awe or
even wonder; in that case we could "humanize" the Treaty, or look for tran-
scendent human qualities that led to its framing, or find some other Roman-
tic approach to it.
Second, it encourages us to include in the curriculum the content that
seems best able to stimulate students' senses of wonder and awe. This sug-
gests another short, fifteen-minute curriculum segment, in this case dedi-
218
cated to small but constant stimuli to students' sense ofwonder. One trick is

SOME IMPLICATIONS
FOR THE CURRICULUM
to bring out the strange and wonderful in what seems routine or taken for
granted. Another is to focus on the odd and strange. This curriculum seg-
ment could be organized around varied, random, questions, such as: How
can birds fly? Why are some people colorblind? What good are mosquitoes?
What is plastic and how is it made? Why are there so many stones around?
What is soil made of? Awe is more complicated and more difficult to evoke,
but might be encouraged by a further set of questions: Must all things
end? What is life? How many stars are there? How do we learn language?
This quarter-hour curriculum segment cannot, of course, answer any
such questions adequately. The point is to raise questions and provide as
much of an answer as possible that brings out the wonder of the topic. The
aim is to raise interesting or odd questions and answer them as well as pos-
sible without any pedagogical fuss. By pedagogical fuss here I mean we will
have no "inquiry methods" or "discovery processes" that might have value
elsewhere. "What is soil made of?" may elicit for a few moments T. S. Eliot's
"fur, flesh, and feces" answer. Along with information about how long it
takes how much decaying fur, flesh, and feces to lay down an inch ofsoil, we
could consider the rate of soil erosion, and so on.
The pedagogical skill required here consists of selecting questions that
have surprising or wonder-inducing answers, and not getting tied down in
systematic, detailed coverage of an issue. Perhaps ten minutes might be a
safer amount of time to allot. As with the other small curriculum segments,
students can become involved in framing questions ~nd researching an-
swers, always ensuring that their presentations focus on the strange, won-
derful, and awe-inspiring. The aim is to build gradually and randomly a
particular level of knowledge about the world that stimulates, bit by bit,
wonder and awe at being alive in this world at this time.
A further characteristic of Romantic underslanding, which yields an-
other criterion for selecting curriculum content, is the ready access to
knowledge that is "humanized." Again we have two ways of deploying this
principle. First, it provides us with a criterion for selecting content within
any topic we are teaching. It directs us to bring out those aspects of the topic
that make it accessible in terms of human emotion, and to bring out concep-
tions of causality seen largely in terms of human agency. All events, objects,
and processes, whether physical or historical, can be made Romantically ac-
cessible if they are represented as analogous at some level to the way in
which human emotions are seen as causing things to happen. To repeat an
earlier point, this does not require us to falsify. Rather, the Romantic manner
of conceiving of events, objects, and processes is one way of trying to make
sense of them. They are ultimately ineffable; even our most sophisticated
forms of representation and explanation are inadequate. Shunning this Ro-
219

SEVEN
mantic approach as simplistic is merely a hangover from the polemics that
accompanied promotion of Philosophic approaches; the Romantic is prop-
erly a constituent of later kinds of representation and explanation.
Second, the "humanizing" principle directs us to select curriculum con-
tent that can best stimulate and develop this particular tool of Romantic un-
derstanding. In chapter 3 I mentioned various popular tabloids and
magazines (National Inquirer, People, and Entertainment Weekly, to name a
few) that exemplify the results of aggressively applying this criterion. Such
stories are Romantic in the sense that they focus on individual people or
groups of people, and on exotic or extreme behavior or achievements. Cau-
sality in these stories works through the will, which acts in direct response to
an emotion; luck and chance are usually represented as due to good or bad
behavior or character, however indirectly
Like the previous principles, this one would support a quarter-hour seg-
ment; we could call it "BriefLives."Two or three times each week, teachers or
students could prepare and present the story of someone's life, or some part
of someone's life, emphasizing the Romantic characteristics. The presenta-
tions should come in random order-Hildegard of Bingen today, Jesse
Owen yesterday, Edward G. Robinson tomorrow, then Ramon Lull, Mary
Wollstonecraft, Henry the Navigator, Joan of Arc, someone's great-aunt or
great-uncle, and the last Tasmanian aborigine. One of the related charac-
teristics of Romantic understanding was the revolt against constraining con-
ventional forces, so some of our brief lives might include agonistic accounts
of St. Teresa ofAvila against the church hierarchy, ofGandhi against the Brit-
ish army, of Martin Luther King against the Washington establishment, of
Chief Seattle against an earlier Washington establishment, of Maria Mon-
tessori against the Italian medical powers-that-be, or ofsomeone's mother or
father against some unjust social regulation.
This principle also supports activities that are becoming quite common,
such as having students compile oral histories from their recorded inter-
views with elderly people in the community, tracing their lives, their adven-
tures, exotic incidents, and memories of how things were and how things
changed into the present unpredicted, peculiar world.
So far, then, by considering how characteristics of Romantic under-
standing can become principles for determining curriculum content we
have some new chunks ofcurriculum time and some topics to fill them. Im-
plementing these ideas would give us, perhaps twice a day, brief segments
devoted to people's lives, to stimulating wonder, to forming associations
with transcendent qualities, to recording limits ofexperience and of the nat-
ural world. Over the longer period of one or two years, students would also
220
be pursuing some topic in exhaustive detail, and they may be involved in the

SOME IMPLICATIONS
FOR THE CURRICULUM
topic by playing a role-a sheep trader in Australia, a Franciscan friar in
medieval slums, a particular kind of egg or beetle, or one of the contents of
the solar system. This set of activities is designed both to stimulate students'
active engagement with the world and also to contribute to the unsystematic
but intensive accumulation of detailed knowledge about it.
These brief, frequent exposures to Romantic bits and pieces will proba-
bly do little toward the systematic development of disciplined understand-
ing. We must also attend to putting in place the Romantic constituent oflater
forms of understanding of mathematics, history, and science, focusing sys-
tematically on the stimulation and development of students' Romantic lan-
guage. Earlier I discussed how our most sophisticated understanding is built
layer by layer. Scientific understanding is not simply Philosophic, as it is of-
ten represented, but is properly also Somatic, Mythic, Romantic, and Ironic.
The principle used to explore science in the Mythic section above involved
reflecting in two directions; first, on what form proto-scientific inquiry took
in oral cultures and, second, in what direction we were to stimulate and de-
velop it. Here we will ask an analogous, twofold question: What Romantic
form did science take in cultural history and which features of science are
particularly important to the development of the most sophisticated modern
scientific understanding? We will want to raise this dual question in all disci-
plines.
In the study of history we will look for dramatic narratives driven by
human emotions and intentions. Achronological scheme should be in place
after Mythic studies, refined by the various narratives selected for study An
increasingly confident sense of what is possible in human affairs can be en-
couraged by focusing on the extremes ofhuman experience. Thomas Carlyle
(1795-1881) suggested that history be seen as composed of innumerable
biographies; we will want to incorporate a sense of this Romantic principle
in our curriculum. We will also build our narratives on strong metaphors,
such as those Gibbon (1 737-1794) used in The Decline and Fall ofthe Roman
Empire to describe the empire's passage from vigorous youth to tired old
age. The further Romantic principle ofengagement by the strange and differ-
ent would support, along with other reasons, a much wider inclusion of
events and people in varied cultures from around the world than is currently
common.
Given these criteria, it is clear that no specific historical topics are more
appropriate or more valuable than others. We will select topics from coun-
tries around the world and across time because of their amenability to such
Romantic treatment. The aim will be to build up somewhat unsystematic
historical knowledge. It will be both extensive and intensive, and will focus
on vivid events, characters, institutional rises and falls, and so on. There will
221

SEVEN
no doubt be constant overlaps with the smaller curricula segments discussed
above, particularly the Brief Lives segment, but this overlap seems all to
the good.
History can also playa role in making the science curriculum more acces-
sible to studentsduring these Romantic years. This isnot to collapse science to
history, but r~ther to suggest a way of embedding scientific achievements in
their historical setting, particularly through discussing the passions, hopes,
fears, and intentions of those who developed the scientific knowledge in the
first place.
So what does science look like when we view it "Romantically"? It is,
first, a contextualized science, one in which theories, experiments, and facts
become meaningful within narratives of human lives and intentions, one
which draws on such transcendent qualities as persistence, ingenuity, pa-
tience, accuracy, and so on, in pursuit of the nature of things. This peculiar
adventure-the tools forged to aid in it, the personalities and emotions that
have driven it, and the wonder of what has been exposed by it-will form
our science curriculum. TV programs and books such as]ames Burke's Con-
nections and Connections 2 show how science can be presented in a Roman-
tically engaging way. The average teacher with the supplies available to the
average school cannot be expected to compete with the qUirky showman-
ship of Burke, but they can learn from his construction of engaging narra-
tives and his personalizing of inventions and discoveries.
None of this need change significantly the content of the science curric-
ulum. Theories, laws, factual knowledge, and the systematic investigation of
nature will not be ignored; the usual purposes of the science curriculum will
not be discarded. Central place will, however, be given over to the Romantic
engagement with the exotic and the wonderful, because this focus is prereq-
uisite to, and the route toward, Philosophic understanding of science. Ro-
mantic principles will yield criteria of selection that will effect some changes
in the science curriculum, favoring those topics that are more amenable to
this Romantic treatment. No doubt to the distress ofpurists, implementation
ofsuch criteria would increase the more spectacular and dramatic features of
scientific activity and reduce the logical sequence of systematically accu-
mulating knowledge. This would result because these kinds of understand-
ing see the growth of human knowledge less in terms of the regular logical
sequences we impose on it later and more in the discontinuous forms
shaped by the somewhat distinctive intellectual tools we develop over time.
Emphasizing narrative structures, the drama, the mystery, and the human
dimension undercuts the dulling influence of premature and simplified
Philosophic principles of selection and organization in the science cur-
222
riculum.

SOME
IMPLICATIONS
FOR THE
CURRICULUM
Many of the same general observations can be made about the mathe-
matics curriculum. We need to embed the sequence of skills and algorithms
to be learned into an historical and human context. We need to see the hu-
man purposes for which different forms of mathematics were developed
and, as far as is known, who invented or discovered each theorem, algo-
rithm, technique, or advance in mathematical understanding. The curricu-
lum would be rich in historical figures, particularly the Egyptians, Greeks,
Arabs, and Jews to whom we owe so much.
Clues to the form a Romantic mathematics curriculum might take can
be found, again, if we focus attention on the early period of literacy, between
myth and the systematizers. There we find figures like Pythagoras, whose
intoxication with numbers catches the Romantic sense of what is exotic and
wonderful about mathematics. To Pythagoras, being able to manipulate
numbers and mathematical relationships and find that their results could be
applied to the world was a discovery close to magical. In teaching Romantic
mathematics, we must begin by excavating what is wonderful about each
skill, each technique, each algorithm. This is not a call for massive research
for each element of the curriculum, but for an alertness to the romance of
numbers. In teaching long division or long multiplication, we might intro-
duce the topic by showing how the Greeks or the Romans performed it. The
daunting compleXity becomes immediately clear. But how else might one go
about it? The wonderful ingenuity of the Arab invention of a number for
nothing, zero, and the elegant ease it permits in handling what were im-
mensely difficult calculations, can be made dramatically clear.
So, again, Romantic principles of selection will not significantly change
the content ofthe mathematics curriculum, but they will introduce historical
and human dimensions that tend to be largelyignored at present~ and theywill
focus less on students' gradual accumulation of a logical sequence of algo-
rithms and more on the wonder of puzzles, mathematical tricks, and games,
the peculiarities one can discover in number relationships, and so on.
The formation of romantic associations via transcendent human quali-
ties and the continuing development of linguistic tools will both support a
prominent place in the curriculum for languages and literatures. Recall Wil-
liam Empson's description of literature as the chiefmeans by which we come
to understand what it is like to have feelings and beliefs different from our
own; this will aid in our selection of appropriately Romantic literature. I
should emphasize that, perhaps paradoxically, "Romantic" literature does
not immediately direct us to literature of the Romantic period. The writings
ofWordsworth, for example, include features of Mythic, PhilosophiC, Ironic,
and Romantic understanding, and there are many other past and modern
writers whose work is more purely "Romantic," in the sense characterized in
223

SEVEN
chapter 3. The poetry of Coleridge or Poe, say, can be made more accessible,
engaging, and meaningful if it is introduced with details of the lives of the
poets.
Poetry no less than science can gain by being seen as a part of a person's
life. Literature that involves strong and clear narratives, that deals with tran-
scendent human qualities such as courage, love, and persistence, that focuses
on some extremesofhumanexperience, thatexaminessomethingstrange and
exotic and that highlights other characteristics of Romantic understanding,
will help do the educational job for us. These principles provide criteria that
can be used relatively straightforwardly to select appropriate literature for the
Romantic curriculum.
Exploration and experiment with burgeoning literacy are crucially im-
portant in developing the tools of Romantic understanding. Each area of the
curriculum can contribute something distinctive to this, ofcourse, but it will
be useful also to dedicate a segment of the curriculum precisely to appropri-
ate exploration of and experiment with literacy. The general aim is gradually
to increase students' awareness of language and their conscious control of it.
Many activities can contribute toward this aim, but I will mention just three
that seem not very common-etymology, rhetoric, and "exotic" languages.
The value of etymology as a stimulant to linguistic self-awareness has
been well made before (e.g., Temple and Gillet, 1989), but here Iwant to add
the ways in which etymology can both appeal to and support Romantic un-
derstanding. The trick is to focus on the romance of etymology rather than
on the Philosophic, systematic study of word origins. (Again, this is not to
dismiss the latter but rather to put in place the understanding that will better
lead to it.) If we think of words as like people, whose biographies are made
up of growth and change, with occasional dramatic conversions and con-
fused adventures, then we can discover the romance of etymology. I do not
imagine etymology as a distinct curriculum segment so much as a relatively
common visitor to the languages and literatures curriculum.
Not every word has an adequate "biographical" background to engage
the Romantic mind, and choice of words will be based on those with a suffi-
ciently interesting life story to tell. The manner should be less like the con-
densed listings of the major library dictionaries of etymology and more akin
to the extended tales of a book like The Private Lives of English Words (Heller,
Humez, and Dror, 1984). Students can be asked to solve puzzles, such as to
discover why "money" is connected with "memory" and "muse," or what
"gossip" has to do with God, or, indeed, where the word "god" comes from.
Alternatively, during each lesson teachers can focus on a word or two or ask
224
students to research a word for a future class. Stimulating interest depends

SOME
iMPliCATIONS
FOR THE
CURRiCULUM
partly on the selection of words with vivid, dramatic, and entertaining life
stories. The story is important here. There is not much value in teaching
about the gods after whom the days of the week are named; one has to show
the historical reasons why those gods won out in English, why we have a mix
of cultural deities, why the week is made lIP of seven days, and so on.
Rhetoric is usually described as the art ofusing language to influence the
emotions or, relatedly, the beliefs of others. Rhetoric is valuable here, in part
because it represents the preservation and elaboration within literacy of
techniques of language use largely worked out in oral cultures (Ong, 1982).
That is, if we look at early literacy to help us decide on forms appropriate in
education, rhetoric is indicated as important. Earlier I emphasized the com-
mon discontinuity between the oral culture with which children come to
school and the training they then receive in literacy. More prominent atten-
tion to rhetoric encourages us to tie early literacy to the students' already
well-developed oral skills.
Rhetoric is increasingly recommended in schools and at college level
and offers rich suggestions for the c~rriculum. I would"add only that when
selecting topics we should look at the needs of Romantic students. One use-
ful topic not much mentioned is exploration of the various dialects available
in the student's native language. In English, for example, the range ofdialects
is enormous. Exploring them means learning their distinctive forms and ex-
pressions, learning to speak in appropriate accents, and becoming familiar
with the distinctive vividnesses, force, and subtlety of other dialects, espe-
cially those that are less represented in the student's native dialect or in stan-
dard English. Similarly, students can be encouraged to explore what Walter
Ong has called different "grapholects," forms of written expression different
from conventional standard forms. These explorations will all help to de-
velop awareness of language and extend control over it. They will also help
to resist the repressive conventionalizing that is so common and destructive.
(1 realize that these suggestions will seem themselves exotic to teachers who
struggle to achieve even basic literacy in their pupils. But 1am writing here
for what can be expected of students who have been through an adequate
Mythic curriculum and appropriate teaching and who have made a success-
ful transition to Romantic understanding. 1should add, as well, that these
explorations ofdialects and grapholects will make mastery ofstandard forms
easier to accomplish.)
Students can also study the variety of rhetorical forms around them as
they appear in political arguments and speeches, advertiSing, newspaper re-
porting, conversations at school and at home, comic strips, prayers, and so
on. The central aim is constantly to increase awareness and develop control
225

SEVEN
over the various forms of language. More common tasks, like keeping ajour-
nal, can be encouraged to develop awareness of, and elaborate on, the dis-
tinctive, private "I" who is doing the writing.
I mentioned "exotic" language-learning. I mean that in addition to the
second language students might be learning-and at least one modern lan-
guage is important, if only to provide perspectives other than those that
come with the native language-students should also make some progress
in learning a language very different from their own, say, in a different or-
thography. For native English speakers, Sanskrit, Chinese, Thai, even an-
cient Egyptian hieroglyphs would suffice. The aim is not to achieve fluency
but simply to get some insight into how a very different language delivers a
representation of the world.
Another feature of the languages curriculum suggested by Romantic
principles concerns developing and elaborating students' sense of humor
from its Mythic forms. This is important because vivid and flexible under-
standing and deployment of metaphor are crucial to imagination, creative
thinking, and intellectual freedom. Nelson Goodman suggests that a "meta-
phor might be regarded as a calculated category mistake" (1979, p. 73)~ we
could look at some of the classic "Monty Python" sketches as characteristic-
ally Romantic because their humor tends to rely on taking a metaphor liter-
ally and creating a world that is, as a result, consistent but madly at variance
with the everyday world. Monty Python-ish skits also involve other features,
of course, that make their brand of humor a matter of taste~ when we fail to
appreciate them, however, we might wonder if our dulled metaphoric flex-
ibility is such that we cannot see the fun in creating worlds based on calcu-
lated category mistakes. This dulling represents an educational failure to
develop linguistic tools, and it is a failing we will want to avoid by encourag-
ing students' playful manipulation of metaphors and calculated metaphoric
crimes. The aim is to develop the sense of humor and metalinguistic aware-
ness at the same time.
A general observation concerning the Romantic curriculum follows
from the need to prepare for the development of Philosophic general
schemes. One important feature of those schemes is that the degree of their
sophistication turns on the amount of knowledge they have to organize. The
problem created by too little or too narrowly focused knowledge, to put it in
crude terms, is that almost any general scheme can order it. This means that
the student is easy prey for any ideological or metaphysical scheme. With
too little knowledge, the process of recognizing anomalies and making the
scheme more sophisticated can get going only in the most rudimentary way.
Similarly, Ironic understanding requires development of a sense of the con-
226
tingency of the conditions one finds oneself in. This sense of contingency

SOME
IMPLICATIONS
FOR THE
CURRICULUM
cannot come about as a product of relative ignorance~ that breeds credulity,
not irony. In other words, besides the Romantic reasons for learning a lot of
diverse knowledge, the sense ofdirection toward Philosophic and Ironic un-
derstanding adds a further requirement on the curriculum of the Romantic
years to ensure that students master a lot ofknowledge. This principle seems
lost in a climate where many argue that accumulating knowledge is of small
importance compared with learning procedural skills, or "critical thinking,"
or where to locate knowledge when it is needed. These procedural skills are
often promoted as important aids in sifting a body ofknowledge so large that
no one can "know" everything. But the mind and the imagination cannot do
anything with knowledge that is in the library; they require knowledge to be
in the memory. Now this puts it too crudely, of course, but I want only to
emphasize the somewhat unfashionable idea that the Romantic curriculum
will be rich in detailed and varied content that students will be required to
learn.
Sketching these principles, I have been conscious oftrying to defend my
position on the one hand against those who want the curriculum to be de-
voted to "job-ready skills," to quote a local catchphrase, and on the other
hand against academic purists who are suspicious of anything Romantic as
too like entertainment to involve serious academic work. But I think that the
curriculum I have begun to sketch will do a better job of teaching useful
knowledge and skills and will also better prepare for sophisticated academic
work. Single-minded devotion to "job-ready skills" is a recipe for vocational
redundancy in a decade or so, at a terrible cost to the intellectual resources of
the individual. Single-minded devotion to academic study engenders nar-
rowness of mind, dullness of soul, and what Whitehead called "the shadow
of the crammer" (1967, p. 21).
Early adolescence is commonly a time of intense and vivid emotional
life, and also a time of deepest boredom and depression. Contemporary
schools are often least sure in knowing how to deal with the middle school
years, when the clear socializing and basic information-providing that drives
the early curriculum fades and the urgency of vocational preparation does
not yet give precise direction. This lack of inspiration for the curriculum can
be overcome in Significant degree by recognizing the importance of what I
am calling Romance to students' developing understanding. Romantic un-
derstanding can give shape to the intermediate curriculum and offer the stu-
dents a world that is rich, complex, varied, and as intense and vivid as their
own emotional lives.
At the beginning of this section I mentioned that students at about age
eight experience a transition year between Mythic and Romantic under-
standing and suggested that their curriculum be designed to stimulate and
227

SEVEN
assist that transition. I can now indicate briefly what that year's curriculum
might look like. The major curriculum segments of the Mythic curriculum
would remain in place, though their teaching would increaSingly conform
with the Romantic model. The smaller segments discussed in this section
would be introduced, so the Brief Lives segment, the focus on transcendent
qualities and on stimulating wonder, on presenting extremes of experience
and limits ofthe natural world, would each have a quarter-hour or so ofclass
time a couple of days each week. Throughout the curriculum the focus will
be on Mythic understanding being brought, as it were, within the constraints
of reality.
PHILOSOPHIC UNDERSTANDING
One implication of this theory is that the curriculum of the last two years or
so of secondary schooling and the undergraduate years at college or univer-
sity should have something in common. Having something in common im-
plies not that the last years of secondary schooling are simply a preparation
for college or university but rather that the characteristics ofPhilosophic un-
derstanding will be recognized in both curricula.
One evident hurdle to Philosophic understanding is the inability of so
many students to grasp the point or significance of abstract ideas. This is not
considered a problem, however, by those who see themselves as practical
people engaging in practical things; they tend not to place any value on ac-
quiring the abstract languages framed to deal with an order that underlies
surface diversity. When such people are powerful in government, education
departments, and legislatures, pressures mount for an increaSingly down-to-
earth, real-world curriculum. Abstractions and theories are seen as idle,
ivory-tower indulgences removed from the gritty reality of sensible life. Yet
inadequate development of Philosophic understanding leaves students not
only unaware of the practical power of abstract theoretic thinking but also
pretty well defenceless against any appealing Philosophic scheme, whether
it be Nazi or Marxist or modern variants thereof. Inadequately educated
minds are vulnerable to simplistic ideas; such vulnerability is improper in
the citizenry of a democracy.
A curriculum that embodies PhilosophiC prinCiples may well seem alien
to the needs and backgrounds of many students who have no plans for fur-
ther education. I realize that I focus on developing familiarity with ideas at a
time when many educational institutions, and interested others, including
parents and the students themselves, are looking to more deliberate voca-
228
tional preparation. While I might be able to get away with the claim that the

SOME
IMPLICATIONS
FOR THE
CURRICULUM
Romantic curriculum and teaching methods will be better able to deliver the
skills and knowledge the everyday working world requires, it would seem
implausible to suggest that intensive Philosophic study will better prepare
one for routine work. How then do I justify its place in the curriculum of
those going directly into jobs requiring only basic literacy and some com-
mon sense?
First, this curriculum is proposed not for the typical senior secondary
student of today but rather for the student who has already followed a sys-
tematic Mythic and Romantic program ofstudy. Second, effective citizenship
in a democracy requires some Philosophic understanding, even if such un-
derstanding is not necessary for the bulk oflower-paid service and manufac-
turing jobs; that is, education for democratic citizenship must involve more
than vocational preparation, while it nevertheless supports vocational prep-
aration (a point Dewey makes elaborately [1966]). Third, it may well be that
many students can develop only rudimentary Philosophic understanding in
the final years of secondary schooling; some is better than none, and educa-
tion need not stop with school. Fourth, the development of kinds of under-
standing is not restricted to advanced academic students. Finally, education
is not merely about preparing for jobs.
Even if these justifications are grudgingly allowed, the main obstacle to
Philosophic understanding for most students today is how few are able to
have the intensive contacts with Philosophic communities that are necessary
to stimulate, develop, and support it. Individual teachers will here and there
provide some hint of such a community, but the ethos of the typical second-
ary school is not animated by much in the way of Philosophic excitement.
And even for those students who do attend colleg~s and universities, a large
proportion seem motivated to do so because these are assumed to be the
routes to better jobs. Whatever Philosophic community may be alive in
those institutions is commonly avoided by such students, who are also in-
clined to complain that their studies are not directed precisely enough to the
practical aspects of the jobs they are aiming for and are "too theoretical."
I suspect, and hope, that a clearer sense of Philosophic understanding
might make it easier for us to create the appropriate kinds of communities,
both in senior secondary schools and in colleges and universities. The prob-
lem, I think, is that these institutions are not theoretical enough. Now, I real-
ize that is a dangerous way to put it. What I mean is that, at present, the
rather haphazard introduction of theoretical abstractions leaves students be-
wildered; they are inadequately prepared for theoretic thinking because they
have experienced no systematic Romantic understanding, and they conse-
quently fail to recognize how flexible theoretic abstractions can provide the
mind with the greatest and most powerful tool for practical activity. It is the
229

SEVEN
vague, half-grasped, undeveloped "theory" that is inert, enervating, and re-
moved from practical reality
The energetic combatants in colleges and universities debating the rele-
vance of the Western "canon" are reluctant to recognize that for most stu-
dents whatever result emerges is largely irrelevant. Most students, collecting
their C and B and even A grades, make so little contact with the animating
ideas that undergird their studies that the actual content hardly matters, ex-
cept for purely practical and vocational purposes. Pierre Bourdieu et al.
(1994) make a similar argument in Academic Discourse; while the academic
left and right bicker over whether the curriculum is too traditional or too
radical, they fail to recognize that most students absorb so little of academic
culture that the bickering is largely irrelevant. The malaise of higher educa-
tion is that so few students see the point of it. This scheme is designed to
make the point a bit clearer to those involved in the enterprise and to enable
them to design curricula and teach so that more students can more easily
come to see the point of Philosophic understanding.
I will begin with the transition year, dedicated to the stimulation and
early development of Philosophic understanding. This should be offered at
around age fifteen and will be somewhat distinct f~om the Romantic curricu-
lum that precedes it and the Philosophic that follows. In general, it will in-
volve a shift in focus away from the wonderful and toward the systematic~
students will come to recognize themselves as agents constrained by the
processes that determine the workings of the world. The Romantic quarter-
hour focus on transcendent qualities will shift over the year to a focus on
ideas. Whereas students earlier learned about some human quality through
dramatic events of people's lives, now the central focus becomes the nature
of the quality itself~ from seeing dramatic examples of courage or compas-
sion we turn to consider the nature of courage or compassion. We might
change the name of the segment from Human Qualities to Ideas to signify
this shift in focus.
Similarly, the segment devoted to BriefLives might be changed to People
and Their Theories. Whereas at the beginning of the year we might consider
Bentham and his remarkable career and achievements (not to mention his
mummified body moldering very gradually till the 1960s or 1970s in its dis-
play case in the University of London), by the end of the year we will con-
sider Bentham's theory of Utilitarianism. A quarter-hour account of Utilitar-
ianism might seem absurd, but the purpose is dramatic presentation of the
main features of the theory rather than systematic study of the theory itself.
Such segments should retain a tie to the theoreticians' lives, preserve some
sense of narrative, and capture the dramatic nature of a very wide range of
230
theories-social, physical, cosmological, weird, utopian, you name it. As

SOME
IMPLICATIONS
FOR THE
CURRICULUM
earlier, the teacher might present some theories, and students either individ-
ually or in small groups might research and present other theories, and other
teachers, parents, visitors, might describe or advocate yet other ideas. Some-
times, ofcourse, segments may revisit and discuss previously presented the-
ories or ideas, or to present countertheories or conflicting ideas. The aim is
to present theories clearly and dramatically so that they will'be accessible
even to the less intellectually gifted students.
The gradual move toward theoretic abstraction will characterize the
whole curriculum of the transition year. If students are to study transporta-
tion during this year, for example, we will use many Romantic principles in
organizing ,r,he topic, but we will also deliberately introduce a number of
very ge:neral ideas. If we are considering developments in transportation
over time, we might liken the earth to a kettle heating up, on which things
begiI),gradually to pick up speed and various forms of transportation, allied
to growing populations, enable more and more people to travel faster and
faster around the globe until they bubble and boil off into space. Well, not
the greatest idea, but an example ofhow even a simple theory-like simile can
introduce a dimension of general ordering to varied and complex phenom-
ena. Study offorms oflife might move to introduction of the Gaia hypothesis
-the idea that the whole earth should be considered a single liVing organ-
ism. This is the point in a student's life at which one might get the maximum
intellectual mileage out of such theories.
Teachers for the subsequent years can then assume that students will be
disposed to engage knowledge presented in this way, as well as in MythiC
and Romantic ways, and, that students will be open increasingly to Ironic
hints and doubts. The gradual move indicated above, from people and hu-
manized events to ideas and theories, is one that will be mirrored in all cur-
riculum areas; in some cases it will result in a change in focus, as in choice of
appropriate literature, but in others, such as science, both the topics and
their treatment will undergo a more radical shift through the year toward the
kind of curriculum I will describe below.
The most general Philosophic prinCiple that will serve as a criterion for
selection of curriculum content is the search for general laws that operate
"behind" phenomena. The Philosophic curriculum will be shaped by two
divergent impulses resulting from this prinCiple. One will lead to more
discipline-oriented content than in previous years because most theories
and general organizing schemes have been worked out in the particular dis-
ciplines; if that's what we want, there's where we'll find them. The second
will point toward general schemes that reach across diSCiplines, looking al-
ways for more general theories, complex causal networks and connections
among theories located in particular disciplines. We will want to respond
231

SEVEN
both to increased disciplinary inquiry and to an increased impulse to inter-
disciplinary inquiry.
One response to this latter impulse is to introduce a new and substan-
tial curriculum segment called something like Theory of Knowledge-to
choose a term used in the current International Baccalaureate program-or
Metaknowledge. It would be dedicated to very general, interdisciplinary in-
quiries, as well as metalevel questions about particular disciplines and their
theories. That is, it would encourage a level of reflexive inquiry about all the
other things the students are studying. This segment might be introduced
during the transition year but would playa more central role for the remain-
der of the secondary school years.
Metaknowledge would obviously overlap with the brief segments on
Ideas and Theories but it would differ from them in that it would involve a
systematic and detailed exploration of fewer ideas. The danger of calling it
simply Philosophy is that it would be influenced by university philosophy
courses that do not routinely explore the most general ideas in psychology,
SOCiology, cosmology, morality, anthropology, and connections among them.
The aim is not a careful analytic study of past philosophers' arguments-
though these may occasionally be relevant-but rather is to open up the
world of ideas at its most general and, dare I say, intoxicating level. This en-
gagement, after an adequate Romantic curriculum, should indeed carry with
it an excitement not common in schools today.
The training feature of this curriculum segment is one that has been long
established in French senior secondary schools, where one of the rites of
passage has involved a four-hour essay to be written on a philosophical ques-
tion~ some recent examples include: Is passion compatible with wisdom?
Can a work ofart be considered immoral? Does knowledge inhibit the imag-
ination? To be able to perform this daunting task, French students are
trained largely in rhetorical skills, such as how to construct and present an
argument about abstract ideas. They learn how to use such formal organiz-
ing techniques as thesis-antithesis-synthesis and others that should
help political discourse in a democracy. I am far from proposing wholesale
adoption of the French model, though it has obvious virtues-philosophy
students all remember the question on which they wrote their "bac-philo"
essay. The subject for Metaknowledge, though, would not be techniques for
dealing with abstract questions, which can stimulate a precocious virtuosity,
so much as chewing on the thesis ofgeneral arguments such as Karl Popper's
Open Society and its Enemies or Allan Bloom's The Closing ofthe American Mind
or Giambattista Vico's The New Science.
I should emphaSize again that the purpose of this kind of abstract study
232
is not to carry the mind away from concrete particularity-quite the oppo-

SOME
IMPLICATIONS
FOR THE
CURRICULUM
site. Recall Hayek's argument that abstractions are necessary for identifying
concrete particulars. These general thematic abstractions bring into recogni-
tion and under control a wider and more varied range of concrete facts,
events, and phenomena, and it will be in terms of these that most of the
discussion and inquiry goes forward.
The languages and literatures curriculum would focus on development
of appropriate Philosophic language, not simply in the sense of vocabulary
development but also in the elaboration of ideas through engagement of the
imagination. A writer who exemplifies this is Jorge Louis Borges, whose In-
qUisitions, Labyrinths, and other works show how a literature of ideas brings
sharply into recognition vivid concrete events and objects, whether Argenti-
nian gauchos or mythical lotteries that determine history Perhaps influ-
enced by their philosophic studies, French and German authors commonly
write fiction animated by ideas; one thinks immediately of Camus as an ex-
ample accessible to students.
The study ofliterature is in danger when its quarrelsome old antagonist,
philosophy, is around. The danger is that the literature will be displaced by
the ideas. Certainly this has tended to be common in universities, where
reading enjoyable books and talking about them seems so unlike anything
one could justify being paid for. In fact, upon its introduction in the univer-
sity curriculum in the nineteenth century, literature was promptly displaced
by a rigorous philology on the desks of the more hard-minded professors. It
is commonly displaced today by any number of ideological interests, by var-
ious forms of deconstruction and postmodernism, and by something gener-
ally and quaintly called "theory" The fashionable displacers will change and
literature will survive, but the call for a Philosophic understanding of litera-
ture might seem to support these kinds of displacement. No, what I am call-
ing for is a study of literature that helps to develop ideas, not a study of ideas
that helps to displace literature. "Great" literature will be useful because, as I
noted earlier with respect to Wordsworth, one dimension of greatness is the
involvement of all kinds of understanding. As students develop Philosophic
understanding, we might note a shift of focus from the drama and events of
Hamlet, to give another example-will Hamlet kill his uncle before the un-
cle kills him?-to the ideas and motives that animate Hamlet, or from the
tensions]ane Austen creates among her characters to the ways in which so-
cial conventions undergird the relationships. The shift involves the addition
of a dimension of understanding that can enrich one's experience of the text.
The way in which development of theoretic abstractions brings a wider
range of concrete particulars into sharp focus may be made evident also in
the history curriculum. Philosophic understanding will not only draw us to-
ward metahistories and the potent generalizations that bring some order and
233

SEVEN
meaning across as wide a range of events as possible, but it thereby returns
us to detailed events, facts, and concrete particulars that further support or
undermine generalizations and metahistorical schemes. When studying, say,
medieval k~ights and the crusades, we will constantly seek to set the details
in wider contexts. Elaborating these will require gathering further detailed
knowledge: about armaments and therefore metallurgy at the time, about
inheritance laws that survive into this period of increasing food production
and population growth and their influence on the prospects and behavior of
younger sons, or about the early development of capital accumulation. That
is, what the drive to form general historical schemes does is bring into mean-
ingful recognition a range of concrete detail that would have had little Ro-
mantic appeal. Whatever the historical topic being studied, the Philosophic
principle will direct us to the content that allows us to construct potent gen-
eralizations.
If we use the principle to select the most appropriate topics for the his-
tory curriculum, we will turn to those that already have been organized by
some strong and clear general scheme. Abook like Tawney's Religion and the
Rise of Capitalism (1926) might alert us to include such a topic for study,
beginning with Tawney's dramatic argument (that the individualism and
work ethic fostered by Calvinist Protestantism led to the development of an
efficient workforce, industrial growth, and capitalism in northern Europe).
The purpose is to stimulate a Philosophic understanding of history and
imaginative engagement with the details. The thesis of Tawney's book, and
of many like it, may be wrong in all kinds of ways, but they are right for
students at this age as stimulants to a further dimension of historical under-
standing. In building support or doubts about some general scheme, stu-
dents will have to engage in studying details and weighing their significance
in light of some more general meaning. We may regret the immense gener-
ality and drama of the theories to be focused on, particularly in the first
couple of years of Philosophic engagements, but these form the route to in-
creasingly precise and supportable claims, to seeingjust what the problems
are with these metahistorical schemes, to development of analytic rigor in
research, and to making more sophisticated sense of history. To try to skip
what some academic historians consider as a regrettable kind of historical
study is to neglect development of a level of historical understanding that
leads to more general meaning than that x or y happened.
Through college and university years, the history curriculum will grad-
ually focus on increaSingly particular topics, though students will persis-
tently be challenged to form, defend, and undermine general schemes. None
of this leads to prescribing particular eras or arenas of history. The main su-
234
perficial difference from typical history curricula today might be the choice

SOt\lE IMPLICATIONS
FOR THE
CURRICULUM
of which general ideological schemes or metahistories are prominent. A seg-
ment of the history curriculum might be devoted to ongoing discussion
about general trends in history Are we studying a Thucydidean tragic pro-
cess or an organic rise and fall of civilizations? Are we driven by economic
forces working themselves out through class or national competition, or
have we come to "the end of history"? Does history consist ofjust one damn
thing after another? Are the patterns we see our own constructions in hind-
sight or are they reflected from historical events themselves?
Science is the "natural" Philosophic subject. Science grew in the histori-
cal program of developing Philosophic understanding and has remained its
ideal embodiment, dedicated to capturing the nature of things in a theoretic
language. But given the pedagogical rule that universal dullness buries all,
one of the peculiarities of the science curriculum and teaching when stu-
dents are in their the late teens is the common rejection of theoretic excite-
ment in favor of the accumulation of facts. This is particularly evident in
universities, where the first couple of years of most science programs are
taken up with cramming basic knowledge seen as prerequisite to approach-
ing the realm of general and disputed theories. The more general and spec-
ulative theories in any discipline are treated like an unconventional and
disreputable relation who, even though the children find her exciting and
entertaining, must be kept hidden from view, her very existence denied as
long as possible. So the main pedagogical engine for engaging the late teen-
ager with science is shut away, and allowed to peek out only later when the
conventionalized and dulled students who remain may be assumed to be
inoculated against her wiles. A common result is that the more imaginative
students, who might enormously enjoy scientific study and contribute sig-
nificantly to the enterprise, are disenchanted and repelled.
Well, that's maybe a too jaundiced view, but it is one supported too com-
monly by the programs I have seen and by undergraduate students who say
they are waiting for all the details to make sense but who for now must con-
tinue to cram in the details. Perhaps stimulated, too, by memories of a
Physics teacher who would carefully steer us away from anything interesting
to the class, with a pursed-lipped smile that suggested these were matters to
be approached by initiates only after years ofgrim toil. So the dramatic, spec-
ulative, and contentious theories will be up-front in the early years of our
Philosophic science curriculum. Investigation of the contentious questions
will carry the students to the detailed studies that are currently presented in
a contextless fashion.
Similarly in the social sciences, the first university courses in psychol-
ogy, sociology, and anthropology are not the forums for getting the basic
tools and facts in place; rather, they provide the opportunity to deal with the
235

SEVEN
most general theoretical disputes in those disciplines. Psychology programs
often begin by teaching about human behavior in a way that presupposes the
appropriateness of the cognitive science program or, a little while ago, the
behaviorist program. I suggest, on the contrary, that raising the problems
with these programs provides the way in to the study ofthe psyche. What are
the competing theories about how to understand the psyche, or society, or
human behavior? What evidence supports these different theories? How can
one assess this evidence? What further information would help one theory
or another?
These comments are obviously not designed to fill out a detailed curric-
ulum but to show how the characterization of Philosophic understanding
yields principles that direct us to one kind of curriculum rather than an-
other. For the natural and social sciences, they point toward a curriculum
that will begin with the most general and contentious theories and work
from them to expose in a meaningful way a range of new concrete particu-
lars. As the years go by, we can assume that students will have the range of
theoretical understanding well developed so that new, detailed content can
be introduced without undue concern about its being located theoretically
Students will absorb content into increasingly sophisticated theoretical posi-
tions or will see it as anomalous and, as such, particularly valuable in requir-
ing adjustments to accepted theories and in stimulating the development of
Ironic understanding.
Our Philosophic curriculum, then, will start from the most general the-
oretic dimension ofany area ofstudy-whether that be molecular biology or
selling real estate. The engine of theoretic understanding is fueled by the in-
teraction between general theory and the range of particulars it opens up-
the facts, events, and experiments that support or challenge it. The product
of Philosophic understanding in any area is flexibility and power in dealing
with particulars, and this applies to real estate no less than to molecular
biology.
Philosophic understanding has been discussed here largely in utilitarian
terms, but as with each of these kinds of understanding, it has what is per-
haps best described as a spiritual dimension. The distance is usually quite
large between the interests of the paymasters of the educational system and
the spiritual culture that education at its best cultivates. The problems this
distance creates for educators, insofar as the Philosophic curriculum is con-
cerned, is well put by George Elder Davie: "a consumer society ... is inter-
ested in science only for its material fruits, and. . .has neither patience with,
nor understanding of, the spiritual activity responsible in the last resort for
the thing which gives rise to the useful inventions, Le. the disinterested
236
research and the detached play ofmind which criticizes ideas" (1986, p. 87).

SOME
IMPLICATIONS
FOR THE
CURRICULUM
Organizing curricula and teaching for examinations, and the everyday busi-
ness of school, college and university work, can cause us to neglect this
spiritual aim no less than can the narrow interests of a consumer society
Disinterested study and the detached play of mind are fruits of PhilosophiC
understanding and of the engagement with theoretic abstractions. They may
not be absolutes, and we may not expect students to be absolutely disin-
terested and detached, but we can encourage greater or less disinterest and
detachment in our choice of curriculum and in the manner of teaching;
greater seems better.
It may seem odd to touch on university curricula without engaging the
virulent arguments about the "Western canon." I am suggesting that ques-
tions like these are exactly what the curriculum should include. In order to
ass~ss the merits of the arguments, students will have to sample the literature
of the Western canon in detail and consider other literatures as well-this
goes for the African-American or Asian-British student no less than Jor the
Anglo-Saxon. The energy stimulated by the general argument is what fuels
pursuit of relevant details and careful reading.
I can hardly pretend that the canon Kulturkampf is irrelevant to the
Philosophic curriculum. In general, it seems to me inevitable, ifone wants to
develop PhilosophiC and Ironic understanding, that the inquiries and their
products that generated these kinds of understanding in the first place form
a significant part of the curriculum, which means that the Western tradition
and its diSCiplines are inescapable. Now, clearly, there are many ways of be-
ing, and becoming, educated, and the neoconservative insistence on replica-
tion of a traditional canon is, in terms of the arguments in this book so far,
unjustifiably narrow. But radical assertions of the irrelevance of the Western
canon to adequate education are also, in terms of my argument, unjustifiably
arbitrary
CONCLUSION
Critics of the presently dominant curriculum often hark back to a better
past-presumably the one that produced them or their own greatly admired
teachers. Gary Wills, a conservative Americanjournalist, notes with anguish
and something like anger or despair the rise of such subjects as women's
studies and black studies, and points out that at African-American univer-
sities, such as Fisk in Nashville, the curriculum at the beginning of the twen-
tieth century included Tacitus and Horace in Latin, and Sophocles and the
Bible in Greek. He wonders how it can be considered progress to change
237

238
SEVEN
from this to current vogues like "ecological ethics" and other fashionable
discipline-less topics.
Gerald Graffhas investigated what the old classical curriculum so prized
by conservatives actually involved. Students studied only "a small portion of
any text, dwelling in class on minutiae of pronunciation, etymology, moods
and tenses, and points ofclassical philology" (1987, p. 28). He evokes many
witnesses to the mindlessness of the classics as usually taught. It is unfortu-
nate that the classics curriculum was justified in terms of faculty psychology,
Latin and Greek being valued as hard subjects because hard intellectual
work was supposed to develop faculties of the mind much as hard exercise
developed muscles of the body. We might recall Hazlitt's comment again:
"Anyone who has passed through the regular gradations ofa classical educa-
tion, and is not made a fool by it, may consider himself as having had a very
narrow escape" (1951, p. 147).
But while it might seem easy to scoff at the educational value of Latin
and Greek for a microtechnologized world awash with drugs and plagued by
violence, even the most radical cannot avoid a nagging doubt that the pro-
gressivist program that made the curriculum increasingly "relevant" to stu-
dents' lives has been profoundly unsatisfactory. In fact, the more urgently
"relevant" the curriculum has been made, the more generally clueless seem
its products.
What I am taking from the classical curriculum is the recognition that,
in some Significant degree, knowledge forms the mind, but I am arguing that
it does not do so in the simplistic way assumed by traditionalist educational
thinkers who draw on Plato. From the more radical curriculum, I am taking
the recognition that the mind is also formed by the intellectual procedures
developed in the process of learning. We cannot, however, rely on some de-
velopmental regularities to support this process as assumed by progressivist
and radical educational thinkers who draw on Rousseau. The curriculum I
have outlined here draws on principles derived from the distinctive kinds of
understanding. It leads students by a somewhat unconventional route to,
what seems to me, a more abundantly educated life.

chapter8
Some Implications
for Teaching
INTRODUCTION
If education is reconceived as the process of developing each of these kinds
of understanding as abundantly as possible, how should we reconceive the
role of the teacher and the practice of teaching to accord with this new con-
ception?
Each of the three old educational ideas considered in the first chapter
implies a somewhat different sense of the proper role of the teacher and of
the practice of teaching. Inherited from the socializing tradition is the sense
of the teacher as an initiator and role model whose primary responsibility is
to gUide the students into the norms, values, skills, and knowledge that will
enable them to approximate the ideal ofadult citizenship. Inherited from the
Platonic tradition is the sense of the teacher as an authority in some area of
disciplined knowledge whose primary responsibility is to instruct and in-
spire students to achieve intellectual mastery with regard to that privileged
knowledge. Inherited from the Rousseauian tradition is the sense of the
teacher as a solicitous facilitator whose primary responsibility is to support
each student's individual development. The general conception of the
teacher's proper role today is made up ofa mixture ofthese three overlapping
senses, the mix commonly varying depending on whether primary, inter-
mediate, or secondary students are in mind. The mix will also vary, ofcourse,
depending on the commitment of the conceiver to one or another of those
three traditions. As with the general conception of education from which
they are derived, there are problems with each of these three senses sepa-
239

EIGHT
rately, and they do not fit well together. Trying to implement all of them in
some degree makes for a very tough and frustratingjob.
If one considers teaching as primarily responsible for evoking, stimulat-
ing' and developing kinds ofunderstanding, how does this sense of teaching
differ from the three above? That is what I will try to convey in this chapter.
The somewhat different kinds of understanding also imply differences of
their own for teaching~ trying primarily to develop Mythic understanding,
for example, will involve one in some different approaches, emphases, and
activities than if one is trying primarily to develop Philosophic or any other
kind of understanding. I will, then, discuss teaching in five sections, focus-
ing on each of the kinds of understanding in turn.
As formal education has been a prominent concern in this book, I will
again emphasize Mythic, Romantic, and Philosophic teaching, and will con-
sider these from the point of view of teachers in typical educational institu-
tions. I will assume that the implications mainly to be teased out here are
those that apply to an adult who has responsibility for educating thirty chil-
dren in a class. Except for the first short section on Somatic understanding, I
will deal only briefly with those implications that might be drawn from the
theory for the parent concerned with educating one or a few children,
though I trust a number of implications will be fairly clear. I will also touch
only briefly on implications for continuing and elaborating one's own educa-
tion in the various kinds ofunderstanding, though, again, I trust that a num-
ber of these will be clear.
The trick here, then, is to move from the level of theory to principles for
teaching and from there to the level of practical technique. In each of the
three central sections I will begin with the technique, constructing a plan-
ning framework for teaching from the characteristics of each kind of under-
standing proposed by the theory. I will then discuss the principles that
undergird the framework, and give an example ofhow the framework can be
applied to some particular topic. This chapter is not intended to be an exten-
sive exploration of the theory's implications for teaching practice, but rather
a demonstration that it does have clear and distinctive practical implications.
One general principle is that the best kind of teaching will always be
"outward looking." That is, if we bear in mind that these kinds of under-
standing are not discrete stages but coalesce in a significant degree, then,
while primarily teaching to develop, say, MythiC understanding, we should
try also to include some stimulus to Romantic, and even Philosophic and
Ironic, understanding. For example, in chapter 7 I discussed the value of
humor in the development of language and Mythic intellectual tools. I drew
on some of the jokes Lewis Carroll uses in the Alice books. These are jokes
240
with clear Mythic appeal, but they also have Romantic, Philosophic, and

SOME
IMPLICATIONS
FOR TEACHING
Ironic resonances. These "outward" resonances-the dimensions of mean-
ing below the surface-make them more educationally valuable than other
equally funny but "dimensionless" jokes. I am not suggesting that the more
constrained focus on developing a particular kind ofunderstanding is inade-
quate, but simply that this general principle recommends that the teacher be
alert to introduce resonances ofsubsequent kinds ofunderstanding in teach-
ing any topic.
This general principle might be clarified by relating it to another of
Vygotsky's rich ideas: that of "zones of proximal development" (Vygotsky,
1978, pp. 84-91). Vygotsky distinguishes between the developmental level
a student seems to be at measured by the tasks the student can successfully
perform alone, and the developmental level that is evident when the student
performs tasks with the assistance of others. The zone between these two
measures, Vygotsky argues, needs to be taken into account when assessing
students' development, and teachers should focus much oftheir effort in this
zone so that students' learning can draw forward their development. The
"outward looking" teaching that is implied by the theory in this book shares
with Vygotsky's idea the importance of engaging students in intellectual ac-
tivity in their zones of proximal development. My principle differs, however,
in two ways: first, the image of the zone is not so much a distance on a linear
scale as a space for expansion in all directions outward from a central node~
second, I call for a deliberate teaching effort to extend the zone, even if only
sporadically and tenuously, into the most advanced kinds of understanding.
Students may grasp only the haziest hint of the more distant resonances set
off by such teaching, but that does not matter. Its purpose is to create adi-
mension toward which the student's understanding may grasp. Ah, these in-
adequate spatial metaphors.
SOMATIC UNDERSTANDING
The infant's development of Somatic understanding largely recapitulates
evolutionary adaptations, but, of course, this recapitulation, to be most ade-
quately achieved, needs to be supported by parents and other caregivers.
The significant difference between the modern infant's recapitulation and
the historical evolutionary adaptations is that we now have a sense of the
direction in which we want the infant to develop intellectually It may just
have been a set ofcultural contingencies that led to high literate irony, but in
interacting with the infant we will attend selectively to stimulate and support
the development of capacities that will optimally prepare the infant for an
Ironic destiny This observation needs the immediate qualifier that we must
241

EIGHT
not attend to literacy-directed developments to the exclusion of the range of
capacities proper to Somatic understanding. Abalance is to be sought, rather
than a shallow and febrile precocity.
Somatic understanding primarily results from the infant's mind discov-
ering its body. In the process, the infant learns to use the body to carry out his
or her purposes~reciprocally, the infant discovers through the activity of the
body and of the world's responses to its actions what range of purposes can
be formed and carried out, and, relatedly again, discovers the body as a
source of purposes. This Somatic exploration sets the foundational develop-
ment of understanding, particularly by building the framework of space,
time, causality, effort and response, the rhythms of hunger and satiety, plea-
sure and pain, and so on. Prominent, too, is the discovery of one's social
nature through the patterns of communication, care, and affection that reca-
pitulate evolutionary adaptations and become shaped into particular cul-
tural patterns. These foundations of all future understanding are in
significant part laid in activities commonly referred to as play. Play has some-
times been described as a rehearsal, preparing for real and serious learning
later on, but it might better be seen as the most serious learning in which we
engage, on whose success all later learning depends. (Huizinga, in Homo
Ludens [1949], represents civilization as play prolonged into adult life.) This
is not a call to bring earnest pedagogies to bear on infants' play~ my point
simply reflects an ironic recognition of the proper association between the
serious and the playful in place of the common confusion of the serious with
the grim.
Somatic understanding develops most typically and abundantly till
about two and a half years, at which time it cedes some of its energy to
Mythic developments. But Somatic understanding does not properly cease
to develop at that point. While it diminishes after the early years, though
perhaps experiencing a resurgence in puberty, it can be deliberately ex-
tended in small ways throughout life. The fifty-five-year-old who learns to
somersault when diving from a low springboard into a pool (see your physi-
otherapist before, or after, attempting this), or, less dramatically, decides to
begin using his or her nondominant hand for eating, brushing teeth, clean-
ing, occasional writing, etc., or learns at last to whistle melifluously will con-
tinue to extend Somatic understanding in some degree.
Let me indicate briefly how one might support Somatic development
while attending to the direction of subsequent kinds of understanding.
"Rhythm is a uniquely human attribute~ no other creature spontaneously
tracks and imitates rhythms in the way humans do, without training" (Don-
242
aId, 1991, p. 186). Rhythms in sound are fundamental to language use, and

SOME IMPLICATIONS FOR TEACHING
some of the more subtle rhythms, even to the time taken in breathing in and
out, are intricately involved in the grammar of human languages. We are
evolutionarily programmed for language, and the grammars of all human
languages have much in common, so much, indeed, that a visiting alien
would conclude we all speak dialects of a basic Earthspeak (Pinker, 1994).
Very early, we begin to track the rhythms of our local speech community,
attending to them even in the womb. So, while learning a language is sup-
ported by predispositions, parents can enrich the process by frequent and
varied vocal interactions with infants. Everyday grammatical speech can
playa prominent part in such interactions, but so can rhythmic language-
play, songs, clicks, squeaks, whistles, and occasional harmonizing with the
infant's own sounds. Counting is another rhythmic use of language that par-
ents can use in creating rituals, like counting the steps going upstairs or re-
moving toys from a box. The infant follows the rhythmic sounds related to
certain actions, preparing already for later consciousness of abstractions.
The fascination of people like Victor, "the wild boy of Aveyron" (ltard,
1962; Lane, 1976), or "feral children" who spend their early years cut off
from language-using environments, lies in part in our wonder at what hu-
man consciousness is like without being shaped by language. Whatever in-
tellectual tools feral children develop, they do not include the post-Somatic
set discussed in this book, except perhaps in the most embryonic way. In
contrast, it would seem that the richer the linguistic environment in which
Somatic understanding develops, the better the young mind is prepared for
the further kinds of understanding available in high literate cultures. This
early emphasis on the rhythms of language should not displace energetic
exploration of the body and its purposes, nor is it aimed at precocious ver-
balization approximating adult norms as early as possible. Given the direc-
tion in which we are particularly concerned to stimulate development, an
environment that is rich and varied in the sound~ humans make to build
meanings is educationally important.
As rhythm is to the ear, so pattern is to the eye. The two interact, of
course, but "visual thinking is now seen as largely autonomous from lan-
guage" (Arnheim, 1974, p. 167). By the age of two months, the infant will
shift its focus of visual attention to follow that of an adult, looking across a
room, for example, in the direction the adult is looking (Scaife and Bruner,
1975; Churcher and Scaife, 1982).This indicates something ofhow early we
recognize other people's distinct deployment ofvision. The one-year-old can
begin with colored markers on paper or card, leaving a record of bodily
movement. A parent can begin to introduce patterns, letting the infant ex-
plore shapes and colors and whatever patterns can be constructed. All man-
243

EIGHT
ner of gesturing and pointing games can enlarge the infant's grasp of how to
coordinate bodily movement and vision to communicate and interpret
meaning.
The parent can provide stimuli as rich as possible for the infant's explo-
ration of the body, its possibilities and purposes. Coordination of the senses
into patterned behavior can be encouraged by relating, say, rhythms of
sound with bodily movements, beginning with moving arms to a song and
leading to dance, or by introducing rituals-regularities of behavior that
have significance and impose meaningful patterns on time.
I concluded the earlier discussion ofIronic understanding by emphasiz-
ing that it is grounded in Somatic understanding, that all our understanding
is ultimately rooted in our material being. Our body, then, is where we start
from in our exploration of the world and experience. We begin, as it were, by
our minds expanding throughout our bodies and then from our bodies out
into the world. Later teaching success, therefore, should be sought not so
much in getting knowledge into the student's mind but rather in enabling
the student's mind to expand into the knowledge. This is perhaps a trite way
of condensing the point, but teachers who recognize that difference can
transform their practice. Let us go on to consider how.
MYTHIC UNDERSTANDING
This section focuses on how teachers of children from preschool years to
about age eight can shape and present knowledge so that it is meaningful
and imaginatively engaging and so that it stimulates and develops Mythic
understanding. I will begin with the set of intellectual tools discussed in
chapter 2-such as abstract and affective binary opposites, metaphor, im-
ages, and story-structuring and draw from these some principles for teach-
ing. From these principles I will then construct a framework that could be
used to plan a lesson or set of lessons on a topic. The framework is designed
as a set of questions whose answers should produce an effective lesson or
unit plan. I will exemplify the use of this framework in planning some les-
sons on "The Properties of the Air," which a local curriculum recommends as
an appropriate science topic for the first years of schooling.
I will start with the struts of the framework and briefly discuss the prin-
ciples on which they rest, and then work through the example. Organizing
the topic in this way will, no doubt, be more formal than a parent's thinking
244
about how to explain something to a child, and perhaps more formal than

SOME IMPLICATIONS FOR TEACHING
many experienced teachers might prefer, but the underlying prinCiples can
be drawn out and used more informally and casually by those who wish.
Mythic Planning Framework
1. Identifying Importance
What is important about this topic? What is affectively engaging about it?
The difficult part here, or at least the unfamiliar part for many teachers, is the
requirement that one identify what one finds moving about any given topic
oneself. We are not so much to think about the topic as to dwell on it with
our emotions alert. Commonly, when we think about what children will find
interesting, we can fall into a patronizing view in which we neglect what is
emotionally important about the topic for us. Remember that Mythic under-
standing is not something we leave behind as we grow older; it remains
properly a part of our understanding. So when we locate something with a
significant affective tug for ourselves, we have a good starting point from
which to teach the topic to children. We do not, after all, want to introduce
trivial features of the topic to them; the most important features will better
engage their imaginations and develop their Mythic understanding of their
world. (By going for what we find truly important about a topic, we can at
least counter the insidious trivialization ofchildhood and ofearly childhood
education, in which a sanitized and prettified conception of the world and
human experience is considered all that children can and should under-
stand.) This first step is the hardest of the planning process, but if it is done
well, the rest will follow relatively easily
How can we apply this principle to the topic of"Properties of the Air" for
a class of six-year-olds? What is important about the air we breathe and walk
through unhindered. The point is not to find some "correct" answer or even
the best answer, but to find something that has some affective charge for you
and is a good answer. That the air sustains our lives is, of course, an obvious
point of importance to us, but, put that way, we are reaching a rather Simple
logical conclusion, not locating an affective core. Ifwe were to take a "chunk"
ofair, such as that which fills the classroom, what have we got? The air is full
of noises, somehow, of waves and particles, smells, living things, and de-
cayed flakes of skin. If we could just change the scale of things or what the
eyes can see, instead ofempty, featureless air we could show children that the
air is full of wonders with seemingly magical properties. In the contrast be-
tween its apparent emptiness and its actual fullness ofwonders we can locate
an affective charge that will provide us with our starting point.
245

EIGHT
2.
Finding Binary Opposites
What binary concepts best capture the affective importance of the topic?
This is usually easier to answer than the previous question, though it may
take a little practice to become fluent in finding appropriate oppositions. Bi-
naries are easy to find because they should follow fairly directly from the
reflection on what is affectively important about the topic. The trick here is
to locate something dramatic inherent in the topic. Not drama in the sense of
blood and gore, but a sense of tension, of contrasting perspectives perhaps,
that can be opened up and become immediately accessible to children. This
principle follows from the earlier theoretical discussion about children's in-
telligence and understanding being different from adults' primarily in terms
of the intellectual tools being used. So this principle further disturbs the
common conception of children's thinking as simple, concrete, and, as a re-
sult, trivial. Instead, the theoretical discussion emphasizes a conception of
children's thinking as characterized by complexity, by powerful affective and
abstract concepts, and by a likeness to adult thinking with regard to the in-
tellectual tools of Mythic understanding. The search for the binary concepts
should not be a search "out there" for logical divisions one can make in the
topic but should, rather, continue the internal search of the teacher's own
emotional organization of the topic.
In the case of our example, the initial feeling about what was important
leads us fairly easily to the binary set empty/full, "empty" here carrying the
affective sense of dull, without interest, an undifferentiated lack, an absence
of content in the air, and "full" carrying affective associations with richness,
variety, and magical plenitude.
3.
Organizing the Content into a Story Form
3.1
FIRST TEACHING EVENT
What content most dramatically embodies the binary concepts, in order to
prOVide access to the topic? What image best captures that content and its
dramatic contrast?
We now need to clothe our conclusions to the previous stages of the frame-
work in the content of our topic. The first part of story-shaping the content
of our topic involves locating some dramatic incident, character, or idea that
provides immediate access to the topic by making viVidly clear at the begin-
ning some aspect of its basic affective meaning. This story-shaping does not
require us to find some fictional story to convey the point of the lesson. I
mean by "story" what the newspaper editor means when she or he asks
246
"What's the story on this?" We want to know its affective meaning within a

SOME IMPLICATION
FOR TEACHING
narrative context that orients our understanding to the content-whether it
is a "story" involving incidents and people, or a scientific discovery, or a nat-
ural phenomenon.
Our lesson or unit will be a narrative in a causal sequence, beginning
with a conflict or problem that is elaborated or complicated in the middle
and concluding with some resolution of the initial conflict or problem. Mak-
ing the lesson or unit a story rather than a logically structured presentation of
knowledge implies that the meaning to be conveyed has an affective compo-
nent. Our first teaching event follows from the teacher asking not what are
his or her objectives but rather what is the dramatic true story to be told-be
it about earthworms, the weather, decimalization, or punctuation. Obvi-
ously this does not exclude the pOSSibility of using a fictional story to intro-
duce our topic, if that satisfies the requirements of this principle, but my
concern here is with" teaching academic content using some story ingre-
dients rather than telling stories about academic content.
We might begin teaching about properties of the air by switching on a
radio in one corner of the room and listening for a moment to voices.
Then, turning the radio off, the teacher could carry it to another part of the
classroom, change the channel, and switch it on again, listening for a few
moments to music. How do the music and voices get into the radio? Where
do they come from? A number of the children will likely have asked their
parents such questions, and the teacher can begin by harvesting and clari-
fying the answers. Then the teacher might ask, what does the air in the
room look like to the radio that can only see radio waves? The teacher at
this point might switch on the radio again and move it around while
changing from channel to channel. The air must be full of different radio
waves. To the "eye" of the radio, the walls of the room are not very
significant-
it can "see" through them. Alternatively, if conditions make it
easy, the teacher can darken the room and shine a powerful flashlight or al-
Iowa beam of sunlight to enter, gleaming on the endless dust particles in
the room. They seem to be constantly in drifting motion, and while they
are usually invisible, they seem to fill the air. What are they made of? Well,
60 percent of the dust in a typical classroom is made up of decayed flakes
of human skin. (We commune with each other more fundamentally than
we sometimes realize.) The teacher might ask the students where they
think flies defecate, and wonder what that was that just floated by. In a few
minutes, the empty air can be seen to be full of a huge variety of particles of
things that make up the undifferentiated dust. In both cases we underline
the contrast between the assumed emptiness of the air and its actual reple-
tion with varied, complex, and wonderful things.
247

EIGHT
3.2
STRUCTURING THE BODY OF THE LESSON OR UNIT
What content best articulates the topic into a clear story form?
This section involves organizing the bulk of the content. Having sorted out
our organizing principles above, this should be relatively straightforward.
Our sense, of what is affectively important and our binary concepts become
the criteria for deciding what content about the topic should be included.
The other criterion that will work with these is derived from a central prin-
ciple of good storytelling. Fictional stories, if they are to be effective and
engaging, include nothing that is not relevant to working out the conflict
or problem introduced at the beginning. The state of the weather or a char-
acter's eye color or clothing are mentioned only if they contribute in some
way to building the affective meaning of the story. To the degree that irrele-
vant material is included, the story becomes flaccid and interest is dissi-
pated. Describing the eye color and clothing of every character, for
example, would quickly bog most stories down: each character is no doubt
clothed and has eyes of some color, but the criterion that determines
whether these should be mentioned comes from whether they advance the
plot in some way. If a novelist leaves off developing the plot when the cen-
tral characters meet for the denouement in a disused factory and begins to
describe what the factory produced, where its raw materials came from,
what the workers were like and what tasks they performed, the reader's in-
terest will qUickly wane. Similarly, in building our story-form lesson or
unit we must use as a criterion of selecting for content whatever is relevant
to elaborating and developing the binary concepts set up by our beginning;
they are to provide the basic and clear structure. So we will not include ev-
erything of relevance to the topic; "relevance" in a story-form lesson is de-
termined by the binary concepts that catch what is affectively important
about the topic.
If the teacher thinks of the lesson or unit as more like telling a good story
than conveying a body of information, then the need to focus on how to tell
the story as crisply and vividly as possible comes to the fore rather than the
attempt to meet sets ofknowledge, skills, and attitude objectives. If the story
is told well, such objectives will be met in a more meaningful context. I
should perhaps add that when I mention telling a story, this does not mean
simply that the teacher will be unvaryingly talking at the student~. Trips to
museums, interviewing people in the community, building models, and so
on can all be tied into the developing storyline. What makes the lesson or
complex unit story-structured is not some fictional component but its narra-
tive development of the central binary concepts. This makes it clear why it
248
matters to identify a centrally important aspect of the topic in the beginning

SOME IMPLICATIONS
FOR TEACHING
and find sturdy binary concepts that bring out a conflict or problem: every-
thing in the lesson or unit is going to be tied precisely to them.
How, then, will we story-structure our lessons on the properties of the
air? Well, I think that is already clear. We can deal with a range of properties
following the pattern ofthe introductory teaching event. We can find ways to
help the students form images of other entities that fill the air of the class-
room, focusing on, say, microbial life, gases, subatomic particles from the
sun and from outside our solar system, pollutants, pollens, and perhaps
even an exploration of the history of the chunk of air currently in the class-
room from earliest times to the present.
4.
Conclusion
What is the best way of resolVing the conflict inherent in the binary
concepts? What degree of mediation is it appropriate to seek? How
appropriate is it to make the binary concepts explicit?
As with any story, the conclusion has to resolve or satisfy something set up in
the beginning. In the case of story-form teaching, a primary focus for the
concluding teaching activities will be on the binary concepts that have given
structure to our lesson or unit. Sometimes the conclusion can be used to
mediate the binary set, or, if one concept has been emphasized at the ex-
pense ofanother, the conclusion can involve switching the perspective to the
neglected concept. If we bear in mind the general theoretical observation
that educational development proceeds by means of the mind becoming
more explicitly aware ofwhat earlier had been implicit structural features of
thinking, it will always be appropriate to reflect on whether and to what de-
gree children should be aware of the binary concepts that have given shape
to their exploration ofa topic. One might retell in brief the narrative that has
been followed, exposing its structural features.
The conclusion, then, is not simply where we stop because we have cov-
ered the reqUired material; rather, it needs to have, like the ending of a good
story, a quality such as]ames]oyce describes as an "epiphany"-in the case
of our teaching, that means revelation of something about the topic that
takes one's understanding further, reveals some deeper meaning, perhaps a
mystery, that cannot easily be conveyed in the body of the lesson or unit. I
recognize that this might seem to border on the exotic, or even to be over the
border, but it punctuates what might otherwise be routine teaching with
moments of rich intensity. One way of achieving such intensity might be to
combine this search with the push toward some Romantic, Philosophic, or
Ironic understanding.
So how might we conclude our exploration of the air? In this case the
249

EIGHT
empty/full binary concepts will have been quite close to the surface, if not
explicit, through the unit. But the dimension of richness and wonder in the
"fullness" of the air might usefully be focused on. Ask the children to sit still
and close their eyes and imagine themselves shrinking and shrinking, like
Alice in Wonderland. And when they have become as small as a mote, the
teacher can describe the senses that will allow them to "see" and feel the air in
their classroom quite differently. Either the teacher can prepare a "gUided
discovery" tour around the huge viruses and bacteria, the swirling winds
that carry the varied and multicolored boulders of dust around, the particles
flashing by, the waves of radiation from light sources, fly feces, heat from
bodies, radio waves, and so on, or, alternatively, the children can describe
what they can "see" after some preparation and rehearsal. If time has been
spent in groups working to represent the various properties of the air, the
conclusion of the unit could be the celebrous presentation of each group's
"property"-bacteria, dust, gases, pollutants-to the class. The point of
such an exercise is to emphasize that this amazing wonderland ofunfamiliar
thronging objects, life forms, and forces is the very classroom they are sitting
in~ unlike Alice's, it is a real wonderland.
5"
Evaluation
How can one know whether the topic has been understood, its importance
grasped, and the content learned?
Evaluation in this framework will focus on seeking evidence for the child's
MythiC understanding of the topic. We will be looking for such things as
affective engagement, imaginative involvement, and the deployment of the
intellectual tools that constitute Mythic understanding. How does one mea-
sure these? Most experienced teachers would have little difficulty in most
cases identifying which students experience these at varying degrees of in-
tensity. It might be useful to develop an instrument, perhaps a Simple check-
list, that would help teachers to attend to the behaviors and qualities of
engagement that would give some evidence ofstudents' MythiC understand-
ing. The instrument might alert teachers to such things as the amount of
continuous time a child spends engaged in a project, the kinds of questions
and comments made, the originality of the work and its evidence of meta-
phoric connections, the degree of commitment to a project, the recognition
of the role of the binary structuring of the unit and use of it in their own
work, competence and confidence in written, oral, and pictorial presenta-
tions, and the vividness, originality, and relevance ofimages used in oral lan-
guage, in writing, and in pictorial displays. More traditional forms of
250
evaluation and the newer qualitative procedures can be used, of course,

SOME IMPLICATIONS FOR TEACHING
to give evidence of the degree and extent of children's knowledge of the
content.
In the case of our unit on properties of the air, the teacher might observe
the ways in which children reflect their understanding through their role-
playing, discussions, and their final presentations; assess the degree of un-
derstanding by their implicit or explicit deployment of the dominant binary
concepts and their recognition ofthe richness ofthe "full" air; their contribu-
tions to the group project and their ability to cooperate in the process of
jointly conceiving their aim; originality in their written, oral, and pictorial
presentations; imaginative involvement and affective engagement in roles, in
the group project, and in the final presentation; a simple test ofknowledge of
the properties of the air. All but the last of these can be conducted during the
normal teaching/learning process of the unit.
The example given above is a sketch of a plan that might be used by a
single teacher presenting a traditional subject area to a class of students. I
chose this kind of example because this remains, according to extensive sur-
veys (Goodlad, 1984), the most common style of teaching. That is, this ex-
ample, and the others that will follow, do not reflect curriculum preferences,
but are common topics taught routinely at these ages and help to clarify
some principles of this theory for teaching. Before moving on, though, I
would like to make two points. First, I should acknowledge that the most
urgent affective issue concerning properties of the air these days might be its
quality and its ability to suspend and distribute pollutants of varied kinds.
One might, therefore, organize the unit on a pure/polluted binary set, or,
more dramatically yet, on a life/death structure. These choices would, in
turn, influence the content selected and the kind of story one would tell
about the air.
Second, I should describe briefly the way this framework has been used
by teachers who have worked most intensively with it. Much the same has
occurred with the other frameworks, to be described in the rest of this chap-
ter, so I will make this point just once here, though it refers equally to the
following kinds of understanding, too.
The principles and framework seem to incline teachers to cooperate in
designing integrated units of study lasting from a month or so to a whole
term or semester. Between two or three to as many as seven or eight teachers
plan together developing a "story" that may involve three or more classes of
students. All the prescribed curriculum content will be accommodated
within the overarching story structure.
In Melbourne, for example, a group of teachers prepared a term-long
unit on the early Australian sheep business. The teachers and students
251

EIGHT
worked together to transform the classrooms, using all kinds of craft and art
skills. In one room, a platform about knee height was built around two walls.
When I visited recently a computer sat on a desk near one end, and other
structures were in the process of going up. This room was the loading dock,
from which the wool would be exported around the world. The computer
operators kept track of quantities, prices, and destinations. An adjoining
room was a small town, made ofold milk cartons that rose to about eye level,
leaving space for twisting narrow streets between offices, shops, and school.
A bemused visitor to this wonderland, I was surprised as a class of children
arrived, squeezing past, tossing their bags into their "office" or "shop," and
getting on with the work of the day, dealing with some aspect of the social
economy of the sheep. Elsewhere, no doubt, the farmers were busy with
their activities.
In Winnipeg, six teachers combined their classes for a "Romantic" story
of the 1920s for students of about ten and eleven years. In a section of the
library the teachers performed a play, which opened with an old woman leaf-
ing through the contents of a trunk from her attic. As she takes out the ob-
jects and photographs, culled from the students' parents' or grandparents'
attics and old junk shops, her reminiscences are brought to life by the other
teachers. In 1920s life, the main character appears as an impetuous young
woman whose adventures give rise to much worry in her family The "play"
becomes a way for the teacher-actors to recapture the spirit of the 1920s and
to engage the student audience in the project of recreating what life back
then was like. The students then play roles in groups, learning some aspect
of 1920s life-business speculation, music, manufacturing growth, inven-
tions, and so on-and presenting their discoveries to the other groups and
to the school as a whole. Their story tells of the confident expansion of the
economy, then overconfidence, then the stock market crash of 1929.
Extensive units such as these provide opportunities for teachers' own
engagement and enlarges their energies; the influence of such projects also
tends to spread to the rest of the school. At the same time, the students be-
come involved with their learning in a way not common in school experi-
ence. Most of the Melbourne children will remember aspects of the wool
trade throughout their lives, and most of the Winnipeg children will retain a
strong association with the 1920s.
How can parents encourage the development of Mythic understanding?
As oral language is central, continuing to talk with children is clearly indi-
cated! The characteristics ofMythic understanding suggest ways to structure
the conversation. Parents might practice telling their young child or children
252
the most important thing that happened to them each day If this narrative

SOME IMPLICATIONS
FOR TEACHING
involves the child, so much the more engaging. Appropriate, powerful, bi-
nary concepts can build the narrative, and vivid metaphors and images can
enrich its meaning and promote accessibility Agood starting point is an inci-
dent that creates an expectation that can then be confirmed or undermined
by subsequent incidents. These need not be polished performances; short
and simple will do. And then, parents should be prepared for questions that
show surprising incomprehension on the part ofchildren. But persistence is
essential, and with the child's guidance parents can become experts quite
quickly. Soliciting the child's equivalent narrative about his or her day is use-
ful, particularly if parents ask the right questions. It can become a pleasant
and easy habit.
The other range of stories that parents have to tell are about the social
and natural world. If we think of the knowledge we have accumulated over
millennia as conceivable in a variety of ways, and recall that it can be consti-
tuted as a set of great stories as well as a store of academic disciplines, then
parents can shape knowledge about galaxies and dinosaurs or anything in
the world into brief, engaging narratives.
And, of course, there are fictional stories. Which stories should we tell
young children? Those with the characteristics described in chapter 2. Chil-
dren's taste is no less varied from child to child than is adults', so we should
explore a range of stories. Let the children's response-as well as our own
sense of what is affectively important and valuable-be our guide.
A story time each day, perhaps at bedtime, clearly has many benefits in
addition to the educational ones. We tend to be so dependent on books and
TV that few of us have confidence that we can tell a story But I encourage
every parent to try. Perhaps read a story to yourselffirst, and run through it in
your head. Then, cuddled in the dark perhaps, tell it in your own words,
following your own, perhaps stumbling rhythms. This recommendation fol-
lows the earlier observations that a crucial part of the development of the
imagination involves the child's generation of images from words. Illustrated
storybooks in part, and TV all the time, supply images that reduce or sup-
press this vital intellectual capacity. Also, parents might be surprised by how
much more powerfully the child responds to the oral telling of a story over
the polished reading. As Northrop Frye put it: "The art of listening to stories
is a basic training for the imagination" (1963, p. 49).
Mythic understanding, like Somatic, is not something only for the child-
hood years, when it tends to be most energetic. Our fifty-five-year-olds can
continue to enlarge their Mythic understanding ofthe world and experience.
A more energetic and imaginative intellectual life will follow from the effort
to see particular experiences in varied, perhaps competing story structures,
to persist in constructing vivid, perhaps deliberately weird mental images
253

EIGHT
from the words of friends or TV characters, to cultivate in our own oral and
written discourse vivid images, fresh metaphors, and concrete particularity
(he writes abstractly). A greying woman chatting on the phone, sitting on a
red chair in the kitchen, looking through the doorway to the room where her
overweight husband's brown-slippered feet are stretched out toward the TV,
on which a football game is being shown, can imagine that the feet are in
control of the man and they have stretched him out so they can watch from
close up the exciting antics of the football players' feet. (This is just an exam-
ple, not a fetish being exercised.) Or perhaps she can imagine that the TV is
watching him, its active eye presenting him with different images so that it
can study his response-a frustrating piece ofempirical research as the hus-
band half-dozes through everything.
Lively metaphoric "seeing as" is crucial to an imaginative mind able to
do original thinking. Very quickly the early energetic "seeing as"-seeing the
cylinder open at one end as a cup-becomes a set of fixed and rigid con-
cepts, the products of frozen metaphors. We might make a habit of disrupt-
ing this habit of the dulling mind by constantly "unseeing as," by unfreezing
the metaphors. See the table as cut and treated wood, or laminated par-
ticleboard and plastics and metal. See the familiar garden as it once was-
waving grassland or forest. See the school as bricks and glass and bureau-
cratic structures.
Mythic understanding grows with flexible use of oral language, and we
can, after extending and elaborating our vocabulary, constantly work toward
precision, clarity, simplicity, and vividness in our oral delivery.
ROMANTIC UNDERSTANDING
In this section I will focus primarily on how teachers of students from about
eight to fifteen can shape and present content so that it will be meaningful
and engaging and will stimulate and develop Romantic understanding. I will
work from the set of characteristics discussed in chapter 3. These include a
fascination with the limits of reality and the extremes of experience~ an at-
traction to those things, people, ideas, qualities that transcend the con-
straints ofour everyday lives~ a ready engagement by knowledge represented
as a product of human emotions and intentions~ and a detailed interest in
something. The role played by narrative structuring, affective meaning, and
images will continue, if at a somewhat reduced level.
Let us see how we can infer from these characteristics of Romantic un-
derstanding another planning framework, one appropriate for students who
254
are prominently deploying Romantic intellectual tools in their learning.

SOME
IMPLICATIONS
FOR TEACHING
Again, I will organize the framework in terms of a set of questions whose
answers should yield a lesson or unit plan, then briefly discuss the principles
that undergird each section of the framework, and conclude each strut with
an example. In this case, given that "literacy" has been a central feature of
Romantic understanding, I will try to sketch a "romantic" unit on the im-
probable topic of punctuation. I will again stick to a restricted topic in a par-
ticular teaching area-language arts or English-because this seems to
conform with the way most teaching is organized, but teachers might find
the framework helps them design more elaborate, integrated units.
The Romantic Planning Framework
1.
Identifying Transcendent Qualities
What transcendent qualities can be seen and felt as central to the topic? What
affective images do they evoke? What within the topic can best evoke wonder?
As with the Mythic framework, the most difficult part is at the beginning.
This first strut of the framework asks teachers to begin planning a topic by
searching within themselves for the transcendent qualities that can give life,
energy, and meaning to the topic. A part of this task might involve running
through the content in one's mind, searching for affective images, for some-
thing heroic or wonderful about the topic. It might help to look for examples
of qualities like courage, compassion, energy, ingenuity, and tenacity
It should be emphasized that this first step requires teachers to think
about the topic until they are moved by something in it. That emotional en-
gagement provides the key to the student's imagination. Again, it is not a
matter ofworking out what will "Romantically" move the students but rather
what "Romantically" moves the teacher or parent. This emotional engage-
ment, this moving, needn't suggest images of teachers in tears or in the throes
of passion while planning. Rather, it suggests that they think about the topic
with their emotions alert and home in on whatever eJ).gages their Romantic
sensors. As always, the more one knows or finds out about a topic, the easier
this will be. Once the transcendent quality is identified, the rest of the plan-
ning should be relatively easy
How, then, do we think about punctuation in such a way that we can
find something moving about it? What transcendent quality can we build
the lessons on? We might begin by reflecting on the purpose of punctuation
and how it developed. Early alphabetiC texts had no punctuation-just let-
ters, one after the other, filling the space on the tablet, stone, or parchment.
Reading was consequently difficult, and, to make sense of atext, one would
have to read it aloud. Indeed, silent reading seems to have been a very rare
accomplishment in the ancient world. Julius Caesar apparently mastered the
255

EIGHT
skill so that he could read letters about military or political affairs without
being overheard, and St. Augustine notes St. Ambrose's ability to read si-
lently as unusual. Punctuation, then, consists of simple, elegant, and inge-
nious inventions that have been added to texts for easier reading. These
inventions democratized reading, making it no longer the exclusive skill of
an elite eager to protect the power, privileges, and social benefits that went
with it.
This brief history suggests one area in which we might find something
moving: the new accessibility of reading has brought about incalculable rev-
olutions in human history and cultural life, influencing more people more
profoundly than all the conquerors, warriors, and egomaniacal politicians in
the world. Our sense ofwonder might be readily engaged by the discrepancy
between the invention of these tiny marks and their vast social and cultural
consequences-a little like chaos theory's example of the movement of a
butterfly's wing in South America leading to profound changes in weather
conditions in the northern hemisphere.
An alternative transcendent quality we might have picked out of this
reflection is courtesy. Had we selected that one, we would have seen punc-
tuation as an act of courtesy from writer to reader. But let us take simple,
elegant ingenuity.
2.
Organizing the Topic into a Narrative Structure
2.1
INITIAL ACCESS
What aspect of the topic best embodies the transcendent qualities identified as
central to the topic? Does this expose some extreme of experience or limit of
reality? What image can help capture this aspect?
We might again approach shaping the topic into a narrative with our news-
paper editor's question "What's the story on this?" in mind. The story-
structuring need not be as tight as in the earlier framework, but the basic
principles of the story will still be important to provide access, ensure clear
communication, and encourage affective engagement with the content. To
begin with, we need to find some aspect of the topic that clearly embodies
our chosen transcendent quality. Commonly, this will be clear as a result of
the reflection that yielded the transcendent quality in the first place, but
sometimes it might require a separate reflection and research. The aspect we
begin with also should suggest an image that is vivid and exposes something
central about the topic. We should also seek out something that might seem
strange, bizarre, wonderful, and show something extreme about experience
or some limit of reality. Overlapping criteria are suggested here, and the
256
teacher should not think it essential to satisfy all of them for every lesson.

SOME
IMPLICATIONS
FOR TEACHING
Think of them as hints about the direction one's thinking should take when
looking for the initial teaching event for a unit.
How can we find some aspect ofpunctuation that will satisfy these crite-
ria? The overall narrative line suggested by earlier reflection on the topic
concerns the impact on cultural history, political history, and even our sense
of ourselves brought about by these simple, elegant, and ingenious marks in
text. The story describes a momentous shift from reliance on the ear to re-
liance on the eye in accessing knowledge. It is part of the adventure of mov-
ing from an oral to a literate culture with all that that has entailed. In this
story, punctuation plays a decisive role in transforming text so that it can be
read easily. Our exploration of punctuation will involve spaces between
words, paragraphs, headings, uppercase and lowercase letters, commas, pe-
riods, quotation marks, exclamation points, and question marks. Each ele-
ment helps to break up text for easier understanding; they permit us to
engage relatively easily in such curious silent communication as you and I
now share. Try reading this punctuation-less text:
INITIALACCESSTHENMIGHTBEPROVIDEDBYGIVINGTHESTUDENTSAPIECEOFTE
XTWITHOUTANYPUNCTUATIONSIMPLYALLTHEWORDSFLOWINGTOGETHERAUSEFU
LINTRODUCTIONDOYOUTHINKSONOBREAKSCOMMASORPERIODSORANYOTHERSI
MPLEANDELEGANTINTENTIONSTHATPROVIDECUESTHATMAKETEXTSSOMUCHMOR
EACCESSIBLETOTHEEYEAREYOUSTILLSTRUGGLINGTOREADTHISJUSTSEEINGHOWM
UCHMOREDIFFICULTTOREADTEXTLIKETHISWILLGIVESTUDENTSSOMEIMAGEOFT
HEVALUEOFPUNCTUATIONDONTYOUTHINKPERHAPSYOUMIGHTHAVETHESTUDEN
TSREADTHISINITIALTEXTALOUDNOTTHISONEOFCOURSEBUTSOMETEXTYOUCHOO
SETHATCANBEPRESENTEDLIKETHISBETTERTOSELECTSOMETHINGMADEESPECIALL
YHARDDUETOITSLACKOFALLKINDSOFPUNCTUATIONBYREADINGITALOUDTHEYWI
LLDISCOVERWHYTHEEARREMAINEDIMPORTANTTOREADINGUNTILPUNCTUATIONT
RANSFORMEDTEXTTHATISONEWAYOFBRINGINGOUTTHEIMPORTANCEANDIMPACT
OFPUNCTUATIONOK
2.2
COMPOSING THE BODY OF THE LESSON OR UNIT
What content best articulates the topic into a clear narrative structure? Sketch
the main narrative line and fit the content to it.
The task now is to use our transcendent quality to select appropriate content
that will be articulated on a clear narrative line. The transcendent quality
becomes our principle of selection, our criterion of relevance, ensuring that
the affective point runs from beginning to end of the lesson or unit. A Ro-
mantic perspective on a topic can disturb some people; it is not qualified
enough or not precise enough; it seems to grab for the exotic and showy
rather than the cautious and correct. But Romantic planning is not a license
for glitter and sparkle at any cost, especially at the cost of accuracy; it never
257

EIGHT
licenses falsification, even if it does encourage highlighting certain aspects of
a topic at the expense of others. This feature of Romantic understanding is
found regrettable by those who have been schooled not to trust their own,
perhaps suppressed sense of romance. But it seems to me necessary for ade-
quate development ofunderstanding ofany topic: more proportionate views
may follow, but engagement is necessary first.
The central task here is to reflect on the whole unit or lesson and think of
it in terms of some overall narrative structure. That is, one needs to select
and highlight content that will make clear to students that one is not Simply
relating a sequence of facts or events but that one has a story to tell them, and
that the set of facts and events constitute a unity of some kind. As Richard
Feynman described his approach to teaching: "I wasn't only worried about
the content of each lecture, but also each lecture had to be self-contained,
complete in itself. It had to be a dramatic production-which had a dra-
matic line, with an introduction, a development of the theme, and a denoue-
ment" (Regis, 1994, p. 18). Another scientist who is a master of such
narrative structuring is Carl Sagan. His Cosmos series for TV and in book
form (1980) have been much criticized by "sophisticates," but it is brilliantly
organized to engage the Romantic mind.
Our punctuation example arrives at this point with the general principle
of its narrative structure worked out. The transcendent quality of simple,
elegant ingenuity provides our criterion for selecting content, and the con-
nection between the tiny textual marks and their massive social and culture
consequences is the source of wonder that we will highlight as we demon-
strate punctuation's help in the momentous move from ear to eye. Given our
narrative line, we could decide to take each punctuation mark that we want
to consider either in the sequence of historical appearance or, which turns
out to be not very different, in the degree ofits impact on making texts hospi-
table to the eye. This narrative line, incidentally, properly brings into the
topic items sometimes not considered in lessons on punctuation, such as
separation ofwords by spaces. We could begin with that dramatic invention,
showing in the introductory block oftext what an enormous impact it has on
the eye's ease ofaccess to meaning. Then we might consider the use ofupper-
case and lowercase letters, then the effects of the period or full stop, and the
comma, and so on. Each item needs to be shown in terms of its simple ele-
gance and ingenuity and its contribution to moving away from the use of the
ear to the independence of the eye. Such a narrative might lead to instances
ofconcrete poetry or to other modes of using text so that the ear contributes
very little and meaning relies almost entirely on the eye.
One could use the initial block of text, showing how each new punctua-
258
tion adds to easy scanning~ in addition, the students could be asked to com-

SOME IMPLICATIONS FOR TEACHING
pose texts that are particularly ambiguous, hard to interpret, or funny with-
out a particular punctuation mark. The teacher could initiate this latter ac-
tivity with some examples, along the lines of the message sent by Tyrone, a
character in one of Donald]. Sobol's Encyclopedia Brown stories (1986). Ty-
rone wanted to send a loving message to his sweetheart that read, "How I
long for a girl who understands what true romance is all about. You are sweet
and faithful. Girls who are unlike you kiss the first boy who comes along,
Adorabelle. I'd like to praise your beauty forever. I can't stop thinking you
are the prettiest girl alive. Thine, Tyrone." But Tyrone phoned the message to
Adorabelle's younger sister, Lulubelle, and neglected to read the punctua-
tion. So the message Adorabelle received was this: "How I long for a girl who
understands what true romance is. All about you are sweet and faithful girls
who are unlike you. Kiss the first boy who comes along, Adorabelle. I'd like
to praise your beauty forever. I can't. Stop thinking you are the prettiest girl
alive. Thine, Tyrone."
2.3
HUMANIZING THE CONTENT
How can the content be shown in terms of human hopes, fears, intentions, or
other emotions? What aspect of the content can best stimulate a sense of
wonder? What ideals and/or revolts against convention are evident in the
content?
This strut of the framework directs us to think about the content in terms of
its human dimensions-what our newspaper editor might call "digging out
the human-interest angle." While this technique can lead to journalistic
trivia, when properly used it can also identify an important element of Ro-
mantic engagement in a topic. The point is not simply to "put people into the
lesson" but rather to focus on what it is about the content that can be grasped
in terms of emotions. Recall from chapter 3 how the Romantic understand-
ing of causality begins with emotions initiating events. Emotions are most
easily identified when we focus on the hopes and ideals of proponents in
conflict with the conventional forces that oppose them. But we can also iden-
tify emotions in unlikely topics, by describing, say, weeds on a rock face in
terms of tenacity or earthworms slithering through damp soil in terms of
aesthetic joy
Teachers recognize that an illustrative anecdote that deals with some
extreme of human endurance, foresight, ingenuity, compassion, or suffer-
ing immediately grabs students' attention. What this strut involves is the
extension ofthe engaging force ofsuch narratives to the whole lesson or unit.
Often we can achieve this by locating content in the context of hopes, fears,
passions, and intentions of people's lives. What makes others' lives interest-
ing to us is the degree to which we can imaginatively grasp them in terms of
259

EIGHT
the emotions, hopes, fears, and intentions we can share. This principle does
not refer to our finding some introductory "hook" to the topic but directs us
rather to locate its human importance.
How can we apply this prinCiple to punctuation? Well, we have already
articulated the topic in a narrative of a set of tiny but revolutionary inven-
tions, so we might very easily focus wherever possible on some of the inven-
tors. We can find useful material in Illich (1993) and Olson (1994). We
might dwell on Hugh and Andrew of St. Victor, say, and those monks who
transformed the appearance ofa typical page of text during the eleventh and
twelfth centuries in their drive to capture a more literal sense ofBiblical texts.
It was a drive that Smalley, writing about Hugh of St. Victor, compared with
"that curiosity which set explorers in quest of Eldorado and led to the dis-
covery of a continent" (1941, p. 72).
2.4
PURSUING DETAILS
What parts of the topic can students best explore in exhaustive detail?
This strut directs us to focus on encouraging students to build their own
areas of genuine expertise. By discovering something exhaustively, students
can gain security that the world is knowable and is not infinite.
We can incorporate this principle into our unit on punctuation fairly
easily. Students, individually or in small groups, can research the comma,
the question mark, paragraphing. The teacher will need to ensure that the
library or a study area contains sufficient resources so that students can, in-
deed, learn perhaps as much as is known about the topic. In some cases, the
origin might still be little known, and so exploration might focus on changed
usage through the centuries or in different countries.
3.
Conclusion
How can one best bring the topic to satisfactory closure? How can the
student feel this satisfaction?
Our narrative line through the lesson or unit should not simply run out
when we have covered the content. As with any story, we need to find some
satisfactory ending; the sense of an ending may be felt in a satisfying way if it
provides both the kind·of epiphany mentioned earlier and some glimpse of
Philosophic and Ironic understanding of the topic.
We might conclude our unit on punctuation by bringing together the
variety ofindications that students will have encountered about the impreci-
sion of rules of punctuation. At the pragmatic level, this may help alleviate
some frustration caused by the difficulty in understanding clearly the proper
use of the comma, say, or the apostrophe. Drawing on the alternative tran-
260
seendent quality indicated in the beginning, our attempted epiphany might

SOME
IMPLICATIONS
FOR TEACHING
occur if we emphasize that punctuation is not so much a set of precise rules
to be mechanically mastered as simple, elegant, and ingenious inventions
used in somewhat unstable ways as acts of courtesy between writer and
reader. The sense of punctuation as courteous convention also stimulates a
Philosophic general scheme about the proper way to understand punctua-
tion while hinting at an Ironic sense of the ultimate arbitrariness of these
ingenious inventions.
How can we manage such an epiphany in practice? At the Simplest level,
if the unit has prepared students for such an understanding by J!leans of the
various practical exercises and research projects they will have done, the
teacher could Simply bring it about by talking about punctuation as cour-
tesy. Alternatively, we could give out blocks of text again, this time of lower-
case text in which the words are separated. The students, in small groups,
could be invited to invent their own punctuation marks in order to make the
text easier to read and understand. The only rule would be that none of the
conventional punctuation marks could be used in their usual ways. (If
computers are available with "dingbat" fonts, the students might find it eas-
ier to work on screen.) When finished, students could look at as many of the
newly punctuated texts as they can. If the whole set can be made available to
each student, the class might vote on the innovations they find most helpful,
constructing an agreed-upon convention. A few things should become clear
in this exercise: the arbitrariness of the conventions that are currently domi-
nant; their simple elegance and ingenuity; the difficulty of coming up with
new punctuation ideas (in that most of the students' innovations will likely
be Simple substitutions for current conventions); the recognition that punc-
tuation marks are meaningless and confUSing unless there is agreement
about their use and meaning; that acceptance of someone's innovation is a
recognition of how it helps one's interpretation of text. These lessons can be
underlined by the teacher's accompanying them with the courtesy narrative.
4.
Evaluating
How can one know that the content has been learned and understood and
has engaged and stimulated students' imaginations?
Evaluating the development of students' Romantic understanding involves
~nsuring that they understand the material, but we will not measure that
understanding solely in terms ofwhat details they can recall. Rather, we will
focus on whether the students can use the knowledge in contexts other than
those in which they learned it. We will seek evidence as well of Romantic
engagement with the knowledge, attending to students' pursuit of further
related knowledge beyond what is required by classroom aSSignments.
261

EIGHT
Teachers can use the qualitative approaches popularized in recent years, and
familiarize themselves with the practices of connoisseurship as described by
Elliot Eisner (1985).
How can parents encourage the development of Romantic understand-
ing? I argued that this kind ofunderstanding is a product ofa particular kind
of literacy, largely elaborated in ancient Greece, which stimulated and sup-
ported a distinctive inquiry into the nature of reality. What is distinctive
about the initial stages of that inquiry is that they are not the kind most typi-
cal of much (prematurely) theoretic schooling but are rather more keenly
directed to whatever exposes dramatic details about the extremes or limits of
reality. Details from the Guinness Book of Records, the mega ergon, the outra-
geous behavior of pop stars, film stars, sports stars, and "personalities" in
general, the most terrible suffering, the greatest achievements, ashes and dia-
monds but little in between, are what stimulate the Romantic mind.
The easy seductiveness of television has made dinnertime reading al-
most obsolete, it would seem. Instead, parents-and perhaps children, too,
depending on their fluency-could spend the dinner hour reading aloud
from a romantic book (a practice one reader of the manuscript thought I
might promote as a dieting technique). By themselves, of course, children
can read appropriate books as well, from sensational stories of exotic and
bizarre events and behavior to more exemplary accounts of people exhibit-
ing extremes of behavior that are outside the range of children's everyday
experience. Dramatic biographies can be very appealing~ children might en-
joy learning about people such as Gandhi, Marie Curie, Martin Luther King,
Helen Keller, and Florence Nightingale. In addition, there is a vast range of
books with the characteristics sketched in chapter 3 that "Romantic" chil-
dren can launch into; for those who become absorbed, there are also major
literary works with prominent Romantic qualities (such as Dickens's novels).
Dickens's writings, of course, also have Philosophic and Ironic qualities that
can elaborate the young person's understanding in ways that more popular
novels will not. Many materials, from comic books to Dickens and beyond,
can stimulate and develop Romantic understanding.
This theory is largely about language developments, not so much in
terms of vocabulary growth and grammatical sophistication-though they
obviously playa role-but in terms of the kinds of concepts, the focus of
discourse, the everyday content that surround and seek responses from the
child. Parents can stimulate and develop Romantic understanding by talking
with their children about those things that conform with the characteristics
mentioned in chapter 3, such as heroic acts, amazing events, new discoveries
262
about the cosmos, the outrageous behavior of"personalities," dramatized ac-

SOME IMPLICATIONS FOR TEACHING
counts of friends' behavior, interesting gossip, or the children's particular
hobby or obsession.
Our fifty-five-year-old can continue to develop Romantic understand-
ing by seeking out experiences or reading that will stimulate awe and won-
der. He or she might choose one ofthose "exploration holidays" into unusual
places to witness strange and exotic customs and behavior, or more simply
decide to become knowledgeable about a particular subject, be it spiders,
women philosophers of the Middle Ages, or jungle warfare in Malaya. Any
such Romantic exploration will lead to increasing one's sense of the limits of
reality and the extremes of behavior, and make life more abundant.
PHILOSOPHIC UNDERSTANDING
In this section I will focus mainly on how teachers of students in senior high
school or college might shape and present material to students so that it will
be meaningful and imaginatively engaging and will also stimulate and de-
velop their Philosophic understanding. I will begin with a planning frame-
work again-not that I expect teachers to follow it slavishly-because it is a
convenient way oflaying out the set ofprinciples derived from the theory for
teaching at this level. Teachers can then select whichever features they think
might be useful.
At this teaching level, the logic of the content often determines its pre-
sentation. As with the psychological models that currently dominate think-
ing about instruction of younger pupils, this seems inadequate.
I am assuming these students will have been educated according to the
prinCiples outlined for each of the previous kinds of understanding. In the
real world of current high school, college, and university classrooms, a sig-
nificant proportion of students will have only very partial access to Philo-
sophic understanding. My general recommendation would be to combine
elements of the Romantic framework with the Philosophic, perhaps even
providing a Mythic introduction. Both Feynman and Sagan prOvide this mix,
and, particularly in the high school years, mixing of modes is probably the
most sensible way to proceed. In a later section of this chapter I'll explain
how to manage this fairly easily.
The characteristics of Philosophic understanding discussed in chapter 4
include the formation of general schemes and a language of theoretic ab-
stractions to support them; the sense of oneself as an agent (or, more fash-
ionably, a victim) within complex social, psychological, metaphysical, and
historical processes; the lure of certainty; the search for authority and truth
within general schemes; the dialectical play between general schemes and
263

EIGHT
anomalies~ and the flexibility theory gives to the mind's ability to deal with
the world.
Let us, then, move from these characteristics to a planning framework.
The high school teacher, whose students may only be beginning to construct
their Philosophic understanding, needs to emphasize the first couple of
struts of the following framework. The college and university teacher might
want to emphasize the later struts, which encourage elaborating and dis-
turbing general schemes. After setting each strut in place, I will discuss the
principle on which it is based and then give a couple of examples of its use.
Driven by Ironic reflexiveness again, I will use the topic of this book as one
example and will consider as well the more routine academic topic of the
Industrial Revolution.
Philosophic Planning Framework
1.
Identifying Relevant General Schemes
What general schemes seem best able to organize the topic into some coherent
whole? What are the most powerful, clear, and relevant theories, ideologies,
metaphysical schemes, and metanarratives?
For the average teacher, this beginning should seem less difficult than those
reqUired in the previous two frameworks. Even though we might not usually
think ofa topic to be taught in terms of the general schemes used to organize
it, such schemes are usually closer to the surface of our thinking at this level
of education. A useful guide for identifying general schemes is to consider
what are the main controversies surrounding the topic, what ideological
sides are taken on it. Among these, one can look for the more dramatic and
powerful general schemes. In this context, "powerful" refers to the generality
of the scheme in terms of how much of the relevant content it can organize
and give meaning to.
In the earlier frameworks teachers are asked to reflect on the topic until
they locate something within it that moves them affectively Similarly, in be-
ginning to plan Philosophic teaching it is important to locate something that
stirs the teacher, something that he or she cares deeply about. What we will
be dealing with at this PhilosophiC level are the schemes that we and others
have developed for composing meaning in our lives and in our world. So,
again, our reflection must not be of a purely intellectual kind, assessing
which ofa range ofschemes students might find engaging, but must begin in
the rag-and-bone shop of our own hearts, turning up those things that mat-
ter to us affectively and aesthetically
The teacher's job here is to think about the topic Philosophically and
264
present it to the students Philosophically To do this, some general scheme

SOME IMPLICATIONS FOR TEACHING
will be required. This does not mean that the teacher should continually
supply the students ~Tith general schemes. Indeed, students will already
have their own that are only too ready to absorb the topic. What the teacher
can offer in such cases is an alternative that students might consider or seek
to displace with their own preferred scheme. While nothing may matter to
the student more than his or her particular general scheme, from a pedagogi-
cal point of view what particular general scheme is used doesn't matter at all
so long as it can make some comprehensive sense of the topic.
If I were to teach the topic of this book, I would begin by locating what
seem to me the main theories used in representing the process ofeducational
development. I would likely conclude that Plato's and Rousseau's theories
were largest on the landscape, along with a rather diffuse conception of so-
cialization, and, little regarded now but clearly a distinct theory, recapitula-
tion. The modern forms these theories take, and the ways they have mixed
together, awkwardly produce what seems to me a dominant and somewhat
incoherent ideology ofeducation. That this matters to me has less to do with
some abstract idea of improving educational practice, I suppose, than with a
personal sense of opportunities lost, aesthetic pleasures denied, abundant
pOSSibilities diminished by an education the recollection of which brings to
mind fear, humiliation, conviction of stupidity, numbing boredom, and a
belittling bewilderment at not being able to make some sense of what
schooling was supposed to be about. What it is about clearly connects with
the peculiar cultural development of the West, which raises a set of related
theories. I would also, of course, have in mind the new idea of this book,
contrived with the help of recapitulation, and other bits and pieces. This
general scheme seems to me more coherent and aesthetically more satisfying
than the unsteady melange of theories for which it is proposed as a replace-
ment, and it seems to have the potential to lead to better educational prac-
tice. It also aims to follow Bruner's (1960) recommendation of contriving a
scheme of education courteous enough to represent the world and experi-
ence to children in ways they are best able to understand.
The Industrial Revolution, for another example, might be represented
in either of the two main metanarratives used to organize history-comic or
tragic. Comic metanarratives represent events within an overall historical
scheme of improvement; the most common has been a liberal progressive
scheme of gradual amelioration: enlargement of freedoms and knowledge,
restriction of arbitrary violence and despotic power, and so on. Marxism is
another of the great comic metanarratives, in which history is represented as
the dialectical struggle of classes, each new one generating its own antithesis
on the way to a better and classless society Tragic general schemes have in-
cluded Thucydides' vision ofdecay being tied in with flaws in human nature
265

EIGHT
and, in recent times, Foucault's accounts of diminishing freedoms. Let us
take the liberal progressive scheme as our organizer for the content about the
Industrial Revolution.
2.
Organizing the Content into a General Scheme
2.1
INITIAL ACCESS
How can the general scheme be made vivid? What relevant content best
exposes the general scheme and shows its power to organize the topic?
These questions direct us to think about what will be our first teaching act as
we introduce the topic. We have our general scheme in mind and now begin
clothing it by finding the most dramatic content that is representative of the
topic as a whole. The beginning of the unit has both to engage the students'
Philosophic imagination by its dramatic representation of what is centrally
important about the topic and also to stimulate their desire to learn more
about it in order to see whether or to what degree the suggested general
scheme is True.
In teaching about development, Iwould begin with briefaccounts ofthe
main general schemes that have been used to organize the topic in the past
(such as socialization and the schemes of Plato and of Rousseau), indicate
why they are separately and jointly inadequate, and then offer grounds for
thinking that a new kind of recapitulation scheme might do the trick.
The Industrial Revolution might be introduced with a sketch, using
whatever media the teacher chooses, of the "advance of civilization" meta-
narrative. Western history is thus represented as a process in which knowl-
edge, reason, and individual freedoms from oppression and for personal
choices have been gradually increasing. In this metanarrative the Industrial
Revolution, in the fag end ofwhich we are living, may be seen as the greatest
contributor to an ameliorating process. During the revolution mechanisms
were developed for generating freedom from drudgery, for the establishment
of legal and political institutions to protect enlarged freedoms for the indi-
vidual, for the invention of technologies of knowledge production and dis-
semination, for the rapid increase in wealth that greatly enhanced cultural
and educational opportunities, and so on. Although far from utopian, these
can be represented as significant advances from the nasty, brutish, and short
lives that had been the lot of the bulk of humanity. The current state of these
products of the Industrial Revolution will thus be represented in the general
scheme as all subject to continuing improvement in the future, and students'
proper social roles, suggested by this metanarrative, will involve their strug-
266
gling to further these progressive social and cultural developments.

SOME
IMPLICATIONS
FOR TEACHING
2.2
ORGANIZING THE BODY OF THE LESSON OR UNIT
What content can be used to articulate the topic into a general scheme? What
metanarrative provides a clear overall structure to the lesson or unit?
Here the teacher needs to reflect on how the selected general scheme can
best organize the content into a coherent whole. This planning strut is an
extension of the story and narrative structuring of the two previous frame-
works (it is helpful to keep this in mind). The story feature moves in this case
from the level of individuals, motives, and events to that of ideas; even so,
similar structural principles need to come into play-think of the story as a
metanarrative that emphasizes the narrative.
In the case of my first example, the developmental scheme of Somatic,
Mythic, Romantic, Philosophic, and Ironic kinds of understanding suggests
a fairly simple metanarrative structure. The underlying narrative would
focus on developments in language and in related intellectual tools that are
in turn tied in with this sequential unfolding ofhuman understanding. Some
dramatic tension could come from contrasting this scheme with those it is
proposed to replace-which is, of course, the metanarrative of this book.
For the unit on the Industrial Revolution, the teacher could use the lib-
eral progressive scheme as the criterion to select the contenLWe will look at
the inventions in terms ofrelease from drudgery and the enlargement ofpos-
sibilities for most people, at child labor laws and the progressive legislation
aimed at improving the conditions the revolution created for the laboring
masses, at increases in population and food supply, at antislavery activities
and legislation, at cultural activities and increased scope for their enjoyment
by greater numbers, and at the gradual growth of education and democracy.
3.
Introducing Anomalies to the General Scheme
What content is anomalous to the general scheme? How can one begin with
minor anomalies and gradually and sensitively challenge the students'
general schemes so that they make the schemes increasingly sophisticated?
The aim here is not to destroy students' general schemes by confronting
them with major anomalies. Rather, teachers must be sensitive to the degree
to which students are committed to their general schemes and aim to make
these more sophisticated. The longer-term aim is to change students' percep-
tions of the status of their general schemes-not exchange one general
scheme for another-so that they see them eventually as not simply true or
false but as more or less useful. The teaching task may be seen initially as
prOViding aliments-to use Piaget's term-to the scheme, enlarging its
scope and potency as an explanatory device, and then sensitively introduc-
267

EIGHT
ing facts or events or ideas that are anomalous. Teachers must then help stu-
dents elaborate the scheme in order to accommodate anomalies. Perhaps
only a few anomalies can be dealt with by a full class of students~ others
might need to be addressed to individual students in response to written
work or in small group discussions. Teaching needs to move each student
forward between the Scylla of overconfident belief in the truth of general
schemes and the Charybdis of undermined schemes leading to a general
cynicism and alienation. The trick is to kickstart the dialectical process of
anomalies that cause revision of the general scheme, which then demands
further knowledge to deal with the anomalies, which in turn suggests further
anomalies.
It may seem that teaching at these higher levels is only peripherally con-
cerned with specific content and is intently conscious of general schemes
and anomalies to them. Obviously, that is an inappropriate picture. The
usual focus on the content to be taught should continue, but here we should
add a dimension of learning that seems rarely to be considered.
In the first example, the development ofkinds ofunderstanding, I find it
relatively easy to raise some anomalies to the three old theories I plan to dis-
place. During the presentation of my alternative scheme, I would probably
prefer to layout the Somatic, Mythic, Romantic, PhilosophiC, and Ironic
kinds of understanding first, and then give voice to some of the anomalies
that remain-as in chapter 6. In some cases I would suggest ways in which
the scheme could be elaborated to respond to anomalies, and in other cases I
would Simply have to acknowledge that this general scheme cannot accom-
modate all the evident anomalies. The final defence would be that it can ac-
commodate a lot of what might appear as anomalies and that it organizes
more of the phenomena it deals with in a comprehensible order than any
other theory or scheme
In the second example, we might suggest anomalies to the liberal pro-
gressive scheme used to organize the Industrial Revolution by asking some
very general Philosophic questions: Is industrialization fundamentally at
odds with human nature? Has industrialization, Frankenstein-like, taken on
a life of its own, which now threatens its creators? Why should this rational
process of ameliorization have led, in advanced countries, to Hitler, Mus-
sohni, Franco, and Stalin with widespread and enthusiastic support? Do we
continue to face such dangers in our country now? Why or why not?
It does not matter that students do not have enough data to formulate
adequate answers. No one has. What such questions achieve is stimulation,
even, perhaps, irritation~ students are invited to apply their general scheme
to new, very general data and to try to impose shape and pattern on further
268
historical phenomena. Once students show some flexibility and control over

SOME
IMPLICATIONS
FOR TEACHING
the general scheme and some commitment to it, then the teacher may begin
the introduction of increasingly anomalous particulars, to kick into self-
sustaining life, as it were, the engine of Philosophic inquiry.
Students who have adopted the liberal progressive scheme might be
asked to study the forces that led to legislation to improve working condi-
tions and consider whether it was enacted only when it was seen as support-
ing rather than threatening increased production. Or they might be asked to
study the constraining and disciplining practices of factories, the new
prisons, and the new schools, and consider how these can fit a progressive
ameliorating scheme. Students who have adopted a Marxist general scheme
might be asked to study the movement to abolish slavery to see how the
scheme needs to be elaborated to accommodate what the student learns, or
to study the reforms of factory owners such as Robert Owen to see how their
scheme can deal with these. The aim here is not to propose destructive ob-
jections to the schemes but to focus them on material that is in some degree
anomalous to their simple forms.
4.
Presenting Alternative General Schemes
What alternative general schemes can organize the topic? Which can best
be used to help students see the contingency of such schemes?
The principle suggested here is that somewhere in our teaching ofa topic, we
should provide students with alternative general schemes to the one we, or
they, have most prominently used. In some subject areas and with some
topics this will be easier than with others, of course. An historical event, for
example, can usually be seen in a number of ideological contexts or philo-
sophical schemes. The final years of the Chinese Empire can be taught from
the perspective of a liberal Westerner, an archconservative Mandarin, or a
Marxist. Each of these, and perhaps others, can be seen to highlight particu-
lar features of those years; none of them needs to falSify anything, and none
of them represents some objective truth. Each perspective in turn can be
evaluated as more or less satisfactory in conveying an understanding of the
relevant events and in determining what events should be considered rele-
vant. It should become clear that considering a variety of general schemes
contributes to a richer understanding of the topic.
In the case ofmy first example, Iwould begin with some alternative edu-
cational theories, only to point up their inadequacies. I would also consider
alternative recapitulation theories, shoWing again how they were unable to
accommodate to large-scale anomalies. In writing this book, of course, I
have a persuasive purpose, so I have not tried to highlight the virtues ofalter-
native general schemes, but in teaching this to a university class I would
269

EIGHT
explore in particular other developmental schemes, such as those of Piaget,
Vygotsky, Erikson, and Donald, drawing attention to the dimensions of cul-
tural and/or individual development about which they enhance our under-
standing. I would try to make clear that these varied attempts to represent
human development, and to seek educational implications from them,
should be seen not so much as to-the-death competitions for the truth but
rather as comparatively useful aids in understanding the processes to which
they refer.
In dealing with the Industrial Revolution, it would be useful to offer a
Thucydides-Foucault tragic scheme for students' consideration. The pur-
pose would be to see more or less the same content from a quite different
perspective. Contrasting schemes should help students recognize that the
schemes themselves are not right or wrong so much as more or less adequate
in accounting for the data. One or other of the schemes might be assessed as
more powerful in accounting for most of the data, but it might need to be
pointed out that they also serve as criteria for deciding what counts as data,
and that the more powerful scheme is often seen as such only because it
focuses too little on what would otherwise be anomalous data. The clash of
general schemes may raise more general questions, such as whether the true
dynamic of liberal progress derives from self-interest rather than selfless-
ness. If a student's general scheme resists accommodating the conclusion
that self-interest is the dynamic, that student might be aSSigned to study in
detail various inventions, their adoption, and their dissemination to deter-
mine whether any dynamic other than self-interest is able to explain the
facts. If the opposite conclusion is held, that student might be aSSigned to
study in detail the activities of Robert Owen, Elizabeth Fry, and middle-class
supporters of labor organizations and consider whether there is no useful
distinction to be made between their behavior and that of the most ruthless
factory owners.
5.
Conclusion
How can we ensure that the student's general schemes are not destroyed or
made rigid, but are recognized as haVing a different epistemological status
from the facts they are based on? How can we ensure that the decay of
belief in the truth ofgeneral schemes does not lead to disillusion and
alienation? How can we lead students toward a sophisticated Ironic
understanding of the topic?
The objective here is to ensure that students recognize that their general
schemes have potential utility rather than objective truth. Now, when stu-
270
dents are just beginning to develop general schemes, we will obviously not

SOME IMPLICATIONS
FOR TEACHING
want to emphasize the undermining features. But in concluding any unit or
lesson it will be appropriate to seek out some way of at least hinting at the
difference between the very general schemes and the facts they are based on,
letting the teacher's sense of students' Philosophic development determine
the degree of support or challenge the teacher offers.
A point I will return to later, but which is particularly pertinent here,
concerns the importance of the teacher's own development of Ironic under-
standing. "Philosophic" teachers, committed to their own general schemes,
tend to see their teaching task as bringing students to recognize the truth of
those schemes. Too often they count success as the creation of disciples, and
students with whom they are not in this way "successful" are dismissed as
hopeless or as ideological enemies. It is true that such learning can generate
great fervor and energy in students, but it also commonly results in personal
conflicts, and it can be dramatically confrontational. Often, the most zealous
Philosophic teachers use the intellectual seduction of students to compen-
sate for their own suppressed doubts about the adequacy of their general
schemes. None of this helps students recognize the difference between the
epistemological status of detailed factual claims and the claims of general
schemes. This is not to assert that such claims are entirely distinct but only
that they are not the same, and that recognizing the difference is important to
a rich development of Ironic understanding; it is in that distance between
details and scheme, between reality and idea, that the shadow of irony
lengthens.
In my first example, I could conclude by returning to the three general
schemes I began with and give each of them a more generous reading, show-
ing how each one might be interpreted more liberally or be extended to ad-
dress material I claimed my general scheme dealt with in a superior fashion.
As a result, I would expect students to recognize that each of these schemes
helps to enlarge our understanding of cultural or individual development.
While I wouldn't expect much fainting despair as 'students come to recog-
nize that the general scheme that undergirds this presentation of my theory
is something less than the ultimate word on its subject matter, I would want
to ensure that they recognize its utility. The recognition of utility as separate
from objective truth provides appropriate preparation for Ironic under-
standing.
In the increasing sophistication of general schemes, I argued earlier, lies
the seeds of their own destruction. The conclusion of the unit on the Indus-
trial Revolution seeks to elaborate students' understanding while exposing
in greater or lesser degree the difference between the general scheme and the
facts, events, and other detailed knowledge they have learned. It may be that
this purpose has been largely fulfilled by the previous activity of looking at
271

EIGHT
the revolution through the lenses of three or four general schemes, compar-
ing their adequacy, utility, and even aesthetic appeal. A concluding activity
might be to consider what promises are implicit in the different general
schemes for the postindustrial world. For example, if a Marxist scheme is
adopted, students could be asked to consider whether the inherent promise
of equality-generating a proletariat whose increasing power is prerequisite
to the classless society-does not presage the eclipse offreedoms as a condi-
tion of achieving that equality. If a liberal progressive scheme is adopted, the
students could be invited to consider the likely social consequences of al-
lowing individual possessiveness such a free rein, and whether private
wealth, public squalor, and a large underclass ofpowerless, unhealthy, uned-
ucated, frustrated, and bitter people is not inevitable. Both scenarios-and
others-underline the extent to which the same body of data can be orga-
nized in different ways and disrupt in lesser or greater degree the sense that
the truth lies in the general scheme.
6.
Evaluation
How can we know whether the content has been learned and understood,
whether students have developed a general scheme, elaborated it, and
attained some sense of its limitations?
We will, ofcourse, want evidence that students have learned the content that
has made up the lesson or unit of study; this can be achieved through tradi-
tional techniques. We will also want evidence about how adequately stu-
dents have developed some general scheme and used it in organizing the
content. This can be evaluated by examining students' written or oral discus-
sions to see whether the theoretic language appropriate to the topic is de-
ployed flexibly and correctly The teacher can also examine the written work
for evidence of increasing elaboration of general schemes in light of anoma-
lies. Either casual cynicism about or committed devotion to the truth of
some scheme indicates failures of teaching and learning, though unqualified
commitment during the early period of Philosophic understanding should
not be a cause ofmuch worry. From the students' writings it may be relatively
easy to gauge their fluency in and commitment to abstract ideas as a means
of gaining a flexible understanding of the world, but it is difficult to be pre-
cise in scoring such readings. Perhaps the teacher could use rather gross
categories, like "easy and flexible," "adequate," "inadequate," to evaluate stu-
dents' performance. Such scales are also useful in encouraging the teacher to
value such characteristics in their students' performance.
272
For the first example, that of the topic of this book, the teacher should

SOME IMPLICATIONS
FOR TEACHING
see whether students recognize the characteristics of each kind of under-
standing and have a flexible sense of how one kind leads on to the next, how
they partially coalesce, how the dynamic of the process works, and so on~
again, these can be evaluated with traditional techniques. The teacher could
also look for evidence that students recognize the limits of this scheme.
In the Industrial Revolution example, we would want to know at the
most basic level whether and how adequately students have mastered the
content, recognizing that what counts as appropriate content will change
somewhat depending on the general scheme. We will want to know from
their written work how flexibly and fluently they can use the abstract lan-
guage through which general schemes can be developed, deployed, and
elaborated. We will want to ensure that they can consistently deploy a partic-
ular general scheme in making sense of the details of the revolution. And,
particularly as students develop more sophisticated general schemes, we can
examine their written work and oral discussions for evidence of recognition
that all is not well in the realm of general schemes, that truth is not as easily
attainable there as had been thought, that the worm of irony is beginning to
wriggle and chew into the grand edifices of the general schemes.
Parents of well-educated children at around fifteen or sixteen years can
stimulate and help the development ofPhilosophic understandingbyincreas-
ingly using theoretic language while dealing with abstract ideas. This should
not involve droning disquisitions~rather, a chat about sport or fashions or a
pop star can be made more interesting to the incipiently Philosophic adoles-
cent by referring to the social functions ofsport, the exploitation ofthefashion
impulse or what drives changing fashions, or the cult ofcelebrity, illustrated
perhaps by some ofMarshall McLuhan's snappy and Philosophically rich ob-
servations. The point is not to change the topic ofconversation but to enrich it
with a philosophic dimension that will readily engage students at about
this age.
The parents themselves, and our fifty-five-year-old, might be the ones
trying to keep up with the Philosophic understanding of late adolescents.
There are many communities-including "virtual communities," which one
can join via computer-that support and develop the language of theoretic
abstractions crucial to this kind ofunderstanding. The subject does not mat-
ter so much as the language in which it is framed, expressed, and under-
stood. "Intellectual" journals such as Scientific American, New Society,
Harper's, the New York Review of Books and the London Review of Books, and
the Times Literary Supplement are significant components ofthe public Philo-
sophic community, providing commentary on Philosophic research, ideas,
273

EIGHT
and books. There is also a range of literature aimed particularly at, and sup-
portive of, Philosophic understanding; Jorge Luis Borges exemplifies a fo-
cused Philosophic discourse that involves contstant Ironic elements.
Our interactions with Philosophic communities will constantly mix fea-
tures of MythiC, Romantic, and Philosophic kinds of understanding. We
should keep this in mind, since their separation in this book for purposes of
description may lead some to expect them to be used distinctly I mentioned
earlier that PhilosophiC understanding of any topic might be eased by pro-
viding a MythiC and Romantic path ofaccess to it. Consider, again, this book
as an example. It opens with a trio of inadequate ideas in binary contrast to a
new and adequate idea; the reader is'encouraged to feel that the traditional
behemoths' lumbering dominance should be challenged by a nimble and
cheerful newcomer. The reader's Romantic association is attracted toward
the underdog, first by exotic bits and pieces from recapitulationists and
Vygotsky, and then from the worlds of myth and fantasy, Herodotus and an-
cient Egypt, central Asian peasants and their inability to manage syllogisms,
and so on. These elements ease the reader through the lengthy characteriza-
tion of the new idea, which keeps an open door to the Ironic while working
largely in a Philosophic vein.
Similarly, the teacher can provide access to a Philosophic treatment of a
topic by means of a MythiC and Romantic introduction. A unit on plate tec-
tonics might begin with "static/dynamic" binary concepts, presenting im-
ages of the earth as static, stable, and working through its reliable cycle of
seasons. Such a view has an obvious intuitive appeal because, in terms of the
tiny human life span, the earth does appear stable. The teacher can indicate
that this view dominated thinking in the West until the nineteenth century,
when people's imaginations became accustomed to much longer stretches of
linear time. The competing image of a dynamic earth can then be intro-
duced. The teacher could encourage Romantic association with the dynamic
as crucial to understanding a constantly changing planetary surface. The
teacher could also focus on the drama of relatively recent events. The spill of
Atlantic water over the Straits of Gibraltar, filling the low-lying basin ofwhat
is now the Mediterranean, is a good example; for years and years there
poured one of the largest waterfalls that could even have been witnessed by
early humans. The explosion of Krakatoa is another dramatic event; its mas-
sive destructive force, its sound, and the violence of the waves it generated,
were detected thousands of miles away None of this introductory material
need be labored or very time consuming, but it should ease access to the
topic, increase engagement, and enrich understanding.
As I mentioned earlier, the teacher of Philosophic students should have
274
already developed significant Ironic understanding himself or herself. Now,

SOME IMPLICATIONS FOR TEACHING
this kind of observation is sometimes construed as implying that the teacher
is supposed to talk down to or patronize students. This interpretation strikes
me as a peculiar way oflooking at an inevitable feature ofadequate teaching.
If the teacher has no greater understanding than the student, it is hard to see
how the role can be justified. The central sensitivity and skill of teaching
consists in presenting knowledge to students in a manner that is most acces-
sible and most stimulating to their developing understanding. What some
represent as patronizing might more properly be seen as a matter ofcourtesy.
IRONIC UNDERSTANDING
Teaching people who are already engaged in Ironic understanding and who
deploy the appropriate intellectual tools might be seen as a conversation be-
tween one who knows more about a topic and one who knows less. But this
teaching will not involve the disparities assumed above, in which the Ironic
teacher courteously accommodates students' kinds ofunderstanding. Ironic
teaching will casually use all ofthe kinds ofunderstanding, moving from one
to another as seems best to enrich and deepen understanding.
CONCLUSION
This somewhat new conception of education requires that teachers be sensi-
tive to the kinds of understanding and the intellectual tools their students
are deplOYing. This sensitivity obviously needn't be in the terms of this
theory, with its unfamiliar categories and unconventional manner of charac-
terizing children's thinking and learning; many teachers exemplify remark-
ably well-attuned sensitivity to their students and would no doubt
characterize students' thinking in terms that are quite different from mine.
But I hope even such expert teachers would recognize an echo of their in-
sights in this theory, and see its value in its provision of at least one way of
alerting preservice teachers to a crucial dimension of educational practice. I
think it might also be valued as offering some new strategies for planning
and teaching; these are sketched only in outline here but can be elaborated
in a number of ways (e.g., Armstrong, Connolly, and Saville, 1994).
Initially, it may seem daunting that one has to develop some new ped-
agogical refinement and precision in recognizing arcane "kinds of under-
standing." I don't think the call is for something extraordinary. I have tried to
provide concrete, descriptive help to support and direct that sensitivity, and
the rough age gUides given earlier can limit what one has to focus on. So-
275

276
EIGHT
matic characteristics will likely predominate up to two and a halfyears, then
Mythic until about eight years, Romantic until about fifteen, Philosophic un-
til the early twenties, and Ironic thereafter. This scheme describes ideal cir-
cumstances, of course, but these kinds of understanding are not the precise
on/off conditions suggested by some Piagetian stages, for example. Teachers
can relatively easily appeal to more than one kind ofunderstanding at a time.
Addressing students in a "higher" kind than their most energetic zone of de-
velopment doesn't make the material incomprehensible; it may just be less
engaging and less meaningful than it could have been, but that seems the
normal course of events in many classrooms. If one is teaching, say, a class of
twelve-year-olds, one can introduce a topic in a Mythic way, using binary
concepts in a dramatic story opening, and then move on to a Romantic ex-
ploration of extremes and limits, exposing the binaries to critical examina-
tion, and showing the human dimensions of the content through a narrative
structure, in the process providing some glimpse of general schemes that
undergird the topic. While the main focus will be Romantic, one can set up
the topic to provide as clear access as possible for the more Mythic and the
more Philosophic students, too. This flexibility of presentation may seem to
require superhuman intellectual nimbleness, but we actually do this kind of
shifting routinely when addreSSing diverse groups and in conversation.
When a scheme like this makes differences in understanding explicit, how-
ever, it provides some practical guidance for those who lack experience of, or
an intuitive feel for, such differences.
A clear implication of this conception of education is that, in order to
teach effectively at any level, the teacher must be familiar with the appropri-
ate kind of understanding and have themselves abundantly and flexibly de-
veloped it, and must consequently feel and clearly recognize its affective tug
in their own lives. This central principle challenges most directly the disin-
terested dispensing of knowledge that has no affective tug on the teacher.
What does not engage the teacher produces dreariness for both teachers and
students; the students being younger can often bear it better, but it erodes
the souls of both.
(Teachers who would like copies ofthe Mythic, Romantic, and/or Philo-
sophic planning frameworks will find them on my home page, whose ad-
dress is in chapter 6, page 173.)

Afterword
The idea of education in this book is that we recapitulate the kinds of under-
standing that have developed in cultural history. We begin with the Somatic
and Mythic kinds, whose basic forms are genetically programmed as a result
of our evolutionary history; they come with the human body, in its senses
and brain, and with the development of an oral language. Thereafter our
general learning capacity comes increasingly into play, enabling us, more la-
boriously, to develop Romantic, PhilosophiC, and Ironic kinds of under-
standing by recapitulating the cultural inventions of literacy, theoretic
thinking, and extreme linguistic reflexiveness.
The educational process is shaped by evolutionary developments in the
distant past and by cultural developments in the more recent past. There
were clear advantages to early societies if their younger members learned
language very qUickly and used it to build workable images of the society
and the cosmos-images to which they also developed strong emotional
commitments. The reproductive success of such groups led to the unique-
ness of human childhood in the animal world. An advantage also was to be
gained in preserving throughout life, even if in diminishing degree as indi-
viduals aged, a relatively undifferentiated learning capacity. Such a capacity
would allow a degree of adaptability and flexibility in learning the particular
skills and lore required within the complex cultural societies that language
created; these societies might be indeterminately varied, and the individual
had to be intellectually eqUipped to adapt to any particular set of norms.
277

AFTERWORD
Today, as a result, young children qUickly learn a language and generate
images of their immediate society and of their cosmos. This early learning is
rapid and typically so successful that it remains fixed throughout life, pro-
viding a template of presuppositions on which future learning is fitted. By
ages four or five this incisive learning-directed, in plausible accounts, by a
differentiated mental module-diminishes significantly and, during the
next few years, the dynamic language-learning and society-orienting drives
gradually give way to the less urgent general learning capacity.
Evolution has not eqUipped us ideally for the educational tasks reqUired
by advanced literate societies. We are equipped intellectually for the condi-
tion of small nonliterate social groups sharing unquestioned ideologies and
images of the cosmos. Our preparation for such groups is only too evident
despite our educational assaults on our young, and helps to explain why we
have such difficulty and pain in expanding our understanding into and
through adulthood. We have to adapt our undifferentiated learning capacity
to deal with much more complex and flexible learning than it has been evo-
lutionarily shaped to handle. We cannot tinker with the "hardware" supplied
to us by evolution, so we have to adapt the "software" of educational pro-
grams in order to subvert the natural constraints on our intellectual flex-
ibility. The weak, undifferentiated learning capacity is not deSigned to
disturb and reshape the early intellectual conditioning we experience. The
challenge for education is to work out how we can nevertheless manage to
do this.
All major educational thinkers have recognized the problem created by
the influence of evolutionary pressures to adapt to conditions that are no
longer those with which we are faced in modem, highly literate societies.
The theorists did not put it in these terms, ofcourse. Plato offered a fifty-year
curriculum of increasingly abstract, disciplined knowledge. While that cer-
tainly seems a part of the solution, by itselfit seems too fragile, too rigid, and
ultimately an act ofinsufficiently warranted faith. Rousseau offered the more
radical recommendation of trying to starve the early rapid learning of any-
thing to work on-by keeping the child away from society and away from
words, words, words as much as possible-thus leaving the later learning
capacity with nothing to undo. While this is an acute suggestion, it seems in
the end simply unrealistic-the child deprived of so much early learning
would not likely develop the later richness of understanding Rousseau as-
sumes will be possible. John Dewey characterized the problem in terms of
"natural" or "incidental" and "formal" learning (1966, pp. 6-9), and pro-
poses as a solution making the latter as much like "natural" learning as can be
278
contrived. This, too, is an important inSight, but it seems in the end inade-

AFTERWORD
quate because it does not recognize that the dynamic of "natural" learning is
available to us in significantly diminishing degrees after about age five.
My proposal for dealing with this fundamental problem draws on that
greatly underestimated educational thinker who foolishly expressed his
ideas in verse, William Wordsworth. His sense of the character of early
"modular" learning and its diminution at around five led him to conclude
that the best hope for keeping that educational energy alive in the later years
was to stimulate the imagination. This would preserve some flexibility of the
intellect that would enable people to deal more effectively with the complex
demands of modern changing social conditions. I have tried to draw on and
develop this idea. For each of the "literate" kinds of understanding-
Romantic, PhilosophiC, and Ironic-I have emphasized the particular intel-
lectual tools that support imaginative flexibility. My characterization ofthese
tools has been drawn from observations of their development, refinement,
and use in cultural history.
Ideas about evolution transformed understanding in nearly all areas of.
human inquiry. Even as they began to take shape in the late nineteenth cen-
tury they foundered in education because ofinadequate conceptions ofwhat
aspects of human evolutionary and cultural history were being recapitu-
lated. Since the abandonment of recapitulation, educational thinking has
persisted in a manner uninfluenced by the seismic paradigm shift that Dar-
win's ideas effected in modern thinking. It may seem a lame boast to have
devised a theory that manages to bring educational thinking into the late
nineteenth century-but there we are.
279


b
biography
Alvarez, A. (1995). Night: An exploration ofnight life, night language, sleep and dreams. Lon-
don: Cape.
Applebee, Arthur N. (1978). The child's concept of story. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Armstrong, Miranda, Connolly, Ann, and Saville, Kathy. (1994). Joumeys of discovery.
Melbourne: Oxford University Press.
Arnheim, Rudolf. (1974). Art and visual perception. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Ascheim, Steven E. (1994). The Nietzschean legacy in Germany, 1890-1990. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Ashton, Elizabeth. (1993). Interpreting children's ideas: Creative thought or factual be-
lief? A new look at Piaget's theory of childhood artificialism as related to religious
education. BritishJournal ofEducational Studies, 41 (2), 164-73.
Bacon, Francis. (1965). The great instarvation. In S. Warhaft (Ed.), Francis Bacon: Aselec-
tion ofhis works. London: Macmillan. First published, 1620.
Bai, Heesoon. (1996). Moral perception in the nondual key: Towards an ethic of moral pro-
prioception. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
Canada.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1986). Speech genres and other late essays (Caryl Emerson and Michael
Holquist, Eds.; V.W McGee, Trans.). Austin: University of Texas Press.
Banks, M. S., and Salaparek, R. (1983). Infant visual perception. In M. M. Haith and].].
Campos (Eds.), Handbook ofchild psychology (Vol. 2). New York: Wiley.
Barzun,]acques. (1961). Classic, romantic and modern. Boston: Atlantic-Little, Brown.
Behler, Ernst. (1990). Irony and the discourse ofmodernity. Seattle: University ofWashing-
ton Press.
Bennett,joAnn, and Berry,]ohn W (1991). Cree literacy in the syllabiC script. In David R.
Olson and Nancy Torrance (Eds.), Literacy and orality. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Bernstein, Basil. (1975). Class, codes, and control: Vol. 3. Towards a theory of educational
transmission. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Bertelson, P, and DeGelder, B. (1988). Learning about reading from illiterates. In S. Gal-
aburda (Ed.), From neurons to reading. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Bettelheim, B. (1976). The uses ofenchantment. New York: Knopf.
Black, Max. (1962). Models and metaphors. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
Bloom, Alan. (1987). The closing ofthe American mind: How higher education hasfailed de-
mocracy and impoverished the souls oftoday's students. New York: Simon and Schuster.
281

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Booth, Wayne C. (1974). A rhetoric ofirony. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
---. (1979). Metaphor as rhetoric: The problem of evaluation. In Sheldon Sacks
(Ed.), On metaphor: Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Borges, jorge Luis. (1968). Other inquisitions 1937-1952. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Bourdieu, Pierre, et al. (1994). Academic discourse (Richard Teese, Trans.). Oxford: Polity.
First published in France, 1965.
Brainerd, Charles]. (1978). Piaget~ theory ojintelligence. Englewood Cliffs, N.].: Prentice-
Hall.
Brett-Smith, H. F B. (1921). Shelley's Defence ofPoetry. Oxford: Blackwell.
Brown, D. E. (1991). Human universals. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Bruner, jerome. (1960). The process of education. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
---. (1986). Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
---. (1988). Discussion. Yale]oumal ojCriticism, 2(1).
---. (1990). Acts ofmeaning. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Bruns, Gerald L. (1992). Hermeneutics: Ancient and modern. New Haven, Conn.: Yale Uni-
versity Press.
Burckhardt, jacob. (1955). Force andfreedom: An interpretation ofhistory (james Hastings
Nichols, Ed.). New York: Meridian Books.
---. (1960). The civilization of the Renaissance in Italy (S. G. C. Middlemore, Trans.).
London: Phaidon Press.
---. (1965). On history and historians (Harry Zohn, Trans.). New York: Harper Torch-
book.
Burke, james. (1978). Connections. Boston: Little, Brown.
Burkert, Walter. (1985). Greek religion (john Raffan, Trans.). Cambridge: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
Burton, Virginia Lee. (1962). Life story. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Butler, Marilyn. (1981). Romantics, rebels, and reactionaries. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Carey, S., and Gelman, R. (1990). The epigenesis ofmind. Hillsdale, N.].: Erlbaum.
Case, Robbie. (1985). Intellectual development: Birth to adulthood. New York: Academic
Press.
---. (1991). The mind's staircase: Exploring the conceptual underpinnings oj children~
thought and knowledge. Hillsdale, N.j.: Erlbaum.
Cassirer, Ernst. (1946). Language and mind (Suzanne K. Langer, Trans.). New York: Har-
per.
Chesterton, Gilbert Keith. (1937). Autobiography. London: Sheed and Ward.
Churcher,]., and Scaife, M. (1982). How infants see the point. In G. E. Butterworth and
P. Light (Eds.), Social cognition: Studies of the development ofunderstanding (pp. 116-
36). Brighton, Sussex: Harvester.
Cochrane, C. N. (1929). Thucydides and the science ofhistory. London: Oxford University
Press.
Coe, Richard. (1984). When the grass was taller: New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
Coles, Robert. (1989). The call of stories: Teaching and the moral imagination. Boston:
Houghton Mifflin.
Cole, M., and Scribner, S. (1974). Culture and thought: A psychological introduction. New
York: Wiley.
282
Collingwood, R. G. (1946). The idea ofhistory. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Comnena, Anna. (1969). The Alexiad of Anna Comnena (E. R. A. Sewter, Trans.). First
published in Greek, ca. 1150.
Conway, Daniel W, and Seery,]ohn E. (Eds.). (1992). The polities of irony. New York: St.
Martin's Press.
Cornford, Francis MacDonald. (1907). Thucydides mythistoricus. London: Edward Ar-
nold.
---. (1912). From religion to philosophy. London: Edward Arnold.
---. (Trans., Ed., Intro.). (1941). The Republic of Plato. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
---. (1952). Principium sapientiae: The origins oj Greek philosophical thought. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cunningham, Valentine. (1994, February 18). Fight, fight, and fight again. Times Literary
Supplement.
Dale, Peter Allan. (1989). Science, art, and society in the Victorian age. Madison: University
of Wisconsin Press.
Danzig, Tobias. (1967). Number: The language ofscience. New York: Free Press. First pub-
lished, New York: Macmillan, 1930.
Darling,John, and Van de Pijpekamp, Maaike. (1994). Rousseau on the education, domi-
nation and violation of women. British Journal of Educational Studies, XXXXII(2),
115-32.
Davie, George Elder. (1986). The crisis ofthe democratic intellect: The problem ofgeneralism
and specialization in twentieth-century Scotland. Edinburgh: Polygon.
de Castell, Suzanne, Luke, Allan, and Luke, Carmen. (1989). Language, authority and
criticism: Readings on the school textbook. London: Falmer.
Dewey,]ohn. (1911). Culture epoch theory. In P. Monroe (Ed.), A cyclopedia ofeducation
(Vol. 2) (pp. 240-42). New York: Macmillan.
---. (1966). Democracy and education. New York: Free Press. First published, 1916.
---. (1972). Plan of organization of the university primary school. In]. A. Boydsen
(Ed.), John Dewey: The early works, 1882-1898: Vol. 5. Early essays, 1895-1898
(pp.224-43).
Dodds, E. R. (1951). The Greeks and the irrational. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of
California Press.
Donald, :Nlerlin. (1991). Origins of the modem mind. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Donaldson, Margaret. (1978). Children's minds. London: Croom Helm.
Durkheim, Emile. (1956). Education and sociology (Sherwood D. Fox, Trans., and Intro.).
New York: Free Press.
Egan, Kieran. (1978). Thucydides, tragedian. In Robert H. Canary and Henry Kozicki
(Eds.), The writing of history: Literary form and historical understanding. Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press.
---. (1979). Progress in historiography. Clio, 8(2),195-228.
---. (1983). Education and psychology: Plato, Piaget, and Scientific psychology. New
York: Teachers College Press.
---. (1986). Teaching as story telling. London, Ontario: Althouse Press~ Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1989; London: Routledge, 1989.
---. (1988). Primary understanding: Education in early childhood. New York: Rout-
ledge.
283

BIBLIOGRAPHY
---. (1990). Romantic understanding: The development of rationality and imagination,
ages 8-15. New York and London: Routledge.
---. (1992). Imagination in teaching and learning: The middle school years. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press; London, Ontario: Althouse Press; London: Routledge.
Eimas, P. D., et al. (1986). Speech perception in infants. Science, 171,303-306.
Eisenstein, Elizabeth. (1979). The printing press as an agent ofchange: Communications and
cultural transformations in early-modern Europe (2 vols.). New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
---. (1983). The printing revolution in early modern Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Eisner, Elliot W (1985). The educational imagination. New York: Macmillan.
Elkind, David. (1976). Child development and education: A Piagetian perspective. New York:
Oxford University Press.
---. (1981). The hurried child: Growing up too fast too soon. Reading, Mass.: Addison-
Wesley.
Ellis, A. K. (1986). Teaching and learning elementary social studies. Boston: Allyn and Ba-
con.
Enright, D.]. (1988). The alluring problem: An essay on irony. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Erikson, Erik H. (1963). Childhood and society (2nd ed.). New York: Norton.
Favat, Andre. (1977). Child and tale: The origins of interest. Washington, D.C.: National
Council of Teachers of English.
Feldman, Carol Fleisher. (1988). Symposium contribution on "Literacy, reading, and
power." YaleJournal ofCriticism, 2 (1), 209-14.
---. (1991). Oral metalanguage. In David R. Olson and Nancy Torrance (Eds.), Liter-
acy and orality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ferguson, Kathy E. (1993). The man question: Visions of subjectivity in feminist theory.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Fischer, Kurt. (1980). A theory of cognitive development: The control and construction
of hierarchies of skills. Psychological Review, 97, 477-531.
Fodor,]erry. (1983). The modularity ofmind. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Fornara, Charles William. (1983). The nature ofhistory in ancient Greece and Rome. Berke-
ley: University of California Press.
Fox-Keller, Evelyn. (1986). How gender matters, or, why it's so hard for us to count past
two. In]. Harding (Ed.), Perspectives on gender and science. Brighton: Falmer Press.
Frye, Northrop. (1963). The educated imagination. Toronto: Canadian Broadcasting Cor-
poration.
Gadamer, Hans-Georg. (1976). Philosophical hermeneutics (David E. Linge, Trans. and
Ed.). Berkeley: University of California Press.
Gardner, Howard. (1983). Frames of mind: The theory of multiple intelligences. New York:
Basic Books.
---. (1991). The unschooled mind. New York: Basic Books.
---. (1993). From conflict to clarification. Linguistics and Education, 5(2), 181-
36.
Gardner, Howard, and Winner, Ellen. (1979). The development of metaphoric compe-
tence: Implications for humanistic disCiplines. In Sheldon Sacks (Ed.), On metaphor.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
284
Gluckman, M. (1949-50). Social beliefs and individual thinking in primitive society.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Memoirs and Proceedings of the Manchester Library and Philosophical Society, 91, 73-
98.
Gombrich, E. H. (1960). Art and illusion. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Gomme, A.W (1954). The Greek attitude to poetry and history. Berkeley and Los Angeles:
University of California Press.
Goodlad, John 1. (1984). A place called school. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Goodman, Nelson. (1979). Metaphor as moonlighting. In Sheldon Sacks (Ed.), On meta-
phor. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Goodman, Paul.. (1962). Compulsory mis-education and the community of scholars. New
York: Vintage Books.
---. (1970). New reformation. New York: Random House.
Goody, Jack. (1977). The domestication ofthe savage mind. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
---. (1987). The interface between the written and the oral. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Goody,Jack, and Watt, Ian. (1963). The consequences ofliteracy. Contemporary Studies in
Society and History, 5,304-45.
Gordon, Daniel. (1994). Citizens without sovereignty: Equality and sociability in French
thought, 1670-1789. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Gould, Stephen Jay. (1977). Ontogeny and phylogeny. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Graff, Gerald. (1987). Professing literature: An institutional history. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Guthrie, W K. C. (1962). A history ofGreek philosophy. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Hall, G. Stanley. (1904). Adolescence: Its psychology and its relations to physiology, anthropol-
ogy, SOciology, sex, crime, religion, and education (2 vals.). New York: D. Appleton.
Hallam, Roy. (1969). Piaget and the teaching of history. Educational Research, 12, 1,211-
15.
Hallpike, C. R. (1979). The foundations ofprimitive thought. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Handwerk, Gary J. (1985). Irony and ethics in narrative: From Schlegel to Lacan. New Ha-
ven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
Hardy, Barbara. (1968). Towards a poetics of fiction: An approach through narrative.
Novel, 2, 5-14.
Harris, R. (1986). The origin ofwriting. London: Duckworth.
Havelock, Eric A. (1963). Preface to Plato. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
---. (1982). The literate revolution in Greece and its cultural consequences. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
---. (1986). The muse learns to write. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
---. (1991). The oral-literate equation: A formula for the modern mind. In David R.
Olson and Nancy Torrance (Eds.), Literacy and orality. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Hayek, F A. (1970). The primacy of the abstract. In Arthur Koestler andJ. R. Smythies
(Eds.), Beyond reductionism. New York: Macmillan.
Hazlitt, William. (1951). On the ignorance of the learned. In WE. Williams (Ed.), A book
of English essays. Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin.
Heath, Shirley Brice. (1983). Ways with words. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Heller, Erich. (1959). The disinherited mind. New York: Meridian Books.
285

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Heller, Louis, Humez, Alexander, and Dror, Malcah. (1984). The private lives of English
words. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Hicks, Deborah. (1993). Narrative discourse and classroom learning. Linguistics and Edu-
cation, 5, 127-48.
Hirsch, E. D. Jr. (1987). Cultural literacy. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Hirst, Paul. (1974). Knowledge and the curriculum. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Huizinga,Johan. (1949). Homo ludens: A study ofthe play element in culture. London: Rout-
ledge and Kegan Paul.
Hoogland, Cornelia. (1992). Poetics, polities and pedagogy of Grimm's Fairy Tales. Un-
published Ph.D. thesis, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia, Can-
ada.
---. (1994). Real "wolves in those bushes": Readers take dangerous journeys with
Little Red Riding Hood. Canadian Children's Literature, 73, 7-2l.
Hudson, W H. (1918). Far away and long ago. London: Dent.
Illich, Ivan. (1983). In the vineyard of the text. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Inhelder, Barbel, and Piaget,jean. (1958). The growth oflogical thinking (Anne Parsons and
Stanley Milgram, Trans.). New York: Basic Books.
Itard,jean-Marc-Gaspard. (1962). The wild boy ofAveyron. (George Humphrey. and Mur-
iel Humphrey, Trans.). Englewood Cliffs, N.].: Prentice Hall. Compiled from two
reports, first printed in 1801 and 1807.
jarolimek,]. (1982). Social studies in elementary education (6th ed.). New York: Macmillan.
jowett, Benjamin. (1937). The Dialogues ofPlato. New York: Random House.
joyce, james. (1964). A portrait ofthe artist as ayoung man. New York: Viking.
Kant, Immanuel. (1952). Critique ofjudgement (j. C. Meredith, Trans.). Oxford: Oxford
University Press. First published, 1790.
Kearney, Richard. (1988). The wake ofimagination. London: Hutchinson.
Keil, F. (1989). Concepts, kinds, and cognitive development. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Kenyon,john. (1989, December 15-20). The outcome of energy and conflict. Times Lit-
erary Supplement.
Kermode, Frank. (1966). The sense ofan ending. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Keynes, john Maynard. (1936). General theory ofemployment, interest and money. London:
Macmillan.
Kierkegaard, S0ren. (1965). The concept ofirony: With constant reference to Socrates (Lee M.
Capel, Trans.). Bloomington: Indiana University Press. First published, 1841.
Kittay, jeffrey. (1991). Thinking through literacies. In David R. Olson and Nancy Tor-
rance (Eds.), Literacy and orality (pp. 165-73). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Kleibard, Herbert M. (1986). The struggle for the American curriculum: 1893-1958. Bos-
ton: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Knapp, M., and H. Knapp. (1976). One potato, two potato. New York: Norton.
Koestler, Arthur. (1964). The act ofcreation. New York: Macmillan.
Kolakowski, Leszek. (1989). The presence ofmyth. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kozol,jonathan. (1967). Death at an early age. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Kristeva,julia. (1984). Two interviews withjulia Kristeva by Elaine H. Baruch and Perry
Mersel. Political Review, 1.
Kuhn, Thomas S. (1962). The structure ofscientific revolutions. Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press.
286
Lane, Harlan. (1976). The wild boy ofAveyron. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

BI BLI OG RAPHY
Leach, Edmund. (1967). Genesis as myth. In john Middleton (Ed.), Myth and cosmos.
New York: Natural History Press.
Levi-Bruhl, Lucien. (1985). How natives think (Lilian A. Clare, Trans.~ C. Scott Littleton,
Intro.). Princeton: Princeton University Press. First published, 1910.
Levi-Strauss, Claude. (1964). Totemism. London: Merlin.
---. (1966). The savage mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
---. (1970). The raw and the cooked. New York: Harper and Row.
---. (1978). Myth and meaning. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Lloyd, G. E. R. (1988). The revolutions ofwisdom: 'studies in the claims and practices of an-
cient Greek science. Berkeley: University of California Press.
---. (1990). Demystifying mentalities. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Luria, A. R. (1976). Cognitive development: Its cultural and social foundations. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
---. (1979). The making ofmind: A personal account ofSoviet psychology (Michael Cole
and Sheila Cole, Eds.). Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Lyotard, jean-Fran<;ois. (1979). The postmodern condition: A report on knowledge (Geoff
Bennington and Brian Massumi, Trans.; Fredric jameson, Foreword). Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
MacIntyre, Alasdair. (1981). After virtue. Notre Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame
Press.
---. (1989). Relativism, power, and philosophy. In Michael Krausz (Ed.), Relativism:
Interpretation and confrontation. Notre Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press.
Malinowski, Bronislaw. (1954). Magic, science and religion. New York: Anchor. First pub-
lished, 1926.
Matthews, Gareth B. (1993). Childhood: The recapitulation model. In Matthew Lipman
(Ed.), Thinking children and education. Dubuque, Iowa: Kendall/Hunt.
---. (1980). Philosophy and the young child. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
---. (1984). Dialogues with children. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Mayr, Ernst. (1963). Animal species and evolution. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
McClure,]. Derrick. (1989-90, December 29-january 4). Wars of the word. Times Liter-
ary Supplement.
McFarland, Thomas. (1985). Originality and imagination. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity Press.
McLuhan, Marshall. (1962). The Gutenberg galaxy: The making of typographic man.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Mehler,]., et al. (1988). A precursor to language acquisition in young infants. Cognition,
29,143-78.
Miller, jonathan. (1978). The body in question. New York: Random House.
Modgil, Sohan, and Modgil, Celia. (1982). Jean Piaget: Consensus and controversy. New
York: Praeger.
Momigliano, Arnaldo. (1966). The place of Herodotus in the history ofhistoriography. In
Studies in historiography. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
More, Hannah. (1777). Essays on various subjects, principally designedforyoung ladies. Lon-
don: Wilkie and Cadell.
Morgan, L. (1877). Ancient society. Chicago: Kerr.
Muecke, D. C. (1969). The compass ofirony. London: Methuen.
---. (1970a). Irony. London: Methuen.
---. (1970b). Irony and the ironic. London: Methuen.
287

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Muller, Max. (1873). The philosophy of mythology. Appendix to his Introduction to the
science of religion. London: Murray.
Murdoch, Iris. (1992). Metaphysics as aguide to morals. London: Chatto.
Musil, Robert. (1965). The man without qualities (Eithne Wilkins and Ernst Kaiser,
Trans.). New York: Capricorn Books. First published as Der Mann ohne Eigen-
schaften, 1930-43.
Narasimhan, R. (1991). Literacy: Its characterization and implications. In David R. Olson
and Nancy Torrance (Eds.), Literacy and orality. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Nelson, Katherine. (1977). Cognitive development and the acquisition of concepts. In
R. C. Anderson, R.]. Spiro, and W E. Montague (Eds.), Schooling and the acquisition
of knowledge. Hillsdale, N.].: Erlbaum.
Nietzsche, Friedrich. (1956). The birth of tragedy and The genealogy of morals (Francis
Golfing, Trans.). New York: Doubleday Anchor. The birth of tragedy, first published,
1872~ The genealogy ofmorals, first published, 1887.
---. (1962). Philosophy in the tragic age of the Greeks (Marianne Cowan, Trans.). Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press.
---. (1968a). The will to power (Walter Kaufmann, Ed.~ Walter Kaufmann and R.].
Hallingdale, Trans.). New York: Vintage. First written c. 1883-88.
---. (1968b). Twilight of the idols. In The portable Nietzsche (Walter Kaufmann,
Trans. and Ed.). New York: Viking. First published, 1889.
Norris, Christopher. (1993). The truth about postmodernism. Oxford: Blackwell.
Nyberg, David. (1993). The varnished truth: Truth telling and deceiVing in ordinary life. Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press.
Oakeshott, Michael. (1991). The voice of liberal learning: Michael Oakeshott on education
(Timothy Fuller, Ed.). New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
Ogden, C. K. (1976). Opposition. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Olson, David R. (1977). From utterance to text: The bias of language in speech and writ-
ing. Harvard Educational Review, 47, 257-8l.
---. (Ed.). (1987). Understanding literacy. Special issue of Interchange, 18(1/2).
---. (1993). How writing represents speech. Language and Communication, 13 (1), 1-
17.
---. (1994). The world on paper: Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Olson, David R., and Torrance, Nancy (Eds.). (1991). Literacy and orality. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Ong, Walter]. (1958). Ramus and Talon inventory. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
---. (1971). Rhetoric, romance, and technology. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
---. (1977). Interfaces ofthe word. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
---. (1978). Literacy and orality in our time. ADE Bulletin, 58, 1-7.
---. (1982). Orality and literacy. London and New York: Methuen.
Opie, lona, and Opie, Peter. (1959). The lore and language ofschoolchildren. Oxford: Ox-
ford University Press.
---. (1969). Children's games in street and playground. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
---. (1985). The singing game. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Osborne, John. (1992, May 2). Final victory to the silk dressing gown. The Spectator:
288
Paley, V G. (1981). Wally's stories. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
---. (1984). Boys and girls: Superheroes in the doll corner. Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press.
---. (1990). The boy who would be a helicopter. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Pattanayak, D. P. (1991). Literacy: An instrument of oppression. In David R. Olson and
Nancy Torrance (Eds.), Literacy and orality. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Pearson, Hesketh. (1948). The Smith of Smiths. Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin.
First published, 1934.
Pearson, Lionel. (1939). Early Ionian Historians. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Penrose, Roger. (1993, October 21). Nature's biggest secret. New York Review ofBooks.
Philips, Denis, and Kelly, Maevis. (1975). Hierarchical theories of development in educa-
tion and psychology. Harvard Educational Review, 45(3), 351-75.
Piaget,Jean. (1973a). To understand is to invent (George-Anne Roberts, Trans.). New York:
Grossman.
---. (1973b). The child and reality (Arnold Rosin, Trans.). New York: Grossman.
---. (1975). The development ofthought: Equilibration ofcognitive structures. New York:
Viking.
Piaget, Jean, and Inhelder, Barbel. (1969). The psychology of the child. New York: Basic
Books.
Pinker, Stephen. (1994). The language instinct: How the mind created language. New York:
Morrow.-
Popper, Karl. (1945). The open society and its enemies. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
(1963, 4th rev. ed. by Harper Torchbooks.)
Postman, Neil. (1982). The disappearance ofchildhood. New York: Delacorte Press.
Postman, Neil, and Weingartner, Charles. (1969). Teaching as a subversive activity. New
York: Delacorte Press.
Quine, W V (1979). A postscript on metaphor. In Sheldon Sacks (Ed.), On metaphor.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Ranke, Leopold von. (1956). Preface to Histories of the Latin and teutonic nations from
1494-1514. In Fritz Stem (Ed.), The variety of histories. Cleveland: Meridian. First
published, 1824.
Ravitch, Diane. (1983). The troubled crusade: American education 1945-1980. New York:
Basic Books.
Ravitch, Diane, and Finn, Chester E. (1987). What do our 17-year-olds know? New York:
Harper and Row.
Rawson, Claude. (1988, December 2-8). Quandaries of the quotidian. Times Literary
Supplement.
Read, C., Zhang, Y., Nie, H., and Ding, B. (1986). The ability to manipulate speech
sounds depends on knowing alphabetic writing. Cognition, 24,31-44.
Regis, Ed. (1994, May 26). Swami. London Review ofBooks.
Richards, 1. A. (1936). The philosophy of rhetoric. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Richards, Robert J. (1992). The meaning of evolution. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Ricoeur, Paul. (1991). From text to action: Essays in hermeneutics, II (Kathleen Blaney and
John B. Thompson, Trans.). Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press.
Roldao, Maria do ceu. (1992). The concept ofconcrete thinking in curriculafor early educa-
289

BIBLIOGRAPHY
lion: A critical examination. Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, Simon Fraser University,
Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada.
Rorty, Richard. (1989). Contingency, irony, and solidarity. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
---. (1991). Objectivity, relativism, and truth. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Rosenbluth, Vera. (1990). Keepingfamily stories alive. Vancouver, British Columbia: Hart-
ley and Marks.
Roszak, Theodore. (1969). The making ofa counter culture. New York: Doubleday.
Rousseau,jean-jacques. (1911). Emile (Barbara Foxley, Trans.). London: Dent. First pub-
lished, 1762.
Sagan, Carl. (1980). Cosmos. New York: Random House.
Scaife,M., and Bruner,]. S. (1975). The capacity for joint visual attention in the infant.
Nature, 253, 265-66.
Schein, Seth L. (1984). The mortal hero: An introduction to Homer's Iliad. Berkeley and Los
Angeles: University of California Press.
Schlegel, Friedrich. (1991). Ideas, 69. In Philosophical fragments (Peter Fichow, Trans.).
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. First published, 1800.
Scholes, Robert]., and Willis, Brenda]. (1991). Linguists, literacy, and the intensionality
of Marshall McLuhan's western man. In David R. Olson and Nancy Torrance (Eds.),
Literacy and orality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Scribner, S., and Cole, M. (1981). Psychology ofliteracy. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Seeley, L. (1906). Elementary pedagogy. New York: Hinds, Noble and Eldredge.
Seery, john A. (1992). Spelunkers of the world unite! In Daniel W Conway and john A.
Seery (Eds.), The politics ofirony. New York: St. Martin's Press.
Shattock, joanne. (1989). Politics and reviewers: The "Edinburgh" and the "Quarterly" in the
early Victorian age. Leicester: Leicester University Press.
Shaw, George Bernard. (1965). Collected letters 1874-1897, Vol. 1 (Dan H. Laurence,
Ed.). London: Max Reinhardt.
Shepard, R. N. (1975). Form, formation, and transformation of internal representations.
In R. L. Solso (Ed.), Contemporary issues in cognitive psychology. Washington, D.C.:
VH. Winston and Sons.
Siegel, Linda S., and Brainerd, Charles j. (Eds.). (1978). Alternatives to Piaget: Critical
essays on the theory. New York: Academic Press.
Smalley, B. (1941). The study of the Bible in the middle ages. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Snell, Bruno. (1960). The discovery ofthe mind: The Greek origins ofEuropean thought. New
York: Harper Torchbooks.
Sobol, Donaldj. (1986). Encyclopedia Brown and the case ofthe mysterious handprints. New
York: Bantam Skylark.
Spacks, Patricia Meyer. (1981). The adolescent idea: Myths ofyouth and the adult imagina-
tion. New York: Basic Books.
Spence,jonathan. (1984). The memory palace ofMatteo Ricci. New York: Viking Penguin.
Spencer, Herbert. (1861). Education: Intellectual, moral and physical. London: G. Manwaring.
Sprat, Thomas. (1958). History of the Royal Society of London for the improving of natural
knowledge (j. 1. Cope and H. W jones, Eds.). St. Louis: Washington University Press.
Stock, Brian. (1972). Myth and science in the twelfth century. Princeton: Princeton Univer-
290
sity Press.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
---. (1983). The implications oJ literacy. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Street, Brian V (1984). Literacy in theory and practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Sutton-Smith, Brian. (1981). Thefolktales ojchildren. Philadelphia: University ofPennsyl-
vania Press.
---. (1988). In search of the imagination. In Kieran Egan and Dan Nadaner (Eds.),
Imagination and education. New York: Teachers College Press; Milton Keynes: Open
University Press.
Swearingen, C.jan. (1991). Rhetoric and irony: Western literacy and western lies. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Tambiah, Stanleyjeyaraja. (1990). Magic, science, religion, and the scope ojrationality. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tawney, R. H. (1926). Religion and the rise ofcapitalism. London: Murray.
Taylor, Charles. (1985). Human agency and language. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
---. (1991). The malaise ofmodernity. Concord, Ontario: Anansi Press.
Temple, Charles, and Gillett, jean Wallace. (1989). Language arts (2d ed.). Glenview, Ill.:
Scott, Foresman.
Trilling, Lionel. (1950). The liberal imagination. New York: The Viking Press.
Tulviste, Peter. (1979). On the origins of theoretic syllogistic reasoning in culture and the
child. The Quarterly Newsletter of the Laboratory oj Comparative Human Cognition,
1(4),73-80.
Turner, F M. (1974). Between science and religion: The reaction to scientific naturalism in late
Victorian England. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
Tyler, Ralph. (1949). Basic principles ojcurriculum and instruction. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Vernant,jean-Pierre. (1982). The origins ofGreek thought. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University
Press.
Vico, Giambattista. (1970). The new science (T. G. Bergin and M. H. Fisch, Trans.). Ithaca,
N.Y.: Cornell University Press. First published, 1725.
Vlastos, Gregory. (1991). Socrates: Ironist and moral philosopher. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Vygotsky, Lev. (1962). Thought and language (Eugenia Haufmann and Gertrude Vakar,
Trans.). Cambridge: MIT Press.
---. (1978). Mind in society: The development ofhigher psychological processes (Michael
Cole, Vera john-Steiner, Sylvia Scribner, and Ellen Souberman, Eds.). Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Warner, James H. (1940). The basis of].-]. Rousseau's contemporaneous reputation in
England. Modern Language Notes, 55,270-80.
Warnock, Mary (1976). Imagination. London: Faber.
Watts, Isaac. (1741). The improvement of the mind: Or, A supplement to the art of logick.
London: James Brackstone.
Weber, Alfred. (1946). Theory of location of industries (Carl Joachim Friedrich, Trans.).
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Weber, Max. (1975). Roscher and Knies: The logical problem oj historical economies (Guy
Oakes, Trans.). New York: Free Press.
.
---. (1978). Economy and society: An outline of interpretive sociology (G. Roth and C.
Wittich, Eds.). Berkeley: University of California Press.
291

292
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Weinberg, Steven. (1993). In Roger Penrose, Nature's biggest secret. New York Review of
Books (1993, October 21),82.
Wertsch, James V (1985). Vygotsky and the socialformation of mind. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
---. (1991). Voices ofthe mind: A sociocultural approach to mediated action. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
White, Alan R. (1990). The language ofimagination. Oxford: Blackwell.
White, Hayden. (1973). Metahistory: The historical imagination in nineteenth-century Eu-
rope. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
---. (1978). Tropics ofdiscourse: Essays in cultural criticism. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Whitehead, Alfred North. (1967). The aims ofeducation. New York: The Free Press. First
published, 1929.
Whorf, Benjamin Lee. (1956). Language, thought, and reality. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Wilde, Alan. (1981). Horizons ofassent: Modernism, postmodernism, and the ironic imagina-
tion. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Williams, Bernard. (1985). Ethics and the limits ofphilosophy. Cambridge: Harvard Univer-
sity Press.
Winch, Peter. (1970). Understanding a primitive society In Bryan R. Wilson (Ed.), Ratio-
nality. Oxford: Blackwell.
Winner, Ellen. (1988). The point of words: Children's understanding of metaphor and irony.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Wittgenstein, LudWig. (1969). On certainty (G. E. M. Anscombe and G. H. von Wright,
Eds.; Denis Paul and G. E. M. Anscombe, Trans.). Oxford: Blackwell.
Wood, Michael. (1985). In search ofthe Trojan War. London: British Broadcasting Corpo-
ration.
Wolpert, Lewis. (1993, September 24). Know how to know. Times Literary Supplement.
Yates, Frances. (1966). The art ofmemory. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Young, Michael. (1971). Knowledge and control: New directionsfor the sociology ofeducation.
London: Collier-Macmillan.

n d e x
abstract thinking, 81,106,184,232; in
young children, 47-53. See also
theoretic abstractions
academic disciplines, as foundation
of education, 13-15,20,20-
25
Adams, Richard, 71
Addison, joseph, 112
affective, component in thinking, 61, 64,
245; images, 62, 246, 255; mean-
ing, 63-65, 246
Alcibiades, 141
alienation, 98, 102, 160; "alienating
irony," 161, 162
alphabet, 75, 76
Alvarez, A., 168
Anaximander, 79
Anaximines, 79
anomalies to general schemes, 129-31,
134,135,157,267-69
Apple, Michael, 186
Applebee, Arthur, 45
apprenticeship, 49
Aquinas, St. Thomas, 145
Arian, 108
Aristotle, 55, 75, 79, 105, 110, Ill, 113,
116,124
Armstrong, Christopher, 133, 134, 135
Armstrong, Miranda, 133,216,275
Arnheim, Rudolf, 243
Arnold, Matthew, 181,206
arts, in the curriculum, 216
Ascheim, Steven E., 151
Ashton, Elizabeth, 50
Auden, W H., 158, 192
Augustine, St., 145,256
Austen, jane, 233
autobiographies of childhood, 101
awe, 218,219
Bacon,Franc~,88,Ill, 112
Bai, Heesoon, 193
Bakhtin, M. M., 65, 186
Banks, M. S., 39
Barzun, jacques, 96
behaviorism, 117
Behler, Ernst, 146, 151, 170
Bernstein, Basil, 66, 186
Bertelson, P, 75
Bettelheim, Bruno, 38-40
binary structuring, 37-44,86,160, 184,
185,246,248,249
Black, Max, 55
Blake, William, 96
Bloom, Alan, 31, 232
Bodin, jean, 1
Bohr, Niels, 149
Booth, Wayne C., 56
Borges,jorge Luis, 92, 274
Bourdieu, Pierre, 230
Brainerd, Charles]., 50,122
Brett-Smith, H. F B., 115
Brown, D. E., 34, 38,44,59
Bruner, Jerome, 44,79,96,164,183,
243,265
Bruns, Gerald L., 144
Burckhardt, Jacob, 148, 150
Burke, Edmund, 196
Burke, james, 222
Burkert, Walter, 86
293

INDEX
294
Burton, Virginia Lee, 209
Butler, Marilyn, 123, 127
Carey, S., 50
Carlyle, Thomas, 221
Carroll, Lewis, 211
Case, Robbie, 50
Cassirer, Ernst, 54, 56
causality, 88, 89,151, 219, 220~
development of concept, 41, 42,
242
certainty, the lure of, 127-29
Chesterton, G. K., 194
Childe, V Gordon, 121
Chomsky, Noam, 35, 167
Christianity, 145
Christie, Thomas, 113
Christina, Queen of Sweden, 112
Churcher,]., 164,243
Cicero, 141, 143, 146
classification, 214, 215
Cochrane, C. N., 80
Coe, Richard, 47, 98,101
Cole, Michael, 75, 77
Coleridge, Samuel Taylor, 101, 147, 160,
224
Coles, Robert, 59
collecting, 87, 125,217
Collingwood, R. G., 93
Comenius, 112
common core curriculum, 16
Comnena, Anna, 84,108
Comte, Auguste, 114, 115,203
concrete thinking. See abstract thinking
Connolly, Ann, 216, 275
Constant, Benjamin, 146
constructivism. See learning, constructi-
vist views of
Conway, Daniel W, 140
Cornford, Francis MacDonald, 68, 79,
80,109,110,130
counting, 243
Cunningham, Valentine, 150
Curie, Marie, 149
curriculum, theories of, 205-7
Dale, Peter Alan, 114
Danzig, Tobias, 215
Darling,john,16
Darwin, Charles, 27, 97,124,139,149,
279
Davie, George Elder, 236
deCastell, Suzanne, 93
DeGelder, B., 75
Descartes, Rene, Ill, 112, 146
development, 90-193, 196, 197~ cul-
tural, 27, 30, 76, 77,203, 277-79~
educational, 19,20,30,126,277-
79~ individual, 24, 126~ intellectual,
5,20,21,29,57,126,174,179;
psychological, 25, 29,57,66,174,
189,190,195,201
Dewe~john,16, 17,28,29,31,41,43,
179,201,202,229,278
dialectic, 44,160,268
dialects, 225
Dickens, Charles, 262
Diderot, Denis, 113, 146
discourse forms, 65, 66,75,262
discovery learning, 16, 17, 19
Dodds, E. R., 80
Donald, Merlin,S, 35,49,163-65, 169,
170,183,242,270
Donaldson, Margaret, 50
Donne, john, 155
dreams, 168
Dror, Malcah, 224
Durkheim, Emile, 11
egocentrism, 46
ego self, 193
Eimas, P. D., 35
Einstein, Albert, 149, 215
Eisenstein, Elizabeth, 112
Eisner, Elliot, 262
electronic media, 181, 182
Eliot, T. S., 53, 60,133,219
Elkind, David, 21, 41
Ellis, A. K., 45
e-mail address, 173
embodied knowledge. See understand-
ing, Somatic
emotions, 93, 94,135,219
empirical research, 200, 201~ origins of,
106,110,113
Empson, William, 223

Enlightenment, 105, 111-15, 123, 127,
128,146-48,156
Enright, D. j., 140
epistemology, 144, 146-55
Erikson, Erik H., 270
ethnocentricity, 77
etymology, in the curriculum, 224
evaluation, 250, 251, 261, 262, 272,
273
Evans, James, 77
evolution, 31, 36,124,191,277-79
expanding environments curriculum,
47,60,85,86,125,126,208
faculty psychology, 238
fairy tales, 37, 38,48,71,72
fantasy, 44-47, 71, 72
Favat, Andre, 45
Febvre, Lucien, 119
Feldman, Carol, 78
feminism, 154, 155, 197
feral children, 243
Ferenczi, Sandor, 100
Ferguson, Kathy E., 154
Feynman, Richard, 258, 263
fiction, 150
Finn, Chester E., 15
Fischer, Kurt, 50
Fodor, Jerry, 53
"formal operations," Piagetian, 122
Fornara, Charles, 82
Foucault, Michel, 150,266
Fox-Keller, Evelyn, 37
Francis of Assisi, St., 60
Freud, Sigmund, 46, 92, 100, 149,203
Frye, Northrop, 184,203,213,253
Gadamer, Hans-Georg, 166
Gardner, Howard, 50, 55, 73
Gelman, R., 50
gendered understanding, 11 7, 118
general schemes, 129-31, 134, 155-57,
264-75
genius, romantics' sense of, 147
Gestalt, 49
Gibbon, Edward, 114, 221
Gillet, Jean Wallace, 224
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 146
INDEX
Gombrich, Ernst, 96
Gomme, A. W, 95
Goodlad, john 1., 251
Goodman, Nelson, 55, 226
Goodman, Paul, 11, 21
Good~Jack,39, 76, 77,213
Gordon, Daniel, 119
Gould, StephenJay, 28
Graff, Gerald, 238
Grammaticus, Saxo, 91
Graves, Robert, 202
gUided imagery, 61
Guthrie, W K. C., III
Habermas, jurgen, 186
Haldane, j. B. S., 149
Hall, G. Stanley, 27,194,195
Hallam, Roy, 41, 210
Hallpike, C. R., 28, 38
"hands-on" learning, 52
Handwerk, Gary J., 171
Hardy, Barbara, 59
Harris, R., 81
Havelock, Eric, 75, 76, 98, 99, 107
Hayek, FA., 48,198,210,233
Hazlitt, William, 113, 238
Heath, Shirley Brice, 66, 78
Heca~eus,79,82,97,117
Hegel, G.W F, 142,147,203
Heller, Erich, 139, 146
Heller, Louis, 224
Heraclitus, 106, 138
Herder, johann Gottfried, 33
Herodotus, 77,81-84,88-92,95,96,
107-9,132,178
heroes, 88-92, 158, 159, 194
Hicks, Deborah, 60
hierarchy, 119, 128, 129
Hippocratic writers, 80, 106, 109, 110
Hirsch, E. D. Jr., 15,31
history, 93,107,109,114,121; in the
curriculum, 41-44, 221, 222, 233-
35; theories of, 108, 109, 114, 148,
208,209
hobbies, 87, 125,217
hologram, 86, 91
home page address, 173
Homer, 95,105,109,198
295

296
Hoogland, Cornelia, 38, 185
Hopkins, Gerard Manley, 169
Housman, A. E., 139, 186
Hudson, W H., 124
Hugo, Victor, 138, 147
Huizinga,johan, 69, 242
humanities, 116
Humez, Alexander, 224
humor, 145,210,211,226
Huxley, Thomas, 115
ideas, as curriculum topic, 230, 233
ideologies, 122, 128; students' vul-
nerability to, 226
Illich, Ivan, 260
images, 60-62, 246, 247
imagination, 101, 115, 116, 123, 127,
135,146,147,153,182,189,279
Industrial Revolution, teaching the,
265-73
Inhelder, Barbel, 122
integrated units of study, 251, 252
interdisciplinary curriculum, 216, 232
irony. Passim
Itard, jean-Marc-Gaspard, 243
james, William, 168
jarolimek, j., 43
Jesus of Nazareth, 92
johnson, joseph, 113
Johnson, Mark, 56
Johnson, Samuel, 113, 139, 146
jokes, 65, 200,210,211,240,241
jung,Carl,46
Kant, Immanuel, 123
Keil,F,50
Kenyon, John, 114
Kermode, Frank, 63
Keynes,john Maynard, 8, 32,181,201
Kierkegaard, S0ren, 141-43, 147
Kipling, Rudyard, 167
Kittay, jeffrey, 78
Kleibard, Herbert M., 17
Knapp, H., and M. Knapp, 58
knowledge, 93, 94, 189
Kolakowski, Leszek, 36
Kozol, jonathan, 11
INDEX
Kristeva, julia, 186, 197
Kuhn, Thomas 5.,80,200
Lakoff, George, 56
Lane, Harlan, 243
language, 38, 68,106,138,144,151,
166,202; children's development
of,35,36,47,49,54,56,57,60,
61,66,67,166, 167, 174~76,210,
211,243,262,277; evolutionary
and historical development of, 48,
49,54,106,107,118,119,151,
191,277
language-learning, 226, 243
Latin, 119
Leach, Edmund, 38, 39
Lear, Edward, 211, 212
learning, 42-44, 47,131,277-79; ac-
tive, 51, 52; constructivist views of
56; general capacity for, 36, 278:
'
theories of, 85
Levi-Bruhl, Lucien, 215
Levi-Strauss, Claude, 39,46,54
Lewis, C. 5.,131
"liberal ironist," 138,153-55
literacy, 65-68, 73-81,97-100,105,
106,138,183,190,224
literature, in the curriculum, 212, 213,
223,224,233
Lloyd, G. E. R., 76,80,105,106,109-
11
logic, 56
logico-mathematical thinking, 50-54,
69, 122
losses, in development, 57, 58, 79, 97-
100, 132
Luke, Allan, 93
Luke, Carmen, 93
Luria, A. R., 29, 31, 74, 75
Lyotard, jean-Franc;ois, 156, 166
MacIntyre, Alasdair, 59,60, 124, 126,
145
magk,71,72,80, 162,213,215
Malinowski, Bronislaw, 33, 62
Marxism, 122, 123, 125, 130, 158,203,
265,269,272

mathematics, 64,72, 215, 216~ in the
curriculum, 223~ teaching, 51, 52
Matthews, Gareth B., 50
maturation, 174, 175, 195
McClure,]. Derrick, 113
McEwan, Hunter, 151, 152
McFarland, Thomas, 127
McLuhan, Marshall, 120,273
media, 136, 181
medicine, ancient, 109, 110
Mehler,]., 35
memory, 58, 61, 62, 98,227
Mendelssohn, Dorothea, 147
metahistory, 109,233-35
me~pho~53-58,99,110,210,226
metaphysics, 149
Mill,john Stuart, 39,101,114,115
Miller, jonathan, 179
mimesis, 163-65
modernism, 149-51, 160, 161
Modgil, Celia, 122
Modgil, Sohan, 122
Momigliano, Arnaldo, 82
Montesquieu, 114
Monty Python, 226
morality, 185, 186
More, Hannah, 128
Muecke, D. C., 140
Muller, Max, 34
Murdoch, Iris, 186
Musil, Robert, 139
myth, 33-36, 39, 69, 79,80,86,95,
135,209~andlanguage,33-37,
54
Nabokov, Vladimir, 169
Narasimhan, R., 78
narcissism, 126
narrative, 58-60, 62-65,95,256,257
nature, as gUide to education, 16
Needham, joseph, 39
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 38, 42, 92, 139,
150,151,161,196
Norris, Christopher, 166
Nyberg, David, 37
Oakeshott, Michael, 14
objectivity, 100, 110, 127, 153
INDEX
Ogden, C. K., 40
Olson, David, 75, 76, 77,80,81,107,
260
Ong, Walter]., 44,76,84,98,117,119,
120,138,198,225
Opie, Peter, and lona Opie, 58, 211
oppositions. See binary structuring
oral cultures, 58, 65, 66,74,77, 182,
183
orality, 77,138,163,183,190,254
Osborne, john, 116
Paley, Vivian G., 42, 50, 58
parody, 210, 211
Pattanayak, D. P, 77
pattern, 243, 244
Pasteur, Louis, 149
Pearson, Hesketh, 113
Pearson, Lionel, 82
Penrose, Roger, 139
Pepper, Stephen, 203
philosophy, 105, 110, Ill, 115, 132,
150,232,233
Piaget,jean, 16, 17, 19,26,41,50,51,
57,67,122,179,184; 192, 195,
203,267,270
Pinker, Steven, 5,39,53,57,65, 183,
243
planning framework, mythic, 245-51~
romantic, 254-62~ philosophic,
264-73
Plato, 12-20,22,68,73,75,79,98,
105,107,110-16,128,143,144,
186,199,204,206,278
play, 154,242
Poe, Edgar Allan, 224
poetic thinking, 69, 110, 115, 150, 155,
168
poetry, 224
Popper, Karl, 232
positivism, 114, 115, 117, 146
Postman, Neil, 17,21
postmodernism, 137-71
presuppositions, 79
printing press, 112, 119, 120
print shops, early modern, 112
progressivism, 29, 43,186,238
prose, 79, 112
297

INDEX
298
psychological development. See develop-
ment, psychological
Ptolemy, 132-34
punctuation, teaching of, 255-62
Pythagoras, 92, 93,106,223
Quine, W V, 55
Quintillian, 54,141,142,146
Ramus, Peter, 44
Ranke, Leopold von, 114, 129, 147,
148
rationality, 79,80,98-100, 106, 107,
110,149,150,162,197; romantic,
94-97,110
Ravitch, Diane, 15
Rawson, Claude, 112
Read, C., 75
reality, 72,79,80,83-92, 100, 110,
134,138,149,152,153; develop-
ment of sense of, 100, 101;
extremes of, 87; in romance and
Romanticism, 96
recapitulation, 26-31, 68, 73,80,81,
163,176-80,186,277-79
reflexiveness, 137, 144, 145, 155-57,
160,161,170,171
Regis, E., 258
religious understanding, 144
rhetoric, in the curriculum, 225, 226,
232
rhyme, 58-60, 216
rhythm, 58-60, 211, 216,242-44
Richards, 1. A., 58
Ricoeur, Paul, 55
Roentgen, Wilhelm, 149
Roldao, Maria do Ceu, 47
romance, 146-48
Romanticism, 96,101,115,123,147;
German, 146, 147
Rorty, Richard, 138, 153, 154, 161, 166,
168,170,171
Rosenbluth, Vera, 63
Roszak, Theodore, 11
Rousseau,]ean-jacques, 15-22,31,68,
73,128,206,278
Royal Society, 105, 106, 112
Rutherford, Ernest, 149
Sagan, Carl, 14,258,263
St.-Simon, Claude Henri de Rouvroy, 121
Salaparek, R., 39
Saville, Kathy, 216, 275
Scaife, M., 164,243
Schein, Seth, 198
Schlegel, Friedrich, 146, 147, 171
Schleiermacher, Friedrich, 147
Scholes, Robert]., 75
science, 112-16, 148-50, 162; in the
curriculum, 213, 214, 221, 222,
235
Scribner, Sylvia, 75, 77
Seeley, L., 28
Seery, john E., 140, 144
self, sense of, 100, 102, 124-26
Seuss, Dr., 211, 212
Shattock, joanne, 113
Shaw, Bernard, 107, 150
Shelley, Mary, 127
Shelley, Percy Bysshe, 96, 115
Shepard, R. N., 60
Siegel, Linda 5.,50,122
skills, 73
Smalley, B., 260
Smith, Sydney, 113, 127
Snell, Bruno, 79,82,105,118
Sobol, Donald j., 259
social class, 182, 183
socialization, 10-12, 18-22,24,25,
167,168,206
social studies, 20, 208, 209
sociology of knowledge, 136
Socrates, 138-44, 147, 155; as trea-
sonous, 18
Socratic irony, 18, 138-44, 155
"sophisticated irony," 161,162
Southey, Robert, 212
Spacks, Patricia Meyer, 128
Spencer, Herbert, 25, 27, 28, 30, 115
spirituality, 91, 92, 193,236,237
Sprat, Thomas, 112
stereotypes, 13,37,73,184,185
Stock, Brian, 77, III
stories, 10,45,62-65,71,72,88,96,
153,154,160,161,212,213;
structure of, in teaching, 52,246-
49

INDEX
Street, Brian, 78
sublime, the, 123
superconsciousness, 48, 49, 51
Sutton-Smith, Brian, 58, 59
Swearingen, C. jan, 140
Tacitus, 129
Tawney, R. H., 234
Taylor, Charles, 117
teachers, conceptions of the role of, 12,
15,17,23,131,239-76
technical rationality, 135
Temple, Charles, 224
textbooks, 93, 94
Thales, 79
theater, 144, 145
theoretic abstractions, 97,105,106,
107,113,116,120,122,138,229-
34. See also abstract thinking
theory, 96,97,132-35,153; as curricu-
lum topic, 230, 231
Thompson, joseph, 149
Thrasymachus, 138, 140, 141
Thucydides, 80,108,109,114,129,
132,178,265
Torrance, Nancy, 77, 107
transcendence, 88-92,147,148,159,
218,255,256
truth, 152, 153, 157, 186
Tulviste, Peter, 75
Turner, F M., 114
"two cultures" debate, 115, 116
Tylor, Edward B., 34
understanding, 91, 195; Ironic, 137-71;
Mythic, 33-70,160-62; Mythic, in
the curriculum, 207-1 7; Philo-
sophic, 104-36; Philosophic, in the
curriculum, 228-37; prelinguistic,
35; Romantic, 71-103,158-61,
183, 184; Romantic, in the curricu-
lum, 217-28; Somatic, 5, 35,162-
71,241-44; teaching Ironic, 275;
teaching Mythic, 244-54; teaching
Philosophic, 263-75; teaching Ro-
mantic, 254-63
Van de Pijpekamp, Maaike, 16
vernacular languages, 119
Vernant, jean-Pierre, 76,106
Vieo, Giambattista, 69, 111,203,232
Vlastos, Gregory, 139, 141
Vygotsky, Lev, 4,5,26,29-31,35,38,
186,217,241,270
Waldorf schools, 64
Warner,]ames H., 15
Warnock, Mary, 123
Watt, Ian, 76
Watts, Isaac, 128
Weber, Alfred, 127
Weber, Max, 107
Weinberg, Steven, 139
Weingartner, Charles, 17
Wertsch,james V, 30, 31, 66, 67
White, Hayden, 114, 140, 148,203
Whitehead, Alfred North, 25,91,184,
227
Whorf, Benjamin Lee, 182, 183
Williams, Bernard, 166, 167
Willis, Brenda]., 75
Wills, Gary, 237
Winch, Peter, 130
Winner, Ellen, 54, 55
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 123, 166
Wolpert, Lewis, 116
Womersley, David, 114
wonder, 97, 218, 219
Wood, Michael, 95
Wordsworth, William, 56,98,101,192,
223,279
writing, 213; unreliability of, 143, 144
Xenophon, 108
Young, Michael, 11
299

