1
Front Matter
Don’t
Go Back
to School
A Handbook for Learning Anything
Kio Stark


Additional Praise for Don’t Go Back to School
“In my daily life as a Columbia professor, I’m constantly trying to explain to 
students why a passionate love for learning doesn’t necessarily translate into 
doing graduate work in the humanities. I am incredibly grateful to Kio Stark 
for this wonderful book that explains the matter much better than I could  
myself. I intend to put it into the hands of everyone I know who wants to pursue 
a life of learning but isn’t necessarily well suited for a life inside the academy.”
 — Jenny Davidson, author of The Magic Circle and  
Breeding: A Partial History of the Eighteenth Century
“Kio Stark’s appreciation of real learning over formal education is particularly 
inspiring at a moment when the cost of a decent grad school far exceeds the 
lifetime salaries of the professionals it graduates. As a lifelong learner myself, 
I don’t envy those who will never experience at least a few years in the safety 
and camaraderie of a college campus — but thanks to this engaging book and 
Stark’s enthusiasm, I have new faith in our ability to transcend the quads and 
forge new academic frontiers.”
 — Douglas Rushkoff, author of Present Shock: When 
Everything Happens Now 
“The most important learning revolution today is not the open-sourcing of mas-
sive online courses by major universities — although that is certainly useful. The 
most important learning revolution today is the kind of independent-yet-social 
learning that digital media and networks afford. School — brick-and-mortar or 
bits-and-bytes — is no longer the exclusive purveyor of learning. But technologies  
and networks are only effective to the degree that people know how to use them. 
That’s where Kio Stark’s Don’t Go Back To School is potentially more valuable 
than any 100,000 student online course. Humans are natural learners and 
school is not only not the sole gateway to learning, it often dulls and sedates our 
natural thirst for learning. Through examples of successful independent learn-
ers, Stark gives us a practical and inspiring vision of how to go about learning 
in an environment where co-learners, rich curricular materials, and abundant, 
free, or inexpensive information and communication tools are available.”
 — Howard Rheingold, author of Net Smart: How to 
Thrive Online and Smart Mobs


Don’t Go Back to School


Don’t
Go Back
to School
A Handbook for Learning Anything
Kio Stark

Copyright © 2013 Kio Stark 
All rights reserved. 
Cover and book designed by Ian Crowther/Familiar Studio
Edited by Mandy Brown
Copyedited by Krista Stevens
Cover photo by David Gonsier
ISBN 978-0-9889490-2-7
DontGoBackToSchool.com
Greenglass Books 
With support from Gus Rojo and Christopher Warnock
Photo credits
Quinn Norton, p. 24, © Jesse Vincent
Rita J. King, p. 30, © James Jorasch
Brad Edmondson, p. 36, © Kristine Larsen
Dan Sinker, p. 40, © Janice Dillard
Benjamen Walker, p. 48, © Dorothy Hong
Dorian Taylor, p. 54, © Julie Karey
Molly Danielsson, p. 58, © Mathew Lippincott
Astra Taylor, p. 66, © Deborah DeGraffenreid
Jim Munroe, p. 72, © Stephen Gregory
Molly Crabapple, p. 80, © Julianne Berry
Ken Baumann, p. 86, © Jake Michaels
David Hirmes, p. 90, © David Hirmes
Christopher Bathgate, p. 96, © Christopher 
Bathgate
Caterina Rindi, p. 104, © Troy Sandal
Jeremy Cohen, p. 110, © Andreas Serna
Simone Davalos, p. 116, © Scott Beale
Harper Reed, p. 124, © OFA
David Mason, p. 136, © Jonathan Opp
Karen Barbarossa, p. 156, © Howard Pyle
Cory Doctorow, p. 162, © Paula Mariel Salischiker
Kio Stark, p. 213, © Bre Pettis

For Nika Stark Pettis


Introduction
1
Interviews
Journalism
Quinn Norton, Technology journalist
23
Rita J. King, Nuclear power expert
29
Brad Edmondson, Demographic analyst
35
Dan Sinker, Journalist & programmer
39
General Knowledge
Benjamen Walker, Philosopher & podcaster
47
Dorian Taylor, Design consultant
53
Molly Danielsson, Sanitation expert
57
Film
Astra Taylor, Documentary director
65
Jim Munroe, Novelist & filmmaker
71
Arts
Molly Crabapple, Illustrator
79
Ken Baumann, Actor
85
David Hirmes, Photographer
89
Christopher Bathgate, Sculptor
95
Entrepreneurship
Caterina Rindi, “Faux” MBA
103
Jeremy Cohen, Startup founder
109
Simone Davalos, Roboticist & event planner
115

Technology
Harper Reed, Software engineer
123
Pablos Holman, Inventor
129
David Mason, Product manager
135
Sciences
Luke Muehlhauser, Scientific researcher
141
Zack Booth Simpson, Computational biologist
145
Extra Credit
Karen Barbarossa, Product designer & writer
155
Cory Doctorow, Blogger & novelist
161
How to Be an Independent Learner
Choose a learning method
171
Find learning resources
174
Evaluate sources of information
177
Stick with it
179
Get a job
181
Resources
185
Acknowledgments
199
Interviewees
201
Funders
203

1
Introduction
School is broken and everyone knows it. Public schools from kindergarten to 
graduation have been crumbling for decades, dropout rates are high, and test 
scores are low. The value — in every sense — of a college education and degree 
is hotly contested in the news every day. Students face unprecedented debt in 
an economy with a dwindling middle class and lessening opportunities for so-
cial mobility. This has a significant effect on lives and on the economy itself. 
The student debt crisis reaches through every facet of people’s lives. It affects 
the housing market as grads with debt are likely to be refused for mortgages, 
the auto industry as they put off buying cars, consumer spending in general, 
and decisions to start families. After college, grad school can seem like a refuge 
from the weak economy, which piles up further debt without clear returns. Col-
lege students who go on to graduate school also delay the dilemma of the weak 
job market by using their continued student status to dodge familial pressure 
to succeed economically. They do this even as it becomes clearer and clearer 
every day that degrees may not increase their likelihood of getting a job.
This book is a radical project, the opposite of reform. It is not about fixing 
school, it’s about transforming learning — and making traditional school one 
among many options rather than the only option. I think all the energy and mon-
ey reformers spend trying to fix school misses the real problem: we don’t have 
good alternatives for people who want to learn without going to school, for peo-
ple who don’t learn well in school settings, or for those who can’t afford it. 
Because while you don’t have to go to school to learn, you do have to figure 
out how to get some of the things that school provides. Since most of us grew up 
associating learning with traditional school, we may feel at sea without school to 
establish an infrastructure for learning. This consists of things such as syllabi to 
show us an accepted path, teachers to help us through it, ways to get feedback on 
our progress, ready-made learning communities, a way to develop professional 
networks that help with careers later, and physical resources like equipment and 
libraries. In its best and most ideal form, school provides this infrastructure. 
Introduction

2
Don’t Go Back to School 
But not very many people get to go to school in its best and most ideal form, 
and my research shows that many learners feel they do it better on their own. 
People who forgo school build their own infrastructures. They create and bor-
row and reinvent the best that formal schooling has to offer, and they leave the 
worst behind. That buys them the freedom to learn on their own terms.
I speak from experience. I went to graduate school at Yale and I dropped out. 
I had been amazed that I was accepted, and even more so that I was offered a 
fellowship. Surely this was the fast track to something impressive. But leaving all 
that behind, to my great surprise, was one of the easiest decisions I’ve ever made. 
A gracefully executed quit is a beautiful thing, opening up more doors than it 
closes. I had invested long years and a lot of work in the degree I walked away 
from, but I also had innocently misguided reasons for wanting it in the first place. 
I was fresh out of college and my only thought was that I wasn’t done learning. 
Nobody had told me that liberal arts graduate school is professional school 
for professors, which wasn’t what I wanted to be. Here’s what my graduate 
school experience was like: I took classes for two years and learned one thing. 
It was not a fact, but a process. What I learned was how to read a book and take 
it apart in a particular way, to find everything that’s wrong with it and see what 
remains that’s persuasive. This approach is useful to people who are focused 
on producing academic writing, and it’s a reasonably good trick to know, but 
I could have picked it up in one course. I didn’t need two years, and it’s pretty 
annoying to only get to talk about books in such a limited way. 
My third year, on the other hand, was bliss. I was left alone for a year to 
read about 200 books of my choice. I spent that time living far from school in a 
house in the woods, preparing to demonstrate sufficient command of my field 
to be permitted to write a dissertation. This was the part of grad school where 
I really learned things. And for me, what was most significant about the year 
was that I learned how to teach myself. I had to make my own reading lists 
for the exams, which meant I learned how to take a subject I was interested 
in and make myself a map for learning it. As I read the books on my lists, I 
taught myself to read slowly, to keep track of what I was reading, and to think 
about books as part of an ongoing conversation with each other. I learned to 
take what was useful and make sure it was credible and leave the rest aside. I 
did this with a pen in the margins of the books and by talking to people about 
what I was reading. I had the luxury of a year to devote to it, but I devour a lot 
of books even when I’m busy working at a job, and I could have done the same 
thing over a longer stretch of time. I learned that I didn’t need school after all.

3
Introduction
Years later, I ran into a young, successful woman who was known for host-
ing a popular monthly salon on art and technology and for her work as a blog-
ger for a cultural institution. She told me she was toying with the idea of going 
to graduate school, and wrinkled her nose at the thought. But she lit up when 
she started describing the things she wanted to study, such as art history and 
curatorial skills. I reached back to my own hard-won lesson about what liberal 
arts grad school is really for. I asked her if she wanted to be a professor. She said 
no. So I asked, “Why do you want to go back to school?” She shrugged a little  
and said, “Well, I just want to learn things and be smarter about the things I do.” 
That’s when I got excited. I had some really useful advice on this, and I got to 
be the person to tell her about it. You don’t need school for that. 
 —  
To someone who has never tried, it’s not obvious how to learn the things you 
want to learn outside of school. I’m on a mission to show you how. To do that, I 
became obsessed with how other people learn best, and how they do it without 
going to school. Everywhere I looked, I found people who reach beyond what 
they’re used to, people who create alternatives for themselves and share those 
alternatives with others. I interviewed 90 of them. As you read, you’ll meet 23 
of them, people who rejected school early on as well as those who loved school 
and then graduated into passionate learning without it. They’ll tell you how 
they do it and what drives them to learn. 
From their stories, you’ll see that when you step away from the prepack-
aged structure of traditional education, you’ll discover that there are many 
more ways to learn outside school than within. The people I interviewed all 
touch on similar themes, but they don’t all follow the same methods, have the 
same motivations, or arrive at the same outcomes. As you read on, you’ll find 
a series of complete, complex stories to give you a rich sense of the varieties 
of human learning experience and help you figure out your own strategies for 
learning independently.
It’s important to say that I interviewed people who learn independently by 
choice and are happy about it. They’ve arrived at where they want to be, or feel 
they’re on their way. But not everyone who drops out of school goes on to suc-
ceed, and not everyone who tries to learn independently is able to do so to their 
own satisfaction. There are social and economic reasons for that, and there are 
individual hurdles that no mere book can knock down. What I can do is solve 

4
Don’t Go Back to School 
some significant problems for people who try to learn on their own and haven’t 
been successful. These problems include not knowing how independent learn-
ing works, not having any models for success, and not knowing anyone else 
who is learning independently. I want to ensure that no one ever has to fail at 
learning on their own for those reasons ever again.
My research revealed four facts shared by almost every successful form of 
learning outside of school: 
■
■It isn’t done alone. 
■
■For many professions, credentials aren’t necessary, and the processes for 
getting credentials are changing.
■
■The most effective, satisfying learning is learning that which is more likely 
to happen outside of school. 
■
■People who are happiest with their learning process and most effective at 
learning new things — in any educational environment — are people who 
are learning for the right reasons and who reflect on their own way of learn-
ing to figure out which processes and methods work best for them. 
I’ll give you the most critical information about each of these themes in this 
section, and you’ll see them echoed in the interviews and advice that follow. 
Learning is something we do together
When I began the interviews for this book, I referred to the people I spoke with 
as “independent learners,” and it’s still the most useful shorthand. It’s com-
pact, and it suggests the maverick quality we associate with rejecting institu-
tions. The problem is, it’s also wrong.
Independent learning suggests ideas such as “self-taught,” or “autodidact.” 
These imply that independence means working solo. But that’s just not how 
it happens. People don’t learn in isolation. When I talk about independent 
learners, I don’t mean people learning alone. I’m talking about learning that 
happens independent of schools. Almost all of the people I interviewed talked 
about the importance of connections they forged to communities and experts, 
and access to other learners. One of my interviewees said it better than I could: 
“The first thing you have to do is take the auto out of autodidact.”
Anyone who really wants to learn without school has to find other people to 
learn with and from. That’s the open secret of learning outside of school. It’s a 
social act. Learning is something we do together. 

5
Introduction
Independent learners are interdependent learners. Caterina Rindi worked 
as a teacher and a nonprofit administrator for years. She wanted to start her 
own business, and thought the way into that would be business school, but she 
didn’t get in. Undeterred, she joined a “Faux MBA” reading group started by 
some acquaintances, where she learned everything she needed to start and 
improve her small business. Likewise, Molly Danielsson, a self-taught expert 
on composting toilets, formed a salon with other friends and community mem-
bers in her area who were interested in DIY sanitation. “This has been one of 
the best things for our design process,” she told me.
The internet has always been good for this kind of community-based mutu-
al aid. For years, peers, novices, and experts have been connecting and helping 
each other on myriad bulletin boards and forums, and on sites such as Stack 
Overflow or Ask MetaFilter. There are also more recent experiments in facil-
itating this sort of generosity and openness between experts and novices. For 
example, a service called Ohours allows anyone to hold online “office hours,” 
making their expertise available to anyone with a question. You’ll see many 
examples in this book of novices and experts connecting and the importance 
of this strategy for independent learners.
For independent learning to thrive, we need many more tools for opening 
up education, connecting like-minded learners, and allowing them to reach 
out to experts. There’s a boom in startups experimenting in this area, but 
most of these experiments are not useful for meaningful learning, and many 
focus on connecting learners with material, rather than connecting learners 
with each other, which is a crucial component. Nonetheless, I’m thrilled to 
see every new development. We need a flood of these experiments. Provid-
ing genuinely useful infrastructure for independent learning is a challenge, 
and good systems are built on the failures that precede them. These plat-
forms and networks will live or die by how well they facilitate participation 
and collaboration. 
The experiments that are currently most well known are massive open on-
line classes, or MOOCs. The MOOCs you’ll frequently hear about in the media 
are offered on platforms such as Coursera, Udacity, P2PU, edX — with new plat-
forms debuting every semester. Their goal is to provide higher education at a 
massive scale. The field of open online education is quickly changing, and my 
hope is that it will also quickly improve. And while there are individual teach-
ers experimenting in wonderful ways with opening up their own classes online 
for mass participation, MOOC platforms are a different story.

6
Don’t Go Back to School 
MOOC platforms largely replicate school — including traditional school’s 
problems. The professors vary widely in their actual teaching skills and in how 
engaging they are to students — that capacity for performance that great lec-
turing requires. Grading is built around tests and quizzes that often contain 
ambiguous questions, without much feedback on wrong answers. Innovative 
educators I talked to note that tests are arbitrary motivators and aren’t likely to 
lead to long-term retention of class material. In MOOCs, written assignments 
are pitched at a relatively low level of difficulty, and there’s no way to accom-
modate students’ varying skill levels. These are the very facts about school that 
most of my interviewees cited as reasons why they didn’t like school. 
Simply put, MOOCs are designed to put teaching online, and that is their 
mistake. Instead they should start putting learning online. The innovation 
of MOOCs is to detach the act of teaching from physical classrooms and tui-
tion-based enrollment. But what they should be working toward is much more 
radical — detaching learning from the linear processes of school.
By contrast, the tools I’m most excited about focus on creating online 
environments for collaborative learning. One great example that provides 
a simple, effective system to form groups, coordinate learning, and connect 
people was developed by Tarmo Toikkanen and his colleagues at the Media 
Lab Helsinki. The prototype is called TeamUp, a web-based tool for teachers 
to get students learning in small groups and working as teams. The system  
facilitates group formation and allows group leaders and participants to mon-
itor progress. It was designed for classroom teachers but can be used by any-
one. (The platforms, tools, and experiments I found most promising are listed 
in the Resources section at the back of the book.) If MOOCs were to incorpo-
rate tools like these, it would be a giant step in the right direction. Because the 
most successful learning happens when students are able to communicate and  
learn together.
It isn’t only independent learners who prize their learning communities. 
When I asked people who did go to school what they liked about their time 
there, they unanimously cited “other people” as the most useful and mean-
ingful part of their school experience. Artist Golan Levin said school was most 
meaningful to him for “the community and personal learning networks, and 
occasions for intellectual stimulation. In other words, side-by-side collabora-
tion and competition with both peers and mentors.” Artist and city planner 
Neil Freeman thrived at a small liberal arts college because of “the proxim-
ity to a mass of fellow learners.” Challenge, collaboration, and exchanges of 

7
Introduction
knowledge aren’t the only reason “other people” are important. They can be 
examples of different paths in life than the ones you have imagined for yourself. 
Advertising creative director Ingrid Ducmanis found that exposure to people 
with different ideas about what’s possible after graduation elevated her goals 
and her notions of how to achieve them:
It was the people around me who taught me an important thing. I learned a 
sense of entitlement from rich kids. As a middle-class Midwesterner, being 
exposed to genuine rich kids from New York and Boston and California 
opened my eyes to more possibilities and encouraged me to reach for more 
than I might have otherwise. I got the idea to move to New York City, to aim 
for a real career of my own making. 
Given the primacy of community in the experience of learning, the question 
of how to take the auto out of autodidact is the first and most central question for 
learners. The stories in this book will show you how to find and make communi-
ties. Taking the auto out of autodidact is also the central challenge for technology- 
enabled experiments that aim to facilitate independent learning; the stories 
here are a map for the success of new learning platforms. Entrepreneurs  
and developers need to understand the basic dynamics of how people learn 
without classrooms: What they need in order to do so, and where there are  
opportunities to make those processes better. We are ready for a world in 
which people can learn without institutions. Technology gives us networks and 
tools; conferences and informal gatherings give us learning environments; and 
we have the desire. It’s time to make connecting with others to learn an every-
day act, as ordinary as going to school, rather than something done only by an 
“independent” minority.
Traditional credentials aren’t as important as you think
Degrees and careers are no longer as entwined as you have been led to believe. 
No one I interviewed who had dropped out of school at any level has had a 
problem making a living in traditional or nontraditional careers. There is a 
caveat to this — my research has what’s called a “sample bias,” because the 
people I interviewed are all happy with their choices and scrappy in their ap-
proach to their careers. But for anyone considering the independent path, my 
interviewees’ career experiences are useful and instructive parables for how to 
negotiate the world of jobs when you don’t have traditional credentials. 

8
Don’t Go Back to School 
The independent learners I interviewed all use a variety of strategies for 
succeeding in their careers without getting traditional credentials:
■
■They use portfolios to show their past projects and demonstrate competence. 
■
■They show both enthusiasm and “chutzpah,” which is an insistent, confident 
attitude. Similarly, they’re willing to stretch the truth a little to get a foothold.
■
■They are adept at learning on the job, and often choose to “start small.” For 
example, aspiring journalists may take jobs at small local papers. 
■
■They are meticulous about doing good work and being helpful in their 
workplaces or for their clients. Writer Neil Gaiman offered a perfect model 
for this in a commencement speech in 2012:
You get work however you get work. But people keep working, in 
a freelance world — and more and more of today’s world is free-
lance — because their work is good, and because they’re easy to get 
along with, and because they deliver the work on time. And you don’t 
even need all three. Two out of three is fine. People will tolerate how 
unpleasant you are if your work is good and you deliver it on time. 
People will forgive the lateness of your work if it’s good and they like 
you. And you don’t have to be as good as everyone else if you’re on 
time and it’s always a pleasure to hear from you.  
See the video at is.gd/leyeva.
■
■They use connections from their learning communities to find jobs and get 
recommended for work. This relies on participating in the economy of gener-
osity in their community, understanding that helpfulness is a two-way street.
You’re not crazy if you feel like college and grad school credentials are 
necessary to your career. To varying degrees, credentials have been increas-
ingly important as higher education opened up over the past 50 years. Until 
World War II, many good, middle-class jobs remained open to people with high 
school diplomas. After the war, the GI Bill radically increased the population 
of college grads by paying tuition for war veterans who were accepted to any 
school, but the resulting “glut” of college grads upped the ante for many jobs. 
As higher education became more universal, each step in the educational lad-
der has been devalued. 
Another change since the GI Bill is an increase in the professionalization 
of previously generalist fields, such as public relations, marketing, advertising, 
journalism, communications, accounting, and management. These were once 

9
Introduction
fields open to enterprising people with a high school education or a liberal arts 
degree. Now, you can major in these fields in college, and may have to. 
Finally, as a historical trend, people with college or graduate degrees have 
higher lifetime earnings, a statistic often cited in discussions about the value 
of education. The problem is that this statistic is based on long-term data, gath-
ered from a period of moderate loan debt, easy employability, and annual in-
creases in the value of a college degree. These conditions have been the case 
for college grads for decades. Given the dramatically changed circumstances 
grads today face, we already know that the trends for debt, employability, and 
the value of a degree have all degraded, and we cannot assume the trend to-
ward greater lifetime earnings will hold true for the current generation. This is 
a critical omission from media coverage. The fact is we do not know. There’s 
absolutely no guarantee it will hold true.
All of this adds up to a common perception that if you don’t have a degree, 
your résumé won’t make it through the slush pile. The good news is that this 
is starting to change. Given the current turmoil in higher education, it has to. 
I don’t mean that people need less knowledge to do their jobs. I mean that as 
a culture, we need to — and are starting to — respect learning and competence 
gained outside of school.
Employers are getting there. Some companies are reconsidering the way 
they evaluate résumés and credentials, much to the benefit of independent 
learners. Tony Hsieh, CEO of Zappos, a company known for its innovative  
approach to business practices, told me, “I haven’t looked at a résumé in years. 
I hire people based on their skills and whether or not they are going to fit our 
culture.” A recent NPR piece reports that instead of hiring exclusively college 
grads, corporations such as Siemens are experimenting with apprenticeship 
and training programs for high school grads that lead to guaranteed jobs. Work  
experience and demonstrable skills, as well as cultural fit with a company’s  
values, are starting to matter more. The way we think about and acquire  
credentials is also changing. Alternative forms of credentialing, such as cer-
tificates for non-institutional and online learning, are beginning to be taken 
more seriously and are becoming more available, particularly in technical and 
communications fields. 
A few professions are inflexible about the need for official credentials, and 
that’s unlikely to change. These are completely closed to people who don’t 
have a license and the profession-specific degree required to get the license. 
The most common examples are healthcare professions, law, teaching in a 

10
Don’t Go Back to School 
public school, and architecture. In these cases, there’s no way around it. These 
“protected title” professions require traditional educational credentials with no 
alternatives. If you want a job in one of these fields, you’re in for a mandatory 
dose of higher education. 
Other careers don’t require licenses, but often seem from the outside that 
an advanced degree is the only entrée into an elite world with strict gatekeep-
ers. Think of these soft credentials as a way into “culturally closed shops,” 
such as fine arts, fiction writing, sciences, finance, or engineering. While an 
advanced degree might make some doors easier to open, you can succeed in 
these fields without the advanced degree. You’ll read stories here about people 
who did just that. I spoke to entrepreneurs and finance professionals without 
MBAs. I spoke to artists and writers without MFAs and, in some cases, without 
undergraduate degrees either. I spoke to scientists without PhDs. All of them 
preferred their independent path and found it more engaging, and more prof-
itable than years spent pursuing a degree. 
The last issue related to credentials is how gender factors in the relationship 
between degrees and jobs. Careers such as journalism, finance, sciences, and 
engineering have been, historically, men’s work, only opening up to women 
in the last few decades. Women still hold fewer of these jobs, and are battling 
against long-standing perceptions of gender that often make it such that they 
have to work harder to get and keep those jobs. This means, for many women, 
doing things “by the book” seems a more reliable path. If you are already at a 
disadvantage in the race for jobs, having to forge your own professional net-
works and demonstrate your competence gets a lot harder. You’ll see examples 
in these interviews with women who have succeeded without going to school, 
but these hurdles are serious and not to be discounted, whether or not school 
is an ideal way to learn.
The only good way to learn is to do it your own way
Learning your own way means finding the methods that work best for you and 
creating conditions that support sustained motivation. Perseverance, pleasure, 
and the ability to retain what you learn are among the wonderful byproducts 
of getting to learn using methods that suit you best and in contexts that keep 
you going. Figuring out your personal approach to each of these takes trial and 
error. I’ll talk here about what each of these factors means, and you’ll see them 
played out in the interviews that follow.

11
Introduction
For independent learners, it’s essential to find the process and methods 
that match your instinctual tendencies as a learner. Everyone I talked to went 
through a period of experimenting and sorting out what works for them, and 
they’ve become highly aware of their own preferences. They’re clear that 
learning by methods that don’t suit them shuts down their drive and diminish-
es their enjoyment of learning. Independent learners also find that their pre-
ferred methods are different for different areas. So one of the keys to success 
and enjoyment as an independent learner is to discover how you learn. It will 
probably involve some frustration and failures. But it will pay off.
Flexibility about your methods is inherent to independent learning. You 
might prefer a linear path over a path based on discovery. You might prefer 
to organize your learning around concrete, definable projects. You may find 
that what really solidifies your learning is teaching others what you’ve learned. 
Diving in and learning by doing, on the fly, is a common strategy. Reading and 
listening are ways of gathering information. You can learn through conversa-
tion by participating in communities focused on your area of interest, and by 
tagging along with people who know more than you. You can talk to experts. 
And all of these are learning methods you can do together with others.
School isn’t very good at dealing with the multiplicity of individual learning 
preferences, and it’s not very good at helping you figure out what works for you. 
In its most ideal form, it’s definitely true that teachers try to cater to more than 
one way of learning. It’s equally true that they don’t have the resources to do 
this on an individual basis, nor the time to make this process transparent to 
students. So even in an ideal school situation, you probably won’t get the most 
crucial thing, which is learning about the way you learn. If you do figure this 
out in school, it will probably be by a process of elimination, and that’s only if 
you realize that it’s a question you need to answer. 
One of the first questions for most people is whether they prefer to learn in a 
linear fashion, starting at the beginning of a traditional path and following it, or 
whether they follow a more chaotic and exploratory process. Many of the people 
I interviewed reported that they worked differently on different kinds of materi-
al. Some people drive without directions; some people drive by looking at maps. 
For linear learning, school used to be the only place to get access to a map 
that charted a tried and true path to learning a particular subject. These maps, 
such as syllabi and textbooks, were scarce, restricted resources. But school 
is now far from the only place to find these kinds of maps. Open courseware, 
experimental learning platforms, and the generosity of individual teachers in 

12
Don’t Go Back to School 
sharing their work mean that school isn’t the only place to find a well traveled 
path anymore. They’re widely available without paying tuition. Good old fash-
ioned textbooks can be found cheaply and easily online. Astra Taylor taught 
herself math and science on her own and relied on easily available curricula 
and textbooks along the way: “The fallacy is you can teach yourself arts and 
humanities but not science. Actually I think it’s easier to teach yourself math 
and hard sciences up to a point. There are right answers and very objective 
measurements of progress. Textbooks are very linear.” This makes mas-
sive-scale online learning with services such as Coursera, Udacity, and edX a 
good strategy if you’re inclined toward linear learning. Astra also learned to be 
a filmmaker by jumping into making a film and figuring it out as she went along. 
Her story is a perfect example of how you may prefer different processes for 
different areas of knowledge.
So, linear structure is often a very useful approach, and a prevalent one, es-
pecially for people who are new to teaching themselves. But following a map 
isn’t the only strategy for learning. It’s equally true that some people thrive on 
learning without them. Many people I interviewed described jumping in at the 
point of fascination and working their way in every direction to find what they 
needed to understand their subject. People who learn this way talk about the 
value of connections they stumble into along the way — the purposeful feeling 
they have pursuing bits and pieces in the context of an immediate need to un-
derstand something they are strongly motivated to understand, rather than be-
cause it’s the next chapter in the textbook. Dan Sinker, an editor and journalist 
with no formal training in these or many of the other jobs he has had, describes 
his approach to learning new things: “Here’s how I start: Run at 100 mph in 
one direction, get pretty far and realize I’m in the wrong place, turn around 
and run 100 mph in another direction. It’s not a great way to learn quickly, but 
it really does give me a very wide understanding of a problem. Even though 
backtracking can be really frustrating, I tend to come out with a breadth I 
wouldn’t have if I was a little more methodical about it.” Computational biol-
ogist Florian Wagner emphasizes the advantages of “a more chaotic path” as a 
process by which you are “more likely to stumble upon other, unrelated topics 
that you wouldn’t have found out about otherwise, so it keeps your mind open.” 
Learners who operate this way tend to think that separating knowledge into 
disciplines and depending on the accepted canon of knowledge in each disci-
pline are conveniences for the institutions that house them, rather than tools 
designed for the benefit of learners.

13
Introduction
Reading stories in this book, you’ll see how these different approaches, and 
a host of others, suit different learners in different contexts. You’ll have lots of 
processes to experiment with as you find the way that works best for you.
 — 
Now let’s talk about motivation and sticking with it when you’re learning 
outside the classroom. A lot of people balk at the idea of independent learn-
ing because they think it won’t work without the structured expectations of 
the classroom. They subscribe to the idea that having homework, a reading 
schedule, and regular tests will help you learn and drive you to stick with it. 
This turns out to be a fundamental misconception about how people learn 
best and when they are happiest with the experience of learning. School-like 
online learning platforms such as Udacity, edX, and Coursera, with massive 
enrollments, also have massive dropout rates. Independent learners describe 
their aversion to the arbitrary deadlines and forms of evaluation that school 
offers. They detail their disinclination to stick with school learning and their 
abiding motivation when it comes to learning things they choose to learn on 
their own terms. 
There is a rich body of knowledge about the psychology of motivation in 
education, which I explored after I finished interviewing learners. What I read 
echoed everything I had already learned about motivation by talking to self-ed-
ucated people about why they are driven to learn and why they stick with it. 
Learning outside school is necessarily driven by an internal engine. I heard 
about how this works from people who follow their deep curiosities and imme-
diate needs for knowledge and skills to reach personally set goals. You’ll see in 
the chapters ahead how independent learners stick with the reading, thinking, 
making, and experimenting by which they learn because they do it for love, to 
scratch an itch, to satisfy curiosity, following the compass of passion and won-
der about the world. 
Self-taught scientist Luke Muehlhauser, executive director of the Singular-
ity Institute, describes his own quest for knowledge as based on “genuine curi-
osity, a burning itch to understand reality,” he told me. “If you have that kind of 
curiosity, it can motivate you to do all the other things that you need to do in or-
der to learn.” Karen Barbarossa, a writer, programmer, and interface designer, 
has several university degrees and can’t imagine learning without being driven 
by her own curiosity. “I think part of why people teach themselves things — why 

14
Don’t Go Back to School 
I do — is really for fascination or love or something that drives them to need 
what they’re learning. I’ve never known what it’s like to be uncurious.”
Any young child you observe displays these traits. But passion and curiosity 
can be easily lost. School itself can be a primary cause; arbitrary motivators 
such as grades leave little room for variation in students’ abilities and interests, 
and fail to reward curiosity itself. There are also significant social factors work-
ing against children’s natural curiosity and capacity for learning, such as family 
support or the lack of it, or a degree of poverty that puts families in survival 
mode with little room to nurture curiosity.
I heard from teenage dropouts who felt that school and its rigid structure 
were plainly opposed to their desire to learn. Several of my interviewees de-
scribed how often in high school they would get absorbed with the material at 
hand, only for the bell to ring, forcing them to switch gears and go to another 
class. They described a fundamental problem with school learning: It motivates 
students with external — rather than internal — demands and rewards. These 
are things such as grades, arbitrary deadlines, and test-based evaluation, with 
its “correct” answers. There’s also competition for artificially scarce rewards 
such as praise, attention, curve-based grades, and diplomas — and for genuine-
ly scarce resources such as scholarships. Often, this all has exactly the oppo-
site effect that’s intended. To the people I spoke with who found school to be a 
poor learning environment, these motivational structures felt contrived, and 
pushed inherently smart, curious people to drop out. For filmmaker Charles 
Kinnane, who dropped out of high school and later got his GED, “the beautiful 
thing about learning on your own is you have to be motivated about the subject 
to do it. Anyone can go through the motions at school, but self-learning may 
be the easiest way to find out what you’re good at.” Consultant Dorian Taylor, 
who dropped out of formal high school and has never been to college says, “In 
my experience, the single most important criterion for learning something is 
wanting to. Like genuinely intrinsically so. Virtually everything I’ve learned to 
satisfy some extrinsic goal has been faddish and empty by comparison.” 
As Kinnane and Taylor describe, the internal engine of independent learning 
runs at the opposite end of the spectrum from school’s external demands. Accord-
ing to both my interview data and academic research on motivation, three broadly 
defined elements of the learning experience support internal motivation and the 
persistence it enables. Internal motivation relies on learners having autonomy in 
their learning, a progressing sense of competence in their skills and knowledge, 
and the ability to learn in a concrete or “real world” context rather than in the 

15
Introduction
abstract. These are mostly absent from classroom learning. Autonomy is rare, use-
ful context is absent, and school’s means for affirming competence often feel so 
arbitrary as to be almost without use — and are sometimes actively demotivating.
Let’s go through these three elements and see how they work. First, auton-
omy means that you follow your own path. You learn what you want to learn, 
when and how you want to learn it, for your own reasons. Your impetus to learn 
comes from within because you control the conditions of your learning rather 
than working within a structure that’s pre-made and inflexible. 
The second thing you need to stick with learning independently is to set 
your own goals toward an increasing sense of competence. You need to create 
a feedback loop that confirms your work is worth it and keeps you moving for-
ward. In school this is provided by advancing through the steps of the linear 
path within an individual class or a set curriculum, as well as from feedback 
from grades and praise. Outside of school, people I talked to got their sense 
of competence from many sources. Many reported to me that they often turn 
around and teach what they’ve learned to others as soon as they’ve learned it. 
This gives them a sense of mastery and deepens their understanding. When 
their learning is structured around a specific project, successful completion 
and the functioning project proves their progress. Projects can include mak-
ing a computer program, constructing a book, making a film, writing about an 
unfamiliar topic, starting a business, or learning a skill. Projects give you a goal 
for learning skills and abstract information alike, and contribute to gaining a 
sense of mastery and competence as you complete them. Feedback and rec-
ognition from respected peers supports that sense of competence. Failure was 
also described as an unexpected key to mastery. For many, to fail and learn 
from it and then go on to succeed feels like more concrete progress and a deep-
er learning experience than getting it right the first time.
The third thing can make or break your ability to sustain internal motiva-
tion, as described by my interviewees and academic researchers alike, is to 
situate what you’re learning in a context that matters to you. In some cases, 
the context is a specific project you want to accomplish, which, as mentioned 
above also functions to support your sense of progress. 
My interviewees also described their learning as taking place in a “real 
world” context “with consequences.” Entrepreneur Jeremy Cohen says he 
used his savings “to experiment in the real world, where it counts.” Similarly, 
novelist and filmmaker Jim Munroe says he “learns the hard way about things 
often, but I have to, I feel, to internalize it properly.” When Molly Danielsson 

16
Don’t Go Back to School 
needed to put her desire to learn about composting-toilet design into a context 
with consequences, she and her partner “decided that to stick with our crazy  
plan we had to start telling people about it so they’d hold us to it. I know I won’t 
do good work unless I have someone watching me.” Danielsson used her com-
munity to help keep her on track. These are examples of people learning by 
doing, in public, with the possibility of failure, and self-imposed pressure to 
meet their self-defined goals.
There are more abstract subjects that don’t immediately lend themselves 
to purposeful, project-based learning out in the real world. There may also be 
prerequisites to understanding at more advanced level. If you want to read 
contemporary philosophy in a deep way, you have to read at least a sprinkling 
of classical philosophy. Or perhaps you want to learn Medieval history or basic 
statistics. You may not have immediate needs or use for this knowledge. This 
is another reason that learning communities are key — when you’re learning 
with people, being prepared to participate in discussions can be reason enough 
to do the “homework.” You can also take a lesson from project-oriented learn-
ing, and consider creating useful contexts for yourself: Write a children’s book 
about Plato. Choose a scientific article you’re excited about whose methods 
you need statistical literacy to understand and to decide whether you trust the 
information. Record a video for YouTube to share your new knowledge of me-
dieval weaponry. Invent a compelling reason that will help you use, share, or 
teach what you’re learning.
School is not designed to offer these three conditions; autonomy and con-
text are sorely lacking in classrooms. School can provide a sense of increasing 
mastery, via grades and moving from introductory classes to harder ones. But 
a sense of true competence is harder to come by in a school environment. For-
tunately, there are professors in higher education who are working to change 
the motivational structures that underlie their curricula. For example, when 
I was looking at the academic research, I spoke with Debbie Chachra, a fac-
ulty member at the Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering, an engineering 
school created in 2002 to educate engineers for the climate of innovation that 
now dominates their profession. To be successful, her students need to learn 
flexibility and the ability to adapt and learn on the job. That’s not really the 
focus of the traditional engineering curriculum. Chachra and her colleagues 
have created undergraduate engineering programs that foster a lot more inde-
pendent learning: “Teaching closed-ended problems toward the old job model 
isn’t giving students the other skills they need — lifelong learning skills, how to 

17
Introduction
find information, self-direction, how to figure out where to go, and communi-
cation skills.”
I asked Chachra why fostering intrinsic motivation in a classroom envi-
ronment is important. She said intrinsic motivation correlates with the most 
highly prized characteristics of education: Engagement, retention, and active 
learning. “All evidence shows that people learn better when they’re learning 
with intrinsic purpose. And they’re happier too.” Studies have proven that 
people do better at everything — other than purely mechanical tasks — when 
they’re intrinsically motivated. These are crucial facts for formal and informal 
educators to know about, and employers too, since to be a skilled worker now 
requires the constant ability to learn and adapt. The benefits of internal moti-
vation are things independent learners know in their bones.
My interviewees, the academic research, and Chachra’s comments all sup-
port the notion that internal motivation simply works better and can be fos-
tered or halted by the conditions of learning. People who learn this way report 
a tremendous sense of satisfaction with their accomplishments and in discov-
ering their ability to teach themselves. Computational biologist Florian Wag-
ner speaks for many of my interviewees: “There is something really special 
about when you first realize you can figure out really cool things completely on 
your own. That alone is a valuable lesson in life.”
The future
Should we just close all the universities tomorrow? No, or at least not yet. A 
great deal of our advanced knowledge about how the world works and what it 
means still resides in these institutions, and as a culture, we haven’t figured out 
how to make room for and fund that activity in other ways. Independent learn-
ers also depend in part on access to materials generated by schools — video and 
audio lectures, professors sharing their materials, syllabi, textbooks, research, 
and scholarly publications. Learning outside of school profits by its ability to 
borrow from inside schools. 
That access is increasing. The publication of high level research, which has 
been closely guarded, is in a moment of radical transformation. The scholars 
who publish their research to share it with the world and stake their claim to 
discoveries are agitating successfully for open access. Currently, most scholar-
ly journals are not available to people who don’t have university library access. 
Subscriptions are prohibitively expensive, and publishers insist that they need 

18
Don’t Go Back to School 
to charge those rates to sustain their businesses. The scholars and researchers 
who write the articles and perform the rigorous “peer review” process to vali-
date the articles are not paid for their work. If they want their scholarship to be 
freely available, they are asked to pay upward of $3,000 to the journal publish-
ers. Incensed by these conditions, as of this writing, over 13,000 researchers 
have essentially gone on strike, refusing to participate in the scholarly publish-
ing industry by withholding their work, declining to perform peer review for 
closed-access journals. 
There’s no doubt that as things stand we still need research universities. 
That said, everything about the higher education system as it exists now is up 
for grabs. It’s impossible to predict the ways in which it may change, mutate, 
reinvent itself, or become obsolete and falter. Right now, learning in and out-
side of school runs on parallel tracks. I don’t know if that will continue, or if 
alternatives will eclipse the primacy of school-based education. But I am sure 
of two things: That independent learning isn’t going away, and that school’s 
monopoly on learning and the things that enable non-school learning is al-
ready crumbling. I’m excited that those things are happening and I’m working 
to make them happen faster.
For those of you who have experience with learning outside of school, this 
book is a celebration of what you do. For those of you who haven’t, it’s a warm 
invitation to give it a try.
How to use this book
Theories of learning emphasize the idea that we don’t all learn in the same way. 
Hearing from the dozens and dozens of learners — some of whom you’ll meet 
in this book — made that exquisitely real for me. Twenty-three of the most nu-
anced and insightful interviews follow and will hopefully serve as role models 
to inspire you. Reading their stories, you will hear how communities facilitate 
learning, how different learners find their own way, and even how to get a job 
without credentials. You’ll encounter many different learning approaches you 
can try out for yourself. 
If you read the book from start to finish, you’ll get an in-depth understand-
ing of how and why independent learning works by seeing it in action in real 
people’s lives. You’ll find a wide variety of individual approaches to learning 
that you can try out to find the ones that suit you best. You’ll see the ways peo-
ple find and form learning communities and why that’s beneficial to them. You 

19
Introduction
can also dip in and out of the book where it’s most useful to you. Following the 
stories of people who learned the kind of things you’re eager to learn is a great 
way to get insight into tackling that field or skill outside the classroom. The 
brief how-to sections are there for you to discover how to build specific piec-
es of learning infrastructure and get solutions to problems you’re having with 
learning outside school or are worried you might have if you try it.


Journalism
Interviews


Journalism
Quinn Norton
“The best way to get 
someone to tell you 
what they know is 
to share your own 
knowledge, too.”

24
Don’t Go Back to School 
Quinn Norton is a writer and photographer whose work 
has appeared in Wired News, the Guardian, Make Maga-
zine, Seed, FAIR, the Irish Times, and other publications. 
She covers science, technology and law, copyright, robotics, 
computer security, intellectual property, body modification, 
medicine, and other topics that catch her attention. She has 
also worked as a teacher, a stand-up comedian, and a tech-
nologist. Quinn has a GED and attended college intermittently but did not graduate.
Quinn is a lifelong practitioner of the “fake it till you make it” approach to in-
dependent learning. Here she talks about how she learned the method and how it’s 
served her, as well as the other ways she learns best: by listening, talking to experts, 
and by teaching formally and informally. She offers insight and concrete advice 
about learning to evaluate sources of information for quality and bias. Quinn has 
been successful at getting and keeping a variety of jobs without the usual credentials. 
As an object lesson, she tells the story of learning to be a journalist on the job, and 
what it takes to do it well.

25
Journalism
My educational experience was categorically terrible. I was thrown out of  
elementary school, and then high school later on. Throughout my childhood, I 
escaped from my troubles into a library. So for me, learning things from books 
was very natural. I didn’t learn very well in school and usually I didn’t learn 
very well from my teachers. I ditched high school a lot and went over to the 
University of California, Los Angeles, and crashed classes.
After I left high school, I started a furniture refinishing business with my 
mom’s help. I learned some really interesting lessons there. My mom taught 
me to look at any crazy thing that a client was looking for, cross my arms, look 
thoughtful for a minute, and say, “Yes, I can do that.” Then I’d work like mad to 
figure out how to do it. In that, I learned how to “fake it till you make it,” which 
is a serious life lesson. To make it work, you have to learn to teach yourself fast. 
But you also have to learn to forgive yourself when you fail. 
The furniture business was fine, but it wasn’t what I wanted to do forever. I 
wanted to be a writer, and I wanted to keep learning. Later, I would sneak into 
University of California, Santa Barbara, classes and listen to lectures. I learned 
how to learn from lectures. To this day, lectures are one of the best ways I can 
learn things, now on my iPod. To really get it, I listen to the same lecture back 
to back, twice. I have a good auditory memory, and then I just discuss what I’ve 
learned with whoever is around in order to understand it and make it stick. 
I did eventually get a GED, but not until I needed student loans to go to com-
munity college. I never took a computer class in college. But I got a job in the 
library at the computer lab, so a lot of my learning was by teaching other stu-
dents. I started printing out and reading the technical documents that specify 
the protocols on the internet. I snuck them into my classes and read them while 
I was supposed to be reading other things. When you’re sneaking around read-
ing this obscure technical stuff, there’s something wrong with you. Wrong, but 
possibly something lucrative and useful. 
I ended up teaching that knowledge to others at the school. That’s one of 
my most effective ways to learn, by teaching; you just have to stay a week ahead 
of your students. I trained staff and faculty about what the internet was, how to 
use it, and how to write web pages. I also designed a five-week workshop for the 
more intensively interested people called, “The Internet from the Ground Up.” 
It was a fire-hose blast of everything about the technical core of the internet, 
the things I’d been sneaking around reading. Everything I learned, I immedi-
ately turned around and taught to others. 

26
Don’t Go Back to School 
This was also when I figured out that I could get help from people who had 
serious expertise. It was easy. At the time, the key to learning things on the 
internet was mailing lists. If I was interested in something, I’d join the mail-
ing list on that topic. That gave me access to the best people in the field. It was 
more open in those days, but you can still do this. While I was in school, I was 
really interested in marine science. I got on the marine mammal research list. 
I thought I was just going to lurk and learn, but I found out that experts are 
not actually out of reach to nonexperts at all. Experts are experts because 
they like their topics. They like talking about them. If you want to talk about 
them, great. You’ll have a much easier time getting an expert in marine mam-
malogy to tell you all about dolphins than football. If you are genuinely inter-
ested in people, it’s not that hard to get them to teach you. You do have to do 
some homework first so that you’re asking interesting questions, not totally 
elementary ones.
At a certain point, I couldn’t afford to stay in school anymore. I went to 
work at a computer sales/service company. We were talking about MIME types, 
browser cookies, database-driven websites, and all this kind of stuff that was 
exploding in ’95. I had no idea what I was doing. I spent the entire time I was 
there basically leaning back, crossing my arms, looking thoughtful for a min-
ute, and then saying, “Yes, I can do that,” just as I had with the furniture. I spent 
a few years getting different jobs like that, where I wasn’t really qualified, so 
that I could learn new things. 
After a while, I burned out on computers and the internet. I looked in the 
classifieds and found an ad for a computer teacher for junior high and high 
school students. I went in and said, I don’t have a teaching credential, let’s just 
get that out of the way. So I’m not qualified on an academic level. I phrased that 
very carefully. They said they’d try to figure out how to hire me without a teach-
ing credential. They just needed to have someone who knew computers really 
well. I said that I knew computers really well, which I did. A few months later, 
they figured out I didn’t have a college degree at all, or a high school diploma. 
The principal did a double take. “You didn’t ask,” I told him. 
I was a very odd teacher. This was a computer class, but what I was really 
interested in teaching the students was how to think critically and evaluate the 
information they were consuming. I hated grading. I remember standing up in 
front of them and telling them that grades don’t matter. You just need to calm 
down. Grades do not matter. They just looked at me, blank stares. I told them, 
in ten years, do you know who’s going to care about the grade that you got in 

27
Journalism
this class? No one in the universe. Not even you are going to care about the 
grade that you got in this class.
One of them raised their hand and asked, “Well then Ms. Norton, what 
matters?” I told them what you learn matters. The skills that you get are useful. 
Not the grade that you get. They were aghast. Everything for them, and for me 
growing up, was about good grades, getting into college, in order to be a full 
human being. I hadn’t done any of that. Here I was, a full human being, and I 
was telling them grades didn’t matter.
The best thing I did for them was that I taught them basic research skills 
that applied to both online information and what you get from books. It’s about 
triangulating information. You have to go through a lot of different sources, 
trying to see what makes sense, asking people who might know, and compare 
what you find. See who agrees with whom and figure out why. It’s both the 
source and the voice of what you’re reading that tell you how to interpret it. 
You have to learn this by doing it. There’s no substitution for practice.
We played a game in class called the Batcave assignment. I put a number 
of terms into a hat. Weird terms — “ball lightning” was one of them. Conspir-
acy theories, just bizarre things. All the students had to come up and take a 
topic out of the hat. I gave them an hour to research it online. Then they did a 
ten-minute oral presentation on what they’d found. The first five minutes was 
what they found, the second five minutes was what they thought about what 
they found. 
They learned from practice how to consider the source by looking at how it 
used language, for example. If you read something on the Centers for Disease 
Control site, you might trust it more than some possibly crackpot individual’s 
page. So you think automatically the CDC is the authority, but it’s not always 
like that. The source and the voice are important. The CDC might be talking 
around something, and the crazy page might be a patient telling their experi-
ence. That’s important. 
I ended up quitting teaching because I couldn’t get any health insurance. 
Years later, after being an unqualified systems administrator, a stand-up com-
ic, and a UI designer in the first dot-com boom, I came back to my original 
ambition to be a writer. It was another case of me doing things without much 
experience. You can do a lot of things if you’re not worried that you’re not sup-
posed to be able to do them. I did two articles for the O’Reilly Network. I used 
those two pieces as credentials and did a pitch to the Guardian. They took one 
of the pieces that I pitched them. The next thing I did was pitch Wired, having 

28
Don’t Go Back to School 
written for the Guardian and O’Reilly Network. They took the piece. So I had 
three writing credits. 
When I wanted to learn something new as a professional writer, I’d pitch a 
story on it. I was interested in neurology, and I figured, why don’t I start inter-
viewing neurologists? The great thing about being a journalist is that you can 
pick up the phone and talk to anybody. It was just like what I found out about 
learning from experts on mailing lists. People like to talk about what they know.
Working as a journalist, I found the secret for getting people to teach you 
anything. The best way to get someone to tell you what they know is to share 
your own knowledge, too. By then I had this peripatetic knowledge set that 
went all around technology and technological culture and history and even 
marine mammals. I thought about it as a kind of a trade. I could always lever-
age something I knew into something I didn’t. When I had to interview some-
one and I didn’t understand their area of expertise, I’d read about it. But then 
I’d also figure out what their interests were. I’m stuffed with trivial, useless 
knowledge, on a panoply of bizarre topics, so I can find something that they’re 
interested in that I know something about. Being able to do that is tremendous-
ly socially valuable. The exchange of knowledge is a very human way to learn. I 
try never to walk into a room where I want to get information without knowing 
what I’m bringing to the other person. Once I do that, I’m golden. I may not un-
derstand anything about your product or the science you do, but maybe you’re 
interested in old Chinese water clocks, and we can talk about that. I have this 
sparking little glowing fact I can give you. Or, sometimes that thing I can bring 
is to be funny and interesting and good company. Sometimes good company is 
the best thing you can offer. 
I think part of the problem with the usual mindset of the student is that it’s 
like being a sponge. It’s passive. It’s not about having something to bring to 
the interaction. People who are experts in things are experts because they like 
learning. So what you’ve got when you talk to an expert, ideally, are two curious 
people having a conversation, one of whom is you, and you both know different 
things you’re willing to share. I approach every interview or interaction like 
this: I’m going to bring you a present, then, I’m going to ask you for a present 
as well. 
Quinn Norton’s website is quinnnorton.com

Journalism
Rita J. King
“I thought I had to 
start my career at the 
center of things, but 
that turned out not to 
be true at all.”

30
Don’t Go Back to School 
Rita J. King is the Executive Vice President for Business 
Development at Science House in Manhattan. She currently 
serves as Futurist at NASA Langley’s think tank, the National 
Institute of Aerospace and is a Global Fellow at the Salzburg 
Global Seminar, specializing in creative collaboration. Rita is 
a former investigative journalist on the nuclear industry. 
Rita’s independent learning has been the mainstay of 
her education, despite having gone to college. She’s a wonderful example of how get-
ting a job isn’t tied to having a degree, since she’s never discussed her education with 
potential employers. Her career as a journalist depended on her skills as an indepen-
dent learner and on the generosity of people she contacted and learned from. She 
explains the process by which she learned about the extremely complicated nuclear 
industry in both scientific and political terms.

31
Journalism
I have always been an avid learner. I love to learn, but I deeply disliked the 
feeling of being trapped at school. When I was eight, I spent a day with my 
father that gave me a roadmap for learning for the rest of my life. He was a 
disabled Vietnam veteran, and the GI Bill paid for his education at Columbia. 
Sometimes he used to let me skip school and go with him to college classes. 
One day he took me to his physics class and I learned about quarks. I was ab-
solutely stunned. Up quarks, down quarks, charm, and strange — enchanting 
and mysterious subatomic particles. I became obsessed with physics from that 
moment on. After physics class, we went to French class and watched a film. 
Thankfully, my parents didn’t have any concept of age-appropriateness. All in 
one day, I got obsessed with art, culture, and science. I’ve been that way ever 
since. From then on, all I wanted to do was read physics textbooks and make 
art. It became even harder to sit through school after that. 
In terms of college, my father erroneously assumed that because the GI Bill 
paid for him, that I would also have a full scholarship anywhere I wanted to go. 
I worked really hard to make the most of this privilege I was counting on, since 
it had cost him so dearly earlier in his own life. Turns out he was not correct 
about the GI Bill, nor had he saved any money to educate me. I was an excellent 
test-taker and student, despite feeling stuck in school, and I was accepted into 
all of the universities I wanted to attend. Instead, however, I ended up going 
to a state school and funding most of it myself because that’s what I could af-
ford. After years of being conditioned to believe that anything less than an Ivy 
League education was completely unacceptable, I was devastated and lost all 
interest in college. It took every ounce of my self-control to force myself to go. 
I could have transferred, but I had no desire to accumulate debt, fearing that it 
might force me to take a job that sucked my soul to free myself. 
After I graduated, I wondered if I’d be perceived as less capable or desirable 
because I didn’t have an Ivy League degree. So I tried an experiment. When I 
looked for work, I didn’t talk about my education at all. I approached my career 
like an adventure, accepting work that led to other work and built on itself. I 
could have been a PhD from Harvard, or a high school dropout, nobody knew 
either way. It was a fun experiment to see the assumptions people made about 
my level of education, and also to see how much other people rely on having 
been educated at a prestigious university for social capital. There has never 
been a situation in which I needed to prove that I have a degree to get work. 
People never ask. I was a journalist. I had my own company. I now work at  
Science House in Manhattan. As a consultant I’ve worked with IBM, Manpower, 

32
Don’t Go Back to School 
and the National Institute of Aerospace. I’ve worked all around the world, some- 
times in highly academic settings or as a senior fellow at think tanks, and even 
then the question of where I was educated almost never comes up. 
The most useful thing I did learn in college was basic human interactivity 
skills. At a top school, the connections you make help you later. I didn’t have 
that. Because I didn’t have that network of connections when I graduated, it 
made me so much scrappier, and I took a more interesting, adventurous route.
I decided to become a journalist after I saw a book called The Journey is the 
Destination, a collection of the art of photojournalist Dan Eldon who was killed 
in Somalia in 1993 while covering the crisis there. There were photographs 
from all over the world. He was so young and vibrant. I was flipping through 
this book and I thought to myself, this is how a person should live. I was 25,  
living in Cooperstown, getting ready to move to Manhattan. I had my moving  
van packed. A friend of mine who was helping me move was curious about 
Cooperstown, and asked me to pick up a copy of the local paper to see what 
it was like. I found out they were looking for a reporter. I figured I had to start 
somewhere, so I walked in to see if they’d hire me. They asked if I had experi-
ence, and I said, look, just try me out. I cobbled a portfolio together and they 
hired me that afternoon. I got an apartment and unpacked the truck. I stayed 
there for two years as a columnist and a reporter. Like most people, I thought 
I had to start my career at the center of things, but that turned out not to be  
true at all. You build skills up and you use them as stepping stones to get to the 
next thing. 
After working for the Cooperstown paper, I again planned to move to New 
York City. In the meantime, I was staying in Westchester. My first day in town, 
I ran into a woman who asked me, “Did you get your pills?” What pills? “Po-
tassium iodide pills,” she told me. “If there’s a radiation leak at the plant...” It 
turned out we were in the peak fatality zone of the Indian Point nuclear plant. 
I got a job at the local paper covering Indian Point, figuring I would only work 
there for a few months. I wanted to know everything. Why did they choose that 
location so close to New York City? How much power actually needs to be gen-
erated and how cheaply? Are there hidden costs? The questions were endless. 
Fascinated, I stayed for several years. 
To learn about something so complicated, it helps to lay it out in pieces. 
There’s the territory that’s affected by the thing you’re learning about. Then 
you learn who the key players are, how powerful they are, how much influence 
they have. I took a holistic view of the tax base of the region. Did supporters 

33
Journalism
support Indian Point because it pays for the school districts around it, for ex-
ample, and/or because it provides jobs? A lot of math was required to make 
sense of the reality of the situation. I had to understand the safety and security 
issues. My life was taken over by trying to understand the interlocking systems 
involved. When you start to tackle something new, it’s tempting to start with 
the granular details, but for me it’s more effective to start understanding the 
system in which the thing itself operates. Mapping things out is really help-
ful. Categorizing components and striving to be rational, to overcome natural 
emotional responses is critical. The nuclear industry evokes fear of danger, but 
it’s so much more complicated than that. 
Listening is the best way to learn. I didn’t just call activists and citizens on 
the phone and say, “Tell me about your relationship with the plant.” I would sit 
down with people in their homes. I went to countless meetings. I talked to peo-
ple who were invested in the industry. I interviewed everyone. Anytime I heard 
anything technical that I didn’t understand, I interviewed as many scientists 
as I could. 
Scientists who work for the industry explain things one way, and scientists 
who work outside the industry, or have no connection to it, explain things an-
other way. It’s important to interview people who are coming from different 
perspectives, not just to find a pro and a con and call it a balanced piece. You 
can really just call up people who have expert knowledge. It’s up to them to 
call you back or not. I talked to many scientists who gained their knowledge 
through years and years and years of formal education. In such cases, formal 
education is a necessity. That doesn’t mean that you have to be formally ed-
ucated to know what you’re talking about, but many of the people I talked to 
were. Most people I called were eager to talk about what they knew. 
When you’re learning something, it’s really important not only to under-
stand the system and context in which that thing functions, but also to look 
ahead and imagine what the world would be like with or without this thing. 
These four years enabled me to create a template that has served my entire 
career since. 
After Hurricane Katrina, I knew that the Waterford nuclear plant in Louisi- 
ana was an immediate concern. The power was out, and the plant had been 
fined by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission because their backup generators, 
which might have ended up keeping the spent nuclear fuel rods cool during a 
blackout, had a spotty safety record in the past. I immediately created a blog 
and posted an open letter to the Waterford plant and to the Nuclear Regulatory 

34
Don’t Go Back to School 
Commission asking what they planned to do about the backup generators. An 
organization called CorpWatch saw this and offered me an assignment to in-
vestigate post-Katrina corporate profiteering across the Gulf Coast. Through 
those investigations, I gained knowledge about the relationship between cor-
porations and the government and how that functions. 
My career now centers completely on science, art, imagination, and busi-
ness. I’ve learned about these fields through years of immersion. I continue to 
live and work that way. Life changes constantly, and flexibility is the best path 
to keeping your skills and perspectives current. Formal education is valuable 
in the right context but it tends to be rigid, which can put students at a serious 
disadvantage when they graduate from academia and enter the world. Each 
person is at a different stage in the learning process. We need to all take a step 
back and see ourselves on a continuum of the learning experience. I may some-
times have to stop everything I’m doing and put my hand out and pull you up. 
Then other times, I may have to ask you to stop everything and pull me up. It’s 
the only way for us all to keep moving ahead. 
Rita J. King’s website is sciencehouse.com

Journalism
Brad Edm0ndson
“Learning on the 
job is basically how 
any journalist will 
start — as a cub.”

36
Don’t Go Back to School 
Brad Edmondson is an independent journalist and con-
sultant who lives in Ithaca, New York. He was cofounder  
of  ePodunk.com  and the editor-in-chief of  American  
Demographics  magazine. His writing appears regularly 
in national magazines, including AARP and the American 
Scholar. His focus is on social change in the United States 
and its influence on businesses and other institutions.
Brad refers to his many years on the job at a national magazine as “his grad 
school.” He learned the craft of journalism and magazine publishing by walking in 
the door and offering to work at a local publication. He’s a great example of an ap-
prentice route that many journalists take to getting jobs and learning by doing — and 
how journalism as a profession is an educational pursuit. 

37
Journalism
I always wanted to be a writer and tell stories. I majored in history, and loved it, 
and I thought I would be very happy going on to get a graduate degree in histo-
ry, but the more I learned about the graduate school system the less I liked it. I 
really did not like the idea of spending the next ten years basically being a slave 
in one form or another in order to get a job as a historian.
So I became a journalist because it was also a way to get writing experience. 
My first job was at the Ithaca Times, a local weekly. When I started there, I was 
really green. I had taken one class in school called Basic Newswriting where I 
learned about the Associated Press manual. I didn’t know the nuts and bolts of 
putting a newspaper together. Learning on the job is basically how any journalist 
will start — as a cub. You pick up things from people with more experience. You 
end up as the editor, in my case after two years as a reporter. It was a great way 
to learn journalism and publication skills because it was a very small operation. 
Eventually I needed more money. There was one national magazine that 
was based in Ithaca and it was across the street from the Ithaca Times office. 
That was American Demographics. It was quite prestigious already when I start-
ed, and later was a finalist for the National Magazine Award three times. So, I 
got a job there by offering myself as a stringer without knowing a single thing 
about the magazine. After being a stringer for eight months, I was hired as a 
junior editor. The thing about American Demographics that was really excep-
tional was that the editors there, as a group, created a radically new way of 
writing about social change by integrating demographic analysis with standard 
reporting techniques. During the 1990s, as computing power got cheaper and 
software got better, we also lead the way in improving maps, charts, and other 
graphics that turned statistics into stories. They were really hot, getting a lot of 
attention and their work was cited in the media all the time. I was on the staff of 
that magazine for 13 years and it was a really terrific place to work. That’s really 
what I did instead of going to graduate school.
What I got there was real mentoring. The editors who had those skills and 
taught them to me were all fairly humane and forgiving of mistakes. They 
wouldn’t let anything into print that had a mistake in it. But when they found 
a mistake in your work, they would correct you and more explicitly expect that 
you wouldn’t make that mistake again. The people I was learning from were 
also my friends. It was really a social situation for learning and that made it 
exceptional. People were having fun there. It was like a class that I really looked 
forward to, and it was my job. I was learning something and getting cited by the 
Washington Post and traveling to New York as an expert. 

38
Don’t Go Back to School 
I left the magazine when it moved to New York City in 1998. There are still 
only a few journalists who have the analytical skills I learned there. There isn’t 
excessive demand for it, but when somebody wants it, they really want it, and 
I’m one of the only people they can call. I still make a living doing the same kind 
of analysis I did there, as a consultant, and also as a public speaker. I couldn’t 
have gotten that work, which is quite remunerative, without the education I got 
on the job at American Demographics.
Brad Edmondson’s website is bradedmondson.com

Journalism
Dan Sinker
“All my pressure 
comes from within: 
from hearing about 
something and 
wanting to dive further 
into it, or from having 
an itch I really, really, 
really want to scratch.”

40
Don’t Go Back to School 
Dan Sinker heads up the Knight-Mozilla OpenNews project. 
He was the founding editor of the influential underground 
culture magazine Punk Planet and is now a self-taught jour-
nalist, publisher, and coder. He has no advanced degree, but 
worked full-time as a professor at Columbia College. Dan  
authored the popular @MayorEmanuel Twitter account, 
now collected as a book published by Scribner in 2011. He  
created an election tracker called the Chicago Mayoral Scorecard, and the mobile  
storytelling project CellStories. 
I heard from many people that they learned the most by doing projects they loved 
and learning on the fly, rather than by going to class. Dan has approached learning 
with this DIY spirit his whole life. Here he describes his path to becoming a journalist, 
editor, and publisher, all of which he learned from publishing a magazine he loved. 
There’s a subtle but important point in Dan’s story — that skills you learn in one field 
often become useful in an entirely different pursuit. I loved hearing about the chaotic 
and exciting process Dan goes through to learn new things, in this case learning what 
he needed to know to launch CellStories.

41
Journalism
I spent 13 years running Punk Planet and a larger publishing company called  
Independence Day Media. I started Punk Planet when I was 19 years old, half-
way through college. I was going to the Art Institute of Chicago to study video 
art. I did finish college, although I almost didn’t because I was really involved in 
the magazine. Like all punk scenes back in the late ’80s and early ’90s, every- 
one was so young. The big local bands were comprised of 17-year-olds. Record  
label people were probably a little younger than that, and the people doing the 
zines were even younger than that. It embodied everything about DIY ethics  
that I love: Nobody checking credentials, nobody asking if you have any real  
skills to do the things that you say you’re going to do, and instead really empow- 
ering people to do those things. 
Moving back and forth from that scene to art school was deeply alienating, 
because they were about as opposite as you could get. In school, there were a lot 
of people talking about their ideas and then waiting for some sort of validation 
before they’d do anything. I didn’t feel like I had a lot of peers in school because 
I was the one actually making things happen. I ended up on the internet all the 
time and on message boards, where I found people who were involved in their 
own punk scene and ended up building a little bit of a virtual community. Punk 
Planet magazine grew out of that. So, I was paying money for an education, but at 
the same time, really feeling like most of the education I was getting was actually 
happening on nights and weekends. That’s when I was with this group of people 
and none of us knew what we were doing, but we began to figure out how to run 
a magazine and how to make something like that happen. I thought about drop-
ping out of school a number of times, but I had gotten far enough down the road 
on my degree that I just felt like I needed to see the thing through. In my last year 
of college half of my classes were independent study so I could work on Punk 
Planet. That was probably the best use of tuition money. 
The first couple of years of Punk Planet, it was a terrible magazine. Part of 
that was because nobody involved knew how to run a magazine. One of the 
skills we needed to learn was what an editor does. At some point I realized that 
everything that I had learned about editing video actually applied to editing 
anything. I can remember that moment very well when I thought, wait a sec-
ond, I do know how to do this. I just knew how to do it in a totally different way. 
So I applied what I knew about video to stories in the magazine, and suddenly 
the magazine transformed. So, that is the one thing that I will credit to my col-
lege education. I’ve barely touched a video camera since I graduated, but it 
absolutely taught me how to be an editor.

42
Don’t Go Back to School 
The magazine folded in 2007, and I ended up at Stanford University for a year 
as a Knight Fellow, which is a fellowship program for mid-career journalists. To 
me the fact that I got this fellowship based on Punk Planet was hilarious. It was 
probably about five months before the end of the magazine and I was looking for 
alternative funding. I actually typed “journalism grants” into Google, and the 
Knight Foundation popped up on the top and in poking around their site, I ended 
up on the Knight Fellowship page. I thought there was no way that would happen. 
It was something for Pulitzer winners and very traditional journalists. But my 
wife and my friends said, why not? It turned out they were in the middle of re-
thinking their process, and I was one of a few outsiders they brought in as guinea 
pigs to try a different approach. It was an incredibly lucky thing, to have applied 
right at that time. I got to just be in a place and have open access to whatever I 
wanted to do. I mainly looked into what the influence of mobile technology was 
going to be on culture. But, I’ve joked many times that if that hadn’t happened I 
probably would have ended up working at Arby’s. Instead, after the fellowship, I 
taught digital tools and strategy to journalists at Columbia College in Chicago. I 
did that for three years as a full-time faculty member.
Besides publishing Punk Planet, the best example of something I learned 
totally outside of being a student is when I built CellStories.net, which was a 
cell phone literary magazine that published one story every day and delivered 
it to your phone. It ran from September 2009 to the end of 2010. Building and 
running it encompassed tons of different types of learning. It was built from 
scratch in a framework I taught myself (Ruby on Rails). I developed it around a 
lot of different theories and ideas on mobile content delivery and consumption. 
I tend to not learn well from external pressure. All my pressure comes from 
within: from hearing about something and wanting to dive further into it, or 
(most of the time) from having an itch I really, really, really want to scratch. In 
the case of CellStories it was a combination of the two. I really wanted to learn 
a robust framework for dynamic web creation for a multitude of reasons, and 
I was super interested in mobile phones and wanted to learn all I could about 
them. This started back in the fall of 2007, so in the baby steps era of iPhones.
To learn all that, basically I did what I always do. I start running at 100 mph 
in one direction, get pretty far and realize I’m in the wrong place, turn around 
and run 100 mph in another direction. It’s not a great way to learn quickly, but 
it really does give me a very wide understanding of a problem. Even though 
backtracking can be really frustrating, I tend to come out with a breadth I 
wouldn’t have if I was a little more methodical about it. And, generally, that 

43
Journalism
breadth becomes helpful eventually. Mostly. To keep everything straight, I live 
and die by Moleskine notebooks. I fill them with notes, ideas, sketches, names, 
etc. I tend to have three or so going at any time, one for specific projects, one 
simply labeled “Ideas,” and one or two for classes.
Learning outside school is unimaginable to me without engaging with other 
people. And lonely. As co-working spaces become more popular, I keep wish-
ing someone would come out with a co-learning space. It’s not about a desire 
for a more structured environment. Just people around to be able to bounce 
ideas off of, to help you think things through. When I’m looking for people to 
talk to and learn from, I just hit people up. If I wanted to talk to someone who 
was doing something interesting in Africa, say — like the people who made 
the crisis reporting platform Ushahidi — I’d just drop them a line. It is pretty 
incredible how responsive people are in answering and engaging. I’ve found 
that, by and large, people who are passionate about the things that they do are 
very happy to engage with other people that are passionate about what they do.
There’s always this great moment when you really figure out that you’ve 
actually learned something, because you suddenly realize that you’re doing 
things that you couldn’t do before. Like, for instance, I’ve been hitting my head 
against the wall with some JSON-related stuff lately. And suddenly, the other 
day, without even being at a computer, I figured it out. In my head. And it was 
so obvious! But it felt great. Those moments keep coming. I had been doing 
CellStories for about a year and I realized: Wow, I know this stuff now. And 
then my immediate response was: NOW WHAT?!
Dan Sinker’s website is sinker.tumblr.com


Interviews
General 
Knowledge


General Knowledge
Benjamen Walker
“Having public 
output and public 
conversations about 
what I was reading and 
studying became part 
of the learning process.”

48
Don’t Go Back to School 
Benjamen Walker is the host and producer of the weekly  
radio show and podcast Too Much Information heard 
Mondays 6–7 p.m. EST on  WFMU  in Jersey City.  He also 
produced the Big Ideas podcast for the Guardian and has 
contributed to shows such as Radiolab, On the Media, and 
other Public Radio programs. He is a college graduate. 
Benjamen describes his college education as a self-guided,  
DIY experience that didn’t prepare him for the academic career as a philosopher he 
imagined for himself. He began to work toward gaining a deep knowledge of philos-
ophy by reading and discussing his ideas with peers. This led to his career as a radio  
producer, a perfect example of the value of sharing and publishing your ideas as a 
means to learning. Any career that allows you to do this is a great choice for inde-
pendent learners. Benjamen shares his passion and knowledge in conversation and 
through his radio work. In doing so, he’s created a life of ongoing independent learning. 

49
General Knowledge
I went to public high school and it was horrible. Then I loved college. I went to 
Montana State University in Bozeman. I had a special experience in Montana 
because they had an interdisciplinary program that they had just started which 
allowed you, through the honors program, to make your own degree. So I made 
my own film theory/film production degree. I just had a blast.
The first day of freshman English class the teacher had us read George Orwell 
and Charles Bukowski. I felt like my brain turned on that day. It was the other 
students and teachers who did that for me. They loved reading and literature in 
a way that I had never been exposed to in public school. I had luckily fallen into 
this DIY environment. For me, formal education worked only because I had a lot 
of control over what I was learning. I was basically free to build my own course of 
study. When I look back, it’s very clear that what I was doing was not dependent 
on school, it was dependent on me. I was interested in lots of things and I made 
it work for me.
After that, I thought grad school would be the greatest thing in the universe. I 
was like, if this is school, I’m never leaving! I thought that going into philosophy 
as a profession would be a great existence. What else possibly could I imagine 
doing than academia? I decided I wanted to go to the New School in New York 
and get a PhD in Nietzsche. I even chose the guy I wanted to study with. I had it all 
figured out. Except that we’re talking about thousands and thousands of dollars 
per minute to go there.
I went to New York and met James Miller, who I wanted to study with. I walked 
into his office and we talked for a bit and it became very clear to me that without a 
rigorous study of the German language, I could not be a Nietzsche scholar. 
While we were talking — and I will never forget this — he said, “You remind 
me of a student that I had, that I really loved that was really unhappy. Grad school 
just wasn’t for him and he fell apart.” I thought, why are you telling me that? 
I went and sat in on a couple of his classes. I wanted to be there so bad. I 
thought it was going to be so great. After that we went back to his office and 
talked some more. He asked me about what I was reading, what I was inter-
ested in, and then he said, “If you don’t go to grad school it’s not like you won’t 
keep learning and reading.” The overt message I heard was that I wasn’t good 
enough. But the subtext I heard at the same time was incredibly liberating. You 
don’t have to go to school to do the things that you’re interested in. It was such 
a powerful experience and revelation. From that moment on, I never thought 
of grad school again.

50
Don’t Go Back to School 
I was free to choose my own approach to engaging with the philosophy I was 
excited about. The first thing I did was to stop reading secondary literature, the 
books that are about the actual philosophy and literary books I wanted to read. 
It was such a cool approach for me. I spent a good year reading classics and 
contemporary literature and philosophical texts. I ended up reading probably 
six or seven volumes of Kierkegaard one year and I was thinking: If I was in 
grad school I would have had to read all of the secondary sources and argue 
about whose interpretation is right or wrong. 
I didn’t have the magic box to tell me what to read. So I went to the library 
a lot and the librarians would point me to various places. I talked with friends 
and people who were also interested in similar subjects. I ran into things all the 
time that I didn’t understand. Partially I got through that by talking to other 
people. But also I think that so much of what I’m interested in philosophically 
is precisely about what’s not understood and the journey of grappling with that. 
I would be worried if I was able to understand everything.
I was setting my own goals and expectations of what I wanted out of some-
thing or why I stuck with a certain thing. When I wanted to move on to a new 
writer or subject, I always questioned myself. Am I done or am I worried I don’t 
have the intellectual capacity for that? I tried not to change reading paths be-
cause of that worry, to make sure I pushed myself.
Around the same time that I got started with self-study, I got involved with 
radio, and that became a major part of how I learned. Radio was going through 
a DIY revolution. Because the recording technology got good enough for broad-
cast, there was an explosion in everyone’s ability to produce radio. For me it 
meant walking around and talking to people and interviewing people about 
ideas. I started channeling my studies into radio pieces that I made. It was all 
of the things that I would have gone to grad school for: literature, philosophy, 
thinkers like Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, and Foucault who fascinated me. It was the 
same kinds of conversations my friends were having in their grad school classes. 
It was definitely my own curiosity that drove a lot of the work that I did in terms 
of reading and learning, but it was also the desire to share it. Having public out-
put and public conversations about what I was reading and studying became part 
of the learning process. I also think that one of the reasons I’m attracted to this 
art is because it makes a record of what I’m learning and thinking about. The 
shows are the way I retain things. They’re a journey of asking questions and get-
ting answers and building upon what I’ve already done before. 

51
General Knowledge
Working in the media is a little bit of a cheat in terms of getting access to 
people. For example, one time I went to Copenhagen, where Kierkegaard lived 
and where his archives are. I’ve always had questions about his Stages on Life’s 
Way. For years it’s been a very important book to me. I did a very fun piece about  
Kierkegaard for a Danish radio podcast that let me talk to all kinds of people. I 
went to the Kierkegaard Research Centre and I just wandered into conversations 
with Joakim Garff, who is one of the primary Kierkegaard scholars in the world.
My show, Too Much Information, is all about mixing everything and every-
one together, experts and nonexperts, and talking about ideas. The funny thing 
about the podcasting explosion is that a regular radio producer can’t understand 
why an author would want to talk to a podcaster rather than being on National 
Public Radio. But if an author gets a nice respectable email from someone who is 
actually interested in what they wrote about, why in the hell would they not talk 
to a podcaster who wants to give them five minutes of airtime? It’s the quality of 
the asking. It’s all about having an interest in their knowledge. 
I learn so much from interviewing people as my job, and it gives me a lot of 
feedback on what I’ve learned and that I understand these heady writers just 
as well as anybody else who studies them. I also had the perfect confirmation 
that my self-study was a big success when I met an upcoming young Nietzsche 
scholar who was a friend of a friend. When we hung out and talked, I realized 
that I had done just as well on my own and perhaps maybe even better. I didn’t 
feel like I was not qualified to talk about some things because I wasn’t in school. 
I have to say that I came away from that meeting feeling not only happy and 
pleased with the decisions that I had made, but feeling that maybe my deci-
sions were even better than his, and that I understood as much of it as he did. 
Here was someone who did what I was thinking about doing but yet he and I 
were on the same level!
I think everybody should try this. Recently an intern of mine told me that she 
was thinking of applying to grad school. I told her that that was absolutely the 
stupidest thing that she could possibly do. Going to study literature or language 
or humanities or art or history and pay thousands and thousands of dollars is 
insane. I told her I learned more making podcasts than I did in school.
Benjamen Walker’s website is wfmu.org/playlists/TI


General Knowledge
Dorian Taylor
“Everything I’ve 
learned to satisfy some 
extrinsic goal has been 
faddish and empty by 
comparison.”

54
Don’t Go Back to School 
Dorian Taylor has been a designer, programmer, infor-
mation architect, and now works as a consultant solving 
system-level problems for businesses. He left the public 
school system at 15, just after 10th grade, to attend an  
experimental, nonaccredited “un”-high school.
Dorian gives a rich example of an associative learning 
process in action, and describes the advantages of that  
approach for the complexity of his thinking and his ultimate understanding of new 
areas of knowledge.

55
General Knowledge
Learning is — literally — my job. Whether they know it or not, companies hire me 
to come in completely ignorant, and compose, from scratch, an understanding of 
whatever they’re up to, which I communicate back to them. Everything else is a 
byproduct of that process. I’ve never had a problem finding work. When I was first 
starting out, it was a deterrent when I saw “must have bachelor’s or master’s in X.” 
What’s funny about that though is I found out that they don’t actually care. From 
my perspective, and hearing about it from people who do hiring, most of the time 
they just say that to lessen their workload by scaring people off. It took me a while 
to clue into that. You can be pushy and just apply anyway. It’s worked out for me.
I don’t have a problem putting enormous effort into learning. I do have a prob-
lem with rote drills and sequences designed for administrative convenience. The 
conventional matriculation schedule is so tight that if anything knocks you off 
the rails on the way to university, you might as well not bother. And so it did. I 
burned out trying to earn impressive grades in spite of my disdain for the process. 
When that failed, I went to a place that to call it a school would insult it. There 
I had the license to learn whatever I wanted, and it was the “learning consul-
tants’” job to connect me with real people in the real world who did the relevant 
work. Of course the organization wasn’t accredited, which was the fatal torpedo 
to my already-foundering chance at a regularly-scheduled undergrad program.
At my present age of 33, I suspect I could get into any institution that would 
take my money. But I couldn’t tell you why I’d go, other than for content I 
couldn’t access outside such an environment, say for budget (e.g., particle 
physics) or regulatory purposes (e.g., law). The only thing that I do regret about 
the path I took is not experiencing the social aspect of what it’s like to go to a 
university, or live in a dorm and get into the kind of trouble that only a high 
concentration of post-adolescents can. Keg stands, for example. In that way, 
I do feel a bit removed from the common experiences that other people share. 
The way I approach new things is I start with what’s interesting to me, which 
is invariably connected analogically to something I’m already familiar with. I 
find curricula to be like dictionaries: All too easily forgotten that the shape of 
a certain concept, or structure thereof, is a matter of its author’s opinion, and 
not a natural law. Moreover, a curriculum tends to imply that a given body of 
knowledge is an ordered tree, when it’s really a much more complex structure, 
one for which top and bottom — or first and last — are not meaningful concepts. 
We can waste a lot of effort looking for the right place to start in an uncharted 
body of knowledge, which is what curricula inadvertently teach us to do. And 
even the most expertly-designed curriculum can’t tell you why we’re learning 

56
Don’t Go Back to School 
(in that context, that’s the job of an astute and compassionate teacher). In 
my experience, the single most important criterion for learning something is 
wanting to. Genuinely intrinsically so. Everything I’ve learned to satisfy some 
extrinsic goal has been faddish and empty by comparison.
I don’t impose a structure on my process. I’m not sure how I could. If I had the 
information I needed to put the material in the most efficient order, I’d already 
know it all. Instead of thinking in terms of “top-down” or “bottom-up,” I think in 
terms of “here to there” or indeed many “heres” to many other “theres.” Structure 
emerges over time. It is essential, however, to encode my progress into copious 
artifacts — which can be anything from computer programs to Lego gizmos, but 
most often manifest as pencil on paper. The best materials are cheap enough that 
I don’t hesitate to destroy them in the process of using them in some unexpected 
way. I have a four-drawer cabinet full of legal-sized manila folders full of what I 
call worksheets: Standard copier paper, turned landscape, dated, scribbled all over 
in mechanical pencil. This is how I do just about everything, or at least start. Com- 
puters are great, but only for well-defined, repetitive tasks. Their utility in the 
process of coming up with the structures they will later execute is limited.
Unless the steps to gaining comprehension are well understood, like learning 
a musical instrument, or sport, or a topic so heavily trafficked that an elementary 
textbook can be written about it, the process is literally — as in it exhibits an iden-
tical behavior to — a scavenger hunt. A first clue might send you to the other side 
of town, where you find a second clue that sends you to a third clue almost right 
back to where you came from. There is no way to optimize this process and pick 
up the two items close together before proceeding to the distant one, because 
you won’t know the position of the third item until you reach the second.
A couple years ago, I caught up with an old friend who had since gotten an 
MBA and started a business, and we got on the subject of my learning (and induc-
tively, professional) process. I told her it takes what it takes what it takes, and she 
couldn’t accept the notion, citing investors, ROI, budgets, and deadlines. Solving 
problem X may indeed take arbitrarily long, but in the interim you will solve oth-
er problems which will be valuable — and even salable — in their own right. The 
idea is not to be so transfixed on X that you ignore serendipitous opportunities. 
It really is the only sane way to tackle any process that depends on the effec-
tive synthesis of disparate and eclectic material. Too much focus on a narrow  
objective, and too much emphasis on efficiency before achieving effectiveness, 
is guaranteed to make its acquisition take longer — every time.
Dorian Taylor’s website is doriantaylor.com

General Knowledge
Molly Danielsson
“We decided that in 
order to stick with our 
crazy plan we had to 
start telling people 
about it so they’d hold 
us to it.”

58
Don’t Go Back to School 
Molly Danielsson and her boyfriend Mathew Lippincott 
started the Cloacina Project (named after the Roman god-
dess of the sewers) to create ecological sanitation systems 
that could support communities instead of draining their 
nutrients. They’ve become experts in the field from two years 
of intense study and developing connections to experts and 
enthusiasts. In that time they’ve legalized site-built com-
posting toilets in the state of Oregon, demonstrated their portable composting toilet 
business at a festival of 500 people, and started teaching their approach to artists 
and designers at the graduate school for Collaborative Design at Pacific Northwest 
College of Art.
Molly started her business from scratch, and has reached expert status in eco-
logical sanitation without formal education. Her process has included scholarly 
research, legal research and advocacy, and constant experimentation. All of this 
depends on her connection with a very supportive learning community, and her con-
sistent work to share what she’s learned in as many ways as possible. She’s a great 
example of how making her goals public and feeling responsible to her community 
has kept her motivated.

59
General Knowledge
Mat and I finished school, and we wanted to find a way to support ourselves by 
starting our own business. We decided to start recycling human waste through 
the most high-profit and most-loathed means possible, portable toilets. After 
crunching the numbers on portable toilets we determined that the most profit-
able aspect of the business is festivals and other short-term events. We had to 
learn everything about ecological sanitation, how composting toilets work, how 
to build them, how to maintain them, and how to navigate the legal issues sur-
rounding them. When we started we didn’t know any of this. The legal issues 
were hard. Mat read the rules, but we didn’t directly approach the bureaucrats 
at first. I wish I could have called up the right regulator and just told them our 
full plans and gotten a real answer. That was too risky, so I called up claiming 
to be a student researcher asking hypothetical questions. Eventually we got an 
appointment to meet with the regulator who would oversee us. We got some 
real answers, but they just didn’t know how to handle our case since we weren’t 
mixing waste with water, which is what regular sanitation does, and that’s what’s 
regulated. Even in municipalities where the laws are clear, it’s still a gray area. I 
ran into a group of incredible squatters in Switzerland who were running a por-
table composting toilet out of a squat mansion by a lake. They’d been running 
the business for three years even though it was technically illegal in Switzerland. 
Who’s their most frequent client? The city of Geneva has hired them for the past 
two summers to run toilets and urinals outside the bars in the summer. 
We wanted to get involved in advocacy to change the laws because it makes 
good sense environmentally, and it’s in our interest. We have a good friend 
who works on public restroom advocacy, and she has lots of experience with 
regulators. She told us we needed to beef up our résumé — that would make our 
self-study seem impressive to regulators, since ultimately we’re going to stay in 
Portland and we need the regulators who will oversee us to like us. We did two 
things that helped make all our independent learning seem more legitimate. 
We attended the required classes for certified septage haulers. We attended 
a two-month workshop in Switzerland for “young professionals’’ looking to 
start enterprises in water and sanitation. Nothing looks fancier on a résumé 
than a program in Switzerland, so we applied and got in. The program normally  
costs about $2,000, but I was able to work out a trade with the program by 
writing fact sheets for their online Sustainable Sanitation and Water Manage-
ment toolbox. We felt totally isolated and cut off from our community while 
we were there, but it was worth it. It was that little thing that looked good on 
our résumé. We got a gig doing portable composting toilets at a local festival 

60
Don’t Go Back to School 
and were offered a teaching position at a local art school. Even the Centers for  
Disease Control and Prevention called us about doing an art show on sani-
tation. We also benefited from the fact that the Gates Foundation decided to 
make ecological sanitation a major priority around that time.
After that, we got a grant from the Bullitt Foundation to encourage the 
Oregon Department of Environmental Quality to adopt performance-based 
codes. We got two major codes adopted in October 2011 that legalize site-built 
composting toilets. As part of the grant from the Bullitt Foundation, I’ve fo-
cused most of my energy this year on pushing for more regulatory changes 
through hosting lunch-and-learn events with regulators and the public, but it’s 
really slow going. I’ve done a series of infographics and I’ll be launching a short 
video explaining how sewers and septics work and other alternatives that exist.
Now, we’ve gotten enough rules changed so that we can finally start our por-
table composting toilet business to serve festivals. Over the next year we’re going 
to be assembling a team to work with us on starting this business. The goal of 
launching the porta-potty business is to let people use them at festivals and exper- 
ience a different toilet with their own bottom. We’ve done the legal legwork, 
we know the regulators now, and realize that our original idea of just starting a  
composting porta-potty business is the most direct form of education we can do. 
That’s where we’ve gotten and what we’ve done so far. When we first got 
started, we framed a research question: Is it possible to make a neighborhood 
sanitation system (toilets and graywater) that’s low maintenance, affordable, 
and meets Western hygiene ideals? The question changed the more we got into 
the research. I wish we had rewritten the question on the wall at the beginning 
of each week to give us direction.
The first thing we did was move to the most composting-toilet-friendly legal 
setting in the country: Portland, Oregon. We spent our first month looking for 
advocates who could help us learn about the legal hurdles to our business plan. 
We found the most amazing group of grassroots anti-authoritarians working 
to legalize sustainability through a project called ReCode of Tryon Life Com-
munity Farm. Mathew spent the first winter in Oregon in libraries researching 
sanitation, wastewater treatment, and domestic septage law.
 We decided that in order to stick with our crazy plan we had to start tell-
ing people about it so they’d hold us to it. I know I won’t do good work unless 
I have someone watching me. So having a community is really necessary for 
that as well as for people to learn from. I need people to watch me and give 
me feedback at useful intervals. We worked hard to find our community. I met 

61
General Knowledge
one person through a Research Club brunch. Research Club brings together 
a variety of people to talk about their passions over brunch. She was doing a 
homemade master’s degree on ecological sanitation. She helped us host an 
awesome discussion about sewage, called “Talkin’ Shit.” We met several peo-
ple through Transition Portland and DorkbotPDX who have given us feedback 
on our work and have come over for studio visits, and collaborated with us on 
certain aspects of projects. 
We formed a salon with some friends who are also doing home DIY com-
posting toilets. This has been one of the best things for our design process. The 
group meets to show our composting setups and give each other constructive 
advice on our composting process and issues we’re having. Then we have a 
potluck. I contacted a friend who I knew had a composting toilet and he invited 
folks that he knew who were doing it and it grew from there. Now people hear 
about it and ask to join.
To help explain what we were up to, we decided to make educational post-
ers about toilets, sewage, and composting. It was a great break from research 
for us to collaborate in a way that had a clear end goal. We had enough money 
to print the posters but we wanted to build our social credit in the community, 
so we asked three of our friends and mentors to lend us a total of $800 to print 
the posters. We had to pay them back from the sales. This was a great trick. It 
made us work our butts off to sell $850-worth of posters. It also showed us that 
people thought we were worth investing in. We were so honored that people 
had “invested” money in us that we started doing “investor updates” to tell 
them how our posters were selling, about talks we were giving, and to keep 
them abreast of our research. 
Now they’ve become a board of mentors we look to for support and advice. 
I had one-on-one meetings with them to review our goals and got the feed-
back that we needed to start looking for outside funding, to start promoting 
our work, and to take more credit for our endeavors. We put a lot of energy 
into our presence online. Since we were among the few people in the US being 
really vocal about our enthusiasm for waste composting online, a lot of people 
started contacting us, so now we’re even more connected with experts on this.
Even with our connections, I’m still not completely sure whose information 
to trust in the realm of sanitation. As far as toilet design, I only trust my nose. 
If the toilet doesn’t smell, it works. The problem is it’s impossible to tell from 
photos whether the toilet smells like rotten eggs. While we were in Switzerland, 
I found out a lot of the studies we had read about were seen as total failures. 

62
Don’t Go Back to School 
It confirmed our assumption that with bathroom design the most important 
thing is that users like the system and are willing to maintain it. Novel toilet 
systems cannot be forced on people. So, I only trust people who use the systems 
they make and advocate for. 
Measuring our progress is easy. There are pretty clear indications of success 
and failure. We can monitor our compost piles to determine if they’re perform-
ing. We can test our bathroom designs on strangers to see if they’re acceptable. 
We’ve tested our knowledge of the legal and technical processes at the Oregon 
Water and Environment Short School for septage haulers and at the program 
in Switzerland. I was really surprised when we went to Switzerland to find out 
that I was on equal footing with the other students who had master’s degrees in 
both environmental engineering and ecological sanitation. In those fields you 
don’t get much experience in public speaking or writing. Since I have constant-
ly had to describe what I’ve been doing for the past two years, I’ve gotten a lot 
of experience explaining this topic, and I think that’s part of how we got where 
we are in terms of reputation.
We’re experts on all this now, though I feel so uncomfortable being called 
an expert. We got there through intense reading, by sharing what we were 
learning, and by getting involved in communities of people who cared about 
the issue. I liked college, but learning independently has been a very different 
experience. Since I was moving at my pace and I was personally motivated to 
learn the material, I gained a real depth that I couldn’t have achieved if I wasn’t 
answering personal research questions. So we went from wanting to find a way 
to make a living doing something we cared about and knowing very little about 
it, to being respected experts in the field, without the degrees that most of the 
other experts have.
Molly Danielsson’s website is mdml.co

Film
Interviews


Film
Astra Taylor
“We all know how 
movies work. And we 
know when they don’t 
work. So we know a lot. 
More than that, I think 
you learn much more 
by doing.”

66
Don’t Go Back to School 
Astra Taylor has made two feature-length documenta-
ries about philosophy — Zizek! (2005) and Examined Life 
(2008) — as well as several short films. As a writer, she’s con-
tributed to N+1, Monthly Review, Adbusters, London 
Review of Books, Salon, Alternet, the Baffler, the Nation, 
Bomb Magazine, and other outlets. You can read about her 
ideas and experiences with informal non-school education in 
a Kindle Single called Unschooling. Recently, she has been involved with the Occupy 
movement, Strike Debt, and has written about it for N+1 and the book Occupy!: Scenes 
from Occupied America (2011). Until age 13, Astra did her learning at home with her 
three siblings, without a formal structure.
Astra’s motivation for writing and filmmaking is that both genres are the prov-
ince of independent learning, and give her the structure of a long-term project to fo-
cus her self-education. She describes how she learned filmmaking on the fly. Having 
taken a job to make a short documentary, she convinced a more experienced friend 
to work with her, and treated the experience as an informal apprenticeship.

67
Film
I’m a filmmaker and a writer, but neither of those is something I studied for-
mally. Why would I choose those fields? Because they’re actually ways of 
working that let you pick something to learn about and do it as part of a larger 
project. Being a filmmaker is an excuse to drill into a subject for two years and 
really learn about it. Or with writing, whether you’re writing an essay or a book, 
you pick a subject and get to obsess over it. 
I’ve made my name as a filmmaker, but really I always wanted to write. I 
shifted gears when I saw the movie The Gleaners and I by Agnes Varda. I was just  
astonished when I realized you can write with movies. It turns out that film is  
part of a genre called “essay film,” but I had no concept of that. Seeing that movie 
was a pivotal moment. I discovered that there was another medium besides writ-
ing that lets you explore the world, combining words with pictures and sound. 
I wanted to learn how to do it. So I basically scammed my way into film- 
making in 2001. There was a nongovernmental organization (NGO) in Senegal 
working to promote the nutritional use of a local tree called the Moringa tree. 
You can pick the leaves and dry them and make powder that is full of vitamins E 
and A and calcium. This amazing vitamin source is literally growing everywhere, 
but local people didn’t know much about it. The NGO was looking for someone 
to make an instructional video showing you how to pick these leaves, how to dry 
them, how to use the powder, and to document the effects of the supplement for 
two months on infants who were severely malnourished. I said I would do it. The 
problem was I did not know how to shoot video and I did not know how to edit 
video. And I didn’t speak French, which is one of the languages in West Africa. So 
I got my friend who had been to Senegal, spoke French, had gone to filmmaking 
camp in high school, and had access to a university’s editing system. She ended 
up being my mentor for a few months. All I did was organize the field trip. By 
watching her, I learned the basics. Stuff like what’s a cutaway, what B-roll is, and 
how to put a wireless microphone on someone.
She didn’t know I was doing this. I never really said to her, “I’m siphon-
ing off all your skills!” I think at the time I acted like I was carrying my equal 
weight. But I was really focused on observing everything she did and taking 
it all in. Why are you doing that? Why are you doing this? How are you doing 
it? I never felt ashamed that I didn’t know, though I sometimes felt frustrated 
by my limitations. It’s only in retrospect I see how much I learned from her. 
For example, audio fades. It never occurred to me that you could cross-fade 
audio tracks and that’s why it works when scenes switch and it’s not jarring to 
the viewer. Or, logging footage. When we came home the first night, she just 

68
Don’t Go Back to School 
started logging what we shot. I never would have known to do that. But these 
are the basic building blocks of how you make a film. Really I learned by attach-
ing myself to this project and to her, so I am very grateful.
When I came back to New York, totally through luck, a friend of a friend 
was starting a documentary film production company. There was a little po-
litical documentary bubble that started right after 9/11 around when George 
W. Bush was first elected. I got a job wrangling people to be in a film about 
Muslim communities after 9/11. But I also got to watch experienced filmmak-
ers work. What did I learn from them? I learned about the architecture of the 
film. They took a very formal approach. Instead of interviewing people in their 
homes, they brought people onto a set. When I first saw that, I thought that was 
unnatural and that it would be better to show people in their own homes. But 
then, when I watched the final edit, I realized it actually served the film. There 
was an aesthetic and formal consistency that made it much more powerful. So 
that was like my film theory. I don’t actually read film theory and I don’t even 
watch very many movies. I don’t particularly like watching movies because I 
find them kind of emotionally exhausting, but maybe I also just like depressing 
ones. But really you don’t need to know the history of cinema inside and out to 
make something valuable. We live in such a mediated environment that we all 
know how movies work. And we know when they don’t work. So we know a lot. 
More than that, I think you learn much more by doing, i.e., by experimenting 
and making some mistakes along the way.
I guess in film school, you do learn basic technical skills. And some people 
are amazingly gifted in terms of their shooting ability or their editing or what 
postproduction they can do. It’s nice to know what’s possible in this realm, 
which of these are important skills you can learn in school. But I also could 
have studied them on my own if I was motivated. To a degree, I regret that I 
haven’t cultivated those specific skills more. Instead I work with other people 
who have. My M.O. since that first trip to Africa is to find other people who know 
more than me and then pull them in, use their talent and technical skills, and 
glean what I can along the way, rather than learning those skills myself.
I don’t shoot, maybe at some point I should so I can be more of a one-woman 
show. I think there would be an intimacy, when actually filming, that would be 
pretty powerful. Cinematography seems like a field people can definitely master 
on their own, once they have the gear. And with those technical skills, you’d have 
a way better chance at earning a living than I do. So I’d recommend it. 

69
Film
On the other hand, in my own case, I missed that boat. I don’t have those 
skills so I can’t really never work for someone else, and I’m not unhappy about 
that. I mean, a lot of people burn out. If you got into filmmaking because you re-
ally want to make your own films, because you want to make films you care deep-
ly about, you also have to make a living. Then you’re hiring yourself out and you 
risk draining your enthusiasm for the art form by working on other people’s proj-
ects — things you don’t believe in. When you’re often working on things that you 
don’t quite like, being a hired hand can make it hard to keep the necessary energy 
and enthusiasm to do your own projects. Your day job becomes something you 
kind of like and kind of don’t. If you can’t unite making your living with the thing 
you love, which is obviously ideal, then sometimes it’s best to keep them totally 
separate. If I was working on other people’s sets or in advertising or in features 
and narrative films that I didn’t think were making the world a better place, I’m 
sure I would not want to make my own movies in my free time. The point is that, 
for me, filmmaking is really a vehicle, a way of exploring the wider world. You 
don’t need to go to school for it; it can help make the world your school.
Astra Taylor’s website is hiddendriver.com


Film
Jim Munroe
“If you learn to do 
something when there 
are real stakes, you 
remember what you’ve 
learned more.”

72
Don’t Go Back to School 
Jim Munroe is a novelist and all-around indie culture 
maker who experiments constantly and shares both what he 
makes and what he learns about how to make it. In addition 
to novels, he’s known for his post-Rapture graphic novels, lo-
fi sci-fi feature movies, and award-winning text adventure 
video games. He also works occasionally for clients whose 
work inspires him.
When I started researching this book, an acquaintance sent me a long list of peo-
ple I should interview. Jim Munroe was at the top of the list. He’s taught himself every 
medium he works in. In his early years learning to be a writer, being a part of the zine 
publishing community and putting his work out in the world gave him both feedback 
and motivation to continue. Later, he learned book publishing from the ground up to 
become a successful self-published writer. Jim tells the story of how he achieved artis-
tic success and financial sustainability as an independent publisher, and explains the 
learning process he’s gone through as he’s become a filmmaker in recent years. Jim’s 
experience supports the idea that learning by doing in a real-world context leads to 
richer, more thorough knowledge and skills.

73
Film
Until I got to university, the schools that I went to were fairly conservative 
and didn’t have things like creative writing classes, never mind anything arts 
related, not even a basic writing course. So school wasn’t really catering to 
what I was interested in. But, you know, I think that if I had gone to a very 
artsy school, it could have killed me with kindness. Part of what I needed to 
do as a teenager was to be doing the exact thing they didn’t want me to do in 
school. If writing had been legitimized, it would have taken some of the joy 
out of it for me. 
When I was 17, I published my first zine and started to participate in the zine 
community. That meant getting my work out in front of an audience and get-
ting feedback, even though it was obviously a very small print run. The process 
of writing something and getting it out in the world felt like a completed circle, 
as opposed to writing something that had to sit on your computer or sit in a 
desk drawer. That was really writing.
I published a short story collection and two novellas myself, and then I wrote 
a full-length novel. I wanted a publisher, so I got a book called Be Your Own Lit-
erary Agent: The Ultimate Insider’s Guide to Getting Published by Martin P. Levin 
that explains the format that publishers are used to seeing, which is a cover letter, 
sample chapter, synopsis of the book, and a bio. I sent out 60 packages and got 
six responses. HarperCollins made an actual offer. I’ve been told again and again 
since then that that’s a highly unusual circumstance, and that usually publishing 
houses don’t look through slush piles of unsolicited manuscripts. 
I was uncomfortable with the ownership of HarperCollins. Rupert Mur-
doch is a very right-wing, notoriously cutthroat kind of businessman. I decid-
ed with my second book I was going to publish independently, even though 
HarperCollins was interested in it. That was in 2000, and I’ve been publishing 
books independently in Canada myself and then most often finding a simpati-
co publisher in the US. 
I definitely feel like having one book out with a traditional publisher gave 
me more credibility as a writer, especially from people in the industry, because 
this kind of self-publishing is thought of as “vanity press.” I was very aware 
of that kind of bias in the industry and that was a big motivation for going in-
dependent. I wanted to fight that. It became a bit of a cause for me, being in 
that coveted position as a published author and going the other way to prove 
that people can choose to self-publish for reasons other than desperation and 
last resort. I knew from my experience making zines that there were people 
independently publishing who were just as talented, if not more talented, 

74
Don’t Go Back to School 
than people getting published traditionally. In my case, independent publish-
ing turned out to be much more sustainable and much more suitable to my 
temperament.
I share everything I learned about how to publish independently. It’s im-
portant to me to demystify the process as much as possible by putting infor-
mation on the web — do it yourself articles and “how-to” articles from the per-
spective of someone who has published on their own and wants to share that 
information rather than keep it locked up.
When I need help myself, I would prefer to be pointed to information, not 
have someone walk me through it, because there’s that sense of discovery and 
learning on my own and not being handheld through the whole process. I prize 
that kind of style of learning — the sense of discovery and learning on my own. 
I’ve gotten involved in so many different mediums and it’s the same learn-
ing process every time. I start, and then later, I realize, “Oh that’s why they do 
it like that.” I have to learn the hard way to internalize what I’m learning prop-
erly. Certain things are very standard practices in any industry. People are told 
how to do things first, and then they go do it. For me, I just start by doing it and 
then learn things retroactively. I gain a deeper understanding of the mechanics 
of why things are done the way they are. You have these happy accidents where 
you do something the wrong way, but your work ends up having a different 
style or flavor by happenstance because you haven’t gone through the normal 
route of learning how to do it. There’s something qualitatively different about 
the work, in the end, which I really like. It’s great as long as you don’t mind 
looking like an idiot sometimes, which I certainly don’t mind.
Now I’m making films. Casting was one thing I learned the hard way. We 
really wanted to avoid the bloated machinery of moviemaking. It didn’t occur 
to me to do a call for actors in an official way. I felt like that was procrastinating. 
I thought, come on, let’s just get on with it.
In the process of making a film, I realized the value of working with trained 
actors. Let’s say you choose an untrained actor because they look the part, and 
are willing to take some time off to be in your crazy movie. You do four takes, 
and what you’ll end up with is one take that has background noise or something 
else that makes it unusable. Then, of the three that remain, there might be one 
where the actor gets the line right. In the others, the line might be delivered a 
little bit woodenly or the way it’s said doesn’t deliver the exposition the way 
you need it to. When you’re editing you’re looking for the one that works best, 
and you use it even though the light isn’t really great or the sound isn’t good. 

75
Film
If you have a trained actor, they’ll get the line right each time. It will be de-
livered well and you’ll have three usable shots. One may be a little angrier, one 
may be a little bit lighter in tone, and one may have the lighting in a certain 
way. What I discovered is that the power of talented actors is really seen when 
you get to the editing room, because it gives you so much more of a palette to 
work with. If you’re building a kind of tension, then you can use the slightly 
angrier one. If it seems like something is missing from a scene, you can go back 
and use a different take. Editing is really impacted by your choice of actors, 
which someone could have told me in advance, but I wouldn’t have really un-
derstood it without seeing it in action.
I had to learn this and other filmmaking issues myself by seeing the result of 
doing them wrong. I had to live through the fear of having fucked up the movie 
because of a technical oversight or because of one thing that wasn’t done prop-
erly. If you learn to do something when there are real stakes, you remember 
what you’ve learned more. 
The way I learn is an equivalent of taking a machine apart and putting it 
back together again just to see how it works. But by taking it apart, by decon-
structing it, and fixing something, you find out so many things. I find that learn-
ing process itself to be fascinating. In our kind of culture, we have shorthand 
now for everything: That’s just the way it’s done. And it probably does make 
sense, but you have to dig for the logic. You also sometimes discover there isn’t 
any logic to it. Those are satisfying moments, where you’re vindicated with this 
way of learning, because you can say: This accepted method is total bullshit. 
It’s a lot of work to deconstruct how things are done and why. But there’s also a 
lot of pleasure to be had. 
Jim Munroe’s website is nomediakings.com


Arts
Interviews


Arts
Molly Crabapple
“Basically I looked at 
the world through a 
lens of asking: Is there 
art there? If there is, it 
should be my art.”

80
Don’t Go Back to School 
Molly Crabapple dropped out of art school and has been 
making a living as an artist for five years. She sells her work, 
is hired to paint murals on the walls of swanky restaurants, 
and started Dr. Sketchy’s Anti-Art School, a periodic gather-
ing of artists of all stripes who “draw glamorous underground 
performers in an atmosphere of boozy conviviality” and learn 
from one another, now in 150 cities. She has funded two large-
scale art projects on Kickstarter with great success.
Molly has taken a different road to learning as an artist, getting her work out 
in the world, and supporting herself with her art. Art school didn’t offer her much 
in the way of artistic development, so she found ways to learn her craft on her own. 
She emphasizes that art school fails to teach the most important things to know as 
an artist — the practicalities of how to make a living at it. She learned that on her 
own through life experience, trial and error, and asking other artists how they do it. 
An avid reader and conversationalist, she also possesses a nuanced fluency with the 
history of ideas and literature that matches or exceeds any college graduate I’ve met.

81
Arts
I’ve been drawing since I was a little kid. My mom is an illustrator. I was a bad 
high school student. I went to a very bad college called FIT, but I dropped out of 
it after three-and-a-half years. I don’t feel I learned anything from school that I 
couldn’t have learned another way. Both in terms of artistic skills and the skills 
needed to make a living as an artist. 
Before college, I went to Paris, because I was obsessed with the Lost Gener-
ation writers and artists. I was seeing this guy, and he bought me a really beau-
tiful, expensive leather-bound sketchbook. I was really afraid of messing it up. 
So I started studying and being conscious of pen and ink. I spent every single 
day drawing and drawing and drawing everything that I saw around me. I filled 
maybe 300 pages of this sketchbook in a month. 
I was also a constant reader. At home, I lived next to this thrift store that 
sold paperbacks for 10¢ apiece so I would go and buy massive stacks of paper-
back books on everything. Everything from trashy 1970s romance novels to 
Plato. When I went to Europe, I brought with me every single book that I didn’t 
think I would read voluntarily, because I figured if I was on a bus ride, I would 
read them. So I read Plato and Dante’s Inferno, and all types of literature. I got 
my education on the bus.
When I came back from Europe, I was 19 and I went to the art school I eventu-
ally dropped out of. I also started working professionally as an artist, which to me 
means that I was making money from my work. That’s a big part of my education 
as an artist, and nobody teaches that in school. I was an illustrator then and I did 
every sort of thing that you could to make money with art. I put posters up in all 
the delis around Chelsea saying I’d draw people’s pets for $25. I also put up post-
ers saying I’d draw people’s Dungeons & Dragons characters at Forbidden Planet, 
the comics and games store. I harassed the owner of a local coffee shop to let me 
draw his favorite jazz musicians. Basically I looked at the world through a lens of 
asking: Is there art there? If there is, it should be my art. 
I also stalked all these established artists that I knew and I begged them to 
let me take them out to lunch so that I could talk to them. I asked them about 
their first jobs. I would ask them how they got art directors to be interested 
in them. Mainly just technical career things. I wrote to every single magazine 
and paper I could find, and mostly I was ignored. Deservedly so; I wasn’t very 
good. One of my first jobs was drawing covers for Screw magazine, an infamous 
porn rag with a history of hiring infamous underground artists to do its covers. 
I got that from just picking up a copy of the magazine and writing a letter full of 
bombast to the editor. The bombast appealed to him. I got my biggest paying 

82
Don’t Go Back to School 
job around that time by answering a Craigslist ad to draw for Playgirl. I earned 
$1,600. I was 20, and it felt like a fortune. Then I took that money and invested 
it into making postcards. I got a list of art directors and I started getting jobs 
from the New York Times based on the postcards. I just kept getting more and 
more jobs. It was very gradual. I never had a big break. 
As I said, when I started I wasn’t very good, and I trained myself. I practiced 
a lot. I got better materials. One of the truths in certain types of art fields is 
that if you’re working with cheap materials, your work will just look really bad. 
I stopped living in an unlit room, with three other roommates, where I had to 
work hunched over in the dark on the carpet. I just drew a lot. I drew and I drew 
and I drew and I drew. 
I tended to like art instruction books from the golden age of illustration. 
Sometimes it’s helpful to copy masterpieces or artists you like; when you copy 
someone, and you’re working in an easy-to-figure-out medium like ink, you 
really learn how to get everything. It’s like reading a book aloud. I would also 
just try to draw from life.
Early on I started keeping my “taskmaster notebook” which I carry with 
me all the time. It’s subdivided into things I wanted to do that year as a to-do 
list, and then just this huge section of everything I’ve ever read. I keep notes 
on things I want to try that I’ve seen; for example, I found André Breton’s note-
books and he did this amazing thing where he was writing, but writing in cir-
cles on beautiful pale green paper in white ink. It was a visually striking effect, 
so I’d made a note to try that and experiment with it myself.
When I was 22, I started Dr. Sketchy’s Anti-Art School, which has become 
a real phenomenon. It’s a life drawing class with underground performers and 
models done in an irreverent and accepting environment. People buy tickets to 
go and the performers are well paid for their time.
It happened because I had been working as an artists’ model to make ends 
meet. The artists would never speak to the models, and this got me really an-
gry. Sometimes I was in life drawing class as an artist, but when I was there as 
a model, I was like a chair. It felt degrading. I thought there was a real open-
ing for a life drawing class where it was about the model as a person, not just 
a model as body with muscles and flesh. I had been drawing posters for bur-
lesque shows and I knew all these amazing performers with incredible style, 
so I got one of them to pose in a dive bar and invited people to come draw her. 
I didn’t know it would blow up so big. It’s all over the world, and I’ve gotten so 
many opportunities from it, speaking all over the world and recognition in the 

83
Arts
press for both Dr. Sketchy’s and my own art. It also means I have a network of 
people in most major cities who can organize events around me and get me 
invited to events. That’s a huge advantage.
The upshot is I don’t know that there is anything you can learn in art school 
that you can’t learn on your own. I really don’t know any special secrets that 
you’re supposed to know to get there. There is the idea that you get connected 
to the gallery system, but I went to a lousy blue-collar school. If you go to a rich 
people school, in any major, you will get a network of rich people. If you go to 
a poor people school, you won’t get a network of anyone. I totally understand 
why people go to Ivy League schools, so that they’ll meet the future power  
brokers of the world. I just never had the grades or the money for that, so it 
wasn’t an option for me. I made my own way. 
I network with people who are outside my field — journalists, writers, per-
formers — and I look for every opportunity in the entire world where there is a 
blank wall and I can put my work on it. I do every possible application of visual 
art. I have had super open eyes and I’ve been opportunistic, and because of the 
internet, I can talk to anyone I think is interesting and approach them to hire 
me or to collaborate with me. I’ve been making six figures as an artist since I 
was 26, without being represented by a gallery.
Of course I would love it if a blue-chip gallery called me up and said we 
would love to represent you. But a normal gallery, I don’t know if I would make 
as much money. They would have to be selling a lot of my work and for twice 
the prices I’m getting now for me to make the same amount of money, since 
they take half. I have a really awesome life making a lot of money and drawing 
exactly what I want to without that. I don’t feel my career is lacking without a 
gallery. I also object to the idea that as you’re increasingly successful, by selling 
more expensive work, you’re making art for fewer and fewer people. That’s not 
how it works in any other field, not for writers or musicians. Why should it be 
that way for artists?
Molly Crabapple’s website is mollycrabapple.com


Arts
Ken Baumann
“You cannot and will 
not experience more in 
the classroom than you 
will on a set.”

86
Don’t Go Back to School 
For the past four years, self-taught actor Ken Baumann 
has been a regular on an hour-long, single-camera television 
show called The Secret Life of the American Teenager on 
ABC Family. 
Ken completed his high school education, which he de-
scribes as largely self-directed, at a charter school for stu-
dents involved in performing arts. He describes acting as a 
craft best learned on the job and in collaboration with others.

87
Arts
Neither of my parents went to college. They both just started working right out 
of high school and they learned in the field, so I had that example. I know that 
college is the dominant mode, but for the most part I don’t buy it, especially 
with the performing arts. You cannot and will not experience more in the class-
room than you will on a set. I think it’s much better to learn from people who 
are working with you as opposed to paying for a class once a week. 
I started acting really early. I did a lot of school plays, and then when I was 
about 11, I started to do community theater. Pretty soon after that I got really 
interested in becoming a professional actor. I talked to my parents about it. We 
did some research and figured out that the first step was getting an agent. The 
way that happened for me was that my parents took me to a model/actor talent 
search. I got my first agent that way, and through a chain of recommendations I 
got an LA agent. Talent searches aren’t all on the level, so if you’re a parent, and 
your kid wants to get into this, you definitely have to use your BS detector and 
make sure the search feels relatively professional. If you’re an adult, mostly 
those things are just for money. I have friends who have done it the hard way. 
They found enough work on their own. They built — or fabricated — a résumé 
and then submitted it cold to agencies with a nice cover letter and a headshot. 
It’s easier if you get a referral. You can ask someone you know, who is familiar 
with your work and is represented by an agency if they’ll give you an introduc-
tion. So knowing people and earning their respect is important.
I started with modeling and commercials, and also acted in independent 
shorts done by film students. It was all about learning from experience and 
taking every opportunity. I left regular school and went to a charter school that 
allowed me to work independently on my studies and get done in two years. I 
had auditions five to eight times a week, running around town, so it would have 
been nearly impossible to have attended a regular school and not be behind or 
have to repeat a year or do summer school.
In terms of learning the craft of acting, the independent way to learn is by 
doing. It’s by working and making mistakes, but making them with professionals 
who are better than you and who can help you get to where you need to be. Per-
formance is a hard thing to figure out, but it’s a thing you just have to do, more 
so than reading books about method acting. You have to perform until you feel 
really comfortable being something that you’re not in front of strangers. When 
you’re comfortable, then your performance gets more subtle and refined. 
I think apprenticeship is the best way to learn acting. There is so much 
in film and television that you cannot learn in a class. It’s an entire technical 

88
Don’t Go Back to School 
language that’s being spoken on set. You have to do your job in a collaborative 
way with so many people and work under all sorts of conditions that never get 
recreated in a class. For film and television in particular, there is no better way 
to learn. Even if you’re working on cheap productions like little student films 
or you and a couple of friends are shooting around with a camera and trying to 
make something that sort of resembles what you’ve grown up watching. 
For example, my past four years on Secret Life have been amazing for me, 
especially in terms of learning the language of film and television. I’m sur-
rounded by about 120 people, in addition to the writers, producers, and actors. 
They are doing a very technical job and for me to know how that works is a 
huge advantage as an actor. The best thing you can do is be curious about ev-
erybody’s job. If you’re lucky enough to be on a set where people are investing 
their time and money and are trying to make something good, being curious is 
how you learn, and it’s also how you show respect — both of which are really im-
portant. Your curiosity will help you absorb information that will make you feel 
more comfortable on set. I’ve gotten to a point now with this crew that I work 
with where it’s super shorthand. You can guess what they’re going to require of 
you in rehearsal; to not get in someone’s light or to not look down when you say 
your lines, which is all just as important as your performance. 
The beautiful thing about film and TV is that you can do scenes again and 
again. You can do them multiple ways, and ask for input. You have the chance 
to try things directors or other actors suggest to you, even if they feel a little bit 
wrong or uncomfortable, because you can just do it again. 
Once you have some experience — for example, in community theater or 
local commercials or short films — and you want to work in film and television, 
the place to do it is in Los Angeles. There are a lot of alternatives, like New 
York, but for the most part, the big stuff happens in Los Angeles. If you want to 
get into it, find a way to move and live in the city in which you want to work. It’s 
a hard thing to do, but get up the gumption and come to Los Angeles because 
it’s the best place to do it.
Ken Baumann’s website is kenbaumann.com

Arts
David Hirmes
“I just decided to 
experiment and 
iterate instead of going 
through some sort 
of formal, accepted 
training process.”

90
Don’t Go Back to School 
David Hirmes is a programmer, bookmaker, and pho-
tographer, among other obsessive pursuits, without formal 
training in any of these fields. He graduated from Hampshire  
College, a nontraditional college structured around self- 
directed learning.
David instructively describes the happy medium be-
tween traditional classroom learning and the self-directed 
approach of Hampshire. He offers a great example of a project-oriented learning 
strategy. He gets interested in a technology, an idea, or a subject area and creates a 
project for himself that organizes his learning. Here he describes a project combining 
his interest in macrophotography and the opportunity for no-cost experimentation 
offered by digital photography.

91
Arts
As a kid, I was always curious and interested in all sorts of subjects, but I didn’t 
particularly like school very much. During the summers I would read all of 
these books, like on history and math. I would expect that school would start 
in the fall and then these ideas I’d been reading about would get fleshed out in 
a wonderful way, in which I would understand them even more, and have that 
understanding lead me to ever more interesting places. Instead, I would get 
to school and it would be tedious. The teachers were uninspiring. Topics like 
physics, which were inherently fascinating to me, would be made completely 
boring. I mean, I think it actually takes effort to make a subject like physics 
dull. I just wanted to get to the real stuff so that I could do something with it or 
increase my understanding about the world.
For college, most of the places I looked at were alternative no-grade type 
schools, which for me combines what’s good about school and what’s good 
about independent learning. I took to Hampshire pretty well partially because it 
rewards the curious. Hampshire has few requirements and no grades. You do a 
ton of writing and you’re allowed to take classes in a bunch of different areas of 
study. It was a beneficial way to approach learning for me, although I have vague 
regrets about not being forced to take certain classes because of gaps I find in my 
knowledge now. I used to joke that I probably should have gone to St. John’s Col-
lege, where they learn the classical canon in the original Greek and Latin — but I 
wouldn’t have known that unless I had actually graduated from Hampshire. 
Now I tend to organize learning something new around specific projects. 
One thing that’s a really hard truth about real learning — whether it’s in school 
or on your own — is every project that I’m really proud of and has ended up 
turning out really well has taken 10 times as much time as I thought it would. 
A good example of that process is, a few years ago, I got obsessed with photo-
graphing ice. It’s macrophotography; very close-up shots of ice all taken in very 
controlled environments. They’re shot in a way that a lot of times you don’t ac-
tually know what it is at first. They look dynamic, like maybe there’s some sort 
of action, frozen. They’re all pretty small pieces of ice, with little gas bubbles 
that get trapped in the freezing process. That’s what gives them the dynamic 
look. I would freeze water in bowls or balloons or other things of that size and 
take them out and often just light them with a flashlight or on plates in a totally 
dark room.
This was enabled by the availability of digital cameras. I got one pretty early 
and the idea of having an unlimited number of shots that you could take for free 
was still pretty new, so I was just taking pictures all the time and I never really 

92
Don’t Go Back to School 
considered myself a photographer. The great thing about the digital camera 
was that it was a technology that fit perfectly with my way of learning, which is 
a lot of experimentation. Unlike traditional photography, there was no penalty 
for trying something a thousand times. I didn’t have to waste a thousand nega-
tives and a thousand prints to try a thousand things. I could just keep shooting 
and never run out of film. It was a lucky confluence between this technology 
and my existing proclivity. 
I’ve always been obsessed with macro/micro ideas: very large things and 
very small things. As I pursued this through digital photography, I did some 
reading and got kind of discouraged because the proper photographic equip-
ment was really expensive and the techniques are really difficult and there are 
a lot of things to learn. The facts on the ground turned out to be a little dif-
ferent, because I was actually already doing stuff that I shouldn’t have been 
able to do through this jury-rigged, accidental method that I figured out. I got 
a jeweler’s lens and I just put the camera on top of the lens and the lens on top 
of something and realized that I could simulate a super expensive macro lens 
for nothing if I stood still enough and had the lighting right. And I realized that 
was working just as well as a whole professional setup. As often is the case with 
me, I just decided to experiment and iterate instead of going through some sort 
of formal, accepted training process. It often takes longer, but there’s more of a 
chance I’ll get to some unexpected place.
The process was that I would go to the kitchen every morning and I would 
open up the cupboards and I would look for interesting vessels to pour water 
into to freeze them and just completely fill the freezer with as many of these 
things as possible. I’d go off to work, come home, and then after everybody 
had gone to bed, take all those frozen shapes out, put them in the living room, 
which was totally dark, and just start shooting in as many ways as I could. I 
would take like 200 or 300 shots, upload them to the computer, and look to 
see what was interesting and what wasn’t. For the things that were interest-
ing, I would note the type of vessels and think about pouring salt on it or using 
this magnifying lens with this flashlight and then just head in the direction that 
looked promising. 
I spent a couple of months doing this. I put the photos online and a lot of 
people just saw them. A gallery in Florida decided to put on a show. Then there 
was an article in the New York Times about photoblogs that featured my work. A 
huge blown-up version of one of my shots was on the cover of the Sunday Arts 
and Leisure section, and from that I got a bunch of shots put in Seed magazine 

93
Arts
and then in a book about ice. I haven’t really done any photography projects 
since then. I never really identified myself as a photographer and I think peo-
ple made that mistake, expecting more. That just happened to be a particular 
confluence of interests. It’s funny. Talking about all this, I realize I have the 
capacity for learning a lot of stuff independently, so it makes me think about 
that classical St. John’s College education I wanted. Even five years ago I would 
have said, “I’m totally going to go through the canon. It’s on my to-do list.” 
Now, turning 40 and realizing that time is in fact limited, I think it’s more in-
teresting to follow my actual interests than to go back and try to get some sort 
of completist notion of what an education or well-rounded person is. Back in 
college, I thought of all that as foundational rather than an end point. But I’ve 
already got a foundation. It’s just some hodgepodge thing from Hampshire and 
20 years of continuing to be a curious person, but it works for me. As much as I 
wanted to be like Indiana Jones who could be an adventurer and also knew his 
history and Latin, I’ll probably just have to enjoy the movie, and actually spend 
my time making stuff.
David Hirmes’ website is hirmes.com


Arts
Christopher Bathgate
“Getting stuck for me 
has been one of my best 
teachers. It has taught 
me the huge difference 
between just knowing 
the answer, and 
knowing how to find 
the answer.”

96
Don’t Go Back to School 
Christopher Bathgate is a self-taught machinist sculptor. 
He is a two-time recipient of a prestigious Pollock-Krasner 
Award and has also been awarded the Creative Baltimore 
Grant. His work is in numerous private collections across 
the United States and abroad. His sculptures have been ex-
hibited in galleries in New York City; Brooklyn; San Diego; 
Cincinnati; Washington, DC; Maryland; North Carolina; 
and at the Baltimore Museum of Art. 
Christopher found that art school wasn’t teaching him what he needed to 
make the art he wanted to make. Disillusioned with the curriculum and facing 
financial hardship, Christopher chose a different path to becoming an artist. He 
learned skills and made art simultaneously, learning what he needed to realize his 
ideas, and developing ideas to learn how to use specific tools and techniques. This 
project-based approach is a common one for independent learners, giving them a 
context and a need for what they’re learning. Christopher’s experience is an im-
portant testimony to an artist’s ability to be successful without an art education 
or MFA. Like Molly Crabapple, he emphasizes that selling your work outside the 
gallery system is remunerative and doesn’t limit public respect for your work.

97
Arts
I was always curious about how things worked and how things are made. Every 
object whose construction was not obvious fascinated me. I wanted to know 
how cars worked or how a toaster worked, and I often took things apart. I want-
ed to explore materials, mechanics, and everything in between. In hindsight, I 
probably should have been an engineer, but I am a hopeless creative type. Hav-
ing spent my teenage years at an arts-oriented public high school, I decided 
sculpture was my calling. Most of my earliest attempts at sculpture quickly fell 
apart and were very poorly built. Because of that, I was very discouraged. But 
over time, I began to realize that what I was really lacking were the technical 
skills to properly execute my ideas.
So after high school, I went to a fine arts college seeking the skills I felt 
I lacked. At my school, we talked a lot about visual concepts and art theory, 
which are important. But we rarely, if ever, discussed practical knowledge, 
such as how to build things that wouldn’t fall apart. We weren’t taught carpen-
try skills, how to use power tools, how to utilize materials for their strengths, or 
about fasteners, glues, welding, and the rest of it. I found myself full of ideas 
that I could not execute for lack of information on how best to build them. I 
wasn’t learning basic construction methods, and I felt that my lack of technical 
knowledge and skills, not art theory, was the greatest barrier to making my art, 
and they are the things I ultimately decided to teach myself. 
I worked three jobs just to afford school, and at some point, I reasoned that 
if I was going to work this hard while going into debt, why shouldn’t I spend 
that energy and money building a studio while gathering the equipment and 
technical knowledge I needed for a lifetime of making art? I had initially en-
visioned myself a few years down the road graduating art school with a BFA, a 
ton of debt, no tools or equipment, and few job prospects. The first day of my 
second year of college, I was disillusioned and broke. That morning on the way 
to my first class I finally decided to drop out. And while unsure of my choice, I 
walked right past the school, and never looked back. 
Certain types of education are not necessarily worth the cost because  
either they embody inherently unteachable concepts, or they concern topics  
that are so straightforward that you can easily learn them on your own if  
motivated. For me, art is a good example of both such arguments. No one can 
actually teach you how to be creative; teachers can only expose you to basic 
skills for exercising creativity, and then sort of teach around it. This is helpful 
to some, but I found it lacking focus. I took on a little debt trying out school, 
saw that it wasn’t for me, and then decided to try and make it on my own both 

98
Don’t Go Back to School 
out of necessity and frustration with my experience. Because of that choice, my 
artwork has flourished.
So, how did I do it? Mostly I learned by reading books, trial and error, and 
talking to other people with experience. I took a year off from making art after I 
dropped out and learned how to fix cars. That gave me confidence in my ability 
to tackle things on my own. If I could learn how to rebuild an engine all by my-
self, why couldn’t I learn how to do other things on my own? I bought a welding 
torch and a grinder and set up a studio in an old rusty shed in my backyard. I 
started to teach myself how to be a sculptor in what I thought was a more logi-
cal way than the methods I had observed in school. 
My approach was methodical and focused heavily on technique. I was 
drawn to metal work, so I started simply. I set about mastering one tool at a 
time. First, I learned basic torch work, which I had some exposure to in high 
school. Next, I picked up an electric welder, then a drill press, and on it went, 
one tool at a time. Eventually, I found myself doing complex machine work 
and dabbling in drafting, electronics, chemistry, and even robotics. Later on I 
designed and built my own computer-operated machine tools with the knowl-
edge I had gained through my efforts. 
 Rather than doing practice exercises, I preferred learning while making my 
sculptures. I designed the pieces around what I was trying to learn. For exam-
ple, I wanted to know the best way to turn a perfect sphere. First, I researched 
techniques and built the tools for that particular operation. Then I designed 
a spherical sculpture and worked on it until I learned how best to achieve the 
desired result. If I wanted to learn a different technique, such as thread cutting, 
I designed work to that requirement.
I always felt better learning and creating at the same time. It gave the work 
purpose, other than just being an artifact of my imagination, because I was also 
acquiring valuable skills. Working this way is what shaped the aesthetic I have 
today and continues to influence my work as I continue to learn new things 
through my sculpture. 
One frequent problem of going it alone is getting stuck on a problem, as you 
usually have no one to guide you. When I was building one of my computer-op-
erated machines, the controller just would not work correctly and I didn’t know 
anyone who could help. I frequently used a few online forums I had found 
where people could point me in the right direction. There were also times when 
my research came up empty, and I was on my own. I would think for days about 
the problem and all its different parts. I would come up with a few possible 

99
Arts
solutions and try them; if they didn’t work, it was back to the drawing board. 
Eventually, I would have a breakthrough and I would solve the problem. Doing 
things this way, I found that not only would I eventually find the answer, but 
also my understanding of the problem was so much more comprehensive and 
detailed than if I’d simply had someone else just solve it for me. Getting stuck 
for me has been one of my best teachers. It has taught me the huge difference 
between just knowing the answer, and knowing how to find the answer. 
I did miss out on some opportunities and ways of being recognized early 
on in my career by dropping out of art school. Well, sort of. At my former col-
lege, the graduates were each given a senior exhibition at a small local gallery. 
I had a friend from school that I’d kept in touch with and we knew each oth-
er’s work well. He was planning his senior show, and we talked about what a 
strange and mixed validation it was to be handed an art show simply because 
one had paid a lot of money to earn a degree. Regardless of the merits of the 
work, everyone got a show. My friend thought my self-guided work was as good 
as any of his fellow graduates. Being young and rebellious, he proposed a little 
scheme to help me share in some of the recognition he was getting. The day he 
installed his exhibition, we slipped six or seven rather large and unwieldy steel 
sculptures of mine into the gallery and displayed them alongside his. We never 
asked for permission. We just walked in, acted like we knew what we were do-
ing, and pretended everything was as it should be and nobody questioned us. 
When the show opened a few hours later, everyone was delighted to see some 
very interesting work they had not expected to see. Even the faculty, who were 
understandably angry, begrudgingly admitted that the work was “not bad.” 
They demanded my friend reveal my identity, but he refused. I stood there a 
few feet away listening to the heated exchanges, safe in my anonymity. The 
show was a hit and I had received my first taste of positive feedback from my 
peers. It was a valuable experience that helped spark my pursuit of more public 
venues and the desire to exhibit my work to a wider audience.
Today, my work is in a number of different galleries and I make my living 
as a full-time artist. Showing work at every available opportunity has proven 
to be the most useful strategy for me. Over time, one serendipitous event has 
led to another, and somehow managed to snowball into what now resembles a 
professional art career.
But true to my do-it-yourself spirit, I have never relied solely on art galleries 
to make my living or sell my work. I’ve cultivated my own private list of collec-
tors over the years by networking and meeting as many people as I can. I’ve 

100
Don’t Go Back to School 
done everything I can think of to get exposure for my work, including writing to 
blogs, and magazines, and showing work at unconventional exhibitions in un-
usual locations. I have even gone as far as sticking a webcam on my machines 
while they work, just to see who will watch. With the help of a friend, I set up 
my own website, published my own art book, and have taken extra efforts to 
present my work to as wide an audience as possible. Art galleries still have a 
place because they are a meaningful venue and, in some way, still offer a form 
of validation for artwork. But galleries only have so many resources to give to 
a single artist, so they are only a piece of a larger strategy for artistic success. 
My modest accomplishments reinforce for me that doing it yourself is truly the 
best way to ensure something is done for your own greatest benefit. Because 
of that, I am doing what I love every day. And I can be proud of what I have 
achieved on my own, which is very satisfying. 
Christopher Bathgate’s website is chrisbathgate.com

Interviews
Entrepreneurship


Entrepreneurship
Caterina Rindi
“I realized that, 
mainly, I wanted to 
run a business. If I 
didn’t have the proper 
credentials, I wasn’t 
going to let that stop 
me.”

104
Don’t Go Back to School 
Caterina Rindi got her first job as a bilingual public school 
teacher without a teaching credential, and has worked in 
nonprofits and startups. In 2010, after she applied and 
wasn’t accepted into an MBA program, Rindi started a small 
business and participated in creating alternative systems for 
educating herself and her friends.
Caterina’s story shows a person who wanted to advance 
her career and thought grad school was the answer. When she wasn’t accepted to 
graduate school in her field, she changed gears and started a business instead. By 
reading and participating in learning communities she learned everything she need-
ed to build the business without spending a dime on school. MBA grads usually leave 
school with a solid professional network, which is one of the frequently cited benefits 
of these programs. Caterina gathered like-minded friends and acquaintances to for-
malize an alternative network. 

105
Entrepreneurship
I wanted a graduate degree because I was frustrated professionally and wanted 
to move up a level. I had been doing a lot of program management for nonprofits,  
but I really wanted to move up to director level and I wanted to run my own 
nonprofit. I had applied for lots and lots of jobs, but nobody was interested in 
hiring me with just program management experience and so I thought that at 
least a master’s or PhD in either business or education policy would kick me up 
to a level in which I would be considered for director positions. So, I applied to 
graduate school. But I didn’t get in.
After that, I was really disillusioned with formal education. I realized that, 
mainly, I wanted to run a business. If I didn’t have the proper credentials, I wasn’t 
going to let that stop me. So I just started this little food business and it worked. 
San Francisco is full of trees in people’s backyards that are just neglected. So I 
started “mo foods” to take this surplus food and turn it into preserves and pickles 
and things. I sold them at an underground farmers’ market. The business had a 
great model to it because it was an exchange with the fruit tree owners. I gave 
some of the finished products to the people whose trees I picked from. They were 
so grateful to have me come pick their fruit so it wouldn’t go to waste. 
To figure out how to actually run the business, I read tons of business books 
and I thought about all of the different things that an MBA program should 
theoretically give me. I figured out how to achieve those without actually go-
ing through a program. A handful of my friends do have MBAs, so they are my 
informal advisors. When I had questions or I couldn’t figure something out, I 
definitely had a lot of resources for that.
I also built some real infrastructure for collaborative learning. Right when I 
was starting the business, in 2010, a lot of my friends were looking for work and 
I was having lunch with various people to talk about the frustrations of looking 
for work. We talked about staying positive and taking care of ourselves. We 
also talked about networking and how our skills in one industry could transfer 
to another. I didn’t have a steady income and within my social group there were 
also about 10 other people who were struggling in similar ways. 
I emailed all of them and said, “Hey, how would you like to form a group 
and use that to help launch each other and increase our reach to other people 
who are looking for jobs?” They all said yes. So I started the Goldfish Network-
ing Group. It was in my living room and I’ve been doing it ever since. The group 
emails each other to share opportunities and resources. We have about 30 peo-
ple in the group right now. Last week I had two new members come in. We 
don’t meet every single week if there aren’t enough people who can come. I feel 

106
Don’t Go Back to School 
like we need at least five people to attend for it to be useful. We meet probably 
three times a month. It’s a great model that I’d suggest for anyone looking to 
learn from and help support others.
I have success stories from that group of people who have started their own 
businesses. One member is an entrepreneur who went to Chile and got funded  
by the Chilean government to create another Silicon Valley there. Another 
owns his own dental office here in San Francisco. My brother joined the group 
and he is now working as a film editor for a nonprofit here in the city.
The other really key thing I did to substitute for what I’d get from an MBA 
was joining the Faux MBA reading group started by my friends Greg Veen and 
Samantha Gottlieb. It was 9 or 10 of my friends who also were interested in 
starting their own businesses or in understanding more about the way their 
employers made decisions and set directions. 
It’s been a great space to process a lot of the stuff that I’m reading. As a 
business owner I ended up really being isolated, and that’s something that both 
the networking group and the book club have helped with. I can read all these 
business books, but the processing and synthesizing of that material is difficult 
to do myself. I can write and think about it and put some blog posts up, but the 
group discussions are really great opportunities to do that.
The curriculum is a group effort. Each of us had already chosen a few books 
that we found in different places, from online courses and from things we’d 
heard of. We started out with business theory and we read the original standby 
books that were 10, 15, 20 years old. They were incredibly dry. They were all 
written by white men. 
We all said that we needed to get something that was more relevant to us. 
The next business book was Financial Intelligence for Entrepreneurs by Karen 
Berman and Joe Knight. It’s a great book, incredibly practical. In contrast to the 
older business theory books, she breaks down a lot of the terms around finan-
cial management, defines really simple terms, and teaches you how to read an 
income statement and all the different kinds of people that you need when you 
have your own business. 
We’ve gone around with theory, and with practical knowledge, and then 
things like Tony Hsieh’s book Delivering Happiness, on the culture of Zappos, 
because that’s really more modern. That’s what’s going on today. It’s not some-
thing that anybody was talking about 30 years ago.
Something we did recently that was a great experience was we used a work-
book called Business Model Generation by Alexander Osterwalder and Yves 

107
Entrepreneurship
Pigneur. I was ready for the next step in my food business, which has evolved 
into Share | Kitchen, a food business incubator in San Francisco. For the book 
club, I sent them all my business plan, which was under construction, and we 
all worked on taking my business plan apart and putting it into this framework 
that the Business Model Generation workbook talks about. It was an amazing 
exercise. I couldn’t have done it by myself; to have other people’s eyes and 
perspectives on it was just great, totally valuable, and generous of them. We 
thought, well, yeah we could use it to figure out eBay’s model, or we could fig-
ure out yours, so let’s do yours. Things like this, learning about flexibility and 
personalization, make me think, it’s possible that I have actually benefited by 
not going through a traditional MBA program.
The Faux MBA reading group’s curriculum can be found on p. 190 in the  
Resources section that follows these interviews.
Find Caterina Rindi at twitter.com/caterinarindi


Entrepreneurship
Jeremy Cohen
“Other entrepreneurs 
are basically my 
business school.”

110
Don’t Go Back to School 
Jeremy Cohen runs ExchangeMyPhone, a bootstrapped 
business that pays people for their old phones, or recycles them 
for free if they have no resale or salvage value. The company 
was founded in 2010, was paying its expenses two months af-
ter launch, and started hiring within four months. With his 
fiancée, Katherine Preston, Cohen now manages a team of 
eight. He’s never been to business school and had no connec-
tions to the startup world when he founded his company.

111
Entrepreneurship
For the past two years I’ve run ExchangeMyPhone. We are making cell phone 
recycling as easy as returning a Netflix DVD. We have immense competition. 
Our largest competitor just received $22 million in funding. But really, I like to 
say that our biggest competition is drawers and closets. That’s where 90% of 
used cell phones end up. I don’t have any formal training in business, so we’re 
also still learning on the fly and making mistakes and laughing at ourselves as 
we grow.
What we’re doing is a little different than anyone else. Unlike any other 
buyback service we offer our customers the chance to donate the payout from 
their phone to any of the 765,000 US-registered nonprofits. We also offer same 
day payment, prepaid shipping for every cell phone in our catalog, and free re-
cycling on all phones. Our customer service promises are central to who we 
are and we believe that doing good is good advertising in itself. Our biggest 
challenge is letting people know that we exist. Everything we do to accomplish 
this is stuff I had to learn from scratch.
I’ve taken a zigzag path to get here. Something that has always been a big 
part of my life is my stutter. Growing up I was not able to speak normally, or 
make the first impressions that I wanted to because of my speech. I have expe-
rienced failure just trying to say my name. These days, I’m no longer afraid of it 
and that courage has gotten me where I am.
I went to college in Walla Walla, Washington, and supported myself through 
school and beyond, by working a union job in Chicago as a beer man at sport-
ing events and concerts. After graduating college in 2005 I did a lot of traveling 
and invested my time and money in real estate. I dabbled in starting a number 
of businesses but none of them truly excited me. I looked into the possibili-
ty of business school. I played with it for six months and decided that it was 
more formal and more structured than I wanted. I had been saving for years 
and I knew that if I were to put thousands of dollars of my own money into 
something, I wanted to start my own business. That way I would learn many 
of the same lessons without the incredible debt that business school can cause. 
I guess the biggest draw of business school is the networking, but I decided to 
save my money and use it to experiment in the real world.
ExchangeMyPhone builds on experience I already had. In many ways it’s a 
continuation of my family business. My dad has run a used bookstore for lon-
ger than I’ve been alive. After dealing with used books my whole life, the phone 
recycling business fit very naturally. Besides that experience, one of the oth-
er things that allowed me to start ExchangeMyPhone is perhaps a delusional 

112
Don’t Go Back to School 
belief that I can do anything. And one of the things that has kept us in business 
has been learning to embrace that the people we work with are often better at 
what they do, and that I should take a step back. 
In building the first version of ExchangeMyPhone, I had a hard time figur-
ing out how to break into the industry. I did not take advantage of the resourc-
es in Chicago. I didn’t know that the startup world existed, so I approached  
everything as though I was reinventing the wheel. I did not even attend Meetup 
groups or read startup-related blogs, though I could have easily increased my 
learning in that way. 
For me, one of the awesome things about moving the business to New York 
has been getting more involved in the startup world and seeing what other peo-
ple are doing, and learning from them. Other entrepreneurs are basically my 
business school. I follow business and startup blogs and newsfeeds, and learn a 
lot that way. And, having so many bright, successful, ambitious people to learn 
from and bounce ideas around with here in New York is priceless. In my case, 
finding all those people probably started with the Skillshare classes I took and 
grew from there.
I tend to do first, then ask questions and learn from my mistakes. I’m okay 
making mistakes and picking up the pieces even when that’s unpleasant. I 
made a lot of mistakes in time as well as money. I don’t think that the way I did 
things was the most efficient way, or the way that I would do them again. There 
was very much a sophistication curve but learning and improving as I go has 
allowed me to get where I am today. It has given me a sense that I can make 
anything work.
Generally, in running a startup, there is nothing that’s too difficult and 
there’s nothing that can’t be learned. But there is a lot to be done. The biggest 
challenge that I have faced is the breadth of things to learn and manage. Every-
thing from the specifics of web development to branding, user experience and 
design, web hosting, inventory flow, cash flow, accounting, tax implications 
and regulatory compliance, hiring, community building, marketplace tracking, 
customer service and communication, business development, marketing, net-
working, and — finally — ensuring that everybody still has a job next month.	
When I need to learn about something I do a lot of reading and then I find 
someone who knows more about it than I do and take them out for coffee or 
lunch. In asking for their knowledge, people are even more willing and even 
more generous if you have done something to show that you’re interested and 
you’ve made a commitment on your end as well. I never realized, or embraced, 

113
Entrepreneurship
how valuable networking can be until I moved to New York. Leaving the com-
fort of my home in Chicago, and pushing myself to succeed in a new city, 
changed my outlook and shaped the direction of ExchangeMyPhone. Without 
that change and forced motivation, I don’t think that the business would be 
where it is.
Jeremy Cohen’s business is exchangemyphone.com


Entrepreneurship
Simone Davalos
“It’s just seeing where 
your resources are 
and building on your 
community and then 
it’s equally important 
to give back.”

116
Don’t Go Back to School 
Simone Davalos is Owner of ComBots LLC. Her work cen-
ters on robotics education and the promotion of tomorrow’s 
engineers. ComBots LLC seeks to provide an entertaining and 
educational experience in robotics and engineering for audi-
ences of all ages. Their exhibitions — the ComBots Cup and 
RoboGames — as well as private corporate events, combine 
the excitement of extreme sports events with the solid foun-
dation of engineering and art. She is a college graduate and a combat robotics referee.
As Simone told me, you don’t get to be a combat robotics referee by going to 
school. She describes the joyful process by which she’s learned the technical — and 
pyrotechnical — skills she uses in her robotics work, as well as the immersive learning 
process she has gone through to put on the combat robotics competitions she and her 
husband produce. Simone is a great example of the value of communities in learning 
and in making things happen. It’s a simple rule: You ask for help, and you give back 
when others ask you.

117
Entrepreneurship
I have absolutely no engineering background except for what I taught myself. I just 
was always into that kind of thing. I was always into building and I was always into 
taking stuff apart. I think the highest compliment I ever got was from my father. 
He turned to me at one of my events and said, “You know, you were always a weird 
little kid.” I have always had a thing for engineering anything that goes “boom!”
I got a degree in English at Yale. I learned some things in classes. I can put 
a sentence together and I can read, but what I learned that was useful to how 
I make my living now came from outside of any sort of academics. Mainly, I 
learned how to blow stuff up, which happened in the marching band. I’m not 
musical at all. I like to hum occasionally. But it wasn’t only for musicians. At my 
school, all the clubs court the freshmen. They do all the songs and dances like, 
“Join our club,” “Join our secret society,” “Do our things.” It wasn’t really me, 
and I didn’t know what to do. Then all of a sudden this huge, enormous crowd 
of incredibly loud, crazy people were running screaming down the aisles. And 
they started playing the fight song really loud and throwing tee shirts into the 
audience and saying, “You don’t have to be a musician, you don’t have to know 
how to sing, you don’t have to do anything but come join our band and it will be 
fun.” I thought, I could use some fun. I like fun. 
So I showed up to the meeting and they said, “Hey, great, here, hold this 
duct tape, we’re making a life-size locomotive out of plywood and duct tape 
and a fire extinguisher. We want to see if we can get the lights to work on it.” 
That’s what I did for four years. I figured stuff out largely through osmosis. 
When you joined the band, you had to figure out what you were doing. You 
pretty much just learned from the people that went ahead of you. So the seniors 
were invaluable because they would pass along this knowledge. It was both an 
oral tradition and a written tradition. We had a book of stuff that had been 
written down since around 1980. It was this giant composition book that was 
stuffed with examples of things and plans and sketches and notes and “Don’t 
do this. We did this one time and just trust me, you don’t want to do it that way.” 
Now I run RoboGames with my husband. RoboGames is the world’s largest 
open robot competition. It’s like the Olympics for robots and we have about 60 
different events. We get about 1,000 roboticists to come from all over the world 
to participate. This is our 10th year doing it and it involves a lot of logistics and 
equipment and mechanical engineering and delegation and a lot of event pro-
motion and event logistics. I got started in that 10 years ago. I met my husband 
and he put on robot events. So I got involved. I learned about sumo robots and 
I learned about competitions and I learned about international Japanese robot 

118
Don’t Go Back to School 
happenings. It just cascaded and our events got bigger and bigger until finally 
we were working for the show BattleBots on Comedy Central.
When BattleBots finally shut down, David turned to me and said, “Hey, we 
should keep doing this. All we do is we put on this event and we sit around and 
watch robots fight all day, all the time!” So we bought the arena and we quickly 
realized there was more to it than we thought. It was a lot of learning on the 
job and baptism by fire. Literally. We were just a mom-and-pop operation so 
I had moments like, “I guess I’m going to have to learn how to drive a forklift 
because that truck ain’t going to unload itself.” I can now operate a forklift ele-
gantly. I give elegance to operating a forklift.
We have professionals in all the places that we need professionals now. 
For example, we have a professional materials guy who comes in if something 
breaks on the arena and needs to be fixed the right way rather than “okay, let’s 
patch it back together and hope nothing bad happens.” We have a really crack 
arena crew that’s been doing it for easily seven or eight years and we have new 
people all the time who get that received wisdom. Again, there’s no place you 
can learn how to do it, you just have to do it. It’s an iteration. You can’t learn 
how to do it anywhere. You can’t take classes. You can learn how to use the 
machines that will eventually build your robot and you can consult with other 
people who have built robots in the past, but really the only way to learn how 
to do it is to actually do it, and this is from the event operation side as well as 
the robot building side. There are a lot of people who did a lot of things that you 
can’t learn in school.
Finding people to work with isn’t universally easy. I’m in a very lucky position 
because we’re in the San Francisco Bay Area where combat robots and art robots 
and that sort of thing kind of took hold at a very early stage. You have this whole 
underground art scene and you work off the community, which I figured out is 
the best way to get in contact with people and make things happen. Let’s say you 
wanted to put on a show, and it’s something no club is going to let you do. 
But, hey I know, let’s do it in the junkyard! Because I was down there the 
other day and they were talking about all the art that people were making 
there. But to do that, you had to know a guy. Someone who knows another guy, 
who knows a girl who does the same kind of thing, and suddenly you have this 
community that you’ve tapped into. Every time we did a show at a new venue, 
we’d keep all the contact information and we’d talk to all the people who had 
done shows at that venue before, and we’d end up with a really good informa-
tional resource to go back to. Before iPhones and BlackBerrys, I had a folded 

119
Entrepreneurship
piece of paper in my pocket at all times, in case we needed somebody to come 
and do acoustical stuff because the neighbors were complaining. I’d look at the 
list and see that a certain person used to do sound engineering for big concerts. 
He might know someone who can do that. It’s just seeing where your resources 
are and building on your community and then it’s equally important to give 
back. When someone helps us out, if they need a door person to work three 
nights for their show on surrealistic Dada performance art happenings, I’ll do 
that. So that’s essentially what we do with robotics. 
I’m not sure we’d be able to do this if we were not in a place that had this 
sort of entrenched artsy community; it would be harder to do. It would be pos-
sible, but it would be really hard. But not impossible. A few years ago, there was 
an Eagle Scout who was really interested and curious and ended up collecting 
smoke detectors and building a reactor out of them, in his backyard. He just 
did it because it was fun, because he thought it was interesting. He got in huge 
amounts of trouble for it. But, now of course people are going to offer him jobs 
all over the place because they have seen that he is a really intelligent kid who’s 
got the capacity to find it in himself to do something where he wasn’t surround-
ed by people who were already doing it.
Simone Davalos’ business is RoboGames.net


Technology
Interviews


Technology
Harper Reed
“I try to surround 
myself with incredibly 
smart people who are 
often, if not always, 
smarter than me. 
Because other people 
are so important to 
learning.”

124
Don’t Go Back to School 
Harper Reed served as the Chief Technology Officer for 
Obama for America during the 2012 election; before that, 
he was CTO at Threadless. He is an engineer who builds par-
adigm-shifting technology and leads others to do the same. 
He loves using the enormity of the internet to bring people 
together.
Harper is a wonderful example of a person who loved the 
experience of school, but found that the most significant learning he has done comes 
from his independent education. He emphasizes the importance of learning new 
things in a real-life context, and the experiential, project-oriented process by which 
he usually learns. His advice about how to contact experts for help is invaluable.

125
Technology
I love computers and I’ve always been around computers. I can’t really talk 
about education without talking about computers. I went to high school and I 
actually really loved it. I took all the classes I could, I was prom king, student 
council president. I did everything I could to be more involved in high school 
and that is obviously not the normal path you’d expect for a computer geek.
But, along with that, I was constantly getting into trouble with computers. 
Never with the cops, but I was always getting banned from all the computers in 
the school district. Then, they would let me back in, and I would mess up again 
for whatever reason. It happened over and over. I was caught in this dichotomy of 
trying to be involved, but whenever I was trying to get involved with computers, I 
messed it up because I was curious and experimenting outside what was allowed.
After that, I went to a small liberal arts college. I studied history along with 
computer science, because I knew ultimately I was going to work with comput-
ers and I wanted to learn something else, too. I studied Catholic history and 
the history of science, which overlap a lot. I’m not Catholic. I’m not a religious 
person at all, but it was really fascinating to learn all of the idiosyncrasies of 
Galileo and Bruno and all these different weird scientists who got burned at the 
stake for their discoveries.
I realized about probably three-quarters of the way through my educa-
tion that in terms of computers, I actually wasn’t learning anything I needed 
to learn to get a job later on. I did learn some coding concepts in college, but 
more importantly I figured out that I’m an experiential learner. I need to put 
my hands on things and really see them, and really chew on them. It was better 
to do it in a real context, where it mattered if I did it right. Like where there 
was money at stake. So, I did an internship in Iowa City, IA. I worked for a real 
company that was trying to make a profit. The company built ecommerce apps. 
As an intern I started learning web apps to build web pages.
Given my way of learning, it was fascinating to see how the management 
dealt with me. I was a child. I asked questions like a child does. “Why is the sky 
blue?” They just said, “It’s just blue. Go with that.” I said, “No! Tell me why 
we’re doing it this way. What is this?” It was client services, so we were just 
doing it because the client wanted it done, with no thought behind it. But all the 
questions I asked gave me this opportunity to see how things worked and the 
value of asking things that seemed obvious to everyone else. It gave me a lot of 
hope. It really kicked off the career that I have now. 
The methods I used to learn technology don’t work for everything. I’m 
struggling with learning Japanese. My wife is Japanese and I want to learn the 

126
Don’t Go Back to School 
language, but I don’t know how. I take classes, I fail, it doesn’t work out. I have to 
figure that out. With technology, I immediately find a problem I want to solve. It’s 
usually about learning a new programming language or learning a new technolo-
gy. If it’s a real problem, I want to get to where I can actually picture the solution 
and be able to see it through from the beginning to the end. For me, I can’t learn 
from videos. That just doesn’t do it for me, although there’s a lot of video learn-
ing right now. I find it very frustrating. So usually what I do is I just go through 
a tutorial of some sort and then really start iterating, doing it over and over. I 
start trying to be creative on top of that, and say okay, now that I can figure out 
how to do this, how would I use it? So I set a new goal pretty close in difficulty, 
and when I achieve that, I do that again, until suddenly I’ve learned something. 
When you’re in that process, it can also be the best time to teach someone else. 
A tech writer named Mark Pilgrim, who writes manuals for learning coding lan-
guages including Dive into Python, and Dive into HTML5 said, “The best time to 
write a book about something is while you’re learning it yourself.” So you know 
what’s hard to learn and can talk in an excited, confident, honest way about how 
you got to the place where it’s not hard anymore. 
For me this whole process is really collaborative. I treat everything like I’m 
the CEO of my life. CEOs have boards of directors and boards of advisors and 
these are groups of people who they’re using to really rely on for help and ad-
vice to be successful. I think every person should treat their life like that. 
So, if I’m stuck, I know I can reach out to a buddy, or I can reach out to my 
brother. I know I can reach out to these people who are experts in whatever I’m 
trying to do. I try to surround myself with incredibly smart people who are often, 
if not always, smarter than me. Because other people are so important to learn-
ing, I also think one of the most significant things about the internet is democra-
tization of access. Anyone can email you about self-learning and you’re probably 
going to respond. Probably. I think it’s about how you phrase it. We are all very 
busy, but we’re probably going to respond if you approach it efficiently.
You can learn a lot about this from a really good book called Team Geek by 
Brian W. Fitzpatrick. It’s actually about project managing software develop-
ment geeks, but it applies to most things with communication. It should really 
be called “Interacting with People,” because all it is, is just little tricks on how 
to interact with people, how to make those interactions better.
There’s a section called “Interacting with an Executive,” and that part 
should be called “Interacting with Busy People.” It says if you want to connect 
with someone who is very busy, tell them three bullets and then a call to action. 

127
Technology
So if someone wanted help from me, it might go like this: “Harper, I’m interest-
ed in what you’re doing with the campaign. I’m going to be doing technology 
for a campaign in the coming election. Do you have a hint for product manage-
ment or project management software that you guys use?” I can answer that 
quickly. It’s very simple. Then all of a sudden there’s this person who probably 
wouldn’t have had an opportunity to talk with me, and I can help them out. I 
love what that kind of efficient communication does for you.
Harper Reed’s website is harperreed.org


Technology
Pablos Holman
“My strategy for 
learning has always 
been to take things 
apart and see how they 
work, and to see how 
you can manipulate 
them.”

130
Don’t Go Back to School 
Pablos Holman is a futurist, inventor, and notorious 
hacker with a unique view into breaking and building new 
technologies. He consults worldwide on invention and de-
sign projects that assimilate new technologies. He works at 
Intellectual Ventures, an innovation lab in Seattle. He is a 
high school graduate.
Pablos tells the story of how he learned everything he 
knows by tinkering to see how things work and by learning on the job. He started as a 
computer hacker in childhood. His demonstrable skills and reputation got him jobs 
after high school. He says every job he’s had has been an experience of getting paid 
to learn new things, and that as a businessperson, he’s learned a great deal that’s 
impossible to learn in school.

131
Technology
At Intellectual Ventures, where I work, we invent things. We have about 20 
large-scale experiments running at any given time. We have a lab with one of 
every kind of scientist, and we bought one of every tool in the world, and stuck 
everybody on the same team. Our product is an invention. Usually that means 
that we invent something and patent it, which takes four to five years. We’re on 
a longer timeline than most companies who have to ship a new product every 
year. So we get to work on things that are more futuristic.
My job specifically is to think about the application of new technologies, 
which also means my job is to be learning new things all the time. It’s exciting 
when you get your hands on something new — which could be a new chip or a 
new sensor, or some new possibility that’s been discovered in science. Every 
time, it’s an opportunity to go reimagine everything that humans have ever 
done and see if this new capability lets us do it better. And you have to take it 
apart and learn how it works, and the contexts it could be used in, so that you 
can think about what it could be used for.
So far, I’ve worked on a brain surgery tool and a machine to suppress hurri-
canes. I tried to cure cancer, which didn’t work. I worked on self-sterilizing ele-
vator buttons. I didn’t know anything about these areas before. What I’m good 
at is taking a project and an idea and just barreling through it to figure out if it’s 
going to work. That skill set is applicable to anything. When I was working on 
the brain surgery tool, I had some of the world’s leading brain surgery experts 
helping me out. When I was working on cancer, I was able to round up people 
who know all about cancer to help with the idea.
The researchers in our lab tend to be really specialized. We have a paleon-
tologist, a nuclear physicist, laser experts, biochemical engineers, and doctors 
of various descriptions. I’m actually a specialist in computer hacking, but what 
I really bring to the job is being a good generalist who can see the possible con-
nections between various specializations. That all comes from the way I ed-
ucated myself. It comes particularly from not going to college, because I was 
never encouraged to specialize. Most of my education from elementary school 
on was characterized by the fact that I had a computer. That had nothing to 
do with school. I saw early on that learning outside school was valuable. I was 
the only one around who had a computer, so I spent most of my childhood on 
the computer, or trying to explain to people what I was doing on the computer.
I got an Apple II when I was 9 or 10. Computers in those days weren’t real-
ly useful for anything. Certainly nothing that a 10-year-old kid needed to do. 
Mostly, I did a lot of things to figure out what the computer itself could do, what 

132
Don’t Go Back to School 
its limits were. It was this bottomless pit of intrigue. You had to really figure it 
out on your own. If you had a computer and you were doing this, what you did 
was collect software. Every new piece of software was a new superpower that 
you could strap on. I’d fire up those programs. I’d type every single command 
in and I’d run through every menu and figure out everything it could do. The 
volume of software on the market was low enough, I literally did that process 
with every single program ever made. For about a 20-year span, I used every 
program ever made to the extent that I acquired it, I fired it up, I clicked on 
everything and figured out what it could do, then moved on to the next one. 
For example, I didn’t play games — I gamed them. That was more interest-
ing. There was a game called Ultima. Compared to today these were really ru-
dimentary games, but essentially you’re walking around in this Dungeons & 
Dragons type of world slaying dragons and stuff. There are always obstacles. 
Bodies of water was a big one. You’d run into an ocean, and to cross the ocean, 
you had to collect enough gold to buy a ship. What I did was to figure out how 
to read the map in the code the game was made of, and I would convert all 
the water to ships. Then you could just walk right across it. So my strategy for 
learning has always been to take things apart and see how they work, and to see 
how you can manipulate them.
When I got out of high school, instead of going to college, I figured out that 
companies would pay me to buy the hottest new computers on the market 
and try to make them do stuff for them. So I got all these consulting jobs just 
buying computers. I took those jobs because I wanted to get my hands on that 
hardware, which I couldn’t afford. I got paid to learn. I went to work, I got hot 
new computers, I played, I learned on the job. I felt like I better not screw it 
up because an actual person had referred me to every one of those jobs. I was 
responsible to them socially as well as to the employer. 
Through all the jobs I’ve had — my startups, and now working with Intel-
lectual Ventures — other people have spent millions of dollars on the education 
I’ve gotten on the job. One of my favorite ways to learn is that I’ve been in facto-
ries all over the place as part of my work, and for speaking engagements. I do a 
lot of odd speaking engagements for that reason, because I get to go to bizarre 
places and see the inside of them. Recently, I went to Parma, Italy, to give a 
talk to the biggest pasta maker on earth. I got to visit this factory where they 
make the spaghetti that gets sold all over the world. I spent time with the Barilla 
brothers. It’s their family business from several generations back. I got to ask 
them all types of questions about the history of the company, the factories, and 

133
Technology
how they do everything. They took me on private tours. You don’t get to do that 
if you’re an MBA student. I think of all that as my higher education. And it’s 
better than an MBA. 
I’m not an isolated example. A lot of the people I think of as being the most 
capable and accomplished are those that dropped out of college and learned 
what they do on the job. Learning that way gives you a sense of responsibility 
and a sense of ownership of your skills and knowledge in a way that a degree 
doesn’t. You get a degree and it’s an external authority saying you know what 
you’re doing. The degree abstracts responsibility for learning and the knowl-
edge you have. 
What school doesn’t do can be summed up as apprenticeship. You find a 
situation where you can go hang out with smarter people who know more than 
you. I think that’s a pretty good formula for anybody’s life. Surround yourself 
with people who are going to challenge you. Don’t surround yourself with a 
bunch of average people, because then you’re going to end up that way. You 
have to maximize your curiosity.


Technology
David Mason
“All these experiences 
learning on the job 
really changed the way 
I look at hiring people. 
I couldn’t care less if 
you have a degree or 
not.”

136
Don’t Go Back to School 
David Mason is currently the Director of Community  
Dynamics at New Kind, an agency working as community 
catalysts on brand, culture, and design. He’s also played in 
a band, led a team of developers at Mozilla to build things on 
top of the Firefox platform, managed an international team 
of developers to create Red Hat Linux, been part of a tech 
team for a presidential campaign, and worked for an inter-
national public nonprofit building technologies for health workers in Africa. Being a 
musician is the only one of these jobs for which he had any formal training.
Dave got his first big job, at Red Hat, with a time-honored independent learning 
strategy: He said he knew how to do something he didn’t, and then learned it really 
fast. What’s important is that he had confidence he could learn it on his own, which 
changed his career options, and also his hiring practices as a manager. If you’re  
concerned about getting a job without paper credentials, listen to Dave’s idea of a 
qualified candidate. 

137
Technology
This is something I don’t really tell a lot of people, but now I don’t really care 
because it has been so long. When I got hired at Red Hat, there wasn’t an in-
depth interview process. I met with the owner, Marc Ewing, and we were really 
just shooting the shit. He asked me if I knew anything about XML. I knew some 
about SGML but not really about XML yet. But I told him, “Yes, sure I do,” be-
cause I knew that I could find out whatever I needed to know. I knew I could 
learn it. That was it. He showed me around the office and I was hired. It always 
felt a little disingenuous, but I was right. I could learn it and I did.
When I’d been at Red Hat for a year, I shifted from coding to managing 
coders. We reached a point where we needed management and we didn’t nec-
essarily have the funds yet to go out and hire experienced people. It fell to me 
because I was one of the few in engineering with good communication skills. 
It was important that I understood enough about programming to know what 
it takes to create products, put together teams, and get them to work together 
and meet goals.
I didn’t know how to be a manager when I started doing it. Most of the 
learning came from trying things out. They would either blow up in my face 
or work. When I look back on some of the things that I did, I realize how dumb 
we were in handling certain situations. But I am also really proud of us. It’s still 
really surprising to me that I do this for a living. I’m surprised that I understand 
it, that I’m gainfully employed doing it, and also that I’m so interested in it. 
 All these experiences learning on the job really changed the way I look at 
hiring people. I couldn’t care less if you have a degree or not. Some of the peo-
ple who have worked with me and for me who don’t have degrees are actually 
better than the ones who do have degrees.
I realized that what’s important is hiring people who are confident in their 
ability to go find information and to learn. I don’t care if they actually know 
things or not when I hire them. The best programmers don’t know everything, 
but they know how to quickly pick up whatever it is they need to do. You can 
become good at picking things up fast, mostly by doing it a lot. Of course, it’s 
not something you can put on a résumé. The usual interview process is misera-
ble at detecting it. But when I see it in someone, I know it instantly and I want 
to hire them. 
David Mason works with newkind.com


Sciences
Interviews


Sciences
Luke Muehlhauser
“It has never been 
easier to learn without 
school.”

142
Don’t Go Back to School 
Luke Muehlhauser, a devoted autodidact, is a scientific  
researcher and the Executive Director of the Singularity  
Institute. He left behind a Christian high school and world-
view for a secular college, and then chose to drop out and 
study science on his own. 
Luke is an advocate of independent learning and  
celebrates the resources that have recently become widely 
available to learners outside universities. Here he describes his process for tackling 
new subjects and how the process of writing about his learning and sharing his ideas 
with his community is crucial to internalizing new knowledge and to keeping an  
objective perspective on it.

143
Sciences
My education started out very badly with 12 years at a very small Christian 
school in Minnesota. The quality of education was quite poor, especially in the 
sciences, for reasons you might expect. The first page of the Bob Jones Uni-
versity Press biology textbook said that if you make observations that disagree 
with the Word of God, you should go with the Word of God. I went to commu-
nity college and then transferred to the University of Minnesota. After a year, 
I was disillusioned by the value of what I was studying so I dropped out of uni-
versity and instead went into the workforce. After I dropped out, I worked in IT 
in Los Angeles for two years, but at the same time was rapidly gobbling up all 
kinds of sciences on my own and finding that I learned a lot better as an autodi-
dact. I began writing a blog about what I was learning, and was recognized for 
my knowledge and writing ability on issues that matter to the Singularity Insti-
tute. So I was invited to be a visiting fellow and then was hired as a researcher, 
and then a few months after that I was made executive director.
Skipping school or dropping out of school is obviously a decision that should 
be made on a case-by-case basis. You want to come out of your education with 
certain types of competencies and not a lot of debt. But it has never been easier to 
learn without school. There are so many resources to become a generally capable 
and smart person and there is no trouble doing it outside of the school system at 
all. Your education should amplify your curiosity by giving you the opportunity to 
pursue things that you actually care about, and learning outside of school is ideal 
for that. Try to learn as many things as possible and not be afraid to fail quickly 
and keep trying, or switch tracks. You’ll get experience and valuable lessons in a 
variety of fields, and you’ll occasionally stumble across things that you thought 
you were going to be bad at, and it turns out you’re pretty good at. 
I’ve been doing this long enough that my process for learning new things 
is pretty streamlined. If I want to answer a particular question or learn about 
a particular subject, I have a certain type of algorithm that is very efficient for 
coming to understand a new field of knowledge as quickly as possible. Basically 
the quickest way that I’ve found to come to a good understanding of a new sub-
ject — at least if it’s science, math, or philosophy — is to find recent information 
about the subject. If I know the field well enough to know what the narrow sub-
ject I’m trying to learn about is then I will just look on Google Scholar for what 
are called “review articles” or “survey articles” that are in the last four years on 
that specific topic, and then I will read through all those articles. They are awe-
some because they provide an overview of the different relevant fields, adjacent 
fields, who some of the leading researchers are, what the standard results in the 

144
Don’t Go Back to School 
literature are, what the open questions are, and the bibliography which contains 
references to all of the experimental studies that led to the conclusions that are 
summarized in the review paper. A good review article (or two or five) on the 
subject is my best place to start. You also have to be careful not to just take what 
the review article says for granted. You have to look into the empirical basis and 
the experimental design of the studies that feed into those review articles. Were 
they conducted with solid methodology and proper controls? 
If I don’t know the field well enough to know even what the specific subject 
matter is called or what the key terms to search for are, I will often have to start with 
a university textbook on the broader subject and then flip through the chapters and 
try to find what the key terms are so I can search for them on Google Scholar.
The way my brain works for keeping track of these things is by summarizing 
and writing about the readings in my own words. That’s the best way for me 
to keep it in my memory. It also happens to be a good way to share the results 
of your efforts with other people on the internet, especially if you’re part of a 
community that’s investigating a particular topic. You can share your findings 
with others, post those results, and then maybe people will post back and say, 
“That’s great, but did you see this study that had a different result? What do 
you think of that?” Maybe they can point to things that you had not even found. 
Working this way, I’ve become an independently educated scientist. Most 
people assume you need a PhD to publish in peer-reviewed books and journals, 
but it’s not true — I’ve published in peer-reviewed venues without even a bach-
elor’s degree, because I learned the material well enough on my own to engage 
at the cutting edge of human knowledge.
Luke Muehlhauser’s website is lukeprog.com

Sciences
Zack Booth Simpson
“In a way, the best 
education you can 
get is just talking with 
people who are really 
smart and interested 
in things, and you can 
get that for the cost of 
lunch.”

146
Don’t Go Back to School 
Zack Booth Simpson is a software engineer, artist, and 
molecular biology researcher at the University of Texas at 
Austin. Without any formal study in the sciences, he’s con-
tributed to over half-a-dozen scientific papers published 
in peer-reviewed academic journals. Zack is a high school 
dropout.
Zack struggled with formal school — even at its best, he 
felt it worked against his natural curiosity and love of learning by taking away his 
autonomy. His school experiences show a marked contrast with the satisfaction and 
self-sufficiency he experienced working and learning on the job in a variety of situ-
ations in his youth. He has a long history of getting jobs without formal credentials. 
One of my favorite things about talking to Zack is his conviction that the way he’s 
approached learning is a “perfectly viable way for anyone to do it.” He says people 
often feel he’s been successful in spite of his unconventional path because he’s some-
how exceptional. He thinks they’ve got it all backward. “Maybe it was the path that 
I took that made me extraordinary and not the other way around.”

147
Sciences
I was dyslexic, so I was really slow to learn to read, and I was very visually ori-
ented, which school wasn’t. For example, in first grade, the class was making a 
Thanksgiving dinner out of construction paper. The teacher asked if I wanted to 
make the turkey, but I thought that was way too hard. I said I’d make the cranber-
ry sauce. I took a giant pile of construction paper, and the teacher said — in what 
I now know was a sarcastic tone — “Are you sure that will be enough?” So then, 
without paying attention to what anybody else was doing, I made my cranberry 
sauce. It was all put up on the bulletin board in time for parent-teacher confer-
ences. My mom came in and pointed straight at mine — she knew it was mine. It 
was 3D, not 2D. Now you see why I didn’t want to make the turkey! 
I started playing with computers when I was eight or nine. When I was 
about 12, I used to go to a little mom-and-pop store that sold software for the 
computer I had, a TRS-80. I really liked this little store. One day I was in there 
with my mom and I said it would be so fun to work there. She told me to ask 
the owners. It never had occurred to me. She said, “Put on some nice clothes, 
walk in, and ask if you could have a job.” I did that and they hired me. They 
paid me $2.00 an hour under the table and it was great. When I started, I did 
little things like filing and cleaning. They saw that I could help customers, so 
I started fixing computers and installing software for people. By high school I 
was something like an assistant manager. So from an early age, I had a job in a 
real store where they expected me to act as an adult. Having a responsible job 
at that early age really shaped who I am. 
In high school, things really fell apart. I went to a magnet school that was 
created on the East Side of Austin, which was terrible. My father talked me into 
trying a boarding school. It was a beautiful place with nurturing people. But I 
was still just as turned off by being ordered to learn particular things and not 
having my own time to learn what I wanted. I’m really naturally interested in 
learning things, but there’s one way to guarantee that I lose interest, and that’s 
to tell me to be interested in it, even if I am. So, school worked against my natu-
ral instinct to learn. After one trimester at the boarding school, they suggested 
I could leave, and I didn’t want to be there anymore anyway.
When I went back to Austin, I needed another job so I could still be inde-
pendent and not too much of a drain on my mom. I heard about a job typing 
quality assurance reports at a software company. I went to an interview, and 
there had been some kind of miscommunication. They thought I was applying 
for the quality assurance job, not for the data entry job. I didn’t correct them. 
The quality assurance job was basically a junior programming job, since to do 

148
Don’t Go Back to School 
quality assurance on the compiler, you had to write programs to test the com-
piler. I thought, that’s fine — I know how to program, I can do that too.
I did that while I was supposedly finishing my junior year back at public 
high school. There was a specific moment when I realized it didn’t make sense 
for me to be there. I was in Spanish class in a windowless interior room taught 
by some teacher that didn’t speak Spanish. She was a first-year teacher. That 
day she handed out a Spanish word jumble puzzle — the busiest of busywork 
ever. When you’re a student, you’re like a robot: Someone puts something 
down in front of you, you just mindlessly do it. That day, what I thought was, 
I could write a program to optimize this search. If I had been at work, I would 
have been paid to have that idea. Somehow I had learned what first-year teach-
ers’ salaries were and I realized that my salary was bigger than her salary. I 
thought, what am I doing? I’m just sitting here doing busywork for this woman 
who makes less money than I make, who isn’t teaching me anything, and I’m 
wasting my brain when I could be working and getting paid for this. So I just 
stopped showing up after that. I went to work full-time for that database com-
pany. I worked there for five years. 
A friend of mine was working for a game company and it sounded a lot 
more fun, so I applied there and was hired. Within a few years, when I was 22 
or 23, I was the director of technology there. What had really paid off in terms 
of my career was that I had two skills that I had managed to build for myself. 
One was programming, which I taught myself and did for fun, and the other 
one was acting like a professional adult. Eventually I started making interac-
tive artwork for science and children’s museums. That turned out really well 
for paying my bills, so I had the luxury of doing what I wanted to do for a while. 
And what I wanted to do was sit around reading textbooks.
In those days, my girlfriend and I both worked out of the house. At lunch-
time, we’d meet up in the kitchen and I’d tell her about, let’s say, the thermody-
namics textbook I was reading, and she’d tell me about the web page she was 
designing. After a while, she told me that I needed more nerd friends. 
We lived near the University of Texas. She said why don’t you go down there 
and talk to them about going to grad school? I made an appointment with a 
graduate advisor and he asked what my degree was in. I told him I didn’t have 
one. In fact, I didn’t even have a high school diploma.
He said, well, you need a GED, and then you go get an undergraduate  
degree, and then come on back in. That wasn’t going to happen. It was ridicu-
lous to me. But one good thing came out of it: I had told him I was interested 

149
Sciences
in the intersection of biology and computation. He said that I should talk to 
Professor Edward Marcotte, who is a computational biologist. 
I went to see Edward and we hit it off right away. He knew my artwork and 
he had played my video games and he had no preconceived notions of what I 
did or didn’t know. He walked me around the lab and pointed to every piece 
of equipment and explained how cool it was. He was infectiously positive. As I 
was leaving he asked what I wanted to work on. I said honestly that I just want-
ed to hang out and learn stuff. He said okay, great, there’s the desk right there, 
we meet on Wednesdays. That was it. That’s how I started working in his lab.
At first, I was a little worried I’d be a leech on the system, asking dumb 
questions. I really wanted to be able to contribute. I knew I could at least be 
useful because I know computers, and people everywhere, at every level, end 
up needing help with that. I was totally wrong to have worried — the first thing I 
learned was that there are no dumb questions. Not only that, it was not uncom-
mon that a grad student would thank me later for asking something, because 
they didn’t feel like they could ask. In the same way, my fear that all I would 
be able to contribute would be essentially IT help was completely wrong. My 
contribution was the fact that I had a radically different view on everything that 
was being discussed. I had read the same textbooks, but I hadn’t sat in on the 
classes. I just had a very different way of looking at the material. The reason I 
have a different perspective is because I didn’t go to school. I didn’t go the route 
they took. Ironically, my value to them is exactly the fact that I didn’t do what 
they all did. 
Here’s an example: Shortly after I started, Edward and I were walking down 
the hall and he mentioned an MIT contest in synthetic biology engineering. We 
went to the planning meeting. The professor who was running it was Andy 
Ellington, who I didn’t know at the time, but he’s since become a really good 
friend. He was reading the contest description, which asked entrants to build 
a state machine out of bacterial cells. He asked everyone, “What the hell’s a 
state machine?” No one knew what a state machine was except me. I said state 
machines are really cool, here I’ll explain it. It turned into a whole lesson about 
computational theory. 
What we wanted to do was choose an algorithm that when multiplied by a 
gigantic number of bacteria would do something interesting. I proposed mak-
ing a bacterial edge detector. The idea was to engineer real bacteria to behave 
in a certain way. So you lay the bacteria on an agar plate, and project an im-
age down onto the plate — let’s say a checkerboard. The bacteria will compute 

150
Don’t Go Back to School 
where the edges are and then respond to indicate if they’re at a boundary be-
tween light and dark, for example, forming a checkerboard grid. I made the 
algorithm for it, but I didn’t know the chemistry. I knew it was possible, but 
I didn’t know how exactly. Everyone thought it was a cool idea and started to 
talk through how it would work. They explained the chemistry to me and I ex-
plained the computation to them. 
Over the course of the next year, with a lot of collaboration from Chris Voigt’s 
lab at the University of California at San Francisco, we built the state machine. 
My contribution was having this radically different perspective from the trained 
scientists. It was the fact that I didn’t know all that chemistry, because if I had, 
I might not have proposed the project. Because the chemistry was really hard. 
I feel now actually a little less creative in the lab than I did five years ago, 
because I now know a lot of the chemistry and biology better. I talk myself out 
of ideas very quickly when I don’t see right away how to implement them. Early 
on, I was more creative because I didn’t know what wasn’t possible. 
My experience is not as uncommon as you might think. Edward Marcotte 
was particularly open to it, but it happens from time to time. From the outside, 
it’s easy to think of a university as a big, tall building with a set of steps that lead 
up the front, and some guards at the top of those steps to keep you out. But, if 
you look around the side of the building, there are a whole bunch of doors that 
are wide open! Not every professor is like this, but there are a lot of professors 
who welcome it. They like having people around who are interested in things.
As far as education goes, some people talk as if lecturers have a magic wand 
that downloads information into your head. But it’s your job to learn it, not 
somebody else’s to download it to you. You have to read the book. You have 
to think through what the lecturer is saying. I think everyone is an autodidact.
For me, there are three ways of learning. Reading, listening to lectures, and 
having smart friends. As to reading, when I get interested in an area of science, 
I start by reading a popular-science book. Those are usually well written, in a 
way that you can understand without any expertise. Then I move on to text-
books. There are two important things about reading a textbook. One is don’t 
sweat it; if you don’t understand something, so what, keep reading. Two is that 
no one retains everything, even someone who gets a PhD in the subject. Text-
books are for getting the gist of something and then having a reference that you 
can go back to when you need it. 
A deeper part of learning is having friends. I have a lot of smart friends. As 
I started hanging out at the lab, I started getting a lot more smart friends. My 

151
Sciences
friend’s grandmother told him a joke. She said don’t marry for money, just hang 
out with rich people and marry for love. My addendum to that is don’t bother 
getting an education, just hang out with smart people and ask good questions.
There are people like Edward and Andy from the University of Texas, and 
my neighbor John, who is a professor of electrical engineering. I ask questions 
of them all the time. I go to lunch with them and we just have great conversa-
tions. In a way, the best education you can get is just talking with people who 
are really smart and interested in things. You can get this education for the cost 
of lunch. For a lot of professors, there’s nothing they like more than talking 
about whatever the hell it is that they work on. You can just cold-call a profes-
sor who does research you’re interested in. Read up on it first, and then call 
and say, “Hey, can I take you to lunch, I’m thinking about such and such.” Not 
everyone will respond, but a fair number will. 
Having smart friends is definitely a key to maintaining your motivation, and 
smart friends are also free. The important thing is being able to give something 
back. Friendships aren’t one way. What’s surprising is how much people get 
out of just talking with somebody who asks good questions. Even a professor 
whose work you don’t understand in detail, if you’re excited about it and you’re 
interested enough to ask good questions, then you’re actually contributing to 
their work because you’re making them think about what they’re doing. You’re 
making them answer basic questions without resorting to jargon. 
I can imagine a more organized way of learning this way, where you start 
with X amount of dollars and go to lunch every day with a professor, while read-
ing textbooks. It will cost you maybe $1,000 to have the best education that 
you can imagine. I did this by happenstance, but I don’t see why one couldn’t 
plan it out and do it that way on purpose. 
Zack Booth Simpson’s website is mine-control.com/zack


Extra Credit
Interviews


Extra Credit: languages
Karen Barbarossa
“There is a lot of 
literature on the best 
language-learning 
processes but no one 
taught me that, not 
really, not when I 
started absorbing 
languages.”

156
Don’t Go Back to School 
Karen Barbarossa is a product designer and a writer. She 
is also a lover of languages and an avid student of language, 
culture, and context. Unlike many of the people I inter-
viewed for this book, Karen has two graduate degrees, one in 
language and one in business. Karen understands more than 
a dozen languages. She has learned them through classes, by 
independent means, and by traveling. She has also taught 
English as a second language. In and out of school, she learned how to best learn new 
languages quickly and easily. Here she shares her approaches and experiences. 

157
Extra Credit
As a child, foreign languages seemed like the doors to worlds of magic. My grand-
parents spoke an Italian dialect my brothers and I didn’t understand, a language 
of secrets. I don’t remember if I was exposed to other spoken languages when I 
was young, but I was a curious and voracious reader, and I can remember being 
aware of other worlds, places, and other languages I read about. As I got older 
and began to learn languages, they did open up new worlds. I loved the light they 
shine on culture, context, how people feel, and think. The stories people tell me 
seem different, depending on the language and country. 
I think part of why people teach themselves things is based on fascination 
or passion or some other internal force that drives them to it. For me, it’s the 
drive to know and experience the whole world. To really understand a language 
and how it works also means understanding the history of the language, the 
history of the land, the people, and the geography. If I could spend all my time 
wandering around in the world, spending months at different places learning 
languages, I would do that. 
 There is a lot of literature on the best language-learning processes but no 
one taught me that, not really, not when I started absorbing languages. Later I 
found out that what I learned matched a lot of research on language learning. 
But for me, I figured it out on my own. It’s not the same for everyone, and that’s 
important. You have to try different ways and see what sticks. For example, I 
found that I can’t learn a language I can’t read. So I have had to learn all kinds 
of alphabets, whereas my brother doesn’t need to read, he can learn by hear-
ing. I know I will have to put in extra time, in the beginning, because if I can’t 
see the language I can’t seem to store it in my head. But the basics of learning a 
language seem pretty similar for most people. 
It’s easier to learn a language in a place where it is spoken, whether that’s  
another country or an enclave in your town. There are parts of language learn-
ing that I do use textbooks for. Word order, verb order, does the language have  
declensions, are there masculine and feminine words, and so on. Gendered 
words are not the same gender across all languages. It’s not as though if you 
know the moon is feminine in one language, she will maintain her femininity 
everywhere. It doesn’t work like that, which is a shame. Each one has to be mem-
orized separately. After the textbooks, I talk to everyone who will talk to me. I  
listen to everyone who is speaking. The radio, the television, train announce-
ments, anything. This is where a fluent speaker can make it more pleasant. Then 
you just turn to them and ask questions. Strangers are nice about this too, if you 
are sitting in a café and ask someone to explain a word to you, that helps. 

158
Don’t Go Back to School 
Really, the best possible way to learn a language for me is to have someone 
at my beck and call who’s fluent in that language. Because basically I’ll pester 
them, “So how do you say this? Is this right? What if I wanted to say this?” And 
I often ask how to say very absurd things because if I can do that, then I really 
understand the structure. The absurdity is part of the fun, as well, the laughter 
at the ridiculous things that are grammatically correct but silly. When I was 
learning Hebrew, I was talking with a friend about hamburgers and meat, and 
the different ways of talking about meat in Hebrew. I asked, “If I wanted to say 
that I wanted an elephant hamburger with ketchup, would I say it like this?” 
He just looked at me funny and said, “Yes, it’s exactly like that.” So I knew I 
understood it, I understood the structure well enough to use it. Once I under-
stand the framework, I can plug in the words, but without the framework, the 
grammatical model, you’re just throwing words around willy-nilly. 
I listen to a lot of radio, often in languages I don’t speak. They start to make 
sense after a while. It’s a very passive type of learning, the intonation and struc-
ture float into me, the music and texture of the language, even if I am not un-
derstanding what is being said, yet. It soaks around and it’s really useful when 
I start speaking, because I’ve been listening to the accent. 
One of my professors in school said you should never learn a language 
alone and don’t sit at the table and learn the language because you will never 
remember a language sitting alone at a table. He was keen on contextual learn-
ing. That’s been my experience. I used to do things like listen to language tapes 
while washing dishes. One thing I discovered is that I cannot listen to language 
tapes and drive a car well. I don’t know what’s going on in my brain, and at the 
last moment I have to save myself from veering off the road or into another car. 
I’ve also found that learning languages in school often makes them less 
functional in the real world, because you learn a formal, polite version of a lan-
guage in classes, not languages as they are spoken. For example, when I lived 
in Switzerland I watched American movies, dubbed in French and subtitled in 
French as well. Ones with really foul language, such as Magnolia and American 
Beauty. I got all this raunchy slang from the subtitles. 
When I moved to Washington, DC, I lived with one of my brothers, who also 
knows many languages. We decided to learn a language together that neither 
of us spoke, which turned out to be a funny process of elimination. We were 
down to Arabic or Brazilian Portuguese. We decided to go with Portuguese be-
cause I wanted to dance, and we thought it would be easier and faster to learn. 
We took a class together and spoke Portuguese together at home for about 

159
Extra Credit
three months. We butchered it at times, but we’d look things up, too. It’s great 
when you have a partner in crime for learning languages. 
Not too long ago I was doing some consulting on contextual linguistics and 
translation, and I found a chart showing how the State Department teaches 
languages. What they’d found from their studies was pretty spot on for what 
I’ve learned by trying it out for myself. 
I think the biggest thing though, is that this is fun. Every language is a new 
mystery, so it’s completely exciting when I get to embark on another one. Even 
thinking about it now, I can’t wait to start on a new one, to get out there, to 
begin again.


Extra Credit: creative Writing
Cory Doctorow
“The more you can be 
objective about your 
work, the better. You 
learn to do that by 
learning to critique 
other people’s work 
first.”

162
Don’t Go Back to School 
Cory Doctorow is a science fiction author, activist, jour-
nalist, and blogger — the co-editor of boingboing.net and 
the author of Tor Teen/HarperCollins UK novels such as For 
the Win and the best-selling Little Brother. He is the former 
European director of the Electronic Frontier Foundation 
and cofounded the UK Open Rights Group. He attended sev-
en years of high school and dropped out of four universities. 
He holds an honorary doctorate in computer science from the Open University in 
the UK.
For people who want to teach themselves to write, Cory offers a detailed portrait 
of what got him into writing, how he started teaching himself, how he gets work done 
as a writer, and the practicalities of being a working writer. One effective way to 
learn creative writing is to participate in a writing group or workshop. Instead of an 
MFA program, read Cory’s explanation of how to run a productive group and how 
working with a group teaches you about writing. 

163
Extra Credit
Writing, for me, started when I was six. This was 1977, and the ability of a six-
year-old to experience narratives was pretty constrained. We only had three TV 
channels. We didn’t have a DVD player, obviously. We didn’t have a VCR. And we 
didn’t have YouTube. The books I had were children’s books. But I saw Star Wars. 
Star Wars is not the most complicated story, but it’s got multiple points of view. 
It has nonlinear storytelling. It was, I think, the most complicated story I’d ever 
seen. It really got me sort of fizzing. You know, this idea of a story that was more 
than just the linear, single point-of-view narrative. I went home and I tried to 
take it apart the same way that you would try and take apart and reconstruct a toy 
that you were interested in. I got some paper, stapled it down the side, trimmed 
it to the size of a mass-market paperback, and wrote out the story of Star Wars as 
best as I could remember. The exercise was so exciting and just felt so good that 
I announced on the spot that I wanted to write books. And I kept it up. Then, for 
a while, I wanted to be an astronaut and a deep-sea diver and all the rest of it. 
I went back to writing, and when I was 16, I decided I was going to try to 
commercialize my work. I started writing stories and sending them to mag-
azines. At 17, I made my first semi-professional sale. Ten years later, I made 
my first professional sale. Five more years after that, my first novel came out. 
Learning to write isn’t just about learning to tell good stories, it’s about learn-
ing how to do your work and sell your work.
As a writer, just doing your work is something a lot of people struggle with. 
I did too. My solution was that I started writing even when I didn’t feel like it. I 
started writing even when I felt like I was writing bad material. I chose a modest  
word count goal and did it every day, in narrative sequence. At the time, when I 
was working full days for the Electronic Frontier Foundation, it was 250 words 
a day, which is a page. A page a day is a novel a year. Even on the most blocked 
up, miserable day, it only took 45 minutes to write 250 words. Most days, it took 
15 minutes. Anyone can find 15 minutes in a day. Even after my daughter Poesy 
was born, and my wife, Alice, and I were running around like chickens with 
their heads cut off, there was 15 minutes sometime in the day. The discipline of 
writing every day and the habit of writing every day made it a lot easier. 
If you write every day just a little bit, in sequence, it just becomes a thing 
you do. It becomes much easier to do it even on days when you don’t feel like 
doing it, and especially on days when you’re not feeling it. I used to think of 
writing as such a major undertaking, something that required so much men-
tal preparation and physical preparation — you know, the right music, a ciga-
rette, whatever. Breaking that habit, turning writing into something mundane, 

164
Don’t Go Back to School 
makes it slightly less satisfying, maybe. But it’s also a lot less misery-making. 
Taking the heroism out of writing was a huge thing. 
To figure out what I’m writing each day, I tend to work with major signposts 
in the narrative. At least the next two or three known things. I like to think of 
it as a journey where you’ve got three or four errands you need to run. I’ve got 
three or four places I need the story to go. Each place has to have the character 
or characters in greater peril with a bigger problem to solve. The character tries 
to solve her problem, fails through no fault of her own, and things get worse. 
As long as you’re doing that on every page, you will get to a point of higher 
tension, and there will be a reason for the reader to keep reading. This way, 
it’s really easy to figure out where you should go next. You think: What would 
make the situation worse? How can this person try to solve this problem, fail, 
and have things get worse? It doesn’t have to be like I diffuse a bomb and there 
is a bigger bomb underneath it. It can be: I got into an argument with someone 
and tried to sort it out and actually offended them more. 
One of my favorite resources for these kinds of stories is Dale Carnegie’s 
How to Win Friends and Influence People, because it’s a book written for social-
ly inept people who can’t figure out why no one likes them. If you reverse his 
advice, every situation that Dale Carnegie talks about is a road map for how to 
alienate people and make your social circumstance worse. All you need to do is 
do the opposite of everything Dale Carnegie says, and you will have a character 
who does things that people really do in the real world. You and your readers 
will feel like you can understand why they would do these things because we’ve 
all done them. That is a way of making things worse in a social way. 
Another thing that’s hard is getting myself back into it every day. My best 
technique for that is leaving off in the middle of a sentence where you know 
what the rest of the sentence is going to be. Because that way, you can write the 
first three or four words without having to be creative. And then you’re already 
being creative. And then you’re already writing. Another thing to avoid is when 
you get to a point where you could stop and do something fairly noncreative 
and distracting for a while to fix the story. So you’ve got a spear carrier who 
needs to have a name. You could open the phone book. You could do lots of 
things. But the actual character’s name isn’t particularly important to the sto-
ry; they just need to have a name. This is where you just write “TK,” which is 
what journalists do. And then you go back to it later. Or, anytime you’ve got a 
fact that you’re pretty sure of that you want to make sure is right, you do that 
too. Like, how long is the Brooklyn Bridge? The Brooklyn Bridge, all 800 feet 

165
Extra Credit
of it, across whatever river it is. I can’t even remember what river the Brooklyn 
Bridge goes over. You just write “FCK,” fact check. 
What’s great is you don’t have to go to an MFA program to learn these skills. 
You can learn them in a well-run writing group. While it’s nice to have six weeks 
with an instructor in the formal program, the major value that you get out of 
being in a writing workshop is critiquing people who are at about the same 
level as you, not receiving wisdom from on high. This is something anybody 
can set up for themselves. Just get a group together and agree on the ground 
rules. From day to day and week to week, I don’t even think it’s good to have 
a mentor who reads everything you write and tells you what’s good and what 
isn’t. I think having input from unprivileged viewpoints, everyone being equal, 
is much better. The main thing that group critiquing does is it gives you a better 
critical eye for your own work. To me, learning to critique is more important 
than receiving critique. I think every writer goes into a writing workshop at the 
start feeling like what they want is to improve a particular story by getting some 
critical feedback; or, if they’re really honest with themselves, they also want 
someone to tell them they’re brilliant. 
But the best stuff that you can get out of it is learning to turn a cold, rational 
eye on your own work in pretty short order. Your goal is to have the experience 
of putting something in a drawer and coming back to it later and being able to 
look at it with fresh eyes and saying “Aha. I can fix that, I can fix that, I can fix 
that.” The shorter that drawer period can be, the better. The more you can be 
objective about your work, the better. You learn to do that by learning to cri-
tique other people’s work first.
One thing to look out for is that writing workshops can hurt writers by mak-
ing it hard to separate the urge to revise from the urge to compose. You have to 
figure out how to stop critiquing yourself while you’re writing, and come back 
to critiquing when you’re done. You can’t revise and compose at the same time. 
It’s the centipede dilemma. You know, “Hey Mr. Centipede, how do you walk 
with all those feet?” “I don’t know,” he says. “I’ve never thought about it.” And 
he never walks again.
There are important ground rules to running a good group. Everybody 
has to submit. Sometimes a member stops writing but doesn’t stop coming to 
the workshop. If you’re not submitting to the workshop you lose the right to 
critique. People form groups without any mechanism for un-forming them. 
Without establishing a formal process for ejecting someone from the work-
shop — and having it exist prior to behaving in ways that make them no longer 

166
Don’t Go Back to School 
a candidate for the workshop — you end up in a mean-spirited thing where now 
we’ve invented a rule that means you can’t come anymore, as opposed to ev-
eryone agreeing at the start that anyone who hasn’t submitted a manuscript in 
six months is out, or at least annually if they’re doing novels. 
Another point about work in progress: I really strongly believe that it’s better 
to have a workshop in which the manuscripts are given well in advance than one 
in which the manuscripts are handed out at the start of the workshop. Having a 
long fuse for critique is better. It’s better if you can read it a couple of times.
Unless it’s really a big deal, don’t critique punctuation, grammar, and spell-
ing, just mark it. There’s nothing more deadly than being in a group of 18 people 
and listening to someone speak at length about someone else’s commas. That’s 
the kind of thing that you can just circle in red ink in a manuscript. By all means 
circle it, give the manuscript back to the writer, but you don’t need to talk about 
it. Talk about substantive issues. Don’t repeat anything anyone else has said. Just 
say I agree with so-and-so. From there it’s wide open because why a story works 
is as diverse and personal as why someone is likable. 
For myself, I don’t mind and I actually encourage specific rewrite sugges-
tions. I think there are some writers who like hearing “this is broken” or “this is 
good,” but saying you should fix it this particular way is unwelcome. But I think 
that specific rewrites are great. I think sometimes it’s hard to express why you 
think something is broken, but in describing how you think it would be better, 
you can convey what you think is missing. It doesn’t mean the writer has to take 
your suggestion, but it does have an information richness that’s missing from a 
mere “this is broken” critique.
The other thing that is absolutely off-limits is critiques of the writer and 
not critiques of the work: “You always do this,” “You’re a misogynous prick 
for writing this,” or “This is the technological optimism that you always do 
because you are such a naïve technophile.” That kind of thing is absolutely 
off-limits.
There’s a corollary to it that’s never enforced which is that praise should be 
for the manuscript and not the writer: “This is me. This is my story. They’re 
problems with my story. They’re not problems with me.” The corollary really 
should be: “This is me. This is my story. The virtues of my story are not virtues 
of me,” but no one ever does that. If you’re going to be really intellectually hon-
est, you have to admit that the virtues in your story are not necessarily present 
in you. That’s the reason that wife-beating assholes like Tolstoy could make 
good art because virtues can be an art that aren’t in the artist.

167
Extra Credit
This way of doing things can be so much better than an MFA. I have a friend 
who wanted to be a science fiction writer who went to the University of South-
ern California creative writing program for thousands of dollars a year and who 
was only allowed to write one science fiction story in four years. The entire 
commercial advice she got from the program was jokes about how poor she 
was going to be. She didn’t learn how to prepare a manuscript, how to research 
a market, how to find an accountant who understands the arts, how to incorpo-
rate a personal business to insulate yourself from liability if you ever get sued 
over one of your stories. None of that stuff was present in that academic pro-
gram. Those are really important things to know.
I don’t know that every creative writing program is like that, but I think that 
if you’re considering graduate education in creative writing, you have to ask 
yourself: Will they let you write the kind of stories that you want to write, and 
also give you models for how to live a writer’s life? Not just commercial mod-
els, but personal models like how do you live with a spouse when you have a 
career in the arts and they have a career that’s a regular job — all of the soup to 
nuts of having a creative life. Unless you think you’re going to come out of that 
program understanding how a writer lives, how a writer makes a living, how 
to write, and unless you’re allowed to write the stuff that you want to, then you 
should run fast in the other direction.
Cory Doctorow’s website is craphound.com


how TO BE AN 
INDEPENDENT 
LEARNER


171
How to be an Independent Learner
Choose a learning method
Think about your favorite, most successful learning experiences and what 
characterized them. Try to recall experiences in a similar category of learning: 
skills, academic knowledge, crafts, etc. You might realize that you prefer to 
learn in different ways about areas of knowledge, such as environmental sci-
ence, and skills, such as drawing.
The nuances to preferred ways of learning are plentiful, but they boil down 
to two broadly defined approaches:
■
■You learn new things with the goal of gaining mastery and understanding in 
a specific area of knowledge.
■
■Or, you guide your process by learning what you need to complete a specific 
project.
Within either of these approaches, you will also need to explore the learn-
ing strategies that are most effective for you. Strategies are ways of acquiring 
knowledge: reading, listening to lectures, discussing your subject with others, 
explaining or teaching what you’re learning, collaborating on learning proj-
ects, attending workshops, taking online or in-person classes. This is where 
you want to think back to what has worked for you in the past, or try something 
new if you haven’t found success with any of the methods you’ve already tried. 
These strategies are the tools by which you’ll learn what you’re interested in, 
and in all likelihood you’ll use a combination of strategies.
Paths to general knowledge
First let’s talk about learning an area of knowledge. To do this, you can follow 
one of two paths through the material: linear or associative. 
A linear strategy follows a trajectory like traditional classroom learning, using 
a textbook, a syllabus, or an entire curriculum that is mapped out in an orderly 
How to Be an Independent Learner

172
Don’t Go Back to School 
way. This is a good choice if you have decided that you want to learn a subject as 
a whole, because the subject area is appealing to you, or it’s something you wish 
you had learned in school. It also works well if you find classroom learning ap-
pealing, but want to do it outside of school. The main thing is the idea that you’re 
eager to learn an entire subject area, a large body of knowledge. 
Here’s a picture of what a linear path looks like: You have decided that you 
want to learn basic physics. You can start by finding an introductory course 
online, or reading an introductory textbook, and learn the material in a com-
monly taught sequence of concepts. Newton’s laws, motion, gravity, and so on, 
concepts that build on each other. The path through the material is straight and 
orderly. Completing established levels of advancement through the trajectory 
gives you a sense of accomplishing what you set out to learn.
By contrast, an associative path can start anywhere, and it often appears 
that you are starting smack in the middle, or even at the end of a classical 
learning trajectory. You become curious about something and work your way 
around the ideas you need to know to understand it. You skim over things that 
are too advanced, or back up until you find a level you understand, and go for-
ward again. You will probably end up with an understanding of the subject that 
is deeper in some ways and shallower in others. It’s an equally valid style, and it 
feels more natural to some learners. It tends to emerge from a specific curiosity 
rather than a desire for knowledge in general. Because it is driven by specific 
curiosity, it can be easier to follow through on. People who operate this way 
gain a satisfactory level of understanding of their original starting point and 
often move on to focus on one of the tangents that came out of their starting 
question. This works best for people who don’t need a clear sense of comple-
tion, as there are an infinite number of tangents.
If you’re new to independent learning, you may not be very familiar with 
what an associative path might look like, so I’ll describe in some detail how 
this would look, again with the example of learning physics. Let’s say you read 
a handful of articles about the Large Hadron Collider, a massive particle accel-
erator that is expected to discover new particles that exist in theory but have 
never been observed experimentally. Now you want to learn more about par-
ticle physics. You don’t feel the need to be able to understand and calculate 
every formula or equation involved; you simply want to understand the area 
in a general way. If you started with an introductory physics textbook, it would 
take at least a few semesters’ worth of learning before you get to the meat of 
particle physics. 

173
How to be an Independent Learner
Alternatively, an associative path might begin with reading the Wikipedia 
article on particle physics, or glancing at the table of contents of a particle phys-
ics textbook. You’ll see from there that you need to understand the particles 
present in an atom and how they interact, so you find an introductory physics 
lecture online that explains the atom. From the textbook or Wikipedia article 
you would follow a path to gain a basic descriptive understanding of quan-
tum mechanics. This might lead you to something called the Standard Model, 
which is a giant equation to account for the forces that hold atoms together 
(and by consequence, the universe). In order to work, the Standard Model re-
quires the existence of particles that haven’t been observed, and that’s what 
scientists are looking for in their experiments with the Large Hadron Collider. 
A book about physics oriented toward a general audience and general audi-
ence talks by physicists you can find online can help you understand all of this. 
By following the tangents you need to understand what’s going on at the Large 
Hadron Collider, you’ve arrived at a general understanding of a segment of 
physics. You’ve likely skipped basic Newtonian physical laws, but if you find 
that you need to learn them, you can go learn the elementary equations to de-
scribe things like force and motion. You’ve gone through the frustrations of 
having to find your own way and the degree of backtracking and restarting that 
can be involved. You may have giant gaps in your knowledge. You may have a 
more nuanced understanding of what you’ve learned. Either way, you’re em-
powered and satisfied from having found your own way.
Project-driven learning
Learning by doing a project is a more focused learning experience than learn-
ing a body of general knowledge, and has a built-in means for keeping you mo-
tivated and marking your successes. It’s the most common approach among 
independent learners. Doing a project gives you a defined goal and a sense 
of progress when you finish the project. The project puts your new skills and 
knowledge in an immediate context. You may use traditional assignments 
and exercises to hone skills or internalize knowledge, but they’re in pursuit of 
something concrete, rather than material in a vacuum. Your project might be 
making a film, a physical object, a computer program, a science experiment, a 
book, a business, a graphic novel — anything that puts your learning in an active 
context and makes it useful.
These kind of concrete projects don’t obviously apply to every area of knowl-
edge. One of the best tricks I’ve heard independent learners talk about is turning 

174
Don’t Go Back to School 
their pursuit of a naturally abstract subject — such as philosophy or the history of 
art — into a concrete project. Often, the project involves sharing knowledge with 
others. You might go about this by making a film, recording a podcast, writing a 
blog about what you’re learning, writing an article, making a graphical represen-
tation of your work, teaching a workshop, or running a reading group.
To learn in the context of a project, you’re going to use many of the same 
strategies described for classroom-style learning, but you’ll attach them to an 
achievable goal. You’ll define your project and then make a list of what you 
think you need to learn to accomplish it. You’ll seek out the knowledge and 
skills you need by some combination of the same methods described above: 
reading, listening, discussing, taking notes, collaborating, using tutorials,  
experimenting, and finding experts to help you. 
Learning independently involves not being afraid of failure and do-overs. If 
you get started and find that the approach isn’t working for you, see if you can 
reconfigure your approach by paying attention to what didn’t work the first time. 
The key here is that if it’s not working, try tinkering with your method using any 
of the different approaches described in this section of the book. Everyone I talk-
ed to reported that the process of coming to learn how they as individuals do 
their learning was one of the most significant advantages of learning outside of 
school. It also led to greater satisfaction with their experience and a deeper un-
derstanding of their material or skills. So be prepared for some experimentation!
Find learning resources
Finding the materials and resources you need is a much simpler process than 
finding your approach to learning. You’ll be heavily dependent on your search 
engine skills, so it may take a little practice. Below I provide some hints about 
how to conduct searches and get help deciding which are the most effective 
or high-quality materials to use. You can refer to the Resources section of the 
book for places to start, but your own searches will also be vital, since there are 
new materials available every day. 
Syllabi
A syllabus is the learning path established by a professor for their students 
to learn a particular subject during a semester. It lists the books required, the 
topics covered in each lecture, and often the criteria for success in the course. 
At some schools all classes are required to post their syllabi, and at others it’s 

175
How to be an Independent Learner
voluntary on the part of the professor. Some schools don’t allow public access 
to these materials. Once you start exploring, you’ll get a good sense of where 
and how to find a helpful syllabus. It’s a good idea to compare a few and decide 
which seems most clear and compelling.
Some basic advice for discovering syllabi:
■
■Search for “syllabi database”; try including or omitting your subject area to 
narrow or broaden your search.
■
■Search at particular universities. The syllabi database for Emory University 
is a good example: is.gd/6jmdt0.
■
■Search for a course in a specific subject (e.g., Physics 101 or German history); 
you’ll find syllabi from many schools.
■
■Search for open courseware materials, which can be good sources for syllabi, 
whether or not you use the lectures or other features.
Textbooks
If you want to use a textbook, your goal will be to find one that is respected by 
teachers, that students find useful and comprehensible, and that you can afford. 
There are a few good sources for that information. You can look for course syllabi 
from reputable schools and find out which textbooks they assign. You can also look 
on a website such as ask.metafilter.com; first search for “best [subject] textbook” 
and see if anyone has asked the question before. Chances are someone has, and 
you’ll find suggestions from many knowledgeable people and explanations of why 
they endorse one book over another. If you don’t find an existing thread, you can 
ask the question yourself if you’re interested in joining the community. 
Some collaborative learning communities keep their own lists of reliable 
sources. For example, one of my interviewees is part of a community focused 
on psychology and cognitive science. They have a section listing the best 
textbooks on everything people in the community know about, with specific 
criteria for nominating a textbook (see Resources, p. 185). You can find good 
material in a place like that, and also get a solid understanding of what kind of 
people are reliable sources of textbook reviews (e.g., someone who has read 
more than one). Amazon reviews are sometimes helpful if you can determine 
that the contributor has some level of knowledge about the topic. Students may 
also comment on the accessibility of a textbook, which is useful too. 
Textbooks are expensive, but you can usually get a back edition for the price 
of a paperback novel. If the 10th edition is the most recent and costly (often 

176
Don’t Go Back to School 
hundreds of dollars), look for the 9th edition. Not that much will have changed; 
the textbook industry is invested in updating frequently for profitability as 
much as for keeping current with advancing knowledge.
Lectures
Many independent learners find that online lectures are a really effective way 
to learn new material. For any subject you’re interested in, you’ll want to try out 
lectures by a few different scholars or experts. Lecturing is a performance-based 
activity, and not all of the people who do it are gifted performers. If they’re not, 
you’re likely to lose interest quickly, not for lack of interest in your topic. 
Skills-based tutorials are also plentiful and mostly free on the web. Check the 
Resources section of this book for some of the more reputable sources. You can 
also search to find text or video tutorials created by generous individuals, and 
it’s a process of trial and error to find the tutorial producers who make the most 
sense to you. Taking a one-minute peek can usually give you a reliable sense of 
whether a tutorial producer is a competent, good communicator and teacher.
Online educational institutions
Online educational institutions range from small-group university classes for 
enrolled students conducted online to the MOOCs described in the introduc-
tion. Both differ from open courseware by attempting to more closely replicate 
the classroom experience, including conducting courses during a set time peri-
od, with automatically- or peer-evaluated assignments, and weekly work that 
must be done on schedule. Some MOOCs use discussion forums to encourage 
student participation and discussion, while traditional-scale online classes of-
ten use chat with other students and the instructor. Some MOOCs offer various 
types of certification, and some are moving toward granting college credits. 
You’ll find a list of MOOC platforms and open education options in the  
Resources section, p. 185.
Libraries
Beyond textbooks, your independent reading, research, and exploration will 
likely lead you to crave access to books in general: how-to books for technical 
and craft skills, primary and secondary texts for liberal arts, professional and 
scholarly journal articles, news archives, and the like.
If you are lucky enough to live in a big city with a well-funded public library, 
that may be all you need. It will have a large collection of books and journals, 

177
How to be an Independent Learner
and is likely to give you online access to a wider variety of scholarly journals 
from computers on site. You may be able to print articles or save PDF files to a 
USB drive. 	
If you’re not near a large public library, here are some good tricks for getting ac-
cess to the materials you want, and sometimes the buildings that house the books.
Interlibrary Loan (ILL) is a godsend to independent learners. Even the small-
est town library is part of the ILL system. Any book you find out about and want to 
get your hands on can be requested via ILL. Your library will find a copy at anoth-
er institution and have it sent to their collection temporarily, just for you.
If you live in a town that’s home to a college or university, you may be able 
to use it. Ask at the security or information desk (whichever you can get to) 
about their policy for community member access. They are often quite gener-
ous, ranging from free entry to borrowing privileges. Any state school is likely 
to have the most open policies. In some states, this is mandated.
If your local college or university library won’t let you in, here is my favorite 
work-around: Check to see if your library or a nearby library houses a Feder-
al Depository Library, sometimes called a Government Documents Center. 
These are repositories of copies of federal documents (for example, US Senate 
proceedings). The public is guaranteed access to these documents, and for the 
most part, they are housed within the main library. So the trick is to go to the 
security desk and tell them you are there to use the government documents. 
They will write you a day pass and you walk in the door. You are now free to use 
the entire building’s resources. It won’t get you borrowing privileges, but it’s a 
way in. See Resources, p. 185. 
Evaluate sources of information
Because you’ll be depending heavily on sources of information that you find 
for yourself, it’s important to know how to evaluate information for reliabil-
ity and quality. This has become ever more important since technology has 
opened the tools of publishing to everyone. Your goal here is to become a savvy 
consumer of information. There are several keys to this:
■
■Triangulate your sources, which means reading more than one source for 
the same information and comparing their approaches and conclusions. 
For example, if you are learning about the politics of the Middle East, you’ll 
find perspectives from different cultures, different political orientations, 
and different time periods. 

178
Don’t Go Back to School 
■
■Probe the background references relied on by the source you’re using and 
learn to assess the context in which the information was produced (includ-
ing the funding sources, if any). For example, if you are using general media 
and they report on conclusions of a new scientific study, it’s a good idea 
to track down the original study. Often studies are misrepresented or only 
part of their conclusions are reported. You will also want to look at the fund-
ing sources for the study and the degree to which they may be motivated by 
business or political concerns.
■
■Look up the authors of the material, and consider the other things they’ve 
written and their biographical details. For example, if you discover that the 
author of a book you’re reading was in the military in his youth, that will give 
you some information about the angle from which he perceives the world.
All of this helps you identify biases and track how an original reference is 
used in service of an argument about facts or how the world works.
Wikipedia is a reasonable place to start, but it’s merely an encyclopedia. 
You wouldn’t stop there if it was a physical encyclopedia. What’s better about 
it than a physical encyclopedia is that it is peer edited. This means that anyone 
who finds incorrect or vague information is able to correct or delete the entry. 
Looking at the change history and discussion pages for a few Wikipedia entries 
is itself a great lesson in evaluating information. Citations are supposed to be 
provided for any information added to a Wikipedia entry. Looking at the sources  
is also a good idea, both to see if the information appears to be coming from a 
reliable source, and for some options for further research. In general, Wikipedia  
is more reliable for scientific information, though it can also be more technical, 
so it’s not always helpful for beginners. 
For academic information, finding a “review article” on your subject is a 
wonderful shortcut for gaining a variety of perspectives and having them iden-
tified for you. A review article summarizes and compares a large number of 
books and studies on a specific topic, such as cognitive science or the work of 
the philosopher Nietzsche. Review articles are usually published in scholarly 
journals. If you’re not sure how to find them, the reference librarian at your 
local library can help you.

179
How to be an Independent Learner
Stick with it
Getting motivated and sticking with it are actually easier for independent 
learners than for many classroom students. You’re going to be working on 
something you’re passionate or curious about, something you feel strongly that 
you need to know. You are going to have autonomy over what you’re learning 
and how you’re learning it. 
Community 
The most significant factor in staying motivated and learning effectively is 
participation in learning communities of any size. A ready-made community 
is one of the few advantages of formal school, but you’ve seen in the interviews 
here that it’s also an easy thing to get access to without school. You can track 
down existing communities of learners, or start your own. One good strategy is 
to search for email lists related to the subject you’re interested in. Additionally, 
you can ask friends to join you in your learning project or to refer you to other 
people interested in the same area. Start a reading or skill-learning group for 
people who want to learn what you’re learning or find one. Attend classes or 
open workspace sessions at a local hackerspace. Ask friends who might know 
of a group of students working on an extracurricular project and offer to help 
out. One great independent learning secret is that people I interviewed who 
liked college usually said that one of the best parts was their extracurricular 
collaborations — so you can join in on those without paying tuition. 
Community is also important to your learning because your community 
gives you feedback on what you are making and thinking about. Discussion, 
disagreement, debate, critique, suggestions, corrections, and reinforcement 
all contribute to making sure you’re improving your skills and knowledge. 
These activities hold you to a community standard of rigorous thought or qual-
ity of creative work. 
You can use a learning community to give yourself nonarbitrary account-
ability to the pace of your learning and the depth of your learning. Nonarbitrary 
means the deadline exists for a consequential reason, usually because it has 
an effect on others if you don’t meet it. For instance, a deadline that’s tied to a 
specific amount of time you have to finish something, like time off from work. 
In that case, telling other people what you’re setting out to accomplish can help 
hold you to your plans. Another effective deadline strategy is a deadline that 
is set so that a group can accomplish something together (such as reading a 

180
Don’t Go Back to School 
book by a certain date); this is a community responsibility, and it’s easier to 
hold yourself to than a randomly chosen deadline, whether it’s from a syllabus 
or from a personal schedule. Yes, you could read that book next month instead 
of now, but if your friends are expecting you to lead a discussion on it, you’re 
more likely to do it now, to keep your learning in the present rather than in a 
hypothetical future. Simply declaring your intentions to others is another way 
of holding yourself accountable.
Learning within a community is a collective activity. You collaborate, share, 
teach, and learn. It’s important to be a community member who contrib-
utes — community is a two-way street. Offering to teach others something you 
already know is the best way to join or initiate a learning community. You’re 
introducing yourself as a positive contributor as well as an eager learner. 
Keeping track of what you learn and internalizing knowledge 
Research shows that people who have autonomy over their learning and 
learn new things in concrete contexts have stronger retention of what 
they’ve learned. So you’ve already got a leg up on this as an independent 
learner. Keeping track and internalizing what you learn is another area in 
which you’ll need to explore options and figure out what works best for you. 
Some people take copious notes, both systematically and unsystematically. 
They use notebooks, index cards, or programs such as Evernote and Scriv-
ener. Others teach their new skills or knowledge in an informal context. 
For many people, simply the act of discussing what they’ve learned in con-
versation is all they need to make it stick. Writing summaries or reflections 
about your learning and sharing them with others is also a great strategy, 
particularly if you are involved in or looking for a community of learners. If 
you are making a project, you may find that the project itself and the failed 
attempts by which you’ve figured out how to make it are a clear and useful 
record of what you’ve learned. Some learners collect scraps and make doo-
dles of what they’re learning. 
Some of the people I spoke with reported that they are not very good at 
keeping notes or records on what they’re learning, but that contextual learning 
is how they internalize and hold on to what they’ve learned.
If you’re eager to find a written strategy for recording what you’ve learned, 
check out the Resources section, p. 185, for more information on formal 
note-taking systems and software for note-taking.

181
How to be an Independent Learner
Getting help 
Your community is going to be your first stop for getting help when you get stuck 
or are confused. This could be your in-person community or online communi-
ties you’re part of, whether it’s your social network or a relatively anonymous 
helping community such as Stack Overflow. Start asking around if you need 
help; chances are that if nobody knows the answer, at least one person will be 
able to refer you to someone with the ability to help you. Online help forums for 
specific skills and areas of knowledge are plentiful, and practicing the ability to 
find your own answers by asking others and seeing what others have already 
asked and answered is a skill independent learners develop. These skills are 
also a significant advantage in the world of work.
You might think that access to professors and experts is an exclusive priv-
ilege of being a registered student, but this is far from the truth. Independent 
learners frequently get in touch with experts who are more than willing to help 
them or discuss their ideas and knowledge. 
You’re likely to get a better response if you make sure to clearly express both 
your enthusiasm for the subject and the fact that you’ve done some “home-
work” already. Most of these people are willing to be generous, but they’re also 
busy. Here are some tips for reaching out:
■
■Read their work or look at their projects before you write to them.
■
■Ask specific and detailed questions that are relatively brief. Don’t ask ques-
tions that can be answered by a thorough Google search.
■
■Give positive feedback; briefly tell them what excites you about their work 
or the ways in which it has influenced you. If you want to find out about their 
other work, make sure you’ve already used the standard tools and give them 
a sense of the work you know about. If they have a large body of work, it’s 
okay to ask them where you should look next given your particular interests.
■
■Expect relatively brief responses and only ask follow-on questions if you’re 
invited to. 
Get a job
People who haven’t done much independent learning tend to be concerned 
about getting jobs without degrees, whether it’s an undergraduate or an ad-
vanced degree. Most of the people I spoke with didn’t have any problems find-
ing work and keeping jobs. Some of them cited their independent learning as 

182
Don’t Go Back to School 
an advantage in the workplace because they have better skills in learning on 
the job. Here are their job-seeking secrets.
Chutzpah
Getting a job without a degree or required training takes a little bit of chutzpah. 
You have to be willing to ask an employer to take a risk on you, and to believe 
in your own competence. Sometimes, you have to be willing to exaggerate your 
knowledge or skills, knowing by your past experience that you’ll know how to 
learn what you need. This is the idea of “fake it till you make it” that many suc-
cessful people use to get a foot in the door and learn on the job. It’s a strategy that 
savvy people use, whether they are formally educated or independent learners.
Portfolios
In the absence of the degree that serves as human resources shorthand for be-
ing qualified for a job, you’ll need to be able to show some work that demon-
strates your competence. Work done for previous jobs is great, as are side proj-
ects, blogs, any documentation of work you’ve done or experimented with in 
the area. Spec work is also a good strategy — make something that’s similar to 
the work you’d be doing at the job you want. If you want work as a graphic de-
signer, mock up an ad design or book cover. Or better yet, find a friend who 
needs work like that done and trade services with them.
With any portfolio, it’s important to explain two things, briefly. The first is 
what your goal was in making the work you’re presenting. The second is how it 
relates to the job or type of job you’re trying to get and the path you took in mak-
ing it. Your side project may not specifically demonstrate the skills a job requires, 
but it might show your ability to learn new skills quickly, collaborate with others, 
and adapt to changing circumstances and needs. Both of these will show your 
ability to communicate effectively, and that’s a huge advantage for any job.
Start small
The idea of starting in an entry-level position, working for a small or growing 
business or organization, has gotten a little lost in the recent generation that 
experienced several economic booms. Historically, though, it’s a really suc-
cessful approach for independent learners and the formally educated alike. If 
your goal is to work for the New York Times someday, get a job at your local 
paper first. If you want to be an entrepreneur, get a job working in a growing 
business and learn it from the ground up. If you want to be an artist, consider 

183
How to be an Independent Learner
a job as an artist’s assistant. These are just a few examples. What’s essential is 
that you approach the job with the attitude of an apprentice. This is your train-
ing ground. Find mentors within the organization. Ask good questions and ask 
them often. Be willing to try new things and take risks in your work. Be as help-
ful as you can to the people you’re learning from.
Tap your learning community
The people you’ve been learning with will be able to give you leads on jobs, 
help you figure out the best way to present yourself, give you feedback on your 
portfolio, provide work references and personal references for job applications, 
and support you in learning new things you need to know to get a particular job 
you’re excited about. Ask for help and make sure to offer it when other people 
in your community are in the same boat.


Resources


187
Resources
Collaborative learning systems
The people I spoke with about independent learning unanimously agreed that 
learning with others is one of the things they depend on. No one has really 
solved the challenge of making an ideal online system for collaborative learn-
ing. Below are some very interesting attempts that I recommend investigating.
Piazza
piazza.com
Real-time collaborative learning tool for 
classrooms, adaptable to independent 
learning groups.
TeamUp
teamup.aalto.fi
A new application for forming groups 
to learn skills or interests and record 
progress.
Lore
lore.com
A service designed for educational 
institutions to run courses, including 
discussion tools. Adaptable to indepen-
dent learning groups.
Einztein
einztein.com
Designed for educators and indepen-
dent learners to form and participate in 
learning groups.
OpenStudy
openstudy.com
Collaborative platform for open 
courseware with a nominal fee, offers 
certificates.
Resources

188
Don’t Go Back to School 
NB
nb.mit.edu/welcome
A tool for annotating online course material 
that can be shared among groups. It was 
designed for teachers but can be a great tool 
for independent learning groups.
/mentoring
mentoring.is
Distributed mentoring site for mentors 
and mentees to connect.
Social 
Media 
Classroom
socialmediaclass 
room.com
Open source service for groups including 
integrated forums, blog, comment, wiki, 
chat, social bookmarking, RSS, microblog-
ging, widgets, and video commenting.
Massive open online course (MOOC) platforms
At the time of this writing, you’ll find a dozen free and tuition-based large-scale 
online courses. The available options and formats are changing rapidly.
Coursera
coursera.org
Currently offers the widest range of sub-
ject areas, including sciences and math, 
technology, liberal arts, and many others.
Udemy
udemy.com
Technology and business classes, 
including introductions to commonly 
used office software.
Udacity
udacity.com
Offers primarily science, math, and 
technology courses.
edX
edx.org
Technology, sciences, math, and  
expanding to include liberal arts.  
Anecdotally, I’ve heard the most posi-
tive feedback about edX courses.

189
Resources
Semester 
Online
semesteronline.org
For credit, tuition-based online courses 
from a variety of universities, launching 
in the fall of 2013.
Minerva 
Project
minervaproject.com
Not yet launched at the time of this writing, 
Minerva Project is a tuition-based program.
Academic 
Earth
academicearth.org
Courses in the form of video lectures in a 
variety of subjects from top universities.
P2PU
p2pu.org
A platform for anyone to organize a course 
and form groups to collaborate, complete 
assignments, and give feedback.
University 
of the People
uopeople.org
Tuition-free online university, with 
nominal processing fees. Not yet 
accredited.
Alison
alison.com
Free courses and programs primarily 
oriented around job training, offering 
certificates.
The Open 
University
open.ac.uk
The Open University has been offering 
distance learning since 1969, and con-
tinues to be an excellent place to learn 
online.
Other forms of free and low-cost online learning
Codeacad-
emy
codeacademy.com
Codeacademy is a free, lesson-based 
way to learn programming.
Skillcrush
skillcrush.com
Skillcrush is another free programming 
education site.

190
Don’t Go Back to School 
Treehouse
teamtreehouse.com
Treehouse is a free resource for “job-
ready” tech education.
Google 
Developers 
University 
Consortium
developers.google.
com/university
University Consortium has a variety 
of courses in programming for more 
advanced coders.
Dorkbot
dorkbot.org
Local chapters of Dorkbot — community 
showcases and email lists of technolo-
gists, tinkerers, artists, and geeks.
DIY MFA
diymfa.com
DIY MFA is an alternative to a formal 
master in fine arts for writers, founded 
by an MFA grad.
Faux MBA
fauxmba.com/
book-list
The Faux MBA’s reading list can be 
found here.
Open-
CourseWare
opencontent.org/
ocwfinder &
ocwconsortium.org
OpenCourseWare is offered by many 
universities, with free course syllabi and 
audio or video lectures.
BBC 
Languages
bbc.co.uk/languages
The BBC hosts a language-learning site. 
It is not currently being updated but 
remains useful.
If you are interested in learning a particular coding language (such as  
Arduino, Ruby, Python, and a host of others), go to the website for that coding 
language to find tutorials and in-depth learning materials.
In general, YouTube hosts endless how-to videos, from ballroom dancing 
to technology projects. They vary in quality, but can be a useful addition to your 
learning toolbox.

191
Resources
Local learning 
There are a number of new organizations that allow people to teach what they 
know and for learners to find what they need, either for free or at very low cost. 
They tend to be local and in-person, although they’re expanding and evolving 
at a very fast rate. If these models appeal to you, get in touch with the founders 
and find out about starting an outpost in your city.
Skillshare
skillshare.com
Skillshare is a platform for anyone to 
teach what they know.
Trade School
tradeschool.coop
Trade School is a learning barter platform.
L’Ecole Des 
Beaux Arts
ldbabrooklyn.com/
xoxo/classes
L’Ecole Des Beaux Arts offers artistic 
and skill-based classes taught by artists 
and tradespeople.
Hackerspaces
hackerspaces.org/
wiki 
For technical skills and shared tools 
from hammers to laser cutters, hacker-
spaces are a fantastic resource. They’re 
collectives for people who share skills, 
knowledge, and equipment. Some are 
members-only, but most have at least 
an occasional evening that’s open to 
the public.
Textbooks and curricula
Less Wrong
lesswrong.com
Less Wrong is a community of people in-
vestigating rationality and cognition. The 
site includes a great list of best textbooks.

192
Don’t Go Back to School 
Ask 
MetaFilter
ask.metafilter.com
Ask MetaFilter is a good source for text-
books and curricula, with many sugges-
tions and explanations of why particular 
books are better or worse.
Open-
CourseWare
opencontent.org/
ocwfinder &
ocwconsortium.org
Mentioned above, OpenCourseWare, in 
addition to offering video lectures, is a 
good place to start if you’re just looking for 
syllabi and other open course materials.
Connexions
cnx.org
Connexions is a free educational material 
repository.
Access to scholarly publishing
Directory of 
Open Access 
Journals
doaj.org
See the Directory of Open Access  
Journals in scholarly publishing.
Directory of 
Open Access 
Books
doabooks.org
Directory of peer-reviewed Open Access 
academic books.
Knowledge 
Unlatched
knowledge 
unlatched.org
Knowledge Unlatched is a way to pub-
lish and access open scholarly books.
In addition, many major journal publishers have at least a few open access jour-
nals, so a search of “open access journals” will provide new material as well.
Google 
Scholar
scholar.google.com
Google Scholar searches only scholarly 
publications, rather than the web in 
general.

193
Resources
Abstract 
Science
is.gd/itizos
As always, when working with academic 
materials, it’s important to have evalua-
tion skills. Noah Gray of the Huffington 
Post wrote an extremely useful guide to 
understanding the short abstracts at the 
beginning of scientific papers.
Learning 
Historical 
Research
is.gd/osoqur
Historian William Cronon (a personal 
favorite of mine) offers a how-to site, 
Learning Historical Research. It’s an in-
depth resource on how to do academic 
scholarly research.
Access to library materials
There are two ways to get access to library materials that your local free library 
doesn’t have.
Find the books you want by searching university or public library databases. 
Write down the information and take it to the reference desk at your public 
library. Tell the librarian you’d like to order the book through Interlibrary Loan.
There’s also a way to get into many university libraries that aren’t open to 
the public. If the central library houses a Federal Depository Library, it is man-
datory that the public have access to it. So, walk in and tell the security desk 
you’re there to use the Depository or Government Documents Center, as it is 
sometimes called. That’s it. You’re in.
You can find a complete list of Federal Depository Libraries at is.gd/afeyeq, 
then click the FDLP Public page link.
Note-taking systems
Few of the people I interviewed used formal note-taking systems, though some 
used online or smartphone programs. 

194
Don’t Go Back to School 
The Top 12 
Note Taking 
Apps
is.gd/hikibi
Lifehack offers a list of favorite 
programs.
Fetchnotes
fetchnotes.com
Fetchnotes is a recently launched 
note-taking program created by under-
graduate students from the University 
of Michigan.
Note Taking 
Systems
is.gd/bazofu
The Academic Skills Center at Cal Poly 
in San Luis Obispo has a detailed guide 
to formal written note-taking systems.
Questions and answers
Getting questions answered online is easy. And the great part is that almost 
always, someone else has already asked your question and had it answered. 
The hard part is learning to evaluate the sources of the information you find. 
See the Evaluate Sources of Information section, p. 177.
Some go-to sources for getting answers are:
Khan 
Academy
khanacademy.org
Khan Academy has short, quality tutori-
als in a wide variety of subjects.
MetaFilter
Ask 
MetaFilter
metafilter.com &
ask.metafilter.com
MetaFilter and Ask MetaFilter are end-
lessly useful sources of answers to ques-
tions. If your question hasn’t already been 
asked, you’ll have to join the community, 
with a nominal fee, to ask.
Stack 
Overflow
stackoverflow.com
For programmers, Stack Overflow is a 
rich resource where coders ask ques-
tions and share code.

195
Resources
Wolfram 
Alpha
wolframalpha.com
Wolfram Alpha has extensive resources 
for math- and science-related questions.
It goes without saying that searching Google is very useful. You can type in 
your question, and chances are you’ll find an answer. Many answers. But, this 
is where your evaluation skills will come in handy. As you search a lot, you’ll 
also get better at framing questions that are specific enough to lead to useful 
answers more quickly.
Wikipedia is wonderful, but also requires evaluation skills. Anyone can make 
a page, and anyone can edit it. If someone adds information or changes it, they 
are required by convention to cite their sources. When sources are consistently 
absent, the page will usually be flagged as unreliable or needing verification. Sci-
entific and scholarly information is overall fairly reliable. In any case, learn how 
to understand where the information in a Wikipedia article is coming from. It’s a 
good place to start, but it’s never a good place to end your research.
A selection of further readings
Don’t Go Back to School is an ethnographic project, which means it is drawn first 
from observing and gathering first-person reports on the subject. It’s important 
not to let other people’s theories and research color what you ask and what you 
hear from your subjects. Beyond what I already knew from prior reading, I lim-
ited my explorations of theories of learning and movements for reform until 
after the interviews were done.
Research about adult learning outside of school can be found mostly in the 
vast literature on adult vocational education. Within that literature, the work of 
Malcolm Knowles stands out.
For this project, some of the most inspiring books about learning outside 
of school and changing classroom education actually focus on grade school 
and high school classrooms, and none of them are new. For years, these writers 
have inspired and informed homeschooling. The most significant include:
Ivan Illich’s 1971 book Deschooling Society can be read online here: is.gd/ejobok.
Grace Llewellyn’s Teenage Liberation Handbook: How to Quit School and Get 
a Real Life and Education is a classic, first published in 1991.
John Holt’s work, beginning in the 1960s, has been influential to proponents 

196
Don’t Go Back to School 
and practitioners of alternative education. A list of his books, with excerpts 
from each can be found here: is.gd/itidiv.
More recently, Tony Wagner’s work on teaching innovation for children 
and teenagers mirrors some of what I’ve found related to adults: tonywagner.
com/tag/books.
Teaching practices for “project-based learning” in K–12 are a useful re-
source both for teachers and for adults interested in collaborative learning: 
is.gd/ripako.
Beyond the world of K–12 education reform a few sources informed my 
post-interview thinking.
Edward L. Deci’s scholarly work on motivation has been influential in con-
firming the material in my interviews related to motivation. He has also written 
a general-audience book called Why We Do What We Do. 
Theories and practices of constructivist learning, based on a long history of 
psychological ideas about how people learn, have been useful in my post-inter-
view research and often echo the conclusions I reached. A useful overview can 
be found here: is.gd/eloduz.
Jean Lave and Etienne Wenger’s Situated Learning (1991) focuses on learn-
ing as an act that takes place in context rather than a transfer of knowledge in 
the abstract, closely mirroring the experiences of my interviewees.
I’ve been following changes in the engineering and physics departments at 
MIT, which have been developing classroom practices and configurations that 
provide learning environments designed with forms of independent learning in 
mind. Their innovations are an exciting step toward reform within the system.
For an extensive list of links to the resources and research I’ve collected on 
education, learning, student debt, and other topics related to this book, see: 
is.gd/kihodo.
 — 
Seth Godin’s Stop Stealing Dreams (What Is School For?), is an impassioned, 
provocative manifesto written to provoke teachers to change their classroom 
practices in ways that reflect the findings of Don’t Go Back to School. Godin  
includes an excellent bibliography for teachers: is.gd/monuru.
The brand-new Peeragogy Handbook is another useful resource on peer learn-
ing for classroom innovators and anyone who wants to form a peer-learning group. 
It is based on extensive academic research and contains a multitude of references 

197
Resources
to theories of peer learning as well as practical guidance: peeragogy.org.
For current scholarly resources on free learning and learning technologies, 
see Pepperdine University doctoral student Rolin Moe’s public bibliography of 
the scholarly resources underlying his work: is.gd/bedadi.
Thiel Fellow Dale J. Stephens’ Hacking Your Education: Ditch the Lectures, 
Save Tens of Thousands, and Learn More Than Your Peers Ever Will (2012) offers 
current advice on succeeding in careers without a degree.
Education journalist (and serial dropout) Audrey Watters’ Hack Education  
site is a fantastic resource for new developments and savvy commentary: 
hackeducation.com.
Anya Kamenetz’s reporting for Fast Company tracks the economics of high-
er education and advocates for learner-centric higher education reform. She’s 
also the author of two useful books on the topic, DIY U (2010) and Generation 
Debt (2006): is.gd/ididij.


199
Acknowledgments
Acknowledgments
Above all else, I could not have made this book without Kickstarter, the 1,588 
people who backed the project and cheered me on, and the 90 people who talked  
with me about how they learn. The names of my interviewees and backers are 
listed in the pages that follow.
There is no more powerful lever than the insistent encouragement and  
loving support of my partner Bre Pettis, who was also instrumental in getting 
the book started and getting it done. My mother’s role as a devoted grand-
mother gave me the time to do it.
I’m grateful to Richard Nash, Karen Barbarossa, Clay Shirky, Sherri  
Wasserman, Juliette Guilbert, Liz Danzico, Dan Sinker, Kim Robinson, Tim 
Maly, Joshua Glenn, Jodi Baker, Brian McFarland, Doug Rushkoff, and Debbie 
Chachra, for conversations, feedback, and generosity in sharing knowledge. 
Members of the HC shared their stories and ideas with me.
Behind the scenes, Familiar Studio’s Ian Crowther made this beautiful. 
Mandy Brown was indispensable as an editor, and Krista Stevens hunted for mis-
takes. Lori Lawton transcribed the interviews. I thank all of them for their labors.
I wrote most of this at a sunny table in the corner of Nunu Chocolates in 
Brooklyn. Everyone there cheered me on — in particular Andy, Justine, Josh, 
and Lydia — with coffee, enthusiasm, and occasional bits of broken chocolate.


201
Acknowledgments
Interviewees
Adam Greenfield
Addie Wagenknecht
Alan D. Thompson
Alberic Paradiso
Alec Resnick
Alex Handy
Anindita Basu Sempere 
Anonymous
Anonymous
Astra Taylor
Aurelius Prochaska
Barbara Meinel
Bartram Nelson
Benjamen Walker
Brad Edmondson
Brian LaRossa
Cameron Clark
Cameron Rogers
Carla Kaiser
Cate Duffy
Caterina Rindi
Charles Phillips
Chris Bathgate
Chuck Kinnane
Claire Bangser
Cory Doctorow
Cory Ward
Dan Sinker
Dana Rosen
Daniel Byler
Daniel Thorne
Danny Iny
David Hirmes
David Mason
Devin Rhode
Dorian Taylor
Eliot Lash
Emily Daniels
Eric Ose
Esther Finney
Evangeline Moen
Florian Wagner
Furrygirl
Gene Wolf
Gina Queen
Harper Reed
Henry Wischusen
Jason James
Jenny Davidson
Jeremy Cohen
Jim Munroe
Jimmie P. Rodgers
Joan Ball
John Unger
Josh Sager
Karen Barbarossa
Kayleen Yiltalo-Horsma
Keith Crusher
Ken Baumann
Kevin David Crowe
Kurt Vega
Lana Zellner
Larry Hite
Lenore Edman
Luke Muehlhauser
Michael Busby
Molly Crabapple
Molly Danielsson
Nathan Frund
Nicholas Tozier
Nick Bogdanoff
Nöel Hamer
Pablos Holman
Peter Baumbach
Peter Varshavsky
Quinn Norton
Randy J. Hunt
Rita J. King
Ryan Reif
Sahan Pitigala
Sarah Jasmon
Sarah Laine Milner
Sascha D’Angeli
Simone Davalos
Sonja Landis
Stacie Humpherys
Steffan Antonas
Stephen Lovell
Steve R.
Sufey Chen
Susan Kapuscinski 
   Gaylord
Tara Brown
Tarmo Toikkanen
Thomas Winningham
Timi Gleason
Tony Hsieh
Tristan Davies
Tristan Price
Valerie Vande Panne
Witold Riedel
Zack Booth Simpson


203
Acknowledgments
Funders
Don’t Go Back to School was generously funded by 1,588 individuals, couples, 
and organizations using Kickstarter. To learn more, visit kck.st/ryAqDU.
“AZ” Zinsious
@sourishkrout
404WHYLO
A Cranstoun
A. Hake
A. Lewellen
A.C. Tang
Aaron “Always  
Learning” Klenke
Aaron Garrett
Aaron Harmon
Aaron Katz
Aaron Rutledge
Aaron Watkins
Abe Cajudo
Abie Hadjitarkhani
Ada Nzeribe
Adam Allen Anderson
Adam Brault
Adam Brown
Adam Buckheit
Adam Haas
Adam J. Saint
Adam McCall
Adam Parrish
Adam Reger
Adam Tannir
Adnan Arif
Adriane Horovitz
Adrienne Crew
Aitor García Rey
Akiba
Akihiro Tanimura
Al Billings
Al Wasco
Alan Smithee
Alan Teelander
Albert Tong
Albert Varma
Albion L. Gould
Alec McCrindle
Alejandro Knopf
Aleksander R. 
Nordgarden-Rødner
Alex Chang
Alex Cheek
Alex Crittenden
Alex Hoekstra
Alex Johnston M.Ed.
Alex Nastetsky
Alex Neving
Alexander Grgurich
Alexander Jahn
Alexander Oster
Alexander Weston 
Bennett
Alexis Hope
alf3
Alia Thabit
Alice Lyu
Alison Quinn
Alister Blake
Allison Fink
Allison G. Meade
Allison Hines
Allison Lyzenga
Alvaro Vargas
Alvin Jackson “Rocky J”
Alyse Liebovich
Amanda Moore
Amar
Amar Baber Ellahi
Amber Landgraff
Amos Brown
Amy Fox
Amy Torgeson
Amy YILDIZLI
Amyas David Gilbert
Anaïs Mathers
Anantharaman 
“Anand” Ganesh
Anastasia Vesperman
Andpat
Andras Huszar
Andre Behrens
Andrea Huntley
Andrea La Rose
Andrea Lenhart
Andrea Mignolo
Andrew & Anindita 
Sempere
Andrew Courter
Andrew Crisp
Andrew K. Butcher
Andrew Krause
Andrew Mostajo Magpoc
Andrew Newton
Andrew Peth
Andrew S
Andrew Styer
Andrew Waddell
Andrew Watson
Andrew White
Andrey Sluzhivoy
Andries De Vos
Angie Kalea Ho
Anil Dash
Ankit Bhargava
Ann Chen
Ann K. Hubbard
anna
Anna Creadick
Annalisa Barrie
Anne Jonas
Annemarie Gray
Anthony Hay
Anthony Watts
Anu M
April Walters
Aram Bartholl
Aris Lambrianidis
Arne Kreutzmann
Art Palmer
Art Sederquist
Ash Chapman
Ash Thames
Ashley Alexander
Ashley Kanak

204
Don’t Go Back to School 
AshleyRose Butler
Audrey Auden
Audrey Watters
Aura Castro López
Aurelien Gouny
Aurora Björnsdóttir
Aurora Thornhill
Austin J. Austin
Austin Kleon
Avital Oliver
Axel Clarke
ayesha Abbasi
Azmir Saliefendic
Azucena Gee
B. Tse
Balthazar Simões
Barbara Watkins
Barney Debnam
Baxter Stapleton
Bean Snowboards
Bedirhan Cinar
Belal Breaga Bakht
Belea Simion
Belinda S. Chambers
Belle McQuattie
Ben Kilgust
Ben Lainhart
Ben Tseitlin
Benjamin Ortiz
Benjamin Williams
Benjamin Wilson
Bernd Out
Bernhard “Berny” Marx
Beth Pratt
Betty Nikia
Bill Harwood
Bill Stewart
Billimarie Robinson
Billy Shih
Birte Petersen
Blake Boles
Bob Ippolito
Boon Sheridan
Bosco Hernàndez
Brad Barrish
Brad Edmondson & 
Tania Werbizky
Brad Kik
Brad Morris
Brad Oakley
Bradley Bacon
Brady Forrest-Ignite Talks!
Brandon J. Barba
Brandon Milholland
Brandon Walowitz
Bre Pettis
Breck Sargent
Brendan Crain
Brendan Mathews
Brendan Stromberger
Brett Bretterson
Brett Wilson
BREZTECH.NET
Brian Christie
Brian Del Vecchio
Brian Eoff
Brian J. Peterson
Brian P. Frank
Brian Roberts
Brian Wanless
Brodie Rich
Bronwyn Mahoney
Bruce (Peter) Atkinson
Bruce Heroux
Bruce Murray
Bruno Torres
Bry Ashman
Bryan Laroche
Bryan Taketa
Bryan Thatcher
Bryce Anderson
C Schwoerer
c. g. menssen
C. R. Johnson
C’Ella Clayton
Caitlin J Jung
Callan Lamb
Candie Patterson
Candra Murphy
Captain Crunch
Captain Sasha
Carl Hutchison
Carl Williamson
Carla D. Martin
Carla Diana
Carlos
Carmen Hernandez
Carol Gunby
Carol Wagner
Caroline Craffigan
Caroline Rennie
Carter Bancroft
Carynne Miller Corvaia
Case Larsen
Casey Girard
Caterina Fake
Caterina Rindi
Catherine Mikkelsen
Cathy Stern
Cesare Pagura
Chad Ruble
chad...
Charles Daniels
Charles Kinnane
Charles Lim
Charles Magnuson
Charles Wood
Charlie Wang
Cheryl Furjanic
Chetna Patel
Chip Clofine
Chloe S Jones
Chris Alden
Chris Annand
Chris Bathgate
Chris Bushick
Chris Cee
Chris Curran
Chris Currie
Chris Hopp
Chris Hunter
Chris Janes
Chris Kubica
Chris Lee
Chris Maguire
Chris Moyer
Chris Raab
Chris Reynolds
Chris Sullivan
Chris Varner
Chris XM
Christal cody
Christian “DisOrd3r” 
Johansson
Christian H. Gmelin
Christian Hadidjaja
Christian Hudon
Christina Xu

205
Acknowledgments
Christine Fluor
Christine P. Fojas
Christophe MOUCHEL
Christopher Angus
Christopher B Phelps
Christopher Benner
Christopher Bodel
Christopher Cao
Christopher Corneschi
Christopher E. Lard
Christopher Gray
Christopher J. Agius
Christopher Mullins 
Warnock
christopher starr
Christopher Varano
Christopher Wright
Christopher Yetter
Chuck & Claudia Pettis
Chuck Corbett
Chuck Petras
Chuck Smith
Claire Oliphant
Clay Shirky
Clay Wiedemann
Cliff J. Grant
Clyde Boyer
coffeehaus
Colin Faulkingham
Colin Keizer
Colin McSwiggen
Colin Shaffer
Colin Zwiebel
Coll Wise
Colleen Benson
Conrad Feagin
Corey Clingo
Corey Van Meekeren
Corey Ward
Cornelius Caesar Gloria
Cory Robinson
Courtney Boyd Myers
Craig Blaylock
Creatrix Tiara
CW&T
Cynthia Lawson Jaramillo
Cynthia Nearman
D Rasmussen
D. James
D.A. Cox
D.A. Gutierrez
Dakin R. Tapp
Dan Carlson
Dan Chambers
Dan Coates
Dan Colomb
Dan Lowe
Dan O’Sullivan
Dan Phiffer
Dan Picton
Dan Rezykowski
Dan Sinker
Dane Bettis
Dane Dormio
Dani Vasquez
Daniel Ahrendt
Daniel C Young
Daniel Compton
Daniel Crowell
Daniel Dingeldey
Daniel Dunnam
Daniel Gill
Daniel J. Johnson
Daniel Lemire
Daniel Magriso
Daniel Nephin
Daniel Read
Daniel Samarin
Daniel Sensenbach
Daniel T Smith
Daniel Tabar
Danielle Burhop
Danielle Rose Stack Jacobs
Danny Iny
Danny J Gros
Danny Pettry II
Daryn Nakhuda
Dave Hinman
Dave LeCompte
Dave Pritchard
Dave Wallingford
David Boyer
David Cooper
David Delony
David Hunter
David J Williamson
David Kessler
David Kramer
David Lee
David Lee-Olmstead
David Liu Lau
David Lu
David M. Minger
David Marcantonio
David Mason
David McMullin
David McRaney
David Murray
David Novosel
David Nuñez
David P Lachs
David Pak
David Papini
David R Wilson
David Recor
David Rioux
David Schleifer
David Vogeleer
David W Yarbrough
David Wilkey
David William Breyer
David Wolske
Dawne Charters-Nelson
Deb Saunders
Debbie Weil
Debra A. Joyner
Declan Kehoe
Declan McGrath
Dennis Chan
Dennis Charles
Dennis J Jacobs
Derek Choi
Derek Rodger
Derrick Bohlin
Devin Fraze
Dewey Manhood
Diana M Woody
Diane Gilleland
Dianna Goodwin
Diego Salazar
Diogo Tolezano
Domingo Remigio
Dominic Jarvis
Dominique Ahkong
don clay
Donna Wallstin
Doug Leedham
Dox Doxiadis

206
Don’t Go Back to School 
Dr Toby James Andrews
Dr. Alysia Fischer
Dr. Beverly Yuen 
Thompson
Dr. Chrystal Denmark 
Porter
Dragos Ionel
Drew Petersen
Duncan Dodd
Dustin Woodard
Dustyn Roberts
Dylan Steer
Dylan Zacherle
E. Allred
E. Cagmat
E. Guerrero
E. Wiens
E.K. Weaver
Eamae Mirkin
Ed Sherman
Ed White
Eddy E Farhat
Eileen Can
Elena Murphy
Eleni Thanou
Eliot Graythorne
Eliot Lash
Elisabeth Robson
Elizabeth Eyerer
Elizabeth Harshaw
Ellen Zemlin
Elliot Eubanks
Ellis Reilly
Elroy Davis
Emeka Okafor
Emerald Levick
Emily C
Emily Daniels
Emily Leuning
Emma Davies
Eric Andrade
Eric Beland
Eric Corl
Eric Goff
Eric Krupa
Eric Meltzer
Eric Nakagawa
Eric Ose
Eric Rucker
Eric Skiff
Erin McElhinney
Ernesto J. Torres
Espen Steinsnes
Esther Egerton
Eugene & Vonnie Chan
Eugene Meidinger
Evan Cordes
Evan Morrison
Ewan Adams
Fabio Sarabia
Fatos Gjakova
Felipe Madrigal
Felix Faassen
Fernando Blat
FILMSTORY.ORG
fin
Florian Wagner
Floris Vermeir
Francesca Verdier
Frank Chimero
Franklin Wallbrown
Franz-Philipp Schmuker
Frederic Levesque
FurryGirl
G.
G. Scott Morris
Gœtz S.
Gabriel Beaudoin
Gabriel Ochoa
Gabriel Rosas
Gail Whiffen
Galen Mancino
Gannon Beck
Garrett Belmont
Gary Chong
Gary Parsons
Geek & Dad‚ LLC
Gene Becker
Gene Zhou
Genevieve Gorta
Genya Turovskaya
Geoff Allemand (iLearn 
in the REAL world)
Geoff Urland
Geoffrey Bonser
George Arriola
George Ramos
Gerard Ramos
Gerhard Lindeque
Gert
Girish Arora
Golan Levin
Grace Antonas
Grady Wright
Graeme Asher
Grandpa
Grant Benson
Greg Borenstein
Greg Cooksey
Greg McDougall
Greg Robinson
Greg Roth
Gregory Hirsch
Gregory Miller
Gregory Stromberg
Griff Maloney
Guillermo Martinez
Gus Rojo
Gus Zantanon
Gustavo Barron (Cicloid)
Guy Vardi
Gwen Bell
H Lynnea Johnson
Hadassah S. Hickman
Håkon Knappskog
Hal Gottfried
Hannah Eason
Hannah Margolin
Hannah O’Kane
Har Rai
Hartley Brody
Hasan Gopalani
Heath Holmes
Heather Burrell
Heather Walker
Heather Wilson
Helen Michaud
Helen Walters
Helen Y.
Helmut
Henry McKenzie
Henry Wischusen
High Cove
Highland Dryside 
Rusnovs
Holly Green
Hollyrinny
HowTutorial.com

207
Acknowledgments
Hugh Reynolds
Hugo
Hugo Mesquita
Ian Crowther
Ilse Godts
India Amos
Indigo King
Irwin FV
Isaac Watson Stephenson
Ishaque Hussain
Ivo Beckers
J Reek
J Tuente
J. E. Yochim
J. M. Lee
J. Rothweiler
J.Campbell
J.D. Hollis
Jack Conroy
Jack Kerns
Jack Maus
Jack Price
Jackson Tsai
Jacky Tang
Jacob Attrill
Jacob Kravetz
Jacques Ecuyer
jae maddox
Jaime Joel Jimenez
Jairo A. Marin
Jakob Schnaidt
James Anthony
James Floyd Kelly
James Trotter
Jamison Schweitzer
Jan Beilicke
Jan Michael Maluto
Jan Vantomme
Janelle Ward
Janien Fadich
Janna Jude Brown
Jared Congiardo
Jared Nielsen
Jarrod Pirtle
Jason
Jason Daugherty
Jason Dyer
Jason Li
Jason Naumoff
Jason R Turner
Jason R. Mosack
Jason Rugolo
Jason Scott
Jaswant
Javier Ordóñez
Jay “Null Flow” Kim
Jay Buerck
Jay C
Jay Liu
Jaymee Mak
JD Scott
Jeanette Inthisorn
Jeanine Melanson 
Jeannie Voirin-Gerde
Jed
Jed Lingat
Jef W.
Jeff ‘foxxtrot’ Craig
Jeff Sapp
Jeffery Ugbah
Jeffrey Eran
Jeffrey Willis
Jen Chau
Jen Weintraub
Jennifer & Nowell 
Creadick
Jennifer Leonard
Jennifer Marcson
Jennifer Mathis
Jennifer Skahen
Jennifer Sweeney
Jennifer Walker
Jenny Lawton
Jeremiah Johnson
Jeremiah Lee
Jeremy Hulette
Jeremy Leung
Jeremy Quinn
Jeremy Sprague
Jeremy Wadhams
Jerry Huey
Jerry Isdale
Jerry Proctor
Jeshii
Jesse Fisher
Jesse M Howatt
Jesse Moore
Jesse Russell
Jessica Frances Braz
Jessica Hammer
Jessica Johnson
Jessica Yogini
Jessie Brodsky
Jigesh Mehta
Jillian Brooks
Jim Pfeiffer
Jim Takahashi
Jimmy LaRue
Jince Kuruvilla
JiraJ
JJ Casas
Joan Cabaddu
Joanne McNeil
João Valente
Jodi Baker
Jodi Colella
jodi morrison
Joe Hughes
Joe Santa Cruz
Joel
Joel Hough
John “papa” Cotter
John Bowditch
John Colagioia
John Devor
John Dimatos
John Hergenroeder
John Hodge
John Hupp
John Ibarzabal
John J. Rynne
John L. Kingery
John L. Olson
John M Stein
John McCarthy
John McVey
John Mooney
John R. Dougan
John Rogers
john schroder
John Semeleer
John T. Unger
John Tollefsen
Joi & Jared Kruger
Jolanda
Jon Crispin
Jon Haufe
Jon Osborne

208
Don’t Go Back to School 
Jon Siddle
Jon W. Zeitler
Jonathan Ferrer Custodio
Jonathan Fusellier
Jonathan Klick
Jonathan Liss
Jonathan McManus
Jonathan Unikowski
Jonny Lee
Jordan Budisantoso
Jordan Bunker
Jordan Lee Knape
Jordan Rosner
Jorge Lugo
Jose da Costa
Joseph Keenan
Josh Catone
Josh Hartung
Josh Swihart
Joshua Beale
joshua fouts
Joshua Glenn
Joshua James
Joshua Keesee
Joshua Loy
Joshua Lutz
Joshua Madara
Joshua Sager
Joshua Stylman
Joshua Vergara
Josselin Perrus
JP Rangaswami
Juana Olga Barrios
Julia Fariss
Julia Richards
Julia Wilson
Julian Gates
Juliet Blake
Justin B. Thompson
Justin Charles
Justin Day
Justin J.M. Campoli
Justin M Owens
Justin Ritchie
Justin Smith
Justin Trimm
Jyri Engeström
K. Knapp
Kabron Bingham
Kacie Kinzer
Kai Hawk
Kalee Featherwise
Kamil Sliwowski
Karen Clark
KAREN F MAYER
Karen Feng
Karen Rustad
Karey Pohn, JD, PhD
Kari Sullivan
Karine Ardault
Karl Sakas
Karol Gajda
Kat Ethington
Kate Hartman
Kate Knight
Kate Knolls
Katha Trænkle
Katherine Davis
Katherine Lawrence
Kathleen McGivney
Kathy E. Wright
Kathy T
Katie Turner
Kato Murray
Katy Watkins
Kaydee Kreitlow
Kayla Daniels
Kelley E. Anderson
Kelly A. Spoer
Kelly Blades
Kelly Stegall
Kelly Webster
Ken Baumann
Ken Goddard
Ken Mickles
Ken T.
kendel ratley
Kendra Wiig
Keri Korteling
Kerri Miller
Kevin A. & Tina O. Shaw
Kevin Connolly
Kevin J. Diedrick
Kevin Lewis
Kevin Loney
Kevin Neufeld
Kevin O. Lepard
Kevin Walker
Kiddy Prisons
Kim & Will Honeycutt
Kim Robinson
Kimberley Peter
Kirk S.
Kirsten Lyons
Kirsty Win
Kitt Hodsden
Kiyoshi
Koert Schonewille
Kris Budhu
Kris Gale
Kristelle Aisaka
Kristina Garrels
Kristina Lee
Kristof Lemp
Kyla Ryman
Kyle Bylin
Kyle Largent
Kyle medeyum garlock
Kyle O’Brien
L. A. Miller
Larry & Tona Hattery
Larry Lo
Larry Mason
Lars Harder
Lash LaRue
Laszlo Kiss
Laura Bazzetta
Laura Bilazarian
Laura Galloway
Laura Greig
Laura Jansen
Laura Kanzler
Laura Wolf-Powers
Lauren A. Pitts
Lauren Gardner
Lauren Probert
Laurie Adams
Laurie Glatt
Laurie Monday 
Timberlake
Lea Tui
Leah Lubman
Lee Aylward
Lee-kai Wang
Leen van Dalen
Leila Anasazi
Lertad Supadhiloke
Less Antman

209
Acknowledgments
Lester Koh
Leticia Britos Cavagnaro
Lezlie Amara Piper
Liangjie Xia
Lidor Brosh
Liesje Hodgson
Lim Tee Lip
Linda Ballantine
Linda Edeiken in 
honor of Joe
Lindsay Bernath
Linette True
Lisa
Lisa Kovacevich
Lisandro Gaertner
Liz Danzico
Liz Tomazic
Lizanne Witte
Lola Mullen
Lorenzo Orselli
Lorenzo Santos
Lori Christopher
Lorie A. Johnson
Lorien Green
Lotus M Jones
Lou Ronnau
Luane Todd
Lucia Jeesun Lee
Lucy Rudenborg
Luis Miguel Hervella
Luis-José Torres
Luke Brooks
Luke Kastelic
Luke Leonard
Lydia Pettis
Lynn Cook
LynneFarrow.net
M. Huynh
M. Lisa Phipps
M. Stewart
Magali Value
Mangala Branka Tokic
ManMeetsStove.com
Manny Flores
Mara Zepeda | 
Switchboard
Marcello Seri
Marci Turpin
Marcis Curtis
Marcus Denker
Maria C. Fadda
Maria Mercedes Martinez
Mariana de Carvalho 
Rodrigues
Marina Gijzen
Mario Warren
Marjori Pomarole
Mark Atwood
Mark Fonseca Rendeiro
Mark Glitch
Mark Graham Dunn
Mark K. - Cape Town
Mark Kingwell
Mark LaRocca
Mark Milotay
Mark Movic
Mark Russell
Mark Sessoms
Mark Sturgell,  
pdncoach.com
Mark. Alder
Markus Laumann
Marta Soncodi
Martin Flueler
Martin Storbeck  
(@hdready)
Marty Day
Marty McGuire
Mary Anne Shew
Mary Buhr
Mary Catherine Cusack
Mary Elisabeth Barbour
Mary Frances Barzee
Mary Nichols (DJ Fu-
sion/FuseBox Radio 
Broadcast)
Mary Rock
mashehu
Mason Mindanao
Mat S.
Mathieu Gauthier
Mathieu Gingras
Mathieu Tourneur
Matt Blain
Matt Butson
Matt D
Matt Duhamel
Matt Grommes
Matt Perkins
Matt Royal
Matt Soell
Matt Warshaw
Matthew Cranor
Matthew Eichmann
Matthew Feifarek
Matthew Griffin
Matthew H.
Matthew J McLaughlin
Matthew Knowles
Matthew Leone
Matthew Mark Kroeger
Matthew Sauter
Matthew Wheeland
Matthias Ludwig
Maurice Gaston
Mauricio Cordero
Mauricio Espinosa de 
los Monteros
Max Fenton
Mayim Stapleton
Meaghan B. Whalen
Meg Withgott
Megan Hustad
Megan Marz
Meimei Fong
Meister Bananengrips
Melissa Bee Farm & 
Aquaponic Gardens
Melodie Woods
Merve Karasu
Meryl Stark
Mia Eaton
Michael Baldwin
Michael Bennett Cohn
Michael C Lawyer
Michael Chanter
Michael Declerck
Michael E. Duffy
Michael Kane
Michael Leibel
Michael Markowitz
Michael Mattox
Michael Meigs- 
McDonald
Michael Pagano
Michael Paterson
Michael Rasmussen/
MichaelRpdx

210
Don’t Go Back to School 
Michael Underwood
Michael Zeltner
Michelle Donahoe
Michelle Dunn
Michelle Myers
Miguel Marcos
Mikael
Mike Barraclough
mike boon.
Mike Cardarelli
Mike Cullen
Mike Dory
Mike Farmer
Mike Haeg
Mike Paunovich
Mike Terry
Mike Vanderipe
mikeho
Miles Lightwood
Millie Hayes
Mindy Tchieu
Ming Hwa Ting
MiriamintheMidwest
Mirza Rahman
Misha Hoekstra
Mister Carlisle
Misty Harper
Mitchell Rasor
MK Mercurio
Moe McIntyre
Mogens
Molly Ho
Molly Steenson
Mona T Morgan
Monika Smyczek
Morgan Woroner
Moriah Simmons
mosse
Mr & Mrs N Clarke
Mr. Bucky Fukumoto
MW Malcolm
Mystic Murray
N. D. Pruitt
Nancy Daniels
Nancy Seubert
Nassim Wahba
Natalia Ziolkowski
Nathan Black
Nathan Griffith
Nathaniel Griggs
Neil Freeman
Nicco Wargon
Nicholas Contino
Nick Dalton
Nick Hoath
Nick Nielsen
Nick Nieman
Nick Parish
Nick Turner
Nicky Wolveri Hajal
Nicola Twilley
Nicolas Salerno
Nicole Hennig
Nicole Jones
Niesha B
Nikolai Warner
Nina Ribbeklint
Nishan Karassik
Noah Iliinsky
Nora Abousteit
Nortd Labs
North Pacific Company
Nysa Wong Kline
Oliver Janoschka
Oliver Pospisil
Olivier Mével
Onno Hoogendoorn
Ope Bukola
Ophir Ronen
Oscar
Oscar Von Hauske
Owen Wesley Kerschner
Pablos
Pamela Day
Pat McGarry
Pat Santilli
Patrick Corwin
Patrick Grogan
Patrick M. Lozeau
Patrick Neil
patrick phelan
Patrick Tanguay
Paul A. Wilson, PhD
Paul Bennetts
Paul H. Hyman
Paul Kaiser
Paul M Ramos
Paul M. Wirsing
Paul McGrath
Paul Reynolds
Paul Rothrock
Paul Staunton
Paul Taylor
Paul Tildesley
Pawel
Pedro Silva
Penny Nickle
Perica Cesko
Pete “Patch” Alberti
Pete Welter
Peter A. Johnson
Peter Boardman
Peter DuMont
Peter G. Haendler
PETER MANSFIELD
Peter McQuillan
Peter Purgathofer
Peter S Maylott
Peter T. Bassett
Peter van Schie
Peter Ward
Phenry3@phenry3.com
Phil “Heisenberg” Simon
Phil Borgnes
Phil Correia
Phil Shapiro
Philipp V.W. Grunwald
Philippe Chabot
Phillip D Gonzales
Phillip Smith
Phineas & Jacob
Phoenix Zoellick
Pierce Nichols
Pierre Lempérière
Pietro Conforto Bardellini
Piotr Durlej
PK
Povl Eller
Prashant Agarwal
Priscilla Woolworth
Prudence
PT Bumi Salihara 
(Yoga Prakasa)
Purgatos
Quezia Cleto
R. Maxwell
R. R. Atkinson
Rachael Walker

211
Acknowledgments
Rachel Castle Herzer
Rachel Clark
Rachel Lovinger
Rajat Ghai
Ramona Hutton-Howe
Randal A Dahl
Raphael Fink
Ray Steele
Rebecca Hempen
Reena Esmail
Rees Maxwell
René Cáceres Reséndiz
Renee Perry
Rennie LeDuc
Reny Barahona
Rev. Darrien Woomer
Ricardo “Rico” Acosta
Rich Peterson
Rich Shumaker
Rich Sommer
Richard Hough
Richard Lewis
Richard Lotz
Richard Melo
Richard Szeto
Rick Wilhelm
rlh
RM Garretson
Rob @baconbaum 
Felberbaum
Rob Mills
Rob Mizell
Rob Neal
Rob Nolten
Rob Portil
Robert Belton
Robert Iken Lee
Robert Ristroph
Robert Riteco
Robert Sheff
Robert Spiropoulos
Robert St-Jacques
Robert Thuston
Roberto Greco
Roberto Rosario
Robin Hunicke
Robin Kromann
robosnake
Rodney Hill
Rodrigo Ortiz Vinholo
Rohit Ramesh
Romain Bazile
Roman Tsukerman
Ron Lauzon
Rosa O’Driscoll
Roshan Sunil
Roy Liuzza
Ruth Ann Harnisch
Ryan Buckland
Ryan Clark
Ryan Deugan
Ryan E. Freckleton
Ryan Oclee
Ryan Reiber
S Carter
S Marek
S. C. Versillee
S. Lapeyre
Sacha De’Angeli
Sage Dahlen
Saira Jesani
Sam Lade
Sam van Roon
Samuel Andert
Samuel Basa
Samuel Forbes
Sandra Reeb-Gruber
Sandra Salter
Sanjoy Datta
Sara Hendren
Sara J. Kramer
Sara Marie Korn
Sara Moffat
Sara Thompson & 
Mark Lindner
Sarah Barthelet
Sarah E. Collins
Sarah Hooge
Sarah Simpson
Sarah Szalavitz
Sasha Gelzin
Sasha Irby
SB
Scott A.G. Nelson
Scott Bratcher
Scott Burau
Scott Dutcher
Scott Henshaw
Scott Jones
Scott Kreger
Scott M Collison
Scott McCray
Scott McIntosh
Scott Perlman
Scott Pickard
Scott Woolsey Biggart
Sean Akers
Sean Welsh
Sebastian Ong
Sebastian Orr
Serena Andrews
Serene Ow
Sergey Kiselev
seth godin
Seth Gover
Seth W. Klein
Seumas Macdonald
Shaheen Savarnejad
Shaneque Downie
Shannon Walker
Sharina McCants
Sharjeel Aziz (Shaji)
Sharon Perez
Shaun Farrar
Shayna Gentiluomo
Sherri Wasserman
Shiau-Wei Chew
ShimmerGeek
Shyam Pillai
Siddharth Vanchinathan
Simona Ocelkova
Sir Tedder, Esq.
Sjoerd Adding
Skaja & Sam Wills
Skillshare
Skip Frizzell
Skybur
Smriti Keshari
Sommar Dodge
Sonya Micheals
sophie hwang
Spencer Lambert
Stacey Cournoyer
Stacie Humpherys // 
girl*in*gear studio
Stan Hudecki
Stefan Broda
Stefan Friedli

212
Don’t Go Back to School 
Stefan Heinz
Stefan Oppl
Stefan Schoenweiss
Steffan Antonas
Steffen Seitz
Stephanie Ard
Stephanie Kalfus
Stephanie King
Stephen Angell
Stephen Bruckert
Stephen in Miami Beach
Steve Garfield
Steve Hurlock
Steve Isaacs
Steve Johnson
Steve MS
Steve Pien
Steve Yao
Steven Dee
Steven List
Steven Yau
Stuart Black
Stuart McDow
Suraj Gupta
Sure
Suri Chen
Susan Bennerstrom
Susan Guevara
Susan Kapuscinski 
Gaylord
Susan Kish
Susan Skoog
Suzanne Fischer
swampfiend
swes87
Tabi Joy
Talya Seligman
Tamara Christensen
Tami Evnin
Tammy MoJo
TAN KWANG CHIAT
TANYA ILARDE
Tappi Honkavaara
Tara Lawrence
Tari
Tarjote Chaggar
Tarmo Toikkanen
Tatiana Jimenez
Tayvid
Ted Brown
Ted Muenster
Ted Trent 
Teng Chea
Teri Solow
Terry Carroll-Beyak
Terry S McMahon
Tessa Blake
Tetsuji Asakawa
Thomas Banakas
Thomas Shepard
Tieg Zaharia
TigerLily Cross
Tim Burnett
Tim Densham
Tim Hackbarth
Tim Maly
Timothy R. Armstrong
Tina Hanke
TJ McCue
TL
Todd Lemoine
Todd Sahba
TODOR ILIEV
Tolulope Bukola
Tom Elia
tom evans
Tom Jenkins
Tom Parker
Tom Stacey
Tomasz Finc
Tooth fairy
Torben Olander
Travis Cox
Tredesigns.com
Trevor Brummitt
Tricia Somma
Tristan Price
Trysh Travis
Twilla Coates
Ty Liang
UntzUntz WakaTaka Untz
Usaf Alcodray
Vaibhav Bhawsar
Valia Guzman-Fischer
Varud Gupta
Vasil Kolev
Vicky
Victor A. Bernacé
Victor Mota
Victoria Wasson Pueschel
Victorious Rodriguez
Viktor Solt-Bittner
Vilhelm Rothe
Vin Dang
Vivien Leung
Ward Vandebrouck
Wayne from Maine
Wayne Wilson
wendy macnaughton
Wendy S. Dirr
Werner Schmid-Barnden
Wes Baker
Wickedly Wanda (Pilié) 
from Montreal
WilFromTheFutr
Will Foy
Will Gowen
Will Jones
Will McGregor
Will Selling
William Bettridge- 
Radford
William Logan
William Payne
William Ward
Winston Yu
Wolfgang Nibori
Wolfgang Schuster
Xavier Belanche Alonso
Yaqoubs
Yehuda Miller
yene
Yes
Yoh Sato
Yusuf Abdi
Yvonne Huiskamp-Ung
Yvonne L.
Zabrina Way
Zach Coulter
Zachariah Willoh
Zachary Fannin
Zachary Kyritsis
Zack Armstrong
Zan Chandler
Zev Steen
Zishu Chen
Zoë Jackson


About the author
Kio Stark is a writer, teacher, grad school dropout, and 
independent learning activist. Her first novel, Follow 
Me Down, was published in 2011. Stark teaches at NYU’s 
graduate Interactive Telecommunications Program and 
coordinates the Knight-Mozilla OpenNews learning  
initiative. Some of the things she’s taught herself  
include how to develop and print photos, novel writing,  
the psychology and neuroscience of delusions, and the history of art theft 
and forgery. She talks to strangers and is notorious for opening doors that say  
“Do Not Enter.”


“You don’t need school for that! This is not a book about an easy path, 
but a book about a path that works. If you want to learn, go learn. But 
you don’t need school for that.”
—Seth Godin, author of Stop Stealing Dreams
“Don’t Go Back to School makes good on the advice offered on the cover. 
It is a brisk, useful guide to learning what you need to learn without 
having to finish college, or go to grad school. Kio Stark has interviewed 
a roster of amazing, self-taught talents about how they did it, and 
distilled those observations into an essential guide.”
—Clay Shirky, NYU Professor, author of Here Comes Everybody and 
Cognitive Surplus
Here is a radical truth: school doesn’t have a monopoly on learning.  
More and more people are declining traditional education and college 
degrees. Instead they’re getting the knowledge, training, and inspiration  
they need outside of the classroom. Drawing on extensive research and  
over 100 interviews with independent learners, Kio Stark offers the 
ultimate guide to learning without school. Don’t Go Back to School 
provides models and methods for taking a new kind of path through 
learning, and transforming that alternative education into an exciting  
career path. This inspiring, practical guide provides concrete strategies  
and resources for getting started as an independent learner. If you’re 
debating whether college, trade school, or independent learning will 
get you where you want to be, Don’t Go Back to School is essential reading.
“Not going to graduate school felt like a failure at the time, but wound 
up being the best choice I ever made. It set me out on a path of self-
learning and discovery that led me to work I love, work that would’ve 
never flown in an academic setting. How I wish I’d had Kio’s book as a 
guide to help me along the way!”
—Austin Kleon, author of Steal Like an Artist 

