

Copyright © 2012 by Chris Solarski
All rights reserved.
Published in the United States by WatsonGuptill Publications, an imprint of the Crown Publishing
Group, a division of Random House, Inc., New York.
www.crownpublishing.com
www.watsonguptill.com
WATSONGUPTILL is a registered trademark and the WG and Horse designs are trademarks of
Random House, Inc.
Artwork by Chris Solarski, except as otherwise noted throughout and below:
Images from Gears of War® col.1, 3.1, 4.1, 5.1, 7.1, and 7.2 © Copyright 2006 Epic Games, Inc.
used with permission from Epic Games, Inc. Unreal, Unreal Engine, Gears of War and Epic
Games are trademarks or registered trademarks of Epic Games, Inc., in the United States of
America and elsewhere.  All rights reserved.
Flower artworks 5.2 © 2008 Sony Computer Entertainment America LLC. Flower is a registered
trademark of Sony Computer Entertainment LLC. Developed by thatgamecompany.
Journey artworks 2.1, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 7.2, 7.3, 7.4, and 8.1 © 2011 Sony Computer
Entertainment America LLC. Journey is a registered trademark of Sony Computer Entertainment
LLC. Developed by thatgamecompany.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Solarski, Chris.
Drawing basics and video game art : classic to cutting-edge art techniques for winning video
game design / By Chris Solarski.
1. Computer games — Design. 2. Video games — Design. 3. Art — Technique. I. Title.
QA76.76.C672S65 2012
794.8’1536 —dc23
2011046341
eISBN: 978-0-82309848-4
Cover design by Karla Baker
Cover art: Front (clockwise, left to right): Self-Portrait, Frowning by Rembrandt van Rijn;
anatomical studies of the leg by Peter Paul Rubens; New Super Mario Bros.; Assassin’s Creed.
Back (clockwise, left to right): Gears of War; Little Big Planet; Journey. Spine: Mario.
HALF-TITLE PAGE Journey

TITLE PAGE Detail of The Birth of Venus by Sandro Botticelli, Skeleton with Muscles by
Bernhard Siegfred Albinus, Prince of Persia
v3.1

RAGE

I dedicate this book to Didi Meier, who courageously
endured my absence while I was writing.
“Thank you for your love and support, Didi—most of the
time.;)”

I would like to sincerely thank the following people for their
support in making this book possible: my family and friends;
Victoria Craven, Editorial Director at Watson-Guptill, who had
the vision to see a book when she read my Gamasutra article;
my editor, Martha Moran, whose patient guidance and diligence
was instrumental in bringing everything together; Ben Fisher,
for dedicating precious time to reviewing the anatomy sections
of this book and for his invaluable insights; Tristan Donovan,
Alex Learmont, Dr. Bob Sumner, Andi Brandenberger, Alex
Pons Carden-Jones, Michael Lew, and Pascal Mueller for their
feedback and assistance; my most influential teachers, whose
wealth of knowledge is much a part of this book: Brendan Kelly,
Michael Mentler, and Zofia Glazer; at Gbanga: Matthias Sala,
cofounder and CEO, and Werner Sala, cofounder and CFO, for
their limitless generosity and kindness and for giving me time
away from my duties at Gbanga when I most needed it;
Christine Matthey and Sylvain Gardel for their ongoing support
through www.GameCulture.ch and the Swiss Arts Council;
Christian Nutt, features editor at Gamasutra, who published the
online article that was the original inspiration for this book;
Spring Gombe for kindly hosting discussions at Up the Rock:
Salon der Künste and those who attended to give their crucial
input, including Eugeniya Kareva, Marc Bodmer, Serge Pinkus,
and Ulrich Götz; Janina Woods and Kaspar Manz for being on
call to share their extensive knowledge of video games.
This book could not have happened if it wasn’t for the
following people who kindly helped source the outstanding
artwork featured throughout (and equally the images that didn’t

make it in) despite their hectic schedules: Craig Adams and Jori
Baldwin at Superbrothers; Emily Britt at 2K Games; Jonnie
Bryant at Blizzard Entertainment; Myrna Anderson at Atari, Inc.;
Sam Woodward and the team at Irrational Games; Ruth Kelly,
Emma Tietjens, and Michael Evans at SCEE; Brian Dunn and
Claudine Rican at SCEA; Jenova Chen at thatgamecompany;
Arnt Jensen at Playdead; Cathy Campos, Emrah Elmasli, Mike
McCarthy, and Tak Saito at Lionhead Studios; Simon Flesser at
Simogo; Moby Francke at Valve Corporation; Janna Smith at
Namco Bandai Games; Mark Healey, Alice Liang, and Luci
Black at Media Molecule; Chris Boba at Corel and Alexander
Hopstein at Adobe for giving me support with their fantastic
graphics software.

(photo credit col.1)

Gears of War 2
Cover
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication
Acknowledgments
FOREWORD by Tristan Donovan
PREFACE
INTRODUCTION
LEVEL 01/ FUNDAMENTALS
Materials
Basic Pencil Techniques
Basic Perspective
Basic Volumes
Basic Lighting and Values

Visual Measuring Tools
Drawing Process
LEVEL 02 / ADVANCED DRAWING CONCEPTS
Advanced Perspective and Volumes
Advanced Lighting and Values
Atmospheric Perspective
Landscape Drawing
LEVEL 03 / THE HUMAN FIGURE
Gravity and Movement
Proportions
Skeletal Landmarks
LEVEL 04 / ANATOMY
Six Stages for Rendering Anatomy
The Foot
The Leg
The Pelvis
The Spine and Ribcage
The Shoulder Girdle
The Arm
The Hand
The Head and Neck
Facial Expressions
LEVEL 05 / ELEMENTS OF DESIGN
Frame
Camera Angle
Scale
Grouping
Lighting
Line
Shapes

Subverting Conventions
LEVEL 06 / CHARACTER DESIGN
Good Studio Practice
Brainstorming and Character Concept
Visual Metaphors
Mind-Map, Research, and Mood Board
Thumbnail Development
Final Character Drawing and Model Sheet
LEVEL 07 / ENVIRONMENT DESIGN
Character/Environment Shapes
Building Construction
Character-Centric Environment Design
Top-Down Environment Design
Gameplay Map
LEVEL 08 / COLOR AND DIGITAL TOOLS
Color
Adding Color with Digital Tools
PROFESSIONAL PORTFOLIO AND GETTING WORK
BIBLIOGRAPHY
INDEX
About the Author

StarCraft II: Wings of Liberty (Artwork courtesy of Blizzard
Entertainment)
FOREWORD
We often treat games as if they exist in a bubble. Players and
nonplayers alike talk as if they are separate, somehow
dislocated, from the rest of society and culture. Yet games are
very much shaped by the wider world and visual vocabulary
honed over centuries by artists past and present.
But too often game developers don’t know or fail to draw on
this treasure chest of artistic know-how. Since the earliest days
of video games they have repeatedly defaulted to the
conservative visual tropes of Tolkienesque fantasy, Blade
Runner sci-fi, and Japanese manga and anime without any
vision for how to reinvigorate them. At other times they are
lured by the Siren call of realism, mistaking an extra million
polygons’ worth of detail for an artistic leap forward when it’s
just another layer of information for player brains to filter
through.

Game art doesn’t have to be this unimaginative, as Chris
Solarski expertly demonstrates within this book. He explains
clearly and accessibly how art’s rich past offers game makers
an arsenal of visual techniques that can heighten, reinvent, or
shape the player experience in emotional as well as visual
terms. We learn how RAGE follows in Michelangelo’s footsteps,
how Team Fortress 2 echoes Tintoretto, and how an artist’s
understanding of shapes can explain the importance of
roundness in Mario’s appeal.
This isn’t an academic art history polemic, though. It’s an
immensely practical book that seeks to equip game developers
with tools they can use in their daily work. It explains, from an
often-neglected visual viewpoint, why some of gaming’s most
iconic characters and environments are so memorable and
enduring.
Even for a non-game-developer such as myself, Solarski’s
book is an indispensable guide to the visual lexicon of art and
interactive entertainment that shines a clear, bright, illuminating
light on why the visuals of some games “work” and others do
not.
Tristan Donovan, author of Replay: The History of Video
Games
www.tristandonovan.com

I CAME TO THE VIDEO GAME INDUSTRY with a foundation in digital
art. After graduating with a degree in computer animation I was
lucky enough to secure work at Sony Computer Entertainment’s
London Studio as a 3D environment and character artist.
It was at an art workshop organized by ConceptArt.org (a forum
that promotes, develops, and showcases concept art for
illustration, film, and game production), when I saw artists like
Andrew Jones demonstrate the amazing ability to create lifelike
characters straight from their imaginations, that I began to
question my lack of traditional art training. I saw that it was their
mastery of classical art principles that placed them in the
enviable position of being first to visualize characters and
environments in the development process, for which artists like
me would produce 3D models and textures based on their
designs. I had a lot of catching up to do if I wanted to be
involved in the highest levels of game design.
I took part-time painting lessons from the award-winning
painter Brendan Kelly while continuing to work in video game
development. Brendan taught me about the discipline and
dedication to classical art training that is required to become a
successful artist in any field.
Armed with a solid foundation in classical painting, I
abandoned video game development altogether and spent the
next two years on an intense program of self-guided study in
Poland, where I attended daily life-drawing sessions at the
Warsaw Academy of Fine Art and the atelier of professor Zofia
Glazer, simultaneously sharing my experiences and learning
from the online figurative drawing community at the Society of

Figurative Arts (www.tsofa.com), created by the artist and
teacher Michael Mentler.
During these two years I developed a deep appreciation for
the value of a classical art education and the techniques of the
Old Masters. I realized that the majority of video game artists
(me included) significantly undervalue these skills.
In 2008 I was back in game development as art director at
Gbanga (developer of the pioneering location-based gaming
platform for mobile phones) and continued to work on figurative
drawing and painting.
Switzerland’s Arts Council, Pro Helvetia, invited me to give a
talk about the connection between classical art and video
games at the first Game Culture conference. It was while
preparing for this lecture that I really saw the connections that I
had previously taken for granted between the two disciplines.
Video games are a natural progression of classical art, and the
same visual grammar and artistic techniques and principles
underpin both disciplines. I realized that applying classical art
techniques to video game art would enable artists to create
more meaningful visual and emotional experiences for the
video game player.
This book is the culmination of the unique experiences and
insights I accumulated over the past ten years that have
enriched my video game art and enhanced my career. Not
everyone is in a position to take a couple of years away from
work to study at an art institute. I’ve designed the lessons in this
book to be your own personal art school, and my hope is that
this knowledge and experience will take your art to new and
higher levels.
CHRIS SOLARSKI

INTRODUCTION:
VIDEO GAMES ARE NOT A REVOLUTION in art history, but an
evolution. Whether you are drawing on paper, canvas, or a
computer screen, the medium on which you draw is always an
inanimate, flat surface that challenges you to make something
without depth feel like a window onto a living, breathing world.
The technology powering today’s games influences the way we
experience visual art in a new way—with the gentle push of a
player’s thumb we can now interact with these visual worlds.
But take away that interaction and what remains is the static
visual artwork itself. And the success of that artwork relies on
the same visual grammar (lines, shapes, volumes, value, color)
and classical art techniques that have evolved over two
thousand years.
The focus of this book is how far we can push the world of
game art in purely visual terms without relying on the
technology of interaction, that is, on sound, special effects, and
animation. By going back to square one and studying the basic
elements and significance of visual grammar and technique,
you will discover how visual grammar can be artistically shaped
to create a range of emotional experiences using classical
theory of depth, composition, gravity, movement, and artistic
anatomy. (That’s why distinguished video games like BioShock,
Journey, ICO, and Portal 2 are featured alongside the work of
Old Masters such as Michelangelo, Tintoretto, and Rubens in
all the drawing exercises throughout the book.) Later in the
book these essential skills are applied to game art creation,

providing you with reliable processes for creativity and
imagination, character development, environment design, and
color. I’ll also show you how to put together a professional
portfolio to help you secure work in game development.
Viewed from an angle, the similarities between drawing, painting, and
game imagery become more apparent, as the illusion of life and depth in
each artwork is created on a two-dimensional, static surface. Without the
benefits of digital animation and interaction, the challenge of creating a
window into a make-believe world is the same for video game artists as it

was for the Old Masters.
Study of the Laocoön Group (1601) by Peter Paul Rubens (1577–
1640)
The Laocoön Group sculpture was created sometime around 25 BC,
more than sixteen hundred years before Rubens made this study.
Rubens and other master artists like Michelangelo and Tintoretto
continued to make studies of ancient Greco-Roman sculptures
throughout their careers.
There are a significant number of techniques to master in this
book. Although each is fairly simple, the drawing process
becomes significantly more difficult when managing several
techniques simultaneously while rendering complex subjects,

such as human figures. Discipline through repeated practice is
required to maintain a clear and structured process when
drawing.
Ideally, you should practice drawing every day. One of the
best ways to practice is to copy artworks of artists you admire.
Copying art allows you to absorb the artist’s ideas and
experience his or her process and then apply it to your own
work. The Old Masters themselves used this technique, refining
and perfecting their skills by endlessly copying artworks like the
statues of the Greeks and Romans. The lessons in this book
are based on this copying concept, and each of the classical
and 
game 
artworks 
is 
a 
drawing 
lesson. 
(The 
text
accompanying the art explains the visual grammar and
techniques in the work.) Keep a sketchbook and pencil at hand
as you work through this book, making a quick study of each
artwork as you read through the chapters. The straightforward
quality of the drawing medium will allow you to easily identify
skills that need improving and will help you develop a higher
level of dexterity and understanding of artistic principles when
creating artwork for video games.
Classical artists made their studies and preparatory drawings
deliberately small, as a small drawing is easier to manage and
quicker to complete. The art in this book is purposely sized to
make it easy to copy in your sketchbook without having to scale
it down to fit the page.
Whether you’re a student looking for a career in video game
development or an industry veteran, this book will give you the
tools to be creative on demand and to design video games with
a broader range of emotional experiences that affect players in
new and meaningful ways.
Let’s get to work!

Group of Figures by Luca Cambiaso (1527–1585)
The preparatory sketches of Luca Cambiaso are explicit examples of the
conceptual process that classical artists practiced to simplify complex
forms. They distilled objects to basic geometric volumes, which gave
them the ability to create convincing figures from their imaginations, as
you can see in this Cambiaso sketch. This process of visualizing complex
forms as basic volumes allowed the Old Masters to freely design
compositions and work out complex problems of depth, light, anatomy,
proportions, and the illusion of movement. Until details were added, the

theme and identities of their figures could go in any number of directions.
Typical 3D character base mesh, by Andi Brandenberger
The classical preparatory stage is mirrored in game development, where
every 3D model starts off as a nondescript base mesh. The forms and
proportions of the base mesh are shaped to the general design of the
final character before subsequent stages of refinement are undertaken.
Unlike traditional mediums, the computer automates many of the
technical challenges of calculating perspective and light.

Venus and Adonis (1565–69) by Luca Cambiaso
Luca Cambiaso would have likely created his preparatory composition
sketches from imagination but relied on models for studying details and
for the final stages of painting. Any details he introduced would then
overlay the composition and conceptual volumes established in the
earlier preparatory stages.

How do we go about creating complex emotions for our characters and
game designs? And what exactly is visual grammar? The answer is
surprisingly simple: lines, shapes, volumes, value, and color. Each
element is deceptively simple but it’s how we manipulate, stretch,
combine, contrast, subvert, and animate these elements that creates an
infinite 
number 
of 
expressive 
possibilities. 
You’ll 
develop 
an
understanding for the significance of each element through the practice
of drawing.
The Prince and Elika in Ubisoft’s Prince of Persia (2008)
After the broader forms of the base mesh are established, artists can go
about adding details such as facial features, textures, and animation
based on previsualization and research relating to the game’s overall
theme.

The surprising thing we’ll discover throughout this book is that it’s the
preparatory base mesh stage, not the details, which is primarily
responsible for the viewer-player’s emotional experience. Details are
merely the fine-tuning of a broader concept.

Team Fortress 2 (Artwork courtesy of Value Corporation)
THE FUNDAMENTAL TECHNIQUES we’ll cover in this level—
learning to use drawing media and tools; basic concepts like
perspective, volume, light, shadow; and the basic drawing process
—provide the foundation for all subsequent lessons in this book.
The fundamental techniques—along with Levels 2 and 3—represent
the base mesh stage. Practice them until you have some proficiency
before moving on to subsequent chapters where increasingly
complex subjects will be simplified using the techniques learned in
this level.

The best tools for practicing classical art techniques are pencil
on paper because these straightforward media allow you to
really focus on the fundamentals of the drawing process:
position, direction, and pressure.
You’ll need just a few supplies for all the drawing exercises in
the book—pencils, erasers, a ruler, and paper. (For research
and development, which we’ll cover in Level 6, you will also
need a computer with Internet access and a scanner.)
Putty eraser (top), 3B pencil, pencil sharpener, plastic eraser (left), and
ruler. I recommend grade 3B graphite pencils because they are soft

enough that a “black” value is relatively easy to achieve but not so soft
that you have to sharpen them every few minutes.
Sketchbook studies by (clockwise from top) Albrecht Dürer (1471–
1528), Rembrandt van Rijn (1606–1669), John Singer Sargent (1856–
1925), Eugène Delacroix (1798–1863)
Most artists find inspiration and ideas when they’re away from their studio
or drawing space, so it’s useful to have a portable sketchbook on hand at
all times as a visual diary for daily experiences and ideas. The above
examples from Master artists’ sketchbooks illustrate these myriad uses,
ranging from Dürer’s proportion studies to Sargent’s gesture drawings.
The moments just before going to sleep and when waking up are often
the most creative, so be ready to capture those thoughts on paper before
you forget them. Sketchbook paper should be acid-free, for archival
purposes, and around 80 lb (170 gm).

Even if you’re an experienced artist it’s worth working through
these fundamentals, which will improve processes that you may
otherwise take for granted—like how you hold a drawing pencil.
Most of us instinctively assume the same grip for drawing that
we use when writing; fingers and thumb near the tip with the
heel of the hand resting on the paper for stability. But, unlike
writing letters, drawing requires sensitivity and freedom of
movement, which necessitates a different style of grip and
motion. Your eraser is your pencil’s companion, and using it
with skill entails a lot of practice and experimentation. Here are
some basic pencil, eraser, and shading exercises that will help
you develop and perfect your skills.

Here are the two most common ways to hold a drawing pencil. With grip
(A) the pencil is held from above with the forefinger pressing down on the
pencil shaft. This grip is great for general drawing purposes as it allows
free movement to pull or swipe the pencil in almost any direction. Vary
the line quality between sharp and soft by changing the angle of your
wrist in relation to the direction of movement.
Grip (B) is useful for light and delicate lines like perspective guidelines.
The grip for (B) is further up the shaft, so there’s less pressure placed on
the tip.
Both grips prevent the heel of your hand from resting on the paper (as
when writing), making you draw from the shoulder and enabling a wider
pivot so you can create longer, flowing lines.
Which grip you use and how high or low you hold the pencil will vary
constantly according to the quality of line you desire.

Try the various grips with a series of mark-making exercises as shown
here. Draw with the pencil tip for thin lines (A) and use the side of the tip
for wider lines (B); or try switching between the two along the length of a
line (C). Also have a go at drawing long straight lines across the entire
paper surface (D). Take at least one opportunity to see how hard you can
press before the pencil’s tip breaks off.
It’s important to keep the pencil sharp at all times. A neat trick to avoid
constant sharpening is to rotate the pencil along its length as you draw.

Foreshortening is the optical illusion linked to perspective that makes
distant objects look smaller in relation to closer objects. It is a useful
visual tool to create the illusion of depth, but if you work too large or draw
on a surface not angled properly, your perspective may be distorted,
causing you to unnecessarily exaggerate features to compensate for
foreshortening. To avoid this problem, always draw on a surface tilted at
a perpendicular (90-degree) angle to your line of view and keep your
drawings small; 6 × 8 (14.8 × 21 cm) is sufficient for a full-figure study.
A fundamental exercise with any artistic medium is creating a black-to-
white value scale as shown here. You may find it helps to change the
pencil grip to achieve the full range of values: nearer the tip for darker
values, delicately shifting the grip further up for lighter marks.
It’s vitally important that you achieve a strong black at the darkest end
of the scale as strong darks will be essential to achieving realistic value
contrasts in your drawings. If you’re finding it difficult to get the necessary
contrast, you might need to try a different brand of 3B pencil or switch to
a softer, grade 4 pencil. More often than not it’s just a case of having the
confidence to push down more firmly on the paper surface.

A great exercise to perfect your pencil technique is to practice drawing
ovals and squares, filling them in with an even value of shading. This
exercise helps develop hand-eye coordination and control, which is
essential to getting your ideas down clearly and quickly. Lift the pencil off
the page at the end of each pencil stroke, so that you have more control
over the shape and direction of each line, giving your shading a stronger,
descriptive quality. Shading with a zigzagging motion and scratchy lines
will make your drawings undefined and accuracy difficult to achieve.
The contour line that forms each oval should overlap precisely at the
point where it starts. If you find that the start and end of each line are not
linking up, then you’re likely drawing from the wrist and resting the heel of
your hand on the paper, thus restricting your freedom of movement. You
may also need to make swifter circular actions to create tighter circles.
Try to keep your shading within the bounds of the outer contour lines.

You’ll need both putty and plastic erasers because each has a unique
purpose. The plastic eraser is the most familiar to us, used primarily to
remove large amounts of shading to take the paper back to its original
white.
The putty eraser (shown here) is more like a drawing tool and is used
in combination with the pencil. Think of the putty eraser as your white and
the pencil as your black. It can be kneaded into different shapes to
achieve different line qualities, and comes in handy when you need to
delicately lighten areas of shading or soften edges, either by dabbing (A)

or rubbing (B) the soft eraser gently across your drawing. Experiment
with different eraser shapes and techniques until you are as proficient
with the eraser as you are with your pencil.

The Seven Basic Pencil Marks or Strokes
Seven basic marks or strokes form the fundamentals of drawing
and visual communication. You’ll learn that a single line, a
single stroke, can communicate any of them. These are the
ABCs of drawing: learn them well, as you’ll be using them
repeatedly for the rest of your artistic life!

01 LIGHT It’s possible to communicate whether an object is in light or
shadow, even before doing any shading, by changing the value of
contour lines. Vary the pressure you place on the pencil when describing
forms to create light and dark contour lines to suggest that a surface is
receiving more or less light than surrounding forms.
02 DIRECTION The angle of a line relative to the frame can
communicate the orientation of an object in space or the direction of
movement. Horizontal and vertical lines suggest a state of static balance.
Diagonal lines create the illusion of suspended energy, as in a falling
object frozen in space.
03 DEPTH Lines that converge give the illusion of depth. Additionally,
lines that lighten in value as they recede give the illusion of atmospheric
perspective, which is discussed in more detail on this page.
04 SCALE Drawing lines of various lengths and thickness communicates
a relative scale. The distribution of lines, that is, how close or far apart
they are from one another, can also communicate depth.
05 OVERLAP To create a strong sense of depth, it’s important to be
aware of spatial relationships between forms. Drawing overlapping
foreground and background forms (even deliberately adding overlap
when none is visible on your subject) enhances the feeling of depth
because the nearest form appears to obscure the form situated behind it.
This technique is known as the “T” rule because of the T-like
intersections where two contour lines meet.
06 FORM Varying the angle and curvature of hatch-lines describes an
object’s surface shape and orientation.

07 MOVEMENT A system of opposing curves creates the illusion of
movement, because it provides viewers with a visual path along which
their eye will travel. The mechanics of this illusion are described in
sequence (2), which starts with an upright, static line that appears to
topple forward before flowing into a series of opposing curves. This
sequence of lines can represent an entire figure in motion. Additionally
the system of opposing curves can be incorporated into a drawing of a
static figure or object to give it a sense of energy and life, as we’ll see
throughout Level 4: Anatomy.

Perspective is our primary tool for creating an illusion of three
dimensions on a two-dimensional paper surface. This visual
device must be well understood as it not only applies to drawing
buildings and landscapes but also to figures. The five steps on
this page cover the basics of creating box forms in 1-, 2-, and 3-
point perspective. Feel free to use a ruler for precise lines.
NOTE ON TERMS: Volume describes the three-dimensional
space that an object occupies and form refers to its external
shape. Therefore, a sphere can be described as both a
spherical volume and a spherical form depending on the
context.
1-, 2-, AND 3-POINT PERSPECTIVE
The numbers 1, 2, and 3 refer to the number of vanishing points
in the perspective drawing. Selecting which perspective to use
depends on the angle from which you want to draw a particular
object: 1-point perspective if the object is to be viewed face-on;
2-point perspective if the object will be viewed from an angle,
that is, from the side; 3-point perspective for looking up or down
at a very large object.
Because it’s rare to have a scene where objects are perfectly
aligned to the picture plane, 1-point perspective mostly serves
as a starting exercise. The predominance of vertical and
horizontal lines with 1-point perspective also makes the scene

appear static.
The diagonal lines that go with 2-point perspective more
accurately represent how we tend to view objects in reality. The
predominance of diagonal lines gives the scene a dynamic
effect, which serves most general purposes.
3-point perspective should only be used if you want to
communicate a sense of great scale, because each additional
vanishing point increases the complexity of the drawing.
Drawing is difficult enough as it is, so keep things simple
whenever possible.

The Five Basic Steps of 1-, 2-, and 3-Point Perspective
01 FRAME Get into the habit of drawing a frame before starting
each drawing. The frame’s size and shape is as important as all
subsequent steps because every mark you put down will relate
to these initial four lines.
02 HORIZON LINE (HL) The horizon line represents the
viewer’s eye level. The position of the HL changes within the
picture frame depending on the vantage point of the viewers
and whether they’re looking down, along, or up toward an
object.
03 VANISHING POINT (VP1, VP2, VP3) A vanishing point (VP)
is a point on the horizon to which parallel lines converge. Lines
that are parallel to the HL are an exception to this rule. A
straight set of railway tracks appears to converge at a VP on
the HL, while the sleepers holding the tracks together remain
parallel to it. The angle and position of the HL and VPs
constitute the foundation of your imagined scene. Every object
you create must reference these elements if it is to convincingly
exist within the same space. Artists often label these elements
“HL” and “VP,” and reinforce the HL with a permanent marker to
ensure they remain visible as subsequent pencil lines are
added.
04 GUIDELINES Guidelines emanate from each VP in a 360-

degree radius and are the guides along which parallel lines of
an object converge to the VP. When drawing freehand, it’s
easier to draw long, straight lines if each pencil stroke is made
away from your body, so rotate your drawing paper as you
work. Draw guidelines lightly; they’re for reference only. If drawn
too dark, lighten them using a putty eraser. Each line should be
clear and precise; poorly defined lines make accuracy difficult.
Before drawing each line, practice the motion without touching
the paper, then draw the line confidently and in a single stroke.
05 BOX CONSTRUCTION Box forms are a vital element of
every artist’s repertoire, as almost every physical object can be
conceptualized as a simple box form before complexity and
details are overlaid. A box form consists of six flat surfaces,
known as planes: front, top, bottom, two sides, and a back
plane. Planes are named according to which direction the plane
is facing in relation to the viewer. For instance, a front plane of
the box form is the one that faces toward the viewer, while a
side plane is oriented at an angle. In reality the back-facing
plane would not be visible. However, to develop a strong
conceptual understanding of three-dimensional volumes, it’s
important to consider all six surfaces when drawing a box form.
With 1-point perspective it’s easiest to construct the box form
by starting with its front plane, the surface that also happens to
be closest to you in this conceptual 3D scene. Note that its
vertical lines should be perpendicular to the HL and its
horizontal lines parallel to it.

When drawing a box with 2-and 3-point perspective, it’s
easiest to start with the vertical edge closest to you in 3D
space, drawing it up or down toward the horizon line depending
on its position above or below the horizon.
Side planes. Every line you create to construct the box form
starts and finishes at a certain point. Every one of these points
should be connected with guidelines to all the vanishing points
in the scene. So for every new line that you draw, ensure that
its start and end points have a guideline referencing every
vanishing point in your scene.
Draw the remaining vertical lines to define the side planes
while keeping foreshortening in mind. The side planes should
be drawn narrower than the front plane to give the illusion that
they’re turned away from the viewer and receding into space.
Back-facing planes. Make a habit of indicating the back-
facing planes of each object. This will help you develop a
stronger understanding of objects as solid 3D forms rather than
mere two-dimensional shapes, and create objects with a
believable physical presence that give viewers the sense that
they could reach out and feel the imagined forms.


The taller an object is, the more acute the angle of the converging lines in
relation to the horizon line (HL). Lines nearer ground level gradually
flatten out until they fall in line with the horizon. The same is true for
angles below the HL, although lines converge upward, not down. If you’re
studying perspective from life, use the pencil measuring technique on this
page to help judge angles in relation to the horizon line.

A clear example of a horizon line (HL) is the edge where sky and sea
meet. The HL represents eye level, so your viewpoint (whether sitting,
standing at ground level, or looking down from a greater height) affects
the HL’s vertical position within the frame.
Placing the HL in the center has a neutral emotional effect because the
top and bottom half of the frame are equally balanced. Make the
composition more dynamic by moving the HL up or down within the
frame, or use a diagonal HL for a disorienting feeling. Experiment placing
the HL at unusual angles and make sure you follow the five steps of
perspective (this page) in the order, or your imaginary world may skew to
one side. In 1-and 2-point perspective the vertical lines should always be
at 90 degrees to the HL, which means that they will appear tilted if the HL
is at an angle.

As discussed in the Five Basic Steps of Perspective, almost
every physical object can be conceptualized as a simple box
form before complexity and details are overlaid.
Now that you have a command of drawing box forms in 1-, 2-,
and 3-point perspective, it’s time to practice a freehand drawing
approach, without the help of a horizon line, vanishing points,
and a ruler. This practice will help you develop an instinctive
feeling for perspective that you’ll need for the many occasions
when there are simply too many objects in a scene to create
vanishing points for each one. All this practice may seem
irrelevant to character and environment design, but you’ll see
the benefits once we get into Anatomy and study the drawings
of the Old Masters.
Have a go at copying these box forms or draw similar forms from your
imagination to test the extent of your knowledge of perspective. Take a
moment to highlight the nearest edge and point of each object as if you
could really reach out and touch them.
The simple perspective rule to keep in mind is that parallel lines of an
object must converge. Sometimes it’s helpful to exaggerate convergence
to enhance the feeling of perspective and depth.

Practice drawing a centerline down the middle of each plane. Keep in
mind that the closer half (A) should be larger than the farther half (B),
due to foreshortening. You can find the exact midpoint of a plane by
creating a cross that links all four corners. The point at which the two
diagonal lines meet indicates the center of the plane (C).

Also practice halving spherical forms. Note that foreshortening will make
the circular cross-sections appear oval (A).
Drawing from the shoulder using pencil grip (A) on this page will help
you draw contour lines that link up at the start and finish with a little
overlap. Avoid stopping the curved halving line at the circular form’s edge
(B). Draw it as if it continues around to the back of the form, suggesting a
continuation (C).

One of the biggest challenges for visual artists is to create the
illusion of depth and three-dimensional form on a two-
dimensional surface. The perspective exercises on this page
gave us tools to create the illusion of depth and volume using
only lines. Adding an imaginary light source to the scene allows
us to additionally model the volumes with light and shadow.
Using perspective and light in unison enhances the palpable
three-dimensionality of each volume. Let’s start with some
simple box forms to illustrate how lighting and value work with
perspective to create the illusion of form, before moving on to
more complex objects. Ultimately there’s no right or wrong
approach to value and depth. Lighting decisions are based on
artistic choice, with full understanding of how light can
effectively model form, and the emotions that you want to evoke
in the player.
THE TWO-VALUE SCALE As a first step to rendering light, you can
simplify your values to two, black and white. The paper surface is white
and pencil shading is black. Once the direction of an imaginary light
source has been decided, you’re left with only two choices on how to light
each plane of a box form: either the plane is turned toward the light
(white) or it’s turned away (black).

Note how perspective and light work together to describe form. Box (A)
has no sense of form because it lacks converging lines and values. When
you add converging lines (B) the suggestion of depth and volume
becomes apparent. Box form (C) communicates an even better sense of
form because the interior edge has been drawn to define the two side
planes.
Box form (D) is lit from the right by an imaginary light source and the
two visible planes have been lit accordingly. As a result you get the
strongest illusion of form because converging lines and values clearly
define the planes of your box form.
Team Fortress 2: Dustbowl map (Artwork courtesy of Valve
Corporation)
Team Fortress 2 provides a first-rate example of in-game lighting that
emphasizes the illusion of 3D form and depth. The lighting setup for the
Dustbowl clearly defines which planes in the environment face toward the

light and which face away. Limiting your lighting to a single directional
light source is the best solution to model form in this way.
Heavy Rain (Artwork courtesy of Quantic Dream)
Now compare the screenshot from Team Fortress 2 (opposite) with this
image from Heavy Rain. Notice how the diffused lighting in Heavy Rain
reduces the illusion of form. This is particularly noticeable in the houses
across the street, whose front and side planes have similar values.
Heavy Rain’s lighting is well suited to evoke the shadowy and
melancholic atmosphere of the game.

Box forms make it significantly easier to shade objects drawn from your
imagination because individual planes are clearly defined. These simple
volumes and value systems make it easy to conceptualize light sources
from different directions, and to shade each plane accordingly. The boxes
on the left are shaded according to a light source illuminating from the
left. Now shade the same set of box forms on the right as if the light
source is coming from the upper right. Keep the values simple: either a
plane is facing upward/toward the light or downward/away from the light.
Although there is no definition for what constitutes correct and incorrect
shading, the hatch lines you use should communicate the direction and
orientation of the plane that they’re describing.

There is so much superfluous visual information around us in
daily life that only becomes apparent when we sit down with a
pencil and paper and, perhaps for the first time ever, really look.
This information threatens to overwhelm our ability to draw
because there is so much detail to take in. The exact way in
which a subject is deconstructed will differ from artist to artist;
however, the standard set of visual measuring tools we’ll learn
about here are used by every skilled artist and will allow us to
screen out extraneous detail and systemically deconstruct a
complex subject to simpler, manageable components.

Grand Theft Auto IV: Niko Bellic
Details hold very little importance in drawing because it’s an object’s
characteristic shapes and proportions that make up the broader
silhouette that we recognize first and foremost. If you were to line up your
closest friends at a distance of 100 yards, though you couldn’t discern
any details, you’d still be able to identify individuals just by their unique
silhouettes.
If you’ve played Grand Theft Auto IV, you’ll be familiar with the
character of Niko Bellic. Details, including the blue line across Niko’s

track top and his eyes, become virtually indistinguishable at a lower
resolution or greater distance. But Niko himself remains recognizable at
any distance because of his characteristic silhouette and the larger
abstract shapes in his figure, such as his haircut and the beige panels
and collar of the tracksuit top.

Nine Tools for Solving Visual Distraction
The question is how to begin a drawing without getting
distracted by extraneous visual information. Luckily this
problem was long ago solved with the following nine tools,
which can be applied to any subject matter, including figures
and landscapes.
Each tool is simple to understand, but using them accurately
in combination with one another requires discipline. Continue to
practice and your measuring dexterity will improve to a point
where you can make quick assessments of your subject without
drawing guidelines.
The order in which these tools are presented is only a
general guide, as they’re most effective when used in various
combinations, depending on the subject. Let’s take a look at
how the tools can help simplify the drawing process when faced
with a subject as richly detailed as The Laughing Cavalier by
Frans Hals (ca. 1580–1666) on this page.
Have a go at making several studies of the same subject,
concentrating on each tool individually before trying them in
combination. Your drawings are unlikely to become museum
pieces, so don’t be afraid to fill them with guidelines and
annotations. You can always erase them later and subsequent
details may hide them anyway.

PENCIL MEASURING Before you begin the lesson, practice the
measuring technique, which will help you more accurately measure
subjects, the alignment between them, and determine perspective. To
measure your subject, stretch out your hand toward the subject with your
drawing pencil held in a vertical or horizontal position. Your arm must be
fully extended, elbow straight. While looking down the length of your arm,
as though you were aiming down the site of a gun, align the top of the
pencil with the top of whatever you’re measuring; now move the tip of
your thumb to mark the other end of what you’re measuring: the space
between the tip of the pencil and your thumb is your measuring unit. Be
sure to keep your arm as straight as possible and stand in the same
position because small changes will drastically affect the size of the unit.
You can likewise use this technique to help check alignment this page
between elements and for estimating perspective angles.

The Laughing Cavalier (1624) by Frans Hals, Wallace Collection,
London

01 SQUINTING Squinting (as in half-closing your eyes until objects
appear blurred) is one of the most undervalued tools for reducing visual
complexity. It merges fragmented details into simpler shapes made of
light and shadow. Squinting is a discipline and takes a lot of practice
because the natural inclination is to open your eyes fully to see
everything in detail.

02 FRAME The first step of the perspective exercise on this page, the
frame, forces us to think as broadly as possible about the image. You can
temporarily ignore the complex subject by first focusing on the right
width-to-height ratio for your four-sided frame. The frame is critical to
composition, as it affects the placement and relationship of all
subsequent elements of a drawing.

03 MEASURING UNIT Establish a unit that can be used to measure
elements in your drawing. For example, the head is the standard unit of
measure in figure drawing. In landscape and other genres, you can
choose something convenient, such as the vertical height of a window
frame. Use the unit to measure only horizontally and vertically; diagonals
are difficult to realign and measure with consistency. (See Pencil
Measuring on this page.)

04 ALIGNMENT Checking the relative alignment of elements in the
composition helps on both a large and small scale. You can check the
alignment of an ear in relationship to the foot or zoom in to check the
alignment of lips in relation to the corners of the eye.

05 TRIANGULATION Refers to cross-referencing each imaginary point
of your subject against two or more points. Start triangulating points that
are far apart within the image to check the accuracy of the bigger shapes
before zeroing in on smaller details.

06 ENVELOPE Enveloping the subject helps you visualize it in very
broad terms by focusing on the extremities of a subject over small
changes in contour and detail. You may be more familiar with this
concept if you’ve worked with 3D digital modeling, where programs refer
to the feature as a bounding box.

07 SIMPLIFIED LINES Avoid drawing curved lines for the initial stages of
a drawing, because organic shapes are extremely difficult to assess
visually. Reducing curved shapes to a series of straight lines makes it
easier to judge whether a shape was drawn correctly. It’s easy to soften
and curve the lines to match the subject once you’re confident of the
essential shapes.

08 NEGATIVE SHAPES This is arguably the most reliable tool for
assessing the accuracy of a drawing. Negative shapes work on the
principle that you draw the empty space around your subject rather than
the subject itself. This is such an effective tool because the subject
becomes an abstract puzzle, void of detail. A negative shape drawing can
often stand on its own in describing the unique silhouette of a person.
Use this tool in combination with triangulation and simplified lines to
judge the accuracy of your shapes.

09 POSITIVE SHAPES This is a tricky tool because it ventures into the
dangerous territory of drawing the subject itself in all its eye-catching
detail. Reduce the positive shapes of your subject to simple geometric
shapes: circles, rectangles, and triangles.

Digital software is a very forgiving drawing medium because it
allows you to fix mistakes as you make them using the undo
function. There is no such function when working with
traditional media, but classical drawing practice offers a
structured drawing process that makes it easy to keep track of
the steps in your art, so that you can manually identify and
correct any mistakes as you go along. The drawing process
that follows relies on knowing how to use the nine visual
measuring tools (this page), so be sure you’ve practiced them
all. Though the exercises are applied here to a landscape, the
same process applies to figure drawing.
Landscape with a Cottage and Hay Barn (1640) by Rembrandt van
Rijn (1606–1669)

01 BLOCK IN The first stage of drawing is the block in, where you lightly
outline the largest masses. Be accurate with placement and proportions
of shapes and lines, taking advantage of this loose stage to make
adjustments with the help of the visual measuring tools (this page).
Don’t forget to indicate the horizon line, keeping in mind that all parallel
lines above the horizon converge downward and those below converge
upward. You can also lightly suggest general values to distinguish the
bright sky from the darker ground plane.
02 ANCHOR POINT Once you’ve blocked in everything using simplified
lines it’s time to decide on an anchor point, which is usually the center of
interest or something that has a strong and simple shape. The anchor
point is the point of reference against which to judge the placement and

proportions of all subsequent elements, so it’s important to keep refining
it until you’re confident of its accuracy. And just when you think it’s right,
check it again!
03 SPIRALING The next element you draw should be adjacent to or
overlap the anchor point. Refine this shape until it’s as accurate as you
can possibly make it, using the anchor point to judge relative shapes and
proportions. Continue working systematically, spiraling outward from the
anchor point and only moving to an adjacent element when you’ve
double-checked the existing shapes.
Spiraling is the undo function of drawing. This logical order for image
construction makes it easy to trace back your steps to identify the exact
place you made a mistake so you can correct it. Once you’ve spiraled the
entire image, you can go back over it to refine values and shading and
add details.

LEVEL UP!
Congratulations on completing Level 1 of the book. The tools
covered so far are the fundamentals for every drawing challenge
you’ll ever encounter. Remember that complete understanding
and mastery only comes with a significant amount of practice. In
the following chapters we will investigate how these tools can be

applied to increasingly complex forms and drawings. We’ll also
investigate in greater depth the significance of visual grammar
and how you can integrate concepts of line, shape, volume,
value, and color into your video games to design engaging
emotional experiences.

RAGE
IN LEVEL 1 WE COVERED THE FUNDAMENTALS of drawing
through exercises that gave us confidence in pencil strokes, light,
and perspective. We also learned about the correct process of
observation and drawing, which requires focus and self-discipline
but also makes drawing accurate and easier. In Level 2 we will
explore more advanced concepts for volumes and lighting that will
wrap up all the tools and techniques you’ll need to tackle any
subject. This section primarily focuses on landscape drawing, but
you’ll see that all objects, including human figures, can be reduced
to a common set of basic shapes and volumes. While you can learn
the techniques of landscape drawing through these exercises, I
recommend that you take your sketchbook and pencils outdoors
and have a go at drawing the real thing as well.

Having a command of drawing spheres in perspective is
essential in both landscape and figure drawing because you
almost never see perfect circular forms in nature. Circular
shapes are usually distorted to look like ovals due to the effect
of foreshortening. The exercise on this page is an extension of
the process we used to find the midpoint of a box’s plane (this
page) and will allow you to draw circles with a convincing sense
of depth.
FREEHAND VOLUMES In this section, you will amass the skills to draw

a range of basic volumes, including the box form, sphere, and cylinder.
Continue to practice drawing these volumes freehand from various
angles until the process becomes instinctive.

Four Steps for Drawing Circular Forms in Perspective
01 The process of creating circular shapes in perspective is very similar
to the process of creating box forms. Starting with a frame, horizon line,
and vanishing point, create a base for what could otherwise be a box.
02 First divide this box into quarters using two diagonal lines to connect
the four corners. Where the lines cross is the center point. Second, draw
two lines to cut this box vertically and horizontally across the center point.
Lastly, draw four lines to connect the vertical and horizontal points
together to create a total of 16 sections.

03 Estimate the midpoint along the diagonal lines in the outermost
sections. These are the eight points that define your circle in perspective.
04 By drawing a curved line connecting each point you end up with an
oval—your circle in perspective. Try this exercise a few more times with
horizon lines placed at different angles.

Clockwise from top: Big Daddy (BioShock), Sackboy/Sackgirl (Little
Big Planet); character from Journey (BioShock artwork courtesy of
Irrational Games)
Some of the video game industry’s most iconic and memorable
characters are modifications of the volumes you’ve been practicing. Make
pencil studies of each character above, using only the box, sphere,
cylinder, and pyramid volumes in various combinations. You may wish to
search for alternative views of these characters to get a better
understanding of their volumetric concept. Once you know a character’s
volumetric concept, you’ll be able to redraw it from any angle with ease
using the perspective techniques that we explored in Level 1. (photo

credit 2.1)

We looked at the way lighting describes form in Basic Lighting
and Values. When we draw from life there are more varieties of
volumes and lighting conditions to consider, which require more
advanced concepts.
The two cylinders in the above left illustration demonstrate the difference
between shadow on a form and cast shadow. The shadow on the upright
cylinder (A) shows its form as the surface slowly turns away from the
imaginary light source, nicely modeling its shape. This same form also
casts a shadow (B) by preventing some of the light from reaching the
horizontal cylinder in the background. This is called a cast shadow.
Cast shadows help to communicate spatial relationships between
objects, as demonstrated by situation (C). Without the cast shadow
connecting the two cylinders we cannot determine the relative
proportions of these objects or whether they sit on the same plane.
Cast shadows were not discussed in Level 1 because they often have
the effect of visually confusing the modeling of forms or flattening the
sensation of form altogether. One of our primary goals is to create the
illusion of depth, so cast shadows should therefore be used judiciously.
Notice how the cast shadow of the foreground cylinder (D) has eliminated
the form shadow of the middle cylinder and, hence, the illusion of depth.
The Old Masters were very careful in using cast shadow for this reason,
often subduing or removing them altogether to maintain a strong sense of
depth.

THE FIVE-VALUE SCALE From right to left: (0) white of the paper or
light, (1) highlight, (2) middle values, (3) core shadow, and (4) cast
shadow.
While a two-value scale was sufficient for modeling simple box forms,
you must expand the scale to render more complex, rounded forms as
well as cast shadows. Artists traditionally use a scale composed of ten
values, the lightest value being the white of the drawing surface, but a
five-value scale is, in fact, sufficient for all your needs and reduces the
number of elements to consider while drawing. A five-value scale may
seem limiting, but it is really only a conceptual simplification. More subtle
variations of values will appear naturally once you begin drawing and
blending values together in subsequent exercises.

FIVE-VALUE SCALE This illustration demonstrates how a five-value
scale is used to model a spherical form. The shadows are ordered in a 1-
2-3-2-4 value system in which values 1 to 3 represent form shadow and
4, the cast shadow.
The darkest value on the form, known as the core shadow or
terminator is located at 90 degrees from the light source, where light and
shadow planes meet. The reason the middle and not the furthest point
from the light is darkest is because the away-facing planes receive
bounced light from the environment, such as a table surface.
Characteristic of the cast shadow (4) is that it’s always one value
darker than the core shadow (3). Cast shadow edges are generally
harder than those of the form shadow.
The cast shadow becomes lighter and its edges softer as it falls away
from the shadow-casting object. This happens because the further away
a cast shadow is from the shadow-casting object, the more light it
receives from the surrounding environment and ambient light sources.
BOUNCED LIGHT The danger of disregarding bounced light is that
forms appear flatter without it, as in the above example. According to the
lighting situation in this scene, the left side of the sphere is missing the
bounced light that is vital to creating the illusion of a form turning in
space.
Bounced light is a detail often lost in photo references, as the values

are usually too subtle for cameras to capture. So be careful when
studying photographs, making sure to suggest bounced light in your
drawing even if none is visible in your photo reference.
HATCH LINES Every pencil stroke should be as descriptive as possible
when shading forms per the five-value system. Straight lines best
describe the angle and orientation of flat planes, as in a box form.
Rounded hatch lines better describe rounded forms. The sense of form is
destroyed if you use straight lines to describe a spherical form and vice
versa.
Keep perspective in mind when deciding on which way to curve or
angle your hatch lines. For instance, if you’re looking up at a cylindrical
object, the hatch lines should curve downward to reinforce the illusion of
perspective.
We can also see the difference between soft and hard edges in the
transition between light and shadow. The speed of transition reflects

whether the form is spherical, in which case the transition is soft and
gradual. If the transition is sudden, the edge is described with a sharp
transition (often referred to as a plane break) between light and shadow.
CONTOUR LIGHTING The five-value system can even be suggested
with contours alone by varying the weight of the lines themselves. If the
surface you’re describing is in light, the contour line should be light; if the
surface is in shadow, the line should be thick and heavy. Resist the
temptation to fully enclose objects with a solid, dark line—as is common
with comic-book drawings—as this effectively flattens the form.

Little Big Planet 2
Cast shadows can also be used to suggest objects outside the visible
frame. It’s not always clear what objects are casting the shadows in Little
Big Planet 2, which creates the illusion that parts of the environment exist
beyond the confines of the screen, encroaching into our reality and
increasing our sense of immersion in the game.

Study sheet with children’s heads by Albrecht Dürer
The Old Masters used the concept of basic volumes and light whenever
they wanted to communicate form. The spherical volume that Dürer had
in mind when drawing the head of this child could hardly be more explicit.

Do a quick study of Dürer’s drawing: Start with a circle (A), and refine it to
suggest the contour of the head. The next step is to draw the core
shadow (B). You can see how effective the core shadow is in creating the
illusion of light and in describing the surface of the spherical form turning
in space. You can finish the study by laying down a general layer of
shading to map out the remaining form shadow (C) before adding details
(D).
Notice how Dürer reduced details in the highlights to give a stronger
sense of light. This effect is known as light bloom in computer graphics.
In drawings it’s a tool to compensate for the limitations of traditional
media in translating the range of values witnessed in reality.

Man and a Woman on a Hummock (ca. 1688) by Antonie Waterloo
(1609–1690)
Basic volumes modeled with core shadows and bounced light are so
good at creating the illusion of depth and form that classical artists used
them repeatedly as conceptual foundations for their subjects, even for
objects that are not perceived as solid forms, like the trees in Waterloo’s
etching. Though tree forms are largely composed of empty space defined
by an external layer of leaves, Waterloo conceptualized the combined
mass of the trees as one large spherical form and modeled it with light
accordingly.
The etching is filled with intricate details that make this concept difficult
to decipher until you squint at it to reduce light and shadow masses to
simpler shapes that reveal the lighting concept of the artist.

Sketching on location is the first real test of how well you’ve
grasped the various concepts covered so far in the book. There
are literally millions of elements to distract you, not the least of
which are the constantly shifting light and weather conditions.
Outdoor drawing is the yardstick against which to measure your
progress. If you remain focused on drawing the bigger, simpler
forms under such changeable conditions, then you’re doing
well. Given the short development time for most games,
firsthand research is not always possible. By mastering the
classical concepts of art landscapes, you’ll have a repertoire of
real-life skills to apply to imaginary video game landscapes.
RAGE
One valuable experience of drawing outdoors is the sense of distance
and depth you develop. Atmospheric perspective is a great tool to create
this illusion of depth, and one much used by classical artists. The effect is
caused by water vapor in the air, which creates a diminishing level of
contrast and blurring of forms with distance.
The environments of RAGE perfectly demonstrate the concept of
atmospheric perspective. Compare the furthest ridges with those in the

foreground and notice how shadows become lighter with distance until
the landscape and sky begin merging together. The background
elements additionally have softer edges and fewer details than those in
the foreground. You’ll also find this effect applied to classic figurative
drawings, such as Michelangelo’s Study for the Battle of Cascina (this
page), in which background forms are more lightly shaded than those in
the foreground.
New Super Mario Bros.
New Super Mario Bros. has an abstracted version of atmospheric
perspective, which works well for the style of the game. A sense of depth
is created by T-intersections between overlapping objects, and by placing
the darkest values and sharpest lines in the foreground, such as Mario’s
hair and red overalls.

You’ve now garnered enough tools to tackle a more challenging
landscape study. Landscape by Russian artist Alexei Savrasov
offers an opportunity to practice drawing with the putty eraser in
combination with the pencil.
Landscape by Alexei Savrasov (1830–1897)

Throughout this drawing exercise keep in mind the tools you’ve learned
to create the illusion of depth. So far you’ve worked on overlapping forms
and T-intersections to describe the depth relationship between objects
and have seen the effect that atmospheric perspective has on distant
objects, diminishing the levels of contrast and softening forms.
In landscape drawing it’s useful to organize the scene into foreground,
middle ground, and background elements. The foreground will feature the
strongest contrasts, the sharpest edges, and the most details. Elements
in the background will be lighter, softer, and relatively void of detail. With
this in mind, the general order of drawing a landscape is from
background to foreground.

Begin your quick study by drawing the frame, matching the proportions of
the original as accurately as you can. For the initial block in stage
(described in Drawing Process) focus on outlining the biggest shapes first
by indicating the horizon line and the top edge of the background trees to
define the dominant break between light and shadow.
Continue concentrating on the biggest shapes by blocking in the lower
half of the drawing with an even layer of shading. Savrasov would have
likely smudged the lines with his finger or a paper blender to create a
more even layer of value. The distant trees are “drawn” using the putty
eraser kneaded into a blade-like shape.

Having established the softer background elements, you can tackle the
objects in the middle and foreground. Savrasov deliberately placed the
trees on either side of the central avenue to align along imaginary
guidelines that appear to converge toward a vanishing point. This has the
useful effect of enforcing the illusion of depth. The repeating forms of the
trees as they appear to get smaller with distance also communicate
depth.
Your first pass over the middle and foreground should be fairly light, so
you can easily make corrections and cut out the highlights before adding
the darkest values.
Quickly mass in the branches of the trees and plants, paying closest

attention to the texture of their contours, to suggest the internal forms.
For the final pass, go in and add the darkest values, noting that Savrasov
purposely concentrated the strongest contrasts and details on and
around the foreground tree on the right, which he chose as his center of
interest.
Make some refinements to the ground plane, adding horizontal lines to
distinguish it from the upright trees in the background. Lastly, let loose,
mimicking the great variety of pencil lines Savrasov used to describe the
different textures.

LIMBO (Concept image courtesy of Playdead)
The award-winning visuals from LIMBO are the brainchild of game
director Arnt Jensen. Although in many ways more stylized than Alexei
Savrasov’s drawing, both images have a lot in common in terms of the
visual tools used to create the illusion of depth: overlap, diminishing
contrasts, and softening of forms with distance and repetition of shapes.
Texture suggested in contours can convey enough information for
viewers to imagine the missing visual information of the internal forms.
Jensen has skillfully taken advantage of this phenomenon by giving
objects ambiguous shapes that invite players to use their own
imagination to complete the missing information. Each player will find
different meaning in the shapes based on their personal experiences. If
Jensen had gone the other way and made every detail explicit, there
would be less room to engage the player’s imagination and emotions.
LEVEL UP!
You’ve only completed Levels 1 and 2 and already have an

advanced understanding of how to create images with a
believable sense of depth and volume. These drawing tools are
sufficient for almost every subject you’ll draw. Now let’s see how
to advance your existing knowledge and add a sense of human
life, movement, and weight to your lines, shapes, and volumes.

Detail with overlay of Skeleton with Muscles by Bernhard Siegfried
Albinus
IF YOU’VE EVER HAD THE EXPERIENCE of rotating a 3D character
model in a digital modeling program, you’ll be familiar with the
weightless sensation. The character model remains rigid as it’s
rotated on any axis with the effortless click and drag of the mouse.
To bring the character to life the illusion of weight and movement
must be created by the artist with a skillful use of lines and shapes.
The following section covers the fundamental concepts of
anatomy and the forces involved in human movement. These
concepts will help you instantly bring a sense of life and energy to
your characters, but I recommend that you also draw from life
whenever possible. Drawing from life is the best study method for
understanding the figure because it allows you to record
experiences firsthand and that translates to more believable figures

in the realm of virtual space.

Much of what makes each of us distinguishable as individuals is
communicated in the way we carry our physical weight. What
artists must keep in mind when studying the figure is the
unseen force of gravity, which our bodies constantly oppose. In
this section you’ll explore the anatomical mechanisms that
prevent us from collapsing against this downward force, the
human skeletal and muscular structures that work together to
create a tension that holds us upright.
Team Fortress 2: Anatomy of a Heavy Weapons Guy (Artwork
courtesy of Valve Corporation)
You can think of the human skeleton as being like the structural frame of
a building. Every architectural structure starts with a solid, supportive
skeleton over which the walls and roof are built. Without this supportive
frame the building would collapse. The supportive frame of the human
figure is the skeleton, which would likewise collapse into a pile of bones if

it weren’t for the muscles and tendons keeping it upright.
Humans can stand upright because our bodies have developed a series
of muscles collectively known as antigravity muscles. They function like
metal springs, maintaining tension between body parts. Starting at the
heel, these muscles work their way up the body, alternating from the front
to the back in a system of opposing curves to create forces that keep us
from collapsing against the pull of gravity.
Each curved contour is complemented on the opposite side of the
figure by a straight line. In reality the human figure doesn’t feature
straight lines, but artists use straight (or relatively straight) lines to
suggest the supportive skeletal structure that holds the figure together,
like the nearly straight bones of the upper and lower leg. Muscles, in
contrast, tend to be rounder so opposing curves are generally used to
trace the flow of muscles throughout the body and create an illusion of
movement and life. This play of curved against straight lines is
fundamental to creating believable figures.

The antigravity muscles of the lower leg feature a muscle group that
connects the heel with points above the back of the knee. A similar
arrangement of muscles is also present for the upper leg, where muscles
connect the pelvis and a point just below the kneecap.
The attachment points of the muscle groups across the knee keep our
legs locked in the upright position when standing and support our weight
when walking. If these muscle groups didn’t overlap the knee, the entire
leg would topple forward under the force of gravity.
The concept of opposing curves is especially important for movement,
as without the alternating placement of antigravity muscles, the action of
walking would not be possible.

Moving up the leg, take note of the increasing mass and weight being
transferred down through the legs to the feet. The largest, and therefore
the heaviest, mass of the body is the ribcage. Its position at the front of
the body creates an imbalance, shifting the body’s weight toward the toes
so that the body has a natural urge to fall forward. Luckily antigravity
muscles allow us to choose when this happens. In the action of walking,
the antigravity muscles of the legs exploit the downward pull of gravity
and our body’s imbalance to create forward motion.
To restore an element of balance, the form of the ribcage is tilted

backward, which the pelvis must counterbalance with its forward tilt.
Opposing curves and the asymmetry of the body are likewise visible
when observing a figure walking from the front. With each step the pelvis
tilts depending on which leg is supporting the body’s weight. The
supporting leg is known as the stance leg, while the leg that’s swinging
forward is called the swing leg. The muscles used in one leg oppose
those in the other as shown by the accented lines in this illustration.
The shoulders must simultaneously counterbalance the pelvis’s
movement by tilting in the opposite direction, as it tilts from side to side,
to keep the figure from falling over sideways. The Old Masters called this
counterbalancing mechanism “contrapposto.” One side of the upper body
compresses as the other side expands. The expanded side is where
most of the energy is concentrated, as the muscles flex to stop the swing
leg from swinging out too far.

Team Fortress 2: Heavy
Drawing figures vertically straight is a common mistake. The human
figure has an innate rhythm of opposing curves running from head to toe.
These opposing curves can be drawn to communicate energy and weight
with stronger forces being communicated by lines with a stronger curve.
The addition of a heavy object in the Heavy’s hand increases the
asymmetrical tension working against the downward pull of gravity, and
so opposing curves become more pronounced.
Straight lines create a visual contrast and they also communicate a
sense of solidity and support. For instance, notice the Heavy’s straight
left arm, which supports the weapon’s weight.

The distribution of energy throughout the body varies from person to
person. Acclaimed concept artist Iain McCaig refers to stock characters
from physical theater to categorize various character types based on
which part of the body they lead with (from left): thinkers with their heads;
heroes with their chests; lazy types with the pelvis; cowards with their
knees.
You should always consider the communication of energy with line when
designing characters. Much like the downward forces suggested by the
bowing out of the sides of Greek Doric columns, you can make a
character look heavier by manipulating the curvature of lines and
increasing the character’s contact with the ground. Alternatively, straight
lines communicate effortless energy and strength.

You can play even more with proportions and weight for different
effects. For instance, a person with a small point of contact with the
ground appears lighter, even if they have a rounded silhouette.
If you replace the rounded silhouette with straight lines (far right) you
arrive at a contemporary idea of feminine beauty that communicates a
feeling of weightlessness. Artist Albert Lozano used this concept to
create the young Ellie for Pixar’s Up, describing her shape as an
“exclamation point, sort of light on her feet and lifting up into the air.”
Weight doesn’t actually exist in digital space, so you must employ such
visual tricks to create an illusion of its presence.
Portal 2: GLaDOS (left) and Wheatley (right)
The effect of using lines to communicate energy is applied in an
interesting way in the design of GLaDOS and Wheatley from Portal 2.
The overextended position of GLaDOS’s head and body is the
culmination of a series of opposing curves that begin with line (A), visible
from this view as a straight line, to give a convincing feeling of energy
and support. You can see just how important such cables are in creating
tension and giving GLaDOS a powerful sense of menace when Wheatley
takes over her body. During this changeover, tension is released when

the cables are removed, leaving Wheatley hanging with a significantly
lighter and less threatening appearance.
Pigsy (Enslaved: Odyssey to the West); Steve (Minecraft)

Lili (Tekken); Lalaffel, Elezen, and Roegadyn (Final Fantasy XIV)
Study the above lineup of characters by reducing their designs to black
silhouettes. Notice how the various sensations of weight are
communicated through the different contour lines and how the characters
connect with the ground.
The Minecraft miner communicates no sense of weight whatsoever
due to the straight contour lines of his design. This design fits the style
and charm of Minecraft, but in cases where a stronger sense of life and
movement is wanted it’s important to consider incorporating curves into
the silhouette.

Studying proportions is the practice of applying a measuring
system to the human form. The figure is such a complex
subject that artists throughout history had to develop personal
measuring systems based on a mix of systematic observation
and personal taste.
The standard unit for measuring the human body is the
human head. The average adult person is 7.5 heads tall,
although some artists prefer to use a measure of 8 heads in
height. Whatever standard unit an artist prefers, that unit is
consistently applied to determine the proportions of the figure
being drawn, whether from life or imagination.

Figure proportions from Artistic Anatomy by Dr. Paul Richer
Dr. Paul Richer’s illustrations, from his book Artistic Anatomy (Watson-
Guptill), are widely considered to be among the most accurate and clear
references for artistic anatomy. It’s a worthwhile exercise to make studies
of his suggested system of proportions, starting with a lightly drawn grid
7.5 units in height and 2 units wide (A). To locate the vertical placement
of key anatomical landmarks, Richer has counted 4 units down from the
top and 4 units up from the base (B).
Once your grid is set up, you can start by indicating anatomical
information with simple lines and points that will help you memorize the
relative position of various anatomical features. Where an anatomical

feature falls between a head unit, divide the unit into halves or thirds (as
shown) rather than smaller increments that would be harder to memorize.
Add increasingly complex anatomical information as your knowledge of
the human figure develops.
Note how Richer’s system references the underlying skeleton as
opposed to fleshy points of the body. The reason for this is that the
skeleton is more reliable as a measuring tool because of its solid and
relatively standard form. Soft fleshy landmarks have a tendency to shift
between poses and vary more drastically between individuals.
Working from the head downward, note that the figure’s midpoint is
located at the top of the femur (thigh bone), where the upper leg
connects with the pelvis. Take a moment to note that hands are bigger
than you might think; when the fingers are stretched out wide the hand
will cover the face. With the arms down by a person’s side, the fingertips,
if stretched out, reach all the way down to the middle of the upper leg.
Record such observations by annotating your study with notes and
simple line and point indications (C).

Suggested ideal human proportions by Andrew Loomis
Try the exercise on this page with alternative proportion systems used by
other artists. In illustrator Andrew Loomis’s system of proportions note
that the head is used as a consistent unit of measurement throughout
human development, going from a proportion of 4 heads in height in
infancy, up to 8 heads in height in maturity, as opposed to Richer’s 7.5.
Here are five video game characters and their approximate height in
head units, from left: Kirby (1 head), Mario (3 heads), Link (5.5 heads),
Rebecca Chambers (7.5 heads), Markus Fenix (9 heads).
Figure proportions are open to artistic exaggeration. A character can
be designed with childlike proportions (1 to 7 head units), regardless of
the character’s age, to give it an innocent appeal or with adult proportions
(7.5 to 8 head units) for a mature feel. You can go even further and
design characters with a heroic 9 heads in height, like Gears of War’s
Markus Fenix, which is the proportion the ancient Greeks used to depict
their gods. Notice how Mario appears physically younger than Link
despite Mario’s older age insinuated by his mature facial features. (photo
credit 3.1)

Studying the human skeleton is an important aspect of figure
drawing because the volumes and shape of the skeleton define
much of the body’s outward appearance.
Skeletal landmarks are the points on the surface of the skin
where the underlying bone is nearest the surface. They serve
as reliable indicators for the exact position of the skeleton
because they’re visible on all body types, from fat to thin. Using
fleshy forms to map out your drawing is not advisable because
the soft texture means that it’s susceptible to change.

Skeleton with Muscles (1749) with overlay by Bernhard Siegfried
Albinus (1697–1770)
The skeleton is a hard and solid structure that doesn’t deform. It is thanks
to alternating soft forms located in between the bony masses that
movement is possible. These soft forms are highlighted in red and are
situated across joints as well as in the neck and abdomen.
Head of an Apostle Looking Downward (1508) by Albrecht Dürer
Emphasizing the contrast between hard bone and soft flesh is critical in
order to convey that a character has a believable skeletal structure
holding them together. If the underlying skeleton is not suggested, then
the figure will appear too soft and blob-like.
Albrecht Dürer understood the figure like few other artists in history
because of his devotion to its study, which is evident in the way he has
drawn the flesh of the face to appear stretched over the hard forms of the

skull.
Study of Diogenes for the School of Athens (ca. 1510) by Raphael
(1483–1520)
Raphael’s reclining figure, which is supporting its weight on one arm,
illustrates this contrast of soft and hard masses. Notice how the torso
appears to hang between shoulder and pelvis much like drapery strung
between two poles. What makes this gesture possible is a combination of
flexible elements of the body held together by the rigid skeletal structure.
LEVEL UP!
This chapter demonstrated how characters can be given a sense
of movement and weight by conceptualizing them on a series of
curved lines and shapes. You also took a look at human
proportions and had a preview of artistic anatomy and the way

the figure is constructed of soft and hard forms to make
movement possible. In the following level you will take the simple
concepts that you’ve learned in Levels 1 to 3 and apply them to
drawings of the Old Masters.

Battle of the Naked Men by Antonio del Pollaiuolo (ca. 1429–1498)
WE’LL LOOK EVEN MORE CLOSELY at skeletal landmarks in this
anatomy chapter, which is the most complex chapter in the entire
book as it combines all the elements studied so far. This may sound
like a daunting challenge, but you’ll shortly see that the Old Masters
had some simple solutions for drawing the complex human figure.
In medical science, anatomy is a very technical and detailed
understanding of the human figure. Artists are more interested in
the body’s broader volumes and functions. By conceptualizing the
human figure in terms of basic volumes you’ll have greater freedom
in drawing it from any angle and in communicating its solidity and
weight.
Every artist has their own concept of anatomical forms based on
observation, study, and personal preference. The Old Masters
treated the human figure as malleable and plastic, shaping it to suit
their ideal taste or artistic requirements.

The lessons in this chapter are structured to draw your attention
to the volume and rhythm concepts employed by the Old Masters,
which they used to create a powerful sense of solidity and
movement.

The figure has been broken down into nine elements: feet, legs,
pelvis, spine and ribcage, shoulder girdle, arms, hands, head
and neck, and facial expressions/emotions. Each of these
elements is executed in six stages: massing, bones, skeletal
landmarks, opposing curves, master quick studies, and
anatomy in games.
01 MASSING is the process of conceptualizing an element of
anatomy using a simple volume or combination of volumes to
create a coherent whole. Massing should always follow the
same order: establish the largest forms before moving to the
details. The massing processes here are only suggestions.
You’ll develop your own concepts and shortcuts, as each
drawing you do will present you with new challenges and
insights.
02 BONES constitute the fundamental structure of the figure
and dictate much of its outward appearance. It’s more important
that you develop an overall concept for general forms, rather
than try to memorize the 200-plus bones of the skeleton. For
instance, it’s more important to understand the ribcage as an
egg-like volume than it is to remember the number of ribs it has.
03 SKELETAL LANDMARKS are our spatial guides to map out
a figure because they reveal the orientation and direction of the
skeleton. It’s important that you emphasize these landmarks
because they convincingly communicate that your figures have
an internal skeletal frame holding them together.

04 OPPOSING CURVES are used to create an illusion of
movement by offering viewers a visual path to follow through an
image. An element of interpretation is necessary when studying
opposing curves because they don’t reference literal lines on
the figure. Which lines on the figure to emphasize is the choice
of each artist: the contour of a form or muscle, a shadow edge,
or an imaginary line that references the general shape of a
body part. Concepts for opposing curves for the feet and hands
have been combined with the larger forms of the legs and arms.
There is no section on opposing curves for the pelvis and
shoulder girdle because of their compact form, which makes
them more useful as transitional points for a broader system of
curves. The opposing curves of the leg are covered along with
the foot, and those for the hand are covered with the arm.
05 MASTER QUICK STUDIES bring all our accumulated
copying knowledge from Levels 1, 2, and 3 together. The
practice of copying allows us to study the processes of different
artists and gain an intimate insight into how they conceptualized
the human figure.
06 ANATOMY IN GAMES will demonstrate how classic figure
drawing concepts can be applied to video game characters.
These lessons will help you combine concepts from both
disciplines to design convincing characters, whether they’re
based on a realistic human form or something animal or
imagined.
I’ve avoided using too many technical terms, which are often
not only confusing but easily forgotten. Information about
individual muscles was simplified in favor of broader
concepts, because such information is often too finely

detailed to be of practical help in drawing for video games,
where the action is fast-paced and the characters are
normally clothed. For comprehensive information regarding
anatomy, refer to Artistic Anatomy by Dr. Paul Richer.

Let’s begin our detailed analysis of the figure with the feet, as
this is where all the force and weight of a person is directed.
We’ll study the elastic properties of the feet and anatomical
features that will help you better re-create the illusion of their
weight-bearing energy.
The volumetric concepts that follow are only suggestions. For
example, the spheres used for the head and ribcage could also be
conceptualized as boxes or cylinders. Which volumes you decide
to use can vary with each character depending on the emotions
that you want to communicate through its design.
MASSING OF THE FOOT

Whenever you draw, consider the big forms before details, as details
increase the complexity of the elements you have to consider. In drawing
the foot the first thing to note is that the form has an arched shape, most
prominently visible in the front and side view. The inside plane, where the
two feet come together, is relatively flat.
The arch connects two box-like forms at the front and back of the foot.
The bases of these box forms relate to the pads of the foot that make
contact with the ground. The shape of the front pad, in particular, is
susceptible to change because of the flexible bone structure beneath the
surface of the skin.
Avoid drawing out each toe individually, and instead conceptualize the
toes as one curved mass attached to the larger form of the foot. The
exception is the big toe, which has the most maneuverability and so is
often split from the larger mass of the toes while adhering to the overall
structure.

BONES OF THE FOOT
Six Studies of the Left Foot and One of the Shoulder by Leonardo
da Vinci (1452–1519)

The visible portion of the toes is only a third of their full length, as the
articulated bones start halfway along the foot at the metatarsals (A). The
connections between the remaining two groups of bones at (B and C)
can be traced by the bulky thickness of the joints.
The foot has several useful skeletal landmarks that you can use as
navigation points, such as the heel (D), the navicular bone (E), the cuboid
bone (F), and the hook at the base of the fifth metatarsal bone (G).
The bones of metatarsal section (A) are held together with elastic
ligaments that allow them to spread outward, together with the toes,
when weight is placed on the foot.
Note that the point at which the leg connects to the foot (H) is located
further forward than the heel (D). This is because the muscles and
tendons controlling movement of the foot require leverage. Therefore, (H)
acts as the pivot and tendons attached to either side of this point control
the pulling action.

Anatomical studies of the leg by Peter Paul Rubens

For the rapid process of blocking in a figure, particularly in the case of
action poses or people in movement, artists often indicate the foot using
a triangle shape because it matches the general form of the foot in the
side view. Rubens’s side-view drawing also illustrates the levering
mechanism of the ankle joint. The Achilles tendon (I) of the calf muscles
runs down the back of the leg to cup the heel (D) like a slingshot. The
accompanying sketch illustrates the mechanism in action. To lift the heel
the muscles of the leg (I) pull against the pivot (H). To lift the toes, the
muscles around the front leg (J) pull against the pivot (H).
SKELETAL LANDMARKS OF THE FOOT

Study of a man’s right foot and its skeleton by Albrecht Dürer,
British Museum
Notice how the internal skeleton dictates much of the external shape of
the foot. If you want to draw realistic feet (or any other part of the human
body), you’ll have to invest time in studying the skeleton.

Detail with overlay of Study of a man’s right foot and its skeleton by
Albrecht Dürer, British Museum
Dürer dedicated a lot of time to studying anatomy, so he understood the
basis of surface forms and could confidently indicate important underlying
skeletal landmarks when drawing the foot: the heel (A), the navicular
bone (B), the cuboid bone (C), and the hook at the base of the fifth
metatarsal bone (D). Suggesting skeletal landmarks is an important
element of figure drawing because they indicate the solid internal
structure holding the body together.
To align the toes correctly, Dürer drew a curved line across the bulky
joints between the metatarsals and toes. He has aligned the big toe at a
different angle to the remaining toes, demonstrating its increased
maneuverability.
The fatty pads at the base of the foot are useful tools for
communicating pressure and weight. The fatty pad that is visible on the
side of the foot at (D) squashes outward when downward pressure is
applied and is usually more pronounced on figures with more fat.
OPPOSING CURVES OF THE FOOT AND LEG

Studies for a Statue by Tintoretto (1518–1594)
Artists like Tintoretto who had expert knowledge of anatomy were
masters at combining flowing systems of opposing curves to create the
illusion of movement.
The opposing curves in Tintoretto’s sketch switch between referencing
contours, shadow edges, and internal forms (such as skeletal landmarks
and muscle). Each gesture line represents a choice by the artist in
response to the energy and movement that he perceived in the moment
of drawing.

You can deduce Tintoretto’s concept of opposing curves by the way he
has accented certain lines to give a stronger sense of rhythm and
movement. The red arrows show how Tintoretto’s lines flow across the
curved shadow of the abdomen, then on down the leg to bear down on
the foot where the weight of the figure is concentrated. These lines create
the illusion of movement by offering a path for the viewer’s eye to follow
through the image.
THE FOOT IN GAMES

Jak & Daxter: Jak
The earliest design of Jak’s feet was inspired by Greco-Roman sandals,
which separate the big toe from the rest with fabric. Because we know
that digital space has no gravity and no weight, such details have the
effect of making Jak look more grounded as his imagined body weight
pushes down and out through his feet and toes, much like the way
bristles of a paint brush spread out when pressed against a canvas.

Enslaved: Odyssey to the West: Monkey
The articulation of the big toe on Monkey from Enslaved: Odyssey to the
West adds a great deal of plasticity and life to the feet. Without that
articulation, they’d look like inanimate blocks.
MASTER QUICK STUDY OF THE FOOT

Feet of an Apostle by Albrecht Dürer
Dürer made many preparatory studies for his engravings that feature
meticulous details capable of telling a story in themselves.

When doing your study of Dürer’s feet, ignore the wrinkles and bumps
throughout the early stages and mass in the largest shapes first. Initially
use straight lines to outline each shape, which will help you with
measuring and triangulation (this page).
A good place to start is with the pads of the feet, making sure the
proportions and placement of your shapes are correct because all
subsequent elements will be constructed on top of this base. Even with
these simple indications the feet are already recognizable.
The next step is to refine your initial contours and add more detail for
the mass of the toes. Begin your shading with the strong core shadow
that separates the dominant planes of the figure’s left foot, delineating the
planes facing toward the light and those facing away. This will
automatically give a strong sense of light and form. Continue adding
descriptive hatch lines for the shading, making sure that curved forms are
correctly described with curving lines. Also note any overlapping forms,
correctly describing which form is in the foreground and which sits behind
using T-intersections.

From this point on, add as much detail as you wish. It’s a simple task
now that the largest shapes have been established.

The legs are a pleasure to draw because they feature a
prominent series of opposing curves created by a combination
of bone shapes and muscular forms.
MASSING OF THE LEG
The basic volumes of the leg can be conceptualized as two stacked
cylinders (A). When drawing the leg, your first lines establish its
proportions, noting the top of the upper leg, the knee joint, and the ankle,
and represent the bones of the upper and lower leg connecting to the
pelvis and foot at either end (B). You can then connect these points with
a spiral that wraps around the imagined cylinders behind the knee and
passes on down to the inside of the ankle (C) in a system of opposing
curves.
The section of the spiral connecting the pelvis and the knee defines a
strong plane break between the front or forward-facing plane of the leg,
and the inside plane of leg. The section of the spiral connecting the knee
with the ankle defines the outside contour of the lower leg.
The next step is to suggest the calf muscle and kneecap (D), noting
that the base of the calf is angled, as are the bones of the ankle joint.
Draw a larger circle around the kneecap to locate the muscles on the

front plane of the upper leg, which create an overhanging arch above the
kneecap. You can also run a curved line downward from the base of the
kneecap to suggest the strong plane break of the shin.
The remaining contours of the leg can then be added and the entire
length of the leg described with modified oval cross-sections (E) that take
into account the dominant planes already described.
Allegory of Abundance or Autumn by Sandro Botticelli (1445–1510),
British Museum
The basic volumes suggested for each element of the body can be

changed to suit the personal preference of the artist and the emotions
being communicated. Botticelli was known for his graceful female figures
in paintings like The Birth of Venus. His preferred volume concepts were
the softer cylinder and sphere.
In the drawing above we can see how the upper arm, forearm, and
legs have been shaded according to a cylindrical mass concept. Solid
box forms would have given the figures a heavier appearance.
BONES OF THE LEG
Bones of the lower limb by Dr. Paul Richer (1849–1933)
A common mistake for beginners is to draw the legs protruding straight
down from the pelvis. In reality, the bone of the upper leg inserts into its
socket at an angle of around 45 degrees. If the legs were attached to the

base of the pelvis it’d be extremely awkward to walk, as our legs would
rub against each other and we’d be restricted in raising our knees
forward or out to the side.
Note the slight curvature of the bone of the upper leg in the side view,
which echoes the curving contour of the thigh.
The ankle joint is composed of the topmost part of the foot (the talus) and
the bones of the lower leg, the fibula (A) and tibia (B). The bumps that we
commonly associate with the ankle are the ends of the fibula and tibia
protruding out on either side of the leg. Note that the rounded bump of
the tibia sits higher up than the bump of the fibula on the opposite side.
The tibia (B) appears to be fairly straight but the knife-like edge that is
visible as a skeletal landmark on the surface of the shin is actually
curved.
From a side view, the protruding kneecap creates an upward-facing

plane across its top while the front plane points slightly downward.
In the front view, notice how the outside plane of the knee joint is flat,
which is mirrored in the surface contours. The inside contour is more
rounded because of muscle forms that wrap around the knee.
The midpoint of the figure is at the top of the great trochanter, which is
the outermost part of the femur and is shaped like a bulb. This bulb is
visible as a dimple on the side plane of the figure.
SKELETAL LANDMARKS OF THE LEG

The Four Witches by Albrecht Dürer
Dürer has beautifully rendered the flesh of these females with a
wonderful sense of their soft and supple forms while ensuring that
important skeletal landmarks, particularly in the legs, are also indicated to
communicate a sense of solidity.

The topmost skeletal landmark of the leg is the great trochanter, which is
the bulb shape at the top of the femur. The bony protrusion creates a
dimple (A) on the surface of the skin because of muscles that radiate
around it.
Farther down you’ll find the skeletal prominence of the kneecap (B),
which sits above the knee joint. The bump located just below the
kneecap is the combined mass of the head of the tibia and a fatty pad (C)
that protects the knee.
A barely perceptible bump (D) below the knee’s mid-line represents the
head of the fibula, visible on the side plane of the knee. This skeletal
landmark becomes more pronounced when the knee is bent. The outside
ankle (E) marks the lower end of the fibula, connecting the two points
much like a splint. From here on down toward the ankle you can see the
curved edge of the tibia—the larger of the two bones of the lower leg—
highlighted in blue.
Dürer has expertly suggested the head of the tibia (F), feeling its
arched form across the top of the foot. The vertical plane of the leg has
been modeled in shadow, and the upward-facing plane of the foot is in
light.

MASTER QUICK STUDY OF THE LEG
Studies of two legs and a right arm by Michelangelo (1475–1564),
British Museum
Michelangelo had knowledge of the human form like few other artists in
history, which he gained from performing his own dissections. Luckily you
won’t need to perform any dissections to draw figures with the same
sense of solidity as Michelangelo’s figures because it is largely his
expressive use of light to model forms that gives his figures the illusion of

strength.
Despite the complexity of Michelangelo’s study, you can use the massing
concept (this page) to temporarily ignore details and block in the leg on
the left in no time at all.
The core shadow is the boundary between the light-and shadow-facing
planes. Squinting at the subject helps reduce the complexity of light and
shadow masses so that you can see the core shadow more clearly,
drawing its tangled path as it describes the forms of the leg. With only the
core shadow indicated, you’ve already created a sense of light.
What remains is to refine the contours, ensuring that lines overlap
correctly, depending on which form is in the foreground.
The final layer of shading should be descriptive of the form: curved
lines for rounded forms and straight lines for flat planes.
Michelangelo’s leg study offers the opportunity to study the different
shapes of the calf muscle when it’s resting or flexed. The human body
isn’t an entirely efficient machine. With the masses of the body stacked
up one on top of the other, the feet and ankle joints do an inordinate
amount of work to keep the figure upright. The flexed calf on the left has
a more defined shape than the relaxed calf muscle on the right.

Try the massing process on the other leg featured in the study, noting
how the mass of the leg inserts into the downward-facing plane of the
pelvis.
LEGS IN GAMES
Team Fortress 2: Pyro (Artwork courtesy of Valve Corporation)
The Pyro character from Team Fortress 2 illustrates the strong opposing
curves of the leg that are created by the flow of the antigravity muscles

that you studied in Gravity and Movement (this page). Also note the
forward tilt of the pelvis indicated by the character’s beltline and the plane
change that occurs at the knee, which has been incorporated in an
exaggerated manner. Consider featuring such exaggerations in your
designs, because the resolution at which players may eventually view
your characters may mean that nuances will be too subtle to notice.

The pelvis is the body’s second largest form—the ribcage is the
largest—and should therefore be indicated at the beginning of a
drawing, along with the ribcage and head, before details are
added. The pelvis features prominent skeletal landmarks that
wrap around the body in a 360-degree sweep and that give a
strong visual indication for the orientation and direction of the
pelvis.
MASSING OF THE PELVIS
The pelvis can be conceptualized as a tapered box form (A). The bones
of the upper leg insert in the middle of the side planes of this box. Note
that the volume of the pelvis is angled forward at around 45 degrees.
Refine the box form with the contour of the iliac crest, the curved ridge
that defines the top of the pelvis, and the downward sweep of the pubis
on the front plane (B). The upward-facing plane on the rear side of the
box form features a triangle along its center line that represents the
sacrum (C), which marks the base of the spine.
Without this simple mass concept, it would be extremely difficult to re-

create the form from imagination. But because you’ve been practicing
drawing boxes freehand you can turn the form around any way you wish.
BONES OF THE PELVIS
Pelvic bone illustrations from Artistic Anatomy by Dr. Paul Richer
(1849–1933)
When you look at these anatomical illustrations by Dr. Paul Richer, it’s
easy to see why the pelvis is generally conceptualized as a tapered box

form. The front view illustrates how the sides of the pelvis taper inward
between the curved ridge that defines the top of the pelvis and its base.
The anterior superior iliac crests are the two prominent skeletal
landmarks that you can feel if you trace your fingers across your hips,
roughly above the front pockets of your trousers.
The socket into which the upper leg fits is visible in its central position
in the side view. It faces out to the sides of the figure, not down.
The thin ridges along the top of the pelvis are prominent skeletal
landmarks that will help you position the pelvis. You can see in the side
view how they define the forward tilt of the pelvis, turning at an angle of
90 degrees to form the back plane of the pelvis.

The sacrum triangle is the curved tail shape at the base of the spine.
The three highlighted points are visible as landmarks on the surface of
the body and likewise give us a strong indication of the pelvis’s
orientation in space.
SKELETAL LANDMARKS OF THE PELVIS
Battle of the Naked Men (1465–1475) by Antonio del Pollaiuolo
The iliac crest wraps around the side planes of the pelvis from the back,
marking the top of the form where many muscles from the ribcage and
leg converge. These landmarks are easy to see in the annotated detail of
the artwork (this page).

Detail and overlay of Battle of the Naked Men by Antonio del
Pollaiuolo
The anterior superior iliac spine (A) is a skeletal landmark located on the
front plane of the pelvis at the end of the iliac crest. You can feel the
anterior superior iliac spine on either side of your hips as hard points
below the surface of the skin. The skeletal landmark of the pubis (B)
sweeps down and across the front plane of the pelvis between the two
points of the anterior superior iliac spine (A). The sartorius muscle (C) is
attached to the bony ridge of the anterior superior iliac spine (A), from
where it continues down across the front plane of the leg to attach on the
inside of the leg below the knee.
The great thing about these skeletal landmarks is that they are not
covered by muscle or significant layers of fat, and so are identifiable
points of navigation on all body types.
Following the iliac crest around the waste to the back of the figure we
find the sacral triangle, which is also known as the “devil’s tail.” It has a
curved shape when viewed from the side. You can triangulate its position
using its base and the top two points, which indicate the attachment of
the strong muscles of the back. The sacrum is an important skeletal
landmark because it clearly indicates the orientation of the pelvis.
The bulging form of the external oblique muscle (D) attaches along
much of the length of the iliac crest and is responsible for the upward-

facing plane at the waist in opposition to the downward-facing place of
the ribcage.
THE PELVIS IN GAMES
Enslaved: Odyssey to the West: Trip
The relatively hard-edged iliac crest and the downward sweep of the
pubis can be seen in contrast to the softer muscular form around Trip’s
abdomen.

The female pelvis is comparatively larger and wider than the male
pelvis. The female body also tends to store more fat across the pelvis
around the gluteus and sides of the upper leg, which softens the form of
the pelvis and accounts for Trip’s rounded silhouette. The male body
stores more fat above the pelvis, around the external oblique and
abdomen, thus exposing more of its angular form.
Vanquish: Sam Gideon wearing the Augmented Reaction Suit
Function creates form. Human anatomy has evolved to its current state
due to functional requirements, such as the system of opposing curves of

the antigravity muscles. Considering function will likewise dictate the
forms you design for your own characters or creatures.
This is true of Sam Gideon’s Augmented Reaction Suit (ARS). The
forward tilt of the pelvis is visible here in relation to the backward tilt of
the shoulder girdle, showing the balancing relationship between the
pelvis and ribcage that we explored in Gravity and Movement (this page).
MASTER QUICK STUDY OF THE PELVIS
Seated Male Nude by Egon Schiele (1890–1918)
Although this is a very stylized interpretation of the figure, Egon Schiele’s
classical training and strong anatomical knowledge are evident in the

solidity of the skeletal forms. Schiele has almost entirely ignored the
muscles of the abdomen to emphasize the hard-edged pelvis. The artistic
effect creates a strong sense of vulnerability and discomfort. Our center
of interest here is the pelvis, the box shape of which has been clearly
defined by the prominent upward-facing planes of the iliac crest that wrap
around the figure’s waist.
When drawing the human figure, the starting point is always the biggest
forms. Because the head is obscured by the figure’s arm, start with the
biggest form in the body: the ribcage. Indicate the ribcage’s spatial
orientation with axis lines. The vertical line travels down the length of the
abdomen to meet the pelvis. As you draw this line, closely observe the
relative height of the ribcage in relation to the abdomen to establish good
proportions.
Follow along by drawing the pelvis, head, and legs, using simple lines.
Your eye should be on the extremities, making sure the alignment of the
ribcage and pelvis is correct. You can add the guidelines to the drawing
for accuracy.
Schiele has explicitly conceptualized several other forms of the body
as simple shapes, which make the figure easier to draw. These include
the circular shapes of the chest and lower abdomen, the latter defining

the downward sweeping curve of the pubis. The remaining forms are
easy to fill in once the dominant volumes are established. You can add
simple layers of shading to match Schiele’s strongly silhouetted figure.

The ribcage is the largest mass of the body and therefore the
most important. Artistic anatomy is more concerned with the
volume that best describes the overall form of the ribcage than
it is with anatomical accuracy and the exact number of ribs on
the ribcage. When drawing the ribcage you have to also think
about the spine, which supports the weight of the ribcage and
connects it to the pelvis and head.
MASSING OF THE SPINE AND RIBCAGE

The basic shape of the ribcage is egg-like. It helps to draw a central axis
onto this basic egg-form to indicate its orientation (A). You can also add
an oval to the top of this volume to position the base of the neck.
Refine the volume of the ribcage by drawing the soft inverted V-shape
(B) that describes the base of the ribs and that continues around the form
to the spine at the back.
As you make further refinements, note that the volume of the ribcage is
flatter in back and rounder in front, where it accommodates the lungs (C).
The two lines traveling downward and outward from the base of the neck

define the front plane of the ribcage.
The cylindrical column of the spine attaches to the ribcage along an S-
curve, ending with a tail at its base to form the sacrum triangle (D).
BONES OF THE SPINE AND RIBCAGE
Skeleton of the trunk from Artistic Anatomy by Dr. Paul Richer
(1849–1933)
Proportionally the ribcage is two heads high, two heads wide, and one
head deep. The sternum, located between the ribs on the front plane, is
one head in height.

The relative angle between the apex at the back and front of the ribcage
is indicated by line (A). The dominant plane break is indicated along (B).
Notice the overall orientation of the ribcage, which is tipped backward in
opposition to the forward tilt of the pelvis.
The sternum (C) is a useful skeletal landmark that defines the central
line of the ribcage. Another useful skeletal landmark is the inverted V-
shaped opening at the front of the ribcage.

Vertebral column from Artistic Anatomy by Dr. Paul Richer (1849–
1933)
You can see here how the spine becomes steadily wider from top to
bottom, where it has more weight from the upper body to support. Artists
tend to exaggerate this widening at the base to communicate a stronger
sense of weight. Notice how the shape of the spine dips in and under the
ribcage and head at sections (B) and (D), which are the two dominant
forms it supports. The spine attaches to the sacrum triangle at its base.

The spine has different levels of flexibility. Its seventh cervical vertebrae
(A) is an important skeletal landmark that marks the border between the
flexible neck (B) and the part of the spine that attaches to the ribcage (C),
which has the least amount of flexibility.
You can feel the difference in flexibility between (B) and (C) by placing
your hand on the back of the lower neck and rotating your head and then
on the middle part of your spine at the ribcage. A similar increase in
flexibility occurs between the ribcage and pelvis (D).
The tail-shaped sacral triangle (E) inserts into the pelvis. Its curvature

and three skeletal landmarks make it a useful place to indicate the
orientation of the pelvis.
SKELETAL LANDMARKS OF THE SPINE AND
RIBCAGE
St. Albert by José de Ribera (1591–1652)

In this depiction of St. Albert, José de Ribera drew the ribcage from a top-
down view. He simplified the task of drawing the difficult view of the
ribcage by conceptualizing it as a spherical form. It’s suggested by the
curved contour of the back, which is continued behind the arm and up
and down the side of the figure.
To orient this spherical form and give it a direction, Ribera indicated the
vertical and horizontal axis of the sternum (A) that runs down the middle
of the ribcage. He also made sure to include the skeletal landmarks at
(B), which mark a direction change between the front and side planes of
the ribcage. The solidity of the ribcage means that the triangle connecting
points (A) and (B) is fixed, no matter what action the figure is performing.
On the figure’s side, the downward-facing planes of the lower ribcage
meet the upward-facing plane of the external oblique muscle at point (C).


Study of a Male Figure Seen from Behind by Peter Paul Rubens
Rubens teaches us that maintaining the solidity of the ribcage is much
more important than drawing its details, which should always support the
bigger forms.
He created the illusion of a solid ribcage by drawing a nearly
continuous line around its spherical form. The soft transition of light
across the back reinforces its curved shape. He used the spine and the
skeletal landmark of the sacral triangle to give the ribcage and pelvis a
direction.
OPPOSING CURVES OF THE SPINE AND

RIBCAGE
Enslaved: Odyssey to the West: Monkey
Taking time to establish a flow of opposing curves through the forms is
essential to create a realistic sense of life and movement. Although the
basic volume of the ribcage is fairly simple, the myriads of muscles that

overlay and attach to it make the task of drawing it somewhat of a
technical challenge.
The illusion of energy in Monkey’s pose has a lot to do with the parallel
curves of the spine and the latissimus dorsi (purple) and deltoid (blue)
muscles. The latissimus dorsi is a particularly useful surface feature that
can link elements of the figure together because of its large size and the
way it wraps around the length of the back up to the arm.
You should take the time to study these muscles in detail once you’re
confident drawing the mass of the ribcage from every angle.
MASTER QUICK STUDY OF THE SPINE AND
RIBCAGE

Study of the Female Nude by Alphonse Mucha (1860–1939)
This study by Alphonse Mucha is a great example of how much you can
say with just a few simple lines. Master Japanese painter and printmaker
Katsushika Hokusai (1760–1849) summarized the artistic pursuit of
simplicity beautifully: “At seventy-three, I learned a little about the real
structure of animals, plants, birds, fishes, and insects. Consequently
when I am eighty I’ll have made more progress. At ninety I’ll have
penetrated the mystery of things. At a hundred I shall have reached
something marvelous, but when I am a hundred and ten everything I do,
the smallest dot, will be alive.”
Mucha missed Hokusai’s life goal by twenty-one years, but
nonetheless achieved a level of subtlety that few artists can match.
In your study of the central figure in Mucha’s composition, first block in
the head, then use it to measure out and mark the relative proportions
and placement of the ribcage and pelvis, using the neck and spine as
attachment points. Indicate the central axis lines of each form to establish
their relative orientation to one another.
Mucha used very subtle marks to communicate skeletal and muscular
landmarks: the sternomastoid muscle, which runs across the neck from
below the ear to the clavicle, was suggested with two lines; the short line
at the armpit represents the pectoralis muscle and travels vertically to
attach to the figure’s upraised arms.
Working down the figure, add the central line of the abdominal muscle

and base of the ribcage followed by the contours of the pelvis between
the skeletal landmarks of the anterior superior iliac spine.
Once these large skeletal forms are established you can consider the
softer fleshy forms that overlay them. Most relevant to this study are the
figure’s breasts and external oblique muscles, which are drawn with lines
that overlap our initial volumes.
The initial shapes that you put down to indicate the head, ribcage, and
pelvis can be lightened or removed entirely with the eraser at any
moment, but it’s important that the contour lines that you put in their place
echo their shapes.
THE SPINE AND RIBCAGE IN GAMES

Assassin’s Creed II: Kristen Bell
In the character model of Kristen Bell from Assassin’s Creed II you can
see the inverted V-shape at the base of the ribcage and the central
groove separating the abdominal muscles. Two other skeletal landmarks
are visible: the iliac crest of the pelvis suggested by the folds and
stitching of Kristen’s top and the skeletal landmark of the clavicles, which
you’ll investigate on this page.

Enslaved: Odyssey to the West: Enemy Robot
The function of the inverted V at the base of the ribcage allows us to
bring our chest down toward our toes. Without this V-shaped opening you
would be restricted in this action because the skeletal forms of the
ribcage would pinch the abdomen.
Because this robot from Enslaved: Odyssey to the West is meant to
move in a human-like manner it has the V-shaped opening as well as a
flexible midriff that references the flexible abdomen and lower section of
the spine.
Notice the similarity of the robot’s pelvis to the human pelvis in its
tapered box-shape, and the opposing curves throughout the forms of the
legs. It’s easy to see from this example how knowledge of human
anatomy can be used to create convincing characters from imagination.

The shoulder girdle is the convoluted skeletal link connecting
the bones of the upper arm to the torso. It is composed of the
shoulder blades, acromion process (the flat skeletal form that is
located directly above the arm), and clavicles. The shoulder
blades are an extension of the upper arm and follow the arm
around wherever it goes. The shoulders are very expressive of
emotions because of the free movement the shoulder girdle
affords—pulled back to express confidence, dropped forward
for protection and to express vulnerability.
MASSING OF THE SHOULDER GIRDLE

In the front view a straight horizontal line establishes the plane break
between the front plane of the chest and the top plane of the shoulder
girdle. This line can be continued around to the back and the shoulder
blades to complete the upward-facing plane of the upper body (A). This
top plane should be tilted backward to echo the backward tilt of the
ribcage, in opposition to the forward tilt of the pelvis. The shoulder blades
have a thin, curved form when viewed from the side as they fit snuggly
over the rounded ribcage. Their basic shape is a triangle (B).
A downward-pointing triangle at the pit of the neck indicates the inside

edge of the clavicles and the top of the sternum (C), which is drawn with
a vertical line. The T-shape that these lines create communicates the
orientation and direction of the ribcage. The shoulder girdle’s primary
function is to allow for free movement of the upper arm, to which the
clavicles and shoulder blades are fastened. The pivot point for the
shoulder is located at the inside edge of the clavicles. The clavicles move
in relation to the arms, so the T-shape may turn into a Y if both arms are
raised.
BONES OF THE SHOULDER GIRDLE
Skelatal studies by Bernhard Siegfried Albinus
Knowledge of the skeleton is extremely important because it dictates
much of the outward forms of the body. Knowing the location of skeletal
landmarks lets us communicate direction and structural solidity of the
figure.

The construction of the shoulder girdle allows the shoulder blades to float
above the ribcage, giving our arms a wide range of maneuverability. The
pivot point of the shoulder girdle is located at the inside edge of the
clavicles (C) and (D), where they attach to the sternum (B). The acromion
process (E) is oriented at a right angle to the clavicles (A) in its position
above the bone of the upper arm.

Our shoulder blades have a spine (line F to G), which is a useful skeletal
landmark because it’s a good indication of what the shoulders are doing
beneath the surface of the skin as they follow the movements of the
upper arm to which they are connected.
The base of the shoulder blades is particularly visible when the arm is
pulled back, causing the shoulder blade to literally lift off the surface of
the ribcage. Indicating the points (F), (G), and (H) allows you to
triangulate the position of the shoulder blades.
(H) is where the teres major muscle attaches, linking the shoulder
blade and the bone of the upper arm. This is just one of several
connecting muscles between the two forms. To pull our arms back, we

must push our shoulder blades inward. To pull our arm forward the
shoulder blade must follow, moving away from the spine.
The shoulder blades are larger than most people think: approximately
half the height of the ribcage. In the front view they can be seen
extending out beyond the mass of the ribcage, seen as a triangular
shape below points (A) and (E), to connect with the upper arm.
SKELETAL LANDMARKS OF THE SHOULDER
GIRDLE

The Baptism of Christ by Luca Cambiaso

The shoulder girdle has many useful landmarks that will help you
communicate the action of the arm and orientation of the ribcage. With a
simple straight line between points (A) and (B) Luca Cambiaso defined
the clavicles and established the upward plane of the shoulders. At (C)
he drew a V and a small vertical line to indicate the inside edge of the
clavicles and sternum, giving direction to the ribcage to which these
forms are attached. The line that goes behind the head is the contour
created by the trapezius muscle.
The figure on the left has his arm pulled forward, which
correspondingly causes the shoulder blade to slide over the form of the
ribcage, away from the spine in pursuit of the arm. Cambiaso has
triangulated its position with a contour line and the shadow edge that
continues into the arm.
THE SHOULDER GIRDLE IN GAMES

Crysis 2: Nanosuit 2
The spine of the shoulder blades (A), the acromion process (B), clavicles
(C), and the sternum (D), have all been clearly incorporated here into the
Nanosuit 2. Note how the plane created between these points is tilted
backward in the side view, echoing the backward tilt of the ribcage.

The skeletal landmarks are instrumental in giving the suit its visual
strength. Without them the character would look unstable and lack a solid
structure to keep it upright.
In the front view the silhouette of the trapezius muscle travels behind
the neck in an arc between points (B). The majority of aggressive
characters have an overly developed trapezius because this muscle
stabilizes the neck when the head is punched and adds a sense of
belligerence to their appearance.
MASTER QUICK STUDY OF THE SHOULDER
GIRDLE

Fighting Men by Raphael
Examples of the shoulder girdle in action are in abundance in this study
by Raphael. Make a quick study of the prostrate figure in Raphael’s
composition, whose right arm is pulled forward and up in self-defense.
Raphael would have been perfectly capable of creating this drawing from
imagination, as would all the Masters featured here. You too can draw
such convincing figures from imagination if you take the time to learn the
proportion systems and massing concepts in this book.

The most prominent skeletal landmarks of the prostrate figure are the
sternum (A), clavicles (B), and acromion process (C).
After establishing the head and ribcage, note that the contour line of
the acromion process and spine of the figure’s right shoulder blade
intersect with his face just below the nose. Raphael has used the concept
of atmospheric perspective (see this page) to fade the contour line before
it disappears behind the head to emphasize that the form sits further
back in space in relation to the face.
The figure’s right clavicle is at a steeper angle than his left,
emphasizing the angle of his right shoulder’s defensive position.

The process of drawing arms is similar to that used for legs.
Both the legs and arms have interesting spiraling rhythms
linking their forms. This spiraling placement of forms is
essential to create movement.
MASSING OF THE ARM
The quickest way to mass the arm is to conceptualize it as two cylinders
(A). Begin with simple gestural lines to indicate the direction of the lower
and upper arm using various curves and cross-sections depending on the
action of the arm.
A more advanced mass concept for the arm is to reduce its volumes to
a series of interconnecting box and spherical forms intersecting one
another at roughly 90 degrees (B). For the final stage, refine these basic
volumes, noting the way they attach to one another (C). The top box
represents the deltoid muscle. The base of this form tapers to insert
between the muscles below. A similar tapering and insertion happens
across the pit of the elbow between the box form directly above the elbow
joint and the spherical form below.

BONES OF THE ARM
Arm study by Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519)
In Gravity and Movement you saw how the opposing placement of
antigravity muscles up and down the body is fundamental to the action of
walking. This system of opposing curves penetrates down to the bones,
since this is where the muscles attach. You can see this in the drawing
above in the way Leonardo drew the spiraling shape of the humerus,
which is the bone of the upper arm; see (A) in the next illustration.

Here you can see the action of the two bones of the forearm. When the
palm of your hand is turned so that it faces up or forward, the radius (B)
and ulna (C) sit parallel to each other.
When the wrist is twisted so that the palm faces down or backward, the
two bones twist over each other to create an X-shape (D). This action is
visible on the surface of the skin because of several skeletal landmarks
that we’ll study in the following drawings.
SKELETAL LANDMARKS OF THE ARM

Study of Drapery by Alphonse Mucha

The skeletal landmarks of the arm concentrate around the area between
the elbow and wrist. The hard skeletal form that we think of as the elbow
is the large end of the ulna (A). The ulna has a second landmark, which
is the skeletal bump on the top outside edge of the wrist (B). The line that
links these two points together traces the path of the ulna below the
surface of the skin.
Two smaller skeletal landmarks (C) and (D) indicate the extremities of
the humerus bone, which hold the end of the ulna (A) in place. The edge
of the ulna and the tendons of the triceps create a strong plane break
along the line indicated down the back of the upper arm.

Human Skeleton by Govert Bidloo
This detail from an engraving by Govert Bidloo is included here because
it shows the connection between the ulna and humerus bone. You can
clearly see the ulna and its skeletal landmark where it slots into the
wrench-like shape of the humerus bone. Look for these bones as skeletal
landmarks at the elbows of the female figures in Mucha’s drawing, below
and opposite.

MASTER QUICK STUDY OF THE ARM
Study of Clasped Hands, for Heaven (1895–1916) by John Singer
Sargent, Boston Public Library
This drawing of arms and clasped hands by John Singer Sargent is
beautifully simple and yet it still has a powerful sense of strength and
form. The three-step study opposite will show you how Sargent achieved
this.

Illustration (A) demonstrates the first step of the study. Working from top
to bottom, start with a tapered box for the deltoid muscle. Below this
tapered box form place another box, intersecting it with the one above at
an angle of approximately 90 degrees. The last set of volumes mass the
lower arm, featuring cylinder and box forms, which overlap to
communicate depth.
Because the muscle groups are conceptualized as separate volumes
it’s easier to understand why the contour of the deltoid overlaps the
contour of the triceps, as the triceps sit further back in space. Further
down you see additional overlap where the contour of the forearm
overlaps the outside edge of the triceps to indicate that the upper arm is
further back in space than the forearm. Run a line indicating the core
shadow along the dominant plane breaks of the upper arm (B), as
Sargent has done. This gesture alone already increases the sense of
light and form, but the addition of quick, diagonal shading for the shadow
planes completes the illusion. Finish by refining the contour lines and
adding overlapping T-intersections that communicate a stronger sense of
depth (C).
THE ARM IN GAMES

Gears of War 2: Berserker
You can clearly see the twisting action of the Berserker’s forearm, caused
by the orientation of the downward-facing palm. Starting at the skeletal
landmarks of the elbow, these surface forms twist around the lower arm
toward the wrist, suggesting the same underlying skeletal mechanism
that Leonardo drew in his study of the bones of the arm on this page.
The Berserker’s design also references the anatomy of the upper arm
with the 90-degree intersection between the deltoid muscle and the
combined mass of the biceps and triceps below. The majority of the
muscle fibers have been clearly defined, making them look like they’re
bursting at the seams. (photo credit 4.1)

Prince of Persia
Prince of Persia features excellent lighting that models the planes of the
figures, much like the lighting used by the Masters. The arm in this
screenshot resembles the study by Sargent on this page.

A core shadow runs down the length of the arm, defining the insertion of
the deltoid in between the triceps and biceps. It then turns to wrap across
the triceps before continuing down to the wrist. On its way down, it
breaks at two important landmarks: the base of the lateral head of the
triceps (A) and the skeletal landmarks of the humerus and ulna at the
elbow (B).
The upper arm was modeled asymmetrically with the apex of the
contour for the triceps on the back of the arm located higher than the
apex of the biceps on the front of the arm. When the upper arm is flexed,
the relative positions are reversed.

In comparison to the other anatomical forms we’ve investigated
so far, the hands are a collection of very small forms, the
intricacy and flexibility of which make them a very expressive
feature of the human body.
MASSING OF THE HAND
The quickest way to suggest the hand is with a petal shape (A), the tip of
which is located off center to indicate the position of the long middle
finger. Cut this petal shape in half with a curved line to indicate the
placement of the knuckles. The form of the thumb overlaps the base of
the palm at roughly a 45-degree angle.
To add volume, turn the bulk of the hand into a series of arched box

forms that taper toward the fingers (B).
Keep in mind that the hands are much simpler to draw if you treat the
fingers as one mass, rather than drawing each finger individually. We
took the same approach in combining the toes to enhance the feeling of a
coherent, solid mass. Common exceptions are the index and little fingers,
which are the most maneuverable of the fingers and help communicate
the expressive actions of the hand (C). Notice that fingernails have not
been considered, as they are a detail that is secondary to the overall
mass conception.
The thumb can also be conceptualized using box forms, but its base
(where it attaches to the palm) is closer in shape to an elongated sphere.
Another prominent form is located on the opposite side of the palm
across from the thumb. When tensed, this mass of muscle and fat,
together with the thumb, allows you to cup your hand.
BONES OF THE HAND

The segments of the fingers, known as the metacarpals (A) and
phalanges (B), (C), and (D), are responsible for the skeletal landmarks
on the surface of the hand. You can see how the bulky joints of the bones
create the concertina-like shape of the fingers. Notice how the alignment
of the joints describes the curved form of the hand.
Michelangelo’s study also features the styloid process of the ulna (E)
and the smaller skeletal landmark of the radius (F), which are useful
landmarks for describing the orientation of the wrist.
We often think of classical artworks as “realistic,” but in fact they were
very stylized and unique to each artist. It’s interesting to note that
Michelangelo used a simpler mass concept for the upper arm than did
Sargent (see this page). Sargent’s core shadow snakes its way down
across the deltoid and biceps; Michelangelo’s drops down almost
uninterrupted. Also compare this mass concept for the arm to the
Botticelli artwork on this page. These are great examples of just how
open representing anatomy is to artistic expression.

Study of a left arm and the bones of a left arm by Michelangelo,
British Museum
SKELETAL LANDMARKS OF THE HAND

Right and left hand: outside view in profile by Albrecht Dürer, Saxon
State Library, Dresden

The joints of the fingers serve us perfectly in simplifying the mass of the
hand if we link them together to create a larger shape, as opposed to
drawing each finger individually. Here Dürer linked the skeletal landmarks
of the knuckles with a curved line starting just below the joint of the
thumb (A) and ending at (B). The tip of the thumb is roughly aligned to
the first joint of the little finger after the knuckle.
Another landmark that you looked at already is the styloid process at
the end of the ulna (C). On the opposite side of the wrist is the smaller
skeletal landmark at the outside edge of the radius bone (D).
OPPOSING CURVES OF THE ARM AND HAND

Study for the Battle of Cascina by Michelangelo

Artists sometimes use the spherical form at the base of the thumb in
opposition to the curved contour of the fingers to create a flow of
opposing curves, as Michelangelo has done here.
Make a quick study to find the opposing curves flowing throughout the
figure, wrapping around the head, over the shoulders, and down to the
legs. Note the opposing curves between the triceps and biceps.
MASTER QUICK STUDY OF THE HAND

Sketch for Achilles and Chiron (MFA Rotunda), 1917–1921 by John
Singer Sargent, Museum of Fine Arts, Boston
Preparatory drawings are fascinating to study because they reveal the
thought process of the artist. In this study, Sargent drew two versions of
the same hand. The upper drawing is less developed and reveals how he
conceptualized the clenched hand as a modified box form with a top and
front plane.
If you follow Sargent’s lead and begin with a block in combining all the
fingers into one mass, you’ll see how useful this approach is in
simplifying the otherwise complex elements of the hand.
Since you’re not considering individual fingers but the segments
between the knuckles as a whole, measuring is made easier using

triangulation and positive shapes.
Lighting such a simple mass is straightforward since the planes that
face toward and away from the light are clearly defined. Once you have
the general mass of the fingers blocked in and shaded appropriately, the
fingers should fall nicely into place. Beginners often forget to draw a side
plane for the fingers, which makes the fingers look two-dimensional.
THE HAND IN GAMES

Team Fortress 2: Medic (Artwork courtesy of Valve Corporation)
Team Fortress 2 features some of the best lighting in the business when
it comes to modeling form. Individual planes that face in the same
general direction, such as the fingers, are shaded with the same value,
which subdues individual contours and groups them into one unified
plane.
The proportions of the hands, like the feet, can be enlarged to add a
greater sense of weight, as here with the Medic.
Fable 3, ©Microsoft Game Studios, 2010
In these concept sketches for Fable 3 you can see just how expressive
the hands are in communicating much of the personality of the character
to which they belong. From left to right, the characters’ hands
communicate determination, strength, authority, stubbornness, and
snobbish refinement.

The head is the third largest form of the body, after the ribcage
and pelvis. Its overall shape should be your primary concern in
establishing the solid skeletal form of the skull that it
represents. The facial features are of secondary interest and
allow you to fine-tune the emotions that have already been
established in the broader concepts of the pose and larger
volumes of your characters.
MASSING THE HEAD AND NECK

The best approximation of the head’s form is a sphere that represents the
back of the head. Further refine this mass concept by slicing off the sides
of the sphere to define the side planes of the head. Draw a crosshair
across the front plane of the face to indicate the direction that the head is
facing. The vertical line indicates the central axis of the face, and the
horizontal line indicates the brow. Deciding whether the brow line curves
up or down is very important, as this communicates whether you’re
looking at the head from above or below. This combined mass can be
placed atop the cylindrical volume of the neck.

From here you can divide the vertical axis of the front plane into thirds,
indicating the hairline (or top of the forehead), brow, and underside of the
nose and chin. Note that the scalp extends beyond the top of the hairline.
A common perspective mistake is to forget that all parallel lines of an
object should converge to an imaginary vanishing point, so be sure these
indications converge in a believable way.

The downward plane of the eye sockets is chiseled out of the mass,
much as a sculptor would do working with stone. Draw a curved line from
the quarter mark on the side of the head and down to the chin to suggest
the forms of the cheekbones.
Notice how the round form of the teeth and jaw is suggested simply by
connecting the cheekbones with a curved line. A curved line likewise
defines the forehead, linking the temples on either side of the front plane.
This volume is the first thing to consider when drawing the head
because all facial features overlay this dominant mass. Practice the
above process repeatedly, drawing the head in every possible
orientation, and you’ll soon find yourself drawing heads from imagination.
Complete this massing stage by attaching the ears, which can be
conceptualized as tapered box forms attached behind the vertical center
line of the head on the side planes.
MASSING THE EYES, MOUTH, AND NOSE

You should always be conscious of the spherical form of the eyeball
when drawing the eyelids. Eyelids have a thickness to them that causes
the upper eyelid to cast a shadow onto the sphere of the eyeball as it
wraps around the form. Beginners often have the idea that the whites of
the eyes are indeed white and automatically ignore any visible shadows
cast by the eyelids. It’s better to think of the eyeball as a colorless sphere
and shade it just like the spherical form that we studied in Advanced
Lighting and Values on this page.

Keep in mind that the lips overlay the cylindrical mass of the teeth. As
Andrew Loomis wrote in Drawing the Head and Hands, “To impress upon
yourself what the roundness of this area is like, take a bite out of a piece
of bread and study it. You will probably never draw lips flatly again.”
Note that the outside corners of the mouth are drawn softly to reflect
the curved forms on either side of the lips. The bottom lip can be
described as an upward, light-facing plane. Rather than draw an ugly and
unrealistic contour line around the bottom lip, suggest the shadow below
it. The lower lip magically appears without being explicitly defined.

The box form of the nose should be placed along the central vertical axis
of the face. The top plane of the nose changes from hard skeletal forms
to softer masses at the base. These changes can be described by
varying the weight of the line that describes the contour.
A feature of the nose that is greatly overlooked is that of the nasalis
muscle (highlighted in red), which sits just above the outward forms of the
nostrils. This muscle is emphasized when a person is snarling. The
nasalis muscle and the intersections between forms break the otherwise
straight contour of the nose.
Key to making the nose appear as if it is protruding is the core shadow
that travels around the edges at the base of the nose, creating the effect
of reflected light for the downward-facing plane.
BONES OF THE HEAD AND NECK


Engraving of the human skull by William Miller (1818–1871)
The hardness or softness of the line (A) that defines the front and side
planes of the head varies along its length depending on whether it is
describing bone or softer fleshy forms.
The most abrupt transitions between light and shadow are always
where the bone is nearest the surface at skeletal landmarks. On the skull
these are found along the edge of the nose (D), the temples (E), the
cheekbone (F), the mastoid process behind the ear canal (G), and the
temporal line (H).

The nasal bridge, or glabella (C), is loosely defined by the top of the
nasal bone and the inside corners of the eyebrows on the surface of the
skin. You can see in the side view that this plane is downward-facing and
therefore often in shadow.
The angle of the cheekbone (B), which wraps around the eye sockets,
varies wildly between people and ethnicities.
The cylindrical volume of the teeth and overlaying muscles define the
shape of the muzzle (indicated as a blue oval). It’s difficult to fully
appreciate the exact volumes of the head based on these two-
dimensional etchings, which is why it’s important to find yourself a model
of a skull to study firsthand (a very popular source of anatomy models for
artists is www.anatomytools.com).
SKELETAL LANDMARKS OF THE HEAD AND
NECK
Proportion Studies by Leonardo da Vinci
Every classical artist had their own system of proportions, which gave
them the ability to create figures from imagination. The sketchbooks of
the Old Masters are filled with studies like the one above, where
Leonardo noted the general alignment of various landmarks to make
memorizing them easier.

As you learned in the massing exercises on this page, the face, or front
plane of the head, can be divided vertically into thirds using the hairline,
brow, nose, and chin as landmarks. You can also see here that Leonardo
drew a line from the inside corner of the eye (A) to the outermost edge of
the nose as a way to remember the relative alignment between these two
features. Another vertical line links the left edge of the iris with the
outside corners of the mouth (B). The ears align with the brow line (C)
and the tip of the nose (D).
On the side of the head, Leonardo aligned the ear behind the
centerline of the head (E).
The sternomastoid muscle (F) emerges from behind the ear, wraps
around the cylinder of the neck, and attaches to the inside edge of the
clavicles. The sternomastoid muscles can be thought of as rubber bands
that connect the head to the torso so that we can move our head from
side to side and tilt it forward.
OPPOSING CURVES OF THE HEAD AND NECK


Study of a Bust of Vitellius by Tintoretto (1518–1594)
One of the great exercises to build confidence in drawing the head and
its rhythms is to make copies of ancient Greek and Roman sculptures.
Tintoretto did many such drawings of the Roman Emperor Vitellius (AD
15–69) because he had a copy of a classical sculpture depicting the
emperor’s head in his studio.
Because the general mass of the head is such a compact form, you’d
think that there is little room for creating a flow of opposing curves. But
you can see here how Tintoretto expertly selected and emphasized lines
that would help guide a viewer’s eye around the form.
MASTER QUICK STUDY OF THE MALE HEAD

Study of a Bust of Vitellius by Tintoretto (1518–1594), British
Museum
Practice your massing concept for the head by studying this second
drawing of Emperor Vitellius by Tintoretto.

Six-Stage Gesture Process for Tintoretto’s Head
01 The start of every drawing is the most important because it
is the foundation for successive steps. The first oval indicating
the general shape of the head should be observed accurately
and drawn with precision. Does the head have a tall, narrow
oval shape? Or is it more angular and square? Step back and
consider the head’s overall shape to avoid distraction from
details. You’ll be surprised at the variety of head shapes once
you look more closely.

02 Tintoretto’s head is tilted to the right and has a slightly boxy
shape, so draw your first shape with these two observations in
mind. Then divide the head with a center axis cut into thirds,
noting that the top third, representing the forehead, is smaller
on our subject than either of the two thirds below.
Locate the position of the ears, which should sit between the
brow and the base of the nose. Because we’re looking slightly
up at the figure, the ears appear lower down. Don’t refrain from
drawing guidelines. The Old Masters used them to align facial
features, as you can see in many of their drawings.

03The goal of this stage is to establish the largest planes of the
head. Tintoretto fixed the light source from the upper left of the
drawing, placing the figure’s left and downward-facing planes in
shadow.
A common beginner’s mistake is to create spotty patches of
shadow isolated within the dominant light-facing planes.
Strongly define the light-facing front plane of the face from the
sides of the head by shading the sides lightly with an even tone
to reinforce your volumetric concept. Make a habit of modeling
the mass of the head in this way in all your drawings to create a
strong sense of three dimensions, even if such form-defining
light is not clearly visible on the model.

04 Our next step is to block in the second largest set of shadow
planes, which includes the arches of the eyes, the base of the

nose, the upper lip, and the underside of the lower lip. Work
lightly and make adjustments to your drawing as you progress.
Block in the eye socket by using shadow shapes and useful
landmarks, such as the inside and outside corners of the eye.
Rather than drawing curved lines to block in the shapes, break
down contours into a series of straight lines, which are easier to
triangulate.
Core shadows are especially useful in defining the various
shapes that make up the head. Varying the pressure of the
pencil to create darker or lighter lines is a great shortcut in
suggesting hard and soft plane breaks, which are the points
where the form turns away from the light.
Every line put down is mirrored on both sides of the central
axis. Use your measuring tools to check that the placement of
each line is as accurate as possible. The most useful tool that
trumps all others is squinting because it helps simplify the
subtler modulations of shadow and light into bigger, unified
shapes.

05 Once the facial features are blocked in, begin refining your
drawing by selecting an anchor point—the center of interest—
like an eye. Here, go with the left eye.
Develop the eye socket, making sure that every line you
place to indicate the eyelids describes the spherical form of the
eyeball.
Work the shadow mass of the left eye until you feel it’s
correct, as it will be your anchor point against which all other
shapes and volumes of the head will be judged. When you’re
satisfied with the accuracy of your anchor point, tentatively work
on an adjacent area on the face, such as the nose or glabella,
using the spiraling process (this page).
The glabella, the downward-facing plane between the eyes,
is extremely important in getting a likeness of the figure. Draw
this shape incorrectly—too wide or too thin, for instance—and
the person’s face takes on a completely different character.

06 Notice how important the core shadow is to giving the
feeling that the brow and nose protrude. If you merely suggest
the core shadow with a darker line or shadow mass, then the
remaining shadow area automatically begins to look like it
receives reflected light, making the facial features pop forward.
The hair should be conceptualized in the same way as the
eyeballs: as a colorless volume. It doesn’t matter, for instance,
if your model’s hair is black. The hair is an extension of the
mass of the head, so should therefore be shaded to describe
the head’s major volumes.
Finish by adding some accents of two or three sharp, dark
lines concentrated around whichever area you want viewers to
focus on in a portrait. In Western figurative art the center of
interest was traditionally the left eye because those of us who
read from left to right will usually “read” it as the dominant eye.
Avoid giving equal importance to both eyes to give viewers a

single eye to focus on, as people naturally do during
conversation.
MASTER QUICK STUDY OF THE FEMALE HEAD
Study of a Woman’s Head by Leonardo da Vinci
Have a go at copying this beautifully subtle drawing by Leonardo da
Vinci. Use the same process you did for the male head, although it’s
worth noting the way in which Leonardo has rendered the female head
with softer and more rounded features in contrast to Tintoretto’s relatively

angular male head.
The head in Leonardo’s drawing is more spherical than the boxy male
head by Tintoretto. Leonardo described the head’s volume with a core
shadow that runs almost vertically across the cheek (A) and the reflected
light on the underside of the chin (B).
The ear was shaded to conform to the head’s overall shape, with only
the light-facing top plane indicated. This has an added effect of
maintaining focus on the facial features, which are the center of interest.
Rounder features are a general characteristic of female heads. The
chin, for instance, tends to be more curved in females, although it’s still
important to define the front and side planes of the head with a change in
direction at (C). The female figure also tends to have a longer neck,

which is a feature that can be exaggerated for a swanlike effect.
Leonardo did not draw the sternomastoid muscles on either side of the
neck, which gives it a more delicate appearance. In the eyes, Leonardo
offset the placement of the pupil within the iris to indicate perspective.
What makes this drawing so delicate is that the value contrasts are
subdued. The model would likely have had at least a few wrinkles on her
face, especially the lines that run down on either side of the nostrils to the
corners of the mouth. Emphasizing wrinkles often makes figures look
much older than they are, so ignore labial folds and eye crinkles
altogether when drawing children.
THE HEAD AND NECK IN GAMES
Uncharted 2: Elena Fisher (Artwork courtesy of SCE)
Although the shape of Elena’s head is rounded, the front and side planes
are defined with light and shadow to give the face a strong sense of three
dimensions. You can see the plane break between front and side plane
by following the shadow line that runs along the edge of the forehead,
along the cheek, and down toward the chin. This line is mirrored on either
side of the face.

The front plane of the face starts at the hairline (A), down each side of
forehead, running around the eye sockets, over the cheekbones, and
down to the chin. The sternomastoid muscles on either side of Elena’s
neck are indicated by the lines starting at the inside edge of the clavicles
(B) to which they connect. Even though you can’t see the ribcage in this
close-up view, the orientation of the head in relation to the torso is made
clear due to the alignment of the head and chin in relation to the clavicles
(B).

Team Fortress 2: Concept art for Medic
In contrast to Elena’s head, the Medic from Team Fortress 2 is much
more angular, particularly at the chin. The excellent “classical” lighting of
the game was evidently considered in the concept art stage and defines
the front and side planes of the head much like the study by Tintoretto
(this page).

The human face has the highest concentration of muscles of
any animal, which allows us to articulate a wide and subtle
range of emotions. But a character’s ability to express the
whole range of basic emotions relies on a minimum of four
specific areas of the face: the forehead, the eyebrows, the
eyes, and mouth.

Self Portrait, Frowning by Rembrandt van Rijn (1606–1669)
Rembrandt was a master in creating subtle facial expressions thanks to
his many self-portraits. Note that several important lines are key to
communicating the emotion of anger in this expression: vertical frown
folds (A), a flat brow (B), the downward slope of the upper eyelid,
wrinkling and widening of the nose, and flat, pursed lips (C).
Rembrandt would have created this study by observing himself in a
mirror. Modern-day artists and animators always have a mirror on hand
and continually use it for reference.

Little Big Planet: Sackboy/Sackgirl
Sackboy/Sackgirl in Little Big Planet doesn’t even have a nose or eyelids
but is still capable of expressing a wide range of emotions because the
character has variable frown and brow lines. Different mouth shapes also
express emotion, as does the shape of each eye.

Make some sketches of Sackboy, using as few lines as possible to create
the various emotions. (See Goldfinger’s facial expressions). Learning to
tweak facial expressions to express emotions will enhance your ability to
draw characters from imagination. Note that Sackboy has a proportionally
big head and face, making his expressions more visible. Consider
exaggerating anatomical features to emphasize important aspects of your
character even if you’re designing realistic humans.

Facial expressions from Human Anatomy for Artists by Eliot
Goldfinger
On this page, you practiced four facial features that express emotion:
brow and frown lines, the mouth, and eyes. Goldfinger adds two more
facial features: the crease of the nasolabial folds (also known as “laugh
lines”) and the horizontal wrinkles of the forehead. The elements used to
control expressions are fairly simple if you think of them as abstract lines
and shapes as in Goldfinger’s illustration.
LEVEL UP!
Human anatomy is the heaviest topic in the book, so you should
be proud of yourself for completing all the exercises in Level 4.

You now have specialized knowledge that even some in the art
world don’t have, and most of the tools you’ll ever need to create
figures with a convincing presence and sense of weight and
movement just like the Old Masters.
The next level explores select elements of design, giving you a
comprehensive set of tools to design your characters,
environments, and interactive experiences with specific emotions
that you want players to feel.

Detail of Children’s Games by Peter Bruegel the Elder (1525–1569)
WE SAW IN GRAVITY AND MOVEMENT how manipulating the shape
of a line can create a sense of weight and movement. Classical
artists also used line as a foundation for arranging elements in an
image, which is known as composition.
These abstract approaches to design use the basic elements of
visual grammar and have powerful implications for the way we
design 
video 
games, 
from 
logos 
and 
user 
interfaces 
to
environments, characters, and animations.
Although there are only five elements of visual grammar to
consider—lines, shapes, volumes, value, and color—there are an
infinite number of ways that we can manipulate them using classical
design 
concepts 
to 
create 
complex 
emotions 
and 
player
experiences, as we’ll see when we take a closer look at the various
ways in which they’ve been applied to video games.

A first step in translating classical art principles to video games
is to consider the in-game camera and whether it’s set to frame
the action using a close-up, medium, or long shot.
There are many practical considerations when deciding on a
camera shot. For example, the player must be able to see
enough of the playing area to make decisions on how to act
within the game, so gameplay often dictates the choice of
camera shot. But the final decision on how to frame in-game
objects is not just a technical one; the frame’s artistic intent will
affect the emotional experience of the player as well. The ideal
is to have the gameplay and artistic intent inform the camera
shot unanimously, changing dynamically to fit changing
situations in-game.
The viewer’s perceived proximity to characters in an image either creates
an intimate feeling, as in a portrait (left) or still-life painting, or a more
detached, distant relationship, as in a typical landscape painting (right).
Video games have a significant advantage over traditional media
because the proximity device that influences the emotional connection
between player and characters can be adjusted dynamically depending
on the situation. A close-up shot creates an intimate connection with the

playable character, but as the camera shifts away, the landscape
becomes more prominent and the player-character connection more
detached.
Heavy Rain (Artwork courtesy of Quantic Dream)
A game like Heavy Rain uses the close-up shot a great deal so players
experience an intimate connection with subjects on-screen. The close-up
shot is a translation of the composition conventions of classical portrait
and still-life painting, where the subject takes up much of the visible
frame.

Journey (medium shot) (photo credit 5.3)
Journey (long shot)
Journey generally employs a medium shot, which establishes a
relationship between player, characters, and environment that fits
somewhere between close-up and long shots for a more balanced effect.
But the game’s camera constantly shifts the frame, zooming out to take in
more of the landscape or zooming in to frame the character depending
on the situation. (photo credit 5.4)

StarCraft II: Wings of Liberty (Artwork courtesy of Blizzard
Entertainment)
The in-game camera in StarCraft II: Wings of Liberty frames the action
with a long shot. The long shot is perfectly suited to the genre of real-time
strategy games as it gives players a commanding view of the action. The
distance and number of on-screen objects depicted in this battle scene
make it difficult for players to feel an intimate connection with any one
element. Instead the player’s attention is spread across many elements
that are generally grouped by function for simplicity.

ICO
The interactive element of video games causes players to emotionally
identify with their playable character as if it genuinely represented them.
So in addition to directing the proximity of the camera to on-screen
objects, an equally important design consideration is the proximity of the
playable character to other characters in the game.
The game mechanics of ICO repeatedly bring characters together then
separate them to create emotions of closeness and intimacy contrasted
with loneliness and detachment, which makes the moments when Ico
and Yorda are connected all the more powerful.

We briefly examined the significance of horizon line placement
in Basic Perspective, but now we’ll take a closer look at this
design tool and how the horizon line’s position in relation to the
camera is used in games to affect the player’s feelings.
Assassin’s Creed II
Assassin’s Creed II allows players to scale buildings to reach the city’s
rooftops, which places the horizon line high up in the frame, giving
players a commanding and empowering view of their surroundings.
Avoid placing the horizon line in the exact middle of the frame
because the equal balance between the top and bottom half of the
frame creates a very neutral and static composition (unless that
is the effect that you’re after).

Assassin’s Creed II
The same character placed at ground level creates a more natural
perspective with the horizon closer to the middle of the screen. The
contrast between a high and middle horizon line in this game makes the
player feel more exposed and vulnerable at ground level.

Shadow of the Colossus
Shadow of the Colossus from Team Ico effectively uses a low-angle shot
to create a sense of vulnerability in the face of massive scale. Placing the
camera near the ground, behind the playable character Wander, means
the player is often looking up at the colossi that he must scale.
Uncharted 3
Tilt the horizon line diagonally and you get a dynamic effect.
Uncharted 3 uses a tilted perspective throughout the game to create an
added sense of tension and disorientation for the player, particularly
when the playable character of Nathan Drake is drugged or during the
Sink or Swim level featured here.

Superbrothers: Sword & Sworcery EP (Artwork courtesy of
Superbrothers Inc.)
Superbrothers: Sword & Sworcery EP employs a centrally placed horizon
line, which creates a neutral effect. Moving the horizon line further up or
down would create a more dynamic composition that would be less
appropriate for the relatively tranquil atmosphere of the game.
Players feel a lot of empathy toward their playable character, as if they
were experiencing the situations themselves. Even though the placement
of the horizon line is neutral, a powerful tension is created in this scene

by the position of the playable character relative to the Trigon enemy
(which references the camera angle in Shadow of the Colossus.
Bumpy Road (Artwork courtesy of Simogo)
The emotional effect of low-angle, eye-level, or high-angle shots, relating
to the position of the horizon line in the vertical axis, can also be applied
to the placement of objects along the horizontal axis—when deciding
whether to place characters to the left, middle, or right of the frame.
Bumpy Road from Simogo illustrates the dynamic possibilities of creating
tension with this effect. A balanced feeling is created when the car is

positioned centrally. Placing the car further left or right within the frame
creates more dynamic energy.

Closely related to horizon line placement and perspective is the
scale of characters in relation to other characters and to their
environment. The relative size of the character can make the
player feel either vulnerable or empowered.

Alice: Madness Returns
American McGee’s Alice: Madness Returns takes full advantage of the
video game medium’s ability to dynamically change elements on the fly
by scaling Alice’s character throughout the game to create different
emotional experiences. When Alice is small she can explore more of the
environment, but she also becomes more vulnerable. When Alice grows
to a larger size the player feels more powerful.

Three is the magic number in design. If you have more than
three on-screen elements (or grouped elements) at any one
time, it becomes increasingly difficult for players to orient
themselves amid the visual noise. One way to maintain
simplicity and keep the number of on-screen elements to a
minimum is through grouping.
Pikmin
In the series of Pikmin games, the player can control up to 100 on-screen
characters at any one time. That’s an incredible amount of information to
take in. The reason the player doesn’t get overwhelmed by all the visual
noise is that the characters are grouped into larger masses, sorted by
function and color. The grouping helps players orient themselves within
the action, as they only have to consider a few large masses rather than
100 individual elements.

Empire: Total War
Empire: Total War features hundreds of soldiers fighting in battle, all of
whom the player must control. Arranging the soldiers into large groups
reduces the visual noise.
Note the rectangular group arrangement before battle (left) and the
dagger-like shape that emerges incidentally during this particular charge
(right).
As a game designer you have an infinite number of possibilities to use
this concept and dynamically adjust the shape of groups to create
different emotional effects (which we’ll explore in more detail in Shapes
on this page).

Children’s Games by Peter Bruegel the Elder
Another method to reduce noise is to align elements along composition
lines, as Peter Bruegel did in Children’s Games. Even though there is a
tremendous amount of information in this painting, it’s not overwhelming
because there is order even where there appears to be none.
Bruegel exactingly placed figures along composition lines to dictate
how viewers experience the image by offering them visual paths to read
the scene.

The value key is the proportion of lights to darks in an image.
The majority of artwork is designed around a fairly equal
distribution of values, similar to the natural balance of values
that we see in reality during the daytime. Shifting the values so
that either the lights or darks become dominant is an effective
way to create a special atmosphere within the gaming
environment.
Journey
Journey employs a high-key in this desert scene to create a light and
positive feeling for players traversing the environment. The majority of
objects in the landscape are at the lighter end of the value scale, while
select objects, such as the figures and important landmarks, are made
prominent with darker values. (photo credit 5.5)

Animal Crossing: City Folk
Animal Crossing: City Folk virtually does away with shadows altogether.
Soft-lighting and shadowless environments are common in children’s
games because it creates a safe and surreal feeling. The flip side of
removing shadows is that objects appear flatter and the spatial
relationship between elements becomes difficult to judge (see Advanced
Lighting and Values, for more detail).

Alan Wake
The nighttime scenes in Alan Wake feature low-key lighting, with values
mainly located at the darker end of the value scale. Points of light
highlight key areas of interest, while other areas are shrouded in ominous
shadow. The threatening emotions created by this lighting are amplified
by the contrast to the mid-key lighting (for day scenes) which provides a
fairly equal distribution of light and dark values.

We’ve practiced many of the fundamentals of drawing:
techniques for holding a pencil, how to create various qualities
of line, and how each line quality—thick or thin, light or dark,
curved or straight or zigzag—communicates quite specific
emotional responses to the artwork. But because of its
interactivity, the viewer/player of a video game is actively
involved in shaping the artwork, in affecting the screen visuals.
In this section you’ll see how to design elements of a game so
that players experience the same physical actions and
sensations that artists experience in designing with line.


Diana and Her Companions by Johannes Vermeer (1632–1675)
Basing compositions on a system of lines allowed classical artists to
control the viewer’s overall experience of an image by offering visual
pathways along which a viewer’s eye would travel. Classical artists like
Vermeer sought to make their compositional lines invisible to the
untrained eye so that their subtlety could have a greater subconscious
emotional effect. Vermeer exactingly designed each figure’s pose,
aligning limbs and drapery along the frame of his compositional lines.
This painting communicates a tranquil emotion largely because it’s
constructed on a composition of gentle, curved lines.

Massacre of the Innocents (c. 1610) by Peter Paul Rubens
In stark contrast to Vermeer’s Diana (opposite), the dominant
compositional lines in Massacre of the Innocents by Peter Paul Rubens
are two opposing triangles. Rubens aligned the figures to a network of
straight, angular lines that communicate the aggressive, explosive force
of the figures clashing together.
What made a composition like this possible was Rubens’s ability to
create figures from imagination. He could compose the figures in any way
he wished. Notice that the composition’s lower left triangle exclusively
features female figures who are being trampled by the male figures in the
upper right triangle. Make a simple study of this painting. See if you can
find other lines that form its compositional framework.

Detail from Massacre of the Innocents by Peter Paul Rubens
Detail from Diana and Her Companions by Johannes Vermeer
Take a second look at the Vermeer and Rubens paintings and imagine
substituting the lines of one for the other. You’ll find that it’s not details
that communicate each painting’s particular emotion, but the larger
compositional framework. If you were to switch the composition lines
from one painting to the other, it would completely undermine the artists’
intended messages. The overarching design relies very little on detail
elements like the sword in Rubens’s painting and the plant in Vermeer’s,
which have very similar abstract shapes.

How can you translate the concepts of classical composition to video
games to design powerful emotional experiences? By conceptualizing
classical composition in a new way. Don’t think of compositional lines
purely as visual pathways on a static medium; conceptualize them as an
interactive virtual map whose pathways can be actively experienced by
players.

Grand Theft Auto IV
Consider the anticipation and action players experience driving through a
slow-sweeping curve versus hitting the breaks around an angular corner
in Grand Theft Auto IV. The curved street creates a gentle driving
experience for the player while the angular corner creates a more
aggressive emotional experience through the corresponding physical
actions that they must perform.
In visual and interactive terms, the curved line of the road is like the
composition of Vermeer’s Diana and Her Companions (this page). The

angular pathway that the player takes in navigating corners is like the
aggressive composition of Rubens’s Massacre of the Innocents (this
page). Simply by conceptualizing the pathways within an environment as
curved or straight lines you can design the players’ emotional experience
as they travel through the interactive spaces.
Mario Kart Wii

Reading about video games is like reading a description of a
song. It’s impossible to appreciate a song without hearing it for
yourself because reading and listening appeal to different senses.
Just as you visit museums to study classical artworks, to
understand the full significance of video game art and design you
must play a wide variety of games and reap the benefits of
firsthand experience.

Tron: Evolution
The tracks in Mario Kart Wii (opposite) predominantly feature sweeping
curves and vehicles have a softer handling. In contrast, the Light Cycles
in Tron: Evolution (above) change direction in an angular manner, and
players have to steer using more abrupt physical actions.
Video games that use motion controllers allow players to physically
experience sensations of moving along lines in a virtual three-
dimensional space, as if they were taking part in the act of creating the
compositions they see. As with classical art, in video games it’s the
composition, not the details, that has the strongest effect on the players’
emotions.
Apply your accumulated knowledge about concepts like gravity and
movement to design the emotional experiences of the players on a macro
level and the pathways that you make possible for them to navigate
through your game environment. In another design approach, you could
remove predefined pathways altogether (as in Journey’s desert
landscape), leaving players free to “draw” their own path through the
environment.

Gears of War 2 (above) and Halo 3: ODST (right)
The concept of designing an overarching emotional experience based on
either curved or angular composition lines is present in first-and third-
person shooter franchises like Halo and Gears of War.
Compare the graceful jump arcs, fluid movements, and pathways taken
by Master Chief in Halo against the grounded and angular theme of
Gears of War and its relatively angular forms and character animations.
Although the gameplay conditions are very similar in terms of character
actions and abilities, Gears of War feels more brutal due to its angular
overarching concept. (photo credit 5.1)

Superbrothers: Swords & Sworcery EP
Superbrothers: Swords & Sworcery EP is an example of line-based level
design that sits between curved and angular concepts. The level restricts
the Scythian’s movement to navigating horizontal and vertical pathways.
The game pathways affect players in the same way as traditional
composition in that players are presented with an environment
background that is constructed with an abstract series of lines. What
video games add to the traditional theory of composition is that the
game’s background image is an interactive environment through which
players can move; the playable character dynamically traces the abstract
lines of the composition. The visual and interactive components of the
experience combine to create a type of emotional engagement that is not
possible with traditional media.
The predominance of straight horizontal and vertical lines created by
the 1-point perspective in these screens from Superbrothers: Swords &
Sworcery EP creates a still and tranquil backdrop for the game. If
Superbrothers’ art director, Craig Adams, had used diagonal lines (which

evoke dynamic and energetic emotions) the resulting player experience
would be at odds with the overall concept of the game.
(photo credit 5.6)

Journey (opposite) and Vanquish (above)
You can also direct the players’ emotional experience by applying line
concepts to character animations. The characters in Journey (opposite)
move and jump gracefully across the desert landscape, which the player
traces across the screen with the push of a button. The gentle, curved
movements in Journey, emphasized by the character’s flowing scarf, are
in stark contrast to the violent zigzag movements of Sam Gideon in
Vanquish (above). The different movement styles of each character can
be likened to two distinct musical melodies: one is gentle and flowing,
and the other abrupt and jagged.

StarCraft II: Wings of Liberty: Protoss units attacking from the
bottom; Terran units defending on the top (Artworks courtesy of
Blizzard Entertainment)
StarCraft II: Wings of Liberty illustrates just how important distinct
animations are in such a fast action video game, which presents a
significant amount of visual information for players to assimilate. So much
happens on-screen in a typical game of StarCraft II that it’d be near
impossible for players to comprehend and manage events without
distinguishing animations and shapes for the various character species
and unit types.

StarCraft II: Wings of Liberty: Probe
StarCraft II: Wings of Liberty: Immortal
In StarCraft II the nonaggressive Probes that gather resources travel
across the screen in gentle, back-and-forth, straight lines. In contrast,
Immortal attack units travel with fast, aggressive movements along
angular lines. In the middle of the action there simply isn’t time to take in

all of the game’s rich visual detail, so it’s largely the distinguishing lines
implied by the animations that allow players to subliminally recognize
aggressive and nonaggressive units. Unique shapes for each species
reinforce these visual distinctions.

Line dominated the theory of composition for the majority of art
history, until some 150 years ago when artists began
experimenting with photography. An evolution happened around
this time, much like the evolution that video games are driving.
Artists such as Edgar Degas started thinking not in terms of
lines, but in terms of shapes. The reason for this is that they
were exploring the way in which the photographic camera, and
our eyes, records reality as light and shadow shapes. This was
a revolutionary approach to painting at the time. In Degas’s
artwork, below, and the paintings by Vermeer and Rubens on
this page and this page, we’ll find a common theme of rounded
versus angular elements.

Waiting by Edgar Degas, J. Paul Getty Museum
Degas was a grudging member of the Impressionist movement, which
marked the crossroads between classical and modern art. Degas was a
great admirer of the master Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres who advised
the younger Degas to “draw lines, young man, and still more lines, both
from life and from memory, and you will become a good artist.” Degas did
indeed draw many lines—until the arrival of photography, which changed
the way Degas conceptualized his images from lines to shapes.
Although we can’t fully see the face of either figure in this pastel by
Degas, an emotional tension is created by the contrast of a circle and a
triangle shape. Degas further heightened the effect with a value contrast
of black and white.
Volkswagen Beetle (left), Range Rover (middle), Lamborghini
Gallardo (right)
Abstract communication with shapes is surprisingly universal, appearing
in visual design in every artistic discipline. From left to right: the
Volkswagen Beetle is designed around the circular concept to
communicate that it’s fun and friendly; the square shape of the Range
Rover communicates confidence, stability, and safety; while the
Lamborghini’s triangular shape communicates aggressive speed.


The Lord of the Rings (film trilogy): Hobbits and Sauron
You can see how primary shapes communicate emotions in these stills
from The Lord of the Rings. At one end of the emotional spectrum are the
good-natured Hobbits (left). A circular concept echoes through every
level of detail, from the curl of their hair, rounded shirt buttons and
shoulders, to the rounded buildings of Hobbiton and even the landscape
itself.
On the other side of the emotional spectrum is the evil Sauron (above)
whose menacing triangular shape runs throughout the design, from the
sharp fingertips of his glove to the volcano on the landscape.
You can tell the entire Lord of the Rings story in shapes, with the good,
circular Hobbits traveling from a safe, circular landscape to a dangerous
triangular environment and back again. Appropriate colors and textures
reinforce the emotional concept of each character.

UNIQUE SHAPES = UNIQUE EMOTIONS
Designing with shape was once considered a radical departure
from classical theory. But the two elements are very closely
bound: circles relate to curved lines; the square relates to
straight vertical and horizontal lines; and the triangle relates to
diagonal and angular lines. Surprisingly, the ability for basic
shapes and lines to communicate emotions is rooted in reality,
as we’ll now see.
Where do these concepts of soft rounded forms versus angular shapes
originate? All around us in nature! Things that we deem safe tend to have
rounded forms, while we’re naturally cautious in the company of sharp,
pointy triangles. Our instinctive reactions to these objects are based on
the tactile sense of touch. In visual art this physical sensation is missing,
though viewers react to these shapes based on their real-life
experiences.

You can order the three basic shapes into a scale of emotions. From left
to right: positivity and youthful energy (circles); strength and stability
(squares); aggressive and threatening (triangles). Traditionally the circle
and curved lines have also been used to communicate femininity and
square or angular lines, masculinity.

Note how the well-known “good” characters on the left are designed
around circular concepts, while the enemy characters in the right column
are based on a dominant triangular concept. The silhouettes underscore
the importance of designing characters around larger shape concepts
and not details.

Mario
Even details should echo the character’s overall design concept and the
emotion you want players to feel once the silhouette of a character has
been established. Practically every element of Mario has been designed
around a friendly circular concept, including his mustache (two
overlapping circles and a series of smaller round shapes). His torso too is
modeled on a sphere, the three-dimensional representation of the circle.

Wario (left), Goomba (above)
If Mario was designed around a triangular concept instead of a circular
one, he’d no longer be Mario, he’d be Wario (left)! By little more than
sharpening a few lines the artists at Nintendo transformed a friendly
character into a villain. Although the Goomba characters (above right),
Mario’s enemies, are designed around an aggressive triangular concept,
their edges have been rounded to fit the overall friendly theme of the
Mario universe. These three characters are an example of style
consistency.
Flower

Soft, rounded shapes are the obvious choice for designing an
environment of natural, organic beauty. But you need an element against
which to measure this beauty in order for players to fully appreciate the
positive feelings of the environment. Flower contrasts somber weather,
hard-edged rock, and manmade structures against colorful fields,
sunlight, and rolling hills to emphasize the latter’s natural beauty.
Frieze of Dancers by Edgar Degas
Repetition of shapes and echoing of movement can create a sense of
harmony. Take a look at these beautiful ballerina renderings by Edgar
Degas in which the artist drew the same figure from different angles,
changing elements only slightly to create a feeling of harmonious
movement. (photo credit 5.2)

Journey
A sense of harmony similar to that in Degas’s Frieze of Dancers is
evident in this screenshot from Journey, since the playable character is
nearly identical for every player. A delicate harmony is created when this
uniform design is coupled with the character’s graceful movement. (photo
credit 5.7)

We can think of the primary shapes—circle, square, and
triangle—as conventions that communicate common notions of
good and evil, passivity and aggression, dynamic and static
energy. These conventions are useful tools in game design,
where it’s often necessary that players understand the
significance of their gaming environment as quickly as possible.
There are many instances, however, where players are
afforded more time to become familiar with gameplay elements
or when designers wish to surprise players with the
unexpected. If players expect circular forms to be friendly and
sharp shapes to be threatening, then designing a game where
the opposite is true can create a sense of mystery, surprise,
and depth. The video games featured below are among the
most distinguished of all time because they went against design
clichés to offer new and unconventional emotional experiences.

Samus Aran from Metroid Prime (left); Jade from Beyond Good &
Evil (right)
Samus Aran and Jade are celebrated for their departure from the male-
dominated role of hero. With so many oversexualized female video game
characters, female characters that subvert this convention are refreshing
and memorable. Interestingly, Samus’s gender wasn’t revealed till the
end of the original Metroid game, which created a surprising twist for
players who assumed they’d been playing a male character. Innovation is
not only wide open regarding gender stereotypes, but ethnicity and social
minorities too.

The Last Guardian (above and below)
The main protagonists in The Last Guardian are a young boy (see bottom
left in the above illustration) and a strange mongrel creature. The
friendship between the two characters is made visually ambiguous
because of the creature’s impressive size and aggressive-looking claws
and beak. But, as in reality, not everything that appears ugly or
aggressive is necessarily unfriendly or dangerous.
Rather than attempt to soften the threatening emotions created by the
angular shapes of the mongrel creature, the designers expressly

challenge player conceptions of good and bad. For example, there are
instances in the game when the creature must aid the boy’s progress
through the environment by lifting him with its mouth.
The Birth of Venus by Sandro Botticelli, Uffizi, Florence
Portal 2
The villain in Portal 2 is a great example of subverting conventions.

Rather than sticking to the stereotypes of villainy in the form of an
aggressive male character, the art team at Valve Software took
inspiration from Sandro Botticelli’s The Birth of Venus when designing the
character of GLaDOS. The opposing curves that run gracefully down the
length of Venus’s body have been translated to the inverted mechanical
body of GLaDOS, turning the Renaissance icon of feminine beauty on its
head, both literally and metaphorically, to create one of the most
memorable and emotionally complex video game characters to date.
BioShock: Rapture (Artwork courtesy of Irrational Games)
The character designs in BioShock incorporate an interesting play on
conventions. The Gatherers, who are the innocent-looking girls inhabiting
the dangerous dystopia of Rapture, are at odds with what players would
likely expect to encounter in such an environment. The young gatherers
create a visceral contrast to the violence featured in the game.
LEVEL UP!
The design concepts discussed in this chapter are essentials
every artist should be familiar with. There are many more design
concepts to learn, and the bibliography at the back of this book is
a great place to start. But having now completed Level 5, you are

sufficiently 
armed 
to 
create 
your 
own 
characters 
and
environments. Artistic theory can only take you so far; for the
rest you must learn to use imagination and your own unique
artistic expression with the help of the techniques in the
following level.

World of Warcraft (Artwork courtesy of Blizzard Entertainment)
IT IS OFTEN ASSUMED THAT CREATIVITY IS SOMETHING that
you’re born with: either you have it or you don’t. Although some
people may be more naturally gifted than others, creativity and
exercising your imagination can also be learned and developed.
This level will give you a reliable process for creativity so that you
need never be lost for ideas when designing characters (this same
process can be applied to environment design, game design, and,
for that matter, to creation in any artistic discipline). The structured
process of defining your design goals before researching and
character development will also ensure that you can visually
engineer your designs to express specific ideas and emotions.

Some triple-A development teams consist of more than a
hundred developers, including programmers, marketing teams,
producers, and artists, each with their own unique take on the
game being developed. That’s a lot of ideas and egos to
balance! So before we begin looking at the creative process,
here are a few suggestions for good studio practice to consider:
01 Develop cross-sections of the game rather than focusing on
one aspect. This means developing the whole range of
characters and environments in unison, rather than finishing
one character or environment at a time. The quicker you can
block in one entire cross-section of the game, such as a
playable demo level, the easier it’ll be to judge the full scope of
your game and make comparative decisions.
02 Present your work daily to members of your team. Artists
often find daily presentations an uncomfortable chore because
few want to show work they deem unfinished. But daily
presentations are good because the key concepts can be
refined through quick iterations and team feedback before
precious time is spent on details and polish.
03 Make your inspiration and artwork visible. Never assume at
the end of a discussion that everybody is thinking along the
same lines. Draw it! Hang your latest work on the wall, so that
everyone can visualize the product they’re working on as soon
as it’s realized.

Media Molecule, the studio behind Little Big Planet, goes one step further
and dedicates a corner of the studio to artwork created by its fans and
quirky furniture that echoes the franchise’s handmade concept. (Image
courtesy of Media Molecule)

This section will provide you with tools to be creative on
demand. Make these tools an instinctive part of your design
process and you’ll likely never be lost for ideas.
The first question you or your team should ask is not What
game should we build or How do we build a game? The lead
question of any creative endeavor is What is the emotional
experience we want our audience to feel? The high concept
serves this purpose.
The high concept is a simple paragraph that defines your
design goals clearly and concisely. You can think of it as the
game summary that you’d find written on the back of a video
game box. Who defines the high concept varies:
A game publisher may submit a high concept outline to a
development team
The development team may create its own high concept
A high concept may be derived from an existing story,
such as a book, a film franchise, or a real-life event or
experience
Whatever the scale and premise of your project, make a habit
of developing a high concept before commencing work so that
you can design with intent. Once a high concept is established
for the entire game, take the time to develop similar concepts
for each character, group or race, and environment to be
featured in the game.

A high concept is assembled from keywords generated during
a brainstorming session. Keywords are a small selection of
adjectives that together summarize an entire concept.
To help structure the brainstorming session, write out the
following checklist of key design concepts for you or your team
to consider and come up with keywords for each:
Emotion
Color
Shape
Texture
Line
Speed
Size
Opposing concept

Let’s say that your task is to create a character for a
hypothetical game about exploring a fantasy landscape
populated with fantastic creatures and vegetation. The types of
questions you should ask are: What emotion should the
character communicate? What colors do we associate with
such a character or environment? What shapes are invoked in
our imagination when we think of fantastic creatures and
vegetation? And so on, through all the concepts. Any
association that comes to mind gets written down, whether it’s a

memory from an exotic holiday in the tropics or a plant from the
backyard.
Keywords should be adjectives, not nouns, because
adjectives, like friendly, strange, or dangerous, describe
emotions. Using keywords like these as search terms for visual
research will return a broader and unexpected set of results
than searching for specific objects.
Include keywords that are conceptually in opposition to your
main theme. As we saw in Subverting Conventions you’ll add a
greater element of depth and interest to your design if you
include visual contrast.
Once you and your team have exhausted the idea process,
formulate your keywords into a concise high concept that
summarizes the character(s) and environment(s) you want to
produce. Highlight the selected keywords, as in the following
example, which we’ll use as a launch pad for gathering visual
research.
CHARACTER CONCEPT FOR [Character name]
The […] is a race of creatures whose lines, shapes, and
colors mirror their lofty home of strange, natural beauty.
These creatures are delicate, gentle, and quiet in contrast
to the dark and aggressive […] creatures that live nearby.
SUPPORTING KEYWORDS
OPPOSING KEYWORDS
Developing up from a high concept and a series of character
and environment concepts provides the entire team with

common reference points against which to judge the suitability
of design decisions. Only once you’ve defined your goal are
you ready to begin the character development process. But
before we begin the first stage of development, which is
research, we need to understand what the process of
transforming words from our high concept into images actually
involves. And this is done through visual metaphors.

We are all aware of metaphors in literature. Metaphors like “icy
stare” and “beaming smile” are used to imbue objects or actions
with greater emotional significance. Visual artists can use
metaphors in much the same way, sometimes taking inspiration
from the most unlikely places. All the images you find in the
research stage can be turned into visual metaphors.
Every day you encounter many attention-grabbing visuals, and every one
of them has the potential to be developed into a video game character or
environment, whether it’s the gravity-defying height, solidity, and scale of
a skyscraper or a creepy, shriveled dead spider.
When you see anything that piques your interest, make a habit of
drawing quick black-and-white thumbnail sketches of it in your
sketchbook, spending just enough time to capture the primary element of
interest, as in the sketches to the left.

Reducing objects to black and white silhouettes masks their original
identity. Once you have a shape that captures the abstract qualities of the
original source it becomes easier to imagine it as something else entirely.
The abstract shape of the dead spider above can be turned into a
creepy, arachnid-shaped hairstyle and the skyscraper into a sturdy and
imposing character. Viewers may not recognize the underlying visual
references but they will likely get a sense of their associated emotions.
Though the spider and skyscraper can both be used as abstract
shapes for a character, they don’t fit our character concept that features
keywords natural beauty and light, which the spider and skyscraper do
not embody. So put these drawings aside for a more appropriate future
project.

Thorough research is one of the key factors that distinguish
professional artwork. Your aim is to become an expert on a
given subject so you can create believable characters and
environments with a sense of authenticity. If you have the time
to do firsthand research—sketching on location, life drawing
sessions, etc.—then be sure to take full advantage of the
opportunity.
Once you know what emotions you want players to feel,
begin researching images that abstractly embody these feelings
in the form of visual metaphors. Creating a mind-map will help
you research diverse concepts and images, so you can avoid
drawing the first, most obvious thing that comes to mind.
While the character concept is based on adjectives that
describe desired emotions and feelings, the mind-map looks for
nouns that reflect the character concept’s emotions. Let’s go
through the research and development process for our
character together.

Structure the mind-map like this illustration, placing your high concept in
the middle with key categories radiating out. These categories will help
get your ideas flowing. Combining word associations from your mind-map
categories with keywords from your character concept can uncover an
array of seemingly disparate reference images that you can use to create
an interesting character.
If you’re drawing several thumbnails on one page, it’s a good idea
to place a clean sheet of paper under the heel of your hand to
avoid smudging your work as you move across the page.

The character keywords delicate and natural beauty produced the visual
research results of flora, leaves, and trees. When you make a study of
each research image, draw it as a simple silhouette without details.
You’re looking for a design that abstractly communicates the keywords in
the character concept.
By drawing every photographic image that interests you, you’ll begin to
get a feeling for the lines and shapes that will eventually be incorporated
into the character design. Usually the character begins to evolve naturally
through this repeated process of researching and sketching.
Research into the character keyword silence yielded images with sparse

and simple composition elements composed of vertical and horizontal
lines. Therefore, the goal for this particular character design is to avoid
using too many diagonal or curved lines and noisy details. Feel free to
annotate your drawings to highlight the key design features that you’ll
want to incorporate into your final character design.
When it comes to your characters’ clothing, think about the resources
and textiles available in their environment. In this example, the nature
references in the character concept led to research of African tribal
groups, although you might choose different ethnic or geographic
avenues of research.
Often you just stumble upon interesting and suitable reference images
by chance. In this case it was the garments of the Ndebele tribe of South
Africa. They have simple design patterns and silhouettes that will be
helpful in designing a simple character shape, which is the goal here.
After making these sketches, save your original source images in
a folder on your computer so you can refer to them in future. (And
you’ll be able to use them for the exercises in Level 8.)

Visual metaphors for the keyword delicate were found in “dry, dying
leaves,” some of which resembled a poncho, which was then likewise
researched. Keep in mind that the quality of these research sketches
doesn’t have to be great, as they’re primarily to be used as your own
personal library of reference images. Draw only as long as it takes to
visually note the main element of interest and ignore or suggest the rest.

Keywords light and gentle also influenced research for the character’s
feet, starting with the search term “tiptoe.” This didn’t seem light enough,
so further research was made into “ballet feet” and there was even a brief
investigation of “grasshopper leg.” You can never predict when and
where you’ll discover suitable visual metaphors, so it’s worth exploring
everything that comes to mind for the chance that it’ll take the design in
an unexpected and exciting direction.
Display your most inspiring research drawings, character
concepts, and images around your workspace to create a mood
board that can serve as a shared reference for the entire team.

Research for the character’s eyes began with sketches of images from a
great book called Decorated Skin: A World Survey of Body Art, by Karl
Gröning (Thames & Hudson). But the eyes appeared too alive and
visually noisy for the keywords in the character concept, so the search
term “quiet face” was researched, which uncovered images of “ancient
Chinese sculpture” that featured more suitable eyes. Notice how even the
eyes echo the leaf concept of the character.

Because researching images on the Internet and thumbnail
sketching is so quick, it’s easy to explore several visual ideas in
the space of just a few minutes. When you combine these tools
with your innate ability to recognize meaningful shapes in
random objects (apophenia), you’ll arrive at a process that is
fast-paced and excitingly unpredictable. There’s a great wealth
of fascinating visual information to be discovered, and your task
is to select the appropriate inspirations and then marry diverse
visual concepts together to create a coherent character design,
a process called thumbnail development.
To determine a body shape for your character, review and assess your
sketches from the visual research produced by your keywords and mind-
map. Select shapes that most closely match the character concept.

A first step to developing an abstract shape into a character is to
decide where to place the head, body, and legs. This process of
personification need not be complex. Primary shapes—the circle, square,
and triangle—play a key role in communicating emotions, so even at this
early stage it’s worth considering which shapes best fit your high concept.
Try to echo the overall shape from your thumbnail sketch in the body
parts.
Combine the basic body shape with the thumbnail sketches of leaves
from this page. Play around with the body’s placement within the shape
of each leaf, as illustrated here. From left to right: the leaf becomes
headgear for our character; scaling it up it turns into a full-length
costume; rotating, flipping, and mirroring our abstract shape creates even
more possibilities.

Steadily begin combining the personified abstract shape with elements of
your research, starting with very simple lines and shapes. By keeping
your drawing simple for as long as possible, you’ll be less reluctant to
make bold changes and more inclined to experiment with proportions
than if you were to start out with detailed drawings.
Here you can see how the base shape of a simple leaf is combined
with various research sketches (this page) including Ndebele tribal
clothing, dead leaves, faces from ancient Chinese sculpture, and a
poncho.

Think of the composite sketch as a mannequin over which you can
loosely try out different visual ideas.
Talk yourself through the design, challenging each decision in
reference to the character concept. How can you communicate keywords
like lofty and strange featured in the character concept? Here an
impressive proportion of 10 heads goes some way to convey both
keywords.
What is the character’s anatomy and underlying structure over which
its flesh and clothing is draped? How would the character move? Aim to
incorporate a system of opposing curves throughout your character
designs for a believable sense of energy and life. As noted in Gravity and
Movement, without opposing curves movement would not be possible.
Return to research as often as necessary. Gestures for the hands were
investigated using the search term “delicate hands.”

It’s time to assess how well the character silhouette is working as an
abstract shape. Trace or copy it onto a new sheet of paper and block it in
with a single value of shading. Do the elements of the character remain
distinguishable when you stand back from the drawing? Does the
silhouette sufficiently communicate the keywords in the character
concept?
Angle changes that are too subtle tend to disappear entirely when
viewed at a small resolution. Therefore, it’s important to exaggerate
elements of the silhouette for the purposes of visual interest and clarity.
For instance, where you have two overlapping elements it is often a good

idea to exaggerate the angles between the two elements so as to define
them as separate (highlighted in red).
Team Fortress 2 (Artwork courtesy of Valve Corporation)
The art team at Valve that developed the cast of Team Fortress 2 did a
great job creating characters with silhouettes that are easily
distinguishable and have a strong suggestion of personality without the
need for supporting details. Notice how angles between elements of each
figure are often acute—such as the transitions from boots to trouser cuffs
—adding visual clarity, even when characters are viewed at a small
scale.

With the thumbnail stage complete, we’ve tackled the hardest
part of character design—communicating a character’s concept
through its silhouette. At this point, you might want to switch to
developing other characters and environment silhouettes so
you and your team can begin to get a good visual overview of
the game, and make visual comparisons, which may influence
your character’s final design.
In Elements of Design we saw several examples of games
that successfully echo the high concept at every level of detail.
The character being developed in this chapter has now evolved
to visually communicate its concept keywords, including nature,
silence, delicate, and light, through its silhouette. Details like
body parts, decorations, and textures should also echo the
character’s overarching concepts or enhance them through
contrast.
It’s important to keep in mind that any details you add in
subsequent stages should not disrupt the form that has been
designed so far. Details should assimilate into the design and
not change it altogether.

Lightly trace or copy your rough sketch from this page onto a clean sheet
of paper, making sure that you place the new drawing on the page so that
the head, hands, and feet fit comfortably. Review the character concept
on this page and this page as you check that your design addresses all
the keywords—quiet face; delicate hands; dominant straight, vertical line
for silence—and mute any textures to limit visual noise.
For the same reasons that the Old Masters like Rubens and Vermeer
sought to conceal the compositional framework of their paintings (see this
page and this page), refrain from making your original sources of

inspiration for your character design too explicit. If players are conscious
of the references to leaves, for instance, they will find it more difficult to
appreciate the pure emotional qualities of the abstract shape.
For the face, check that the dominant facial expression lines are all
present so you can manipulate the character’s features to communicate
different moods, gender, and age.
In finalizing your character design, consider how light or dark it should
be in general appearance. This character references the high-key
concept of light, so its value design should reflect this accordingly.
Model sheet from Fable 3, ©Microsoft Game Studios, 2010
The approved final drawing should be combined in a model sheet that will
be used as the key reference document by other members of the team.
Here is an example of a model sheet for the game Fable 3. The model
sheet gives you an opportunity to annotate your designs with information
that may be useful to other members of the team, including references to
fabrics and textures. Cut-away drawings have been included for elements
that are obscured by overlapping details.
LEVEL UP!

Collecting reference images is relatively easy. Combining them to
create just the right character may take hours, days, weeks, or
even months. Whatever your schedule you’ll always wish you
had more time to develop your design further, but it’s better to
present your concepts to the team sooner rather than later. The
team may either like your character design, ask for a revision of
certain details, or turn down the concept altogether if the design
is found to be unworkable for technical or other reasons. Luckily,
you now have a fast process for researching and developing
designs, so any suggestions or feedback can be quickly explored
before your team commits to the timely and costly process of
turning your drawing into a working 3D model for the game.
Repeat the four steps of character development—selecting a
concept, researching the concept and keywords, developing the
thumbnails, and refining the character—until they are instinctive;
then you’ll always have the design tools to be creative on
demand and to be inspired in new and unpredictable ways.

ICO
THE PROCESS OF CREATING ENVIRONMENTS AND PROPS is very
much the same as the process for character design. The concepts
for all your game’s assets (characters, animations, environments,
props, game menus, cover art) should derive from the same high
concept and mind-map if there is to be unity between characters
and the imagined environments they inhabit. As with characters, the
shapes you choose for your environment design have a huge
influence on whether it feels welcoming, threatening, or neutral. In
fact, it helps to think of buildings, in particular, as living objects
rather than lifeless inanimate structures, as they have much in
common with characters when it comes to affecting the player’s
feelings while engaged in a game.

Which character/environment shape combination is best suited
to your particular game depends on the high concept and the
emotions that you want players to feel when they take control of
a playable character. The character/environment relationship
may even change dynamically over the course of the game to
create different emotions as the player progresses, much like
the journey of Frodo and Samwise Gamgee in the Lord of the
Rings trilogy (this page).
The shapes in the illustrations (left) represent characters and the
environment. When you design an environment that echoes the shapes
of its inhabitants, you create a sense of harmony between the characters
and the environment. If you relocate the very same characters to an
environment with opposing shapes, you create a sense of dissonance
between them.

It’s interesting to see how the top left and bottom right examples are
both instances of harmony, yet create very different emotional feelings
due to the primary shapes used. The top left example communicates a
sense of dynamic and positive energy while the triangular environment at
bottom right feels more threatening.
The two examples of dissonance likewise create two distinct emotions.
In the top right example, the circular character appears vulnerable in the
triangular environment, while in the bottom left example the triangular
shape of the character is the aggressor in a passive landscape.
Super Mario Galaxy
An example of a harmonious character/environment relationship is found
in many of the worlds from the Mario franchise. Conceptually, you can
think of Mario’s task as being to restore harmony by ridding his circular
world of aggressive triangular characters.

Journey
The game Journey has a triangular character within a triangular
environment, another example of a harmonious character/environment
relationship. But the feeling generated by the Journey environment is
very different from that of Mario’s due to the different underlying shapes.
(photo credit 7.2)

Morf
The browser-based game Morf features both harmonious and dissonant
shape combinations to explore the influence that shapes alone have on
player 
emotions. 
You 
can 
play 
the 
game 
by 
visiting
www.solarskistudio.com.

Computers make it very easy to create digital objects that are
mathematically perfect. There’s a seductive quality to snapping
a building into place using automated alignment tools. But
much of what distinguishes reality from digital space is
imperfection. With increasing age houses begin to sag, the roof
tilts, and nature begins to reclaim the environment.
It’s this sagging and sense of weight that is very interesting to
game artists. When an actual person stands in front of a real
building they can reach out and touch it to test its solidity. They
can even go inside and walk around to experience the ins and
outs of its structure. With video games, players experience
dislocation of the senses since what they see cannot be
physically experienced.
Therefore, it’s the artist’s job to enhance the feelings of
weight and solidity in video game environments using visual
cues established by their experiences and observations through
firsthand research and the concepts of gravity explored in
Gravity and Movement.
If you’re drawing a particularly complex landscape, a series of
buildings, or an interior, you may want to use a 3D digital
modeling 
program—such 
as 
Google’s 
SketchUp:
http://sketchup.google.com—to 
help 
visualize 
difficult
perspective. Quickly block in the scene in 3D using basic
volumes (paying no attention to lighting or textures) before
printing out a screenshot and lightly tracing the 3D scene onto a
new sheet of paper. Continue to refine your ideas freehand. Be

sure such shortcuts don’t become a substitute for sound
knowledge of perspective!
Fable 2: Tavern, ©Microsoft Game Studios, 2008
For character design we did an extensive study of anatomy, in part to
understand the all-important skeletal structure that holds the figure
together. In creating environments the artist must make a similar effort to
understand the skeletal structure of buildings and the forces involved in
keeping them upright.
Historical buildings naturally lend themselves to emphasizing the
prolonged effects of gravity and wear. The structure, or anatomy, of the
tavern from Fable 2 can be clearly seen, with asymmetry and sagging
between supportive elements being the key to creating a believable
sense of weight and age.

Doric columns in the temple of Hera, Paestum, Greece
Greek columns in the Doric style were not designed to be perfectly
straight. The columns are in fact bowed, creating a feeling of tension
under weight, like that of upraised arms with muscles bulging in support
of the temple roof.

Wherever possible, it’s advisable to suggest the underlying structure of a
building so that you can better consider how the structure would remain
upright against the forces of gravity.
Don’t be afraid to deform the structure to communicate an imagined
weight, even if you’re creating an environment based on reality.
Otherwise your buildings may look like weightless virtual boxes without
mass.

The connection of the base of a building with the ground is very
important, particularly when designing high-rises. Architects understand
that people experience a psychological discomfort if the bases of these
massive structures don’t have features that communicate a sense of
solidity.
In classical Greek and Roman architecture this visual problem was
solved with the base or steps of the building creating a gradual transition
to the ground. In modern design, architects sometimes use the
surrounding environment to visually blend the building’s connection with
the ground and to create the illusion that the weight of the building is
somehow affecting its surroundings.

Mirror’s Edge
Another consideration for environment design is to give buildings a sense
of life because you want the buildings to look inhabited. Consider what
external features might give clues as to who or what lives inside.
Mirror’s Edge is a great example of how the internal functions of
buildings can be suggested externally. The flat skyscraper roofs where
much of the action takes place are filled with things like air-conditioning
units, elevator shafts, and cables. Think of buildings as living organisms
that must be brought to life in the same way as a character.
Make a pencil study of this scene, noting how the view’s high vantage
point and the scale of the buildings requires the use of three-point
perspective (this page and this page). Once you’ve blocked in the simple
box form that represents each building, it’ll become easy to gradually
break it down into smaller forms and add details.

There are two possible approaches to environment design
commonly used in games, and each is practical depending on
whether you’re adding a new environment to an existing world
or creating an environment from scratch.
In the character-centric approach, you assume that the game
visuals have already been defined and your task is to create
new environments that fit into this imagined world. For this
approach, begin by creating a character using the process
explored in Level 6, Character Design before working up to
designing the environment and bigger elements. This may
seem counterintuitive but it’s based on the assumption that the
inhabitants of an environment influence its shape.
Fable 3: Concept art for Auroran female and Auroran dwellings,
©Microsoft Game Studios, 2010
This character and building concept art from Fable 3 demonstrates how a
home environment can be designed to echo the character’s concept.
Once the characteristic design of the Auroran people was established,
buildings were designed by combining decorative elements from their

clothing. The buildings’ architectural forms were influenced by the rocky
landscape in which they live.

World of Warcraft: Blood Elves (Artworks courtesy of Blizzard
Entertainment)
The art team responsible for ongoing development of World of Warcraft
(WoW) has the task of adding new character races to the existing

franchise. This process begins with a new character design that is
compared to existing characters and environments to ensure that each
new race has a distinct motif echoed in its environments and props. Once
the new character design has been defined, props and environments are
designed that echo the character’s visual signature.
The race of Blood Elves features a motif that visually references the
organic forms of spiraling branches with leaves in red, gold, and
turquoise colors. The visual iconography that these characters embody is
visually summarized in the race’s shield and echoed in the props and
environments that the characters inhabit.

World of Warcraft: Troll Race (Artworks courtesy of Blizzard
Entertainment)
The forms and colors unique to the Troll race make them easily
distinguishable from Blood Elves and other races in the WoW universe.
The Troll race features a motif referencing elongated tusks and tooth-
like wooden forms in purples and reds. The characters also feature
relatively more negative space within their silhouettes than do the Blood
Elves. This negative space correspondingly influences the forms of the
environments they inhabit.

The Legend of Zelda: Twilight Prince: Link’s house
Any abstract shape or form can be turned into a building in much the
same way that you went about applying a head, body, and legs to your
abstract shape in Character Design (this page).
With buildings, however, you consider elements that represent a
generic house: doorway, windows, roof, pathway, and possibly levels or
stories. It’s not always necessary to include every element, as a building
can be suggested with little more than a path leading up to a doorway.
But the design of a doorway should not be arbitrary as doorways carry a
lot of symbolic value, communicating something about the character of
who or what is to be found inside.

If you’re designing a brand-new game, then the top-down
approach is the most appropriate because it ensures that the
entire experience of the game is considered as a whole before
individual components are designed. Begin with a high concept,
adapting the process on this page to consider your entire game,
thus defining the overarching design goals that will influence
every artistic decision.
As well as defining your design goals with a paragraph of
text, you can also begin your project by identifying a visual
source of inspiration that summarizes the emotions that you’d
like players to experience. Keep in mind that it will still be
necessary to communicate your visual source of inspiration
textually, so that significant elements of its design can be
communicated to members of the team working in nonartistic
disciplines. This section features two games whose designers
successfully translated both high concepts and visual
inspirations to create acclaimed gaming experiences.
Whichever emotions you decide to create in your game, find
or create an image that summarizes those emotions. The mood
board serves this function, but so can a classical painting or
even a piece of music. Now that you’re at Level 7 you should
have no trouble deconstructing your source of inspiration so
that it can be translated to your video game.

(left to right): Mystery and Melancholy of a Street (1914) by Giorgio
de Chirico (1888–1978); ICO (2001) cover art and in-game graphics.
The top-down process begins with a question: What emotions do you

want players to experience? Fumito Ueda, the director and lead designer
of the critically acclaimed game ICO, was inspired by the artwork of
Giorgio de Chirico and paintings like Mystery and Melancholy of a Street.
In terms of visual grammar, you can read the significance of elements
in de Chirico’s painting in the following way. The clearly defined edges
between objects and the high walls create a feeling of disconnected
spaces frozen in time. Solitary figures and objects hidden from view give
the image a threatening melancholy, as do the deep shadows and
triangular forms defined by an eerie light.
Although ICO’s visuals don’t accurately mirror the aesthetics of de
Chirico’s artwork, Ueda has successfully translated the emotions of the
painting by using a combination of visual abstraction and gameplay
mechanics.
The lone girl seen playing in Mystery and Melancholy of a Street is now
being guided by the game’s main protagonist (also called Ico),
symbolizing that the game’s interactivity empowers players to help
figures escape de Chirico’s eerily desolate paintings. De Chirico’s
ominous shadows become ICO’s shadowy apparitions, threatening to
snatch the girl, Yorda, away from the player at every step. The visual
trappings of the painting translate to the confines of the prison castle and
its static, vertical forms.
These visual elements work on an abstract level to shape the
emotional experience for viewers and players, so understanding their
function is paramount to creating powerful game experiences.

Journey screen shot
After speaking to a NASA astronaut about his experiences seeing the
Earth from space, Jenova Chen, thatgamecompany’s cofounder and
creative director, wanted to create this same sense of the sublime for
Journey players. The sublime experience is often typified by feelings of
insignificance in the face of massive scale and nature’s perceived power.
Chen gave shape to his idea by creating concept sketches like the one
at top, in which the visual ingredients convey the sense of the sublime he
wanted to communicate in the game environment. Both the concept
sketch and the finished game feature giant, vertical falls that create a
sense of awe as the player moves through the environment. (photo credit
7.3)

Journey concept art by Jenova Chen (photo credit 7.4)

The gameplay map is the representation of an environment
from the top-down view. It features annotated points of interest,
much like a fictional treasure map.
The gameplay map is the closest comparison we can make
to classical compositions. Look at the painting by Rubens on
this page where the composition features a network of two-
dimensional paths for the viewer’s eye to follow. This is what
the gameplay map does for the game player. But a gameplay
map also represents the potential routes the players can
experience in three-dimensional space when they take control
of a character. The way you shape the paths—whether with
curved, straight, or angled lines—will greatly influence the
emotions players experience as they move through the
environment.
Gears of War: Gameplay map and logo

Gears of War is an excellent example of fractal design, where the
overarching concept of the game is echoed at every level of detail from
the logo to characters and map design. (photo credit 7.1)

Gears of War: Map detail with overlay
The Gears of War franchise features whole maps based around the skull
motif that is the centerpiece of the Gears of War logo. Although players
may not be conscious of such overarching designs during gameplay, the
shape of pathways along which they travel will nevertheless emotionally
influence them. Because every element in Gears of War was designed
with a coherent theme in mind, the game creates an exceptionally
immersive emotional experience for players.
In addition to pathways, elements to consider annotating in a gameplay
map include: exit and entrance points, districts or zones, landmarks, and
special items and events. (photo credit 7.2)
Super Mario Galaxy 2
The top-down environment design process and gameplay map allow you
to stand back from specific details of the game, so that you can
contemplate the overarching emotions that you want to create for
players.
The more you pull back, taking in the entire universe if possible, the
easier it’ll be to make all the details fit into place.
LEVEL UP!

The four elements of visual grammar studied throughout this
book—value, line, shape, and volume—constitute our visual
language. Their simplicity allows us to reduce emotions to their
visual component parts, giving us the tools to design with intent
and create heightened emotional experiences.
The one element of visual grammar that we haven’t yet
explored is color, which we’ll turn to now. But before we do, take
a moment to congratulate yourself on having completed Levels 1
to 7. Great work!

UNTIL NOW, WE’VE FOCUSED ON DRAWING, as this is the
foundation of all the arts. An additional part of every game artist’s
professional repertoire is to demonstrate an understanding of color
and the ability to use digital tools, such as Adobe Photoshop and
Corel Painter. Once you have the whole set of skills you’ll be a very
versatile artist indeed.
The following Color section will give you an overview of basic
color concepts, including an introduction to the color wheel, color
temperature, and color concepts for harmony and contrast. These
lessons will give you confidence in your color selection and the
application of color to your character and environment designs.
The Digital Tools section will show you a very simple process for
adding color to your sketches using the layer features in Photoshop
and Painter.

COLOR
Color can communicate emotions in a very primal way.
Although the symbolism of colors varies between cultures,
there are constants to be found in color practice that will help
you significantly enhance the emotional messages of your
designs.
One of the primary functions of the color wheel is to order colors in a
circle so that primary colors (red, yellow, and blue) sit opposite their
complementary colors—the secondary colors green, purple, and orange.
You can also think in terms of temperature and split the color wheel
into two halves, one side featuring warm colors and the other cool colors,
dominated by either the warm orange or the cold blue.
A third way to use the color wheel is as a value scale, from the lightest
color, yellow, to the darkest, purple, with all values in between being
gradients of midrange values. This latter concept was a favorite of the
Impressionists, who avoided using a black pigment, preferring to describe
light and shadow with color.

The significance of the primary colors is that, in theory, every color in the
spectrum can be mixed using just these three hues. Secondary colors
are the result of mixing two primary colors together. Yellow and red, for
instance, create the secondary color orange.
Complementary colors have a curious visual relationship to each other in
that placing them side by side increases the intensity of each. Notice how
the orange tile against a complementary blue background appears more
intense and brighter than the tile of the same color against a red
background. Complementary colors can be used to attract the viewer’s
eye to important items, as they create an eye-catching contrast that can
be likened to black against white.

Journey
Journey takes advantage of color contrasts to create subtle emotional
effects. In the opening desert section, the environment and character
feature warm colors that sit very close to each other on the color wheel.
The emotional effect of such closely related colors is one of harmony.
(photo credit 8.1)

Journey
To create situations with more tension and unease in Journey, the red
and orange colors of the character are contrasted with their
complementary colors of green and blue in the background. In addition,
the value key is shifted from high-key to low-key.
You must consider not only the color of objects but also the color of light.
Light has different colors depending on its wavelength. The sun radiates
warm colors in the range of red, orange, and yellow, which makes the
color of illuminated objects appear warmer. If a cloud passes in front of
the sun, then the blue light of the sky (which is the second brightest light

source in a landscape) becomes the dominant light source and the very
same objects take on a cooler hue. Therefore, it’s the dominant light
source that dictates the temperature of colors within a scene. When we
speak of color harmony, what we’re referring to is the overall temperature
that unifies all the colors in an image.
As you get deeper into color, you’ll find that there are even more
subtleties to be discovered in terms of temperature. It’s possible to have
a cool red, or a warm blue. The two blues, for instance, sit very close to
each other on the color wheel but the one on the right is positioned closer
to the reds and oranges, making it warmer, just as the red on the left is
cooler, because it’s positioned closer to blue on the wheel.
Selecting which combination of colors to use depends on the overall
light temperature in your scene.

Stream in the Jura Mountains (1872–73) by Gustave Courbet (1819–
1877)

Landscape in the Jura (ca. 1870) by Gustave Courbet
Gustave Courbet’s fascination with the phenomenon of light temperature
is exemplified by these two paintings. Each has a distinct color
temperature, even though they were both painted in the same region of
the Jura Mountains. The painting on the left is cooler than the one below.
What Courbet recorded are two different lighting situations, caused by
atmospheric conditions and times of day or season, that have affected
the colors within the landscape. Objects bathed in direct sunlight have a
warmer hue (below) while a cloudy day makes the color of objects
appear cooler and grayer (left).

Portrait of Clara Serana (ca. 1616) by Peter Paul Rubens

Praying Hands (ca. 1600) by Peter Paul Rubens
In figurative painting, the concept of warm and cool colors gives figures a
sense of life and living warmth. These two paintings by Rubens illustrate
the areas of the figure that are conventionally painted with reds to
suggest warmth, indicating the parts of the body where blood vessels are
closest to the surface of the skin: cheeks, nose, ears, fingers, knees, and
feet. Cooler colors suggest skeletal landmarks. Note also that the
“whites” of the eyes have a cool color temperature.

Adobe’s Photoshop and Corel’s Painter are industry standard
tools for digital 2D art. They both have fantastic features that
allow you to experiment with and add color to your drawings.
I recommend that you invest in a graphics drawing tablet and
pen, which is the best alternative to drawing traditionally. A
computer mouse doesn’t allow for the same level of dexterity.
One of the main advantages of Photoshop and Painter is
their layer feature. The layer feature allows you to separate the
stages of an image into more manageable steps, in fact
mirroring the stages of creating a classical painting: a finished
drawing followed by a black-and-white tonal painting over which
glazes of color are added.
We will use Photoshop to illustrate the powerful features of
layers for adding color. If you follow this process you’ll have no
trouble using the same process in Painter. Both programs are
available on Mac and PC platforms and therefore share the
same shortcuts. Here in the keyboard shortcuts Ctrl/Cmd, Ctrl
refers to the PC platform and Cmd to the Mac.
The following steps assume you have a basic knowledge of
Photoshop. Please refer to the Help menu within the program if
you’re unsure about some of the settings discussed.
Both Photoshop and Painter are excellent programs for digital
painting. Some artists use both programs, taking advantage of
their respective strengths, while others work exclusively in one
program. Although Corel’s Painter is somewhat limited in terms
of photo editing capabilities, which are Photoshop’s particular
strengths, it surpasses Photoshop when it comes to mimicking
traditional media. Different media will give your character and
environment silhouettes different edge effects that may be more

suitable for your style of game, such as a soft watercolor brush
or the harder-edged round-tip pen.
A workflow that makes the program’s tools transparent is as
much essential in Painter as it is in Photoshop. Memorizing
keyboard shortcuts for the most common tools will allow you to
spend more time engaged with your artwork and less time
navigating menus to switch between tools.
The great thing about Painter and Photoshop is that there’s
no single correct way of doing things. By experimenting you’ll
be sure to develop a personal workflow.
You can use the character you created, copied, and saved in Level 6 for
your digital color practice exercises and lessons in the pages that follow.

Thirteen Most Commonly Used Photoshop Shortcuts
Cycle screen modes (F)
Cycle images (Ctrl/Cmd + Tab)
Step backward/Undo (Ctrl/Cmd + Alt + tap Z)
Hide selection (Ctrl/Cmd + H)
Brush Tool (B)
Toggle foreground/background color (X)
Restore default foreground/background color (D)
Sample color while Brush Tool is active (Hold Alt + LMB)
Zoom in (Ctrl/Cmd + Space + LMB)
Zoom out (Alt + Space + LMB)
Pan (Space + click and drag LMB)
Scale brush size ([to scale down,] to scale up)
Change brush opacity (0, 1, 2, 3 … 7, 8, 9)

Ten Most Commonly Used Painter Shortcuts
Eraser Tool (N)
Zoom in (Ctrl/Cmd + Space + LMB)
Zoom out (Alt + Space + LMB)
Pan (Space + click and drag LMB)
Rotate canvas (E)
Restore canvas (Hold E + LMB)
Scale brush size ([to scale down,] to scale up)
Change brush opacity (0, 1, 2, 3 … 7, 8, 9)
Straight lines (Hold Shift + click and drag LMB)
Toggle between main and additional colors (Shift + X)
If you want to experience the same freedom in digital painting
that you have drawing with pencil on paper, you need to
familiarize yourself with shortcut keys. Memorizing shortcut
keys allows you to concentrate on creating your artwork without
having to constantly look down at the keyboard or navigate to a
menu.
Here is a list of the top thirteen most commonly used
Photoshop shortcuts that will make the painting process easier.
Shortcuts in Painter are very similar. Notice that the cursor
changes to reflect the currently selected tool or action.
LMB refers to left mouse button. If you’re working with a
graphics drawing tablet, tapping the pen on the tablet will
perform the same action as clicking LMB.
PHOTOSHOP DIGITAL PAINTING EXERCISE

Use the drawing from Character Design (this page) for this
exercise. Scan your drawing at a high resolution of 300 DPI,
open it in Photoshop, and save it as a Photoshop file, with a
PSD extension.
You will create five layers in the Layers palette. Each layer should be set
to a unique blending mode to perform its designated function. To change
a blending mode, click the highlighted drop-down menu while the
respective layer is selected. Notice that the Mask layer has been made
invisible and that the Mask and Drawing layers have been locked.
It’s worth naming each layer to keep your file organized and to make
sure that the layers are ordered exactly as above. Remember to click
(Ctrl/Cmd + S) at regular intervals to save your work in case your
computer should unexpectedly crash.

DRAWING LAYER It’s fairly self-explanatory that the layer named
Drawing is where you paste your scanned character sketch. Change the
blending mode of the layer from Normal to Multiply.
It’s essential in this layer that you remove any visible textures from the
paper so that the background is pure white. You can do this by adjusting
the image’s contrasts using the Levels (Ctrl/Cmd + L) or Curves tool
(Ctrl/Cmd + M). Finish by clicking on the Lock All icon to ensure you don’t
accidentally paint onto this layer.

MASK LAYER (LEFT), ACTIVE SELECTION (RIGHT) On the layer
named Mask you use your drawing as a guide to paint a black silhouette
(left), making sure to keep the negative area detail-free. Fill in the
silhouette using the Brush Tool (B) with a hard-edged brush, and finish by
making the layer invisible.
The Mask layer will allow you to create a mask so you can paint within
the contours of the character without worrying about accidentally painting
over the edges. To activate the Mask, hold down (Ctrl/Cmd) and click on
the layer’s thumbnail in the Layers palette. The activated selection will be
indicated by “marching ants” (right). Your paintable area is now restricted
to the region within this selection. You can make this active selection less
distracting by hiding it with the shortcut (Ctrl/Cmd + H).
When you want to paint outside this region, you have to deactivate the
selection with the Deselect shortcut (Ctrl/Cmd + D).
Consider creating masks for individual elements, such as the head,
legs, and hands, to make selection easier.


COMPOSITE To take the edge off the daunting white canvas, you can
use the gradient tool (G) to create a mid-toned background on the layer
named Background. Activate the Mask selection, choose the layer
named Color, and you’re set to begin painting!
The reason you set the layer named Drawing to a Multiply blending
mode becomes evident as you begin painting. As illustrated in the
composite image, the Multiply blending mode turns white areas
transparent, so only the pencil lines are visible as an overlay. You can
therefore experiment with color on the layer below without affecting the
original drawing.

COLOR LAYER On the layer named Color, it’s best to use a soft-edged
brush set to the biggest size the area you’re working in can manage, so
that you can lay down more color in less time. Smaller, harder-edged
brushes should be used for the finishing details.
Paint fairly monochromatically so that you can concentrate on
establishing the lighting to create the illusion of form with core shadows
and reflected light.
The three daubs of color in the top right-hand corner represent the
three values used to paint the skin texture. (Three values are sufficient to
model a form, as you saw in Advanced Lighting and Values [this page]).
You can quickly sample colors from your image with the Brush Tool (B)
selected by hovering the cursor over a color that you wish to use while
holding down (Alt) and clicking (LMB). The color is automatically set as

your brush color and you can continue painting. The colors you choose
should reference the colors in your research mood board. You may even
wish to sample colors directly from your reference images and apply
them to your character.
GLAZE LAYER For the finishing touches you can add subtle variations of
color by painting on the layer named Glaze without affecting the values
that you laid down in the previous stage.
Set your brush to a low opacity of around 10–20 percent and use a
warm red to add reddish tints to areas such as the nose, ears, and hands

to give your character a sense of living warmth. You can also add cooler
tints of color to create an interesting temperature contrast.
Finish by adding some overlap of color between neighboring objects so
that they appear to reflect each other. This effect is called color bleeding.
FINAL COMPOSITE The final composite consisting of a drawing
overlaying a gradient background, a color layer, and color glazes.
LEVEL UP!

Great work finishing Level 8, which completes the technical
chapters of this book! You now have a well-rounded set of skills
that gives you freedom to add more and more emotional richness
to your drawings and game designs. Continue practicing all the
lessons from Levels 1 through 8, as mastery will only come once
you’ve applied each lesson several hundred times. Very quickly
you’ll be able to visualize and create anything your imagination
thinks up.

Traditional drawing portfolios are still highly prized in the digital
content industry. A portfolio demonstrating strong drawing and
design skills is likely to stand out amid other portfolios that feature
digital artwork exclusively. Some studios pay particular attention to
gesture drawings (rapid drawing studies of live models in action,
people in public, or animals, created in a very short time—as little
as 10–30 seconds per sketch) because the practice of drawing from
life demonstrates the true abilities of the artist. It is much easier to
conceal any deficiencies of skills in a highly rendered drawing that
may have taken several weeks to complete.
The following section will give you advice on how best to go
about getting a job in game development, including portfolio
preparation, self-promotion, tips for finding job vacancies and
applications, and how to busy yourself artistically while searching
for work. The tips will give you a comprehensive guide for getting
your first exciting job in games.

LANDING GAME JOBS
If you’re just coming to the end of your studies, the thought of
looking for and finding a job might seem daunting. Don’t
despair; there is work to be found making games!
Think of finding work as your last level. Being professional
and organized is essential. It’s easy to slip into unproductivity if
you’re working outside of the industry or not yet employed,
since there’s nobody to define a schedule on your behalf. Set
yourself milestones and daily schedules specifying the times at
which you’ll start and finish work each day and what you intend
to achieve. Demonstrating that you can manage your own
schedule and stay productive will ensure that you continue
learning and will make you a more attractive candidate to
prospective employers. Updating job placement agencies with
new work on a monthly basis will give them a reason to take
notice.
You may decide to start a project with friends from your
studies or find collaborators through professional groups such
as the local chapter of the International Game Developers
Association (IGDA). IGDA’s website offers a useful resource for
breaking into the industry: www.igda.org/breakingin.

Essential Elements for Your Job Search
Before approaching a studio or job placement agency you’ll
need to prepare the following items:
PORTFOLIO OF IMAGES. Don’t include every piece of work
you ever created. Be selective and limit your choice to around
ten images that demonstrate your abilities in terms of quality,
attention to detail, and versatility. These images should be in
both a simple digital format, saved as JPGs (or similar), and in
a printed format (which you’ll need for interviews).
If you’re registered with a job placement agency then you
may wish to contact your consultant to ask for their advice in
tailoring your portfolio to specific jobs. It’s in their best interest
to give you good advice if they’re to succeed in finding you
work. It also shows initiative from your side, so take advantage
of their experience and feedback and be gracious if they
suggest improving aspects of your portfolio.
BUSINESS CARDS. You’ll need a set of business cards to
distribute at industry events and meetings. Simple business
cards, which you can design and print yourself, are sufficient.
Include these details on your card:
   Email
Landline number Address
   Website Mobile number
EMAIL SIGNATURE. Potential employers should have no

trouble finding your contact details in every piece of
correspondence, so make sure you create an email signature in
your email program. It’s surprising how often this vital piece of
information is overlooked. Your email signature can be a copy
of the information on your business card with additional links to
relevant social networks, such as LinkedIn and Twitter.
RESUME AND COVER LETTER. Limit the length of your
resume to one page, removing any unrelated employment
information and writing “more information provided on request.”
in its place. The cover letter should be a relatively informal and
short introduction to you, your background, and ambitions,
while the resume focuses on academic and professional
achievements, detailing specific skills and experience.
JULIE SMITH
CONCEPT ART
ILLUSTRATION
PHOTOGRAPHY
WEB DESIGN
Wrong: It’s a definite no-no to list all your skills for your job title, as in this
example.
JULIE SMITH
CONCEPT ARTIST
EMAIL

WEBSITE
TELEPHONE NUMBER
Right: Potential employers prefer to see that you’re focused on one
career, so be selective.
WEBSITE. Flashy websites can look impressive, but a simple
website to promote your work can be just as effective. Design
your website using a simple layout that makes it easy to browse
your work and features your contact details prominently.
It is good practice to create sites that don’t require visitors to
download plug-ins and that can be viewed on a mobile phone
browser. Include information such as your resume, making your
website a one-stop source of information for all your activity.
Maintaining an online blog with daily or weekly updates also
helps promote your activity.
As with every other aspect of your work, attention to detail
equals professionalism. Double-check your spelling in every
email you send out and reply to questions in a timely manner.

Game Job Placement Agencies
Once you have everything ready, a good place to start
searching for work is to sign up with a job placement agency
that specializes in game development. The bigger recruitment
agencies source jobs from all over the world, so don’t limit
yourself to contacting local agents. It’ll be easier to find
employment 
if 
you’re 
willing 
to 
relocate 
since 
game
development studios tend to congregate in select locations of
the world.
U.K. and U.S. job placement agencies:
Datascope Recruitment Ltd., www.datascope.co.uk
Women in Games Jobs, www.womeningamesjobs.com
Aardvark Swift, www.aswift.com
Games Recruit, www.gamesrecruit.co.uk
Change Job, www.change-job.com
Wired Talent, www.wiredtalent.com
Game Recruiter, www.gamerecruiter.com
Game Developers and Job Directories

Some studios avoid using job placement agencies altogether,
preferring to advertise vacancies through their own website. So
it’s worth checking in with your favorite developers or visit open
job directories such as:
Gamasutra, www.gamasutra.com/jobs
ConceptArt.org, http://jobs.conceptart.org
EDGE, http://jobs.next-gen.biz
GamesIndustry.biz, www.gamesindustry.biz/jobs
GameJobHunter, www.gamejobhunter.com
Game Industry Grunts, www.gameindustrygrunts.com
LEVEL UP!
If you have the opportunity to email your resume directly to a
studio, then this first contact should be short and concise. Most
people would prefer to receive a short email where you introduce
yourself and provide a link to your website. Avoid sending emails
with image attachments, as they don’t always make it through
Internet security firewalls.
The more studios you contact the better because you’ll likely
get one response for every twenty studios you contact. Some
companies only respond to follow-up emails, so if they don’t
contact you within a week or two after your first contact or
interview, send them a brief and friendly email.

In 
the 
meantime, 
consider 
starting 
your 
own 
game
development project. Game development is so cheap and
accessible with today’s technology that there’s no reason why
you can’t flex your skills in a self-made team, particularly in the
space of mobile game development.
All the best!

BOOKS
Aristides, Juliette. Classical Drawing Atelier: A Contemporary
Guide to Traditional Studio Practice. Watson-Guptill (2006).
Bammes, Gottfried. Die Gestalt des Menschen: Lehr-und
Handbuch der Künstleranatomie. E. A. Seeman (1964).
Bresman, Jonathan. The Art of Star Wars: Episode 1, The
Phantom Menace. Random House (1999).
Bridgman, George Brant. Bridgman’s Life Drawing. Dover
(1971).
Carlson, John F. Carlson’s Guide to Landscape Drawing. Dover
(1973).
Chekhov, Michael. To the Actor. Harper & Row (1953).
Goldfinger, Eliot. Human Anatomy for Artists. Oxford University
Press (1991).
Graves, Maitland. The Art of Color and Design. McGraw-Hill
Book Company, Inc. (1951).
Gröning, Karl. Decorated Skin: A World Survey of Body Art.
Thames & Hudson (1997).
Hale, Robert Beverly. Drawing Lessons from the Great Masters.
Watson-Guptill (1989).

Hale, Robert Beverly. Master Class in Figure Drawing. Watson-
Guptill (1991).
Hauser, Tim. The Art of UP. Chronicle Books (2009).
Itten, Johannes. The Elements of Color: A Treatise on the Color
System of Johannes Itten, Based on His Book “The Art of
Color.” Van Nostrand Reinhold Company (1970).
Kandinsky, Wassily. Point and Line to Plane. Dover (1979).
Loomis, Andrew. Drawing the Head and Hands. Viking Press
(1956).
Lynch, Kevin. The Image of the City. The MIT Press (1960).
Navarro, Joe. What Every Body Is Saying: An Ex-FBI Agent’s
Guide to Speed-reading People. William Morrow Paperbacks
(2008).
Mattesi, Michael D. Force: The Key to Capturing Life Through
Drawing. iUniverse Star (2004).
Quiller, Stephen. Color Choices: Making Color Sense Out of
Color Theory. Watson-Guptill (1989).
Rhyder, Anthony. The Artist’s Complete Guide to Figure
Drawing: A Contemporary Perspective on the Classical
Tradition. Watson-Guptill (1999).
Richer, Dr. Paul, and Hale, Robert Beverly. Artistic Anatomy.
Watson-Guptill (1971).
Ruskin, John. The Elements of Drawing. J. M. Dent & Sons
(1907).

Schmid, Richard. Alla Prima: Everything I Know About Painting.
Stove Prairie Press (1998).
Speed, Harold. The Practice & Science of Drawing. Dover
(1972).
Tolkien, John Robert Reuel. The Art of the Hobbit.
HarperCollins (2011).
DVDs
Levy, David. From Speedpainting to Concept Art: Adobe
Photoshop Custom Brush Techniques with David Levy.
Gnomon Workshop (2006).
McCaig, Iain. Visual Story Telling With Iain McCaig 1: Anatomy
of a Story. Gnomon Workshop (2005).
Mead, Syd. The Techniques of Syd Mead 1: Thumbnail
Sketching and Line Drawing. Gnomon Workshop (2004).
Robertson, Scott. The Techniques of Scott Robertson 5:
Creating Unique Environments. Gnomon Workshop (2005).
Vickery, Jeremy. Practical Light and Color: Theory and
Application with Jeremy Vickery. Gnomon Workshop (2007).
Vilppu, Glenn. Drawing Manual Lecture Series Set. Vilppu LLC
(1994).
Watts, Jeffrey. Drawing from the Model with Jeffrey Watts.
Liliedahl Video Productions (2008).

Zhu, Feng. Concept Design 2: Sketching Environments.
Gnomon Workshop (2003).

alignment
anchor point, 1.1, 4.1
antigravity muscles, 3.1, 4.1, 4.2
arm
atmospheric perspective
background, 2.1, 2.2
blocking in, 1.1, 2.1, 4.1, 4.2
bones
of arm
of foot
of hand
of head and neck
of leg
of pelvis
of shoulder girdle
of spine and ribcage
bounced light, 2.1, 2.2
box forms, 1.1, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 7.1
brainstorming
building construction
business cards
camera angle
camera shots
centerlines
characters, see video game characters
close-up shot, 5.1, 5.2
color, itr.1, 5.1, 7.1, 8.1
digital tools and

harmony in, 8.1, 8.2
temperature of, 8.1, 8.2
color wheel
complementary colors, 8.1, 8.2
composition
camera angle in
emotional experience and, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 5.8, 5.9
frame in
grouping in
lighting in
scale in
shapes in
contour lighting
contour lines, 3.1, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3
contrapposto
conventions, subverting of
copying, itr.1, 4.1, 4.2
core shadows, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5
depth, portrayal of, 1.1, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 4.1
digital tools, 8.1, 8.2
layer feature of, 8.1, 8.2
shortcuts in
direction, portrayal of, 1.1, 1.2
dissonance, 7.1, 7.2
drawing process
edges, hard vs. soft, 2.1, 4.1, 5.1
email signature
emotional experience:
character design and
composition and, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, 5.7, 5.8, 5.9
energy, portrayal of, 3.1, 4.1, 4.2, 6.1
envelope
erasers, 1.1, 1.2
eyes

facial expressions
foot
foreground, 2.1, 2.2
foreshortening
form, 1.1, 1.2, 4.1
box, 1.1, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 7.1
spherical
frame, 1.1, 1.2, 2.1, 2.2, 5.1
gameplay map
gesture drawings
good studio practice
gravity, 3.1, 5.1, 7.1, 7.2
grouping
hand
harmony, 5.1, 7.1, 8.1
hatch lines
head, as unit of measurement
head and neck
high concept, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3
horizon line, 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 2.1, 2.2, 5.1
human figure
arm
facial expressions
foot
and gravity and movement
hand
head and neck
leg
pelvis
proportions of, 3.1, 4.1
shoulder girdle
spine and ribcage, 3.1, 4.1, 4.2
see also skeletal landmarks
imperfection

International Game Developers Association (IGDA)
job search
keywords, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5, 6.6
landscape drawing
leg, 3.1, 3.2, 4.1
life drawing
light, lighting, 1.1, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3
advanced
basic
as design element
light bloom
lines, itr.1, 1.1, 7.1
in composition, 5.1, 5.2
contour, 3.1, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3
hatch
simplified
long shot, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3
low-angle shot
massing
of arm
of eyes, mouth, and nose
of foot
of hand
of head and neck
of leg
of pelvis
of shoulder girdle
master quick studies
of arm
of foot
of hand
of head
of leg

of pelvis
of shoulder girdle
of spine and ribcage
measuring:
head as unit of
visual tools for, 1.1, 1.2
medium shot, 5.1, 5.2
middle ground, 2.1, 2.2
mind-map, 6.1, 7.1
model sheet
mood board, 6.1, 7.1
mouth
movement, 1.1, 3.1, 4.1, 6.1
muscles, antigravity, 3.1, 4.1, 4.2
nose
opposing curves, 1.1, 3.1, 3.2, 4.1
of arm and hand, 4.1, 4.2
in character design
of foot and leg, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3
of head and neck
of spine and ribcage
overlapping objects, 1.1, 2.1, 4.1, 4.2
Painter
pathways:
in video games, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 7.1
visual, in composition, 5.1, 5.2
pelvis, 3.1, 4.1
pencil measuring
pencils, pencil techniques, 1.1, 1.2
perspective, 1.1, 2.1, 2.2, 7.1
Photoshop
portfolios
position
pressure, in drawing, 1.1, 1.2, 4.1
primary colors

proportions, of human figure, 3.1, 4.1
proximity, of characters, 5.1, 5.2
repetition
research, in character design
resume and cover letter
ribcage, 3.1, 4.1, 4.2
scale, 1.1, 1.2, 5.1, 7.1
secondary colors
shadows, 2.1, 2.2
cast
core, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5
shapes, itr.1, 4.1, 5.1
in character design, 6.1, 6.2
in composition, 5.1, 5.2
negative
positive
shoulder girdle, 3.1, 4.1
silhouettes, 6.1, 6.2
skeletal landmarks, 3.1, 4.1
of arm
of foot, 4.1, 4.2
of hand
of head and neck, 4.1, 4.2
of leg
of pelvis
of shoulder girdle
of spine and ribcage
sketchbooks, itr.1, 1.1
spherical forms
spine and ribcage, 3.1, 4.1, 4.2
spiraling
squinting, 1.1, 4.1, 4.2
stereotypes
strokes
studio, good practice in

style consistency
3–D digital modeling programs
T-intersections, 1.1, 2.1, 4.1, 4.2
triangulation
units, measuring
values, value scales, itr.1, 1.1, 4.1, 5.1, 5.2, 7.1
advanced
basic
vanishing points, 1.1, 1.2, 2.1, 2.2, 4.1
video game characters
arm in
foot in
hand in
head and neck in
leg in
pathways for, 5.1, 5.2, 5.3, 7.1
pelvis in
in relationship to environment
shoulder girdle in
spine and ribcage in
video game characters, design of
emotional experience and
final character drawing in
high concept for, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4
keywords and, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5, 6.6
mind-map for
model sheet for
research for
shapes in, 6.1, 6.2
thumbnail development of
visual metaphors and, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4
video game environment, design of
building construction in
character-centric
characters’ relationship to

gameplay map in
high concept in, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3
mind-map in
top-down
visual inspirations in
visual grammar, itr.1, itr.2, 5.1, 7.1, 7.2
visual metaphors, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3
visual noise, 5.1, 5.2
volumes, itr.1, 1.1, 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7, 5.1, 7.1
advanced
basic
websites, job search and
weight, 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, 4.1, 5.1

CHRIS SOLARSKI received a BA in computer animation and
began working as a 3D character and environment artist for
Sony Computer Entertainment in London. Eventually, Solarski
enrolled in art classes at the Warsaw Academy of Fine Arts.
During that time, he discovered the exciting connection
between classical art techniques and video game design. He
currently develops his own video games under Solarski Studio.
He also works as creative director of the Swiss-based social-
gaming startup Gbanga and lectures at SAE/Qantm Institute in
Zurich.

