
Driven to Madness with Fright:
Further Notes on Horror Fiction

DRIVEN TO MADNESS WITH FRIGHT
Further Notes on Horror Fiction
S. T. Joshi

Copyright © 2016 by S. T. Joshi.
Cover art by Allen Koszowski. Copyright © 2016 by Allen Koszowski.
All rights reserved.

Contents
I. The Classics
From Gothic to Weird
The Canon of American Weird Fiction
Weird Poetry, Then and Now
Poe as Revolutionary
The Life and Work of Ambrose Bierce
A Biography of the Mind
Shirley Jackson as a Classic
II. Some Contemporaries
Terror in the Northwest
Campbell and Lovecraft
Rain, Rain, Everywhere
Fifty Years of Ramsey Campbell
Terror in a Sentence
The Sublime and the Ridiculous
Just Like the Movies
A Slow-Moving Tsunami
A Modern “Heart of Darkness”
Sculptures in Prose
The Mystery Man of Weird Fiction
Spanning the Genres with William F. Nolan
Of Revenants and Seedy Taverns
Road Dogs and Iron Dead
III. Some Anthologies
Driven to Madness with Fright
A Smorgasbord of Weird
Chambers, Lovecraft, and Pastiche
The Anthologies of Jason V Brock and  William F. Nolan
IV. H. P. Lovecraft:  His Disciples and His Critics
The Emergence of H. P. Lovecraft
How Not to Edit Lovecraft
The Derleth Mythos
The Lovecraft Cult

The World of Lovecraft Fandom
The Return of Cosmic Horror
Old and New Cthulhu
Is the Well Running Dry?
A Distinctive Talent
Working Together
Darrell Schweitzer and the Mythos
“Life Is More Horrible Than Death”
Conflicted about Lovecraft
Sources
I. The Classics
II. Some Contemporaries
III. Some Anthologies
IV. H. P. Lovecraft: His Disciples and His Critics

I. The Classics
From Gothic to Weird
The recent effloresence of neo-Gothic fiction—the literature of fear, terror,
wonder, awe, and the supernatural—is the product of centuries, perhaps
millennia, of work by a wide array of artists both celebrated and obscure. It is,
after all, in the Epic of Gilgamesh (c. 1700 B.C.E.) that we find such motifs as the
superhero, the quest for eternal life, battles with monsters, and the like. About a
millennium later, the Odyssey is rife with creatures of eccentric cast, from the
sorceress Circe to Polyphemus the Cyclops to the twin horrors of Scylla and
Charybdis. Greek literature and myth regales us with the Gorgon Medusa, the
Furies, the harpies; ghosts stalk through the most elevated of Greek tragedies.
Dante and Milton drew only partly upon scripture, but more upon their own
imaginations, in depicting the terrors of hell and its demons. The ghost in
Hamlet and the witches in Macbeth are familiar to all.
We must, however, be careful not to let our zeal for tracing anticipations of
contemporary Gothic elements get the better of us. The literature of terror can
only be said to have achieved independent existence when it has substantially
segregated itself from religion, myth, and folklore, however much it may draw
upon these rich storehouses of belief and ritual. In particular, the literature of the
supernatural can only be said to have become viable when, in a given culture,
there becomes a relatively clear sense of the natural. If ghosts, goblins, and
vampires are commonly considered to be components of the everyday scene, the
depiction of them in literature cannot be considered supernatural because it
would not constitute a defiance of the natural laws that render such entities
beyond the bounds of the possible. It is for this reason that, without perhaps
being entirely aware of it, literary scholars have rightly declared that Gothicism
commenced as an independent literary mode with the publication of Horace
Walpole’s The Castle of Otranto (1764). For it was only by the middle of the
eighteenth century that human knowledge had advanced to the point where it
could, with some confidence, be asserted that creatures such as the ghost or the

werewolf were definitively outside the limits of nature.
It is often forgotten that this original Gothic movement—running, roughly,
from 1764 to the 1820s—did not get under way at once upon the publication of
Walpole’s curious little novel. It required the added impetus of German
Romanticism to bring to the fore such literary figures as Ann Radcliffe, Matthew
Gregory Lewis, Mary Shelley, and Charles Robert Maturin, not to mention a
host of lesser talents. This movement shares many similarities with the “horror
boom” of the 1970s and 1980s, in that it was energized by a quite small number
of toweringly original writers and a motley crew of crude imitators who sought
to capitalize on the sudden popularity of this literary genre; and there is a further
similarity in that the Gothic movement could not in any sense be said to be
uniform or monolithic, but quickly fragmented into numerous subgenres and
offshoots. The element of supernatural terror was by no means dominant, and
Ann Radcliffe (perhaps unwisely) rejected the supernatural altogether in her
work, opting instead for what has been called the “explained supernatural,”
where supernatural phenomena are suggested but are explained away (oftentimes
in a highly unconvincing manner) at the end. Lewis and Maturin shrewdly
avoided this deflation of the reader’s expectations, while Shelley’s Frankenstein
(1818), by transferring the locus of fear to radical new discoveries in science,
could be said to have contributed significantly to the later creation of science
fiction.
In a sense, the Gothic novelists were trying to have their cake and eat it too.
While depicting the most outlandish incidents in their tales, they placed many of
their narratives in the Middle Ages, at a time when—in their estimation—
ignorance and superstition so dominated the populace that the representation of
wondrous events in fiction could be thought to constitute a backhanded kind of
psychological realism. More relevantly, the supernatural, in those works that
featured it, was acknowledged as beyond the bounds of the real, but because it
drew upon deep, vestigial instincts centred around the fear of death and the
terrors of hell, it commanded a kind of quasi-belief that was the real secret to its
success.
In the 1830s Edgar Allan Poe revolutionized the field both by confining the
literature of terror exclusively to the short story and by bringing to that literature
an entirely new and intense understanding of the psychology of fear. Poe’s
greatest innovation, quite frankly, was his immense literary talent: any one of his
best tales packs more of a punch than entire novels by the Gothicists. That initial
wave of Gothic literature fell by the wayside very quickly, as Poe, both by
precept and by example, championed the short story as the chosen vehicle for
conveying terror. His great contemporary Nathaniel Hawthorne was not quite so

rigid in confining Gothicism to the short story; indeed, his House of the Seven
Gables (1851) might be said to constitute one of the first instances in American
literature in which the entire premise of the work is supernatural—the curse of
the dying Matthew Maule on the entire Pyncheon family—although his
execution of that premise leads more to wistful melancholy than to fear or
horror. Fitz-James O’Brien and Ambrose Bierce followed Poe more closely, but
in England Poe’s example of concision and intensity took much longer to find
favor. If anyone today is capable of wading through Edward Bulwer-Lytton’s
Gothic novels, especially the immense A Strange Story (1862), they will find
that his work is more in the nature of a philosophical tract than an excursion into
the supernatural. J. Sheridan Le Fanu restricted the supernatural almost entirely
to the short story or novella, while a legion of Victorian ghost story writers—
Margaret Oliphant, Mrs. J. H. Riddell, Rhoda Broughton, Amelia B. Edwards,
and many others—resurrected the ghost story with seemingly endless variations.
It was, however, at this juncture—the late nineteenth century—that we come
upon some towering works of Gothicism that still color the popular imagination.
Less than two decades separate the publication of such novels as Robert Louis
Stevenson’s The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde (1886), Oscar Wilde’s
The Picture of Dorian Gray (1890/1891), Bram Stoker’s Dracula (1897), and
Henry James’s The Turn of the Screw (1898)—the first two constituting
imperishable examples of the doppelgänger motif, while the other two remain
the canonical treatments of the vampire and the ghost, respectively. It is of some
significance that three of these works are short novels at best, adhering to Poe’s
notions of the “unity of effect” (which he believed possible only in the short
story) but expansive enough to incorporate the interplay and development of
character that is one of the distinguishing features of the novel. Indeed, one of
the several literary failings of Dracula is probably its excessive length, to say
nothing of the fact that its putative lead character, Count Dracula, remains
offstage for large segments of the work.
What is most notable about this turn-of-the-century period is the degree to
which mainstream literary figures chose to engage in Gothicism, either
supernatural or non-supernatural, for the length of a tale or novel. A substantial
number of the short stories and novellas of Henry James involve ghosts or the
suspicion of ghosts, as do the tales of his friend and disciple Edith Wharton;
such Americans as F. Marion Crawford (The Witch of Prague, 1891; Wandering
Ghosts, 1911), Robert W. Chambers (The King in Yellow, 1895), the architect
Ralph Adams Cram (Black Spirits and White, 1895), Sarah Orne Jewett,
Gertrude Atherton, and Mary E. Wilkins-Freeman made vital contributions to
the literature of terror; such of their British counterparts as Rudyard Kipling, Sir

Arthur Conan Doyle, Wilkie Collins, Richard Marsh (The Beetle, 1897), H.
Rider Haggard (She, 1887), and H. G. Wells did the same. And what do we
make of Joseph Conrad’s “Heart of Darkness” (1902)? Its concluding utterance
by Kurtz, “The horror! The horror!” has become almost self-parodic, but this
novella as a whole fuses the terrors of the external world—symbolized by the
darkness of deepest Africa—and the terrors of the human mind as ably as any
work in literature.
It was during this period that some of the most significant figures in
supernatural horror—the Welshman Arthur Machen, the Irishman Lord
Dunsany, the Englishmen Algernon Blackwood and M. R. James, and the
American H. P. Lovecraft—emerged. Their work, very diverse in subject-matter,
is united by a philosophical vision that found in the supernatural a means of
conveying each author’s deepest metaphysical and moral vision. Machen, the
implacable foe of science, which he believed was tearing the veils from the
mystery of the universe, utilized the supernatural as a means of restoring the
sense of wonder to the cosmos; Blackwood, not quite so hostile to the progress
of human knowledge, nevertheless used his horror and fantasy fiction to envision
a pantheistic unity of all nature; Dunsany was repelled by the onslaught of
technology and commercialism and sought to depict otherworldly realms of
beauty; and James, a relatively orthodox Christian, found in the ghost story a
vehicle for moral accounts of the just punishment that descends upon sin and
error.
Lovecraft, drawing upon the work of all his predecessors, dating back to
Poe, infused the weird tale with a cosmic vision that remains his signature
achievement. Recognizing that many of the standard motifs in supernatural
fiction—the ghost, the witch, the vampire, the werewolf, the haunted house—
had lost much of their potency because the advance of knowledge had rendered
them virtually unusable in serious literature, Lovecraft refocused the locus of
terror to the unbounded depths of the cosmos, thereby effecting a felicitous
union with the burgeoning genre of science fiction.
Lovecraft was, of course, present at the birth of the pulp magazine Weird
Tales, the first periodical devoted solely to weird fiction. Such of his colleagues
as Clark Ashton Smith, Robert E. Howard, August Derleth, and Donald Wandrei
filled the pages of that magazine, and dozens of other pulps, with a wide array of
writing that spanned the spectrum from psychological suspense to pure science
fiction. And yet, it must be acknowledged frankly that the great bulk of material
published in Weird Tales and other pulp magazines was subliterary rubbish that
deserved the scorn it garnered from mainstream critics. Whether the refusal of
mainstream magazines to publish weird material led to the birth of the pulps, or

whether the pulps’ emergence led to the banishing of the weird from mainstream
magazines, is a chicken-and-egg question that may be impossible to answer; but
because the pulps were “popular” literature designed for a largely ill-educated
public, the majority of their contents was hackneyed in conception and slipshod
in execution. Only the very best of the pulp writers surmounted the hackwork of
their fellow scribblers; but because they had few other outlets to publish their
work, they became tarred with the same brush that depicted all the material in
the pulps as beneath critical notice. The entire field of Gothic fiction thereby
came to be considered a poor relation to mainstream literature.
This aesthetic cleavage was never quite so pronounced in England, perhaps
because the unusual longevity of such writers as Blackwood and Dunsany,
whose work continued to be received with respect. The continuing credibility of
the ghost story helped to foster a vibrant and literarily viable tradition of
supernatural writing that included such distinguished figures as Walter de la
Mare, E. Nesbit, L. P. Hartley, John Buchan, Robert Hichens, Elizabeth Bowen,
and May Sinclair. Dunsany’s work had the effect of segregating fantasy—a
mode whereby the author creates his own realm of pure imagination—from
supernatural horror; from the foundations he established came the later work of
E. R. Eddison, Mervyn Peake, and J. R. R. Tolkien.
Curiously enough, the supernatural novel flourished after a fashion in the
early twentieth century, whether at the hands of such an eccentric writer as
William Hope Hodgson or in individual efforts by generally mainstream writers
such as Barry Pain (An Exchange of Souls, 1911), Francis Brett Young (Cold
Harbour, 1924), Herbert Gorman (The Place Called Dagon, 1927), and Leonard
Cline (The Dark Chamber, 1927). M. R. James’s work inspired a small cadre of
disciples who sought to build upon his tradition of the antiquarian ghost story,
although few of these writers came close to matching James’s achievement. But
the neo-Gothic novel all but faded out of existence by the 1930s, overwhelmed
by the literary dominance of mimetic realism (Hemingway, Sinclair Lewis, F.
Scott Fitzgerald, William Faulkner) or the Modernist movement that, while
drawing upon fantasy and terror to some degree, generally scorned pure
supernaturalism. D. H. Lawrence wrote a handful of weird tales, but these were
cast in shade when compared with his immensely influential novels of love and
death.
August Derleth and Donald Wandrei’s founding of Arkham House in 1939
—initially to publish the work of Lovecraft in hardcover—was a mixed blessing:
although the founders quickly proceed to publish other meritorious work from
the pulp magazines, their press in some senses augmented the ghettoization of
weird literature by restricting it to a small and insignificant audience. The

demise of the pulps in the 1940s resulted from the emergence of the paperback
book, and in this market some supernatural writers flourished—but only by
writing work that could be marketed under other rubrics. Fritz Leiber and Ray
Bradbury spanned the spectrum from science fiction to supernatural horror to
pure fantasy, while Robert Bloch did the same but settled upon psychological
suspense as his chosen mode of literary utterance. By the 1950s and 1960s they
were joined by other writers such as Richard Matheson, Russell Kirk, Theodore
Sturgeon, Charles Beaumont, and Rod Serling. Then, of course, there was the
odd case of Shirley Jackson, whose work sat uneasily between the domains of
mainstream fiction and psychological terror, lapsing finally into the supernatural
with the stunning haunted house novel The Haunting of Hill House (1959).
Critics rarely knew what to make of her unclassifiable work, with the result that
she was largely ignored both by the mainstream community and by the cadre of
Gothic devotees.
In England the picture was in some sense not quite so bleak—the flamboyant
supernatural novels of Dennis Wheatley earned him a wide following if little
critical recognition, while Gerald Kersh contributed his eccentric fusions of
supernatural, psychological, and science-fictional terror—but in other ways was
dire indeed, as Robert Aickman was virtually the sole practitioner of pure
supernaturalism in the 1950s and 1960s. It was just at this time when the media
were making their impress upon the literary development of the field. Although
horror movies had been prevalent since the earliest days of the film industry—it
was, indeed, the popularity of Dracula (1931) and other vampire films that
raised Stoker’s novel to canonical status—the impact of film and television upon
literary work only began to be substantially felt in the 1960s. Rod Serling’s “The
Twilight Zone” (1959–64) enlisted the services of some of the best writers in the
field, including Beaumont and Matheson, and it is arguable that it was this
leavening of the popular audience for treatments of the supernatural that led to
the spectacular and seemingly sudden emergence of horror as a bestselling
phenomenon.
Ira Levin’s Rosemary’s Baby (1967), William Peter Blatty’s The Exorcist
(1971), and Thomas Tryon’s The Other (1971) were all adapted into film, the
first two being particularly noteworthy and popular. The synergy between film
and literature gained particular force in the work of Stephen King, who for a
time was the most remarkable phenomenon in the history of publishing.
Virtually every one of his novels, beginning with Carrie (1974), achieved
bestseller status and was adapted into a film or a television miniseries; he
quickly became a brand name, a known quantity like a McDonald’s hamburger
or Tide detergent. Other bestselling writers such as Peter Straub (Ghost Story,

1979) and Clive Barker (The Books of Blood, 1984–85) followed in his wake; a
bit later, Dean R. Koontz and Anne Rice joined the ranks of the blockbusters.
But this “horror boom”—which was, in reality, much more a marketing than an
aesthetic phenomenon—had at least one unfortunate tendency: it impelled
authors of all sorts to aim for popular rather than literary success, their goal
being to reach the bestseller lists, not to produce work of genuine merit. The
result was inevitable: a surfeit of the hackneyed, the uninspired, and the plainly
trashy caused the entire field to implode, at least from a marketing perspective;
publishers radically cut back on their horror offerings or abandoned them
altogether.
The fact is that, during this entire period, any number of sincere, talented
writers were working out of the limelight, and it is their work that will in the end
survive and come to be seen as representative of the best that Gothicism has to
offer. Ramsey Campbell, emerging from his early devotion to Lovecraft, has
produced such a distinguished array of novels and tales from the 1970s to the
present that he must be given serious consideration as the greatest horror writer
of our time, and perhaps of all time. Not far behind are such writers as T. E. D.
Klein, Thomas Ligotti, Dennis Etchison, and Thomas Tessier. And now that
Gothicism has, to some degree, returned to its roots in the small press, such
writers as Caitlín R. Kiernan, Norman Partridge, China Miéville, and Laird
Barron are only the most prominent of a vibrant new crop of neo-Gothicists.
What the present volume demonstrates beyond all doubt is that Gothicism is
a mode of writing that writers of many different stripes—whether it be
predominantly mainstream writers like Toni Morrison, Peter Ackroyd, Joyce
Carol Oates, and Margaret Atwood or genre veterans such as Campbell, King,
Straub, Elizabeth Hand, Dan Simmons, Neil Gaiman, and Phil Rickman—can
utilize to express themes, conceptions, and imagery beyond the purview of
mimetic realism. Many of these writers draw upon the long heritage of
Gothicism stretching back at least two centuries while at the same time
remaining distinctively original in their manipulation of character and incident.
The blurring or melding of genres is the order of the day, and if this sometimes
results in critical difficulties in classification, it is nonetheless a benefit to those
privileged readers who can find in neo-Gothicism some of the best that
contemporary literature has to offer.

The Canon of American Weird Fiction
In 2007, Penguin Classics published my American Supernatural Tales. I was
glad to see the book in print, although I was forced to omit several items for
space reasons. I had also proposed a British Supernatural Tales, but the Penguin
folks have apparently decided to compile such a volume in-house at the London
office. The fact that American Supernatural Tales has not exactly flown off the
shelves may have had something to do with this decision.
I open this essay in this self-absorbed way only as a preface to the thrill and
wonder I have experienced at examining Peter Straub’s splendid two-volume
anthology, American Fantastic Tales (Library of America, 2009; 2 vols.), which,
in approximately three times the space that I was allowed, has presented in a
nearly definitive manner the entire length and breadth of American weird writing
from Charles Brockden Brown to the present day. These volumes constitute a
triumphant pinnacle in the recognition of the fantastic as a genuine contribution
to literature. They have been compiled with such learning, skill, and panache
that it will be many years before anything remotely comparable could be
produced. The prestige of its editor—and, even more so, of its publisher—will
ensure that the weird tale will be regarded by the general literary community
with a seriousness and lack of condescension that it has never before achieved.
If, in the following remarks, I am a bit more critical than praiseworthy, it may
largely be because of my envy that Straub was given the space that I was not
given to represent the finest American supernatural work.
There appear to be three guiding principles governing the inclusion of
authors and works in American Fantastic Tales: 1) authors who are chiefly
known for their weird or supernatural writing; 2) mainstream authors who have
dipped into the weird on occasion, sometimes in a single story; and 3) obscure
writers, either weird or mainstream, who either deserve greater attention or have
written one or more weird specimens that are of contemporary interest. It is
worth studying each of these principles in turn.
The chief purpose of such a set as Straub has compiled is to establish—or at
least suggest—a canon of American supernatural writing. Critics and advocates
of the genre are obliged to admit that this corner of literature is an essentially
minor one that will never attract the wide readership that mainstream fiction
enjoys, or even the readership of science fiction or mystery/detective fiction.
Moreover, only the most eminent weird writers can stake a claim for canonical
status in general literature. To date, only Poe, Bierce, and Lovecraft are in the

American canon (the first and third are now in the Library of America; the
second will be shortly, it appears). It is therefore a trifle disappointing that, in
two out or three instances, Straub’s selection of tales by these writers leaves
something to be desired. Poe’s “Berenice” is an entertaining tale, but it is really a
half-parodic story easily eclipsed by half-a-dozen others one could quickly name
(“Ligeia,” “The Fall of the House of Usher,” “MS. Found in a Bottle,” “The
Black Cat,” “The Tell-Tale Heart,” “Facts in the Case of M. Valdemar,” even the
early “Metzengerstein”). As for Lovecraft’s “The Thing on the Doorstep,” it is
widely recognised to be among the poorest of his later stories. I suspect Straub
chose it chiefly because it (uncharacteristically) features a conflict of human
characters; but it is crude and obvious, and any number of other tales of similar
length (“The Rats in the Walls,” “The Call of Cthulhu,” “The Colour out of
Space,” even “The Dreams in the Witch House”) are more representative of
Lovecraft’s signature theme of cosmicism—the lonely human being’s realisation
of his insignificance in the face of the infinities of space and time—than “The
Thing on the Doorstep.” But Straub has done well to choose Bierce’s “The
Moonlit Road,” a poignant and terrifying late story that is far too little known.
There are some other writers for whom a single story largely defines their
contribution to the weird; hence Straub has properly chosen Fitz-James
O’Brien’s “What Was It?,” Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s “The Yellow Wall
Paper,” Ralph Adams Cram’s “The Dead Valley,” Gertrude Atherton’s “The
Striding Place,” Edward Lucas White’s “Lukundoo,” Edith Wharton’s
“Afterward,” and any number of other such chestnuts. In other cases his choices
seem intended to surprise the reader by the unexpected. One of the longest
stories in the book is Robert W. Chambers’s “The Repairer of Reputations,” the
unnerving opening story in The King in Yellow (1895); and although it may be
considered a kind of horror/science-fiction hybrid (it is set in 1920), it is a
refreshing contrast to the better-known “The Yellow Sign.” Other choices of this
sort are less happy. F. Marion Crawford’s mediocre vampire story “For the
Blood Is the Life” does not stand comparison with the better-known “The Upper
Berth.” Clark Ashton Smith’s “Genius Loci” was probably chosen because of its
contemporary setting, and it is certainly an effective tale; but one can easily
think of several other stories that are both better-known and more substantial.
I imagine Straub had considerable difficulty restricting himself to a single
story by some authors in the field who have produced large quantities of
outstanding work. It is wonderful to see T. E. D. Klein’s “The Events at Poroth
Farm” canonised, and probably it was chosen because several of his other tales
(especially those in Dark Gods, 1985) are too lengthy for inclusion. Fritz
Leiber’s “Smoke Ghost” is a safe choice, as are Robert Bloch’s “The Cloak,”

Ray Bradbury’s “The April Witch,” and Richard Matheson’s “Prey.” Shirley
Jackson is a puzzle. Her work is rarely supernatural, and yet she must be
represented. I chose a relatively little-known story, “A Visit” (a.k.a. “The Lovely
House”), which is indeed supernatural; Straub has chosen “The Daemon Lover,”
an ambiguous horror tale that is certainly a worthy selection.
I think Straub has done Robert E. Howard a disservice by including “The
Black Stone,” a well-known but not wholly successful pastiche of Lovecraft.
One of the Solomon Kane, King Kull, or Bran Mak Morn stories might have
represented Howard to better advantage. A similar complaint can be made
regarding the selection of Thomas Ligotti’s “The Last Feast of Harlequin”:
however skilful an homage to Lovecraft it may be, it is not wholly characteristic
of the nightmarish strangeness of Ligotti’s work. There is also a bit of
awkwardness in the inclusion of Donald Wandrei’s “Nightmare,” first published
in Strange Harvest (1965). The stories in the anthology are arranged
chronologically by date of publication. The likelihood that Wandrei wrote the
story so late as 1965 is, to my mind, fabulously remote; it was probably written
at least 20 years earlier. But in the absence of documentary evidence of its
writing, it is placed in the 1965 sequence, thereby placing Wandrei in the
company of writers like Davis Grubb or Harlan Ellison, with whom he has little
relation.
We now come to the matter of inclusions and omissions of leading figures in
the field. I fear that Straub has committed several gaffes in this regard. Julian
Hawthorne did produce an array of weird work toward the end of his career, but
his long story “Absolute Evil” simply does not justify the space it occupies. But
this error in judgment is nothing compared to the inclusion of . . . yes, that’s
right . . . Seabury Quinn! What temporary fit of insanity led Straub to include the
Jules de Grandin tale “The Curious Case of Benjamin Button” (1927) is beyond
my power of understanding. This long, maundering bit of pure hokum takes up
32 pages that could have been devoted to much worthier work. Work by whom?
I will confess that there are not many writers of the nineteenth or early twentieth
century whom Straub has overlooked, although I probably would have included
Irvin S. Cobb (“Fishhead,” “The Unbroken Chain,” “Faith, Hope and Charity,”
etc.) and perhaps even Gouverneur Morris (“Back There in the Grass,” “It,”
etc.). Moving on a bit, I think Carl Jacobi (“Mive,” “Revelations in Black”) and
Joseph Payne Brennan (“Canavan’s Back Yard,” “Levitation”) deserved
inclusion. But it is in the second volume of the set (“From the 1940s to Now”)
that some of the most cavernous omissions occur:
Rod Serling. Dennis Etchison. Karl Edward Wagner. Bentley Little. Brian
Hodge.

How any of these writers could have been omitted is incomprehensible to
me. Possibly copyrights were an issue: Rod Serling’s widow denied me
permission to include the story “Dust” in my anthology. The omission of
Etchison is crippling: it would be difficult to find a writer of weird short fiction
of greater eminence in the last thirty years. As for Wagner, Joe Pulver has
recently stated that “Sticks” is—or should be—on everyone’s list of the 100 best
horror tales of the twentieth century. William F. Nolan probably deserved some
consideration: his retrospective collection Dark Universe (Stealth Press, 2001)
contains some outstanding material, and he was (and is) an important member of
the California “Group”—Beaumont, Matheson, Serling, and others.[1]
As for Straub’s promotion of mainstream writers who have occasionally
contributed to the weird, the record is also somewhat spotty. Anything by
Herman Melville is worth reading, but “The Tartarus of Maids,” about the
horrors of a paper factory, is not fantastic in any meaningful sense of the term.
Bret Harte’s “The Legend of Monte del Diablo” is more successful in its account
of a Spanish priest of the eighteenth century who is shown apocalyptic visions of
the future by the Devil. Harriet Prescott Spofford is attracting some attention as a
weird writer, and her tale “The Moonstone Mass” is a gripping account of
horrors in the ice-fields near the North Pole. Another woman writer of the
period, Alice Brown, has written in effective moral ghost story in “Golden
Baby.” And it is a pleasure to read both Willa Cather’s “Consequences” and
Ellen Glasgow’s “The Shadowy Third.” The latter, in particular, is an
outstanding work—delicate, restrained, moving, and yet insidiously terrifying. It
does justify the 24 pages it fills. So does Truman Capote’s “Miriam,” about an
evil child. However, F. Scott Fitzgerald’s “The Curious Case of Benjamin
Button” is a ridiculous comic story about a baby born at the age of 70 and
growing younger day by day. Tennessee Williams’s curious and not entirely
coherent “The Mysteries of the Joy Run” does throw in a ghost at the end, but it
seems adventitious. And I had best maintain merciful silence regarding John
Cheever’s intolerably banal and predictable femme fatale story “Torch Song”
and (though I regret to say it) Vladimir Nabokov’s fussy and pointless “The
Vane Sisters.” The general impression one gets from these stories by mainstream
writers is that they (the authors) are not sufficiently experienced in the handling
of the supernatural in a coherent and compelling way.
The third category I have identified—authors who are little known but, in
Straub’s opinion, are deserving of wider notice—is the smallest subset of the
two volumes. I have never heard of Madeline Yale Wynne, who wrote only a
single collection of tales, The Little Room and Other Stories (1895), but after
reading “The Little Room” I am not inclined to read much more. It is nice to see

Francis Stevens included—Straub has chosen the wonderfully chilling “Unseen
—Unfeared”—but I wonder whether her inclusion has more to do with her
gender than with her overall body of work. There are also works by more recent
writers who are new to me—George Saunders, M. Rickert, Brian Evenson,
Benjamin Percy—but I don’t have much to say about them.
One could, however, cavil at length in this manner. The fact is that a
compilation of this sort turns every reader—at least every well-informed one—
into a kind of editor: it forces you to come to terms with what you would have
selected if you had been given the opportunity. In spite of all the above, I cannot
recommend these volumes with sufficient enthusiasm: they are a towering
landmark in the canonisation of the weird, fantastic, and supernatural in
literature. Never again, it is hoped, will ignorant and prejudiced critics be able to
dismiss the entire field as insignificant and sub-literary: there is simply too much
good work—some of it transcendently brilliant—for anyone to adopt this
attitude. Now it is up to us to continue the study and analysis of weird literature
—American, English, and foreign—so that a full and all-encompassing canon is
established.

Weird Poetry, Then and Now
It is well known that, in general, the earliest expressions of a culture’s literacy
take the form of poetry—Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey for the Greeks, Beowulf for
the Anglo-Saxons, and many other examples that could be cited. In the field of
weird fiction, the same holds true: Homer’s epics themselves (especially the
Odyssey) are filled with all manner of bizarre figures and episodes, ranging from
the ungainly Cyclops to the lotos-eaters to Odysseus’ desent into Hades.
When the Gothic movement began with Horace Walpole’s absurd little
novel The Castle of Otranto (1764), poetry was not slow to take up the cause.
An important prelude to the development of weirdness in verse was Thomas
Percy’s Reliques of Ancient English Poetry (1765), an invaluable font for the
balladry that quickly came to fruition in such works as G. A. Bürger’s “Lenore”
(1773) and “Der wilde Jäger” (1777), culminating in the greatest weird poem of
them all, Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s The Rime of the Ancient Mariner (written
1797).
It is, therefore, not quite accurate for Brett Rutherford, the editor and
publisher of a valuable new edition of Matthew Gregory Lewis’s 1801 anthology
Tales of Wonder (Yogh & Thorn, 2012), to say that the book “launched the
Gothic-Romantic Poetry Movement,” since there was plenty of horrific verse
before that two-volume set appeared; but Rutherford’s hyperbole is pardonable,
since Tales of Wonder does indeed contain a rich feast of terror that even the
most jaded of today’s readers will find shuddersomely pleasurable. Lewis
himself wrote or translated several of the best or most important poems in his
anthology, including Goethe’s “The Erl-King” (1782) and Herder’s “The Water-
King.” Some of the poems, such as “Alonzo the Brave, and Fair Imogene,” were
taken from his own sensational Gothic novel The Monk (1796), which appeared
when he was a lad of twenty-one. Lewis seems to have had difficulty
overcoming the opprobrium that that novel—which, let us recall, was the work
of a young man who was then a sitting member of Parliament—brought down
upon his head. One wonders whether Lewis published Tales of Wonder in a
feeble attempt to restore his literary (or, more precisely, moral) reputation by
collecting works of poetry, then regarded as the loftiest form of literary art. If so,
he was in for a disappointment. Not only did the second volume of his book,
consisting largely of reprints reaching back more than a century (Dryden, Gray,
Parnell, Mallett), gain the derisive sobriquet “Tales of Plunder,” but someone
later in the year concocted a delicious parody, Tales of Terror, that lampooned

some of Lewis’s own verse. Brett Rutherford, however, makes an intriguing
conjecture that Lewis himself may have been the compiler of that volume.
Rutherford, indeed, seems unduly wary of speaking too highly of the
material in Tales of Wonder, chiefly I think because the contemporary reader
(especially the reader of weird fiction) is unused to poetry and, in Rutherford’s
view, has little patience with it. Accordingly, he states in his introduction: “The
poems here are unlikely to frighten anyone other than the superstitious, or very
small children; instead, they delight those of a Gothic predilection who enjoy the
sublime frisson of danger and supernatural awe.” Well, maybe so; but I think
that Goethe’s “Erl-King,” if no other, still sends a shudder up my spine,
containing as it does a “surprise ending” more pungent than any concocted by
Ambrose Bierce, John Collier, or Roald Dahl. Robert Burns’s “Tam O’Shanter”
still has the power to evoke a shiver, and several other specimens in the book
create that “pleasing terror” which M. R. James so highly prized.
But the value of Rutherford’s edition is not its intrinsic contents, important
as it is to bring these poems back into print; it is, rather, the care and
meticulousness with which he has edited the poems. He has thoroughly and
expertly annotated all the items, providing useful background on the authors and
clarifying many details of the poems themselves (including the thankless task of
providing English equivalents to the sometimes impenetrable Scots dialect in
“Tam O’Shanter” and other poems). He has also provided the German, Latin, or
other originals of several of the translated poems, going all the way back to the
Greek writer Phlegon, whose tale “Philinnion and Machates” (presented here in
English, not in Greek!) provided the basis for Goethe’s other great weird poem,
“The Bride of Corinth.” Therefore, to say that this is the first unabridged reprint
of Tales of Wonder is insufficient; what Rutherford has presented is a tasty
banquet of weird poetry that stretches back two thousand years.
In the generation after Lewis wrote, Edgar Allan Poe revolutionised both
weird fiction and weird poetry. That achievement is too immense to be detailed
here, but Rutherford has provided a fascinating glimpse of one sliver of it in his
splendid book Last Flowers (Poet’s Press, 2011), an account (and anthology) of
the troubled relationship between Poe and his Providence sweetheart, the poet
Sarah Helen Whitman. Rutherford presents samples of Poe’s and Whitman’s
poetry juxtaposed against each other to highlight both their literary and their
personal relationship; and he precedes it with a 70-page introduction that delves
deeply and compellingly into their involvement—an involvement that came
within a hair’s-breadth of marriage and continued well beyond Poe’s death, with
Whitman assisting numerous Poe biographers to defend Poe’s work and
character, a task that culminated in her own fine treatise, Edgar Poe and His

Critics (1860).
But the true revelation in the volume, beyond all the details that Rutherford
provides of this brief but intense relationship, is the fact that Sarah Helen
Whitman herself was an accomplished poet in her own right. She is not in any
sense a writer to whom the derisive and now mercifully archaic term “poetess”
could apply. Consider a stanza from “Resurgemus,” a poem written shortly after
Poe’s death: Those melancholy eyes that seemed To look beyond all time, or,
turned On eyes they loved, so softly beamed— How few their mystic language
learned.
How few could read their depths, or know The proud, high heart that
dwelt alone In gorgeous palaces of woe, Like Eblis on his burning throne.
Pure horror is evoked in “Proserpine, to Pluto, in Hades,” which opens as
follows: I think on thee and these spring-time flowers, On thee, my emperor, my
sovran lord, Dwelling alone in dim Tartarean towers Of thy dark realm, by earth
and heaven abhorred, Wandering afar by that Avernian river Where dead kings
walk and phantoms wail forever.
And so we come to Rutherford’s own poetry, as contained in a new edition
of Whippoorwill Road: The Supernatural Poems of Brett Rutherford (Grim
Reaper Books/The Poet’s Press, 2012). I’m sure he will not make the claim that
he deserves to be ranked with Poe or even M. G. Lewis as a weird poet, but there
is a certain jarring discontinuity between the classic poems he has reprinted in
the previous volumes discussed and his own thick book of poems. I’m not
criticising Rutherford in particular so much as the whole trend of twentieth-
century poetry in general. His deliberate avoidance of rhyme and metre (there
are only two poems that are rhymed), and his occasional descent into the kind of
prosaic verse championed by William Carlos Williams and others, result in
passages like this one (from “Gorgon at the Wedding”): You chattered on about
her home in Greece, her hobby, those charming little marble animals frozen as if
in life.
They’re all the rage at the shops in the Agora.
Read this passage as if it were prose—I’m not sure you could tell much
difference. In the absence of rhyme and metre, other elements—such as simile,
metaphor, and symbolism—need to come to the fore, and in too many instances
they don’t.
But Rutherford deserves to be judged by his best poetry, not his worst—and
his best can be very, very good. Consider the flawless opening stanza of what I
have long maintained is his finest weird poem, “Fête”: A thousand stars will
blaze and sing tonight.

The livid day has blown before itself all clouds to leave this sepulchre of
sky a barren bowl of paranoiac suns.
Come I this eve into my mirthless wood, this colonnade of grey-striped
masts, to celebrate some lisping, rhymèd love?
I am Love’s Antichrist—my barbed-wire heart has never beat in time with
another’s!
That, my friends, is poetry! Even without the aid of the pentameter rhythm, the
powerful compound adjectives and bold metaphors render this passage vivid and
memorable—and yet, it is surpassed by another couplet later in the poem: “Not
even a random thought can penetrate / this furry arbor of my wretchedness.”
Other poems also demand our attention. “Maker of Monsters, Maker of
Gods” (one of the two poems in rhyming quatrains) is one of several eloquent
poems about Frank Belknap Long, whom Rutherford knew in the final stages of
the former’s life. Possibly one has to know a bit about Long’s wretched
condition, wracked by all manner of illnesses and plagued with a crazy wife, to
understand some of the details of the poems; but everyone can appreciate the
plangency Rutherford infuses into these works. “Nights at the Strand” is a
kaleidoscopic evocation of a young boy’s love of horror and science fiction
films, and there are any number of poems summoning up the shades of Poe,
Lovecraft, and other weird writers. In fact, the poems gain a sort of cumulative
power even if not all of them are as stellar as the best of them: after a time one
falls under the spell of Rutherford’s incantatory language, and by the end of the
book one is left longing for more.
Brett Rutherford is the author, editor, and publisher of all the volumes
reviewed here. To be sure, there are some advantages in this kind of
consolidation, but it has some drawbacks as well. In plain words, all these books
could have benefited from a thorough and professional copyediting. To choose
just one point among many, one has to remark that the accents on such words as
“séance” and “précis” are not optional. Of factual errors there are perhaps not
many, but Rutherford stumbles badly when he writes of Poe in 1845: “Poe’s
book Tales Grotesque and Arabesque, meantime, was being reviewed
everywhere . . .” Tales of the Grotesque and Arabesque had appeared in 1840;
the book that was published in 1845 was titled simply Tales. Overall, the quality
of copyediting is superior to that of many other small presses in our field; but it
could have been better.
Rutherford promises a comprehensive two-volume edition of supernatural
poetry subsequent to 1800, a compilation that will certainly be worth looking
for. His comprehensive knowledge of the field—and, more relevantly, his keen

sensitivity to weirdness in verse—will make that edition a landmark. Let us hope
it reaches as wide a public as possible.

Poe as Revolutionary
The work of Edgar Allan Poe (1809–1849) revolutionised and transformed
supernatural and psychological horror fiction in so profound and multifaceted a
way that it could plausibly be maintained that these genres, as serious
contributions to literature, only began with him. The keenness with which Poe
analyzed the psychology of fear; the transcendent artistry of his tales, from
construction to prose rhythm to aesthetic focus; the intense emotive power of his
principal narratives—these and other elements make him not merely the
essential foundation of horror literature but, in many ways, a figure unsurpassed
in the breadth and scope of his work.
Poe emerged at a critical moment in the history of horror fiction. In the
several generations before he began writing, Anglo-American literature had been
dominated by the so-called Gothic novel, initiated when Horace Walpole
published The Castle of Otranto from his own press on Christmas day of 1764.
This outlandish and implausible work of supernatural terror perfectly captured
the rejection of eighteenth-century classicism as represented by Alexander Pope
and Samuel Johnson. With a healthy infusion of German romanticism, it
spawned a literary legacy whose pinnacles were such works as Ann Radcliffe’s
The Mysteries of Udolpho (1794), Matthew Gregory Lewis’s The Monk (1796),
and Charles Robert Maturin’s Melmoth the Wanderer (1820).
Gothic novels, of course, were not in any sense uniform in theme and focus,
ranging from pure historical novels to tales of rapid action and adventure, to say
nothing of such oddities as William Beckford’s Arabian tale Vathek (1786) and
Mary Shelley’s proto–science fiction novel Frankenstein (1818). But many of
the 400 Gothic novels of the period shared certain common features, among
them a medieval setting (because it was believed that the pervasive
superstitiousness of the period fostered the credibility of supernatural
manifestations), the “woman in peril” motif, the Gothic castle with its hidden
rooms and secret chambers, and a dominant male personality whose Faustian
quests—whether it be for all-encompassing knowledge or for the acquisition of
wealth and power—served to render him the chief villain of the narrative. Pacts
with the devil were common, and ghostly manifestations were not infrequent.
It is unclear how much Gothic fiction Poe read, but the sum total of his
remarks—in reviews, essays, letters, and even stories—make it clear that he, like
others of his time, regarded the Gothic novel as utterly passé and played out. Poe
recognised early on that fear—especially fear of the supernatural—is a highly

fleeting emotion, difficult or impossible to sustain over the length of a novel.
Accordingly, he turned his attention to embodying fear within the parameters of
the short story.
It has long been acknowledged that Poe is the virtual inventor of the short
story as we know it; but of course short stories had been written before Poe. In
his own land, he had been preceded by Washington Irving, whose Tales of a
Traveller (1824) and other volumes contained liberal doses of weirdness. Poe
himself read the occasional weird tales published in Blackwood’s Edinburgh
Magazine, a periodical founded in 1817. When he wrote his first short stories in
the early 1830s, he may well have used the stories in Blackwood’s as examples.
One of these, “Metzengerstein,” is little more than a compact little Gothic tale,
complete with a castle, a supernatural horse, and other elements.
But Poe remains a critical figure in the development of the short story by his
emphasis on what he called “unity of effect.” By this, he meant that a story
should focus on a single basic incident, and that every scene, every paragraph,
even every single word of the tale must contribute directly or indirectly to the
final outcome. Poe himself brilliantly practiced what he preached, producing a
succession of tales of unparalleled concision, focus, and cumulative power.
But why did Poe write tales of horror and the supernatural? No definitive
answer can be given to this question; the fact remains that he remained attracted
to the weird and bizarre for the whole of his career, even when writing tales that
were ostensibly comic or parodic. Poe did little theorizing on the nature of weird
fiction, but a single sentence in the preface to his landmark collection, Tales of
the Grotesque and Arabesque (1840), is worth citing. Poe had taken umbrage
when some critics had claimed that he was merely copying German models in
his tales, and he threw down this gauntlet: “If in many of my productions terror
has been the thesis, I maintain that terror is not of Germany, but of the soul.” By
this Poe meant that he would focus, not on the outward stage properties of an
attenuated Gothic tradition, but on the effects of fear upon human psychology.
The result is an unprecedented array of supernatural fiction that laid the
groundwork for much of the work that followed in this genre: psychic possession
in “Ligeia” and “The Fall of the House of Usher”; supernatural revenge in “The
Black Cat”; the weirdness of remote places in “MS. Found in a Bottle” and “A
Descent into the Maelström”; the dangers of untrammeled science in “The Facts
in the Case of M. Valdemar.” Other tales tread the nebulous borderline between
life and death, in a haunting, incantatory language that—as in “Shadow—A
Parable” and “The Masque of the Red Death”—is as much poetry as prose.
And Poe did not neglect psychological horror, which in some ways seems to
have been even closer to his temperament. The grisliness of revenge in “The

Cask of Amontillado” and “Hop-Frog”; the loathsomeness of torture in “The Pit
and the Pendulum”; successive waves of horror and death in The Narrative of
Arthur Gordon Pym; extreme psychological aberration in “Berenice,” “The Tell-
Tale Heart,” and “The Man of the Crowd”—these and other tales show Poe to be
a master of psychological suspense that does not require the supernatural to
engender fear.
Poe’s poems are also full of weirdness and horror, although here he had a far
more distinguished array of predecessors, ranging from Coleridge (The Rime of
the Ancient Mariner, 1798) and Keats (Lamia, 1820) and including Goethe,
Schiller, Sir Walter Scott, and many others. But even such well-known poems as
“The Raven” and “Annabel Lee” retain their power to terrify, while the
unearthly landscapes of “The City in the Sea and “Ulalume,” the bleak
pessimism of “The Conqueror Worm” and “For Annie,” and the cosmic
speculation of “Dream-Land” establish Poe as a touchstone for weird verse.
Poe’s influence on subsequent horror literature is incalculable. Ambrose
Bierce, H. P. Lovecraft, M. R. James, Walter de la Mare, all the way down to
Stephen King, Ramsey Campbell, and Thomas Ligotti all owe a deep debt to
Poe’s pioneering dissection of the psychology of terror, his deliberately frenetic
and flamboyant prose, and the sheer originality of his weird conceptions. If any
author can be said to have single-handedly founded the genre of weird fiction,
that author is Edgar Allan Poe.

The Life and Work of Ambrose Bierce
The year 1929 was certainly an odd one for Ambrose Bierce. Having died
(presumably) fifteen years earlier, Bierce was suddenly the subject of four very
different books: Walter Neale’s Life of Ambrose Bierce, a chatty but unreliable
biography/memoir by Bierce’s friend and publisher; C. Hartley Grattan’s Bitter
Bierce: A Mystery of American Letters, an unsatisfying mix of biography and
criticism; Adolphe de Castro’s absurd Portrait of Ambrose Bierce, with its
ludicrously unlikely anecdotes and obvious self-promotion; and (clearly the best
of the lot) Carey McWilliams’s Ambrose Bierce: A Biography, a thoroughly
researched and sensitive biography that may still be the best we have.
It was a generation before anyone else tried his hand at a Bierce biography,
and the result—Paul Fatout’s Ambrose Bierce: The Devil’s Lexicographer
(1951)—was decidedly mixed. Although exhaustively researched, the volume
did not seem to accord Bierce particularly respectful treatment, making one
wonder why Fatout had bothered to write the book at all.
Now we have had to wait yet another generation or two for a new biography:
Roy Morris, Jr.’s Ambrose Bierce: Alone in Bad Company (Crown, 1995).
Morris is a respected Civil War historian who has previously written a book on
General Sheridan. It is presumably his work on that book that led him to write a
full-scale biography of one of the few individuals who actually served in the
Civil War and then went on to write anything of substance about it. And yet,
perhaps there is reason to question the extent to which this biography can be
considered a “new” work.
I mean no disrespect when I say that the best part of Morris’s book is his
preface. This is a superb summing up of Bierce the man and writer, written with
all the panache—and, in part, that cynical tartness that many writers on Bierce
seem to develop by a kind of osmosis—of Bierce’s own work. It is perhaps a
little sanguine of Morris to write that “It is no longer necessary, as it was for
decades following his death, to plead the case for Bierce’s importance”; for
Bierce remains as uneasily ensconced in the canon of American literature as
Edgar Allan Poe. But Morris goes on: “At least two of his Civil War stories,
‘Chickamauga’ and ‘An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge,’ as well as his
groundbreaking nonfictional work, ‘What I Saw of Shiloh,’ will last for as long
as anyone cares about good writing in general, or that bad war in particular.” To
those devotees of weird fiction who might be puzzled at the mention of that last
title, let me state categorically that I am very close to endorsing Morris’s later

view that “What I Saw of Shiloh” (one of the essays in the “Bits of
Autobiography” section in Volume I of Bierce’s Collected Works) “may well be
Bierce’s finest piece of writing.” If, as I have said on several occasions,
Lovecraft’s best work may be his letters, then Bierce’s best work almost without
question is his essays and journalism.
Little is known about Bierce’s early life aside from the fact that he was
raised in a strict Christian household, with the predictable result that he became
an unremitting foe of religion for the remainder of his life. Bierce was the tenth
child in his family, and the tenth to be given a Christian name beginning with the
letter A. So scanty is the evidence that Morris is reduced to appealing (without
proper qualification) to a story Bierce wrote much later in the volume Nuggets
and Dust (1873) as evidence for Bierce’s opinion of his siblings.
But it was the Civil War, breaking out when Bierce was scarcely nineteen,
that changed his life forever, both for good and for ill. At loose ends, he enlisted
immediately in the Ninth Indiana Volunteers. It is perhaps understandable that
Morris at this point plunges into an extraordinarily detailed account of the
conflict, seemingly out of proportion with its chronological place in Bierce’s
life. Morris spends 107 pages of text covering the first twenty-six years of
Bierce’s life, but only 161 pages on the remaining forty-five years. If this
disproportion is not immediately evident, let it be recalled that in most
biographies the account of a figure’s early years is generally rather brief,
especially given that Bierce had written virtually nothing in this period.
But Morris’s expansiveness is fully justified. Not only does he provide
stirring accounts of the major battles of the war in which Bierce participated
(notably Shiloh, Chickamauga, and Resaca), but he skilfully weaves in the war
stories (from Tales of Soldiers and Civilians [1891]) that Bierce wrote decades
later as he dredged up his memories of the horrific conflict. In some cases, it is
true, the details of Bierce’s actual involvement in a battle must be conjectured,
but Morris writes here with such verve that few will come away unimpressed or
uninformed.
Around 1868 Bierce settled in San Francisco, and Morris supplies an
engaging account of the city that had emerged only two decades before from an
insignificant hamlet to a thriving and rather decadent metropolis of 100,000.
Bierce latched on as the editor of a “Town Crier” column in the San Francisco
News Letter and California Advertiser, writing a 2000-word piece every week
for about three and a half years. This material is very hard to find, but Morris has
found it in repositories in California; less industrious readers can consult
extensive extracts in Ernest Jerome Hopkins’s The Ambrose Bierce Satanic
Reader (1968). Bierce’s quite delightful misanthropy—he took particular

interest in noting the frequency of wife-beatings and suicides in the region—is
already manifest in these pieces. And yet, somehow or other he managed to woo
and marry the well-bred society woman Mollie Day in 1871.
The next year Bierce went to England to make his literary fortune, spending
the next three years there. This part of Morris’s book may perhaps be his
weakest, for I see little evidence that he has actually consulted the relevant
primary documents. Bierce wrote with staggering prolificity during this period:
twice-a-week columns for Figaro; stories, fables, and sketches for Tom Hood’s
weekly Fun; a magazine called the Lantern that lasted for only two issues in
1874 but for which Bierce wrote every word; and much more.
Morris concludes rather loftily that “virtually everything he published in
England, whether in book-form or in the various humor magazines, was second-
rate.” Well, perhaps one can take a more charitable view. I choose at random an
item from Figaro: “The Very Rev. Monsignor Patterson calls disbelief in
modern miracles ‘cheap philosophy.’ It certainly costs very little, whereas the
opposite faith requires the expenditure of a good deal of energy in the repression
of reason.” I rather think that’s first-rate, and it could be multiplied many times
over. In any event, I think Morris overlooks the formative value of Bierce’s
English writings. They allowed him to broaden the scope of his satire beyond
merely local incidents to world events; and they continued to deepen his
perfectly justified cynicism as to the eminence and worth of the human species.
In any event, Bierce had to return to San Francisco in 1875, by now the
father of three children. In 1877 he gained a new forum as the editor of the
Argonaut. For the next two and a half years he wrote more columns, along with
fiction, poetry, and essays. In 1879–80 Bierce joined a doomed enterprise to
exploit mining interests in the Black Hills. Morris covers this period in two
pages, even though Paul Fatout wrote an entire book on the subject (Ambrose
Bierce and the Black Hills, 1956), a book Morris lists in his bibliography but
does not cite even once.
In 1881 Bierce joined the staff of the Wasp, writing weekly columns for the
next five years. It was at this time that he began his Devil’s Dictionary, although
it underwent many revisions until reaching (more or less) final form in the
seventh volume of the Collected Works. By this time Bierce’s marriage was in
serious trouble: never keen on family life, he began spending more and more
time away from home, living in hotels in various parts of northern and central
California (including—as will be of interest to Clark Ashton Smith enthusiasts—
Auburn, which he skewered in a poem entitled “The Perverted Village”!).
What saved Bierce’s career—and perhaps led to his greatest work—was the
offer by the twenty-three-year-old William Randolph Hearst to be a columnist

for the San Francisco Examiner. Morris writes piquantly about the atmosphere
of lunacy that seemed endemic to this first of the “yellow” journals; fortunately,
Bierce was given a free hand, and his “Prattle” column became nationally known
for its merciless attacks upon the great and the small. Bierce wrote for the
Examiner for the better part of twenty years (1887–1905), and it was lamentedly
shortsighted of him not to have included much of this material in his Collected
Works: it is arguably his greatest body of writing. Bierce’s greatest triumph, of
course, came when he stopped the railroad baron Collis P. Huntington from
getting a sweetheart deal in Congress in 1896, engaging in an unrelenting
programme of invective that finally resulted in Huntington crawling ignobly
away. In 1898 his reports on the Spanish-American war were also stirring (they
have been reprinted in Lawrence I. Berkove’s Skepticism and Dissent [1980]).
But as Morris covers the last two decades of Bierce’s life, it becomes evident
that he is in rather a hurry to get to the end. While he makes use of some of the
important memoirs of Bierce (Gertrude Atherton’s amusing account of spending
a day arguing with the grand old man in 1891, after which he burst out, “You’re
the most detestable little vixen I ever met in my life, and I’ve had a horrible
day”; H. L. Mencken’s account of going to the funeral of Bierce’s friend
Percival Pollard in 1911, during which Bierce made the most appallingly morbid
jokes), he fails to use all the material he could have. When Bierce’s elder son
was involved in a sordid love-affair (and ultimately killed his rival and himself),
Bierce came to see him in an effort to dissuade him from his involvement. The
broken son, after a meeting with his magisterial father, could only blubber, “My
father is a greater man than Christ! He has suffered more than Christ.” How
could anyone omit such a thing?
Indeed, this selectivity creeps over into Bierce’s actual writing. It becomes,
in fact, quite clear that Morris is interested only in Bierce’s Civil War writings,
and his judgments on other bodies of Bierce’s work are highly suspect. He does
not even mention the publication of Fantastic Fables (1899), which established
Bierce as perhaps the greatest fabulist in English. (Morris does allude to these
fables in his discussion of the Collected Works, but then erroneously states that
they were published in Fun. In fact, it was the “Fables of Zambri the Parsee” that
appeared in Fun, and they were almost wholly excluded from the Collected
Works.) There is similarly no mention of Bierce’s second poetry collection,
Shapes of Clay (1903), secretly financed by his protégé George Sterling.
(Incidentally, Morris is in error in declaring that Black Beetles in Amber was the
only book issued by the Western Authors Publishing Association, the firm
established by Bierce and Adolphe Danzinger. Danziger’s story collection In the
Confessional and the Following appeared in 1893 under this imprint. Lovecraft

revised at least two stories from this collection in the 1920s.) Morris briefly
notes the publication of Can Such Things Be? (1893), but clearly has little
interest in Bierce’s supernatural work. There is no discussion of the important
tales in this volume—“The Death of Halpin Frayser,” “The Damned Thing,”
“Moxon’s Master”—nor even of many of the “civilian” tales from Tales of
Soldiers and Civilians (whose augmented reprint by Putnam’s in 1898 Morris
also ignores). Morris calls the Bierce-Danziger collaborative translation The
Monk and the Hangman’s Daughter “ridiculous,” but it is certainly strange that
this quite subtle work (charming and fairytale-like on the surface, dark and
subversive within) would have been reprinted so many times (eight editions
from 1892 to 1978, including a deluxe Heritage Press volume) if it were quite so
poor as that. Its landscape descriptions of Bavaria (although surely the work of
its German author, Richard Voss), if nothing else, make the work distinctive.
Morris also has an unwarrantedly low opinion of Bierce’s verse, much of which
is as tart and stinging as the best of his journalism. (A selection of his poems was
published in 1995 by the University of Nebraska Press.) Nor can one be very
confident of Morris’s opinion on the work of Bierce’s colleagues, very little of
which he has made much apparent effort to read or understand. In calling George
Sterling “minimally talented” Morris overlooks the fact that Sterling is pretty
widely regarded as the leading American poet between Longfellow and Edwin
Arlington Robinson; his scintillating “A Wine of Wizardry” (1907) is a poetic
fantasy surpassed only by the work of Clark Ashton Smith and justifies Bierce’s
praise of it. Gertrude Atherton’s novels are by no means “largely unread”; and
some few words on the work of other friends and acquaintances of Bierce—
Percival Pollard, Ina Coolbrith (“the poet laureate of California”), Mary Austin,
Samuel Loveman (nowhere mentioned in Morris’s book)—might have been in
order.
But it is clear that Morris is in hot haste to get to the end—or what he
believes to be the end. Morris rightly quotes John Lennon’s remark on Elvis
Presley’s death in speaking of Bierce’s disappearance—it was a “good career
move.” A full twenty pages of his book are spent on the various theories
regarding that event (although Morris cannot seem to be bothered with the wild
tales in Danziger/de Castro’s Portrait of Ambrose Bierce), and he concludes that
the commonly held theory that Bierce died in Mexico is highly unlikely, or at the
very least rests upon surprisingly scanty evidence. Morris himself inclines to the
view—first propounded by Walter Neale and repeated in Joe Nickell’s Ambrose
Bierce Is Missing and Other Historical Mysteries (1992)—that Bierce
committed suicide in the Grand Canyon. The only problem with this view is that
there survives a letter to Blanche Partington dated December 26, 1913, written in

Chihuahua, Mexico, of which Morris is regrettably ignorant. So his theory falls
completely to the ground.
I find plenty of other deficiencies and caveats in Morris’s biography, and I
also find him rather more reliant than I would like on previous biographical
work on Bierce. Nevertheless, he has done more than a serviceable job; if
nothing else, he writes well, and he has the good sense to pepper his book with
liberal quotations from Bierce’s little-known work, especially his journalism. I
repeat that that journalism is his greatest accomplishment, even though it may be
some time before such a view is generally recognised (it first requires the
gathering of this widely scattered work, and David E. Schultz and I have now
completed this enterprise). As for the oft-voiced claim that the victims of
Bierce’s satiric barbs were unworthy of them; that (in George Sterling’s words)
he engaged too much in “breaking butterflies on a wheel”: well, stupidity,
hypocrisy, and absurdity need to be battled wherever they can, and Bierce could
not say enough about them. We have very few writers today courageous enough
to make the enemies Bierce made through his pen; and certainly no one can say
that this age does not cry out for someone like him.

A Biography of the Mind
There has, of late, been no shortage of biographical work on Ray Bradbury
(1920–2012), who has just turned ninety-one. In 2002 Jerry Weist published Ray
Bradbury: An Illustrated Life; 2005 saw the issuance of Sam Weller’s The
Bradbury Chronicles: The Life of Ray Bradbury; Gene Beley in 2006 produced
Ray Bradbury Uncensored: The Unauthorized Biography, a book about which I
know nothing. What has been lacking—and what has now been fully remedied
in Jonathan R. Eller’s Becoming Ray Bradbury (University of Illinois Press,
2011), a scintillating new biography of Bradbury’s first thirty-three years—is a
work that integrates the life, work, and thought of Bradbury into a coherent
unity that allows us to realize how this shy, bespectacled youth became a living
icon in the fields of weird, fantasy, and science fiction.
Eller is singularly fitted for the goal he has set out to accomplish—the goal
of presenting “a biography of the mind” of the author of Dark Carnival and
Fahrenheit 451. Eller is a cofounder, with William F. Touponce, of the Ray
Bradbury Center at IUPUI (Indiana University–Purdue University in
Indianapolis), where he is, among many other things, a professor of English.
This center has accumulated a rich treasure-house of printed and manuscript
material that will serve as the Mecca of Bradbury studies for the foreseeable
future. Eller and Touponce had already presented a thought-provoking analysis
of Bradbury’s entire literary corpus in Ray Bradbury: The Life of Fiction (2004),
and the present volume—to be followed by a successor covering the remaining
six decades of Bradbury’s life—bids fair to become the definitive a study of
Bradbury’s life and mind.
What separates Becoming Ray Bradbury from its predecessors is not only
Eller’s effortless marshaling of the documentary evidence for Bradbury’s life
and thought—ranging from unpublished letters to and from Bradbury, interviews
both published and unpublished (which Eller uses with due caution, pointing out
a number of instances where Bradbury’s recollections have strayed from the
facts), and even random notes and jottings for works never completed.
Significantly, these all showcase the keen insight and perspicacity that comes
with decades of study of the entire Bradbury corpus. At times the writing may be
a bit dense for a biography, but the studious avoidance of meaningless lit-crit
jargon makes Becoming Ray Bradbury a pleasure and a challenge to both the
well-versed Bradburyian and the relative novice.
If any criticism is to be made against this book, it is that it is in some parts

too compressed. My understanding is that the publisher required Eller to cut as
much as 75,000 words from his original manuscript; however necessary such an
excision may have been from the standpoint of today’s perilous economics of
book publishing, one senses that certain phases of Bradbury’s life and work had
perforce to be passed over without the depth of detail they deserve. I, for one,
might have asked for somewhat ampler background on several aspects of the
literary milieu in which Bradbury immersed himself from a very early age: I
refer specifically to such obscure subcultures as those of pulp fiction (both weird
and science fiction) of the 1920s, the emergence of the fantasy fandom
movement in the 1930s, and perhaps even the development of horror and science
fiction film from the 1920s onward. I don’t know that it can be assumed that
today’s readers—even those among them who are devotees of weird and science
fiction—have anything approaching an adequate understanding of these realms.
But putting these matters aside, Becoming Ray Bradbury treats expansively,
and with unfailing sympathy and penetration, every phase of Bradbury’s life and
career up to the publication of Fahrenheit 451 (1953). We learn, of course, of
Bradbury’s early interest in Tarzan and Oz, of science fiction comics such as
“Flash Gordon” and “Buck Rogers,” and his early readings in the science fiction
and fantasy pulps, including his enthusiasm for Clark Ashton Smith. The text
chronicles the period when, in the mid-1930s, Bradbury’s family settled in Los
Angeles; a young Ray soon joined the Los Angeles chapter of the Science
Fiction League, where he first made acquaintance with Forrest J Ackerman,
Hannes Bok, and other longtime friends. He had already begun writing at this
time, naively sending his stories out to Harper’s and the Saturday Evening Post
with the full expectation that they would be accepted. Ackerman, who as editor
of the SFL’s publication Imagination published Bradbury’s early stories and
sketches, lent Bradbury $50 to attend the First World Science Fiction
Convention in New York (NYCon) in 1939. Around this time Bradbury had
launched his own fanzine, Futuria Fantasia.
By this time Bradbury had struck up acquaintances with such professionals
as Henry Kuttner, Leigh Brackett, and Edmond Hamilton, and all three of them
were instrumental in raising Bradbury’s work to professional caliber. Incredibly,
it was the space opera hack Hamilton who urged Bradbury to read more
mainstream literature, from Shakespeare to Emily Dickinson, as well as such
contemporaries as Sherwood Anderson and John Steinbeck. The lessons that
Bradbury learned from this wide reading of non-fantastic literature cannot be
overstressed, for they made him the writer he became—the writer who could
easily make the transition from the dying weird and science fiction pulps of the
1940s and 1950s to such “slicks” as Collier’s, Mademoiselle, and, yes, the

Saturday Evening Post. Bradbury keenly summed up the help of Brackett and
Hamilton (at whose wedding he was the best man) as follows: “Edmond
Hamilton was my professor, and Leigh Brackett was my teacher. They taught on
different levels. She taught me basic writing, and he taught me the classics.”
Eller’s biography is particularly strong on this transition in Bradbury’s work,
which occurred during and after World War II. In successive chapters he
discusses Bradbury’s readings in science fiction, fantasy, and mainstream
literature, as well as in such thinkers as Arthur Koestler and Joseph Wood
Krutch. Bradbury himself recognized that Koestler’s grim novel about Soviet
Russia, Darkness at Noon (1940), was a greater influence on Fahrenheit 451
than such superficially similar dystopias as Huxley’s Brave New World (1932)
or Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-four (1949). Bradbury remarked: “People have
often asked me what effect Huxley and Orwell had on me, and whether either of
them influenced the creation of Fahrenheit 451. The best response is Arthur
Koestler.”
Readers will be most interested in Bradbury’s horror fiction, published
extensively in Weird Tales in the 1940s and collected in the early Arkham House
volume Dark Carnival (1947). It is to Arkham House publisher August Derleth’s
eternal credit that he early on recognized Bradbury’s radical difference from—
and superiority to—the other pulpsmiths appearing in Weird Tales at that
juncture. If Derleth had done nothing but publish the first books of H. P.
Lovecraft, Ray Bradbury, Fritz Leiber, and Ramsey Campbell, he would deserve
to be remembered—as he certainly does not deserve to be remembered for his
own mediocre weird writing, or even for his somewhat better mainstream work,
which often seems rushed and thin, a casualty of Derleth’s self-imposed multi-
tasking as writer, editor, and publisher. But there is more to it than that; for all
Derleth’s appreciation of Bradbury’s brilliance, Derleth at times seemed
unwilling or unable to acknowledge that, even before Dark Carnival was
published, Bradbury had gone far beyond the pulp ideal and had effected that
fusion of weirdness and the mainstream that Derleth himself had never
accomplished or even attempted. A pungent comment by Kuttner in a letter to
Bradbury offers perhaps the most compact and judicious epitaph on Derleth’s
literary work that I have ever read: “Look at August Derleth. He began rather
like you, sold easily at an early age, got into the novel field, the slicks, etc.; and
milked his subjects dry. He never leaves Sauk City mentally. There is a now a
fatal sterility about his work; he has reached the limits of his cosmos, and he
won’t go outside of it.”
The rest of Eller’s book, discussing Bradbury’s surprisingly rapid migration
from the pulps to the slicks, the early adaptations of his work for radio and

comics, his writing of The Martian Chronicles (1950), The Illustrated Man
(1951), and Fahrenheit 451 (1953), are just as luminously insightful as the rest
of his book. Bradbury wrestled repeatedly, and often frustratingly, with book-
length works during this period, and Eller’s treatment of several unfinished
novel ideas—an “Illinois novel” (ultimately transformed into Dandelion Wine
[1957]), Masks (1946–49), and Where Ignorant Armies Clash by Night (1947–
48)—strongly suggests the difficulties Bradbury had at this juncture with the
transition from short-story writing to novel-writing. Whether Bradbury truly
solved the problem even with Fahrenheit 451—an expansion of the novella
“The Fireman,” and one that Bradbury wrote in some haste largely in the spring
and summer of 1953, even making significant revisions on proofs as late as
August, only two months prior to the book’s release in October—is a matter of
doubt.
The second volume of Eller’s masterful and sensitive biography, Ray
Bradbury Unbound (University of Illinois Press, 2014), is as compelling a read
as its predecessor, Becoming Ray Bradbury (2011)—but for very different
reasons. Whereas the earlier book was a fascinating chronicle of Bradbury’s
development from a naïve and callow science fiction and fantasy “fan” to a
leading writer in these fields—one who, during his first decade and a half of
professional writing, produced such landmark works as Dark Carnival (1947),
The Martian Chronicles (1950), The Illustrated Man (1951), and Fahrenheit 451
(1953)—this new volume is largely an account of Bradbury’s frustrations and
failures as a writer, playwright, screenwriter, and poet over the next two decades
of his career. And yet, the narrative that Eller spins remains enthralling, and even
veteran Bradbury enthusiasts will find many illuminating points in his
account.             
Ray Bradbury Unbound begins with Bradbury’s fateful trip to Ireland in
September 1953, where he spent the next seven months in one of the most
grueling undertakings of his life—writing the screenplay for John Huston’s film
Moby Dick. Huston, a notoriously difficult director who was hard on everyone
connected with his films and also liked to engage in practical jokes that verged
on malice, made life miserable for Bradbury as he compelled him to write and
rewrite the script many times over. As a respite, Bradbury took his family to
Italy, where he met the elderly art historian Bernard Berenson, who became a
kind of mentor to Bradbury. It is representative of the scorn in which science
fiction was held at the time that Berenson urged Bradbury to write mainstream
work to become a legitimate writer: “Your sense of people, their reactions as
well as spontaneous actions is so fine, so delicate that I could wish you were
creating novels & stories of character, & characters not engaged in fantastic

events.” Berenson—and many others then and now—failed to realize that
imaginative fiction can in fact shed light on human character precisely through
the “fantastic events” that the protagonists experience.
The Ireland trip had, in my judgment, another deleterious effect on
Bradbury: the praise he won from such writers and critics as Christopher
Isherwood and Gilbert Highet went, to some degree, to Bradbury’s head, and I
believe his work suffered as a result by becoming self-consciously literary,
alternating between arch sophistication and naïve sentimentality. Eller, as a
Bradbury partisan, seems reluctant to speak directly on this issue, only hinting at
it from time to time. But I believe everyone recognises that Bradbury’s work
subsequent to Fahrenheit 451 simply doesn’t stand up to his earlier writing, as
Eller himself acknowledges at the end: “Much of his subsequent fiction [after the
mid-1950s] would not, as a body of work, have established an enduring
reputation if he had not already been Ray Bradbury.”
Bradbury’s literary troubles in the 1950s and 1960s were augmented by the
fact that he became enamoured with media—film, television, the stage, and the
like—to the detriment of his purely literary output. The number of projects—
most of which failed to eventuate, as is common in the film and television
industries—that Eller chronicles is so bewildering that the reader has trouble
keeping track of them. After working with Huston, Bradbury received many
offers to write other screenplays, some of which would seem not at all suited to
him: such things as the film version of Orwell’s 1984, Alfred Hitchcock’s The
Birds, even the Liz Taylor/Richard Burton Cleopatra! Mercifully, Bradbury
turned all these offers down. He himself worked extensively on a screenplay,
The Rock Cried Out (an adaptation of his story “And the Rock Cried Out”), for
Sir Carol Reed, but it ultimately came to nothing, as did his adaptation of a novel
by Roger Manvell, The Dreamers. Bradbury teamed with Paul Gregory and
Charles Laughton (who also became an important mentor) on a stage and/or film
version of Fahrenheit 451, but years of sporadic work also resulted in failure.
Part of the reason for that was the years-long litigation that Bradbury was
obliged to undertake when a television broadcast, “A Sound of Different
Drummers,” appeared on CBS Playhouse on October 3, 1957. This teleplay
seemed clearly derived from Fahrenheit 451, but the initial court verdict went
against Bradbury, since the defendants made the ludicrous claim that Bradbury’s
novel itself was a kind of plagiarism of 1984 and Aldous Huxley’s Brave New
World. Only on appeal was that verdict reversed, in 1961, awarding Bradbury
the princely sum of $25,000.
Bradbury did have success in getting his work adapted for television,
although even here there were troubles and frustrations. Alfred Hitchcock

Presents aired several Bradbury stories beginning in the mid-1950s, as did other
shows. But, as Eller painstakingly chronicles, Bradbury’s difficulties with Rod
Serling’s The Twilight Zone ultimately led to a permanent break between these
two creative geniuses. Bradbury felt that several early episodes borrowed ideas
from his stories without acknowledgment. Bradbury could live with this, but
when Serling made a last-minute change in the adaptation of the Bradbury story
“I Sing the Body Electric!” he broke with Serling forever. In effect, Bradbury
(and others in the science fiction field) felt that Serling was a newcomer
muscling in on a field they had long tilled, with little recognition, for years or
decades.
Of course, Bradbury did produce a certain body of literary work—the story
collections A Medicine for Melancholy (1959), The Machineries of Joy (1964),
The Vintage Bradbury (1965—all reprint, of course), and I Sing the Body
Electric! (1969), and the novels Dandelion Wine (1957) and Something Wicked
This Way Comes (1962), and several other books. This would seem to be an
impressive tally for any writer; but most critics rank the collections as inferior to
their predecessors (and the last one begins an ominous tendency, carried on to
the end of Bradbury’s long life, of mining stories from the 1940s and 1950s to
flesh out the contents, as he was simply not writing enough new work to fill a
book), while the fix-up novel Dandelion Wine was a somewhat disappointing
end-product of a much grander project—the “Illinois novel” that he had been
working on for years—that never came to fruition. Even Something Wicked This
Way Comes—a splendid return to his earlier, weird-fiction manner (it was, in
fact, based on a screenplay, Dark Carnival, that Bradbury had conceived early in
his career)—is, in my view, married by overwriting and sentimentality. It is
interesting to read some scornful reviews of this novel, one of which (by
Kingsley Amis) criticised Bradbury for abandoning science fiction for “a kind of
California Gothic”! It would seem that weird fiction was held in even lower
esteem than science fiction at this time.
Another literary project that failed to eventuate was The Fire Walkers—
which would have been a collection of stories focusing on the gay men,
transvestites, and others whom Bradbury knew. These sensitively told stories
would have been highly controversial at this time, and perhaps his agent, Don
Congdon, was right to dissuade Bradbury from publishing such a book. But
surely the time is now ripe for just such a volume to appear, as it would present a
fascinating new angle on Bradbury’s literary output.
Other projects that Bradbury was working on during this whole period make
one scratch one’s head and wonder what he could have been thinking. He
wanted to turn The Martian Chronicles into a musical! Thankfully this idea

came to nothing. A proposed anthology, God on Tomorrow Morning (in
Bradbury’s words, “a collection of stories about the Space Age, God, and Man in
the coming half-century”), found no takers. A book (or perhaps a series of
books) for children called Nemo! would have featured a resurrected Captain
Nemo (from Verne’s 20,000 Leagues under the Sea, a book that perennially
fascinated Bradbury) for various space adventures—but this too floundered
when one core element of the plot was anticipated by the film Fantastic Voyage
(1966).
By the 1960s Bradbury had become increasingly fascinated with the stage.
He worked for years on Leviathan ’99, a kind of Moby Dick in space that
alternately took the form of a novel, radio play, opera libretto, and other genres.
Three short plays—including the well-known Wonderful Ice Cream Suit—did
get staged successfully in 1963, and a later work, The World of Ray Bradbury
(featuring adaptations of “The Pedestrian,” “The Veldt,” and “To the Chicago
Abyss”), ran for eighteen weeks in Los Angeles in 1964, but bombed on
Broadway. A collection of four plays about Ireland, under the collective title The
Anthem Sprinters, ran for about a month in Hollywood—but even Bradbury
sensed that audiences really wanted him to stick to science fiction subjects.
The two major films based on Bradbury’s work that did emerge during this
period were interesting contrasts. François Truffaut had purchased the film rights
to Fahrenheit 451 as early as 1962; he had asked Bradbury to write the
screenplay, but Ray begged off. Bradbury liked the film when it appeared in the
summer of 1966, although in my judgment it is a trifle slow in pacing and has
other problems. Bradbury yearned to work with Truffaut on some subsequent
film project, but it never happened. As for The Illustrated Man (1969), Bradbury
had little involvement in it, and I believe most devotees and critics believe it to
be largely a failure. Bradbury came to pretty much the same conclusion.
There is much more that Eller chronicles: Bradbury’s years of work on a
screenplay of The Martian Chronicles; Harry Belafonte’s plans (never realised)
for a musical based on The Wonderful Ice Cream Suit; Bradbury’s searing
condemnation of the lack of imagination of horror films in the essay “Death
Warmed Over,” published in the January 1968 issue of Playboy; his trip to
England in the summer of 1969, just as the moon landing was occurring
(Bradbury appeared on British television to comment on it). With each new
project that emerges, Eller’s taut, engaging prose selects just those details that
are of the greatest significance and that will impel the reader to keep turning the
pages to see what the ultimate outcome will be.
Reviewers are constitutionally inclined toward nitpicking, and I am no
exception. However impertinent it may be to question Eller’s judgments or the

overall content of his book, I will add a few caveats. I was struck by his lack of
discussion of the reception of the Moby Dick film—something that seems to be a
fairly significant matter in terms of Bradbury’s career. How was his screenplay
received by audiences and critics? We hear little on the matter. In regard to The
October Country (1955), Bradbury’s revision of his early weird volume Dark
Carnival, Eller writes that it “transcended the earlier collection completely.”
Well, maybe not: there are those who feel that Bradbury’s overwriting has
actually marred the straightforward but highly compelling prose of the Dark
Carnival stories, and many prefer to read them in their original versions. Eller
rightly notes that Dandelion Wine is “an unsightful glimpse of the passing age of
innocence common to all,” but only delicately hints that some American
reviewers (and more British ones) found the book overly sentimental. And Eller
seems at times so fixated on chronicling the innumerable projects in which
Bradbury was involved that he doesn’t provide critical judgments on the books
and other works that Bradbury actually produced—judgments that he has
eminent authority to make.
There is no question that Jonathan R. Eller is the leading critic and
biographer of Ray Bradbury, and every one of his views is carefully considered
and the result of the absorption of an immense amount of primary and secondary
source material. Ray Bradbury Unbound is as vivid and dramatic as any of
Bradbury’s own works, and I look forward to a subsequent volume recounting
the remaining four decades of this eternally fascinating author’s life. As a fiction
writer, screenwriter, playwright, poet, and embodiment of the poetic element in
man’s quest for space exploration, Ray Bradbury is a permanent fixture in
American and world culture; and it has found no better chronicler than Jonathan
R. Eller.

Shirley Jackson as a Classic
Shirley Jackson (1916–1965) is a kind of forgotten figure in American literature.
Even the year of her birth was, until recently, a matter of doubt, since she herself
cut off a few years and claimed to be born in 1919, so as not to appear older than
her husband, the critic Stanley Edgar Hyman (1919–1970). Because she was not
firmly ensconced in either mainstream fiction or weird fiction, critics in both
genres have tended to ignore her. While mainstream critics admire her artistry in
the short story, they disdain the oftentimes grim and horrific subject-matter of
her tales and novels; while the horror community, noting that she published in
the New Yorker and Mademoiselle instead of the horror or science fiction pulps
(or, as they were on the point of dying, their successors, the digest magazines),
seems to regard her as a dilettante who is merely slumming in their field. It is,
therefore, particularly satisfying that the Library of America has now issued a
volume of her best work (Novels and Tales, ed. Joyce Carol Oates [2010])—a
volume that straddles the weird and the mainstream in exactly the way Jackson
herself did.
Jackson emerged as a writer at a curious time in the history of supernatural
fiction. The deaths of H. P. Lovecraft and Robert E. Howard and the near-total
literary silence of Clark Ashton Smith created a void that took some time to fill.
The 1940s and 1950s were virtually lost decades for weird fiction, as such
notables as Ray Bradbury, Robert Bloch, Fritz Leiber, Richard Matheson, and
Charles Beaumont were compelled to write horror fiction under the guise of
either psychological suspense (Bloch’s The Scarf [1947] and Psycho [1959]) or
science fiction (Leiber’s Conjure Wife [1943], Matheson’s I Am Legend [1954]).
Bradbury’s early stories in Weird Tales were gathered in the landmark volume
Dark Carnival (1947), but he made his reputation on such seminal science
fiction works as The Illustrated Man (1950), The Martian Chronicles (1950),
and Fahrenheit 451 (1953); and the demise of Weird Tales in 1954 compelled
him to publish either in the SF digest magazines or, increasingly, in mainstream
venues like Collier’s and Saturday Evening Post. Bradbury’s appearance in
these “slicks” did not make him a “mainstream” writer, however, as he was
always associated with the genres of horror, fantasy, and science fiction; but
Shirley Jackson remained a writer who was manifestly mainstream—at least as
far as the publication of her work was concerned—but she was only uneasily
accepted as such.
It is unclear to me how much orthodox weird fiction Jackson read; there is

little evidence, judging solely from the internal evidence of her fiction, of any
significant influence—or, indeed, any influence at all—from Lovecraft or other
Weird Tales writers or even of older figures such as the Victorian ghost story
writers, Bram Stoker, or Arthur Machen. Jackson’s weird writing, intensely
character-based and domestic as it is, appears to have been a kind of strange
outgrowth of family life: the mother of four children and the wife of a notorious
philanderer, Jackson papered over the traumas of her life in the dozens of
sketches that she collected in her two utterly captivating books about her family,
Life among the Savages (1953) and Raising Demons (1957). Joyce Carol Oates
has wisely included a few of these sketches in the Library of America volume,
although if space had allowed, more would have been included (including a
dozen or more that remain uncollected). So many of Jackson’s weird tales
involve perversions of domestic or social scenarios that no dominant literary
influence can or should be brought forth to account for their subject-matter or
execution.
If it is the case that Jackson’s first weird tale is “The Lottery” (New Yorker,
26 June 1948), then we must ask why she wrote a spate of borderline horror
stories at this precise juncture. I’m not sure of the answer, and I’m not sure an
answer can be given. Even “The Lottery,” manifestly non-supernatural as it is,
fits only uneasily into the rubric of weird fiction, unless we assume that the
overall scenario—the very existence of a lottery of the sort depicted in the story
—throws the tale into the realm of alternate-world science fiction. Something
vaguely similar could be said of “The Intoxicated,” first published in The Lottery
(1949). A man at a rather boring party encounters a girl of seventeen who is
harrowingly certain that the world is going to come to an end soon. Is she right?
—in which case she is (supernaturally) clairvoyant. Is she insane?—in which
case the tale is one of psychological suspense. Or is she merely a kind of tease?
—in which case she is a little sadist, making the tale a different kind of
psychological suspense. That Jackson refrains from answering these questions
attests to the artistic restraint of her work.
The entire contents of The Lottery collection have been included in the
Library of America volume—as is right, since it is the only volume of short
stories that Jackson herself assembled in her lifetime. I am not as convinced as
other scholars are that there is any kind of overriding thematic or structural unity
to this collection, for all its division into four discrete sections, with an epilogue;
the volume, quite frankly, seems somewhat hastily assembled to capitalize on
the notoriety of “The Lottery,” which created an unprecedented furor when it
appeared in the New Yorker (Jackson’s essay on the tale and the reaction to it,
“Biography of a Story,” has been included as an appendix). The Lottery is, in

truth, a hodgepodge of very heterogeneous stories, ranging from thinly disguised
autobiographical sketches (“My Life with R. H. Macy”) to peculiar tales of
domestic conflict (“Charles” and “The Renegade”) to grimly powerful tales of
psychological trauma (“The Daemon Lover” and “Pillar of Salt”). The fact that a
recurring character—James Harris, the Daemon Lover—runs through a few of
the stories amounts to little: although “The Daemon Lover” is itself one of
Jackson’s masterpieces of terror, Harris’s other “appearances” (he in fact never
appears in any of the stories in which he is mentioned) cannot be harmonized
into any coherent aesthetic unity.
Jackson published six novels in her lifetime, from 1948 to 1962, and the
Library of America volume includes two: The Haunting of Hill House (1959)
and We Have Always Lived in the Castle (1962). This is a sensible choice,
although I wish there had been room for the utterly eccentric The Sundial (1957),
perhaps the ultimate perversion of domestic life that Jackson ever wrote: the
scenario of an extended family all gathered inside a house, convinced that the
rest of the world will soon be destroyed, is one that brought forth all Jackson’s
skills in psychological analysis and (it should be said with praise) pungently
misanthropic satire. I know of no other work in all literature like The Sundial:
even such charmingly eccentric weird novels as Charles G. Finney’s The Circus
of Dr. Lao or Leonard Cline’s The Dark Chamber cannot compare to it.
But the two novels that were included have much to offer. Both are, to my
mind, weird, the one supernaturally, the other non-supernaturally. I am far from
endorsing the common view that The Haunting of Hill House is the best
haunted-house novel ever written; for my money, the palm ought now to be
awarded to Ramsey Campbell’s The House on Nazareth Hill (1996). Hill House
is, in fact, a bit diffused and unfocused, and its plethora of supernatural
phenomena seem to be paraded somewhat unsystematically merely to create a
shudder. Where the novel triumphs is in its exquisitely delicate but cumulatively
powerful portrayal of its central figure, the lonely spinster (the sexist word
precisely suits this context) Eleanor Vance, perhaps Jackson’s most skillfully
etched portrait of the weak-willed, love-starved woman. We Have Always Lived
in the Castle, meanwhile, brings Jackson’s satirical skills to the forefront in its
searing display of the hatred and occasional violence directed at the Blackwood
family for past indiscretions that are only revealed at the conclusion.
A case could easily be made that Jackson’s husband, Stanley Edgar Hyman,
did her a posthumous disservice by how he handled her work after her death. In
the first place, he assembled a lackluster omnibus of Jackson’s “best” work, The
Magic of Shirley Jackson (1966), that, although it included many of the better
stories from The Lottery, erred badly in including The Bird’s Nest (1954), a

mediocre novel of psychological terror about a woman with multiple
personalities; the volume’s best feature, perhaps, is its inclusion of the complete
contents of her two books about her family life. Hyman then went on to compile
another middling volume of Jackson’s uncollected work, Come Along with Me
(1968), which overlooked a number of her most powerful uncollected short
stories (including the potent specimen “One Ordinary Day, with Peanuts,”
published in Fantasy and Science Fiction). I am half convinced that Hyman
resented his wife’s literary success and paradoxically sought to downplay it after
her early death. Jackson’s children have not done much better: Laurence Jackson
Hyman and Sarah Hyman Stewart’s compilation Just an Ordinary Day (1997)
includes—aside from a wide array of unpublished stories that may in fact have
been drafts that Jackson meant to discard, since for the most part they are slight
and undistinguished—a fair proportion of uncollected tales but also ignores
several outstanding items, such as the compact science fiction tale “Bulletin,”
also published in Fantasy and Science Fiction.
For her part, Joyce Carol Oates has done creditably in a 200-page section of
“Other Stories and Sketches,” including 21 items (although, curiously, five of
them are declared to be “unpublished,” simply because they appeared in the
“Unpublished Stories” section of Just an Ordinary Day). But it is evident that
Oates has not done any independent research on Jackson’s uncollected fiction
(although an extensive list is now available in Joan Wylie Hall’s Shirley
Jackson: A Study of the Short Fiction [Twayne, 1993]), since a number of choice
specimens have been overlooked. A thorough edition of Jackson’s complete
short fiction would be most welcome. Still, we should be grateful that such
stories as “The Summer People” (a grim story of what happens to vacationers
who ignore the unspoken custom of leaving before Labor Day), “The Possibility
of Evil” (about a vicious old woman who writes poison-pen letters), and,
preeminently, “A Visit” (a.k.a. “The Lovely House”) are included. I am not shy
in declaring “A Visit” Jackson’s best short story, “The Lottery” not excepted:
this extraordinarily subtle and delicate tale of what happens to a young woman
who comes to visit her friend’s family (an extreme makeover of an actual
incident when Dylan Thomas came to visit Jackson) shows, better than any tale I
can think of, how weird fiction can achieve tremendously powerful effects
without the least violence of diction or incident.
The notes and commentary in the Library of America volume are as
parsimonious as we have come to expect: no introduction, very compressed
annotations (there are all of four notes to We Have Always Lived in the Castle),
but welcome information on the first publication of all the items included. There
is little doubt that the edition includes much of the best of Jackson’s work; it is

simply that there is so much more that could be considered her best. It hardly
need be stated that the Library of America editors did not set out to publish a
volume of “weird fiction”: Jackson deserves to be in the series regardless of the
kind of work she wrote; but devotees of our genre can only welcome the
appearance of a volume that canonizes a writer whose work in our field is of
such consummate artistry.

II. Some Contemporaries
Terror in the Northwest
Laird Barron has, in a remarkably short period of time, emerged as one of the
leading writers of contemporary weird fiction. Indeed, in my judgment he stands
just below Caitlín R. Kiernan as the preeminent weird writer of his generation.
(The wily veteran Ramsey Campbell still looms above them and others; by this
point, the sum total of his achievement may place him at the very pinnacle of
weird fiction, past or present.) In large part this high ranking is the result of
Barron’s undoubted merits as a writer—a prose style of singular fluidity and
muscular sinuosity; a skill at blending genres (the supernatural tale, the hard-
boiled crime story, the superhero narrative, the tale of espionage) into a seamless
unity; and an imaginativeness in the fashioning of weird scenarios and
phenomena that casts into the shadows of mediocrity the tired vampires,
werewolves, and zombies of popular fiction. But in at least a small part Barron’s
celebrity has to do with a certain amount of log-rolling on the part of some
influential figures and institutions in the field. Their identities are well known,
and there is no need to cite them here; nor is there any need to suggest any
underhanded motive in their promotion of Barron and his work, which on the
whole justifies their lavish praise. But he is not the only writer who deserves to
be singled out, and one hopes that some of our critics eventually learn to cast a
wider net and elevate other worthy writers in our midst.
Barron excels in the novelette and the novella; and his third story collection
—The Beautiful Thing That Awaits Us All (Night Shade Books, 2013)—like its
predecessors, The Imago Sequence (2007) and Occultation (2010), contains nine
lengthy and substantial stories. On the level of prose, there is not a single
criticism to make, save one that I will reserve for the end of this review; on the
level of substance and import, the verdict is a bit more mixed.
One of the difficulties that many contemporary authors face is the incessant
demand of editors to write stories on a given theme or topic. (I am myself as
guilty as anyone, having badgered any number of writers into generating

Lovecraftian tales for my Black Wings series and other stand-alone volumes; I
have published what I humbly believe to be Barron’s best story—“The
Broadsword”—and will be publishing two others in anthologies in 2014.) There
is reason to think that such demands are deflecting authors from writing what
they really wish to write and forcing them to produce stories to order; even
talented writers like Kiernan and Barron seem at times to have difficulties in the
process, writing tales that are either only tangentially related to the purported
theme of the anthology or that are so mechanically in consonance with the theme
that they become artificial and contrived. Barron’s work generally tends toward
the former—and the paradoxical result is that, when the stories are printed
outside the context of their original appearances, they gain a certain aesthetic
independence that allows them to stand on their own as genuine imaginative
products.
Consider, for example, “Hand of Glory.” This richly textured novella was
originally written for The Book of Cthulhu II (2012), but one would never know
it, for its Lovecraftian elements are slim to non-existent. What we have here is a
compelling tale of Johnny Cope (a characteristic Barron character—a tough-guy
fighter with remarkable capacities for recovering from injuries and a world-
weary cynicism that bring Sam Spade or Philip Marlowe to mind) pursuing a
man named Conrad Paxton, who may or may not have killed his father. Did
Paxton somehow “drain [Cope’s] father’s energy” through photography? The
narrative gradually shifts to Eadweard Muybridge, the photographer, who may
have come “tantalizingly close to unlocking something vast and inimical to
human existence.” That single line may be the closest we get to Lovecraftian
thematics, but otherwise there is nothing of the Cthulhu Mythos or any other
signature Lovecraft element—and that is all to the good.
The other nominally Lovecraftian tale, “The Men from Porlock” (written for
The Book of Cthulhu [2011]), is an even more powerful and gripping narrative,
but again its Lovecraftian elements are slight. Here we are in a logging camp in
Washington State in the 1920s, where a group of loggers are sent out to hunt
some deer but find something much stranger—specifically, an uncharted village
populated with many pregnant women but apparently no children. When the men
of the village return, there are some customary fisticuffs, but that is the least
interesting part of this grim and brooding tale.
It is, indeed, good to see Barron drawing upon his Pacific Northwest roots,
even though he moved away from Washington State a few years ago: every one
of the stories in the book, except the last, is set in the land of old-growth
evergreens and crystal lakes. Hunting seems to be the focus of “Blackwood’s
Baby,” but it quickly becomes evident that the human hunters have become the

hunted in their pursuit of a huge stag. Like many of Barron’s longer tales, it
begins slowly but develops toward a powerful climax. And the surface scenario
gradually unfolds into a rumination on the age-old human tendency toward
sacrifice: a scapegoating ritual proves to be the grisly climax of this hypnotic
story.
“The Redfield Girls” is set in what Barron calls Lake Crescent (although
everyone I know in the Seattle area refers to it as Crescent Lake). A poignant
and melancholy tale of death and the ghosts that emerge from it, it is a more
conventional narrative than many of Barron’s, but no less gripping. A somewhat
similar story is “The Carrion Gods in Their Heaven,” an account of two women
in a remote cabin in Washington State, one of whom may be turning into a wolf
or coyote.
But even Barron nods; and, alas, there are several tales that don’t come off.
Perhaps the most disappointing is a lengthy story, “The Siphon.” It does little but
talk about weirdness (somewhat in the manner of some of Arthur Machen’s
tales, notably “The White People,” although Machen takes care to deliver an
actual story in the process), then descends into pointless bloodletting (the tale
was written for Ellen Datlow’s Blood and Other Cravings [2011]), then
concludes with more talking. It is, I am sorry to say, one of the most pretentious,
unfocused, and verbose stories Barron has ever written. Not much better is
“Vastation,” written for Cthulhu’s Reign (2010), a volume that asked writers to
imagine what it would be like if the Lovecraftian cosmic entities took over the
earth. Barron’s tale is a perfectly incomprehensible horror/science fiction hybrid
that remains opaque even when its purported “theme” is known.
But the saddest story of the lot is “More Dark,” the one tale not set in the
Pacific Northwest. Instead, New York City is the locus, and we are treated to a
dismayingly nasty and mean-spirited caricature of Thomas Ligotti (poorly
disguised as “Tom L”). Barron’s protagonist states: “My impression of L’s work
was lukewarm as I found his glib pooh-poohing of the master Robert Aickman
as a formative influence of his disingenuous considering their artistic
similarities, and L’s reduction of human characters to ciphers a trifle off-
putting. . . . His gloom and groan regarding the Infernal Bureaucracy wasn’t my
cup of tea, yet it possessed a certain resonance among the self-loathing,
chronically inebriated, perpetually persecuted set.” There is much more of this,
not to mention cameo appearances of Ellen Datlow, Mark Samuels, Michael
Cisco, Gordon Van Gelder, and many others (including myself). What possible
reason Barron could have had for writing this story is beyond my understanding;
it would probably prove entirely incomprehensible to those who don’t know the
characters involved, and unseemly for those who do. I fervently hope Barron

doesn’t write anything like this again.
Laird Barron is, as I say, immensely talented; but he is not beyond criticism.
He occasionally reveals a tendency toward highfalutin’ literary archness that is
more than a little dismaying. Perhaps he is trying to please certain editors who
think this kind of writing constitutes high art. He would be well advised to stick
to the sort of narrative that has made him justly recognised as a titan in our field
—stories like “The Broadsword” or “The Men of Porlock” as well as his superb
first novel, The Croning (2012). Thankfully, there is enough of this kind of
writing in The Beautiful Thing That Awaits Us All to make it a feast for any
connoisseur of weird fiction.
The copyediting of this book leaves much to be desired. Barron is one of
many talented writers whose work would benefit from the tender ministrations
of a skilled copyeditor; and his publisher failed to provide them here. This is a
perennial problem in the small press, even one so eminent as Night Shade; but it
needs to be addressed if contemporary weird fiction is to be taken seriously as a
legitimate art form.

Campbell and Lovecraft
It is a bit surreal to think that Ramsey Campbell (b. 1946) has been writing
longer than many of us have been alive. I am not even referring to his very
earliest juvenilia, a little book of stories called Ghostly Tales (1957/58). The
earliest drafts of the stories that comprised his first book, The Inhabitant of the
Lake and Less Welcome Tenants (Arkham House, 1964), were written in
1960/61, and Campbell and his publisher have now generously presented them,
along with their final drafts, in The Inhabitant of the Lake & Other Unwelcome
Tenants, the title of which should have appeared on the Arkham House book
published nearly a half-century earlier.
It might be a good idea for readers to begin a new, expanded edition of that
book— The Inhabitant of the Lake & Other Unwelcome Tenants (PS Publishing,
2011)—with the Appendices, for it is here that Campbell presents the first drafts
of the 1964 Inhabitant tales, along with a few tales that were not included in that
book at all. We find here the first publication of what appears to be Campbell’s
very first Lovecraftian tale, “The Box in the Priory,” probably written in 1960.
This story of the god Byatis (which had been casually mentioned by Robert
Bloch in “The Shambler from the Stars”) is a surprisingly entertaining—and,
more significantly, surprisingly mature—piece of work. It could have been
written by a writer twice Campbell’s age of fourteen. Granted, this and other
stories largely adhere to the “Derleth Mythos” rather than the Lovecraft Mythos,
as Campbell himself notes with regret in the afterword, and the surprise ending
of the story is probably derived from “The Shunned House.” Nevertheless, there
is much of merit in the tale.
The same could be said for all the drafts included here, some of which had
appeared earlier in The Tomb-Herd and Others (Crypt of Cthulhu No. 43 [1986])
and others in Cold Print (Scream/Press, 1985; rev. ed. Headline Feature, 1993).
To be sure, these tales adhere far more closely to the Lovecraftian idiom—in
style, in nomenclature, in landscape, and in setting—than the tales included in
the 1964 Inhabitant, but they remain enjoyable nonetheless. “The Tomb-Herd”
follows the eclectic pattern of many Mythos stories by referring to many other
creations aside from those of Lovecraft, from Frank Belknap Long’s Hounds of
Tindalos to Clark Ashton Smith’s Zothique (this is a bit awkward, since
Zothique is postulated in Smith’s work as a continent of the far future).
One of the most interesting specimens is “The Horror from the Bridge.”
What is most notable is not that Campbell has here invented a new city in

Massachusetts (Healyville) that, as it happened, he never used again; rather, it is
that this tale may actually have influenced the work of Campbell’s mentor
August Derleth. Campbell had sent this and other stories to Derleth in 1961–62,
and Campbell eventually produced a revised version of it that appeared in the
1964 Inhabitant. It was based on an entry in Lovecraft’s commonplace book.
But several years later, around October 1965, Derleth himself wrote a story
called “The Horror from the Middle Span” (one of his “posthumous
collaborations” with Lovecraft). This story was based on the identical
commonplace book entry, but Derleth betrays no awareness that Campbell had
beaten him to the punch. Resolute professional as he was, Derleth’s story is
much inferior to Campbell’s—even to the first draft.
“The Tower from Yuggoth” exhibits the degree to which Campbell was
besotted with Lovecraft: its protagonist is named Edward Wingate Armitage
(from Edward Derby in “The Thing on the Doorstep,” Nathaniel Wingate
Peaslee from “The Shadow out of Time,” and Henry Armitage from “The
Dunwich Horror”). Moreover, it is set in 1929, roughly the time when “The
Dunwich Horror” and “The Whisperer in Darkness” are set. Some of these
Lovecraftian echoes may have been unconscious. Consider a throw-away line in
“The Tomb-Herd”: “I read of what Azathoth had resembled before that
monstrous nuclear chaos had been bereft of mind and will.” This reminds us of
the line in “The Whisperer in Darkness” that reads: “I learned whence Cthulhu
first came . . . and I started with loathing when told of the monstrous nuclear
chaos beyond angled space which the Necronomicon had mercifully cloaked
under the name of Azathoth.”
As mentioned, Campbell sent a number of these drafts to August Derleth in
1961; he did not deliberately conceal the fact that he was only fifteen at the time,
but he did not broadcast it either. Derleth, understandably, found something to
praise in the stories, but he offered Campbell a momentous piece of advice: . . .
there is one alteration I think you should definitely make; . . . and that is to
remove your stories from the Lovecraft milieu. I mean, keep the Gods, the
Books, etc., but establish your own place. This would give the stories vastly
more authenticity as an addition to the Mythos rather than pastiche pieces, and it
might then be possible for us to consider their book publication in a limited
edition over here.
What I suggest you do is establish a setting in a coastal area of England
and create your own British milieu. This would not appreciably change your
stories, but it would give them a much needed new setting and would not, in
the reader’s mind, invite a direct comparison with Lovecraft, for in such a
comparison they would not show up as well as if you had your own setting

and place-names for the tales. (letter of 6 October 1961) Campbell was not
slow to take up the advice. The end result was that he rewrote “The Box in the
Priory” as “The Room in the Castle,” rewrote the other stories by transferring
them to an English locale (he settled on the Severn valley for his analogue to
Arkham, Dunwich, etc.), and made other changes that improved the stories.
But Campbell’s first appearance in an Arkham House anthology was “The
Church in High Street,” in Derleth’s anthology Dark Mind, Dark Heart (1962).
This story is Derleth’s heavy rewrite of the revised version of “The Tomb-
Herd.” Derleth agreed to publish it only on condition that he could change the
title and have a free hand with the revision of the text. Campbell’s version (i.e.,
the revised version of “The Tomb-Herd”) is no longer extant. The one thing one
can say about “The Church in High Street” is that Derleth’s revisions are
relatively seamless; I myself cannot detect what is Campbell and what is
Derleth, and I have read plenty of both.
The incredible thing about Campbell, however, is that even before
Inhabitant appeared in the spring of 1964, he was already moving beyond the
Lovecraft idiom and becoming his own writer. The first draft of “The
Interloper,” one of the more distinctive tales in Demons by Daylight (1973),
dates to 1963. Derleth had the good sense to encourage Campbell’s new literary
direction by publishing a number of these stories (including the revolutionary
“Cold Print”) in his anthologies of the 1960s and in sending Campbell a contract
for his second story collection, Demons by Daylight, as early as 1968. Campbell
has never looked back.
In Visions from Brichester (PS Publishing, 2015), Campbell has brought
together all his Lovecraftian short stories that did not already appear in The
Inhabitant of the Lake and Other Unwelcome Tenants. This volume collects not
merely the early Lovecraftian tales of the 1960s that showed him to be far more
than a competent teenage pastichist of Lovecraft, but also tales written over the
next several decades, all the way down to the novella The Last Revelation of
Gla’aki (2013). I will not say much about these fourteen stories, many of which
will be familiar to devotees of both Lovecraft and Campbell, save to note that in
my judgment two of the earliest ones, “Cold Print” (1967) and “The Franklyn
Paragraphs” (written in 1967 but not published until it appeared in Demons by
Daylight, 1973), are among the most original, scintillating, and sophisticated
riffs on Lovecraftian themes ever written. It is the more remarkable that their
author was in his early twenties when he wrote them.
From here Campbell went on to write such tales as “The Tugging” (1976), a
deft fusion of his own tendency toward intimate, domestic horror and

Lovecraft’s impersonal cosmicism; “The Faces at Pine Dunes” (1980), a
gripping story in which an adolescent boy comes to the harrowing realization
that his parents are involved in a witch-cult; “Blacked Out” (written 1977,
published 1985), in which a man traveling in Germany is lured by a sexually
appealing young woman into an encounter with a nameless monster in a church;
“The Horror under Warrendown” (1995), written for an anthology of stories set
in Campbell’s own invented English topography (the Severn valley, with such
towns as Severnford, Temphill, Goatswood, Brichester,[2] and Clotton), and
which presents a hideous race of beings who seem to meld animal and vegetable
traits; and so on. I have previously expressed my reservations about some of the
tales Campbell has reprinted here. In particular, he himself has declared that
“The Voice of the Beach” (written 1977, published 1982) represents his most
successful Lovecraftian venture by virtue of its “return to Lovecraft’s first
principles” and “without the encumbrances of the mythos,” as he wrote in the
introduction to Cold Print (1985). These goals are laudable, but I am not entirely
convinced that “The Voice of the Beach” embodies them. It is a fine and
compelling story that again seeks to unite a Campbellian focus on individual
psychology with Lovecraftian cosmicism; but to my mind, “Cold Print” and
“The Franklyn Paragraphs” are easily superior both as stories and as Lovecraft-
inspired narratives.
“The Other Names” (1998) is of interest in being a later story that utilizes
the god Daoloth, which Campbell invented in one of his early Inhabitant tales.
One cannot help thinking that the author was making a not so subtle allusion to
his early correspondent and mentor August Derleth, publisher of Arkham House.
As for “The Correspondence of Cameron Thaddeus Nash” (2010), a story that
Pete Crowther, publisher of PS Publishing, twisted Campbell’s arm into writing
for my first Black Wings anthology, it is a pungent tale that plays with the iconic
figure of Lovecraft himself (Nash is a previously unknown British correspondent
of the Providence writer). It is all great fun, and Campbell shrewdly uses Nash’s
increasingly abusive letters to highlight Lovecraft’s excessively modest opinion
of the merits of his own work.
But the most interesting aspect of Visions from Brichester is the substantial
appendix, which includes a number of items—uncollected or previously
unpublished—that shed immense light on Campbell’s response to Lovecraft. The
two chief items are the original drafts of “Cold Print” (titled “The Successor”
and dating to 1964) and “The Franklyn Paragraphs” (dating to 1965). Both
stories, if read as independent items, could stand as passable Lovecraftian
pastiches—but how cataclysmically inferior they are to their final drafts! And
what a remarkable progression in Campbell’s work over a period of only a year

or two they embody!
“The Successor” introduces us to the blandly named Derek Sheridan (a name
far less evocative than “Cold Print”’s Sam Strutt), who seeks out erotica from a
dubious bookseller in Brichester. Specifically, he is seeking books published by
“Sweden’s Ultimate Press” (a stand-in for the Parisian publisher Olympia Press
—many of which, as Campbell’s correspondence with Derleth reveals,[3] were
banned in England, forcing Campbell to ask Derleth to order them for him, have
them sent to the U.S., and then mail them on to him). Once again, even the titles
of the books Sheridan seeks—The Experiments of Youth; The Pleasures of Adam
and Ryan—pale in comparison to Strutt’s chosen bill of fare (The Caning-
Master; Miss Whippe, Old-Style Governess), books that paint a much darker
portrait of the psychology of Strutt. It is in such an environment that both
individuals encounter the ultimate obscenity—the nine-volume Revelations of
Gla’aki; but in “The Successor” Sheridan has a grotesque and unintentionally
comical dialogue with the bookseller, who then metamorphoses into the god
Y’golonac (one is reminded of an analogous scene in Brian Lumley’s disaster of
a novel, Beneath the Moors, in which a character has a genial conversation with
Bokrug, the water-lizard), whereas in “Cold Print” the confrontation with the
bookseller inexorably takes on more sinister overtones until the final revelation
(“before he could scream out his protest his breath was cut off, as the hands
descended on his face and the wet red mouths opened in their palms”).
As for “The Franklyn Paragraphs,” the early version is much less
Lovecraftian than its revised version and also commits the gaffe of placing its
supernatural dénouement at the beginning of the story. The basic motif of both
stories is again that of the “forbidden book,” already well used by Lovecraft
himself and his disciples; by the time Campbell got around to using it, something
new had to be done. He did so—but bunglingly in the first version. Here a
character named Harvey Shea (presumably derived from J. Vernon Shea, a
correspondent of Lovecraft cited by name in the revised version) who comes
upon a strange book by Roland Franklyn, Magic, Legend and the Infinite Self (a
far less evocative title than the revised version’s We Pass from View). But
whereas in the later version the climax—the fact that the book begins writing
words of its own accord (SHE HAD ME BURIED HER REVENGE TOLD
HER CREMATE . . .) in front of the narrator’s eyes, as the spirit of Franklyn
seeks to escape from the tomb in which his vindictive wife buried him—is
placed well along in the story for maximum impact, in the early version it is
matter-of-factly introduced toward the beginning. What is more, Campbell in the
later version has incorporated his own persona into the narrative, presenting a
series of letters from Roland Franklyn to himself and thereby radically

enhancing (and in some senses subtly parodying) the “documentary style” so
frequently used by Lovecraft to create verisimilitude.
There is much else in the appendix to Visions from Brichester that demands
our attention. I am not referring to some early poems that Campbell wrote as if
he were Edward Pickman Derby (the author of Azathoth and Other Poems, as
recounted in Lovecraft’s “The Thing on the Doorstep”), or, even more
delightfully, a series of limericks (“Mushrooms from Merseyside”) that
amusingly encapsulate his own stories. Instead, we find several early essays,
notably “Rusty Links,” written around 1960 but not published at the time. What
is noteworthy here is that Campbell takes a strongly negative view of the
Cthulhu Mythos stories of Lovecraft’s most prominent self-styled disciple,
August Derleth. It is remarkable that Campbell could, at the age of fourteen.
detect the manifest failings of Derleth’s stories when a fair number of
purportedly mature scholars and critics today remain unable to do so. “Lovecraft
in Retrospect” (1969) is an historically interesting essay that, in its surprisingly
hostile attitude to Lovecraft, really comprises Campbell’s declaration of
aesthetic independence from Lovecraft—a testament that the stories he was
already writing for the landmark Demons by Daylight collection would be
Campbellian, not Lovecraftian. What Campbell is criticizing in Lovecraft is in
failing to do what he (Campbell) now wishes to do: “The horror tale must surely
turn towards the more intimate, more personal and yet paradoxically more
universal fear.” There we have the program of Demons by Daylight in a nutshell.
Contrast this early essay with the recent “On Four Lovecraft Tales” (2013),
which presents unfailingly perspicacious analyses of “Dagon,” “The Rats in the
Walls,” “The Call of Cthulhu,” and “The Colour out of Space.” So many acute
comments could be cited, but I will restrict myself to one: “Lovecraft’s
increasing use of science in his fiction doesn’t expunge the occult and fantastic
but often embraces them, drawing on the imaginative strengths of both.”

Rain, Rain, Everywhere
I am writing this from the famously rainy city of Seattle—although, in point of
fact, our rain is most often a fine mist of precipitation rather than a heavy
downpour, and our annual rainfall, by volume, is slightly less than that for New
York City and other metropolises. I mention this seemingly irrelevant detail
because Ramsey Campbell, in his novel Creatures of the Pool (PS Publishing,
2009), has accomplished something that I do not ever recall being achieved or
even attempted in any other novel-length work of horror fiction—to induce a
kind of nameless terror by persistent, even omnipresent, rainfall.
The “pool” of the title refers generally to Liverpool—and, perhaps more
specifically, to the pool of water, the Mersey, around which Liverpool grew. For
this novel is nothing less than an attempt—and a highly successful one—to draw
upon history as a source of terror. Creatures of the Pool may be Ramsey
Campbell’s ultimate tribute to the hold that the city has exercised on him his
entire life, even though in 1980 he moved across the Mersey to live in
neighbouring Wallasey. Campbell long ago admitted that the principal city of his
invented constellation of Seven Valley towns, Brichester, although initially
devised as a kind of English equivalent to Lovecraft’s Arkham, had, by the time
he was writing the stories in Demons by Daylight (1973), become “Liverpool . . .
in all but name” (as he noted in the introduction to The Face That Must Die,
1983), and beginning with “The Cellars” (written 1965), Liverpool serves as the
setting for many of Campbell’s most chilling and disturbing novels and tales.
Here Campbell enlivens both the topography of Liverpool (the novel actually
contains several splendid historical photographs of the actual locales described
in it) and its history by suggesting both literal and metaphorical depths of which
most of its hundreds of thousands of citizens are mercifully unaware.
Much of the novel is a delightful fusion of the (historically) real and
imaginary. The first of several epigraphs is a couplet from a Description of
Liverpool (1802) from an obscure poet, William Colquitt. This person (as
Google Books conveniently informs me) is a real individual, although his poem
is not a self-standing work but a contribution to his volume of Poems (1802)—
and I imagine that some of the lines of poetry scattered throughout the text are in
fact of Campbell’s, not Colquitt’s, devising. The technique naturally reminds
one of Lovecraft, who, even when citing real works—such as Remigius’
Daemonolatreia—creates the impression that they are invented for the occasion.
Campbell continues this pattern by repeatedly citing John Strong’s Glimpses of

Absolute Power, an imaginary work he had originally invented for his first
novel, The Doll Who Ate His Mother (1975)—and the remarkable advances that
Campbell has made since the writing of that novel thirty-odd years ago are no
more clearly evident than in the highly disturbing and inscrutable passages by
Strong scattered throughout Creatures of the Pool, so different from the rather
crude and bombastic occultism of the analogous passages in Doll.
The first-person narrator of Creatures of the Pool is Gavin Meadows, who
runs the Liverghoul Tours—tours of locales in the city where murders have
occurred. His father, Deryck, is increasingly obsessed with the secret history of
Liverpool, thinking that there is a vast conspiracy of silence that hides something
baleful behind—and beneath—the city’s bustling streets and plazas. Deryck runs
a website devoted to the subject. Gavin finds his father’s brusque and abrasive
manner rather mortifying, especially in one instance where Deryck had
demanded to be allowed to see some unpublished papers that the public library
was supposed to house, but which the librarians (including Gavin’s girlfriend
Lucinda, who works there) denied owning. Things take an alarming turn when
Deryck disappears—and Campbell effects a striking juxtaposition of past and
present by the fact that Gavin delves simultaneously into Liverpool’s past and
hears sporadically from his father by means of curiously misspelled text
messages on his cellphone (which the British call a “mobile”). Gavin also
develops something akin to his father’s obsession as he continues his
explorations around, and under, the city.
And yet, Creatures of the Pool is not quite the success that I was hoping it
would be. Campbell’s prose has never been so scintillating and crisp, and that
omnipresent rain—augmented by Gavin’s anomalous thirst, which compels him
to consume enormous quantities of water whenever the occasion allows—is
harrowing; and, although there is a compelling climactic episode in which Gavin
seeks to track both parents (for his mother has also by now disappeared) through
the (real) tunnels of Liverpool, in the end we are not given quite the climax we
are expecting. There is really no adequate explanation for the range of bizarre
incidents scattered throughout the novel, so that the whole work becomes a kind
of tease. I am not giving anything away in saying that Lovecraft’s “The Shadow
over Innsmouth” hangs heavy over the novel—even though Campbell, in his
afterword to Just Behind You, seeks in part to deny its influence.
It is much greater pleasure that I turn to Campbell’s latest short story
collection, Just Behind You (PS Publishing, 2009), his first since Told by the
Dead (2003)—not counting the far from inconsequential Tales (2008)—and
containing stories that appear to have been written entirely in the first decade of
the new millennium. What strikes me about this collection is that two dominant

themes run through it—the horrors, both real and supernatural (the latter, of
course, being in many ways symbolic of the former), that children face, and the
manner in which new technologies, far from undermining the supernatural
(which, true enough, is largely oriented toward the past, rooted as it is in myth,
legend, and superstition), can actually enhance it.
Let us start with the latter. “Digging Deep” is the delightful half-comic terror
tale that Campbell read at the World Fantasy Convention in Saratoga Springs in
2007—the tale about a man who is buried alive but who happens to have his
cellphone (or mobile) with him. His frantic and seemingly unsuccessful efforts
to convince the police that he is not a prankster but is really and truly buried
alive would be bad enough—but the grim twist at the very end is much worse.
Nothing can surpass Campbell’s own reading of the tale, and some media
company could do well by issuing an audiotape of such readings.
There are two other stories in the book about cellphones, although by far the
best one—and perhaps the best in the whole book—is “Breaking Up.” This
magnificently haunting tale of the terrors that can lurk in the bitter cold of a
snowstorm features a cumulative build-up of horror that is well-nigh
unsurpassed. Consider the care with which the following paragraph fuses overt
description with sinister implication: Despite her glove, the rail felt like a
handful of ice. To her right, lumps of snow had been gouged out of the crests of
the hedges for snowballs or by someone’s desperate clutch. Beyond the hedges
on both sides of the road, pale figures no more shapely than a child’s first
drawing appeared to mark her progress. She might almost have fancied they
were watching her, even those that had least with which to do so. When a phone
jangled, she was near to imagining that it related to a dim hunched shape with
the sloughed remains of a face. The sound was in the house belonging to the
snowman. She hauled herself past it in a rage at her nerves. It fell silent, and her
phone rang.
As an aside, I cannot help noting some other instances of jewelled prose in the
book, whether it be chilling phrases like some of the above (a cellphone
“weighed less than a tiny skull”) or pungent descriptions that compactly probe
character (“his jowls were starting to bag his age”) or disturbing glimpses into
abnormal psychology (“It made him feel reduced to someone else’s notion of
himself, in danger of becoming insignificant to himself”).
The childhood theme in these stories is frequently linked to another theme
one can readily detect—the continuing reality of class conflict. In the United
States we are ruthlessly programmed to disregard all distinctions save those
based purely on wealth or income, but in Campbell’s England the cultural,
educational, and behavioural cleavages between classes is starkly displayed.

Indeed, this collection reveals (not that his previous works haven’t) that
Campbell has become a noted satirist whose shuddering loathing of certain
behavioural patterns of the lower classes—their deceitfulness, their quick
tendency to violence, their resentment and envy of their social and economic
betters—does not negate an awareness that these traits are often their only means
of survival in a world where the cards seem stacked against them. And a story
like “Feeling Remains” shows that Campbell can aim his satirical barbs just as
keenly at the airheaded liberalism of the middle classes.
And yet, some of the stories in the book seem afflicted with the same
problems as Creatures of the Pool. “Dragged Down” is a splendid depiction of
the wrenching class conflict inherent in a lower-class teenage boy’s longing for
an upper-class girl at school; but we are not given sufficient clues as to what
kind of creature could have caused their drowning in a tunnel separating the
districts where they live. Analogously, “Unblinking” is a fine study of paranoia,
about a psychology professor who has an increasingly odd series of
confrontations with a surly neighbour, but the climax or resolution of the story
does not seem entirely satisfactory. But there are other stories that are
unqualified successes: “Fear the Dead,” where a small boy’s fears that speaking
ill of the dead will have dreadful consequences proves all too true; “Respects,”
where the revenant of a dead teenager haunts an elderly woman; “Raised by the
Moon,” about hideous creatures emerging from the sea; and a number of others
one could cite.
Whatever possible drawbacks these stories have, they—and, indeed,
Creatures of the Pool also—are ample evidence that Campbell continues at the
top of his form in what have already been a remarkable four decades and more
of writing. His drawing of character has never been sharper; his prose has never
been more supple or resonant; and his ability to engineer a shuddering climax
that is simultaneously surprising and inevitable has never been greater. And to
say that Ramsey Campbell is at the top of his form is to say that he stands at the
pinnacle of the entire realm of supernatural literature.

Fifty Years of Ramsey Campbell
In 2012, Ramsey Campbell celebrated his fiftieth year as a published writer, for
it was in 1962 that his story “The Church on High Street” appeared in August
Derleth’s anthology Dark Mind, Dark Heart. While that shy, withdrawn,
sixteen-year-old Campbell is almost unrecognisable from the bluff, jovial, and
immensely accomplished elder statesman of our field—the sum total of whose
achievement places him in the ranks of Poe, Lovecraft, Blackwood, Dunsany,
and Machen at the very pinnacle of weird fiction—there are points of continuity
to be found all along the line. His recent books offer testimonials both to how
Campbell has changed and to how he has remained true to the literary goals and
purposes he had formulated, however inchoately, even as a teenager.
Ghosts Know (PS Publishing, 2011) is one of the most compulsively
readable of any he has written in recent years—and that’s saying much. It
concerns Graham Wilde, a radio talk show host in Manchester who, firstly,
becomes involved with a reputed psychic, Frank Jasper, whom he hopes to
debunk, and, secondly, with the death of a teenage girl, Kylie Goodchild, who
proves to have been murdered. The first-person account by Wilde is hypnotic,
revealing Campbell’s seemingly effortless skill at character depiction and in
worrying out the smallest nuances of meaning and emotion by means of
dialogue. Jasper becomes Graham’s apparent enemy when the latter claims on
the air to know revealing details of Jasper’s past by psychic means, when in fact
he had known him in school. Graham himself finds Kylie’s body in a canal
drain, and it is later revealed that she had come to the radio station on the night
of her death, evidently seeking to talk to Graham for some unspecified reason.
Suspicion naturally turns to Graham himself as a possible murderer—a suspicion
that Jasper augments in a speech at Kylie’s funeral.
Throughout the text, we sense that Graham is seething with barely
suppressed rage, and Campbell deftly traces this to incidents in Graham’s past,
especially to his relations with his parents. When Graham is pressured into
taking a lie detector test on his own radio program—and, more disturbingly,
when the person administering the test finds many of his responses
“inconclusive,” perhaps because Graham’s rage was distorting the polygraph
machine—things look bleak for him. Is he an unreliable narrator who in fact
killed Kylie but is keeping vital facts from his readers? Does his increasing
paranoia see enemies where none exist? There are no simple answers to these
questions; and even when many of the central issues of the scenario are resolved,

the novel ends without full resolution.
My only reservation with this gripping and consistently unnerving novel is
its title. It manifestly suggests the supernatural, but there is nothing supernatural
here. Even some of the chapter titles bear the word “ghost” or “ghosts” in them,
but I am apparently too dense to ascertain their precise meaning or relevance.
But this is the only flaw in the novel, if indeed it is a flaw. Ghosts Know adds
another piece to the imposing obelisk that is Ramsey Campbell’s oeuvre—an
oeuvre that places him at the very pinnacle of weird writing in our time.
A new story collection by Campbell is always cause for celebration, and
Holes for Faces (Dark Regions Press, 2013)—which presents fifteen stories
published in various magazines and anthologies over the past decade—is no
different. We find here, time and again, the patented Campbellian touches: an
extraordinarily careful and precise use of language, where every word counts;
subtle and indirect suggestions of horror and weirdness, where less is always
more; a sense of cumulative terror and unease that builds from the first word to
the last. Any one of these stories would establish another writer’s reputation; for
Campbell, they only add to the embarrassment of riches that we have come to
expect from the author of “Cold Print,” “The Franklyn Paragraphs,” “The
Chimney,” and “Mackintosh Willy.”
One interesting touch in these narratives is what might be called the greying
of Ramsey Campbell. As he approaches his sixty-eighth birthday on January 4,
2014, he has correspondingly turned his attention to the plight of the elderly
among us. His portrayals of senior citizens are not always flattering, but they are
always telling; and he is particularly focused on how the elderly deal—or fail to
deal—with the rapid social and technological changes that many younger
individuals themselves struggle to assimilate. Hence, in “Passing through
Peacehaven,” we find an older man seemingly alone at night in a strange train
station, unable to make out the muffled announcements over the PA system and
dimly aware of vague threats, both physical (there is a deserted factory nearby)
and spiritual. The sense of isolation, helplessness, and vulnerability this story
evokes is unmatched even in the bulk of Campbell’s own work. Somewhat
similar is “Recently Used,” where a man seeks with increasing alarm to locate
his wife in a hospital, and finally finds her—with ominous results.
“Peep” conveys, in twenty pages, the complex social ties that an old man
struggles to deal with—both an aunt whose strange behaviour had disturbed him
as a boy and the daughter and grandchildren whose affection he strives to retain.
Does the ghost of the aunt return from the dead at the end? We never know for
certain. “The Decorations” is told from the perspective of a boy who senses that
his grandmother is for some reason afraid of a plastic figure of Santa Claus

placed on the roof of her house. The grandmother dies—but does she too come
back from the dead?
He saw at once that she’d become what she was afraid of. She was draped
with a necklace of fairy lights, and two guttering bulbs had taken the place of
her eyes. Dim green light spilled like slimy water down her cheeks. She wore
a long white dress, if the vague pale mass wasn’t part of her, for her face
looked inflated to hollowness, close to bursting. Perhaps that was why her
mouth was stretched so wide, but her grin was terrified. He had a sudden
dreadful thought that both she and the worm were inside the shape.
Here again, every sentence, every word is made to count; and the passage,
without the least violence of diction or image, conjures up—or, more precisely,
allows each reader’s imagination to conjure up—visions of unthinkable horror.
Campbell has also become adept at fusing the most contemporary elements
of our society and culture into his fiction. “Getting It Wrong” alternates between
terror and humour in its portrayal of a woman on a quiz show who seeks out an
“expert friend” to answer questions about films, and who may have come to a
horrible fate when the friend’s answers are erroneous. “The Rounds” tells of an
elderly man on a subway train haunted by the prospect of a young Muslim
woman who appears to have left a suitcase (or a bomb?) on the train. “Chucky
Comes to Liverpool” is a pungent story of a woman so obsessed with banning
what in England are called “video nasties” (films portraying extreme violence)
that she fails to notice that her own teenage son is turning into a delinquent.
Not every story in Holes for Faces is entirely successful. “The Room
Beyond” tells of sinister happenings in an old and decrepit hotel, but the
development seems meandering and unfocused. Similarly meandering is
“Behind the Door,” where a man becomes obsessed with the numbers in an
Advent calendar—a calendar that seems tied to his hatred of an old
schoolteacher. But there is so much good work elsewhere that these possible
failings are brushed aside. The title story, for example, is a mesmerising tale of a
boy who had been traumatised by the sight of faceless bodies in the catacombs
of Naples and subsequently sees faceless figures everywhere thereafter. And the
collection ends with “The Long Way,” a novelette first separately published in
2008 and featuring those searing portrayals of urban blight and decay that
Campbell has made his own.
The Kind Folk (PS Publishing, 2012) is Campbell’s twenty-seventh novel
(not counting his three novelisations of Universal horror films under the house
name “Carl Dreadstone”), and a more flawless encapsulation of all that
Campbell means to weird fiction would be difficult to find. The narratives

focuses entirely—and obsessively—on a single character, the young Luke
Arnold, who is astounded to discover (on a nationally broadcast television show)
that he is not the biological son of his parents, Maurice and Freda Arnold. The
existential unease that this revelation creates is only augmented by subsequent
developments. What of the fact that his beloved uncle, Terence, dies of a heart
attack before he is able to tell Luke something important about his origins? What
are we to make of a rambling and seemingly incomprehensible diary that
Terence left behind—one that suggests that he may have developed an interest in
the occult (both John Strong—a baleful figure from Campbell’s first novel, The
Doll Who Ate His Mother [1975]—and Roland Franklyn, from “The Franklyn
Paragraphs,” are cited in it)? Why does a nurse whom Luke tracks down first say
that she knows what happened during Luke’s birth, then frantically deny it?
The title of course refers to fairies—the euphemism “kind folk” being
exactly analogous with the ancient Greek term Eumenides (“the well-
intentioned”) in reference to the Furies. These fairies are, accordingly, very
different from the airy sprites of Walt Disney; and their sinister presence lurks in
the background of the entire novel. In one harrowing chapter, Luke actually
pursues what he takes to be one of the kind folk, only to lose track of him (or her
or it). Later he strikes one with his car:
He’s nearly at the junction when the shape lurches in front of the car,
flinging its arms wide and thrusting its mouthless head forward so violently
that the eyes almost sink out of sight. He doesn’t brake; he floors the
accelerator, and the car runs the scrawny figure down, having struck it in the
region where its genitals should be, a withered tangle more like bone than any
species of flesh. Luke doesn’t feel an impact, but the car shudders as though it
has been seized by a wind across the moors. As he races past the Crakemoor
road he sees a dim glimmering shape stagger to its feet in the mirror and
stretch out its claws to the car. The arms are lengthening; they’re yards long
now—they’re even longer. Then they appear to merge with the night, and
eventually Luke lets the car lose speed on the ascent to the highest moor.
It is bad enough that Luke at times suspects that he himself is a child of the
fairies; but he finds it much worse to contemplate the fate of his own child, being
carried by his partner, Sophie. Initially the child seems normal, but it soon makes
a bizarre hand gesture that ought to be physiologically impossible for human
hands (this is the focus of the rather amateurish jacket art by Erika Steiskal). In a
conclusion that vaguely echoes Lovecraft’s “The Shadow over Innsmouth”—
where the protagonist first flees the hybrid horrors of Innsmouth, only to
embrace them later once he realises he is biologically related to them—Luke

concludes the novel by feeling “wistfully relieved that there’s still magic in the
world.”
The Kind Folk is written with a fluidity of prose rhythm that Campbell has
mastered, along with an ever-growing sense of existential terror that is perhaps
unlike anything in his previous works. It seems on the surface deficient in
explicit physical horror, but it achieves its effects in a far more profound and
psychologically resonant manner, as the horror interweaves itself into the very
fabric of a family’s most intimate relationships.
The Last Revelation of Gla’aki (PS Publishing, 2013) brings us full circle,
for of course the title alludes to the fictitious grimoire—The Revelations of
Glaaki—that Campbell, in his very first book, The Inhabitant of the Lake and
Less Welcome Tenants (1964), added to the groaning bookshelves of Lovecraft’s
Cthulhu Mythos. But to refer to this short novel as a pastiche in the manner of
such crudities as “The Insects from Shaggai” or “The Mine on Yuggoth” would
be little short of grotesque. What Campbell has done here is to reinterpret the
“forbidden book” topos—a vital and ever-changing conception in Lovecraft’s
own work, but often rendered trite and hackneyed by some of his lesser imitators
—in the light of his own immensely enhanced understanding of human nature
and motivations. We are here focused on Leonard Fairman, an archivist at
Brichester University, who ventures to the town of Gulshaw to secure a copy of
the fabulously rare nine-volume work, The Revelations of Glaaki. (In a prefatory
note, Fairman points out that, according to the redoubtable John Strong, the
apostrophe in “Gla’aki” was dropped by Percy Smallbeam, the editor of the
1862 edition, “to make for ease of reading.”) But as Fairman meets with Frank
Lunt, the head of the Shaw Theatre in Gulshaw, he is disconcerted to find that
Lunt has only one volume of the work. This begins an increasingly frustrating
quest whereby Fairman is obliged to go from one inhabitant of Gulshaw to the
next, each of whom hands him another volume of The Revelations of Glaaki
while he continues to stay in a bizarre hotel in the town and consumes increasing
quantities of the peculiar food he is given at various establishments. Meanwhile,
Fairman is disturbed by the strangeness of the town’s denizens, as in a home for
the elderly he visits:
One old man was opening his mouth wide and circular to expose his greyish
gums, and several of his companions joined in, as though they were
competing to produce the roundest mouth. An old woman was dangling her
arms on either side of her chair to touch the carpet, and Fairman might have
thought her hands were too long for the arms. Outside the windows a number
of apparently unsupervised residents were shuffling and wobbling about the

grounds; several had gathered to stare through a gap in the wall into the ill-
defined depths of the woods.
There is, quite frankly, not much of a climax to this short novel, but its chillingly
cumulative sense of increasing unease is sufficient reward for any reader.
Ramsey Campbell has already done more than several lifetimes’ work by
any ordinary writer, and the prospect that he will continue for another ten or
twenty years to produce gems like the three books discussed here is perhaps the
chief reason to maintain an interest in contemporary weird fiction.

Terror in a Sentence
For the better part of his half-century of writing, Ramsey Campbell has
performed an elaborate dance on either side of the supernatural divide. His
novels in particular seem to fall in almost equal numbers into the realms of
supernatural horror and psychological suspense. Among the former are such
triumphs as The Parasite (1980), Incarnate (1983), The Hungry Moon (1986),
Midnight Sun (1990), The Long Lost (1993), The House on Nazareth Hill (1996),
The Darkest Part of the Woods (2002), and The Seven Days of Cain (2010);
among the latter we can cite The Face That Must Die (1979/1983), The Count of
Eleven (1991), The One Safe Place (1995), The Last Voice They Hear (1998),
and The Grin of the Dark (2007). The marvel of Campbell’s new novel, Think
Yourself Lucky (PS Publishing, 2014)—one of the most compelling of his recent
novels and certainly among the best novels he has ever written—is that it
cleverly and poignantly fuses these two modes into a single unclassifiable
amalgam.
The novel introduces us to David Botham, a mild-mannered, perhaps overly
self-effacing man who works at a travel agency in Liverpool. But Botham is, in a
sense, periodically obliterated in the course of the narrative by the intrusion of
another figure—whose presence is indicated by a different typeface and first-
person narration, as opposed to the third-person narration of the passages about
Botham. This person seems like a typical representative of the anger-filled,
alienated youth that populates big cities everywhere (“I’m glad my rage hasn’t
deserted me, but then it never does”)—but this individual acts upon his rage by
causing the deaths of any number of individuals, but always in such a way that
the victims appear to have died by accident. And what is even more horrible is
that these deaths frequently happen to individuals who superficially seem to
deserve to die—or, at the very least, are morally and socially culpable in some
way. An overweight man who munches a hamburger and French fries on a
commuter train (and heedlessly litters in the process!) is dispatched in an
elevator; another fat man who continually gets in the way of the killer in a movie
theatre is loathsomely killed in the theatre’s toilet.
But what possible connection can there be between the placid, somewhat
inhibited Botham and this vile murderer? David reveals something of his past to
his current girlfriend, Stephanie, when he tells her that as a child he had created
an imaginary playmate who, unlike him, was able to do bad things and get away
with them. He had called this creature Lucky, then later given him the surname

Newless. He also admits that he had taken an unknown drug at college—could
this somehow have caused Lucky to come to life? Whatever the case, the
incident allows Campbell to indulge in some fine prose-poetry as he relates the
hallucinatory effect of the drug: The old buildings of the university had glowed
like bones in a fire, but he’d seen that the new blocks lit by white globes on
stalks were fossils of the future. As he crossed a road, the cars that glared at him
with their great eyes had seemed poised to multiply their speed the instant he
stepped off the kerb. . . . Despite the January chill, he’d felt his sweaty feet
squelch at every step. At last he’d come into the open on the far side of a stile,
which was as cold as metal and transformed his hands on it into wood. The
electric amber sunset of the town had faded from the sky he’d left behind him,
and eventually he’d lain down in the middle of a field that frost had turned into
enormous spiky half-buried ribs. He’d felt the skeleton splinter beneath him, and
then he’d been aware of nothing except the sky, where the moon had sharpened
the edges of clouds as it crept from behind them.
David is now horrified to find that a person calling himself Lucky Newless is
writing a blog (the title of which, “Better Out Than In,” David had invented) in
which the murders are spelled out in painstaking detail.
This extraordinarily ingenious premise—supernatural in the sense of an
imagined entity coming to life, but psychological in multiple senses, in that
Lucky may represent the rage and frustration that David himself feels but is
unable to act upon, and also in that the deaths that Lucky contrives are all too
plausible and grimly realistic—engenders a remarkable sense of unease in the
reader. For long stretches of the narrative we are unsure whether anything
supernatural has actually happened: David himself wonders whether he himself
is writing the blog without being aware of it—and he is also unnerved by the
realization that he has encountered many of the individuals who are so callously
rubbed out by what may or may not be a creature of his imagination. Lucky
engages in contriving increasingly grisly deaths for his chosen victims, as when
he causes a disabled man in a scooter to be hit by a truck in the street: “I’m
diverted to see how many ways metal and cloth and meat can be torn apart and
rearranged together.”
Campbell enlivens the scenario by exhibiting the very real social and
personal tensions under which David, and others around him, are compelled to
live. David’s superior at the travel agency is Andrea, a woman who was his
former lover—and their tense conversations, with so many hidden meanings
lurking under their superficially bland words, are almost enough to create terror
in themselves. David’s mother, a social worker, tells of a particularly disturbing
case that is troubling her—one Benny Moorcroft, who for a time the reader is led

to believe may be the killer, until it becomes clear that he himself is one of
Lucky’s victims. David manages to look up a man whom Lucky did not manage
to kill but only injure seriously: this person, who is in the intensive care unit, can
barely manage to speak, but he sends a chill in David (and the reader) by saying
that he did see the person who caused him to fall from a ladder: “Somebody
that’s got your face.” Later, a security guard who has followed both David and
Lucky states ominously: “I might have mixed him up with you if I wasn’t
careful.”
In a sense, Think Yourself Lucky is a vast expansion of Campbell’s story
“The Depths” (1978), where a true-crime writer finds that if he does not set
down his hideous dreams of murder and mayhem, they happen in real life. In the
story, the writer serves as a kind of focus for the collective repressions of a
society that would prefer to ignore the very existence of crime and its sources. In
the novel, Campbell employs the doppelgänger motif—the influence of Poe’s
“William Wilson” seems particularly strong here—to suggest that the horrors are
the result of David’s own repression of his anger at the seemingly endless
annoyances of life in the twenty-first century.
Indeed, Think Yourself Lucky is only the latest and perhaps most pungent of
Campbell’s ventures into satire—and, in this case, satire of an engagingly
misanthropic sort. All manner of contemporary absurdities are held up to
ridicule: the Internet, which has made possible the dreary proliferation of writing
by all manner of people who shouldn’t be engaging in it; the excessive use of
euphemisms in a frantic effort not to cause the slightest offense to anyone; the
tortuosities of office politics, where subtle forms of one-upmanship are
constantly indulged in; and much else. An exquisitely hilarious passage relates
how Lucky walks into a bookstore and compels a sales clerk to look for the
several literary classics that have a certain politically correct word in the title,
until finally she is forced to utter the name of a celebrated novel by Joseph
Conrad: “The En Word of the Narcissus.” As Lucky sagely comments, “You
can’t suppress words. . . . It doesn’t make the thoughts go away.”
As always, Campbell puts on stage a wide array of crisply realized
characters, each rendered distinct in the most compact possible manner, chiefly
through their speech. The dialogue Campbell places in their mouths is, in all
frankness, quite artificial: it is difficult to imagine normal people engaging in the
kind of tit-for-tat repartée that we find throughout this work. But what this usage
signals is Campbell’s increasing awareness of the baffling complexity of
language—a complexity that can lead to all manner of misconstruals, double
entendres, and subtle insults or denigrations that suddenly open a window on the
character of the persons making the utterances. But, in contrast to some of his

recent works, this intense focus on the ambiguities and overtones of everyday
language does not in any way hinder the progression of the narrative or make it
any less of a page-turner in proper bestseller tradition.
Think Yourself Lucky is Ramsey Campbell at his very best. No one in the
entire range of supernatural fiction can evoke terror in a single sentence, or
depict gruesomeness without the slightest coarseness or violence of diction, or
generate an atmosphere of appalling, cumulative horror as well as he. After more
than fifty years of writing, his work remains fresh and vivid, to be read as much
for its insight into our troubled psyches as for its expositions of horror and
weirdness.

The Sublime and the Ridiculous
Dennis Etchison is one of the jewels of our field. He has raised the short story—
whether it be supernatural, science fiction, psychological suspense, or, most
provocatively, an indefinable combination of several or all of these—to a level
of high artistry that, among current writers, perhaps only Ramsey Campbell and
Thomas Ligotti can match. His story collections—from The Dark Country
(1982) to Red Dreams (1984) to The Blood Kiss (1988) to The Death Artist
(2000) to Talking in the Dark (2001)—contain so much good work that they
easily allow us to forgive the gaucheries of his several unsuccessful attempts at
the supernatural or psychological horror novel.
Got to Kill Them All (Cemetery Dance, 2008)—a more smirk-inducing title I
have not come upon in a long time—is not actually a “new” collection, but one
that spans the chronological gamut of Etchison’s work, from as early as 1966 all
the way up to 2001, and taking a few stories from previous collections. It has
been carefully selected to gather tales that Etchison, in an all too brief foreword,
deems “ruthless, cold or even cruel.” If readers believe that this indicates a
unified collection of tales that displays the full range of psychological suspense,
and even the conte cruel, they would be right.
If the volume covers a wide chronological range, it also, sadly, displays a
wide range of quality, from some of the transcendent heights of Etchison’s short
story output to a few that come close to the nadir. Mercifully, the former far
outweigh the latter, and every one of the tales is meticulously crafted and
elegantly written. We can, perhaps, forgive the inchoateness of “The Walking
Man” (1966), as it was written for what I assume is Etchison’s college paper at
Los Angeles State College. In spite of several subsequent revisions, the tale only
displays a flicker of promise: a potentially interesting meditation on the banality
of killing, it is deflated by a conventional crime scenario. Substantially better is
“The Pitch” (1978), a tautly written tale of a man who boobytraps kitchen
utensils. Rarely has horror emerged from such mundane objects of common use.
“On the Pike” (1977)—which, as the author oddly fails to indicate in his
acknowledgments, was included in Red Dreams—comes close to the pinnacle of
Etchison’s work. A haunting tale of freak shows at a carnival, it slowly
accumulates in power to reveal the true horror of the tale: it is not the various
misbegotten creatures who make up the freak show, but rather the protagonist’s
girlfriend, Sherron, who goads the freaks into ever more severe acts of self-
mutilation. The tale is closely matched in quality by “The Scar” (1987), a

powerful, grim, and poignant story of a woman and child at the mercy of a
psychopath, told in language so seemingly flat that it appears to be the work of a
literary tyro, but is all the more effective for it. This kind of super-
Hemingwayesque prose is also found in “Red Dog Down” (2001), which is in
reality a mainstream story of familial abuse.
Other tales in the volume, however, reveal occasional slips in Etchison’s
powers of storytelling. The climax of “Today’s Special” (1972) is telegraphed
almost from the opening sentence. “White Moon Rising” (1977) is a promising
story of a serial killer victimising coeds, but is marred by excessive
fragmentation of the narrative. “The Detailer” (2000), about a man who brings to
a carwash a car in which he killed his wife, is entirely predictable and, for once,
fails to be enlivened by Etchison’s customarily distinctive prose. “Home Call”
(1983) is overwrought and predictable, and “My Present Wife” (2000) takes too
long to reach its denouement.
But all these less-than-sterling specimens must be forgiven in light of the
merits found elsewhere. Who can forget “Call Home” (not to be confused with
“Home Call”!), with its memorable child psychopath; “No One You Know”
(1997), about a fiercely manipulative man who threatens to kill himself unless
his girlfriend (one of a succession of many, it turns out) returns to him; or the
title story, where a psychopath meets an even worse psychopath? It is in these
stories that we find the Etchison we know—“cruel,” perhaps, but not (as he says
in his foreword) “heartless.” It is here that Etchison’s exquisitely subtle but
overwhelmingly plangent display of the horrors of psychological aberration
finds its broadest scope; and his spare but fluid prose, laden with piquant
metaphors and keen observation of the grotesqueries of human personality,
makes his tales uniquely recognisable. Got to Kill Them All exhibits forty years
of Etchison’s mastery of the short story, and leaves us hoping for many more
years of the same.
Ray Garton is, to put it mildly, a very different kettle of fish. Although he,
like Etchison, is a Californian and, in Slivers of Bone (Cemetery Dance, 2009),
also focuses on psychological horror, the resemblance ends there. The keynote
of Garton’s work, it appears, is a flamboyant mix of sex, mutilation, and
occasional supernaturalism. This book is, so far as I can tell, his fourth volume
of short stories, although none of the individual items are dated and at least two
are anything but short.
Garton exemplifies, to my mind, some of the worst traits of the
contemporary horror movement. He is afflicted with what I call the three C’s of
bad writing—he is crude, crass, and clumsy. Consider the opening story in the
volume, “The Guy Down the Street.” Here we are asked to believe that all the

teenage girls of an otherwise placid suburban street have chosen to perform sex
acts on videotape for an ageing hippie—whom the narrator himself describes as
singularly unattractive—for showing on the Internet. The parents of these wild
girls take the law into their own hands and kill the fellow. There are a few other
complications, but that is the basic story. But the utter implausibility of the
premise of the tale—that every one of the neighbourhood girls would be tempted
to engage in this behaviour—causes the entire narrative to collapse in absurdity
at the outset.
Then there is “Second Opinion,” in which a succession of writers kill one
another to gain possession of a “perfect,” unpublished story. Every one of the
plot twists in this tale is entirely predictable long before it occurs. “Website”
starts promisingly, in its account of a man who is so obsessed with an Internet
website that he becomes a killer, but is spoiled by a sudden and incompetent
supernatural twist.
Two immense stories—“411,” nearly one hundred pages, and “Monsters,” in
excess of a hundred pages—have novelistic pretensions but come up empty. The
former tells of an operator at Directory Assistance who is apparently pursued by
a killer whose crime she overheard on the phone, while the latter concerns a
writer, Roger Carlton, who turns into a hideous monster because, it would seem,
of the psychological perversion he experienced during his religious
indoctrination while a member of a Seventh-Day Adventist sect. In neither tale
does the narrative ever catch fire: Garton’s ham-fisted prose is so unwieldy
(including actual spelling mistakes such as “subtlely” for “subtly” and “choosey”
for “choosy”) that we never gain any sensation of reality.
Don’t believe me? Consider this paragraph from the story “Homeless
Couple”: On this particular morning, it was raining hard. The charcoal sky
seemed to hang just above the tops of the city’s towering buildings. Roland held
a large, deep, black umbrella in his right hand, and a matching briefcase in his
left. The rain made such a loud roar as it fell on the umbrella that the sounds of
the city seemed far away.
It would be difficult to generate prose as banal as this. This is the kind of prose
that, quite literally, anyone could write. My next-door neighbour could do as
well, or better. This is the overriding problem with Garton’s work: even if, on
rare occasions, he has a clever idea, his execution of it is exactly the sort that
your next-door neighbour would do. I am reminded of what H. P. Lovecraft once
said regarding the common run of material in the pulp magazines of his day:
“Someone ought to go over the cheap magazines and pick out story-germs which
have been ruined by popular treatment; then getting the authors’ permission and
actually writing the stories.”

It would be too painful to catalogue the failures in Slivers of Bone.
“Punishments” is yet another story of Seventh-Day Adventists. Can this mean
that Garton was one himself? Somehow I don’t think scholars of the future will
care one way or the other. It turns out to be a rather vile S&M tale. “The Other
Man” is a ridiculous story about astral projection, and “The Picture of Health” is
a shameless ripoff of Oscar Wilde’s The Picture of Dorian Gray. It doesn’t help
that Garton commits another grammatical blunder here (“free reign” for “free
rein”). “The Other Man” and “Screams at the Gateway to Fame”—another tale
of the supernatural featuring psychic phenomena and, ultimately, Hell and Satan
—represent another phase of Garton’s incompetence: his utter inability to utilise
the supernatural convincingly. In effect, he doesn’t even try: he just presents the
phenomena as such, unaware that the great majority of readers are going to
require some kind of plausible accounting for them before they swallow them
wholesale.
Surprisingly, Garton does well with the final story in the book, “Myiasis,” in
which a man whose tumour is receiving an innovative treatment (maggots are
eating away the necrotic tissue) finds the wherewithal to remove the “necrotic”
phases of his own life—a shiftless employee at his office, his ne’er-do-well son,
and so on. But it cannot redeem the nearly 500 pages of wearisome bloodletting
and blundering prose that preceded it. To paraphrase Ambrose Bierce (or
whoever came up with this ultimate reviewers’ put-down), the covers of this
book are way too far apart.

Just Like the Movies
Orrin Grey likes movies; he likes horror movies in particular. This is not to say
that he doesn’t care for literature—the stories in this slim but worthy collection
draw upon elements from Poe, Lovecraft, H. G. Wells, and other writers—but
his dominant influence, frankly and unashamedly acknowledged, is the
panorama of horror films from at least as early as Nosferatu (1922) to the slasher
films of our own day, with much in between.
As a source of inspiration for horror tales, one could do far worse. Many of
the greatest weird tales—even those written long before the advent of film—
have a cinematic quality that is a chief source of their power and vividness. It is
no surprise that, amidst all the plodding prose of Bram Stoker’s Dracula (1897),
individual scenes from the book remain in the memory—and it is no accident
that it is exactly those scenes that have become iconic in the leading film
adaptations of that novel. Lovecraft may achieve his most pungent effects from
his use of dense, richly textured language; but certain images in his work—the
pursuit of the hapless protagonists by the amorphous shoggoth at the end of At
the Mountains of Madness is to my mind the chief example—are imperishably
visual and cry out for transformation on the big screen.
And yet, Grey does not rely solely on image—or on nods to well-known
horror films—to create an effective tale. The opening story in Painted Monsters
& Other Strange Beasts (Word Horde, 2015), “The Worm That Gnaws,” about
two grave robbers (the technical term is “resurrection men”) gathering recently
buried corpses for the use of anatomy schools, is grimly powerful both in its use
of what the author calls “Edinburgh grave robber accent” and in the appalling
revelation made by one of the robbers—appalling precisely because he speaks of
it so offhandedly—that he resurrected his own wife after she died suddenly.
Film imagery comes to the fore in “Night’s Foul Bird,” a brooding,
atmospheric story that seeks, as the author states, to evoke “vampire imagery
from early silent horror films.” (I should note that the author has added
explanatory notes to each story—a practice that I do not necessarily condone,
since it creates too many opportunities for an author to seem pompous and self-
important. Grey does not entirely evade these pitfalls, but on the whole his notes
provide valuable clues as to the story’s inspiration and overall direction.) “The
Murders on Morgue Street” might be thought an ingenious riff on Poe’s “The
Murders in the Rue Morgue,” with a nod to H. G. Wells’s The Island of Dr.
Moreau; but it is more an homage to the film adaptations of the works in

question. “The Red Church” is an evocative tribute to the Italian giallo films—
films that might seem to be more aligned to the mystery or crime/suspense
genre, but which apparently include an abundance of horrific imagery and at
times even venture into the supernatural. Here the suggestion is that an artist
creates exceptionally vivid sculptures—perhaps out of once-living subjects?
Perhaps the best story in the book is “The Labyrinth of Sleep,” a poignant,
hypnotic tale of a man who pursues a friend and colleague who has been lost in a
dream world called the Labyrinth. The story was written for a Lovecraftian
anthology, and it concludes appropriately on a note of cosmic menace. Not far
behind is “Strange Beast,” a fascinating and complex story about a group of
filmmakers who are kidnapped in 1972 and forced to make a monster movie on a
remote island, in the course of which the man playing the monster is killed—and
strangely transformed. Grey effectively uses what in literature would be called
the “documentary style”—a tissue of blog entries, excerpts from interviews, and
other documents. In film lingo he is perhaps evoking the “found footage” trope.
Whatever the case, the story develops increasing layers of richness and texture
as it proceeds.
“Persistence of Vision” is a chilling but moving tale of the return of the
ghosts of the dead en masse into the world of the living. While generally
effective, the idea seems rich enough for a full-scale novel, and I for one would
welcome Grey making the attempt to write it. The same might be said for the
long unpublished novella that concludes the book, “Painted Monsters.” Here, the
premise of the story—the executors of a dead actor in horror films, Constantin
Orlok, invite certain individuals to Orlok’s estate in Mexico City for the reading
of his will—sets the stage for a wild, histrionic narrative involving revivified
corpses, meditations on the nature of the horror film, a certain amount of
gunplay and fisticuffs, and much else besides. I’m not entirely sure the story
truly hangs together, but it is not only an entertainment but, as the author states,
a “whirlwind ride across horror’s cinematic history.”
Not every story, sadly, is effective. The events of “The White Prince” take
place the year after the publication of the novel Dracula; and, although it keenly
extends sympathy to a dying vampire, the story is too brief to have much impact.
“Walpurgisnacht,” published in a tribute volume for Laird Barron but actually
written much earlier, is a confused, rambling story about a private party held on
Walpurgisnacht on Brocken, a mountain in Germany made famous by a
reference in Goethe’s Faust. “Remains” is an implausible story about a serial
killer who is also a sorcerer. “Ripperology,” in which a Jack the Ripper scholar
is killed by the shade of the serial killer, is narrated in too bland and languid a
manner to generate any true suspense or terror.

This is Orrin Grey’s second story collection, following Never Bet the Devil
and Other Warnings (2012). He has also written a few chapbooks and edited
some anthologies; and, of course, he writes extensively on horror film. He is
clearly at the beginning of his career; and—aside from more than a sprinkling of
annoying and needless grammatical errors—he can boast a prose style that is
smooth, easily absorbed, and occasionally able to rise to the level of prose-
poetry. His reliance on film as a source of inspiration might be troubling, but he
has demonstrated the ability to absorb his influences and transmute them through
the alchemy of his own imagination into something original and distinctive. I
envision a bright future for Orrin Grey.

A Slow-Moving Tsunami
CAITLÍN R. KIERNAN. Tales of Pain and Wonder. Third Edition. Burton, MI:
Subterranean Press, 2008. 345 pp. $35.00 hc.
Caitlín Kiernan is no longer a secret. Ever since the publication, in 1998, of the
story collection Candles for Elizabeth and the novel Silk (winner of the
International Horror Guild Award for best first novel), Kiernan has inexorably
ascended the echelon of supernatural horror with an array of distinguished
novels and story collections that have already led some critics to rank her with
such luminaries as Ramsey Campbell and Thomas Ligotti. The comparison with
Campbell seems to me particularly apt, for there are few writers in the entire
history of supernatural fiction who have simultaneously mastered both the short
story and the novel and who have combined such copious productivity with such
a high level of meticulous craftsmanship.
It seems to me a bit odd that all her story collections have been published by
small presses (chiefly Subterranean Press) and all her novels by mainstream
publishers (chiefly Penguin/Roc). If this is one more indication of the pervasive
and ingrained prejudice of commercial publishers for short story collections, it is
one that no amount of lamentation by critics—and no amount of proof (which is
abundant to the point of embarrassment) that horror almost always works best in
the short form—is likely to overturn in the near future. Kiernan has, in part,
solved this problem by writing nominally disconnected stories that nonetheless
feature a recurring set of characters, spanning several generations from the late
nineteenth century to the present day. In a new edition of Tales of Pain and
Wonder (Subterranean Press, 2008), she has arranged the stories chronologically
by date of writing but has helpfully provided an “Alternative Table of Contents”
for those readers who might wish to read the stories by the sequence of the
events they relate. In all honesty, I do not perceive any genuine sense of
progression or development in the latter arrangement, nor do I sense that the
stories build extensively upon one another or flesh out their characters from tale
to tale; but it is engaging to come upon these recurring figures, which do give the
faint sense of a generational saga.
The two sterling features of Kiernan’s work are a prose style of wondrous
luminosity and a grounding in the sciences (she has herself written numerous
academic papers on paleontology and related subjects) that comes to the fore in
tales of what might be called geological horror. As for her prose, she seems to
have mastered the art of the scintillating opening paragraph. Consider this one

from “To This Water”: Hardly dawn, and already Magda had made her way
through the forest into the glittering frost at the foot of the dam. When the sun
climbed high enough, it would push aside the shadows and set the hollow on
fire, sparkling crystal fire that would melt gently in the late spring sunrise and
drip from hemlock and aspen branches, glaze the towering thickets of mountain
laurel, later rise again as gauzy soft stream. Everything, ice-crisped ferns and
everything else, crunched beneath her shoes, loud in the cold, still air; no sound
but morning birds and the steady gush from the spillway into South Fork Creek,
noisy and secretive, like the careless whispers behind her back.
I cannot imagine how passage could possibly be improved upon: the crispness of
description, the elegance of diction, the overall atmosphere of tense anticipation
all draw readers into the scenario and compel their rapt attention. As for the
scientific element, I suspect that only Kiernan, among contemporary horror
writers, could toss off such phrases as “bathypelagic echoes” and “something to
trigger a postembryonic morphogenesis” and make them seem natural to her
narrative.
“To This Water” tells the tale of the Johnstown flood of 1889, suggesting it
may have been supernaturally caused by the rape of a young girl. This fusion of
the cosmic and the personal is also a keynote of Kiernan’s work. It is not
sufficient to say that she adopts the visionary horror of Machen, Blackwood, and
Lovecraft; especially in contrast to the last-named, Kiernan’s work features an
intense focus on the shifting and at times contradictory emotions of her
characters, and their ability or inability to deal with domestic, social, and sexual
—particularly sexual—traumas. Her stories are littered with the refuse of our
society—the aimless teenagers, the abused whores, the vicious but vulnerable
drug dealers whose flittings at the fringes of middle-class life we so fervently
seek to ignore.
Kiernan’s tales do, however, at times fail to cohere as narratives and can
descend into mere vignettes or prose-poems that appear to have little focus or
direction. There is never a wasted word; the prose is always throbbing with
vitality and pathos; but too often the stories don’t seem to go anywhere, and
merely end arbitrarily and inconclusively. Among the full-fledged narratives,
“To This Water” and, preeminently, “In the Water Works (Birmingham,
Alabama 1888)” stand head and shoulders above the rest. The latter (which I
included in my historical anthology, American Supernatural Tales, for Penguin
Classics) is a masterwork of subtle cosmicism, telling of what may lie in a
water-filled pit as the water lines of Birmingham are being built. There are the
dimmest echoes of Lovecraft’s “The Colour out of Space,” but the loving
character descriptions—both of the grizzled workmen and of the young

professor, Henry S. Matthews, investigating the site—as well as the gradual
accretion of horrific details are pure Kiernan. Matthews is first puzzled by a
curious wormlike object that one of the workmen has found and placed in a
bottle. Then Matthews sees this on a wall of a tunnel deep underground: And
one of the tendrils has pulled free of the rest, rises silently from the water like a
charmed cobra. Henry can see that it’s turning towards him, already six or seven
feet of it suspended above the dark water, but it’s still coming. The water
dripping off it very, very loud, impossible drip, drip, drip like a drumbeat in his
ears, like his own racing heart, and then he notices the constant movement on the
underside of the thing and knows at once what he’s seeing. The worm thing in
Wallace’s bottle, coiling and uncoiling, and here are a thousand of them, restless
polyps sprouting from this greater appendage, row upon writhing row, and now
it’s risen high enough that the thing is right in front of him, shimmering in the
lantern light, a living question mark scant feet from Henry Matthews’ face.
This entire tale must be read to appreciate fully the exquisite pacing that allows
the cosmic terror to wash over the reader like a slow-moving tsunami.
It is not entirely clear why Kiernan has chosen to issue this third edition—
what she, somewhat archly, refers to as “the ‘Remastered’ Definitive Text”—of
Tales of Pain and Wonder. It was first published in 2000 by Gauntlet Press and
reprinted in 2002 by Meisha Merlin. So far as I can tell, the only differences
between this new edition and its two predecessors are the addition of two stories
—“Mercury” and “Salammbô Redux (2007)”—and, presumably, the textual
revision of the other twenty stories, although I have made no line-by-line
comparison. Perhaps she wishes to have all her short fiction under the
Subterranean Press imprint; this collection takes its place with such earlier
volumes as From Weird and Distant Shores (2002), To Charles Fort, with Love
(2005), and the slim Alabaster (2006). It is also possible that the relative paucity
of Kiernan’s short story output, now that she has turned to novels—including the
novelisation of the film Beowulf (2007)—makes it unlikely that she will issue a
brand-new collection of short stories in the immediate future. I for one, however,
would welcome an omnibus of her three separately published novellas, In the
Garden of Poisonous Flowers (2002), Waycross (2003), and The Dry Salvages
(2004), even though the last-named is a somewhat uncharacteristic horror-SF
hybrid.
But whatever the motivations behind this edition, it is a volume that every
aficionado of the supernatural in fiction should have. It is the cornerstone of
Kiernan’s work in short fiction, and as such may be a seminal and landmark
volume in the history of the genre. Kiernan’s career currently spans scarcely
more than a decade, but there is hardly a doubt that she deserves a place, and

perhaps a lofty place, in the canon of horror literature.

A Modern “Heart of Darkness”
The Red Tree (Penguin/Roc, 2009) is a book about layers.
Caitlín R. Kiernan’s latest novel (either her sixth or her ninth, depending on
which ones you count) is entitled The Red Tree. It concerns a writer named
Sarah Crowe (already dead by suicide as the novel opens) who has written a
book (really a series of diary entries written over a roughly two-month period)
entitled The Red Tree. Within this text, Crowe transcribes portions of a
fragmentary treatise written by a professor named Charles L. Harvey entitled . . .
The Red Tree. Layers upon layers upon layers.
But there is more to it than that. In this richly textured work, fusing
autobiography with the supernatural, Kiernan utilises a technique that I have
elsewhere, in reference to the work of Thomas Tryon, called the successive
peeling back of layers—and it is therefore of some significance that the diary
written by Crowe, banged out on Harvey’s old manual typewriter, is typed on
onionskin paper. In the course of this work, we learn with each passing page
more and more about the characters, the locale, and of course that eponymous
and foreboding red tree, which looms over the scenario like some kind of baleful
wizard or puppet-master.
There are times when The Red Tree seems almost uncomfortably
autobiographical. Sarah Crowe is a “lifelong Southerner . . . [who] abruptly fled
to rural Rhode Island,” just as Kiernan did a few years ago. (Well, Kiernan is
now living in the tolerably cosmopolitan Providence, but that’s a minor point.)
Crowe is a novelist with several books to her credit; she herself remarks that
much of her work is “autobiography tarted up and disguised as figment and
reverie.” I will make no more hypotheses as to other autobiographical elements
in the book; but the unusually candid, even confessional style of Sarah’s daily
jottings makes one wonder.
Sarah has painfully broken up with her lover, Amanda, after a two-year
romance; we eventually learn that Amanda had been unfaithful to Sarah and then
killed herself. For a time Sarah is plagued by disturbing dreams of Amanda. But
matters become more troubling when Sarah unearths the incomplete Red Tree
typescript written by Charles L. Harvey, a professor at the University of Rhode
Island who became obsessed with the red oak (Quercus rubra) at the farmhouse
where Sarah herself is now staying as a renter. Harvey committed suicide by
hanging himself from the red tree. What kind of sinister power does that tree
have? In the course of the narrative we learn that its evil effects stretch back

centuries, perhaps millennia. In the 1830s, the builder of the current farmhouse,
William Ames, had been found dead near the tree under mysterious
circumstances; as Harvey wrote, “His corpse was mauled almost beyond
recognition and had been partly eaten.” And yet, Sarah herself feels no particular
fear when she pays a visit to the tree. But as she reads further into Harvey’s
treatise, she realises that the tree has cast a sinister shadow reaching back at least
to the seventeenth century: the original (white) settler of the property, John
Potter (c. 1715), had made reference to “the red indyen dread of an olde tree s’d
haunted by the divel Hobbamock, an enemy to all good, who appeareth there by
night.” Now we’re getting to it! This part of the narrative, evoking a centuries-
old evil lurking in the wilderness, is a plot that Lovecraft could, and should, have
written.
But The Red Tree is far more than a simple “horror novel.” The texture of
the work changes significantly when another tenant—the painter Constance
Hopkins—arrives. Initially irritated at this disruption of her solitude, Sarah
gradually develops a complex, conflicted relationship with Constance. To be
sure, there is a sexual element, for Constance admits that she is bisexual; but
there is much more to it than that. Why is it that Constance locks herself away
for days at a time in her attic garret, emerging with face, hands, and body
covered with a bewildering array of paints? Why is it—more pertinently to those
seeking a jolt of terror—that the two women cannot make their way to the red
tree, even though it lies less than a hundred yards from the farmhouse and even
though Sarah herself had reached it easily by herself? As Constance notes
harriedly, “Why doesn’t it want me to reach it?” This segment is one of the most
potent in the book, but it may be exceeded by a later episode in which the two
women seem to get lost in the vast expanse of the farmhouse’s cellar. For the
horror aficionado, these set-pieces are the high points of the novel. Almost
nothing actually happens in them; but Kiernan’s witchery of words creates a
mesmerising effect that we haven’t seen since the days of Lovecraft and
Bradbury.
And this brings me to the real virtue of The Red Tree, as with the entirety of
Kiernan’s work in general. She is, simply put, one of the great prose stylists of
modern literature—not just modern horror literature, but all modern literature.
Every single sentence in The Red Tree is a positive, sensual delight to read. It is
one of those rare novels that one wishes would never end. When I regretfully
reached the final page, I was strongly inclined to go right back to the beginning
and read it all over again. I have no doubt that it will repay many rereadings in
the future.
Exactly what the secret of Kiernan’s prose may be is difficult to specify. To

be sure, her gift for metaphor is part of it; but more than that, it is her seemingly
effortless and unerring instinct for tailoring her narrative voice to the task at
hand. The Red Tree in particular brings each of its multiple voices (the voice of
Sarah in her diary, the voice of Constance in dialogue, the voice of Charles
Harvey in his seemingly dry historical treatise, even that of Sharon D. Halperin,
the overall editor of Crowe’s book, who has added a preface replete with
scholarly footnotes) to vivid life—to such a degree that the reader feels almost
embarrassed at being a kind of Peeping Tom glimpsing the intimate and private
moments of the characters on stage.
Those seeking a neat resolution to the overall scenario—either to the
supernatural manifestation that is the red tree or to the lives and fates of the
protagonists—are likely to be disappointed. As Sarah herself states at the end,
“just when you think it’s one thing, this story, it’ll go and become something
else entirely.” The Red Tree is supremely rewarding not merely for its moments
of terror, but for its ineffably sensitive display of the complexity of human
emotions. It is a kind of “Heart of Darkness” for our time—an exploration of
both the sinister darkness of the foreboding rural landscape and of the
inscrutable darkness of the human heart. The reader comes away feeling
privileged to have read it.

Sculptures in Prose
When you come upon the prose of Caitlín R. Kiernan, all you can do is gasp in
amazement. I pick a passage almost at random from her latest short story
collection:
“And then,” she says, as though she still imagines that I’ve somehow never
heard this story before, “the demons tried to carry the looking glass all the
way up to Heaven, that they might even mock the angels.” But it shattered, I
cut in, trying to sound sober, and she smiles a vitreous sort of smile for me. I
catch a glimpse of her uneven bluish teeth, set like mismatched pegs of
lazulite into gums the colour of a stormy autumn sky.
For my sins, I have myself lately taken to writing fiction, but passages like this
make me want to give up in despair. Purely on the level of prose, Kiernan
already ranks with the most distinctive stylists of our field—Edgar Allan Poe, H.
P. Lovecraft, Lord Dunsany, Thomas Ligotti. With Ligotti’s regrettable retreat
into fictional silence, hers is now the most recognizable voice in weird fiction.
No one is ever likely to mistake a sentence by Caitlín R. Kiernan for a sentence
by any other writer.
One of the distinguishing features of Kiernan’s work, both on the level of
technique and on the levels of theme, imagery, and motif, is its inextricable
fusion of science and artistry. It is now well known that she studied geology and
vertebrate palaeontology before turning to fiction writing, and she has published
learned papers on these subjects. This fusion is perfectly encapsulated in the title
of the present book. I for one did not know what an ammonite was (a tribe cited
in the Old Testament, perhaps?), but Kiernan provides a helpful definition in the
title story: ammonites are “mollusks, a subdivision of the Cephalopoda, kin to
the octopus and cuttlefish and squid, but possessing exquisite shells, not unlike
another living cousin, the chambered nautilus.” To envision a violin made of the
shells of these creatures is a conceit that perhaps only Kiernan could have
devised. A passage in “The Dreamtime of Lady Resurrection” captures this
melding flawlessly:
She whispers to me, and I float across endless plains of primordial silt and
gaping hadopelagic chasms where sometimes I sense the awful minds of other
sleepers, ancient before the coming of time, waiting alone in sunken temples
and drowned sepulchers.
The paragraph goes on to cite Huxley (Thomas Henry, not Aldous), adding Latin

and German to boot. Let it pass that some of us (myself included) may not grasp
every technical term thrown into this mix of science and poetry; the cumulative
effect is to evoke the wondrous beauty of the natural world as a prelude to a deft
sliding off into the supernatural.
Kiernan’s gift for language can, let us be frank, gloss over a number of
elements that, in a weaker writer, might be seen as flaws. It is surprising how
many of the stories in The Ammonite Violin and Others (Subterranean Press,
2010) deal with venerable tropes that have dominated weird fiction for centuries.
“The Dreamtime of Lady Resurrection” is, as its title suggests, about the
resurrection of the dead—but it is told in the first person, by a woman so
resurrected, and so Kiernan is able to portray with heart-rending pathos the
shifting emotions of the woman as she undergoes the experience. Perhaps,
indeed, she did not wish to be resurrected at all? The line “I cross one way for
you, and I return as another’s experiment, the vessel of another’s inquisition,”
would certainly indicate so.
A number of stories rather quaintly treat the mermaid theme, but even this
hoary topos is rendered distinctive by novelty of approach. How does a
mermaid, having been skinned and therefore become approximately human, seek
to buy back her own skin from a curio dealer? You can find out in “For One
Who Has Lost Herself.” “Metamorphosis B” is told from the point of view of a
woman who professes to be the daughter of a mermaid and the sea captain who
raped her. “Madonna Littoralis,” insofar as I can make sense of the plot, is about
lesbian sex with a mermaid. Sexual desire, indeed, looms large in this book, and
its performance and ramifications—chiefly lesbian or gay, but occasionally
heterosexual, as a kind of novel diversion—are rendered as achingly beautiful by
the alchemy of Kiernan’s prose. This fusion of sex and the supernatural can also
revivify otherwise stale themes, as in “Orpheus at Mount Pangaeum” and “Ode
to Edvard Munch,” both of which feature heterosexual sex with a female
vampire.
One of the drawbacks of Kiernan’s focus on beauty of language is, perhaps,
a certain deficiency in that mundane literary element called plot. Every one of
the stories in The Ammonite Violin is really more a prose poem than a short
story, and to that extent the dovetailing of a plot becomes secondary. But one
sometimes yearns for a little more structure. In “The Cryomancer’s Daughter,”
for example, every word is golden—but what, exactly, is the story about? I am
not sure that anyone, including its author, could say. In “The Voyeur in the
House of Glass,” Kiernan uses the device of a carnival setting to engender a
kaleidoscopic succession of bizarre scenes and tableaux, with a near-total
absence of narrative.

But it seems churlish to criticise Kiernan for this presumed deficiency. If one
wants plot, one can read—or attempt to read—James Patterson or John Grisham.
The virtues that Kiernan brings to her short fiction—an impeccable gift for
word-choice, the seemingly effortless ability to evoke an atmosphere of
languorous melancholy, a stunning capacity for transporting the reader from the
real to the unreal—are those that few in the entire realm of literature have ever
possessed, and we should treasure them. A story like “Metamorphosis A” is a
sculpture in prose in the manner of Bernini or Canova, where every element is in
place and not a single word can be altered without damage to the whole.
Kiernan’s gifts lend new life even to apparently hackneyed conceptions—such
as “The Madam of the Narrow Houses,” where a Boston medium reflects on her
ability to evoke the shades of the dead, or “Bridle,” a story about a kelpie.
The stories in this volume were first made public in the Sirenia Digest,
Kiernan’s subscription website devoted to stories and vignettes that meld fantasy
and eroticism. It is an ingenious way both to satisfy her many devotees and to
raise revenue. But it is also good to have these tales in a print edition. It is a
scandal that the publisher of Kiernan’s novels, Penguin, apparently disdains to
issue her short story collections; but she can do far worse than to allow them to
appear with Bill Schafer’s Subterranean Press. The impeccable production
values of this volume—including superb and evocative dust jacket art and
endpapers by Richard A. Kirk—perfectly capture the chiseled elegance of
Kiernan’s work.

The Mystery Man of Weird Fiction
It is no secret that Thomas Ligotti is something of a mystery man in
contemporary weird fiction. In some ways he is the prototypical weird writer—at
least in terms of what the popular imagination thinks a weird writer ought to be:
an “eccentric recluse” (a term that used to be applied to Lovecraft before it
became obvious that Lovecraft was far more gregarious and venturesome than
was commonly believed) who rarely stirs from his house and who sends forth his
jewelled and darksome vignettes upon an unsuspecting world. In many ways
Ligotti seems a nineteenth-century figure—an American Baudelaire or
Lautréamont living in the age of Facebook and Twitter.
This is why Matt Cardin’s collection of interviews, Born to Fear: Interviews
with Thomas Ligotti (Subterranean Press, 2014), spanning a full twenty-five
years, is so valuable. It may never be possible—given Ligotti’s general reticence
about the facts of his own life (in spite of the volubility of some of the answers
he has provided in the interviews gathered here) and, more pertinently, given the
general lack of incident in his sixty-odd years of his life—to write a full-scale
biography of the man, but a number of these interviews reveal facts that help us
to understand how he came to write the uniquely misanthropic and pessimistic
weird fiction that he has made his own.
Know, then, that Thomas Ligotti was born in 1953 (a fact, awkwardly
enough, never mentioned anywhere in this book) and, surprisingly, was raised a
devout Catholic; indeed, so fervent was he that he tortured himself in his youth
with fears of hell and other hallucinations brought on by religious faith. He states
flatly that “I was a religious fanatic for years when I went to Catholic school.”
But he renounced all religious belief at the age of eighteen and has been an
atheist ever since. He does not specify in these interviews how or why he came
to do so; but perhaps the nervous breakdown that, he says, occurred in 1970 had
something to do with it. Up to this point, Ligotti had not been notably interested
in writing or even reading, devoting himself to sports and other non-intellectual
activities. But during the four years that followed his breakdown he took to
reading and then writing, as a kind of therapy to maintain his equilibrium. It was
at this time that Ligotti was diagnosed with agoraphobia, a fear of open spaces
that has starkly restricted his ability to venture forth in the world—and,
correspondingly, to have much knowledge or even interest in the outside world
and its inhabitants.
Ligotti had always been attracted to horror fiction, and now he doubled

down to read as much of this work as he could find, even hunting out obscure
fanzines devoted to the field. As any sensitive reader will quickly discover, he
learned that the great majority of this work (like the work in any other field) is
rubbish, but two writers—Poe and Lovecraft—became the central pillars of his
aesthetic life. Ligotti is frank in saying that in many of his tales he has striven to
write as much like one or the other, or both, of these figures as he can. In later
years he came to appreciate the work of Machen, Blackwood, Ramsey
Campbell, T. E. D. Klein, and other classic and contemporary weird writers, as
well as much European fiction that lies on the borderland of the weird—Bruno
Schulz, Thomas Bernhard, and others.
Ligotti began publishing stories in the small press in the early 1980s, and his
first collection, Songs of a Dead Dreamer, appeared in 1986; the rest his history.
However, he abruptly stopped writing in 1991, apparently around the time that
his second collection, Grimscribe: His Lives and Works, appeared. (This
evidently accounts for the absence of any interviews in this book between 1991
and 2000—a point that editor Cardin does not make in his brief introduction.)
For the next several years he devoted himself intensely to playing the guitar.
Gradually the itch to write returned—and did so in a curious way. Ligotti had
worked for years at an academic publisher, Gale Research Co., in Detroit.
During the 1990s the company underwent several reorganisations of corporate
structure, and the upshot was that Ligotti gained a loathing of the corporate
culture—and capitalism as a whole—along with an intense hatred for some of
his fellow employees, to the point that (as he frankly admits) he actually wished
to kill them. Rather than “going postal,” Ligotti took out his frustrations by
writing My Work Is Not Yet Done (2002), three tales of “corporate horror” in
which the long title story seems to embody his murderous fantasies—and does
so, in my opinion, with singular panache.
It was only in 2001 that Ligotti began seeing a psychiatrist. Around this time
he relocated to Florida, where he lives today. Over the next decade he wrote
little fiction, chiefly because he was on heavy antidepressants to deal with the
affliction known as anhedonia, the most severe form of depression. Ligotti is
brave and frank in outlining his condition and the medications he takes—
medications that have stifled his ability to write fiction (“The anti-creative effect
is primarily due to the fact that antidepressants flatten out one’s emotions and
scramble one’s thought processes”). But he can still write nonfiction, and in
2010 he released The Conspiracy against the Human Race, a treatise that made
explicit what had been implicit in his fiction all along—that Ligotti is one who
not only wishes that he had never been born, but that the entire human race and
perhaps all entity had never existed.

This is not the place for any detailed discussion of Ligotti’s philosophical
thought; but I will say that I am more than a little surprised that he seems
unaware that his dour outlook on life is, quite frankly, largely a result of his
brain chemistry. The most serious fallacy of Conspiracy (and I helped shepherd
it into print when Ligotti offered it to Hippocampus Press) is the author’s
attempt to generalise from personal experience. For him, “Human life moves in
only one direction—toward disease, damage, and death.” Those who seem to
find any kind of pleasure in life are merely deluding themselves, doping
themselves on illusions such as food, sex, intellectual or aesthetic activity,
religious belief, and other meaningless palliatives. In a late interview, in
response to one interviewer’s keen observation that “it’s one thing to argue . . .
that the joys of life are, essentially delusions and escape mechanisms, but it’s
another to argue that that invalidates those joys,” Ligotti denies claiming that
these “joys” are delusions; but it is hard to imagine what other conclusion is
possible when, in an earlier interviews, Ligotti asserts that humans are simply
creatures who “bullshit themselves a mile a minute in order to keep going,” and
that
This bullshit takes various forms. Primary among them are simply ignoring
that there is anything problematic about our existence, indulging in
pleasurable distractions, creating bogus structures of meaning such as a
pleasant afterlife in which the books will be balanced for the suffering we
endure in this life, and transmuting our suffering into works of art and
philosophy wherein we distance ourselves from what real suffering is and in
the process reform it into a source of amusement.
I hardly know how to begin addressing this remarkable statement. I can only
speak from personal experience. As an atheist I certainly take no spurious
comfort in an afterlife or a benevolent God; but I do not go to the extreme of
believing that all art, no matter how profound and elevated, is merely a
“distraction” from the hard truths about life; the best art surely confronts pain
and suffering in ways that allow us to confront it as well. But Ligotti is devoted
to his view, maintaining that even the loftiest art, music, and literature is mere
“entertainment.”
Ligotti comes frustratingly close to realising the vital connexion between
“happiness” and brain chemistry in a discussion of the celebrated football player
Terry Bradshaw, who admitted that he realised something was wrong with him
when he found he could derive no pleasure from winning the Super Bowl on
multiple occasions; he himself was later diagnosed with anhedonia. Ligotti
remarks: “Terry Bradshaw was wired to get no satisfaction from winning those

Super Bowls.” Well and good; but why then should it be remarkable that I—
about as cheerful a person as I’ve ever met—am wired in such a way as to gain
enjoyment from life? My philosophy has nothing to do with the matter; it really
isn’t possible to argue someone into a depressing outlook on life. Even if I fully
agreed with Ligotti’s philosophy (and, as a matter of fact, I largely do), I cannot
feel it emotionally and psychologically as he does because my brain chemistry is
different from his.
None of this would matter much, but Ligotti’s outlook affects his evaluation
of weird writers in a way that to my mind is not entirely sound. In essence, he
sees many of the weird writers he likes—notably Poe and Lovecraft—as being
just as psychologically troubled, and as embodying the same bleak outlook on
life, as himself. But in the case of Lovecraft this is very much to be doubted. In
fact, Lovecraft, who may have been more damaged in his youth than Ligotti was,
managed in the last decade of his life to find a remarkable psychological
equilibrium that allowed him to gain a strong interest in human life (as exhibited
by his keen interest in politics and economics and the cause of social justice) and
also to gain a vigorous pleasure in all manner of things, from travel to
intellectual activity to playing with cats.
There are a number of other surprising things in this book—the fact that
Ligotti once co-wrote an episode of The X-Files on spec (never produced, of
course); his curiously low opinion of Robert Aickman, whom he dismisses as
one of a number of “horror writers of manners rather than madness”; the fact that
he enjoys movies, especially horror films, although chiefly as a mindless
pleasure; and the fact that he considers himself “just a buffoon, a jokester, a
natural fool, a completely absurd creature” (although he counters that a few
pages later on by saying: “There is really nothing to laugh at, except
sardonically, hellishly, ironically, bitterly”).
It was big news when it was announced some time ago that Ligotti had
written two new stories. These are now published in the slim booklet The
Spectral Link (Subterranean Press, 2014). To my mind they do not quite have the
flavour of his great work of the 1980s, nor are they total successes as narratives;
but even the poorest of Ligotti is better than the best work of most of his
contemporaries, and these tales are far from his poorest. The first, “Metaphysica
Morum” (Latin for “the metaphysics of morals”), deals with a narrator who
seeks help from a psychiatrist, Dr. Olan, for his suicidal tendencies. No one need
be told that the story is autobiographical; indeed, one of its problems is an
insufficient distance between the narrator and Ligotti himself. But, although it
engagingly treats of the interplay between dream and reality, it is really too
clinical and philosophical to be effective as a fictional narrative. Ligotti has said

in an interview that “I to tend to look at a story more as an essay than a work of
fiction,” and in this tale he has carried this principle to its ultimate logical
conclusion. The other story, “The Small People,” has more of the characteristic
Ligotti touch, broaching the idea of “small people” who seem to exist in various
pockets of the world and whom the first-person narrator finds profoundly
disturbing. Whether these people are meant as some kind of metaphor or
microcosm (pardon the pun) for humanity in general is not entirely clear,
although one comment—that the material world is a “junkyard of cast-off
ectoplasm”—suggests it. But the narrator reveals his greatest loathing for what
he calls half-small people, those who look like humans but in fact have some
taint of the small people in them. In the end the narrator discovers that he
himself is the adopted son of half-small parents, and he kills them. I suspect the
influence of Lovecraft’s “The Shadow over Innsmouth,” another story about
miscegenation in which the narrator ultimately discovers that he is one of the
hybrid monsters he has been fleeing so ardently.
But Born to Fear is the chief prize among these two Ligotti books. It
provides such a feast of intellectual and aesthetic stimulation that one could
spend hours arguing with one or the other of Ligotti’s philosophical stances; and
his discussions of weird fiction are always vivid, acute, and illuminating. It is
fair to say that Ligotti ranks with Ramsey Campbell and Caitlín R. Kiernan as
one of the most articulate spokesmen of the literary weird tale. It is a shame,
therefore, that Matt Cardin couldn’t have expended just a little more effort in the
compilation of this book. He states that he has pruned the interviews to eliminate
the more obvious instances of repetition, but a fair amount of redundancy
remains. And the book would have benefited from some additional material:
there is not even a basic bibliography of Ligotti’s writings, nor of writings about
him (a mention should have been made of Darrell Schweitzer’s exemplary
collection The Thomas Ligotti Reader [2003]); and there is no index. But these
blemishes do not detract much from the engaging stimulus provided by Ligotti’s
own words and opinions, which are as artfully expressed here as in the best of
his weird fiction.

Spanning the Genres with William F. Nolan
I daresay that William F. Nolan—who recently celebrated his eighty-sixth
birthday—long ago became tired of being referred to as “the author of Logan’s
Run.” Although this iconic science fiction novel, co-written with George Clayton
Johnson and published in 1967, established Nolan’s reputation as a leading genre
writer, Nolan has done so much more than this in a sixty-year writing career that
one scarcely knows where to begin in charting his variegated achievements. He
has published more than eighty books, and this figure includes not merely fiction
in any number of genres—science fiction, horror, crime/suspense, mainstream—
but also many substantial works of nonfiction (including major biographies of
John Huston and Steve McQueen; a definitive biography of Dashiell Hammett is
forthcoming, and his recent Hippocampus book, Nolan on Bradbury, was
nominated for a Stoker Award). Nolan has also edited dozens of anthologies, and
has even written poetry.
In Like a Dead Man Walking and Other Shadow Tales (Centipede Press,
2013), nearly all the contents of which are previously unpublished, is a fitting
encapsulation of all that Nolan has done in his decades-long career. Amidst the
scintillating tales that span multiple genres, we also find poetry, nonfiction
sketches, and a substantial interview. And, as a delightful bonus, there are
reproductions of pages from Nolan’s notebooks—pages that reveal a mind
constantly alert to the literary possibilities of scenes, characters, and episodes he
has encountered in his long and eventful life.
What strikes us in reading the stories in this book is the sheer skill and
deftness that Nolan brings to the craft of writing. Consider the opening novella,
“The Blood Countess.” This tale, indirectly involving Elizabeth Bathory, the
seventeenth-century figure who considered herself a vampire (she drank blood,
bathed in blood, and engaged in all manner of other unsavoury activities),
revitalises the seemingly tired trope of the vampire with clever plot twists all
throughout, and with an especially shocking one at the tale’s end. Written in a
clipped, Hemingwayesque prose that allows the reader’s imagination to fill in
the hints and portents that lie submerged under the seemingly simple language,
the story develops a cumulative terror that fully justifies its length.
One of the remarkable aspects of this book is the surprising poignancy of
some of the specimens. “Getting Along Just Fine” is a tale only a man of
substantial years could have written—a moving account of a protagonist who
watches his friends and family successively die off (Nolan is manifestly thinking

of actual people he knew—Ray Bradbury, Charles Beaumont, and others of the
Southern California “Group”), and yet it manages to end with a touching
affirmation of life. “Descent” is a riveting account of a man’s thoughts as he
falls to his death from the window of an office building to escape a fire. Along
the way, the man successively expresses regret, resignation, thoughts about the
presence (or absence) of God, and so on. And what can we say of the
inexpressibly moving “The End: A Final Dialogue”? Here we are asked to
consider what a husband and wife would say to each other if they knew that the
world was about to end in an hour.
Many of the tales are pure science fiction, but with a wide range of tone and
affect. Humour is at the forefront in “My Girl Name Is Elly,” where an alien
entity has come to the Earth by mistake and taken on the form of a sixteen-year-
old girl—and has also adopted the annoying language of such creatures as well
(“High school is where I go like the other sixteen-year-olds because you have to.
All the boys like my boobies, but the teachers are all glum-faced old poops”).
But the tale takes a turn toward grimness when Elly reveals her penchant for
“opening people up” . . . Other science fiction tales are more purely comic, such
as “Millikan’s Machine,” an amusing time-travel adventure in which the hapless
inventor gets lost in time and can’t quite find his way back to his own era. This
tale is comic and is also about a comic—a comic book, that is: the inventor
hopes to make millions by going back in time to secure a copy of a 1938 issue of
Action Comics (where Superman debuted) and then to back to his own time and
sell it; but, as is always the case in such matters, things take a turn that the
inventor doesn’t expect. “A New Man” is a science fiction tale with more than
its share of terror, telling of how humans in the future can easily be
reconstructed after seemingly fatal accidents, or else turned into “replicants”
(androids).
Impish humour is at the heart of the compact “Dysfunctional”—on the
surface an homage, but in no small measure an affectionate parody, of the super-
condensed prose of Richard Christian Matheson. Perhaps less successful is
“Flight to Legend,” a rather flippant comic narrative about Sherlock Holmes’s
nemesis Moriarty, in which Holmes himself is present precisely by his absence.
Nolan, having clearly nurtured himself on the hard-boiled crime writing of
Hammett, Chandler, Cain, and others, utilises the idiom well in several tales.
“The Recluse” is a crime/adventure story that features a central character clearly
based on Howard Hughes, while “Like a Dead Man Walking”—one of the most
accomplished stories in the book—seems to begin as a grim tale of murder in
Los Angeles, but turns spectacularly supernatural with the introduction of a
Lovecraftian monster toward the end. “Exchange” (written with Jason V Brock)

is not in the hard-boiled style; indeed, it is a very contemporary story, consisting
entirely of e-mail messages between two friends. It again cleverly reveals its plot
twists purely through the characters’ own words—and their silences. “A Lot
Like the Joker” is a disturbing tale of child abuse. More purely horrific is
“Ashland,” a clever riff on Nolan’s own classic horror tale “The Party” (1967),
where a party whose guests burst out with unexpectedly bizarre revelations
(“Found her in the tub: strangled with a coat hanger . . .”) proves to be far more
ominous than the hapless protagonists realise.
In a category of its own is “The Beach” (also co-written with Jason V
Brock), a timeless tale of the horrors of war. The setting is deliberately vague—
it could be any war, of the past, present, or future; and the numberless little
tragedies that such wars engender are encapsulated in the searing heartbreak of
its lugubrious central figure. We may call this a mainstream story, a crime story,
even a science fiction story (if, as is not at all unlikely, the war takes place in the
future); all we can say for certain is that it is a great story.
The book concludes with two touching tributes to the departed Ray Bradbury
and Richard Matheson, and with an extensive joint interview of Nolan and
Matheson conducted by Jason V Brock, in which Nolan acts alternately as
interviewer and interviewee. What comes across in this interview is the sheer
enjoyment of life and of one another that the members of the “Group”—
Bradbury, Beaumont, John Tomerlin, George Clayton Johnson, Rod Serling, and
others—derived from their fertile literary and personal relationships. They
heyday of the Group, from the 1940s to the 1960s, must have been a thrilling
time. Aesthetically, it was a time when genre literature was increasingly melding
into the media, with Serling’s Twilight Zone, the films of Dan Curtis (with
whom Nolan worked extensively), and other media outlets creating a dynamic
fusion of prose and image. The breakup of the Group began with Beaumont’s
unexpected death in 1967; and now, although Johnson is still with us, Nolan
stands virtually alone as a productive member of this distinguished cadre.
We should all be lucky if, at his age, we could boast the literary vitality of
William F. Nolan. If he has to some degree failed to gain full recognition of his
talents, it may precisely be because those talents extend in such multifarious
directions, making it difficult for critics and readers used to pigeonholing authors
in a given genre to take in the full scope of his achievement. But Like a Dead
Man Walking exhibits to the full what Nolan can do as a fiction writer, poet,
critic, and biographer, and we eagerly await what further literary revelations he
has in store for us in the years to come.

Of Revenants and Seedy Taverns
There is something to be said for late bloomers. The British writer Reggie Oliver
had already established himself as a distinguished actor, playwright, and
historian when, in the year 2000, at the age of forty-eight, he took to writing
weird tales. Since then, he has published more than half a dozen story
collections, including a massive Centipede Press omnibus in 2010. The Sea of
Blood (Dark Renaissance Books, 2015) is a careful selection from all those
volumes, with the addition of some uncollected and unpublished pieces.
It is facile to say that Oliver follows in the ghost story tradition of M. R.
James; and it is true that there is a plethora of historical erudition in many of his
tales, just as there is in the ghost stories of the Provost of Eton. But it would be
highly misleading to suggest that Oliver’s tales are nothing but exercises in
cobwebbed antiquarianism. One of his earliest tales, “The Dreams of Cardinal
Vittorini,” is indeed a richly detailed historical tale of a cardinal in the 1570s
who tries to suppress a cult called the Ignotists, who worship Nothing. But
consider the premise of another early tale, “The Blue Room,” where a room in
an old castle inspires sexual yearning in those who occupy it—something the
staid bachelor James could not have imagined. Another story somewhat along
the same lines is “The Time of Blood,” a powerful and historically vivid tale of a
young nun who, when having menstrual periods of unusual heaviness, makes
odd prophecies that (as we, looking back upon them, can easily tell) come true.
And I cannot bypass “Absalom,” a previously unpublished story that is nothing
more than a simple narrative of supernatural revenge—but contains such a
flawless re-creation of the prose and atmosphere of the late seventeenth century
that one wonders whether even James could have equalled it.
Oliver combines his love of the past and his love of the stage in “The
Constant Rake,” about strange events surrounding the discovery of a previously
unknown Restoration drama. Once again the evocation of the period is flawless
and hypnotic. Other tales deal with more contemporary phenomena relating to
acting, including a number of stories where actors are compelled to stay in seedy
inns or taverns while on tour. “Puss-Cat” is another elementary supernatural
revenge tale whereby a cat avenges the death of a young actress who committed
suicide when an older actor rejected her; but it is enlivened by a clever use of
lines from King Lear to advance the plot. Then there is the bizarre “Baskerville’s
Midgets,” where a group of midgets who form part of a theatrical troupe come
back from the dead. But here the supernatural manifestation is so late in

appearing, and narrated so indirectly, that it fails to have much of an impact.
Much the same could be said for several other Oliver tales, such as “Bloody
Bill,” a rather long-winded and extremely subdued ghost story set at Eton.
Oliver truly excels in two phases of the weird tale that are rarely practiced—
at least, rarely practiced successfully. One is the use of Greek myth to inspire
terror. Oliver, who studied classics at Oxford, is thoroughly versed in all phases
of Greek and Roman myth and literature, as his passing reference in one story to
a (fictitious) translation of Silius Italicus’s obscure (and quite bad) epic poem
Punica indicates. But Oliver knows that these ancient civilizations were by no
means the unadulterated beacons of rationality that a casual glance at Greek
philosophy or at the seeming purity of Graeco-Roman sculpture might suggest.
In “A Donkey at the Mysteries” he cites E. R. Dodds’s classic study The Greeks
and the Irrational (1951) by name, and this story goes on to be a highly effective
attempt at using the darker elements of Greek myth as the basis of a weird tale,
here set on the imaginary Greek island of Thrakonisos. Even more impressive is
“Minos or Rhadamanthos.” The title refers to the two judges in Hades—and also
to two canes named after them by a sadistic headmaster at a boys’ school. It
becomes quickly evident that the headmaster gains sexual gratification from
punishing the boys under his tutelage. What starts out as a conte cruel
insidiously and wondrously transmogrifies into a tale of exquisite poignancy,
where a former student encounters the ghost of the headmaster—and there is a
final twist that is too good to reveal here.
And this brings up the second phase where Oliver excels—the fusion of
pathos and horror. This has been a slim thread from the beginning of weird
fiction, from Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein (1818) to H. P. Lovecraft’s “The
Outsider” (1921), but it takes the utmost delicacy to bring off. Oliver does so
transcendently well in “Flowers of the Sea,” the plangent story of a man
enduring the illness and death of his wife from Alzheimer’s and other ailments.
There is only the faintest tinge of the supernatural here, but it is telling. “Trouble
at Botathan,” another previously unpublished story, is the disquieting account of
a revenant—a young woman who was sexually abused by her uncle and
apparently committed suicide.
And yet, the impressive range of Oliver’s weird work is demonstrated by a
tale of a very different sort, “Lapland Nights,” which pungently combines humor
and psychological terror in its depiction of an old couple staying with a put-upon
woman and who do away with her in a particularly grisly fashion. Another story
that, although written (as Oliver’s tales always are) with superbly modulated
prose, verges on the extremes of physical horror is “Mrs. Midnight,” about a
man (who may or may not be Jack the Ripper) who has extended his life

unnaturally by a method that cannot be uttered here.
It cannot be said that Oliver’s tales are uniformly successful. A suggestion of
prolixity dogs several of them, and in this volume in particular the reader is
forced to read several lackluster stories before coming upon the solid array of
meritorious work later in the book. Oliver himself seems to have a fancy for one
of his earliest tales, “Beside the Shrill Sea,” but to me it is little more than a
routine account of a revenant. Later stories are not free of defects. “The Druid’s
Rest” tells of two young women traveling in Wales who stay at a seedy inn and
are forced to flee, as the owner is some kind of pervert; but whether the
supernatural ever comes into play remains unclear. “The Rooms Are High” is
another tale of a dubious hotel—or, rather, a bed-and-breakfast that houses some
“regulars” who seem extremely (perhaps unnaturally) aged. But the tale loses
focus as it progresses, and in the end we are left with unresolved ambiguities.
But Oliver’s failures pale in relation to his successes. His prose is a model of
decorum, fluency, and rhetorical skill; and in his best tales he is able to create a
sense of ineluctable, cumulative terror that does not require the least violence of
diction or incident to overwhelm the reader. The Sea of Blood is as splendid an
encapsulation of the best of Reggie Oliver as anyone could wish for—and his
best is very good indeed.

Road Dogs and Iron Dead
I take particular satisfaction in the advancing career of Norman Partridge. More
than a decade ago, on the recommendation of Stefan Dziemianowicz, I read
Partridge’s scintillating novel, Slippin’ into Darkness (1996), and wrote a
glowing review of it in Weird Tales. Later I read his rich and substantial story
collection, The Man with the Barbed-Wire Fists (2001), and found that his
deftness at the short story equalled his mastery of the novel. On the basis of this
and other work, I decided that Partridge was canonical enough to be included in
my Penguin Classics anthology, American Supernatural Tales (2007), although
evidently Peter Straub (or the editors at the Library of America) thought
otherwise when they left him out of American Fantastic Tales (2009). Lesser
Demons is his first entirely new collection since Barbed-Wire Fists, although his
first collection, Mr. Fox and Other Feral Tales (1992), was reissued in a
considerably augmented edition in 2005. I think it is safe to say not only that
Partridge has “arrived,” but that he can take his place with such of his
contemporaries as Caitlín R. Kiernan and David J. Schow as one of the dynamic
young figures in our field—one who may eventually challenge such veterans as
Ramsey Campbell and Dennis Etchison.
Partridge works in that nebulous middle ground between supernatural horror
and crime/suspense, sometimes veering toward the one or the other, and
sometimes fusing the two modes into an indefinable amalgam. He has written
several crime novels that don’t shy away from mayhem and gunplay, and many
of his stories follow suit. The very opening tale of Lesser Demons (Subterranean
Press, 2010), “Second Chance,” illustrates many of Partridge’s virtues as a
writer. What seems at the start merely a sordid tale of criminals trying to do each
other in takes a surprising veer toward the supernatural at the end. I’m not sure I
entirely understand that shift, but it illustrates the kind of teasing with genre that
Partridge appears to enjoy.
And yet, Partridge can work just as well when he adheres to a single genre.
One of the most impressive, and poignant, stories in Lesser Demons is “And
What Did You See in the World?” Its opening sentence—“He drove out of
Dallas with Jenny in the trunk”—is more than a little unnerving: can we be
dealing with some depraved homicidal maniac in the manner of Henry: Portrait
of a Serial Killer? This tale remains non-supernatural throughout, but what
Partridge is playing with here is readers’ expectations: first, it turns out that
Jenny is not in fact dead but alive; second, the driver of the car, her husband

(never named in the story, so far as I can tell), is not the crazy one—that honour
goes to Jenny herself. For she is one of those unnaturally sensitive persons who
are overwhelmingly affected by even the smallest tragedies of life—“a stray dog
banging around their garbage cans, some kid shivering in the cold without a
coat, even the smell of a hospital corridor”—and is therefore forced to retreat
into a dark closet to shut out the world. I’m sorry to have spoiled even this much
of the story for those who have not read it: the insidiously gradual way in which
this scenario unfolds is a masterstroke of subtlety.
As for the supernatural, Partridge shows off his skill in a number of tales,
perhaps the best of which is “Road Dogs.” Here again we seem to be dealing
with merely a domestic conflict that might turn violent: Glen Barlow is so upset
by his sister Kim’s sudden and unexplained death that he immediately blames
her boyfriend, Kale Howard, whom Glen had once thrown out a picture window.
All this sets the stage for what might be a mundane shoot-’em-up scene between
Glen and Kale . . . the only trouble is that Kale is a werewolf. It is at this point
that Partridge unleashes that grimly elegant prose-poetry for which he has
already become celebrated: Kale smiled. Though he stood in darkness, that same
moonlight crept up his spine like a dozen furious scorpions in a hurry to plant
stings at the base of his brain. In his world, that wasn’t unfamiliar feeling, and it
dug down to his core like a grave robber’s shovel, churning up secrets buried in
the deepest, darkest corners of the shriveled black hunk he called his soul.
There is, to be sure, plenty of bloodletting in this story, but Partridge’s masterly
prose makes it seem like a kind of violent ballet being danced in front of our
eyes.
If I have any criticism to make of Partridge’s supernatural tales, it is that in
some cases there doesn’t seem to be a sufficient accounting for the basic
supernatural phenomenon on display. Consider “The House Inside,” one of
several tales that paint a frighteningly apocalyptic picture of our dismal future on
this earth. Here, an anomalous and extreme increase in the sun’s heat results not
only in the death of the pathetic human beings who are almost literally fried
under its rays, but also in the animation of plastic and wooden toys in a boy’s
toybox. How could this have happened? Partridge acknowledges, in his notes to
the story, that the tale was in part inspired by a “Twilight Zone” episode (I’m
sure we all know which one it is), but nothing quite so bizarre occurred there.
Similarly, “Carrion” is an entertaining story set in the post–World War II
Southwest: here we find a sheriff who is killed but then somehow reanimated.
How? Does it have something to do with a mysterious and oddly shaped wooden
house that is the focus of the tale? Perhaps, but Partridge doesn’t supply enough
clues to clue his readers in.

L. P. Hartley long ago wrote, in speaking of the ghost story: “Chaos is not
enough. Even ghosts must have rules and obey them.” His point was that the
supernatural must be shown to be somehow plausible, at least in the context of
the story, otherwise it will seem random and unmotivated. The supernatural
should never be taken for granted. It must always be remembered that the
existence of some supernatural figure or incident in a story suggests, at the very
least, a radical misconstrual on the part of human beings of the very nature of the
universe. If an event that is obviously contrary to our understanding of how the
universe operates is merely presented without explanation, it will simply inspire
the reader’s incredulity. I am not suggesting that every tale must have a pseudo-
scientific justification, for that would drive the tale in the direction of science
fiction; but some attempt to render the supernatural credible must be made.
Partridge has made no secret that his work is inspired not only by previous
literature in the field, but by films and comic books; and it is in these latter two
media that the reader/viewer is on many occasions forced to take the
supernatural, as it were, on faith, just to see how it will work itself out. That
Partridge does a splendid job of working it out doesn’t excuse him from the hard
work of justifying the supernatural in the first place.
The longest story in the book, “The Iron Dead,” is a case in point. Here we
encounter hideous monsters, half flesh and half metal, who terrorise a
southwestern community. How did they come to be? Well, it appears that the
Devil was involved: “That thing had been a king among vampires, a member of
the Black Council commanded by Satan himself.” We are evidently to accept
this on faith, even though another character expresses obvious incredulity: “The
Devil? You’re kidding, right?” Au contraire, mon ami. Partridge says it’s the
Devil, and that’s what it is. The problem with bringing either God or Satan into
the mix is that it’s simply too easy: one can just say, “Yeah, Satan did it,” and be
done with it. It doesn’t take a religious unbeliever to find that reasoning not very
compelling. The fact that Partridge writes a wonderful, slam-bang action story (it
would make a great movie) based on this premise is beside the point: it is that
inadequate motivation for the supernatural that sticks in one’s craw.
I hope I am not being prejudiced in saying that perhaps the best tale in the
book is the title story—for this was written for my own Black Wings anthology. I
frankly did not know whether Partridge had any inclination to work in a
Lovecraftian idiom, but I’m glad I gave him the chance; for he has produced
exactly the sort of innovative tale—partly supernatural, partly apocalyptic, partly
crime/suspense—that I was hoping for. To call it pastiche would be crude and
inaccurate. It uses Lovecraft as a springboard for expressing ideas that are
clearly close to Partridge’s own heart.

Norman Partridge has such a wealth of talent—a prose style of wondrous
luminosity and grace; a narrative drive that carries the reader inexorably to the
spectacular climax; an ability to convey violence and gruesomeness without the
least suggestion of crudity or exploitation; and an imagination that opens new
worlds to all who venture within his realm—that it will be engaging to chart his
course in the future. Lesser Demons is one more building-block in what will be
an impressive body of creative work that Partridge will leave to the future.

III. Some Anthologies
Driven to Madness with Fright
It has become a truism that, for the past twenty or thirty years, the original
anthology has become a replacement for the magazine. In the weird field, at any
rate, there has been an insufficiency of periodical outlets for short fiction ever
since the demise of Weird Tales in 1954; and after the overwhelming critical and
popular success of Kirby McCauley’s landmark anthology Dark Forces (1980),
many editors have taken to amassing previously unpublished weird tales from
leading contemporary writers.
This evolution has had both its positive and its negative aspects. One of the
most keenly felt of the latter, as far as the writers themselves are concerned, is
the long gestation period of many anthologies. Whereas a story accepted by a
magazine can plausibly be expected to appear within a few months, publication
of a story in an anthology can take years. Another drawback is the regrettable
tendency of editors to devise ever more arcane and abstruse “themes” for their
anthologies (“New Tales of Lesbian Mormon Vampires!!”)—a tendency that
augments the potential for repetition and monotony to which theme anthologies
are in any event liable.
The two volumes under review—Shadows Edge, edited by Simon Strantzas
(Gray Friar Press, 2013), and A Season in Carcosa, edited by Joseph S. Pulver,
Sr. (Miskatonic River Press, 2012)—embody both the virtues and the failings of
theme anthologies, although in very different ways. Whereas Strantzas’s
Shadows Edge does not actually make clear what its theme actually is until the
end, given that the editor does not provide an introduction but rather prints a
“prologue” that is itself a short story of rather ambiguous import, Pulver’s
A Season in Carcosa declares its theme upfront: a series of riffs on Robert W.
Chambers’s legendary volume The King in Yellow (1895) and, more specifically,
on the cryptic references to the imaginary play of that title and the various
inscrutable characters and elements presumably featured in it.
Strantzas does, in the end, articulate the overarching theme of his volume in

a brief afterword: Thin places. Soft spots. Cracks in reality. These interstial [sic]
spaces are liberly [sic] spread throughout the Horror and Weird genres, acting as
windows, or perhaps gateways, into those mysterious other worlds that operate
beyond our own. They purport to graze against our reality, rub thin the walls
between.
This theme is sufficiently broad as to allow writers a wide compass in the
composition of tales—the “weird place” is a topos that can engender the most
diverse treatment, and the authors in this book have done exactly that, with
generally admirable results.
It would be difficult to single out any individual stories in the book, but I
think the final two—among the longest in the anthology—probably take the
prize. Peter Bell’s “The True Edge of the World” features an imperishable
portrayal of the atmosphere of the Hebrides islands north of Scotland, hinting at
the pervasiveness of the old legends that continue to haunt the region. This is
really nothing more than an elementary ghost story, but it is told with such
superb attention to landscape and with such exquisitely paced cumulative horror
that it must rank as one of the more powerful tales of any sort in recent years.
John Langan’s “Bor Urus” is a complex narrative about a man who is fascinated
by storms. At one point he appears to see a huge monster in a storm, and later
this creature (two or three times the size of a bull) chases him. Langan suggests
that this supernatural phenomenon is a symbol for the freedom from domestic
responsibilities that the protagonist apparently yearns for.
Other tales are not quite on this level, but are still highly creditable. W. H.
Pugmire’s “Within One Ruined Realm” is a superb prose-poem playing off of H.
P. Lovecraft’s “The Music of Erich Zann,” itself one of the prototypical tales of
the “weird place.” Joel Lane’s “Echoland” is a characteristically brooding tale of
a man who tries to find a realm of wonder and horror (the Echoland of the title)
through drugs, sex, and other means. Gary McMahan’s “The Old Church” is told
from the point of view of an atheist who expresses increasing alarm at the
archaic and barbaric rituals that continue to be practiced in an old church. R. B.
Russell’s “At the End of the World” vaguely recalls John Langan’s story in
focusing on a storm—perhaps a symbol, in this tale, of the chaotic life led by the
narrator’s brother.
Still other tales have points of merit, but are beset with flaws of varying
degrees of severity. I confess to my disappointment at Richard Gavin’s “Tinder
Row.” Gavin can usually be relied upon to produce outstanding work, but I
found this tale somewhat meandering. It portrays a woman going to a strange
realm and being attacked by insect-like creatures—but there is no explanation of
who these creatures are, where they came from, and, most significantly, what

their symbolic function might be. It is almost an impertinence to criticize Steve
Rasnic Tem, but his “Lost in the Garden of Earthly Delights,” although a
poignant story of a man working in a homeless shelter, seems somehow
unfinished. Two other tales are crippled by excessive obscurity: Michael Cisco’s
“The Penury” and Lisa L. Hannett’s “Morning Passages.” The latter contains
some exquisite prose-poetry, but the narration is so oblique that it is impossible
to tell what has actually transpired in the story.
Overall, however, Shadows Edge is an anthology of substantial merit that
does credit to its editor and publisher. Every one of its tales is written with
elegance and panache, and several items deserve consideration for awards and
best-of-the-year anthologies.
Much the same can be said of A Season in Carcosa. Here, however, the
overarching theme—a play on Chambers’s The King in Yellow—tends at times
to be a limiting factor. That 1895 volume purported to deal obliquely with a play
called The King in Yellow whose reading drove people to madness and despair;
and it contained cryptic references to the realm of Carcosa and to such characters
as Camilla, Cassilda, and others that Chambers deliberately refrained from
describing with any specificity. So the potential for interesting elaborations on
what might be called the “King in Yellow mythos” seem abundant. Several
authors take full advantage of it, while others come up a bit short.
One of the dominant motifs of the book is a kind of updating of Chambers’s
fictitious play, with the idea that it has been adapted into more contemporary
media. For example, Cody Goodfellow’s compelling “Wishing Well” speaks of
a short-lived children’s television show based on The King in Yellow, with the
result that one of its actors has been strangely affected in his later life. It is not
entirely clear what happens in this story, but it contains the same kind of half-
incomprehensible terror found in The King in Yellow itself. Similarly, John
Langan’s “Sweetums” tells of a movie that is to be based on the play. Don
Webb’s “Movie Night at Phil’s” is more specific, claiming that Roger Corman
actually directed a film entitled Edgar Allen [sic!] Poe’s The King in Yellow,
which causes death and madness in an entire family that watches it. Simon
Strantzas’s “Beyond the Banks of the River Seine” is an exquisitely written tale
of a man who has composed a musical adaptation of The King in Yellow.
Richard A. Lupoff’s “April Dawn” somehow weaves together an opera based on
The King in Yellow composed by Chambers himself with the San Francisco
earthquake and fire of 1906.
But these tales are dwarfed by Gemma Files’s “Slick Black Bones and Soft
Black Stars,” easily the best story in the book. In this richly textured narrative,
Carcosa is depicted as an island near East Timor. An expedition unearths

numerous bodies that have been mysteriously murdered, with the result that the
King in Yellow himself is resurrected. Here is a genuine adaptation and
elaboration of the King in Yellow mythos, in a tale that evokes the
archaeological horror of Lovecraft and Machen.
Nothing else in the book compares with this tale, but some others are
noteworthy. Daniel Mills’s “MS Found in a Chicago Hotel Room” cleverly
weaves the King in Yellow mythos with Winfield Scott Lovecraft (H. P.
Lovecraft’s father), who went mad in a Chicago hotel room in 1893—and now
we know why. This story is perhaps more clever than brilliant, but it is certainly
effective. Gary McMahon’s “it sees me when I’m not looking” is full of sex and
violence, but is written in a strangely beautiful prose-poetry that remains
powerful (aside from the affectation of lower-casing the first words of every
sentence) in spite of its filth and vulgarity. Ann K. Schwader’s “Finale, Act
Two” is an actual poem, and an evocative one. Richard Gavin’s “The Hymn of
the Hyades” reveals a notable but highly indirect Chambers influence and is the
better story thereby.
I wish I had better things to say about the remaining contributions to the
book. Some of them—like Michael Kelly’s “The White-Face at Dawn”—seem
merely to toy with the various elements of the King in Yellow mythos,
sometimes in a corny manner (“I had, at that time, quite the reputation; one in
need of repair”—a reference to the opening story in The King in Yellow, “The
Repairer of Reputations”). Laird Barron’s “D T” is a bit disappointing: not only
is its relation to The King in Yellow pretty tenuous, but the story itself seems
quite literally unfinished.
But the nadir is reached in two stories, Edward Morris’s “The Theatre and
Its Double” and Allyson Bird’s “The Beat Hotel,” both of which are insufferably
arch, affected, and pretentious. Anna Tambour’s “King Wolf” is rambling,
meandering, unfocused, verbose, and ultimately pointless, without the slightest
relation to anything in Chambers. Pearce Hansen’s “The King Is Yellow” is
written in prose verging on illiteracy and telling the preposterous and
unbelievable story of bizarre events in San Francisco (and later the world and the
universe), somehow caused by a copy of The King in Yellow.
Pulver’s own story, “Not Enough Hope,” appears to have something to do
with Karl Edward Wagner (whose “The River of Night’s Dreaming” is a
landmark elaboration of Chambers’s themes and motifs), but is otherwise
entirely incomprehensible. The brooding, clipped, prose-poetic manner that
Pulver has cultivated in the last several years may be on the verge of becoming a
shtick. A writer of his considerable talents owes it to his readers, and to himself,
to broaden his literary palette and write in a variety of modes and manners; there

is otherwise a danger that all his stories will begin to sound the same. Indeed,
Pulver would probably have been better off reprinting his earlier story, “Carl Lee
& Cassilda” (from Blood Will Have Its Season [2009]), one of the most powerful
and evocative weird tales of any sort written in the last two decades.
I am forced to remark that the copyediting and proofreading of A Season in
Carcosa is some of the worst I have ever seen. Don Webb’s story is virtually
illegible because of typos and other errors. Kristin Prevallet’s “Whose Hearts
Are Pure Gold” is defaced by such ridiculous errors as “Common” for “Come
on” (or maybe she means “C’mon”), “principal” for “principle,” “thorough” for
“through,” and so on. Bad—or, more precisely, nonexistent—copyediting and
proofreading are the besetting sins of small-press publishers, but here the
problems are so severe as to be seriously disruptive of the overall reading
experience. This is a shame, because A Season in Carcosa contains any number
of highly worthy tales that ingeniously elaborate upon themes, motifs, and
imagery in The King in Yellow in a manner that is as far as can be imagined from
mechanical pastiche. The authors deserve better.

A Smorgasbord of Weird
It is often forgotten how radically the anthology has evolved in our field. A look
at Mike Ashley’s monumental Supernatural Index (1995) reveals that, from the
time the first “horror” or “weird” anthology appeared in the early nineteenth
century until about 1980, the overwhelming majority of such volumes consisted
of reprints of previously published material—whether it be Christine Campbell
Thomson’s cullings from pulp magazines like Weird Tales or the diligent
scouring of obscure works and authors by Peter Haining, Hugh Lamb, Michel
Parry, and others.
The 
original 
anthology—the 
anthology 
that contained 
previously
unpublished material—was virtually unheard of: aside from the pioneering
Ghost Book anthologies of Cynthia Asquith (1927–55), such books were largely
unknown before Kirby McCauley edited his landmark Dark Forces in 1980.
That volume, coming in the midst of the horror boom, contained superb original
material by such leading writers as T. E. D. Klein, Robert Aickman, and Stephen
King. Charles L. Grant’s Shadows anthologies (1978–91) established a notable
reputation for featuring “quiet” horror.
Still more rare, before 1980, was the theme anthology—the volume that
contained stories devoted to a single theme or motif. Once again, what volumes
there were of this sort consisted largely of reprints—and, moreover, were of such
relatively broad scope (consider Haining’s The Satanists [1969], consisting of
tales of black magic) that the likelihood of monotony or repetition were
markedly reduced.
For the last several decades, however, we have been inundated with a
plethora of ever more esoteric original theme anthologies, some of which are so
arcane and narrow that it would seem difficult for the hapless authors
commissioned to write for them to produce anything radically different from the
work of their compatriots. In part this development is the result of the relative
demise of the horror magazine, so that the original anthology has, in effect,
become one of the few venues where original fiction can appear with anything
like regularity. Whether this is a good state of affairs for the field in general is a
question I cannot presume to address here.
I don’t imagine that Lois H. Gresh—who has contributed to her share of
original themed anthologies—is making a deliberate protest against such
volumes and in favour of more open-ended books, but Dark Fusions (PS
Publishing, 2013) certainly throws down a kind of gauntlet to overly schematic

theme anthologies. In her brief introduction she declares her unwavering
devotion to weird fiction, which she declares “lies on the boundaries of horror,
fantasy, and science fiction.” She goes on to say that the stories in the book “fuse
all the elements of dark fiction. Some are pure horror, some are science fiction,
others are weird tales, and yet others are fantasies.” This is about as adequate a
description of Dark Fusions as anyone could want, and the breadth of theme,
mood, and approach is one of its most refreshing aspects.
Dark Fusions contains eighteen stories—a good many of them excellent,
others quite good but with a few drawbracks, and a (very) few that to my mind
are inferior and probably should not have been included. Agreement among
critics on this matter is not likely to occur, and everyone’s judgment will differ
on the merits of this or that story. Although the volume lacks any blockbuster
names, it contains a number of authors well known in the field and some
younger or novice writers who show promise—and, in a few cases, more than
promise.
It is difficult to pick any one story that towers over the others, but I think two
or three stand out. Yvonne Navarro’s “Faceless” is an incredibly powerful tale of
existential terror where a woman is apparently pursued by a ghost-companion
who is continually by her side. She then senses that others are plagued by similar
creatures. Aside from a somewhat disappointing ending, this tale evokes a keen
sense of the bizarre and unnerving. Ann K. Schwader’s “Where the Stars Run
Away” is an exquisite union of the cosmic and the human, leading to an
unthinkable apocalypse. Schwader is celebrated as one of the finest poets in our
field, but her prose work is no less distinguished and ought to be better known.
Christopher Fulbright’s “Death Eater” is a touching and emotionally intense
story of a man who undergoes a curious ritual that somehow allows him to take
his young daughter’s cancer into himself. In many ways this story exemplifies
the ability of weird fiction to address plangent human concerns: the underlying
motif is a father’s fervent desire to do anything possible to relieve his child’s
suffering; and by transferring this motif to the supernatural, the author only
enhances its effect. Lynn Spitz’s “Sidestep” strikes me as pure science fiction,
dealing (apparently) with possible alternate worlds; but its overall effect is
intensely terrifying. This is Spitz’s first professional sale, and I imagine we will
hear more of him in the future.
Nancy Kilpatrick is always worth reading. Her “Gurrl UnDeleted” strikes me
as something of a trick story, but it is nonetheless intensely real, vital, and
riveting. Also not without its elements of trickery is Darrell Schweitzer’s “The
Corpse Detective,” a twisted zombie story in which a dead detective roams
among the dead and investigates odd cases of spontaneous combustion. The

premise may be a bit hard to swallow, but the cumulative effect is surprisingly
powerful. Nicholas Kaufmann’s “The Rest Is Noise” is an interesting attempt to
imbue music with weirdness, and its cosmic ending is notable.
Among those stories that are effective but flawed, we can cite Norman
Prentiss’s “Beneath Their Shoulders,” a hideous tale of a small-town community
where all the inhabitants are hunchbacks—and some of them considerably
worse. There is, however, an unpleasant suggestion that the author is
encouraging the reader to find horror in people’s disabilities. “Ignis Fatuus,” by
Scott David Aniolowski and T. E. Grau, is an intriguing but not entirely
successful story of a bookish man who stumbles upon a lonely cottage where the
fairy-tale figure of Jack of the Lantern is found. This is an interesting attempt to
evoke horror from folklore, but story lacks verisimilitude. Cody Goodfellow’s
“The Flea Circus” is almost entirely incomprehensible, but features a
tremendous imagery of over-the-top horror. John D. Haefele’s “Little Bastards”
is a curious and ambiguous story full of telling weird details, but they fail to add
up to a coherent whole. James Alan Gardner’s “Thirst” is a clever but contrived
story of a serial killer in which the narrative drifts slowly into the supernatural
and mythic.
Robert M. Price’s “Medieval Metaphysics” is, like much of his fiction,
highly learned, but as a result it is over-intellectualised and lacks emotive
resonance. The title alludes to a line in H. P. Lovecraft’s “The Thing on the
Doorstep,” where it is said that the baleful Asenath Waite was taking “a special
course in mediaeval metaphysics at Miskatonic [University].” Price’s story,
however, has no relation to Lovecraft’s tale; instead, it attempts to find horror in
a purported mediaeval treatise that seeks to prove the existence of the Devil. As
an intellectual exercise (by an author who has evolved intellectually from
Christian fundamentalism to outspoken atheism), it is a rich feast for the mind;
but as a story it fails to bring its characters to life.
Bringing up the rear, sadly, are a handful of tales that would have been better
off remaining unpublished. Michael Marano’s “Reign” is, like Goodfellow’s,
entirely incomprehensible, but fails to be enlivened by any positive qualities. I
think Marano has been reading too much of Michael Cisco for his own good.
Lisa Morton’s “Golden State” is an implausible story about a piece of land in
California that demands a blood sacrifice in exchange for fabulous wealth; its
implausibility is regrettably enhanced by a flat, mundane prose style that renders
the supernatural that much more incredible. David Sakmyster’s “Five-Star
Review” is an utterly ludicrous and preposterous story about a strange restaurant
in Toronto that somehow manages to eliminate a woman’s tumour—for a price.
And Nick Cato’s “What Was Called” is a crudely written and ridiculous story

about a monster coming out of Long Island Sound. Mark McLaughlin’s “Aunt
Paloma” is nothing more than a joke story; the author has done creditable work
in weird humour, but this is one of his better efforts.
As I say, the very existence of this volume—an original unthemed anthology
—is cause for celebration. There is more than a sufficiency of outstanding
material here, and virtually every story is engaging and compelling. The widely
differing nature of the various stories proves emphatically how rich and diverse
weird fiction can be, and how virtually any subject can be made the focus of
terror and strangeness.
As with so many small-press publications, the copyediting of this book is not
quite what it should be.

Chambers, Lovecraft, and Pastiche
One wonders whether the King in Yellow boom is already fading. The flurry of
interest inspired by the HBO television show True Detective, mainly due to its
dropping of names (Carcosa, the “Yellow King,” and so forth) from Robert W.
Chambers’s eccentric 1895 story collection, has led to an array of books seeking
to capitalize on the sudden interest in what had decidedly been a cult text and, in
general, a cult author. (In his time, of course, Chambers obtained considerable
fame and fortune—not by his weird work, but by best-selling historical and
romance novels.) The King in Yellow itself will, of course, remain eternally
fresh, but contemporary writers’ attempts to play riffs upon it are beginning to
sound increasingly tired and contrived. We have already had one volume, A
Season in Carcosa, edited by Joseph S. Pulver, Sr., that was at best fair to
indifferent; Glynn Owen Barrass’s In the Court of the Yellow King (Celaeno
Press, 2014) is quite a bit worse, with only a few worthy specimens amidst a
mass of sorry rubbish.
Let me deal with the better tales first. I’m sorry to report that W. H.
Pugmire’s “These Harpies of Carcosa,” which programmatically opens the book,
is not one of them, being little more than a rambling and pointless prose-poem.
Christine Morgan improves things considerably with “The Viking in Yellow,” a
stirring tale of Vikings who go from town to town to destroy all copies of The
King in Yellow (the play whose reading causes madness, depression, and death).
This fictitious play serves as the focus of a number of the better tales in the
book, among them Stephen Mark Rainey’s “Masque of the Queen,” a gripping
story about a performance of The King in Yellow in New York City, replete with
a cataclysmic culmination. Greg Stolze’s “Homeopathy” is a clever story in
which the play is used as part of “traumatic association reduction therapy.”
“Lights Fade” by Laurel Halbany (the author’s name almost sounds as if it were
invented by Chambers) deals with a play called Carcosa, written by one Abelard
Jarré. The company putting on the play is made up entirely of women, and one
of them, a dancer, finds an old set of dance steps that leads to a stirring
conclusion. Nevertheless, the story, interesting and well-written as it is, did not
strike me as particularly frightening. Gary McMahon’s “The Yellow Film”
interestingly tells of a fragmentary 1993 film of The King in Yellow made during
the Bosnian War. A film devotee tracks down the filmmaker—and probably
wishes he hadn’t.
The psychological aspects of The King in Yellow (that is, the apparent ability

of the play to drive people mad or compel them to commit suicide) are the focus
of several tales that tread the line between psychological and supernatural terror.
Among the best of them is Jeffrey Thomas’s “Grand Theft Hovercar,” an
effective tale of an obsessive video game (set in a virtual version of Thomas’s
invented future city of Punktown) that features elements from the baleful play.
In Tim Curran’s “The Penumbra of Exquisite Foulness,” a woman kills her baby
while under the influence of The King in Yellow and is placed in a madhouse.
Powerful as this story is, there is some sense (a sense echoed in other tales) that
the author is merely using terms from Chambers’s King in Yellow as a kind of
incantation or talisman without any real sense of their meaning. (Chambers
himself, of course, refused to define many of these terms—Carcosa, Hastur,
Hali, etc.—and it is precisely that nebulousness that lends them such evocative
overtones.)
Continuing the psychological theme, Brian M. Sammons’s “A Jaundiced
Light at the End” focuses on a worker at a suicide hotline who begins to hear
from people who have encountered the King in Yellow, the Yellow Sign, and so
on, leading to an epidemic of suicides. Here the emphasis is on The King in
Yellow (the play) as a kind of instigator or facilitator of both psychic and
physical death. Lucy A. Snyder’s “The Girl with the Star-Stained Soul” is a
Lovecraft/Chambers hybrid that captures something of the stateliness and nearly
incomprehensible horror of The King in Yellow.
That’s about it for worthy stories in this book. Among the others, especial
dispraise should probably go to Edward Morris’s “Who Killed the King of Rock
and Roll?” That title sums it up: yes, friends, we are asked to see parallels
between The King in Yellow and the life of Elvis Presley (his family name, it
turns out, is Castaigne; his wife, Priscilla, is in fact Cassilda). This insufferably
arch, pretentious, meandering, and unfocused tale seems even longer than its 22
pages, and the reader cries for it to be over long before the end is reached. Not
much better is Robert M. Price’s “The Mask of the Yellow Death,” a frankly
obscene tale of the ninety-year-old Hoyt Heft (an obvious stand-in for Hugh
Hefner) who is throwing a birthday party for hundreds of celebrities—during
which, naturally, the King in Yellow appears.
The array of mediocrity continues. C. J. Henderson’s “Yield” is a bombastic
pseudo-philosophical rumination on the meaning of the play. William Meikle’s
“Bedlam in Yellow” is a corny and confused melding of Chambers and William
Hope Hodgson, whereby the latter’s psychic detective Thomas Carnacki meets
the King in Yellow. As for editor Barrass’s tale, “Future Imperfect,” an
incoherent and shoddily written story about horrible monsters called Carcosans
who appear to be in control of the earth—it is an excellent example of why

editors shouldn’t litter their anthologies with their own stories. Pete Rawlik’s
“The Sepia Prints” is an indifferent tale of a private production of The King in
Yellow in Paris of 1898. Cody Goodfellow’s “Nigredo” is an incomprehensible
account of a deprogrammer, with random references to the King in Yellow
mythology. And winding up the volume inauspiciously, T. E. Grau’s
“MonoChrome” is a rambling and long-winded story of strange goings-on in Los
Angeles orchestrated by the King in Yellow. There is a fine sense of place in the
narrative, but it is unfocused and verbose.
Jesse Bullington’s Letters to Lovecraft (Stone Skin Press, 2014) presents
similar difficulties. Over the past decade there has been an explosion of books
featuring work that seeks to elaborate on the motifs, conceptions, and imagery of
H. P. Lovecraft’s stories, to such a degree that we can now consider this a
distinct subgenre of weird fiction. The sheer volume of this material can be
gauged by noting that I personally edited three separate anthologies of this sort
in 2014, with at least two more scheduled for 2015. And just as vampire (and
perhaps zombie?) anthologies became ever more esoteric in devising “themes”
into which hapless writers were forced to mold their imaginations, the “theme”
of Letters to Lovecraft is, to put it mildly, a trifle unusual.
The basis of the anthology is not, in fact, Lovecraft’s fiction, but his essay
“Supernatural Horror in Literature.” As the editor explains, “I asked eighteen of
my favorite storytellers to read the essay and select a particular passage that
resonated with them. Each then wrote an original story inspired by whatever
quote they chose.” No doubt this is a novel premise, but the end result is a
bizarre hodgepodge of material that has little unity of motif and relatively little
“resonance” with Lovecraft’s work or even with the particular passage from
“Supernatural Horror in Literature” that the authors chose. This wouldn’t matter
so much if the anthology contained better stories; but almost no tale in the book
is fully satisfactory, and many are fairly sad specimens.
If you are looking for any actual pastiches of Lovecraftian (fictional) ideas,
you had better look elsewhere. Only two or three stories are of this sort. Perhaps
the best of them is Angela Slatter’s “Only the Dead and the Moonstruck,” an
effective story of a female Deep One (from “The Shadow over Innsmouth”) who
seduces young boys in Arkham and elsewhere. Conversely, Orrin Grey’s
“Lovecrafting” is a confused story about a horror writer who tries to dig up
Lovecraft’s grave, while Nick Mamatas’s “The Semi-Furnished Basement” is a
formless, cutesy fragment of a tale about some ill-defined “change” that has
occurred throughout the world, perhaps caused by the crawling chaos,
Nyarlathotep. Asamatsu Ken’s “Glimmer in the Darkness” is an unsatisfying
mix: partly a fictional account of the nineteen-year-old Lovecraft encountering a

strange man involved in early aviation, and partly a plodding story about UFOs
in the decades following Lovecraft’s death. The two halves fail to cohere into a
unified narrative.
Of the other stories, only a few are even tolerably respectable. Livia
Llewellyn’s “Allochthon” is a beautifully prose-poetic tale of a woman in 1934
who is chained to a monotonous life as the wife of a factory worker; she
eventually rebels against this stultifying life, albeit in a violent and aberrant
manner. It is not entirely clear that this is even a weird tale, but it is certainly a
gripping narrative. Otherwise, we have stories that almost work, but don’t quite
succeed. Brian Evenson’s “Past Reno” attempts to capture the sense of
weirdness in remote places (here, the boundary between Utah and Nevada), as a
man tells of his disturbed upbringing, during which we are led to believe that his
rancher father may have killed people and sold their flesh for meat, but the story
is a bit too vague to be effective. Stephen Graham Jones’s “Doc’s Story” starts
out as a rather moony, meandering tale about a family of redneck werewolves,
but gains power as it hurtles toward an unexpected and horrific climax.
Even the usually reliable Gemma Files fails to deliver a satisfying tale in
“That Place,” a powerful, but somewhat vague story about a “portal universe”
(of the sort that C. S. Lewis used in the Chronicles of Narnia). Robin D. Laws’s
“The Trees” is a well-written, but ultimately ludicrous story about some sailors
who land on a remote island and (get this) begin to copulate with trees, who
gradually start taking on the shape of women. The story ends with a ridiculous
anticlimax. Molly Tanzer’s “Food from the Clouds” is about poachers in a
futuristic London (which has apparently been partially destroyed, or at least
radically altered, by the fall of a comet in its vicinity) who venture into Hyde
Park—now a private and walled enclosure—and find some loathsome monster
(something approximating a shoggoth) there. The tale is generally effective, but
with a slight anticlimax at the end.
From here we go downhill rapidly. David Yale Ardanuy’s “One Last Meal,
Before the End” is a retelling of the wendigo myth. To put it mildly, the story
compares poorly with Algernon Blackwood’s “The Wendigo” (although the
author engages in some silly carping about the story in his headnote). The author
professes to be a graduate student in American history, but his French is
apparently so poor that he fails to include the acute accent on the name André
and the cedilla on the name François. Nadia Bulkin’s “Only Unity Saves the
Damned” is an interminable, unfocused, and pointless tale of a witch. Paul
Tremblay’s “______” is the shoddily written account of a woman who sidles up
to a man and his two children at a beach and acts as if she is his wife, and then
causes odd physical transformations in them—who knows why or how. The coy

title (which should probably have been “ ——— ”) presumably points to the
mystery of the woman’s name and origins. Tim Lebbon’s “The Lonely Wood” is
a confused and disjointed story about a man who sees—or thinks he sees—
something at the top of St. Paul’s Cathedral. Cameron Pierce’s “Help Me” is the
preposterous account of a man-fish hybrid on the Pacific coast.
Adding to the mediocrity of the volume is Jeffrey Ford’s “The Order of the
Haunted Wood,” a pseudo-scholarly “essay” about an ancient fertility cult. The
story is neither funny (it makes a labored attempt to draw parallels between the
cult and modern ads for erectile dysfunction) nor frightening—just windy and
tiresome. Kirsten Alene’s “There Has Been a Fire” is a perfectly incoherent
story about a fire (possibly arson) at a college. Perhaps this is Alene’s attempt at
being “poetic,” since the quotation from “Supernatural Horror in Literature” she
chose as her inspiration reads: “Just as all fiction first found extensive
embodiment in poetry, so it is in poetry that we first encounter the permanent
entry of the weird into standard literature.” But a comparison of the great poetic
ventures into weirdness with Alene’s abysmal tale would not redound to her
credit.
I have saved the discussion of Chesya Burke’s “The Horror at Castle of the
Cumberland” for last. This is a grim and poignant tale of a black man and his
teenage daughter, both of whom are unjustly accused of theft and lynched in
rural Kentucky. It may well be the most accomplished and powerful story in the
book, although whether it really constitutes a “weird tale” is a matter of debate.
The author, an African-American woman, tells in her headnote of her response
when she started reading Lovecraft’s stories: “I read, with growing trepidation,
the descriptions of those things that Lovecraft feared. For me, those fears
sounded all too much like . . . me. Brown people and black people and yellow
people, and Jews, Lovecraft believed, would corrupt the good, decent Aryan
race.” I must say that this strikes me as rather odd. I have said on many
occasions that there are relatively few Lovecraft stories that have racism as their
explicit—or even implicit—foundation; of his major tales, only “The Shadow
over Innsmouth” can qualify. Are we really to think that, say, the barrel-shaped
extraterrestrials called the Old Ones of At the Mountains of Madness are
somehow emblematic of “foreigners”—or the Great Race of “The Shadow out of
Time”? I too am a person of color (as most people who have recently
commented on Lovecraft’s racism are not), and I can say frankly that I felt
nothing like what Burke felt when reading Lovecraft. Indeed, she seems to
condemn the entire genre of weird literature for ethnic bias: “The hoard [?], the
zombie, the monster, the fear of anything that isn’t white, pure, and virginal.” I
scarcely know how to respond to this. Is all weird fiction inherently racist

because it depicts “The Other”?
I doubt that we are to draw any broad conclusions from these two inferior
books. I would like to think that it is still possible to produce worthy stories
inspired by Robert W. Chambers, and I am professionally committed to
encouraging writers to produce meritorious stories based on Lovecraft’s ideas. I
think we must simply conclude that, in these two cases, the job just wasn’t done
very well.
At this stage my strictures against the bad (or altogether absent) copyediting
of small-press books might seem akin to a broken record, but the deficiencies in
both volumes cry out for notice, particularly those in In the Court of the Yellow
King. In C. J. Henderson’s story alone we find such things as “its” for “it”;
“applauds” for “applause”; “their” for “there”; and “complimented” for
“complemented.” And consider this sentence from Sammons’s story: “Then
came the people from the hotline, but this time they called on him only by phone
and there were just three of them, pretty Lacey had quit a few days before.” In
my day this would have been considered a run-on sentence. The simple
placement of a semicolon before “pretty” would have made the sentence elegant
and effective; as it is, it is just a mess. Will small-press publishers ever learn that
this kind of shoddiness reflects badly, both on them and on the authors they
publish? Or do they think readers won’t care or notice? The latter is indeed a
disturbing possibility, especially given that the publishers themselves appear to
be on the same level of grammatical incompetence as their readers.

The Anthologies of Jason V Brock and 
William F. Nolan
Jason V Brock and William F. Nolan’s The Bleeding Edge (Cycatrix Press,
2009) is a snapshot of the extraordinarily rich and varied modes of writing that
have dominated weird fiction over the past fifty to seventy-five years. Without
any intention of doing so, the twenty-plus contributions to this book make clear
that the literature of terror and the supernatural can encompass the widest
possible array of human emotions—from sardonic humor to cosmic tragedy—
and do so by manipulating the widest possible diversity of styles, themes, and
subject matter. In these days when “theme” anthologies all too often produce a
monotonous sameness in motif and treatment, it is refreshing to come upon a
volume as multifaceted as this.
To gain a sense of the directions weird fiction has taken over the last half-
century or so, a good place to start is Frank M. Robinson’s touching essay on his
early readings of the pulp magazines, including Weird Tales. In the 1920s and
1930s, H. P. Lovecraft was the dominant writer for the magazine—not only in
his own right but by way of the many friends and colleagues who formed what
came to be called the “Lovecraft Circle,” including such writers as Robert E.
Howard, Clark Ashton Smith, Henry S. Whitehead, E. Hoffmann Price, Robert
Bloch, Fritz Leiber, and many others. It is of course unjust to regard these
writers as somehow dependent on Lovecraft, for many of them evolved
distinctive styles and themes of their own, as witness Howard’s Conan and King
Kull and Smith’s exotic tales of Zothique and Hyperborea. Indeed, it was not so
much Lovecraft himself as some of his frankly less talented disciples—of whom
we are forced to number August Derleth, his chief advocate and champion after
Lovecraft’s early death in 1937—who, in their attempt to write homages to their
lost mentor, unwittingly produced parodies of Lovecraft’s own work and
manner.
Accordingly, the generation that came to literary maturity after Lovecraft—
including such writers as Ray Bradbury, Richard Matheson, William F. Nolan,
Charles Beaumont, and Ray Russell, several of whom are represented here with
work both old, though unpublished, and new—revolted from what they felt to be
the now hackneyed “Lovecraftian” tale, the tale of some erudite professor
battling cosmic monsters in obscure corners of the earth. That this was in reality
a caricature of Lovecraft’s densely textured tales is of no consequence; what this
new cadre of writers sought to do was to bring the weird and the supernatural

down to the level of daily reality, and in this task they were wondrously
successful. Bradbury, along with Fritz Leiber, perpetually danced on either side
of the thin dividing line between horror and science fiction, and his contribution
to this book, brief as it is, shows keenly how imaginative fiction can serve to
address complex social issues such as racism and moral conservatism.
As Bradbury, Matheson, Beaumont and others were making horror (and
science fiction) more accessible to the average reader, writers like Robert Bloch
were broaching the equally thin partition between horror and psychological
suspense. Bloch’s classic novels The Scarf (1947) and Psycho (1959)
definitively made psychological terror a key component of weird fiction writing,
and that tendency has continued to the present day, as the grim tales by John
Tomerlin and Joe R. Lansdale attest. It was during this period, too, that media—
especially film and television—significantly influenced the writing of weird
fiction. The complex interplay of writing and media is most clearly evident in
George Clayton Johnson’s unpublished Twilight Zone script, “The Grandfather
Clock.” Johnson, in his brief author’s note, observes that his script was
purchased by Rod Serling but that it was subsequently “changed quite a bit.” We
can perhaps elaborate on this tactfully restrained remark. What happened was
that William Froug, a new producer, disapproved of Johnson’s script and
commissioned another writer, one Richard deRoy, to rewrite the story. Although
the central idea is preserved, the general consensus is that deRoy’s version—
aired on December 20, 1963, as “Ninety Years Without Slumbering”—is
substantially poorer than Johnson’s. The collaborative nature of media makes
this type of result all too common. Such veterans of film and television as
Norman Corwin and Dan O’Bannon, with their widely varying but equally
distinctive unproduced screenplays, can attest to the truth of that dictum.
Weird fiction was changed irrevocably when it became a bestselling
phenomenon, beginning with Ira Levin’s Rosemary’s Baby (1967) and
continuing on with William Peter Blatty’s The Exorcist (1971), Stephen King’s
Carrie (1974), and the many works that have followed in their wake. In a sense,
this development was also intimately tied to the media, for the new mass
audience for weird fiction might never have been created if horror in film and
television had not been laying the groundwork for fifty years or more. Indeed,
some of the novels that became bestsellers only did so when blockbuster film
adaptations appeared. This “horror boom”—which finally exhausted itself by the
early 1990s—left a very mixed legacy. To the extent that many more readers
than previously would seek out horror fiction, the field was broadened in a way
that could encompass both the quiet lyricism of a Peter Straub and the noisy
pyrotechnics of a Clive Barker, with all manner of gradations between. But

many writers strove merely to duplicate the worst aspects of literary
bestsellerdom in a quest for quick riches, and the appalling plethora of
subliterary rubbish that emerged made it difficult for the work of superior writers
to get a hearing. What is more, it is by no means clear that the weird works best
in the novel form; indeed, if this volume is any testimony, it is almost uniformly
better in shorter compass. But stories, then and now, are a harder sell than
novels, and accordingly many of the best writers of this period were relegated to
the small press.
Nevertheless, the expansion of range in weird fiction to cover nearly every
style and manner of writing is now evident. The weird can now take the form of
the erotic tale (Nancy Kilpatrick’s “Hope and the Maiden”), the satirical parable
(Christopher Conlon’s “Triptych”), the gruesome comedy (“Madri-Gall” by
Richard Matheson and Richard Christian Matheson), the tale that draws upon
ancient myth (Cody Goodfellow’s “At the Riding School”) and age-old fears and
phobias (Earl Hamner’s “The Death and Life of Caesar LaRue,” Lisa Morton’s
“Silk City”). At the same time, even such venerable supernatural motifs as the
ghost can, as John Shirley’s mordant tale attests, be given new life through a
distinctively original vision. And Gary A. Braunbeck’s tale shows that the
Lovecraftian idiom can also be revitalized by an appeal to contemporary
advances in science. The stories by James Robert Smith and Kurt Newton
approach the realm of fantasy in showing that even the possession of wondrous
supernatural abilities cannot ward off horrific tragedy.
Fear and terror have definitely been brought down to earth. What we learn
from such tales as Steve Rasnic Tem’s “Red Light” and Jason V Brock’s “The
Central Coast” is that the most unremarkable events—driving a car at night,
throwing a house party—can lead to unthinkable results. The very fabric of daily
life provides all the seeds for the most bizarre of scenarios; and now that horror
writing has returned to its proper venue, the small press, writers have
rediscovered the monumental impact that a trenchantly written short story can
have.
We may well be entering a new golden age of horror writing. A century or
so ago, such titans as Arthur Machen, Lord Dunsany, Algernon Blackwood, and
H. P. Lovecraft absorbed the best of the weird literature that preceded them and
raised supernatural writing to its heights through a dark vision that looked upon
literary terror as far more than a momentary shudder: these and other writers
realized that the supernatural could be used symbolically to express their deepest
beliefs about the fragility of humankind in a bafflingly inscrutable cosmos.
Today, a new generation of writers seems to be following their lead, writing
vibrantly and at times explicitly about the terrors of science, of sex, of society,

and of the simple act of living from day to day. Are we alone in the universe, the
creatures of a day, the victims of our own tragic flaws, or are we the pawns in
some enigmatic game played by forces incalculably superior to anything we can
imagine? The writers in this volume would not presume to answer these
questions, or even to maintain that these questions can ever be answered; they
are content to provide intriguing hints, with a few shivers along the way.
In these days of ever-increasing and ever-more-arcanely specialized anthologies
(“all-original stories of lesbian zombies from outer space!!!”), it is refreshing to
come upon a volume that simply presents an array of good stories with no
apologies and no excessive fanfare. What Brock and Nolan’s The Devil’s
Coattails (Cycatrix Press, 2011) also establishes is something that I have long
contended: that weird fiction is not a genre in any concrete or meaningful sense,
but a mode of writing to which authors of many different sorts can resort when
they find that actual genres (science fiction, fantasy, romance, the Western) or
mainstream fiction cannot easily accommodate the ideas, moods, or imagery
they are seeking to convey.
Hence we find, in this book, an affecting if relatively traditional ghost story
(Nancy Kilpatrick’s “Invisible”) cheek-by-jowl with such an avant-garde piece
as Gary A. Braunbeck’s “‘. . . And Dream of Phaedian Fancies . . .’” Meanwhile,
stories like J. Brundage’s “Too Good to Be Human” and Richard Seltzer’s
“Crimean Vespers” come within striking distance of being mainstream, but
retain a sufficient sense of the odd or the numinous to merit inclusion here.
Much the same could be said for John Shirley’s stirring Western, “Gunboat
Whores” 
and 
Richard 
Christian 
Matheson’s 
hard-boiled 
short-short,
“Interrogation.” And the perfumed prose-poetry of “The Hidden Realm,” by W.
H. Pugmire and Maryanne K. Snyder, links the weird with the historical tale
with its evocation of the shade of Oscar Wilde.
Ramsey Campbell’s “The Moons” takes pride of place here as yet another of
that author’s scintillating ventures into supernaturalism. Campbell has perfected
the art of leading the reader subtly into the weird by deft characterization, a
prose of unsurpassed luminosity, and a keen understanding of the psychology of
fear—traits that link him to such past masters as Edgar Allan Poe, Algernon
Blackwood, and H. P. Lovecraft, and come close to placing him in their august
company. The vividness with which Campbell evokes the British countryside is
matched by the vital re-creation of the American South in Steve Rasnic Tem’s
“Cattiwampus” and Earl Hamner Jr.’s “The Woods Colt.”
Coeditor Jason V Brock’s “Object Lesson” is one of several tales here that
fuse horror and pathos—a felicitous melding that can be traced at least as far

back as the pathos of the lonely artificial creation of Victor Frankenstein. The
loss of longtime friendship is etched with exquisite delicacy in Melanie Tem’s
“Best Friends,” just as Paul G. Bens, Jr. searingly portrays the cruelty of
manipulative love in “If You Love Me.”
Sunni K Brock’s “Dying to Forget” is a textbook example of why weird
fiction is necessary: this moving tale of a man undergoing the anguish of
successive deaths could only have succeeded in a literary mode where the
constraining rules of mimetic fiction were loosened, if not discarded altogether.
The same could perhaps be said for Dan O’Bannon’s engaging Lovecraftian
frivolity, “Invocation,” and Jerry F. Airth’s “Night Food.” And only through
weird fiction could an apocalyptic narrative like James Robert Smith’s “‘On the
First Day’” be rendered frighteningly plausible.
William F. Nolan’s “Dread Voyage” reminds us not only that humankind’s
earliest mode of expression was in poetry—and that the work of epic poets like
Homer and Virgil also laid the groundwork for the weird fiction to follow. It
may be impossible to determine precisely how the remarkable imagination of the
Greeks led to such a prodigal creation of monsters, ranging from the sorceress
Circe to Polyphemus the Cyclops; suffice it to say that the legacy of that
imagination is with us still. That poetry can also be applied to very modern
concerns is the subject of Paul J. Salamoff’s whimsy, “Can You Imagine . . .”
Marc Scott Zicree’s moving teleplay “Knife Through the Veil” shows that
weird fiction has seamlessly made its transition from poetry to prose to the mass
media. It is debatable whether the unnumbered array of horror films, from the
silent era to the present day, has genuinely added any core of aesthetic value to
the weird, but there is no question that such figures as Rod Serling, Charles
Beaumont, and Richard Matheson, all of whom contributed to The Twilight Zone
and other film and television shows, brought both supernatural and non-
supernatural horror into the living rooms of uncounted millions of Americans;
and Serling’s deeply held moral beliefs, which served as the basis of many of his
teleplays, showed that the weird can be much more than mere shudder-coining
and can reveal secrets about our own psyches that we are sometimes not eager to
acknowledge.
The generous sampling of weird art contained in this book takes us beyond
the realm of words altogether and into that of pure image. That so many of the
world’s great artists, from Bosch and Brueghel to Blake, Goya, and Doré, have
been drawn to the weird, the terrifying, and the supernatural reveals the depth
and endurance of our human attraction to that which surpasses mundane reality.
H. P. Lovecraft was correct in believing that our prodigal creation of devils and
monsters constitutes the dark side of our religious instinct, with its equally

prodigal fashioning of gods who we hope against hope are filled with
benevolence toward a human race that in reality seems terrifyingly alone in the
universe. Aristotle’s notion of tragedy as a purgation through pity and fear seems
entirely applicable to weird fiction, where the terrors that are put on stage—
whether it be through art, literature, or media—are an entirely human attempt,
futile as it may be, to cast out the demons that reside in our own minds.

IV. H. P. Lovecraft: His Disciples and
His Critics
The Emergence of H. P. Lovecraft
The emergence of H. P. Lovecraft from a titan in the tiny fields of amateur
journalism and pulp fiction to a writer of canonical status in American and world
literature is little short of incredible—perhaps unparalleled by any other writer in
Western literature. Only the self-imposed obscurity of his New England
contemporary Emily Dickinson is even remotely akin to Lovecraft’s failure to
publish even a single book of his stories (apart from the shoddily printed The
Shadow over Innsmouth, 1936) in his lifetime.
When Lovecraft began publishing in the amateur press, in 1914, he was
emerging from a six-year period of reclusiveness following his abrupt
withdrawal from high school without a diploma. At this time, his focus was on
poetry, essays, and editorials; and it was only through the encouragement of W.
Paul Cook and others that he resumed the writing of fiction in 1917 after a nine-
year hiatus. Cook’s brief essay “Howard P. Lovecraft’s Fiction” (1917)[4]
remains a perspicacious analysis of his early writing, but other amateur
journalists, not accustomed to weird and supernatural literature, were less
enthusiastic.
The founding in 1923 of the pulp magazine Weird Tales was, however, a
mixed blessing. To be sure, the magazine provided the first steady professional
market for Lovecraft’s tales, but in appearing there Lovecraft and other
practitioners of weird fiction began a process of self-marginalisation that was not
overcome for decades. There is, however, a vexing quandary over cause and
effect here: Did the establishment of Weird Tales and other pulps cause
mainstream magazines and publishers to eschew the publication of weird fiction,
however skilfully written, or did broader cultural changes affecting literature—
whether it be the avant-garde Modernism of T. S. Eliot and Ezra Pound or the
social realism of Theodore Dreiser, Willa Cather, and Sinclair Lewis—result in

the banishment of non-mimetic fiction to the aesthetic ghetto of the pulps? I
suspect the latter; but whatever the case, it was at this time that all the recognised
genres (horror fiction, detective fiction, science fiction, romance fiction, the
Western) were established, at least in nucleus.
For such a self-effacing and unworldly writer as Lovecraft, the result of his
relegation to the pulps was doubly unfortunate. Not only was he unsuccessful in
his rather clumsy attempts to secure book publication for his tales with such
publishers as G. P. Putnam’s Sons, Vanguard, and Alfred A. Knopf, but the
general literary world almost entirely failed to notice the increasingly dynamic
and revolutionary work that he was producing in the course of the 1920s and
1930s. The number of references to Lovecraft in standard literary venues during
his lifetime can be numbered perhaps on the fingers of one hand, ranging from a
brief mention in a column by William Bolitho in 1930 to an embarrassingly silly
article by J. Randle Luten on “What Makes a Story Click?” in an obscure
writer’s magazine.[5] The bulk of “critical” work on Lovecraft, if it can be called
that, was to be found in the readers’ columns of the pulp magazines—notably,
Weird Tales and Astounding Stories. Some of these comments are surprisingly
acute, but on the whole they are distinguished more for their enthusiasm than for
their critical sagacity.
It was, perhaps, inevitable that Lovecraft’s emergence from the obscurity of
the pulps was posthumous. And yet, it is notable that a lengthy review in
Publishers’ Weekly of Lovecraft’s first true book, The Outsider and Others
(1939), was devoted more to praising the idea of the book—as a monument to
friendship, given that August Derleth and Donald Wandrei had formed a
publishing company, Arkham House, specifically for the purpose of publishing
the work of their departed friend and colleague—than to the actual contents of
the book.[6]
The early Arkham House volumes of Lovecraft’s tales and other writings
never received extensive notices, but the enthusiasm of mystery devotee Will
Cuppy is evident in his several reviews for the New York Herald Tribune. T. O.
Mabbott expressed pride in being the first academician to review Lovecraft, and
his laconic comment in American Literature (March 1940)—“Time will tell if
his place be very high in our literary history; that he has a place seems
certain”[7]—is as true today as it was seventy years ago. Other reviewers, such
as comic novelist Peter De Vries and Marjorie Farber, were less welcoming.
This set the stage for Edmund Wilson’s “Tales of the Marvellous and the
Ridiculous” (New Yorker, November 24, 1945), which apparently sought to bury
Lovecraft by wholesale condemnation: “The only real horror in most of
[Lovecraft’s] fictions is the horror of bad taste and bad art. Lovecraft was not a

good writer.” And yet, one is struck by the grudging praise that emerges in the
course of Wilson’s overall attack: “Lovecraft himself . . . is a little more
interesting than his stories . . . his long essay on the literature of the supernatural
is a really able piece of work . . . The story called ‘The Colour out of Space’
more or less predicts the effects of the atomic bomb, and ‘The Shadow out of
Time’ deals not altogether ineffectively with the perspectives of geological eons
and the idea of controlling time-sequence.”[8] And so on.
Nor is it the case that Wilson’s diatribe silenced other critics who might have
had a different view. Only a few months after his review-article appeared, the
critic Fred Lewis Pattee praised Supernatural Horror in Literature as “a brilliant
piece of criticism”;[9] J. O. Bailey (who had briefly corresponded with
Lovecraft as early as 1930), in the first academic treatise on science fiction,
Pilgrims through Space and Time (1947), spoke warmly of Lovecraft’s
contributions to the genre; Richard B. Gehman, in a popular article on science
fiction, “Imagination Runs Wild” (New Republic, January 17, 1949), found
much to praise in Lovecraft’s work and influence. Joseph Henry Jackson, a well-
known critic at the San Francisco Chronicle, cited the early Arkham House
volumes as having “something quite special in the line of shudders.”[10] When
the first British editions of Lovecraft appeared in 1951, Eric Keown and the
noted British novelist Anthony Powell generally praised Lovecraft, although not
without equivocation.
Derleth was also the spearhead for what would be called the Cthulhu Mythos
(his term, not Lovecraft’s). This whole enterprise of imitating, or adding to, the
pseudomythological background that Lovecraft developed in his tales, beginning
with “The Call of Cthulhu” (1926), is itself so bewilderingly complex that it
deserves separate study;[11] suffice it to say that this too is a phenomenon
virtually without parallel in the annals of literature—a phenomenon that began
with Lovecraft’s own colleagues (Frank Belknap Long, Clark Ashton Smith,
Robert E. Howard, and several others), but to which Derleth devoted a
substantial portion of his time and energies. His own contributions to the
Cthulhu Mythos are less than inspired, chiefly because he seriously
misconstrued the fundamental philosophical underpinnings of Lovecraft’s myth-
cycle; it is only in recent years that more dynamic and innovative treatments of
the Cthulhu Mythos have emerged.
If Lovecraft was largely ignored in the 1950s and early 1960s, it was
because the entire field of weird fiction was at this time at a low ebb. With the
demise of Weird Tales in 1954, many weird fictionists had few venues in which
to place their tales; several writers, including Ray Bradbury, Robert Bloch, Fritz
Leiber, and Richard Matheson, wrote weird fiction under the guise of science

fiction or crime/suspense fiction. It is possible that the increasing popularity of
horror films and television shows in the late 1950s and 1960s ignited a
resurgence of interest in weird literature: it was certainly the case that revenue
from several Lovecraft films of the early 1960s, such as The Haunted Palace
(1963), allowed Arkham House to reissue Lovecraft’s tales after having allowed
them to fall out of print.
But it was Lovecraft’s sudden and surprising popularity in paperback
editions—first from Lancer, then from Beagle/Ballantine beginning in 1969—
that catapulted Lovecraft onto the world stage, at least in terms of pop culture
appeal. Time magazine took note of the wide sales of these volumes in a jocular
but largely respectful review on June 11, 1973. It was just at this time that a
renewed 
scholarly 
interest 
in 
Lovecraft 
was 
underway, 
ultimately
revolutionising our understanding of the man and his work. Sadly, this work was
in some sense triggered by the death in 1971 of August Derleth; for it was
Derleth’s stranglehold on Lovecraft’s work—and his self-assumed role as
Lovecraft’s authorised spokesman—that inhibited the proper understanding of
his work for decades. But Derleth laid the seeds for the overturning of his own
misconceptions by publishing Lovecraft’s Selected Letters (ultimately issued in
five volumes between 1965 and 1976); for these letters not only revealed the
metaphysical and aesthetic bases for his fiction, but showed that Lovecraft was a
keen thinker and observer of his times, very different from the “eccentric
recluse” he had been thought to be.
The scholarly revolution, led initially by Dirk W. Mosig, took wing with the
dynamic work of such critics as Donald R. Burleson, Peter Cannon, David E.
Schultz, and many others. I myself contributed to the movement at an early age
by a series of fortunate accidents, issuing the first anthology of Lovecraft
criticism from an academic publisher (H. P. Lovecraft: Four Decades of
Criticism, 1980) and compiling the first comprehensive bibliography of
Lovecraft (1981). During my years of undergraduate and graduate study at
Brown University, I prepared accurate texts of Lovecraft’s fiction and other
writing; this work eventually led to Arkham House’s corrected editions of the
1980s. A decade later, I prepared annotated editions of Lovecraft’s work for
Penguin Classics, and these three volumes (1999, 2001, 2004) appear to have
triggered Lovecraft’s ultimate canonisation in the Library of America edition of
his Tales (2005).
Scholarly work on Lovecraft reached a culmination with the H. P. Lovecraft
Centennial Conference at Brown University (August 17–19, 1990), in which
scholars from around the world congregated in a stimulating series of panel
discussions that went far in exhibiting the richness of Lovecraft’s life, work, and

thought. It was at this time that a number of important books on Lovecraft
appeared; reviewing one of them, the prestigious journal American Literature
was forced to conclude: “It’s getting to where those who still ignore Lovecraft
will have to go on the defensive.”[12] My biography, H. P. Lovecraft: A Life
(1996), sought to present a fuller and more sympathetic portrait of Lovecraft’s
than L. Sprague de Camp’s Lovecraft: A Biography (1975), although the latter
volume, whatever its deficiencies, did bring Lovecraft to mainstream attention as
never before.
Lovecraft’s fiction, poetry, and essays have now been published in
definitive, textually corrected editions, and his thousands of letters are being
issued in a print edition that may exceed twenty-five volumes. And, as my
revised bibliography of Lovecraft (2009) establishes, his work has been
translated into hundreds of editions in at least twenty-five languages worldwide,
from Bengali to Serbo-Croatian. Criticism of his work is still relatively rare in
standard academic journals, but such specialised journals as Lovecraft Studies
(1979–2005) and the Lovecraft Annual (2007f.) have published many valuable
studies. References or allusions to Lovecraft in books, magazines, newspapers,
and online sites are now so numerous as to defy tabulation.
But Lovecraft’s uniqueness resides in the remarkable way in which he
remains both a popular and a critically acclaimed figure. We can find praise of,
or at least allusions to, Lovecraft coming from such figures as Jorge Luis
Borges, Paul Theroux, Gore Vidal, and Umberto Eco; but we can also find an
immensely popular role-playing game, “The Call of Cthulhu” (1982f.), along
with plush Cthulhu dolls and “Cthulhu for President” bumper stickers. Film
adaptations continue apace, although few of them capture the essence of
Lovecraft’s cosmic vision. No writer, not even his great predecessor Edgar Allan
Poe, conjoins popular and critical renown in this manner.
The time for defending Lovecraft as a genuine literary figure is long past; his
ascent to the canon of American and world literature is complete. What now
remains is the continued analysis and evaluation of his entire work—fiction,
poetry, essays, letters—and the placing of that work in the context of his times
and in the overall history of weird and mainstream literature. It is the purpose of
this book to carry on that process of analysis so that the true richness of
Lovecraft’s writing can be fully revealed.

How Not to Edit Lovecraft
H. P. Lovecraft’s The Classic Horror Stories (Oxford University Press, 2013)
was compiled by Roger Luckhurst, a professor of modern literature at Birkbeck
College in the University of London. He has no obvious qualifications for
assembling the book, since to my knowledge he has not written a single book,
article, or review about Lovecraft. Instead, he has written a book on mummies
and edited some Victorian works of the supernatural for Oxford University
Press. But one must not condemn a book merely because its compiler may be a
relative newcomer to the field; after all, we are all newcomers once.
There are at least three ways to assess this volume: 1) its selection of
material; 2) its preparation of the texts; and 3) its notes and commentary. In all
these ways, but especially in the second and third, this book fails lamentably.
As for the selection of stories: it is unexceptionable—except for the
inclusion of “The Horror at Red Hook” (1925), a shoddy and contrived story that
nearly every Lovecraft scholar regards as one of his worst tales. The choice of
this story is particularly anomalous because Luckhurst avows that his selections
“primarily focus on Lovecraft’s work after his return from his traumatic years in
New York in 1926.” Why the exception for “Red Hook”? Evidently it embodies
“Lovecraft’s engagement with the actual city of New York.” If this formulation
makes any sense, it would surely have been better to have included the poignant
story “He” (“My coming to New York was a mistake . . .”) or the compact and
satisfying horror tale “Cool Air.” And if Luckhurst had already decided to
violate his general rule of printing stories from the 1926–31 period (which he in
any case has violated in the other direction by printing “The Dreams in the
Witch House” [1932] and “The Shadow out of Time” [1934–35]), he could have
done so by printing “The Outsider” (1921), one of Lovecraft’s signature stories,
or “The Rats in the Walls” (1923), a nearly perfect example of short story
construction.
In regard to his preparation of the texts, Luckhurst has made the regrettable
decision to return (more or less) to the original pulp magazine editions of the
stories. At this late date, when my corrected editions of Lovecraft’s stories have
been available for nearly three decades, the logic of this decision can seriously
be questioned. What is to be gained by this procedure? Was Luckhurst or his
publisher unwilling to pay the modest fee I might (or might not) have charged
for the use of my texts? If push came to shove, I would have provided the texts
gratis. Did they not know how to contact me? I hear from people around the

world every day and usually reply in minutes. I could have provided Luckhurst
with the corrected texts with one click of a mouse, as I have recently done to
Leslie S. Klinger for his forthcoming Annotated H. P. Lovecraft (W. W. Norton).
Or, if Luckhurst didn’t wish to rely on my editions, he could have done the
job himself. For every one of the stories in his book (with the exception of “The
Colour out of Space”), a fairly clean typescript exists in the John Hay Library of
Brown University. He need not even have made the tedious (but no doubt
pleasant) trip to Providence to consult the texts; the library would probably have
sent him copies at his request. In these particular instances (with the possible
exclusion of At the Mountains of Madness), the preparation of the texts from the
typescripts would not qualify as rocket science. He could probably have
delegated the job to a graduate student or even an eager undergraduate.
How does Luckhurst defend this return to corrupt texts? Well, in reality he
doesn’t. He states: “The texts have been checked against the first publication of
the stories, nearly all in pulp magazines, with obvious mistakes silently
corrected.” There is a considerable ambiguity in this utterance. Let us consider
the text of “The Call of Cthulhu.” Luckhurst has in fact not followed the Weird
Tales (February 1928) text in certain particulars, especially as regards
Lovecraft’s British spellings, which appear in his text but do not appear in the
Weird Tales text. Surely he cannot claim that the (proper) restoration of the
British spellings constitutes a “correction” of “obvious mistakes”; what is more,
not all of Lovecraft’s British spellings have been restored, as Luckhurst has not
printed “connexion” (found in Lovecraft’s typescript) where Weird Tales (and
all previous texts prior to mine) print the American “connection.” Luckhurst
does follow Weird Tales in (erroneously) printing “Eskimos” where Lovecraft
wrote “Esquimaux.” He follows Weird Tales in some paragraphing errors as
well. Then he prints “This data,” whereas Weird Tales and earlier Arkham
House editions printed “These data.” The fact is that “This data” is a
grammatical error found in Lovecraft’s typescript, and I printed it in my text.
Weird Tales was actually correct in printing “These data.” But I need not go on.
The end result is a textual mishmash more worthy of some fly-by-night print-on-
demand publisher rather than of one of the world’s great academic presses.
The most unfortunate decision was to use the Astounding Stories
appearances of At the Mountains of Madness and “The Shadow out of Time.”
Even Luckhurst appears dimly aware that the former, in its butchered appearance
in Astounding, is so corrupt as to be unusable; so he has essentially used the
version that August Derleth prepared in 1939 (reprinted, with further errors, in
1964), based on Lovecraft’s corrected copies of Astounding, where at least the
paragraphing has been repaired and the omissions of text (especially toward the

end) mostly filled in. But the result is still a text that contains about 1500
divergences from the typescript. In the case of “The Shadow out of Time,” the
decision is also regrettable. Consider this passage in Astounding: I was born and
raised in Haverhill [. . .] and did not go to Arkham till I entered Miskatonic
University as instructor of political economy in 1895.
The actual text reads:
I was born and reared in Haverhill [. . .] and did not go to Arkham till I
entered Miskatonic University at the age of eighteen. That was in 1889. After
my graduation I studied economics at Harvard, and came back to Miskatonic
as Instructor of Political Economy in 1895.
Luckhurst actually supplies the above passage in a footnote; but the degree of his
ignorance of Lovecraft textual scholarship is betrayed by his comment:
“Astounding simplified this sentence from HPL’s original . . .” What actually
happened, in all probability, was that R. H. Barlow, in preparing the typescript of
the story for Lovecraft, skipped a line or two of text (probably because his eye
saw “Miskatonic” twice and largely skipped from the first usage to the second),
causing the omission.
Luckhurst tries to justify his use of the Astounding texts by declaring that he
wants to “retain some of the pulp energy that Astounding Stories wanted to inject
into Lovecraft’s tales.” This is, I humbly submit, blithering idiocy. The only
reason Astounding chopped up the long paragraphs in both stories is that, in the
two-column format of the magazine, the paragraphs would seem even longer
than on an ordinary printed page, and therefore would presumably be
intimidating to the brainless sods who would be reading the stories. And if
Luckhurst really wanted to give present-day readers a taste of “how they [the
stories] were first encountered by their audience in the Golden Age of science
fiction,” he should have printed the Astounding version of At the Mountains of
Madness intact, without Derleth’s restoration of the paragraphing and of the
passages omitted toward the end.
Let us consider Luckhurst’s annotations. For a text of 447 pages, he has
about 40 pages of notes. For the same stories, I have 74 pages of annotations in
my various Penguin editions. But quantity isn’t everything, I suppose. Perhaps
Luckhurst has found some nuggets of information that I overlooked? It doesn’t
appear so. In his notes to “The Horror at Red Hook,” he largely copies my own
notes, but entirely fails to indicate that Lovecraft had provided his own (often
erroneous) definitions of the words in the Hebrew/Greek incantation in the story;
I quote them in full in my notes. Where he doesn’t copy my notes, Luckhurst
gets things wrong. He claims that, in “The Call of Cthulhu,” Lovecraft’s use of

the terms tornasuk and angekok may have been taken from E. B. Tylor’s article
on “Demonology” in the Encyclopaedia Britannica; in fact, they were taken
from Tylor’s article on “Eskimos.” In his notes to At the Mountains of Madness,
Luckhurst states that Poe’s Arthur Gordon Pym was “serialized in 1837 and
1838.” In fact, only the first few chapters were serialised in the January and
February 1837 issues of the Southern Literary Messenger; it was published in
book form in 1838.
As for Luckhurst’s introduction, it is routine at best. It presents a fairly
straightforward, if highly condensed, chronicle of Lovecraft’s life and work,
although he fails to mention Lovecraft’s reading of Poe at the age of eight, the
single most significant influence on his weird writing. Luckhurst also dwells far
too long on Lovecraft’s racism, which is only a relatively small aspect of his
philosophy and only enters into a few of his major tales. The introduction is also
full of annoying little errors, such as the misspelling (twice) of Gustave (not
“Gustav”) Doré’s name; the implication that Clark Ashton Smith and Robert E.
Howard were part of the amateur journalism movement (Smith was only
tangentially, Howard not at all); the idea that “Dagon” (1917) was influenced by
Lord Dunsany, whom Lovecraft would not read until 1919; the omission of the
macron for Dunsany’s first book, The Gods of Peg ā na; the statement that
Lovecraft published in Astounding Science Fiction (the magazine was called
Astounding Stories at the time it published Lovecraft’s two stories in 1936); the
notion that Lovecraft “mov[ed] back to amateur circulation” for his stories after
1931 (he published no fiction in the amateur press after 1925); that Lovecraft
was 47 when he died (he was 46 and a half); the dating of Colin Wilson’s The
Strength to Dream to 1962 (it came out in the UK in 1961); the misspelling of
the name of Jason Colavito (as “Cavolito”), author of The Cult of Alien Gods;
the mistitling of Lovecraft’s essay “Notes on Writing Weird Fiction” as “Notes
on Weird Literature”; the mistitling of Jeff and Ann VanderMeer’s collection
The Weird as Weird Compendium (and the misspelling of the editors’ names to
boot); and so on and so forth.
Luckhurst’s “Select Bibliography” of primary and secondary sources is, to
be frank, a disgrace. I suppose it was to be expected that he would not list either
the two Annotated H. P. Lovecraft volumes (1997, 1999) or my three Penguin
editions (1999, 2001, 2004), as they are all direct competitors to his own book
(he does cite one of the Penguins in a footnote in his introduction). But the
omission has apparently led at least one naïve and uninformed reviewer—one
Jess Nevins, in the Los Angeles Times Book Review and Salon.com—to say of
Luckhurst’s book: “One might argue that it is past time for a short form, one-
volume critical edition” of Lovecraft. (Let it pass that this is not a “critical

edition,” since it does not formally record textual variants.) For Lovecraft’s
essays, Luckhurst lists Miscellaneous Writings (1995), which has been out of
print for years and has been totally superseded by Collected Essays (2004–06),
of which he appears to be unaware. He cites no edition of Lovecraft’s poetry—
not Collected Poems (1963), not A Winter Wish (1977), not The Ancient Track
(2001). For letters, he of course cites Selected Letters (1965–76), but cites none
of the many other editions of letters that have appeared since the 1990s.
In his list of biographical and critical studies, Luckhurst stumbles
immediately out of the gate by citing Lin Carter’s Look Behind the “Cthulhu
Mythos” (1972). I suppose it was too much to expect him to know of my Rise
and Fall of the Cthulhu Mythos (2008); given that ignorance, it would probably
have been better to have passed over Carter’s flatulent popular tract in merciful
silence. He does cite the three versions of my biography (1996, 2001, 2010) and
—rather to my surprise—does not cite de Camp’s biography. He lists Shreffler’s
H. P. Lovecraft Companion (1977) but does not list the Joshi–Schultz H. P.
Lovecraft Encyclopedia (2001). And imagine citing John Taylor Gatto’s The
Major Works of H. P. Lovecraft (Monarch Notes, 1977)! For those of you
unfamiliar with the Monarch Notes series, it can be charitably described as Cliff
Notes for the poor. Gatto, it will be recalled, was the one who put forth the novel
theory that “The Whisperer in Darkness” was subtly pornographic, and who
printed an erroneous death date for Lovecraft by taking it from a book review in
Time magazine.
It is nice that Luckhurst cites Peter Cannon’s H. P. Lovecraft (Twayne,
1989)—but not so nice that he dates it to 1982. His omission of Cannon’s
Lovecraft Remembered (1998), a definitive anthology of memoirs of Lovecraft,
is cavernous. He cites my H. P. Lovecraft: The Decline of the West (1990), but
not Timo Airaksinen’s The Philosophy of H. P. Lovecraft (1999). Also missing
are such seminal works as Scott Connors’s exemplary critical anthology A
Century Less a Dream (2002) and Robert H. Waugh’s two scintillating
collections of essays (2006, 2011). No Lovecraft bibliography is listed—not
Wetzel (1955), not Chalker (1962), not Owings–Chalker (1973), nor either of
mine (1981, 2009). Luckhurst seems never to have heard of Lovecraft Studies or
the Lovecraft Annual. In his notes he cites no articles on any of the stories he
prints, even though there is a superabundance of very perspicacious criticism on
all these tales.
And for someone who puts himself forth as an authority on weird and Gothic
fiction, Luckhurst’s list of works on that subject is peculiar to the point of
idiosyncrasy. He lists not one, not two, but three short articles by China
Miéville, one of which is exactly one page long—but does not list David

Punter’s The Literature of Terror (1980, 1996), the last incarnation of which is
two volumes. And it was written by an Englishman, to boot! Important treatises
on weird fiction or the Gothic by Les Daniels, Julia Briggs, Jack Sullivan, Terry
Heller, and many others are missing. I will be charitable in assuming that my
Unutterable Horror: A History of Supernatural Fiction (2012) came out too late
for Luckhurst to cite; I am less charitable in pointing out the omission of my
Weird Tale (1990), Modern Weird Tale (2001), and Evolution of the Weird Tale
(2004).
In At the Mountains of Madness, Lovecraft states, in regard to the
protagonists’ first view of the shoggoth: “It was the utter, objective embodiment
of the fantastic novelist’s ‘thing that should not be.’” This volume is,
prototypically, the Book That Should Not Be. It has no reason for existence,
aside from putting a few pennies in the pockets of its editor and publisher. The
decision to use pulp magazine texts—especially those from Astounding—
borders on the moronic; the selection is flawed, the introduction is windy and
contentless, the notes disappointingly skimpy when they are not ripped off from
my own work. The paper and typography are nice, and the dust jacket presents a
curious and rather spooky illustration of a sea creature (Ascidia) from an old
book by Ernst Haeckel (whose Riddle of the Universe [English translation 1900]
is, incidentally, misdated to 1903). But that’s about all the good that can be said
about this rudis indigestaque moles.
I guess the lesson one has to draw from this book is: Don’t entrust an
amateur to do a professional’s job.
A much more creditable book is The New Annotated H. P. Lovecraft, edited by
Leslie S. Klinger (Liveright, 2014). This mammoth tome is one of the most
impressive volumes ever published relating to the work of H. P. Lovecraft. In its
more than 900 pages (including a lengthy “foreword” [i.e., introduction] that
provides both a compact history of weird fiction up to Lovecraft’s time and a
sound bio-critical overview of the author) are contained nearly all the tales for
which Lovecraft is best known. The annotations are almost unfailingly
intelligent, copious, and pertinent.
Leslie S. Klinger may not have been one’s most likely choice to compile
such a book, since nearly all his previous books relate to Sherlock Holmes (he
has co-written one book on nineteenth-century vampire fiction); but, as his
copious bibliography attests, he has been a quick learner of all things
Lovecraftian and has absorbed the best scholarship old and new on the
Providence writer. His annotations also include an abundance of illustrative
matter ranging from photographs of sites mentioned in the tales (especially the

plethora of Providence sites in The Case of Charles Dexter Ward), illustrations
of Lovecraft’s stories by artists in Weird Tales as well as contemporary artists
such as Jason C. Eckhardt, and numerous covers of Lovecraft books (both US
and foreign), posters of Lovecraft films, and all kinds of other interesting matter.
The evaluation of a book of this size and complexity must proceed in stages.
The first order of business is to determine what stories were selected. In a book
that is approximately the size of the Library of America edition of Lovecraft’s
Tales (2005), it would seem possible to include just about every tale that is
generally considered top-notch. But a stark omission meets us almost at the
outset. Where is “The Outsider”? Could Klinger not spare 7 pages for this
signature story? To be sure, it perhaps offers relatively little fodder for the
annotator (although the multifarious literary influences—Poe, Hawthorne, Mary
Shelley, etc.—might have been of interest to point out), but it surely deserves
inclusion more than the mediocre early story “Beyond the Wall of Sleep.” That
story has some minimal interest as a kind of predecessor to “The Shadow out of
Time” (although Klinger makes the odd comment that “The Whisperer in
Darkness” “may be seen as a more mature version of ‘Beyond the Wall of
Sleep’”), but that is about all. And then there is the cavernous omission of “The
Rats in the Walls,” which—as anyone can see from my version of the story in
The Annotated H. P. Lovecraft (1997)—is extraordinarily rich in annotation
possibilities. I suppose we should now be resigned to the inclusion of “Herbert
West—Reanimator” among Lovecraft’s “best” stories (too bad Klinger used a
colon instead of a dash in the title), and we should perhaps be grateful for the
small mercy that “The Horror at Red Hook” is omitted (it is unfortunately
embalmed in the Library of America edition, chosen by Peter Straub).
Otherwise, every major story Lovecraft wrote—especially in his last decade of
writing—is included here.
I provided the texts of the stories, although these are not the slightly revised
texts that I have prepared for my new variorum edition of Lovecraft, due out
later this year. The publisher has apparently made some deliberate format
changes—such as printing most extracts (e.g., the letters between Curwen and
his cohorts in The Case of Charles Dexter Ward; the letters between Wilmarth
and Akeley in “The Whisperer in Darkness”) in italics. This is nothing to get all
hot and bothered about, but it would have been nice to have printed the tagline to
the epigraph to “The Haunter of the Dark” (“—Nemesis”), as Klinger is forced in
a note to identify the epigraph as coming from Lovecraft’s poem. Speaking of
epigraphs, many readers will be startled to find one at the head of “Herbert West
—Reanimator”; it reads: “To be dead, to be truly dead, must be glorious. There
are far worse things awaiting man than death.”—COUNT DRACULA. Well, what

can this possibly be? It turns out to be a paraphrase from the film version of
Dracula (1931), which Lovecraft is on record as despising! No such epigraph,
needless to say, appears either in Lovecraft’s surviving typescript or in the only
publication (Home Brew, February–July 1922) of the story in Lovecraft’s
lifetime. When I raised the matter with Klinger upon seeing the proofs, he
informed me that he had found it in several online versions of the story. I gather
this is one of those instances where, in Klinger’s opinion, he has “noted errors in
Joshi’s work or expressed a different opinion about the ‘best’ text.” Klinger
admitted to me that the epigraph did not in fact belong in the text, but it was too
late to do any major surgery, so he ended up revising his footnote to declare that
the epigraph is “apocryphal.”
Toward the end of The Case of Charles Dexter Ward, Klinger fails to print
the “Saxon minuscules” that a nameless denizen of the eighth century scribbled
to Willett in the basement of the Ward/Curwen bungalow. The omission is
particularly odd, since my Arkham House edition (and every other text I have
ever seen) does print it, and the paragraph preceding it states explicitly: “The
briefly scrawled message was this . . .” (In my electronic file I have a
placeholder for the minuscules, since I feel that the only way to reproduce them
accurately is to print a facsimile of Lovecraft’s manuscript at this point. His
manuscript shows his numerous attempts to get this inscription exactly right.)
One other small point in which Klinger disagrees with my texts is in printing
“out” with a capital O in the titles “The Colour out of Space” and “The Shadow
out of Time.” (Oddly enough, he does not use a capital O in “over” in “The
Shadow over Innsmouth.”) This variant occurs frequently in many Lovecraft
editions, including my own corrected Arkham House editions of 1984–86, where
Jim Turner overruled me on this point (the “out” is lower-cased in the electronic
files I sent to Klinger). To put an end to this insignificant matter, out in these
titles is a preposition, and by contemporary rules for printing titles prepositions
are not capitalised. Lovecraft himself did not pay much attention to these matters
(for which, in any case, there was no standard usage in his day), so one can find
“out” capitalised or uncapitalised when he cites these titles in letters.
It is understandable that Klinger, aiming for a general audience, seeks to
define words that some readers might find difficult. I was asked to go easy on
this point when compiling my Penguin editions, but I did define a few. Klinger’s
definitions are for the most part unexceptionable, but he stumbles on a few
occasions. He defines “Cyclopean” as “huge, massive, like the Cyclops of
classic mythology” (the definition is quoted from Brewer’s Dictionary of Phrase
and Fable); but this is not quite right. The Oxford English Dictionary (OED)
supplies two definitions, one specifically applied to architecture (which is almost

always how Lovecraft uses it): “Applied to an ancient style of masonry in which
the stones are of immense size and more or less irregular shape . . .” This seems
to me an important distinction.
Klinger supplies a long note on the word “alienist,” which he at the outset
defines merely as a “‘mad-doctor’ who treated mental disease.” This is not so
much inaccurate as inadequate; for the term gained currency in the later
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries as referring to a physician who was
specifically brought in to gauge whether a potentially “mad” person was to be
confined in an asylum or mental hospital; all Lovecraft’s usages (especially in
The Case of Charles Dexter Ward) are of that sort. And does “infandous” really
mean “too terrible to be described”? Not quite; OED says: “Unspeakable, not to
be spoken of, nefarious.” The Latin derivation (from fari, to speak) is critical
here.
Klinger’s decision to focus almost exclusively on historical and literary
elements in the tale, with little discussion of their origins in Lovecraft’s own life
and career, sometimes carries him too far. I acknowledge his courtesy in not
treading ground that I covered in my annotated Penguin editions, but I think he
could have added certain critical bits of information with little difficulty. For
example, is it not significant that Lovecraft derived the inspiration for “Beyond
the Wall of Sleep” from an article in the New York Tribune (April 27, 1919)
about backwoods denizens in the Catskill Mountains? Instead, we have a long
note citing other articles about such denizens that Lovecraft probably did not
read. Both he and I have missed the fact that, in the resonant opening paragraph
of “The Picture in the House,” the phrase “catacombs of Ptolemais” probably
comes from Poe’s “Shadow—A Parable” (where Ptolemais is mentioned). He
and I are also remiss in not identifying the name Keziah Mason as probably
deriving from Hawthorne’s Septimius Felton, where an Aunt Keziah is cited.
And would it have been so much trouble for Klinger to have mentioned, in his
note on the Endless Caverns in Virginia (alluded to in “The Shadow out of
Time”), that Lovecraft had visited the site in 1928 and written extensively about
it in “Observations on Several Parts of America”? And Klinger not only
erroneously defines “Magnum Innominandum” (cited without explanation in
“The Whisperer in Darkness”) as “The Great One Who Is Not to Be Named”
(the term is a neuter singular, hence must mean “The Great Thing That Is Not to
Be Named”), but cannot be troubled to note that the term occurred in Lovecraft’s
great “Roman dream” of 1927 (where the reference is indeed to some kind of
entity—but the fact that it is neither masculine nor feminine is significant).
In other cases, Klinger simply errs in his understanding of certain phases of
some stories. Some of these matters relate to points of interpretation that,

generally speaking, should probably not have been the subject of annotation at
all; I specifically avoided such notes in my Penguin editions, leaving these
matters to readers, critics, and scholars. For example, in reference to the
poignant line in “The Festival,” “For though the wind had not left much snow, a
few patches did remain on the path near the door; and in that fleeting backward
look it seemed to my troubled eyes that they bore no mark of passing feet, not
even mine,” Klinger remarks: “This makes no sense,” and goes on to berate
Lovecraft for irrationality. Alas, this is the intemperate comment of a critic
whose preference for the cut-and-dried reasonableness of detective fiction has
made him insensitive to the subtleties of the weird tale. Perhaps we are to
understand the image as an indication that the entire episode of the narrator’s
wandering through Kingsport was a dream? Lovecraft himself suggests as much
when recounting his trip of December 17, 1922, that inspired the story (a trip
that, needless to say, Klinger fails to mention). Other interpretations are possible.
Klinger fails to note that Lovecraft erred in dating the Danish scholar Olaus
Wormius (the translator of a Latin version of the Necronomicon) to the thirteenth
rather than the seventeenth century. The issue is not specifically addressed in
“The Festival” (“the unmentionable Necronomicon . . . in Olaus Wormius’
forbidden Latin translation”), but it most emphatically is in “History of the
Necronomicon,” which is printed in one of the seven (!) appendices to Klinger’s
book.
In regard to the passage in “The Call of Cthulhu” where the narrator notes
that “in some way the second of April had put a stop to whatever monstrous
menace had begun its siege of mankind’s soul,” Klinger notes: “This is wishful
thinking” (he cites one Justin Taylor for this remark), saying that threats to
mankind still exist. But the comment refers specifically to the second sinking of
R’lyeh after its temporary emergence a few days before: the point that Lovecraft
is making is that the stars are not “right,” and therefore it is not yet time for
Cthulhu’s definitive re-emergence in the world.
In correctly identifying Borellus in The Case of Charles Dexter Ward with
Pierre Borel, Klinger curiously refers readers to Roger Bryant’s old article “The
Alchemist and the Scientist” (Nyctalops, January–February 1975), which
erroneously identifies Borellus as Giovanni Borelli.
At the end of “The Whisperer in Darkness,” in regard to the climactic
utterance (“For the things in the chair, perfect to the last, subtle detail of
microscopic resemblance—or identity—were the face and hands of Henry
Wentworth Akeley”), Klinger states oddly that “the use of the word ‘identity’
here suggest[s] that the mask is a representation of Akeley’s actual face.” Well,
no—what is suggested (even more horribly) is that it is Akeley’s actual face!

Finally, in noting the seemingly peculiar mention of “Roderick Usher”
toward the end of “The Haunter of the Dark,” Klinger says that the name was
mentioned to refer to “Usher’s hypersensitivity to distant sounds.” Again no: as
Klinger (who otherwise seems well familiar with “Supernatural Horror in
Literature”) should have known, the reference points to the psychic union at this
point of Robert Blake and the haunter of the dark (“I am it and it is I”), since
Lovecraft is referring to his own pioneering interpretation of “The Fall of the
House of Usher” as suggesting the psychic union of Roderick, Madeline, and the
house itself. This point was made as long ago as the 1950s by George T. Wetzel.
But Klinger does make a number of advances in Lovecraft scholarship. He
identifies the “Dr. Anderson” cited in the quotation from Garrett P. Serviss at the
end of “Beyond the Wall of Sleep.” He suggests an intriguing source for
Alhazred’s “unexplainable couplet” in the work of John Donne (“One short
sleep past, we wake externally, / And Death shall be no more; Death, thou shalt
die”). He works out a detailed chronology of events in “Herbert West—
Reanimator,” which begins so early as the year 1903. He corrects me on the
origin of the concept of Lemuria, which dates to the work of one Philip Sclater
in 1864, not Ernst Haeckel, as I had stated. Sometimes, though, Klinger goes a
bit overboard. He has discovered that Narath (as in “the peerless beauty of
Narath” in “The Silver Key”) is a town in southwestern India; but I suspect
Lovecraft thought he had made it up. And Klinger seems to fancy that everything
in The Case of Charles Dexter Ward is based on some real person or event, so he
states blandly, in reference to “Melville F. Peters, Esq., of George St.”: “There
are no records of this individual.” No surprise!—he is fictitious. Perhaps this is
an instance of annotator’s humour.
Klinger is pretty good on citing up-to-date sources for both primary and
secondary texts; but it would have been nice to have noted that the notes to At
the Mountains of Madness, “The Shadow out of Time,” and “The Shadow over
Innsmouth” (complete with Lovecraft’s illustrations) are included in Collected
Essays, Volume 5 (the series is indeed cited in his bibliography), rather than
referring readers to the almost inaccessible Something about Cats and Other
Pieces (1949).
If many of the above criticisms seem picayune, that is because, for the most
part, they are. Aside from the actual errors cited above (not numerous), some of
my comments merely relate to different philosophies or practices in preparing
annotated editions. No one can deny the diligence and intelligence that Leslie S.
Klinger has brought to his chosen task, and it is safe to say that this volume
contains more hard information relating to H. P. Lovecraft’s stories than any
book ever published. It deserves the widest possible audience.

The Derleth Mythos
In A Look Behind the Derleth Mythos: Origins of the Cthulhu Mythos (H.
Harksen Productions, 2012), John D. Haefele, a longtime fan of H. P. Lovecraft
and (especially) August Derleth, has undertaken an heroic task: to rescue Derleth
from the decades of abuse he has taken for his propagation of numerous errors,
distortions, and outright lies about Lovecraft’s fiction and general philosophy,
and his writing of dozens of “tales of the Cthulhu Mythos” that widely depart
from Lovecraft’s conceptions and are, to compound the injury, pretty awful tales
in their own right. To this task Haefele brings weapons of surprising weakness—
nothing like incisiveness of critical analysis, but merely a mass of verbiage and
obfuscation, as if the sheer tsunami of words will overwhelm his perceived
opponents (chief of them, to be frank, is myself). Haefele claims magnimously
that his “strategy is to muster the facts and let them speak for themselves.” But
in fact his choice of “facts” is highly selective and his interpretation of them so
severely biased and prejudiced—in favour of Derleth, in what he avowedly sees
as a necessary counterweight to the “anti-Derlethianism” of myself and other
critics—that his own screed becomes considerably more one-sided than the
critics he is seeking to refute.
The essence of the Derleth Mythos is as follows:
There is a moral conflict between the Elder Gods (benevolent cosmic
deities who battle on behalf of the human race) against the “evil” Old
Ones (Cthulhu, Yog-Sothoth, etc.), who are intent on subjugating the
human race. [In Lovecraft’s stories, there are no benign deities, and
the Old Ones are for the most part not gods at all but morally neutral
space aliens who have come to earth and encountered human beings
and other earthly entities at random points in history.]
As a result of this cosmic struggle, the Elder Gods have “imprisoned”
the Old Ones in various obscure corners of the world or the universe.
[In Lovecraft’s stories, none of the “gods” or space aliens are
imprisoned with the exception of Cthulhu, and there is no evidence
that his imprisoning was at the hands of any benevolent deity.]
Accordingly, the Cthulhu Mythos is analogous to the Christian
mythos, especially in regard to the expulsion of Satan and his minions
from heaven. [Lovecraft, an avowed atheist, portrayed a bleakly
amoral and atheistic vision of an insignificant humanity lost in the
temporal and spatial depths of the cosmos.]

The Old Ones are “elementals”—that is, they represent the four
“elements” (earth, air, fire, and water) of ancient and mediaeval
philosophy. [Lovecraft’s “gods” do not bear the slightest resemblance
to elementals, especially as they have come from the depths of space
where earthly elements may not exist.]
What has Haefele’s treatise done to overthrow or mitigate any of these points?
Nothing. I repeat—nothing.
Do Elder Gods—benign gods eager and willing to assist humanity against
the “evil” Old Ones—exist in Lovecraft? It does not appear so. The term “Elder
Gods” certainly does not exist, although phrases similar to it do; but,
paradoxically (from the Derlethian perspective), they seem to be applying to the
Old Ones! Are there any entities in Lovecraft who embody “cosmic good . . . and
cosmic evil” (as Derleth states in “The Return of Hastur”)? Haefele tries mightily
to prove it, or even to render it vaguely plausible, but fails every time. In all
Lovecraft’s work, there is only a single comment that might be construed as
justifying the existence of such a Manichean set of entities—and that occurs,
bizarrely, in the revision “Out of the Aeons.” There the high-priest T’yog (whom
Haefele erroneously identifies as the “narrator” of the story, when in fact his
narration is being paraphased by the actual narrator, Richard H. Johnson, curator
of the Cabot Museum of Archaeology) claims that “he felt sure that the gods
friendly to man could be arrayed against the hostile gods.” Well, this sounds
promising! But who does T’yog identify as the “friendly” gods? “[He] believed
that Shug-Niggurath, Nug, and Yeb, as well as Yig the Serpent-god, were ready
to take sides with man against the tyranny and presumption of Ghatanathoa.” In
other words, the very gods whom Derleth would identify as the “evil” Old Ones!
Haefele is curiously silent about a celebrated quotation in “Through the Gates of
the Silver Key” that largely undermines his argument: “He [Randolph Carter]
wondered at the vast conceit of those who had babbled of the malignant Ancient
Ones, as if They could pause from their everlasting dreams to wreak a wrath
upon mankind. As well, he thought, might a mammoth pause to visit frantic
vengeance on an angleworm.” Odd that this is not cited in Haefele’s
interminable book!
And as for Nodens, who in the Derleth Mythos is as it were the boss of the
Elder Gods, Haefele quotes the well-known comment in The Dream-Quest of
Unknown Kadath: “And hoary Nodens raised a howl of triumph when
Nyarlathotep, close on his quarry [Randolph Carter], stopped baffled by a glare
that seared his formless hunting-horrors to grey dust.” But, aside from the fact
that Nodens is here acting merely as a kind of cosmic cheerleader and does not
actually intervene in Carter’s battle against Nyarlathotep, there are precious few

moral overtones to the Carter-Nyarlathotep struggle; if anything, it is more of an
aesthetic struggle, since Carter’s quest for his “sunset city” is being foiled by
Nyarlathotep.
Haefele repeatedly attempts to argue that the “Great Old Ones” really are
“evil” or “malevolent” after a fashion—but these qualities are only attributed to
them by the human narrators in Lovecraft’s tales, who naturally see these
immense forces as inimical to human life. As early as “The Shunned House”
(1924), Lovecraft was emphasising this “relativity of morals” in regard to
various alien entities: “Such a monster must of necessity be in our scheme of
things [my emphasis] an anomaly and an intruder, whose extirpation forms a
primary duty with every man not an enemy to the world’s life, health, and
sanity.”
In spite of all this, Haefele still has the chutzpah to declare that “we find
Elder Gods in Lovecraft’s fiction”!
Haefele gets himself into further hot water by attempting to defend Derleth’s
repeated claims that Lovecraft’s pseudomythology is somehow “parallel” (or
even “similar”) to the Christian mythos. Haefele, whose training in philosophy is
about as rudimentary as his training in literary criticism, claims that the various
battles between cosmic entities in Lovecraft’s tales (the Old Ones of At the
Mountains of Madness vs. the Cthulhu spawn, for example) somehow attest to
this “similarity.” I had already stated that these battles have no particular moral
overtones; in fact, if anything they embody Lovecraft’s adherence to the tenets
of Oswald Spengler’s The Decline of the West, which propounded a complex
theory about the rise and fall of successive civilisations; and Haefele does not do
much to overthrow this basic conception. Instead, he quotes Donald R. Burleson
discussing “The Whisperer in Darkness”: “The figure in the great easy-chair
speaks . . . and tells of the great revelations in which Wilmarth is to share,
including ‘the black truth veiled by the immemorial allegory of Tao,’” which
Burleson believes (correctly) demonstrates how Lovecraft “deftly interweaves
known bodies of mythic tradition into the flow of his own Mythos.” But how
does this have any relevance to the idea of “parallels” to the Christian myth?
Taoism is not Christianity; and Lovecraft’s very general notion that all human
myth is a dim echo of the Old Ones has no bearing on the matter of any specific
“parallels” between the Lovecraft Mythos and Christianity.
Haefele goes on to say that Lovecraft’s various parodies of Christian myth
(such as the “crucifixion” of Wilbur Whateley’s twin at the end of “The
Dunwich Horror”) testifies to the “similarity” of his mythos with Christian myth.
This is analogous to contemporary religionists’ oxymoronic claim that atheism
(a denial of religion) is itself a religion. Haefele also misunderstands David E.

Schultz’s conception that Lovecraft was creating an “anti-mythology.” This does
not refer to such parodies of Christianity, although that may be a small part of it;
rather, it is a much more deep-seated subversion of all religions and myths,
whose central premise is the close relationship between man and the divine.
Much of Haefele’s discussion of the matter rests upon his analysis of the so-
called “black magic quotation” (or BMQ, as he conveniently abbreviates it).
This, you will recall, is what was once the most celebrated and widely quoted
statement attributed to Lovecraft: “All my stories, unconnected as they may be,
are based on the fundamental lore or legend that this world was inhabited at one
time by another race who, in practising black magic, lost their foothold and were
expelled, yet live on outside ever ready to take possession of the earth again.”
David E. Schultz discovered that this quotation was not in fact by Lovecraft but
by his correspondent Harold S. Farnese, who in a letter to Derleth in April 1937
claimed to be quoting the remark from a Lovecraft letter. Derleth seized upon
the quotation and used it everywhere he possibly could. But the revelation of the
spuriousness of the quotation materially destroyed the plausibility of the Derleth
Mythos as a legitimate extension of the Lovecraft Mythos.
Haefele cannot give up the fleeting hope that the quotation might actually
exist in some missing letter by Lovecraft. He states that Farnese wrote seven
letters to Lovecraft and that only two by Lovecraft survive: “This suggests at
least four from Lovecraft unaccounted for.” But that does not follow: Lovecraft
did not in fact reply to each and every letter sent by a correspondent, and it is
likely that Farnese sent Lovecraft several letters in succession and that Lovecraft
replied to them in a batch. Farnese himself admitted to only one missing letter
beyond the two that survive. In any case, Haefele in this matter is acting as a
kind of magician: he is fabricating a piece of evidence (i.e., the existence of the
BMQ in an actual Lovecraft letter) and then—hey! presto!—making it
disappear.
But mercifully, Haefele doesn’t make much of the slim possibility that the
quotation actually comes from Lovecraft. He takes a different tack, asking
whether the BMQ “really strays so far from orthodox Lovecraft.” Well, yes it
does. Let us consider the central issue of “black magic.” The term was originally
defined as referring to the practice of a magic or sorcery deemed blasphemous
and heretical by Christian teaching—something that a cosmic “god” from outer
space is not likely to undertake. Even if the term is used more loosely, it is
entirely inapposite to the events in Lovecraft’s stories. Haefele confuses the
practice of black magic among human beings (or, in a few cases, the alien
worshippers of the Lovecraftian “gods”), which can be found in abundance in
Lovecraft’s tales, with such a practice by the “gods” themselves. For that is what

the BMQ is stating: black magic was practiced by the “race” of gods—not their
human or alien worshippers.
And even if the “gods” did practice such black magic, was it in any way
instrumental—as the BMQ unequivocally states—in their being “expelled”?
Expelled from what? The earth? The universe? Well, it certainly seems as if the
various entities (Yog-Sothoth, Nyarlathotep, etc.) roam pretty freely wherever
they like. Even in “The Dunwich Horror,” the most Derlethian of Lovecraft’s
tales, there is no explicit comment that the Great Old Ones have been “expelled”
from anywhere; what Armitage says is that there is “some plan for the
extirpation of the entire human race and all animal and vegetable life from the
earth by some terrible elder race of beings from another dimension . . . the Elder
Things wished to strip it [the world] and drag it away from the solar system and
cosmos of matter into some other plane or phase of entity from which it had
once fallen, vigintillions of aeons ago.”
As for the notion that the Elder Gods “imprisoned” the Great Old Ones (a
comment made explicitly by Derleth in “The Return of Hastur” and elsewhere),
only one entity is so imprisoned: Cthulhu. And why is he imprisoned? Is it for
practising “black magic”? Is it by the hands of some race of entities called the
Elder Gods? Lovecraft is in fact wondrously silent about these matters. All he
says (in “The Call of Cthulhu”) is that the Great Old Ones came from outer
space but “were gone now, inside the earth and under the sea”; at some point
“the great priest Cthulhu, from his dark house in the mighty city of R’lyeh under
the waters, [will] rise and bring the earth again beneath his sway.” (Let us add
the caveat that this is coming from the old mestizo Castro, and it is not clear
whether he is reflecting metaphysical “reality” or merely his cult’s wishful
thinking; there is a strong suggestion, I believe, that it is the latter.) But aside
from Cthulhu (and that is the only “god” that Castro could possibly be talking
about), what others are “imprisoned”? Certainly not Azathoth, who is at the
center of “nuclear chaos.” All the other “gods” appear also to have eluded the
Elder Gods’ jail cells.
Haefele entangles himself in further absurdities in defending Derleth’s
preposterous statement that Lovecraft’s gods are “elementals.” Let us recall
precisely what Derleth said: “. . . Nyarlathotep . . . correspond[s] to an earth
elemental; Great Cthulhu, dweller in hidden R’lyeh deep in the sea—
correspond[s] to a water-elemental; Hastur the Unspeakable, who occupies the
air and interstellar spaces—correspond[s] to an air-elemental”; to which Derleth
adds modestly, “I myself added Cthugha, corresponding to the fire elemental
Lovecraft failed to provide” (“H. P. Lovecraft and His Work,” 1963). Let us pass
over the plain fact (which Haefele does his best to obfuscate) that Lovecraft does

not refer anywhere to Hastur as an entity, even though Derleth falsely claims that
Hastur was part of the “roster of the Great Old Ones as they were originally
conceived.” How exactly Derleth made the other designations is unfathomable;
as Dirk W. Mosig long ago pointed out (and which Haefele fails even to
address), the fact that Cthulhu is imprisoned in his underwater city of R’lyeh,
and the fact that he too came from the “interstellar spaces” (as do Yog-Sothoth
and Azathoth, apparently—so why aren’t they air elementals, even though there
is no air in space?), militate against the view that water is his native element!
And why Nyarlathotep would be an earth elemental is also not apparent.
And yet, Haefele attempts to come to Derleth’s defence on even this
indefensible point—and falls hard on his face time and again. Haefele actually
thinks he has found traces of the elemental idea in such random phrases in
Lovecraft as “crackings and rumblings from the ground.” So finding the word
“ground” in a Lovecraft story suddenly validates the idea that the Old Ones are
elementals? Yes, my friends, this is exactly what Haefele says. And yet, he is
strangely silent on the precise way in which the specific gods in question (i.e.,
Nyarlathotep and Cthulhu, or even Hastur in Derleth’s conception) could
embody the specific elements they are thought to embody. I once stated a tad
satirically that Derleth had to come to Lovecraft’s rescue in the invention of the
“missing” fire elemental Cthugha. Haefele delicately states that this idea is
“hogwash,” but what other interpretation is possible? If, as both Derleth and
Haefele assert, Lovecraft was diligently crafting the Cthulhu Mythos throughout
the last decade of his life, in both original stories and revisions (and apparently
giving “permission” to other writers to elaborate it too), how is it possible that,
in all the wealth of this fictional output, he could have come up with only three
of the four elementals? It is to laugh. Haefele finally throws up his hands and
blames Francis T. Laney for the inclusion of the elemental idea—as if Derleth
was so passive and inept that he simply took up the idea from a fan, and as if he
had not already broached the idea fairly extensively in several stories before
Laney ever showed up on the scene!
So passionate is Haefele in defending Derleth from every possible
imputation of error or fraud that he commits absurd gaffes of his own. Let us
consider the simple fact of the very coining of the term Cthulhu Mythos. I
pointed out that Derleth’s use of the passive voice in a statement in his early
article “H. P. Lovecraft, Outsider” (1937)—“Bit by bit it grew, and finally its
outlines became distinct, and it was given a name: the Cthulhu
Mythology”—“concealed” the fact that it was Derleth himself who coined the
name. Haefele comes back with the assertion that, in an article published thirty-
two years later (“The Cthulhu Mythos,” 1969), Derleth finally admitted that

“Lovecraft never so designated it.” The exact relevance of this later remark is
not obvious. What bearing does it have on the article of 1937, which never
mentions that Lovecraft did not come up with the designation himself?
Haefele also seeks to rebut my comment—“He [Derleth] was not within his
rights to foist his interpretation of the Mythos on to Lovecraft, as he did
repeatedly in article after article”—by saying that Derleth’s various articles were
really all based on chapter 3 of H. P. L.: A Memoir, with little revision thereafter.
How this fact is of any relevance is also not evident. It reminds me of the
(unfair) comment by Igor Stravinsky that Vivaldi didn’t write 600 concerti, he
wrote one concerto 600 times. The fact that all Derleth’s articles on the Mythos
are largely based on a single ur-text still means that these articles appeared
separately, in different venues, over the course of decades; and they still
propagated error after error upon each reiteration.
Haefele also attempts to come to Derleth’s defence by maintaining that these
articles were really marketing gimmicks designed to promote Arkham House
publications. Even if this were the case, it does not justify the ridiculous errors
and distortions found in them. Haefele also claims that Derleth was not writing
specifically about Lovecraft in these pieces but about the “Cthulhu Mythos” as it
had by then evolved. This assertion is flatly false—and (to use one of Haefele’s
favourite words) disingenuous to boot. Consider one of many remarks that could
be cited from the 1969 article: “It is undeniably evident that there exists in
Lovecraft’s concept [my emphasis] a basic similarity to the Christian Mythos,
specifically in regard to the expulsion of Satan from Eden and the power of
evil.” I have already demonstrated that this is rubbish; and it is specifically
making a comment about Lovecraft and not about the “Mythos” as a whole. In
any case, even if it is about the latter, there is a fatally twisted logic in defending
Derleth on this score. Under Haefele’s scenario, Derleth altered Lovecraft’s
vision, and then wrote article after article (or the same article many times over)
claiming that this new (and, let us be frank, perverted) vision is the Mythos. It is
as if a wife killed her husband and then asked for sympathy by claiming she was
a widow.
Haefele also claims that Derleth always asserted that Lovecraft was an
“important writer.” Is that so? Consider the end of “H. P. Lovecraft and His
Work,” the introduction to The Dunwich Horror and Others (1963), where
Derleth states that Lovecraft’s “place as a major writer in the minor macabre
division of literature is secure” (my emphasis). If that isn’t a backhanded
compliment, I don’t know what is. The implication clearly is that Derleth, in
contrast, is a major (or perhaps, if he had a spasm of unwonted humility, minor)
writer in the major field of mainstream fiction. (As things currently stand,

Derleth doesn’t even register as a writer of even a minor sort in mainstream
literature.) As for Derleth’s weird fiction, Haefele presents still more bizarre
defences. He dismisses his early Mythos writing—from 1931 to 1937, including
such tales as “Lair of the Star-Spawn,” “Ithaqua,” “The Thing That Walked on
the Wind,” and “The Return of Hastur”—as “juvenilia.” Once again, he is both
wrong and disingenuous; for he has to know that the term is not used in the
manner he wishes to use it. Derleth was between the ages of twenty-two and
twenty-eight when he wrote these stories; “juvenilia” is used only for work
written before a writer attains his or her majority. Under his definition,
Lovecraft’s “The Tomb” and “Polaris” would be juvenilia. Derleth was a full-
grown adult when he wrote these tales; they may be juvenile, but they are not
juvenilia in any meaningful sense of the term.
Haefele goes on to say that Derleth’s own tales somehow “instigate[d] a
handful of the better cosmic notes we sense in Lovecraft’s later stories.” On
what basis does he make this whopper of a claim? On the basis, apparently, that
Lovecraft made a tip of the hat to Derleth’s Tcho-Tcho people in some late
stories! The idea that any of the hack fiction written by the “self-blinded earth-
gazer” Derleth could somehow have inspired the cosmic reflections of Lovecraft
in his prime is ridiculous on its face; and Haefele makes himself the more
ridiculous for making ludicrous assertions of this sort.
And Haefele inevitably falls into the fatal error of defending Derleth’s
Mythos tales as “entertainment.” Indeed, he goes on in a bizarre manner to say
that “Derleth—unlike Lovecraft—never set out to break new ground. Rather, it
was all an exercise in formula, wherein he depicted literary objects, actions,
motifs, and events readers were familiar with, all to achieve genre-fiction’s chief
object, which is to be entertaining” (italics in original). Oh, my dear man, where
to begin in correcting you? Bad genre fiction strives to be “entertaining,”
because it cannot be anything else; it is the classic defence of bad writing, used
time and again by popular writers and the sycophants who lick their boots. Good
genre writing is “entertaining” and much more—it says much about the human
race and its relations to the universe, whether it be the hard-boiled crime stories
of Raymond Chandler or the dense science fiction of Arthur C. Clarke. (Haefele
commits another gaffe by saying that “Relating Derleth’s Mythos to Lovecraft’s
work is somewhat analogous to considering Hamilton or ‘Doc’ Smith’s work in
the genre of science fiction in light of Heinlein and Asimov, or perhaps
Clarke”—failing to point out that Derleth followed Lovecraft, therefore
representing a decline from a loftier aesthetic height, whereas Hamilton and
Smith preceded Heinlein, Asimov, and Clarke.) The fact that Haefele cites
bonehead critics like Lin Carter who were apparently “entertained” by Derleth’s

stories hurts his case more than it helps it.
But the whole issue of “entertainment” is worth pausing over. What’s wrong
with “entertaining”? The critical issue becomes: Who is entertained, and how?
Pornography and crossword puzzles entertain those who partake of them, but
that doesn’t confer any aesthetic value to pornography or crossword puzzles.
And then there is the awkward question: What if popular writing does not
“entertain”? No doubt Haefele would say that this is merely the reaction of an
inveterate snob; but I’ve never been convinced that there is anything bad in
being a snob of this sort. There is so much literature out there to read that it
doesn’t seem productive to waste time on inferior products; and if they fail to
“entertain” even on their humble level, then the author would appear to be in
deep trouble.
So biased is Haefele that even when he makes some good points, they are
tainted by his Derleth obsession. He whines that scholars like myself and others
have criticised Derleth’s Mythos stories for their endless catalogues of Mythos
“gods” and other elements, each of them with precise, clinical descriptions of
their nature and function (from “The Dweller in Darkness”: “He spoke of beings
whose very names were awesome—of the Elder Gods who live on Betelgeuse,
remote in time and space, and who had cast out into space the Great Old Ones,
led by Azathoth and Yog-Sothoth, and numbering among them the primal spawn
of the amphibious Cthulhu, the bat-like followers of Hastur the Unspeakable, of
Lloigor, Zhar, and Ithaqua, who walked the winds . . .”—and much more to this
effect, ad infinitum and ad nauseam). Haefele maintains that Lovecraft did the
same thing on several occasions. Where exactly? In that famous catalogue of
names in “The Whisperer in Darkness.” Silly me!—how could I have forgotten?
But wait . . . wasn’t that catalogue a random list of elements that was effective
(if indeed it was so) precisely because the elements were left undefined? Haefele
also cites the list of human and other entities into which the minds of the Great
Race had entered in “The Shadow out of Time,” but this is entirely irrelevant,
since these entities are not part of any theogony or cosmic pantheon.
Haefele goes on to say that the catalogues of Mythos entities in Derleth’s
stories might have been useful to readers of the period (say, the 1940s), when the
details of the myth-cycle were not as familiar as they are now. In the first place,
even if this were true, it doesn’t justify the perversion and distortion of the
Mythos that Derleth instigated in story after story; and secondly, a great majority
of even the stories’ original readers would already have been familiar with
Lovecraft and therefore not needed the laborious and time-wasting summaries
Derleth provided. (Sorry, I’ve lapsed into an overuse of Derlethian italics.)
Haefele spends several chapters of his book defending Derleth’s “posthumous

collaborations” with Lovecraft—another case of defending the indefensible.
Haefele just cannot bring himself to admit that the very act of writing these
works was deceitful and duplicitous. The bottom line is: How do you collaborate
with a dead man? The fact that others had done it before (e.g., attempts to
complete Dickens’s Mystery of Edwin Drood) does not justify Derleth’s
procedure—especially the manner in which he did it, specifically in the act of
putting Lovecraft’s name first, as if he were the instigator of the work and
Derleth merely “completed” it (the designation “Completed by August Derleth”
appears on several of the collaborations when first published).
Let us take the case of the first and longest of the collaborations, The Lurker
at the Threshold. Haefele unwittingly provides ammunition to the opposition by
unearthing a damning statement (published in the fanzine Shangri L’Affaires in
1944) that “Among the mss. left by the late great H. P. Lovecraft was the
complete outline of a novel, together with some fragments of that novel.” What
an incredible whopper! If Derleth really expects anyone to believe that the little
scrap of paper now called “The Round Tower” (scarcely 200 words in length),
along with the bit of prose called “Thaumaturgicall Prodigies in the New-
English Canaan,” amount to a “complete outline of a novel,” then he could
probably have sold that person a nearby bridge. Haefele dutifully declares that
Derleth removed the reference to “complete outline” in later discussions of the
novel, but he stoutly (and falsely) maintains that Derleth was still not trying to
deceive anyone, which of course he was. As late as 1969, in his article “The
Cthulhu Mythos” (the introduction to Tales of the Cthulhu Mythos), Derleth was
still describing The Lurker at the Threshold as Lovecraft’s “unfinished novel,
. . . which I completed and saw published in 1945.” If Haefele really thinks this
is an accurate reflection of the true state of the case, then I don’t know what
would pass as a lie or an equivocation in his eyes. Haefele, incidentally, does not
quote this passage—strange oversight! I thought naively that he was just going
to cite facts and let them speak for themselves . . .
As for the other “posthumous collaborations,” Haefele attempts to make the
case that (a) Derleth was merely trying to sell Arkham House books, and (b) he
was trying to bolster Lovecraft’s reputation. But the first reason does not provide
any justification for writing stories with a dead man’s name attached to them,
and the second reason would only work if the stories themselves were good
stories. But they aren’t. Haefele repeatedly makes a fool of himself by trying to
defend the literary quality of these wretched tales (even as “entertainments”),
when the overwhelming consensus of modern opinion is that they are hackwork
whose permanent inhumation can only be a blessing both to Lovecraft’s and also
to Derleth’s reputation.

Nevertheless, Haefele continues to state, over and over again—as if mere
repetition would serve in place of reasoned argument—that Derleth’s attaching
of a dual byline to these works was “the right thing to do, despite how much of
the actual writing he [Derleth] did” (Haefele’s emphasis). He whines
querulously that Lovecraftians don’t object when film “adaptions” [sic] that
pervert or dumb down Lovecraft’s ideas are presented on a yearly basis. Once
again, the relevance of this remark is a trifle unclear. Is Lovecraft declared to be
a “collaborator” of these film adaptations? Is he, for example, referred to as the
author (or even the co-author) of the screenplay? This is one of many times in
his book that I almost begged Haefele to shut up, to preserve what scraps of
intellectual decency he might have left. But he doesn’t shut up. He goes on and
on and on . . . After chiding me for maintaining (plausibly) that “The Horror in
the Museum” is a parody, Haefele presents a much more absurd argument for
arguing that “The Dark Brotherhood” is a parody—but the fact that a story has
in-jokes (which it does) doesn’t make it a parody. And why does Haefele, in his
otherwise exhaustive treatment, remain stonily silent about “The Ancestor”?
This is the tale, you will recall, that Derleth thought he was writing up from a
plot-germ of Lovecraft’s; but in fact it is a synopsis of the novel The Dark
Chamber (1927) by Leonard Cline, so Derleth has performed a piece of
unwitting plagiarism. I suppose it is a small mercy that Haefele doesn’t attempt
to defend this piece of literary buffoonery.
Only at the very end of his book does Haefele say, a tad unexpectedly and
sheepishly, that “I will go on record stating that a campaign is needed to remove
forever Lovecraft’s name (except perhaps in a footnote) from most of the
Lovecraft-Derleth ‘posthumous collaborations.’” But he confounds this note of
sanity by going on to say that, from his standpoint as a “businessman,” these
stories still sell books and so the joint byline should be kept! But since Arkham
House is itself all but moribund, and since the collected collaborations (The
Watchers out of Time and Others) remains in print (with Lovecraft’s name in
large letters and Derleth’s in very small ones) from Ballantine/Del Rey (a
company that is not hurting for money, so I understand), how is the need to sell
books a viable justification for continued deceit? Haefele knows full well that
critics like Damon Knight and Avram Davidson chose these collaborations as
opportunities to kick Lovecraft’s butt in reviews, and yet he can still maintain
ludicrously that they were meant “to further Lovecraft’s literary reputation by all
means.” With friends like Derleth, Lovecraft doesn’t need any enemies.
There is, indeed, no limit to the number of misinterpretations, misconstruals,
distortions, and outright lies that Haefele commits when addressing my work in
particular. Let us take one example and let it stand for the whole. In complaining

that I chastise Derleth for being an inveterate imitator, he makes the astonishing
charge that I believe Derleth “had nothing of his own to say in any [Haefele’s
emphasis] of his writing.” For someone who has dissected my own writings with
the fervency of a biblical scholar, it is remarkable that he did not notice my
discussion of Derleth’s early mainstream books, Place of Hawks (1935) and
Evening in Spring (1941), both of which I have read and appreciated; as I remark
in my biography of Lovecraft, these works are “written in a poignant, Proustian,
reminiscent vein whose simple elegance allows for evocative character
portrayal. . . . Those who fail to read these two works, along with their many
successors in Derleth’s long and fertile career, will have no conception as to why
Lovecraft, as early as 1930, wrote with such enthusiasm about his younger
colleague and disciple” (I Am Providence 680). Could it be, then, that I am not
quite as prejudiced against Derleth as Haefele portrays me as being—or that
Haefele himself is in riding his own hobby-horse? The suspicion lingers . . .
So eager is Haefele to denigrate my work that he resorts to verbal abuse. If
my work is not “hogwash” or “rubbish,” it is “absurd” and “preposterous.”
Haefele cannot, then, be surprised if I have reacted in kind here. But he goes on
to make wild and false accusations such as that I “censored” Robert M. Price’s
article “The Lovecraft-Derleth Connection.” My dear chap, I reprinted that
essay, without alteration, in Lovecraft Studies. Certainly a strange and novel way
of censoring a text!
Haefele also distorts my views regarding the overall effectiveness of work
by Lovecraft and others. He claims I want to “purge the Lovecraft canon of ‘The
Dunwich Horror,’ ‘The Dreams in the Witch House,’ and ‘The Thing on the
Doorstep’” (I’m not exactly sure I how would do or have done that, since I
myself have reprinted these stories in any number of editions), but my criticism
of these stories rests not upon their failure to conform to Lovecraft’s later
conception of “non-supernatural cosmic art” (indeed, “The Dreams in the Witch
House” is one of the most spectacularly cosmic stories in the entire Lovecraft
oeuvre), but because of what I (and others, like Steven J. Mariconda) perceive to
be failures based on generally recognised aesthetic principles. I see no reason to
engage in blanket praise of everything Lovecraft wrote—even of what Haefele a
bit oddly refers to as the Great Tales. Some critical distance is necessary: even
Lovecraft nods. Not every story he wrote was great, however popular it may be.
Similarly, I have never judged a post-Lovecraftian Mythos story adversely
because it fails to depict cosmicism, which is only one element among many that
could be elaborated upon by other writers—and these other elements are indeed
elaborated upon by any number of writers I myself have published in my Black
Wings series and other such anthologies.

Haefele’s overall methodology, especially in addressing my work, involves
an endless repetition of the fallacy known as the “appeal to authority.”
Whenever he can find anyone at all—ranging from some propeller-beanie writer
of a letter to Weird Tales to such a lofty critic as Fritz Leiber—who seems to
support his points, he quotes them in the charmingly naïve belief that they must
be right; but whenever he finds someone who either agrees with me or disagrees
with some of his own conclusions, he quotes them in the self-evident belief that
they must be wrong. How convenient! He doesn’t pause to wonder whether the
authorities he quotes in support of himself might themselves be mistaken.
Multiple people agreeing on an error doesn’t make it true. For instance, in
objecting to the whole process of “demythologising” Lovecraft’s “gods” so that
they become nothing more than space aliens, he quotes Leiber as saying: “There
is never any question of his [Azathoth] being merely an alien entity from some
distant planet or dimension, like Cthulhu or Yog-Sothoth. He is unquestionably
‘god,’ and also the greatest god.” But I fear that Leiber is simply mistaken.
Azathoth is nothing but pure symbol—a symbol for the inscrutability of a
boundless cosmos. Even in a tale such as “The Dreams in the Witch House,”
where it is said that “He [Walter Gilman] must sign in his own blood the book of
Azathoth,” Azathoth really has no function in the narrative.
But let me come to an end.
Where does August Derleth’s legacy stand? His incompetent and error-
riddled editions of Lovecraft’s work have been replaced by accurate editions.
His possibly illegitimate grasp of the Lovecraft copyrights has been wrested
away from him. His suppression of writers like C. Hall Thompson (who wrote
better Lovecraftian fiction than he did) has long ago come to an end. His various
articles and books about Lovecraft and the Mythos have faded into oblivion, and
even I don’t care much to dispute with them. His Mythos fiction does not appear
to have a wide readership anymore, so far as one can judge by its presence in
bookstores or its discussion in online venues. So where does that leave John D.
Haefele? He is a lone voice crying to “welcome Derleth back in the fold.” Even
the members of the August Derleth Society don’t seem to care much about
Derleth’s weird fiction, but are rightly focused on his work as regional writer;
not one of Derleth’s original collections (all published by Arkham House) is in
print. Haefele concludes his book with the plangent remark, “Comment,
particularly bad, keeps the pot boiling. When to worry is when people stop
commenting.” As far as Derleth is concerned, people—excluding Haefele—
stopped commenting long ago. August Derleth is now an irrelevance in the study
of H. P. Lovecraft.
I am sorry to report that John D. Haefele does not have the training or the

background to be a literary critic or scholar. He is a faux critic, aping the style
and mannerisms of professionals but not getting it quite right. (In that sense, he
bears to real critics exactly the relation that Derleth bears to Lovecraft—a third-
rate imitator.) He has not spent his life in academic or scholarly pursuits, or even
in the world of publishing, but in the realm of business; and he is, to be blunt
about it, a Johnny-come-lately to scholarly research and writing. This becomes
painfully evident in the clumsy and tortured prose in which his entire treatise is
written, which at times makes it difficult to understand what his precise point is
supposed to be; or in silly gaffes, as in his reference to Sir Arthur Conan Doyle
as “Sir Doyle”; or in his confusing manner of citation, whereby it is sometimes
impossible to tell what primary or secondary source he is citing.
In short, Haefele has written what amounts to a mountainous assemblage of
special pleading. He is so intent on using every means of defending Derleth,
legitimate or illegitimate, that his book comes across as a partisan screed—much
more partisan, as I have stated earlier, than the critics he opposes—in the manner
of a Republican political operative launching a polemic against Barack Obama
and liberal secularism in general. He shows no compunction in launching snide,
captious, pedantic, mean-spirited, and—in the most fundamental sense—
intellectually dishonest attacks on myself, David E. Schultz, Steven J.
Mariconda, Stefan Dziemianowicz, Donald R. Burleson, and even Robert M.
Price (who has shown himself to be something of a Derlethian), all in the cause
of vaunting his fellow-Wisconsinite. This makes his fleeting and token words of
praise (“This author admires and respects the work of S. T. Joshi and David E.
Schultz . . . especially in the field of Lovecraft Studies”) read like a sick joke.
But I fear Haefele has backed the wrong horse. There is no escaping the
verdict of history: H. P. Lovecraft was a great weird fiction writer, August
Derleth a very bad one. And that is all that need be said.
There might be some minimal interest in conducting a psychological
analysis of Haefele’s Derleth-worship. Could it simply be that he is passionately
intent on defending the writer who claimed (self-importantly) to be the leading
literary figure in his state? This seems insufficient to account for Haefele’s
agitated resentment of his antagonists. Perhaps it is that Haefele enjoyed the
Derleth Mythos of Derleth, Lumley, and others as a kid and that now, as
(aesthetically speaking) an arrested adolescent, he takes mighty umbrage at the
reduction of his paragons to the level of hacks and tyros? I think there is
something to this conjecture, if the pitiable way in which Haefele defends the
purported merits of Derleth’s Mythos fiction is any guide. Only the critically
naïve—or inept—could find virtues in this mass of sub-literary rubbish. (The
genial W. H. Pugmire, in his preface, now also vaunts Derleth’s Mythos tales,

but no one takes him seriously as a critic.) As it is, one can only conclude with a
single sentence from Lovecraft that would have sufficed as a review of this
book: “We laughed, and hoped he’d soon be sane again” (Fungi from Yuggoth
11.4).

The Lovecraft Cult
At the H. P. Lovecraft Centennial Conference in Providence, R.I., in August
1990, I was one of several individuals assigned to lead a walking tour of
Lovecraft’s Providence. Because I had only an hour to lead the tour, and because
of the large number of sites I wished to cover—and, perhaps more importantly,
because I was then a militant New York City pedestrian—I led the tour at a
fairly brisk clip, flinging my arms to right and left, saying, “This is where
Lovecraft sat to have his photo taken” or “This is where Henry Anthony Wilcox
had his studio.” Later I read a newspaper reporter’s account stating that my tour
was something of a “sprint.”
This is my general feeling in reading Kenneth Hite’s Tour de Lovecraft: The
Tales (Atomic Overmind Press, 2008). In 102 pages of text, Hite purports to
discuss 51 of Lovecraft’s original tales (only those, curiously enough, in my
three Penguin editions, ignoring some interesting specimens—such as three of
Lovecraft’s four prose-poems—found elsewhere). This averages to 2 pages per
story; sometimes a story is covered in one page or less; on only one occasion
(“The Dunwich Horror”) do we get an analysis that goes on for six pages. (More
on that later.) All this is strange for more than one reason. Given that this casual,
flippant, slang-ridden treatise began its life on the Internet, where space is not
exactly at a premium, there seems no rationale for this kind of parsimony, aside
from the disturbing possibility that Hite really doesn’t have much of interest or
substance to say about Lovecraft. Several of his analyses of individual tales are
merely fragmentary notes or jottings, as if he read the story in question and just
wrote down the first thing that entered his head.
Hite or his publishers managed to get Tim Powers (not noted as an authority
on Lovecraft or Lovecraft criticism) to state that this book “is indispensable . . .
This is the companion to Lovecraft’s fiction.” But any informed reader will
conclude that there are several much better “guides” out there—off the top of my
head I can mention Donald R. Burleson’s H. P. Lovecraft: A Critical Study
(Greenwood Press, 1983), Peter Cannon’s H. P. Lovecraft (Twayne, 1989), and
(if I do say so as shouldn’t) my own A Subtler Magick: The Writings and
Philosophy of H. P. Lovecraft (Borgo Press, 1996). Only the last is cited in
Hite’s brief bibliography.
The main problem with Hite’s work is not that it has factual errors, although
there are plenty of these. Many of them may be minor, but cumulatively they do
not inspire confidence in Hite’s scholarship. He repeatedly uses the word

“anthology” (a volume of works by different authors) when he means
“collection” (a volume of works by a single author). He mischaracterises George
T. Wetzel’s “The Cthulhu Mythos: A Study” as “almost the only serious attempt
at a structuralist analysis of Lovecraft’s fictional oeuvre,” when in fact Wetzel’s
essay is a fairly elementary (if at times insightful) thematic study. I knew
Wetzel, and that pioneering but critically naive fellow wouldn’t know a
structuralist analysis if it hit him over the head. There are several actual
structuralist essays out there (by James Anderson and Carl Buchanan, among
others), but I for one don’t find them notably illuminating. Hite also attributes
the term “anti-mythology” (to refer to Lovecraft’s subversion of conventional
myth in the Cthulhu Mythos) to Robert M. Price, when in fact David E. Schultz
coined the term. He refers to my compilation of Lovecraft’s letters, Lord of a
Visible World (Ohio University Press, 2000), as A Visible Life. The biographical
note on Hite states that he owns 7000 books, but evidently he doesn’t keep this
one within reach of his eye or hand.
Hite also seriously errs in summing up my own views of Lovecraft. “For
Joshi, Lovecraft is most valuable as a philosopher, an exponent of the unified
life, a tireless evangelist for the gospel of atheist cosmicism, or what he [who? I
or Lovecraft?] calls ‘mechanistic materialism.’” I have never made any such
argument. In fact, I do not find Lovecraft’s philosophical thought of any intrinsic
value or interest, since it is chiefly borrowed from the thought of such
predecessors as Ernst Haeckel, Thomas Henry Huxley, Friedrich Nietzsche, and
(later) Bertrand Russell. What I do say—and have, I believe, established at
painful length in H. P. Lovecraft: The Decline of the West (1990) [also not cited
in Hite’s bibliography]—is that Lovecraft’s philosophy is vital for the
understanding of his fiction. This is a point on which Hite himself appears to
agree, if his own repeated citations of Lovecraft’s philosophical views are any
guide.
One of Hite’s most egregious errors is in his citation of a celebrated
quotation by Lovecraft on his own work: “Even when I break away, it is
generally only through imitating something else! There are my ‘Poe’ pieces &
my ‘Dunsany’ pieces—but alas—where are my ‘Lovecraft’ pieces?” I long ago
established that the final phrase should read “where are any ‘Lovecraft’ pieces?”
Hite could have known that if he had cracked open A Visible Life—er, Lord of a
Visible World—where the quotation is printed correctly. But Hite compounds
the error by claiming that “Lovecraft is actually referring to his poetry.” Did
Lovecraft imitate Poe’s poetry? Not to any significant degree, except parodically
(see “Nathicana”); and imitating Dunsany’s poetry would have been a neat trick
for Lovecraft, given that Dunsany’s first volume of verse—Fifty Poems (1929)

—only came out in the very year that Lovecraft made his remark. No, Lovecraft
was referring to the stories of his first decade of writing, which are indeed
heavily influenced by Poe and Dunsany. When Lovecraft (as quoted by Hite)
goes on to say, “Only in some of my more realistic fictional prose do I shew any
signs of developing, at this late date, a style of my own,” he is manifestly
referring to the array of tales beginning with “The Call of Cthulhu” (1926).
But, as I say, all this is by the way. The real problem with Hite, aside from a
brevity that renders most of his analysis all but useless, is his evident eagerness
to tell us which of Lovecraft’s stories he likes and which he doesn’t. Given that
Hite is not exactly a shining luminary of literary criticism, the inevitable
question becomes: Who cares? What possible difference can it make whether
Hite likes “The Doom That Came to Sarnath” (I personally don’t) and doesn’t
like “Hypnos”? I’m not even sure I’d care what Lovecraft stories Harold Bloom
liked or disliked (in fact, he once told me that “The Rats in the Walls” kept him
up at night). With charming ingenuousness, Hite actually declares, “I find that
the better the story, the less I feel the need to say much else [sic] about it”—a
plain admission that his lofty critical methodology amounts to this: “I like this
story, so let’s move on.”
Hite’s most controversial judgment is his disfavour for “The Outsider,”
which he thinks is highly overrated. But in the few pages he allots to the story he
has difficulty justifying his dislike with anything approaching persuasiveness or
even coherence. Hite writes, in reference to the overheated language of the story:
“Where Poe uses the warm fog of such language to create a psychological
sensation linking the reader and narrator while exploring the narrator’s inner life,
Lovecraft’s wordage is just larded on to extend the distance to the ending”—
something that strikes me as just plain false. And if Hite really likes “The
Terrible Old Man” better than “The Outsider,” he is just begging for his critical
judgment to be called into question.
Hite spends most of his six pages on “The Dunwich Horror” belabouring me
for my own low opinion of the story. Some of his remarks are a bit off the mark.
In taking me to task for labelling the “hero,” Henry Armitage, a pompous ass,
Hite notes: “one would imagine that S. T. Joshi has met even more tenured
academics than I have.” What exactly is the logic here? Because there are other
pompous asses in the world, therefore Armitage is not a pompous ass? But Hite
never comes fully to terms with what I regard as the central flaw of the story: its
naive good-vs.-evil scenario—a scenario in defiance of Lovecraft’s express
purpose in weird fiction writing (“Now all my tales are based on the
fundamental premise that common human laws and interests and emotions have
no validity or significance in the vast cosmos-at-large”). The best Hite can do is

to claim that, because the story is a pastiche of Machen, Lovecraft is also
imitating “Machen’s concepts of good and evil”! That’s taking pastiche a bit far,
don’t you think?
The brutal fact is that Tour de Lovecraft was written about thirty years too
late. The most charitable thing that can be said of it is that it is a fairly interesting
example of “fan” criticism (and sometimes not even that: to say that the
supernatural entity in “The Hound” is a “really cool monster” does not rank high
among critical apothegms). Had it been published, say, around 1973, it might
have engendered some fruitful discussion among other fans of the period. But
given the enormous quantity of sound, substantial, and sophisticated criticism
that has been published in the last three decades—by Donald R. Burleson, Peter
Cannon, David E. Schultz, Robert M. Price, Steven J. Mariconda, Robert H.
Waugh, and any number of others—a book like Hite’s is, in the most literal and
painful sense of the term, supernumerary. It has no reason for existence. If this
kind of off-the-cuff criticism, filled with lame attempts at humour and irrelevant
and self-indulgent digressions (such as an entire paragraph about why Hite
doesn’t like the Harry Dresden novels of Jim Butcher, whoever he may be), is
the best the Internet can do, then I’m happy to stick with the stolid, pompous
academicians whom Hite would like to wish away. But I have a sneaking
suspicion that it is their work that will survive and Hite’s that will descend into
the maws of oblivion.
I haven’t left myself a great deal of space to talk about Robert M. Price’s
Blasphemies & Revelations (Mythos Books, 2008); but in spite of the fact that
the book is five times the size of Hite’s, there doesn’t seem very much to say
about it. Let me begin by saying that Bob Price is a splendid fellow—immensely
learned (with two Ph.D.s in New Testament studies), a dynamic and diligent
editor (not only of the long-running Crypt of Cthulhu [1981–2003], which
generated some superlative criticism of Lovecraft during the most fertile period
of Lovecraft studies, but also of many Cthulhu Mythos anthologies for
Chaosium), a chap endowed with pungent wit and rollicking good-humour, and
overall a wonderful boon companion. But, alas! fiction is not his forte; and this
volume of what appears to be his collected short fiction—at least his fiction in
the Lovecraftian vein—leaves one regretting that he has not spent still more of
his seemingly inexhaustible energies in the writing of those articles that, because
of his unique erudition in religious studies, have penetrated certain aspects of
Lovecraft’s life, work, and thought more searchingly than any other scholar’s,
before or since.
Price is up-front about the fact that he wishes to write old-time pastiche—
pastiche, in other words, that not merely imitates the themes and motifs of the

model chosen but also the model’s style and manner. But what this amounts to,
in a distressing number of instances, is that the pastiche ends up just retelling the
story on which it is based. Accordingly, we have any number of stories that retell
“The Dunwich Horror” or “The Rats in the Walls” or other works by Lovecraft;
and, since Price takes a generously catholic view of Mythos writing, welcoming
any and all such writing by any and all writers, whether intended as frank
imitation or homage or as a somewhat loftier attempt at writing an aesthetically
viable story in its own right, Price has also chosen to imitate secondary
Lovecraftian writers such as August Derleth, Lin Carter, James Wade, Colin
Wilson, and several others. The result, however, is curiously wooden and
academic. The writing is always competent, at times lively; but the overall effect
is either predictable or anticlimactic. Price seems to have a certain difficulty with
dénouements, and his stories frequently leave the reader with a sense of
deflation: the tale almost leads up to a spectacular climax—but then somehow
fails to deliver.
The curious thing is that, in spite of Price’s own stated intentions as a
pastichist sticking as closely as possible to his original source—and his disdain
for those writers who have attempted to expand upon Lovecraft’s ideas “by
using various ‘hipper’ and ‘cutting-age’ genre conventions” (Price names no
names, but it is possible that he is referring to such writers as Thomas Ligotti,
the later Ramsey Campbell, and Caitlín R. Kiernan)—occasional stories by Price
show exactly this kind of aesthetic independence. Take a story like “The Horror
in the Genizah” (a genizah is, in the Islamic world, a “treasury”—a place where
old, battered copies of the Koran are kept, since it is blasphemy to destroy them).
Written in 1997, the story strikingly anticipates Islamic terrorism at the same
time that it suggests a fusion of the Necronomicon (or Al Azif in the original
Arabic) with the Koran. The resulting effect may be a bit too intellectual, but the
story has an originality and vibrancy that many of Price’s others lack. Easily the
best story in the book—and the longest—is “Acute Spiritual Fear” (2003), in
which a student at the Miskatonic University Divinity School finds his faith
challenged both by Wilbur Whateley’s diary and by the disturbing suggestion
that Whateley might have represented the secret second coming of Christ, an
event hinted at in certain cryptic passages in the Bible. Price’s knowledge of the
academic milieu, as well as his keen awareness of the manner in which religious
faith can be shaken (he himself, as I understand it, has run the gamut of belief
from fundamentalism to atheism), make this story ring true as few others in the
volume do. I would also draw attention to the relatively early story “The
Deprogrammer” (1989), in which a man whose profession it is to “deprogram”
young people who have been brainwashed into a religious cult finds himself

falling under the sway of the Starry Wisdom sect (cited in “The Haunter of the
Dark”). This story is strikingly original in many of the ways that Price seems to
disfavour; but it gains in substance and vitality thereby.
Price himself makes no elevated claims for his fiction, and I daresay that
those who have enjoyed Lovecraft, Clark Ashton Smith, Robert E. Howard, and
the neo-Lovecraftian writers will find a wealth of entertainment in these
ingenuous and ably written pastiches. But, in my humble opinion, a volume of
this size featuring Price’s many pioneering articles on Lovecraft would have
served an infinitely higher purpose.

The World of Lovecraft Fandom
I wish I had read, and reviewed, Jack Koblas’s The Lovecraft Circle and Others
as I Remember Them (Battered Silicon Dispatch Box, 2012) before its author
died on March 8, 2013. I can at least say that I met him—one of the key figures
in the Lovecraft fan movement of the 1970s and 1980s—only a few months
before his death, when I was guest of honour at Arcana 42, the successor to the
private MinnCons dating back to the early 1970s. This book—arranged rather
oddly in alphabetical order by the author or artist discussed, as if it were some
kind of reference work—is an utterly charming account of the many distinctive
personalities, from Robert Bloch to Jack Williamson, whom Koblas knew in the
course of his long career. Many of them had direct, or at least tangential,
associations with Lovecraft, and others were central players in the worlds of
weird pulp fiction (many of them contributed to Weird Tales) or weird art from
as early as the 1920s to the present day.
One of the more surprising details that emerge out of this book is the number
of individuals who were based in, or had become transplanted to, the Twin Cities
region of Minneapolis–St. Paul. It was, of course, largely this fortuitous
collocation of both fans and professional writers that led to the formation of the
MinnCon gatherings, which began in a loose and casual manner and later
became a more formalised convention where notable figures were brought in as
special guests. The core of the group—which paralleled the contemporaneous
MadCon gatherings in Madison, Wisconsin—were Koblas, Carl Jacobi, and
Donald Wandrei (whom Koblas declares was “my mentor and perhaps closest
friend”), but included many others, either as one-time guests or as regulars. The
agent Kirby McCauley was in frequent attendance, as were Richard L. Tierney,
the artist Joe West (who curiously has no chapter dedicated to him), E.
Hoffmann Price, and many others.
A number of interesting tidbits emerge from this book. I don’t recall hearing
before that Robert Bloch first heard of Lovecraft’s death while listening to
Stravinsky’s Firebird Suite. “That music has always signified death and funerals
ever since,” Bloch testifies in an interview. Koblas had a long and involved
association with Mary Elizabeth Counselman, many of whose letters he prints
here. Those letters are written with a liveliness and pungency that frequently
equals Lovecraft’s own; and what is more surprising are the numerous
references to Lovecraft and his creations found in those letters, written by one
who to my knowledge never wrote a truly “Lovecraftian” story in her decades-

long career. Still more surprising, Counselman notes that in “my Callow Teens,
in Tallahassee,” she had written a fan letter to Lovecraft after reading “The Rats
in the Walls” in Weird Tales; but she had never received a response. This seems
very odd—Lovecraft would surely have written back if he had received the
letter, especially as it was from a young woman. This probably was in the late
1920s (Counselman was born in 1911).
Another fascinating chapter deals with Raymond B. Nixon, an old amateur
journalist whom Koblas one day found in his local telephone book. Nixon was
the editor of the Dixie Booster, the amateur journal that in 1916 published
Lovecraft’s “Temperance Song.” He of course never met Lovecraft, but his
impressions of Lovecraft and the amateur movement of the day are fascinating.
Nixon went on to become a longtime editor of the Emory University alumni
magazine and a professor of journalism at the University of Minnesota.
Koblas established a close relationship with E. Hoffmann Price, whose
letters (reprinted here in extenso) are also vivid and at times acerbic. Price
roundly abuses the fans of his day for misplaced nostalgia for old-time writers of
the 1920s and 1930s while ignoring the good work being done by their
contemporaries. And he has a touching tribute to August Derleth, written about a
year after Derleth’s death: While I do not pretend to be sitting around, either in
mourning or despair, I have not yet recovered my emotional equilibrium, and I
think I shall for a long time remain keenly aware of the gap created by his death.
August had for so long been part of my scene—through our correspondence,
since 1932; through our sharing of the impact of HPL’s death; through other
deaths, and, through our working together in producing my first and thus far,
only hard cover book—and, finally, our two meetings in Sauk City clinched the
bond, although a prior meeting in Redwood City had done much to strengthen it.
I realized his importance as a friend, as a long time associate, as a fellow pioneer
of W.T.[’s] early days—yet until his death, I did not suspect how important
August had become in a purely personal way, through our long sustained
exchange of thoughts on life and living, things and people, friends and their
opposites we shared!
More recent members of the extended Lovecraft circle—many of whom are
still alive—also come in for discussion. The larger-than-life Wilum Hopfrog
Pugmire made an impression on a number of the people with whom Koblas
associated, and from an early age. Mary Elizabeth Counselman charmingly
refers to him at one point as “Wilum the Wampyr, from Seattle.” Pugmire
naughtily told J. Vernon Shea that he had written the screenplay to the dreadful
horror film Dracula vs. Frankenstein (1971). The screenplay is credited to one
William Pugsley, and Wilum (who at times went by the nickname “Count

Pugsly”) maintained that this was his own pseudonym. Shea fell for the playful
deception in toto, repeating it soberly (although with due incredulity) in a 1976
letter to Koblas. Given that Pugmire would have been only twenty years old at
the time of the film’s release, and that he had (and still has) not the slightest
experience as a screenwriter, Shea should have been a bit more skeptical.
There are discussions of other writers not associated with the Lovecraft
Circle, but these prove to be entertaining and informative as well. John
Arfstrom, for example, was a Twin Cities–based artist who did some
illustrations for Weird Tales but mostly for other science fiction or adventure
pulps; he also did some dust jackets for early Fedogan & Bremer titles. Then
there is Tommy Thompson, a prolific writer of westerns who was elected a life
member of the Cowboy Hall of Fame. Who knew there was such a thing? But
even he proves to be of interest.
This book is not in any sense a formal treatise but more a mine of
information that others might quarry for treatises of their own. Koblas prints
many letters by his associates (and does so, insofar as I can tell, without
permission), including more than 80 pages of letters by Counselman and dozens
of letters by Price, Shea, Wandrei, Jacobi, and others; he even prints the entire
text of Edmond Hamilton’s early story “The Monster-God of Mamurth.” The
book could inevitably have used a professional copyedit, and Koblas’s chapter
on Wandrei would have benefited from his consultation of recent publications by
and about Wandrei, including Mysteries of Time and Spirit and Wandrei’s
Collected Poems (revised as Sanctity & Sin). But these are cosmetic matters.
Overall, this book is a delightful and, at times, poignant look at some of the
personalities over the past several decades, stretching back almost a century, that
have made the worlds of pulpdom, fandom, and Lovecraftdom so appealing. To
those of us of a certain age who lived through at least some of that period, this
book will evoke many echoes of friendships, feuds, and distinctive characters
now gone forever—gone, that is, except in our memories and in the abundant
writings they left behind.

The Return of Cosmic Horror
Over the past two or three decades, there has been a remarkable upswell in
interest in H. P. Lovecraft (culminating in the appearance of a volume of his
Tales from the Library of America in 2005) and in pastiches of, or elaborations
upon, his writings. Scarcely a year now passes without several such volumes
appearing from the press. It is heartening, however, that many of the writers
working in the Lovecraftian vein—they are, necessarily, for the most part young
and aspiring, although they include such veterans as Caitlín R. Kiernan, Laird
Barron, and Brian Stableford—have taken note of the immense advances made
during the same period in Lovecraft scholarship, advances that have entirely
revolutionised our understanding of the Providence writer and the basic thrust of
his fiction. The tendentious interpretations of the Cthulhu Mythos made by
August Derleth—that Lovecraft’s mythos was basically similar to the Christian
mythos (an odd result for an avowed atheist); that his “gods” were analogous to
elementals; that there was a countervailing set of entities called “Elder Gods”
who battled for the sake of man against the “evil” Old Ones (Cthulhu, Yog-
Sothoth, and the like)—have all been swept away, and all that remains is the
very name of the mythos. For all the replacements that have been made over the
years, we are necesarily stuck with Cthulhu Mythos, and publishers now find
that the C-word in a title is a sure-fire seller.
The very appearance of Dead But Dreaming 2, edited by Kevin Ross
(Miskatonic River Press, 2011), is welcome. Miskatonic River Press was
founded in 2008 by Keith Herber, but his unexpected and much-lamented death
in early 2009 seemed to be the kiss of death for his fledgling press. However,
Tom Lynch and others have revived it and now plan an array of publications
highly tempting to the Lovecraftian devotee. Kevin Ross edited the first Dead
But Dreaming anthology all the way back in 2002, but the publisher, DarkTales,
released only 75 copies before having to shut down. Miskatonic River Press has
not only re-released that volume but now issued a follow-up, and the number of
rich, substantial items in it constitute a significant contemporary addition to the
Cthulhu Mythos.
There are (or, perhaps more accurately, were) two types of Mythos writing:
the bad old school, led by Derleth himself and a number of his followers (of
whom Brian Lumley can be singled out for dispraise), that unwittingly imitated
Derleth rather than Lovecraft, and that often found the pinnacle of its success in
simply rewriting Lovecraft’s own tales in a half-baked fashion; and a new, more

dynamic school that used the essence of Lovecraft’s vision—the cosmic
indifferentism that it at the heart of his work; his subtle evocation of an imagined
New England topography, duplicated by writers ranging from Ramsey Campbell
to Walter C. DeBill, Jr., in other parts of the country and the world; and a
uniquely intellectualised brand of horror that did far more than merely put
professors, librarians, and other such characters on stage, but that saw the acme
of horror in the simple realisation of man’s insignificance, all apart from any
baleful entities that might be encountered in a tale. It is a welcome relief that the
great majority of the tales in Dead But Dreaming 2 follow this latter pattern,
augmenting it with literary techniques derived from a wide array of other forms
of writing.
One of the most interesting things about this anthology, indeed, is the way in
which the Lovecraftian idiom can be made to inform literary modes that seem
very remote from the kind of fiction Lovecraft himself wrote. The opening—and
perhaps the best—story in the book, Walter Jarvis’s “Taggers,” brilliantly and
harrowingly invokes Lovecraftian cosmicism by means of a hard-boiled crime or
police procedural scenario, set amid the gangs of Los Angeles and finding a
hideous significance in the graffiti they write in the slums of the city. The almost
unthinkably cosmic conclusion of this tale offered me a genuine shudder that
I’ve not felt since I first read Thomas Ligotti.
Now consider Darrell Schweitzer’s “Innsmouth Idyll.” What seems on the
surface merely a rewriting of “The Shadow over Innsmouth” proves to be a
sensitive portrayal of young love, not without its moments of terror. Schweitzer
has mastered this fusion of cosmicism and emotional intensity, as another of his
tales in the book, “Class Reunion,” attests. Lovecraft was notoriously bad at
portraying vivid characters aside from the intellectuals who narrate most of his
tales (who are indeed portrayed far more subtly and sensitively than he generally
gets credit for); but Schweitzer and others show that cosmicism can actually be
enhanced by the display of living, breathing human beings.
Several authors take the Lovecraftian sense of topographical richness to
other realms. Scott David Aniolowski’s “First Nation” is an atmospheric study
of a legion of monsters in the backwoods of Ontario. T. E. Grau’s
“Transmission” effectively utilises the remoteness of the parched Southwest to
evoke horror—a horror that comes from the chilling and potentially cataclysmic
messages heard on a radio transmission.
David Annandale’s “Lure” is a powerful rumination on the potentially
sinister quality of books in a library. In this digital age, the mere appearance of
row on row of ponderous tomes, filled with the massed learning of the ages, can
be strangely unnerving: “The books were no longer the material embodiments of

knowledge. Now they were the bricks and mortar of secrets, the dark walls of a
labyrinth that led not to enlightenment, but only to more shadow.” This tale is
one of the most powerful recent expositions of the “forbidden book” theme that
Lovecraft largely introduced to weird fiction.
Several authors attempt to make use of the Lovecraftian “gods,” although the
results are not always happy. It was here that the failings of the bad old school of
Mythos writing were most readily evident, as some writers of the past were
content merely to create their own outlandish gods (say, Shudde-M’ell)
consisting usually of unpronounceable names and impossible biology. The
authors in this book do not produce anything quite as crude as this, but they do
not always manage to avoid other pitfalls. The editor’s story, “Dark Heart,”
appears to be about a band of little men in the woods west of Arkham, but many
questions are left unanswered: Who, exactly, are these creatures? How did they
get there? The story has an unsatisfactory and unfinished quality to it. John
Goodrich’s “N Is for Neville” creates genuine terror at the figure of
Nyarlathotep, clearly one of Lovecraft’s most complex and fascinating creations,
but the story’s ending is a trifle weak. Rick Hautala’s “The Call” is about a
“black, amorphos shape” that emerges out of a lake in rural Maine, but the mere
existence of this imprecisely described entity does not make the tale sufficiently
Lovecraftian to justify its inclusion in this book. Will Murray’s apocalyptic “The
Hour of Our Triumph” begins with a ridiculous premise—the sun has been
extinguished by a “star-plague,” but human beings seem to carry on with little
inconvenience, when in fact they would all be frozen stiff—but if one can
swallow this ludicrous blunder, a powerfully cosmic narrative develops.
Then there is Joseph S. Pulver, Sr.’s “No Healing Prayers.” It would appear
that this story deals in some fashion with Shub-Niggurath, usually taken as a
kind of fertility goddess; but beyond that, I am unable to make head or tail of it.
Pulver has developed a highly distinctive style—clipped, evocative, prose-
poetic, frequently violent in imagery—that can be frequently effective, but he
seems to be overusing the idiom and is danger of becoming a Johnny One-Note.
Much the same can be said of Cody Goodfellow’s “Uncle Sid’s Collection.”
Goodfellow is a writer of immense talent—gifted with a prose style of lyrical
power, a prodigious technical knowledge of various subjects that he has
effectively utilised in his tales, and an unflinching vision that can display the
extremes of physical and supernatural horror—but he too is in danger of
becoming too fond of his own voice and becoming self-indulgent and precious.
Let us hope he has the good sense to harness his talents and produce narratives
that readers can actually understand.
The longest tale in this book is Adrian Tchaikovsky’s “The Dissipation

Club,” and it deserves the 30 pages it occupies. A rich tapestry of a tale that
takes us to London, where a self-described ghost-hunter is seeking to track down
the whereabouts of a wealthy man’s missing son, this novelette introduces us to
a highly exclusive club that has apparently been in existence for millennia, its
chief function being to placate Dispater (the Roman god of the underworld) with
human sacrifices. The author does not explicitly state that this god is merely a
kind of standin for a Lovecraftian entity of far more nebulous character, but the
suggestion is there, as is the plain hint that other such entities lurk elsewhere in
the forgotten corners of the earth.
There are other good stories here—W. H. Pugmire’s “Your Ivory Hollow,” a
rumination on the occult powers residing in the skull of the Marquis de Sade;
Michael Tice’s “The Spell of the Eastern Sea,” a tale set in Kingsport and
written with exquisitely modulated prose; Donald R. Burleson’s “Christmas
Carrion,” an amusing deconstruction of “The Terrible Old Man”—but there are
also a few bad apples also. The most disappointing, because it reveals an unusual
lapse of judgment on the editor’s part, is Daniel W. Powell’s “The Timucuan
Portal,” a weak pastiche reminiscent of bad old Mythos writing; but several
others—Don Webb’s rambling and confused “Plush Cthulhu”; Erik T. Johnson’s
insufficiently developed “The Depopulation Syndrome”; Brian M. Sammons’s
“Father’s Day,” a lifeless elaboration of “The Shadow over Innsmouth”; Pete
Rawlik’s “Here Be Monsters,” a purported inversion of “The Call of Cthulhu”
but marred by stiff and clumsy narration—are tales better left unpublished. The
editor’s slangy introduction also cries out for rewriting.
Overall, however, Dead But Dreaming 2 contains enough meritorious—
indeed, outstanding—material to qualify as one of the premier Cthulhu Mythos
anthologies of recent years. It may not contain many “name” authors, but the
volume is a testament to the wealth of good writing that H. P. Lovecraft’s life
and work can inspire. If Miskatonic River Press can retain this relatively high
standard of quality in the several other books it has announced for publication, it
will be well on its way to filling a valuable niche in the crowded realm of the
small press.

Old and New Cthulhu
It is fair to say that the Cthulhu Mythos has become, in recent years, virtually its
own subgenre, with dozens of anthologies, story collections, and full-length
novels that adapt, update, or even subvert the imagery, themes, and conceptions
that H. P. Lovecraft so humbly initiated with “The Call of Cthulhu” (1926).
These two substantial volumes are only the latest contributions to an
overcrowded field.
There is, however, a clear distinction to be made between early and late
Mythos writing—and the borderline is fairly obviously to be drawn at the death
in 1971 of the Mythos’s most enthusiastic proponent, August Derleth, and the
subsequent decade of Lovecraft scholarship, where a revolution occurred in our
understanding of what Lovecraft’s work was actually about. It was then
discovered that Derleth’s own understanding of the Mythos was very wide of the
mark, chiefly in that he failed to grasp the bleak, atheistic cosmicism of
Lovecraft’s vision. For much of the period from Lovecraft’s death in 1937 to
Derleth’s own demise, it seemed sufficient to contribute to the Cthulhu Mythos
by coming up with an outlandish new “god,” a preposterous new book of
forbidden lore, a new locale analogous to Lovecraft’s imaginary New England
topography, and so forth; half-baked attempts to imitate Lovecraft’s dense prose
style (something Derleth offhandedly claimed was “easy”) were also popular.
Once the true cosmic grandeur of Lovecraft’s conceptions was understood,
however, these superficial imitations gradually fell by the wayside, paving the
way for far more penetrating, searching, and aesthetically rewarding pastiches.
In The Book of Cthulhu (Night Shade, 2011), Ross E. Lockhart, managing
editor of Night Shade Books, has unwittingly provided a good view of this
“before” and “after” phenomenon by reprinting Brian Lumley’s “The Fairground
Horror” and Ramsey Campbell’s “The Tugging,” both originally published in
The Disciples of Cthulhu (1976). Whereas Lumley’s tale is a ludicrous and
verbose narrative full of cheap ripoffs from Lovecraft’s stories, utterly
unconvincing scholarly prose, and similar derelictions, Campbell’s tale seeks to
fuse Lovecraftian cosmic horror with Campbell’s own emphasis on personal,
domestic trauma; the result may not be wholly satisfactory, but the story is
fundamentally serious whereas Lumley’s is merely a piece of buffoonery.
Both of these anthologies are largely reprint, but Lockhart’s scope is a bit
wider. That isn’t necessarily a virtue, for his judgment is not always sound. His
very brief introduction does not provide much of a clue as to his criteria for

choosing stories, aside from merely those he happens to like. He has done well
in selecting T. E. D. Klein’s “Black Man with a Horn” and David Drake’s “Than
Curse the Darkness” from Ramsey Campbell’s New Tales of the Cthulhu Mythos
(1980), which could be said to have decidedly initiated the post-Derlethian mode
of Mythos writing. Michael Shea’s “Fat Face” (1987), fusing Lovecraftian
elements with the grimness of crime and prostitution, is another success, as is
Thomas Ligotti’s “Nethescurial” (1991), an extraordinarily subtle riff on “The
Call of Cthulhu.” Among more recent items, Ann K. Schwader’s “Lost Stars”
(2003) is a superb melding of Egyptian myth, modern feminism, and
Lovecraftian horror. Charles Stross’s “A Colder War” (2000), also in Guran’s
anthology, is a stylish adaptation of At the Mountains of Madness in the context
of international espionage.
Other contributions are less successful. One of the overriding problems with
many of the selections in Lockhart’s book is the central issue of whether the
stories really are Lovecraftian in any meaningful sense. As mentioned, it is no
longer adequate merely to devise some new god, book, or place; and attempts to
imitate Lovecraft’s prose have mercifully subsided. But all this puts increased
pressure on authors to demonstrate exactly how a given tale reflects some facet
of the Lovecraftian vision or worldview. In a number of cases, the tales seem to
fall short—although they may be perfectly good stories in their own right. My
admiration for Caitlín R. Kiernan is second to none, but I do not get a sense that
her story “Andromeda among the Stones” (2002) is Lovecraftian. Similarly,
Bruce Sterling’s “The Unthinkable” (1991), while glancingly mentioning night-
gaunts and an “Azathoth Bomb,” does not seem to echo any central element in
Lovecraft’s work.
This is a litany that one can make over and over again, even in tales that
were actually first published in Lovecraftian anthologies. Silvia Moreno-
Garcia’s “Flash Frame” (from some volume called Cthulhurotica, 2010) is,
frankly, a very bad story, and not remotely Lovecraftian. Molly Tanzer’s “The
Infernal History of the Ivybridge Twins” (Historical Lovecraft, 2011) is a
pretentious attempt to imitate nineteenth-century prose and is also not
Lovecraftian in any sense that I can perceive. Cherie Priest’s “Bad Sushi” (2006)
is an effective story of tentacles—but is that sufficient to make it Lovecraftian?
I’m not sure. Joe R. Lansdale’s “The Crawling Sky” (2009) is about a monster
released by an incantation from an occult book—but although this sounds
Lovecraftian enough, I myself did not get much of a sense of Lovecraftianity
about it.
Some stories, conversely, are certainly Lovecraftian, but their intrinsic
quality is in doubt. Elizabeth Bear’s “Shoggoths in Bloom” (2008) is about

shoggoths being studied by a scientist just before World War II, but the overall
thrust of the narrative is unclear. Is it that the shoggoths’ thirst for freedom from
“enslavement” by their masters, the Old Ones, has inspired the scientist to enter
the war on the side of the Allies? Steve Duffy’s “The Oram County Whoosit”
(2008) is a long-winded and unfocused tale of the Old Ones—this time set
chiefly in the Yukon. Both these stories are in both anthologies, so I must be
missing something. Then there is Laird Barron’s “The Men from Porlock,” one
of the two original tales in The Book of Cthulhu. This is certainly a richly
textured and compelling tale—but is it Lovecraftian? If anything, it is a part of
the Barron Mythos, since it connects with several of his own previous tales.
Paula Guran’s anthology New Cthulhu: The Recent Weird (Prime, 2011),
which reprints what are in her judgment the best Mythos stories of the past ten
years, is overall a superior anthology to Lockhart’s, but is beset by some of the
same problems. She does provide a more substantial introduction, quoting my
own Rise and Fall of the Cthulhu Mythos (2008) as to what elements constitute a
Mythos tale in Lovecraft’s own work and, by extension, in that of others. But
here too we have tales whose Lovecraftian connections are so faint as to be
almost undetectable. Michael Marshall Smith’s “Fair Exchange” (from Weird
Shadows over Innsmouth, 2005) is about British thieves coming upon jewellery
from Innsmouth; but the allusions to Lovecraft are so faint (there is only a
glancing mention that one item “smells of the sea”) that if the story had appeared
in a non-Lovecraftian venue, few would have sensed any connection to
Lovecraft. Much the same could be said for John Langan’s “Mr. Gaunt” (2002),
a fine story about a butler who is a living skeleton, and “The Crevasse” (from
Lovecraft Unbound, 2009), by Dale Bailey and Nathan Ballingrud, a haunting
Antarctic tale but one that has no perceptible relation to At the Mountains of
Madness.
Then there is Neil Gaiman’s “A Study in Emerald” (from Shadows over
Baker Street, 2003), which presents the scenario of the Old Ones’ having taken
over the world (but, curiously enough, things don’t seem very different) and also
introduces us to Sherlock Holmes, who is one of a small band of human beings
attempting to overthrow the Old Ones. This story—like Kim Newman’s
“Another Fish Story” (from Weird Shadows over Innsmouth) is clever without
being in the least bit profound or interesting. Another disappointment is William
Browning Spencer’s “The Essayist in the Wilderness” (2002). Spencer wrote
one of the most brilliant Mythos novels in Résumé with Monsters (1995), but this
story takes a very long time getting going . . . and then ends up not getting
anywhere. Not much better are David Barr Kirtley’s “The Disciple” (2002), an
amateurish tale that fails to convey Lovecraft’s “cosmic indifferentism,” and

Don Webb’s “The Great White Bed” (2007), a vague account of a strange book.
China Miéville’s “Details” appeared in The Children of Cthulhu (2002), but
there is not the slightest Lovecraftian element in it. Trust me, friends—not the
slightest.
But there is no need to focus on the clunkers in Guran’s book. It contains
such gems as W. H. Pugmire’s “The Fungal Stain,” a perfumed prose-poem
about Kingsport; John Shirley’s “Buried in the Sky” (2003), an entirely
implausible but entertaining story about Yog-Sothoth (mentioned by name)
lurking in the basement of an immense apartment complex in Los Angeles; Cody
Goodfellow’s “Grinding Rock” (2005), full of a genuine sense of cosmic
menace; Michael Shea’s “Tsathoggua,” one of several splendid stories in Shea’s
collection Copping Squid and Other Mythos Tales (2009); and Lon Prater’s
strangely poignant “Head Music” (2003). I am pleased to see that Guran
reprinted two stories from my Black Wings (2010), Caitlín R. Kiernan’s
“Pickman’s Other Model (1929)” and Norman Partridge’s “Lesser Demons.”
The lessons we can draw from these two very mixed anthologies is that
working in the Lovecraftian idiom remains a difficult thing to pull of
successfully. But there are enough successes by a wide array of writers, some of
whom one would not think would do well in the Lovecraftian vein, that future
work of this sort will be well worth watching.

Is the Well Running Dry?
The spate of neo-Lovecraftian anthologies (and other works, now extending to
novels and even plays) shows no signs of abating, and there may reason to
wonder whether the market for this kind of material may be flooded. Despite the
controversies surrounding some of Lovecraft’s personal views, interest in his
work has never seemed to be greater—but can we count on that interest (like the
housing market) to continue on an ever-upward trajectory, or will there be a
crash someday?
On the basis of Ross E. Lockhart’s Cthulhu Fhtagn! Weird Tales Inspired by
H. P. Lovecraft (Word Horde, 2015), that crash may be coming—and perhaps
should come.
If there is any overarching theme or agenda in Cthulhu Fhtagn!, it is that the
entirety of Lovecraft’s work—not just his so-called “tales of the Cthulhu
Mythos”—is now fair game for the pastichist. In some senses this is a welcome
development, since the number of elaborations upon “The Dunwich Horror” or
“The Shadow over Innsmouth” (a story that has seen at least three volumes of
imitations, as assembled by British editor Stephen Jones) would seem to be
limited. Nowadays, virtually any story from Lovecraft’s pen can serve as a
springboard for imaginative rumination. The question remains, indeed, whether
sufficient imagination be brought to the task.
Ross E. Lockhart does not get the book off to a good start, writing a windy
and contentless introduction in which he bizarrely asserts that houses are
somehow central to Lovecraft’s vision (but isn’t cosmicism—the depiction of
the boundless gulfs of space and time—Lovecraft’s signature contribution to
weird fiction?). He compounds his difficulties by offering a lineup of largely
unknown writers—and then by failing to provide biographical notes on these
figures, some of whom have actually done more creditable work than the few
“name” writers he has managed to include.
One of the interesting phenomena we see in these stories is the degree to
which Lovecraft himself—or, at least, the not entirely accurate image of
Lovecraft as the gaunt, lantern-jawed figure stalking the streets of Providence,
R.I., at night—has become a fitting subject for fictional treatment. The book’s
first contribution, Walter Greatshell’s “The Lighting Splitter,” is a mad story of
what happens to a family that takes up residence in an 1861 house in Providence
where Lovecraft had reportedly been a frequent visitor. I am not certain the story
has any true coherence or plausibility, but its transition from a routine haunted

house narrative to something much more bizarre and cosmic is effectively
handled.
Quite a bit less successful is Nathan Carson’s “The Lurker in the Shadows,”
in which we are asked to believe that Lovecraft continued living into the 1970s
and came into correspondence with the young Stephen King. This alternate-
reality tale, in which Alfred Hitchcock produced a film version of Cool Air and
Lovecraft met Lord Dunsany in Ireland, is all very amusing; but its flippancy—
and its unconvincing attempts to imitate Lovecraft’s epistolary prose—condemn
it to the status of an in-joke.
Lovecraft’s “dreamland” stories—stories written early in his career, largely
inspired by Lord Dunsany—have not served as the basis of many imitations,
perhaps because they are imitations themselves. But Gord Sellar, in “The Return
of Sarnath,” has written a striking elaboration of “The Doom That Came to
Sarnath” in which a band of fighters led by Terea, a warrior princess, and her
slave Ajal (an unfortunate name, as it is too close to Atal, a character who
figures in several early Lovecraft tales) are confronted by the rebuilding of
Sarnath by unknown hands, centuries after its destruction by the reptilian
inhabitants of Ib. While somewhat long-winded and meandering, the tale
becomes strangely compelling as Ajal exercises his powers of dream to cast his
mind back into the past, in the course of which he sees Cthulhu emerging from
his underwater city of R’lyeh.
W. H. Pugmire, one of the leading voices of modern Lovecraftdom, delivers
a reliably evocative tale in “Into Ye Smoke-Wreath’d World of Dream”—a
tissue of Lovecraftian allusions, where “The Call of Cthulhu,” “The Terrible Old
Man,” and “The Haunter of the Dark” are all summoned. And the tale’s cosmic
and prose-poetic ending can only be quoted:
I rose, like some monster of myth, with a stained glass city of titan blocks and
sky-flung monoliths behind me. I wept, because I would no longer taste the
mad dreams of the acolyte in my embrace. I groaned, because I could not flex
my heavy wings and rise out of the water that was not my cosmic element.
And I raged, because I could not see the stars through which I had filtered in
antediluvian aeons, those stars that I would terrify so that they crawled
through the chaos to the baying of Nyarlathotep, those shuddering stars that
would align so as to spell my appalling name.
In sad contrast, Michael Griffin’s “Delirium Sings at the Maelstrom
Window” is a pretentious and incoherent riff on “The Music of Erich Zann,”
while Orrin Grey’s “The Insectivore” is a lackluster tale based on the idea
broached in “The Shadow out of Time” that beetles will be the dominant species

on the planet after the demise of humanity. Michael J. Martinez’s “On a Kansas
Plain” trots out the hoary idea that the Cthulhu cult—and the entity it worships
—are real after all.
The longest story in the book is also close to the worst. G. D. Falksen’s “The
Curious Death of Sir Arthur Turnbridge” is a corny and verbose melding of the
old-time detective story (with its hackneyed use of a know-it-all Belgian
detective, Hieronymus Nos, an obvious stand-in for Hercule Poirot) with various
Lovecraftian motifs thrown in at random, ranging from “The Rats in the Walls”
(Captain Norrys figures as a character) to “The Hound” (there is talk of ghouls, a
jade amulet, and so on).
Not much better is “The Curse of the Old Ones,” by Molly Tanzer and Jesse
Bullington. This is an attempt at Lovecraftian humor—a very dangerous mode to
venture upon, for it is fatally easy to end up sounding like an idiot. Here we are
asked to believe that a British film called The Call [or Curse] of the Old Ones
starring Peter Cushing, Vincent Price, and so on was once in production—but if
the film is ever completed, then mankind is doomed! Let it pass that the authors
do not know how to spell the central character of “The Dunwich Horror” (whom
they habitually render as Wilbur Whatley, rather than Whateley). This is the
least of the story’s problem. A fictitious entry in a reference book about the film
unwittingly provides a perfect synopsis for the story itself: “Incomprehensible
mishmash of several stories by H. P. Lovecraft.”
The difficulty with a number of other stories in the book is that they may or
may not be competent weird tales, but their connection to Lovecraft is highly
problematical. For example, Richard Lee Byers’s “The Body Shop” is a grim
and grisly post-apocalyptic story about aliens having taken over the earth—but
the aliens don’t seem to be specifically Lovecraftian in any meaningful sense.
Anya Martin’s “The Price of Lyghes” is a tale of “extreme horror” that comes
uncomfortably close to sadism, as we are forced to witness what appears to be
the author’s unholy glee at the dispatching of a cheating and abusive husband at
the hands of some nameless entities he has apparently secured (by mail!) from
the South Pacific; but I derive no Lovecraftian ambiance here at all.
T. E. Grau’s “Return of the Prodigy,” written in a tiresome hipster prose that
relentlessly makes fun of its unsympathetic protagonists, depicts an elderly
couple that takes a belated honeymoon to an island in the South Pacific called
Walakea (veteran readers of Lovecraft will immediately identify this name as
that of a character in “The Shadow over Innsmouth”). There is plenty of
disgusting horror on display in this story, but once again I do not sense any vital
relation to Lovecraft.
The worst offender in this regard is Laird Barron, whose “Don’t Make Me

Assume My Ultimate Form” concludes the book. This is one more reprise of
what has become something of a shtick in Barron’s output—the commingling of
the superhero topos with that of espionage, with a certain amount of physical
gruesomeness along the way. Here Barron seeks to provide some variation by
having his superheroes be a group of strong women (or, as he calls them, a
“cabal of kick-ass bitches”—a term I presume is meant in praise). One of these
individuals heads up to Alaska, encounters a talking marionette in the shape of
Edgar Allan Poe, and does battle with two tough broads who also have a talking
marionette in tow, named Bob (also called “The Eater of Dolls”). There are
some fisticuffs along the way that leave all parties rather the worse for wear.
I am not joking. This really is the plot—if it can be called that—of the story.
Aside from the fact that there is not the slightest Lovecraftian content in it, the
tale embodies what might be called authorial preening: Barron is so keen on
showing you that he is a clever and innovative fellow (he has, after all, used
second-person narration—even though such a device does not in fact work very
effectively here) that the fundamental absurdity of the story escapes him.
Perhaps we can charitably assume that the tale is a parody of some kind.
The problem of true relevance to Lovecraft’s work even dogs what is
unquestionably the best story in the book, Cody Goodfellow’s “Green
Revolution.” This incredibly compelling tale of an ecoterrorist in Honduras
manages to invest a clutching horror into plant life—especially in its
unforgettable image of a tree that has engrafted human beings onto itself:
And everywhere in its branches, she saw people.
They lived in the tree, and they were the tree. Some ran up and down the
trunk like squirrels, or brachiated from branch to branch like spider monkeys.
Others were tethered to vines that joined seamlessly with their spines, playing
out like extension cords as they snatched flying prey from the air, only to snap
taut and retreat back into the green.
Others were little more than tumors on the trunk and branches. Their green
skins were scaly and infested with fibrous growths, their bodies bloated to
translucence, converting sap and nutrients by some weird internal alchemy
into nectar for endless lines of thirsty workers.
But again, one has to ask: Is this Lovecraftian? In such a fine story the question
perhaps becomes an impertinence.
It would be unfair to focus on the distressingly many tales in Cthulhu
Fhtagn! that are either aesthetic failures or insufficiently Lovecraftian or both.
The volume is redeemed by such things as Ann K. Schwader’s “Dead Canyons,”
a heady science fiction tale about artificial intelligence that features many links

with At the Mountains of Madness; Christine Morgan’s “Aerkheim’s Horror,” a
striking narrative in which Vikings battle with Deep Ones in Vinland; Cameron
Pierce’s “Love Will Save You,” an unsettling story of some kind of plague that
turns people into glowing spheres; Scott R. Jones’s “Assemblage Point,” a
hypnotic (if at times alternately coarse and pretentious) tale that melds Lovecraft
and Carlos Castaneda; and Wendy N. Wagner’s “The Long Dark,” a powerful
science fiction/horror hybrid in which the last remnants of humanity are trapped
on a remote planet and are battling a cosmic “world eater.”
But there are so many clunkers in this anthology that we must regard it as a
very, very mixed bag. I am in no way prepared to admit that the Lovecraftian
well is running dry, but I do believe that editors of all such volumes (including
myself) need to exercise considerably greater aesthetic judgment in determining
what we embalm between the covers of a book.
I am once again forced to note the dispiriting absence of anything
approaching competent copyediting in this volume—a perennial problem with
the small press. We are here faced with such stylistic and grammatical blunders
as split infinitives, the misuse of “like” for “as” or “as if” (“He wasn’t getting
over it like she’d hoped”), the superfluous “of” after “all” (one writes “all the
time,” not “all of the time”), the hideous barbarism “alright” (which immediately
places a dunce cap on one’s head), and all manner of other derelictions. The fact
that many readers, writers, editors, and publishers are not even aware that the
above are errors is a sad commentary on the present state of English usage. And
there are some specifically Lovecraftian errors, as when W. H. Pugmire (of all
people) writes the standard cry “Iä! Iä!” but leaves off the diaeresis (umlaut)
over the a.
The demise of the English language is far more horrifying than anything
depicted in Lovecraft’s stories, or in the stories of any of his imitators.

A Distinctive Talent
I have long held the belief that W. H. Pugmire is one of the finest prose-poets in
the entire field of weird fiction and also one of the most powerful and eloquent
writers in the Lovecraftian tradition. The three books under review, the product
of a remarkable efflorescence of creativity over the past year or two, will only
enhance an already lofty reputation.
Pugmire, like Ramsey Campbell and others, has chosen to establish his own
locus of terror separate from, but with intriguing connections to, Lovecraft’s
haunted New England—such towns as Arkham, Innsmouth, Dunwich,
Kingsport, and so on. Pugmire himself can work well and effortlessly within
Lovecraft’s own domain (his tale “The Phantom of Beguilement” is a rapturous
paean to Kingsport), and the stories in these books attest clearly that he was
inspired, even transported, by his own first visit to Lovecraft’s Providence in
2007; but he works best when he sets his tales in his own native Northwest. The
Sesqua Valley, a region of dark woods, a twin-peaked mountain, the small
village of Sesqua Common, and strange and enticing denizens—lorded over by
the inhuman “beast,” Simon Gregory Williams—has gained a greater and greater
sense of reality and living texture in the course of dozens of stories, very much
in the manner in which Thomas Hardy’s Wessex was fashioned in the course of
novel after novel.
That said, one must acknowledge that some phases of literary construction
are not among Pugmire’s strengths. The vein of prose-poetry—derived in part
from Lovecraft’s dense prose, the prose-poems of Clark Ashton Smith and Oscar
Wilde, and other sources, but very much a product of Pugmire’s own sensuous
love of the English language—is not particularly amenable to longer narrative,
especially those that need to be plot-driven. Accordingly, the title story of The
Strange Dark One: Tales of Nyarlathotep (Miskatonic River Press, 2012)—a
book full of varied accounts about Nyarlathotep, the shape-shifting entity that is
one of Lovecraft’s most intriguing creations—is, while beautifully written,
somewhat meandering, with a climax of insufficient power to justify its length. It
is unfortunate that Pugmire reprinted it in Bohemians of Sesqua Valley.
But this possible flaw is easily dwarfed by the many virtues we find in other
Pugmire stories. In The Strange Dark One we are presented with a wondrous
range of richly textured tales. There is “Immortal Remains,” an exquisite prose-
poem mingling the Sesqua Valley with references to Lovecraft’s “The Nameless
City”; there is “The Last Theft,” one of Pugmire’s best longer tales, an evocative

narrative of a man who dares to defy Simon Gregory Williams; there is “The
Hands That Reek and Smoke,” a powerful adaptation of Lovecraft’s baleful
prose-poem “Nyarlathotep”; “The Audient Void,” a slight but affecting vignette;
“Some Bacchante of Irem,” a distinctive mix of horror and an eroticism that
Pugmire is coming increasingly to utilise in his stories; and “To See Beyond,” in
which a writer about to be overwhelmed by Williams is rescued by Erich Zann
(from Lovecraft’s “The Music of Erich Zann”), disguised cleverly as Jon-Eric le
Seuil (the reference being to the Rue d’Auseil where Zann lived—which
scholars believe to be an allusion to au seuil, “at the threshold”). This cleverness
of names extends to the story “Past the Gates of Deepest Dreaming,” with the
character named Philip Nithon (an esoteric reference to an apparent planet cited
in passing in one of Lovecraft’s Fungi from Yuggoth sonnets).
Bohemians of Sesqua Valley (Arcane Wisdom, 2013) is perhaps not quite as
successful overall, for aside from its inclusion of (to my mind) the inferior
“Strange Dark One” it also includes another long story, “One Card Unturned”
(written with Maryanne K. Snyder), which attempts to infuse a deck of tarot
cards (called the Yellow Deck) with horror, but ends up being rather lifeless and
unconvincing. And yet, had the book contained nothing but “Unhallowed
Places,” it would be worth the purchase price; for this set of perfumed prose-
poems is as evocative as anything Pugmire has ever written. Some of these ten
vignettes appear to be based on sonnets in the Fungi from Yuggoth sequence; at
least one is based on Frank Belknap Long’s “The Space-Eaters.” And perhaps
there is an explicit Oscar Wilde influence:
I glanced at the cinders in your burnished eyes and sensed the acidic
wretchedness that burned the brain of a forgotten goddess. Those embers in
your eyes were gold and orange, yet dull of hue like the mauve and ruddy
porphyry with which your sarcopohagus had been constructed. Had it always
existed, your dwelling of anticipated death? Or did you have it built when, in
vision, you beheld the end of your apprehensive adoration?
Aside from this, we are treated to such gems as “In Memoriam: Robert
Nelson,” a gorgeous little piece that pays tribute to a young man of Lovecraft’s
acquaintance who committed suicide at the age of twenty-three; “The Splendor
of the Goat,” a mesmerising and richly textured tale of Shub-Niggurath; and “A
Quest of Dream,” a prose-poetic account of night-gaunts, but one that by design
is largely devoid of terror.
I understand that Pugmire persuaded his longtime friend Jeffrey Thomas to
team up on Encounters with Enoch Coffin (Dark Regions Press, 2013) as a way
of drawing Thomas back into the mode of Lovecraftian fiction, since Thomas

had sworn off such work after being offended by some comments I made about
him in The Rise and Fall of the Cthulhu Mythos (2008). Well, the effort has been
worth the result, for the collaborative effort is a resounding success.
These are not, strictly speaking, collaborations; rather, as with Robert
Aickman and Elizabeth Jane Howard in We Are for the Dark (1951), each author
has, by himself, written six stories, and the authorship of each is clearly
identified. There is little point in deciding which of the authors has succeeded
better; both have done splendid work, although I gain the impression that
Thomas has deliberately modelled his tales—including their prose idiom—after
Pugmire’s.
The opening story, Pugmire’s “Ye Unkempt Thing,” is an extraordinarily
vivid depiction of Lovecraft’s Providence, based on his aforementioned trip. It is
really a kind of prologue to the book, which portrays the encounters by Coffin—
a painter in the Boston area—with various eldritch individuals who lead him to
explore the wonders and terrors of the locale. It is needless to say that the
Lovecraftian influence is strong, as it is meant to be; for these are homages in the
finest sense of the term and must be read as such. Thomas’s first story, for
example, is an ingenious elaboration on Lovecraft’s “The Dreams in the Witch
House.” Pugmire’s “They Smell of Thunder” is a joint tribute to “The Dunwich
Horror” and to Karl Edward Wagner’s superb Lovecraftian tale “Sticks.” This
story, however, is a tad disappointing because it is only a pastiche, lacking any
imaginative elaboration of the themes and motifs of the original stories.
Pugmire does much better in “Mystic Articulation,” a ravishing tapestry
evoking such of Lovecraft’s tales as “The Terrible Old Man,” “The Festival,”
and “The Strange High House in the Mist,” and concluding with a cosmic
wonder that Lovecraft himself would have relished. Thomas replies with “Every
Exquisite Thing,” a clever elaboration of the idea of “essential saltes” from
Lovecraft’s The Case of Charles Dexter Ward. Thomas does less well with
“Impossible Color,” a minimal elaboration of “The Colour out of Space.”
I’m sorry to report that Pugmire’s “Ecstasy in Elaboration” is on the whole a
lacklustre rehash of “The Shadow over Innsmouth,” its only innovation being an
explicit rendering of the sexual undercurrent of the tale. Here especially, as
throughout the book, I believe the authors have made a tactical error in having
Enoch Coffin speak in a jarringly modern idiom, unlike the stately, archaic
speech of Simon Gregory Williams. For example, after Coffin has seen a
sculpture made from Innsmouth gold, he remarks fatuously, “Whoa, that’s
cool!” Not very conducive to the sustenance of weird atmosphere . . .
It is in one of the concluding tales, Thomas’s “Fearless Symmetry,” that the
comparisons between Coffin and Lovecraft’s own hellish artist, Richard Upton

Pickman (from “Pickman’s Model”), are finally drawn out; and they are done in
a manner that enhances our appreciation of both the earlier story and the
contemporary tribute to it. This tale effectively uses fragmented narration to
convey a sense of multigenerational horror. Pugmire concludes the book quietly
but with exquisite pathos in the tale “Unto the Child of Woman,” which not only
transfers us back to his Sesqua Valley but is perhaps a moving paean to his
recently deceased mother.
W. H. Pugmire, whether working alone or with sympathetic collaborators,
has fashioned a literary legacy that is unashamedly dependent upon his literary
idols, chiefly Lovecraft, Poe, Wilde, and Shakespeare. He is happy to work in
what might seem to be a vein of pure derivativeness; but his native talent
enlivens and revivifies nearly every trope he takes from previous literature, and
he himself is a literary figure of substantial standing in his own right. He now
professes he will take a “wee” holiday from writing; certainly, the numerous
books he has produced over the past several years are enough to earn him a rest.
But I suspect we have not heard the last of him: there is no silencing a talent so
distinctive and so exquisite.

Working Together
“The Hooded Thing bleated ‘Kamog! Kamog!’” This is one of the more piquant
lines in H. P. Lovecraft’s “The Thing on the Doorstep” (1933), and it serves as
the apparent inspiration for this engaging novella by two veteran Lovecraftians,
David Barker and W. H. Pugmire. In Lovecraft’s story, of course, the term
“Kamog” is never defined; but Barker and Pugmire, in The Revenant of Rebecca
Pascal (Dark Renaissance Books, 2014), plausibly interpret it as a previously
unknown “god” or entity who is the focus of worship by certain dubious
inhabitants of the town of Arkham.
The tale is narrated in the first person by Richard Pascal, the great-nephew
of Rebecca Pascal, a former film actress and poet who was acquainted with
Edward and Asenath Derby (the protagonists of “The Thing on the Doorstep”),
and in whose cavernous house Richard now lives. The narrative also focuses on
Julia Spencer, a homeless woman whom Richard encounters reciting an
evocatively weird poem at the Desolate Café in Arkham. Later Richard meets
Wilus Lorne, a book dealer who is convinced that Rebecca’s house has a secret
room that contains a large and valuable collection of books on occult lore, and
he continually pesters Richard to look for it. Wilus also claims that Rebecca used
to meet with a group of fellow acolytes in that secret room to perform nameless
rituals. If this is true, could these rituals have had anything to do with a
mimeographed pamphlet that Richard finds, Incantations of Kamog, that features
a poem by Rebecca? In the course of time, Richard senses the presence of
Rebecca as she (following the lead of Asenath Derby) psychically possesses the
body of Julia Spencer and leads her acolytes in a ceremony that might eventuate
in the release of the baleful Kamog.
All this, as I say, is an engaging entertainment—a clever and evocative
adaptation of some of the basic themes running through Lovecraft’s work. W. H.
Pugmire has become something of a phenomenon in the world of Lovecraftian
pastiche, and the remarkable array of books—mostly short fiction—that he has
produced in the past decade stands as a testament to the power of literary
inspiration. In 2007 Pugmire was taken on his first trip to Lovecraft’s
Providence, Rhode Island, and that—along with repeated rereadings of the
works of the master, as well as the writings of contemporary disciples—seemed
to have triggered a flood of fictional composition embodied in such books as
Some Unknown Gulf of Night (2011), The Strange Dark One: Tales of
Nyarlathotep (2012), Uncommon Places (2012), Bohemians of Sesqua Valley

(2013), Encounters with Enoch Coffin (2013; with Jeffrey Thomas), and several
others.
But Pugmire’s brand of limpid prose-poetry seems not entirely amenable to
lengthier narratives, although some of the above volumes do contain stories that
could be considered novelette-length. Enter David Barker, who describes
himself as a “hardcore Lovecraftian,” and who has written two novels, Death at
the Flea Circus (2011) and Electro-Thrall Zombies (2012), although neither of
these appears to be Lovecraftian in essence. One gains the sense—and not only
from Barker’s top billing—that he wrote the bulk of this collaborative work: the
opening sections appear to feature the patented Pugmire prose-poetry, but as the
narrative gains steam Barker’s more action-oriented style takes over, and to good
effect.
If a sense of unreality hangs over this work—a sense that it is nothing but a
pastiche that seeks to do little more than evoke the atmosphere of H. P.
Lovecraft’s prose, motifs, and imagery—and if the narrative pace, for the first
three-fourths of the tale, is a bit leisurely, the narrative pace does pick up in the
final segments as the ritual that seeks to release Kamog leads to an unexpected
dénouement. I am not sure which author is responsible for the striking episode
where Richard Pascal descends into the immense mausoleum of his great-aunt,
desiring to see the state of her body (which now contains the soul or spirit of
Julia Spencer), but whoever wrote it is capable of potent horrific effects: What I
saw was a horror, an abomination suitable only for a demented house of freaks
or a hellish carnival sideshow. A gnarled skeleton clothed in stretched and
cracked and yellowed parchment, its jaws yawning wide, the lips long since
withered away and the bared teeth—fang-like in their jawbone sockets—
grinning with unholy, nightmarish glee. Nothing could have been worse than the
thing I looked upon. It was intolerable, far beyond my most gruesome fears. And
yet, I kept the coffin lid up and stared senselessly at her awful physiognomy. If I
waited long enough, I prayed, I might ultimately see past this vile ruin of what
had once been a human form, might peer deeply enough into and through the
stinking mass of desiccated tissues to detect the presence of Julia’s spirit.
And yet, even this passage is a tip of the hat to Lovecraft, for it consciously
echoes the discovery of the undecayed body of a ghoul by two grave-robbers in
the early story “The Hound” (1922).
One cannot conclude this review without a mention of the excellent
production values embodied in this book. It is one of the first publications of a
new imprint, Dark Renaissance Books, operated by Joe Morey (formerly the
proprietor of Dark Regions Press, now run by Joe’s son Chris Morey), and he
has done well not only in publishing this work (limited to 150 signed and

numbered copies) but in commissioning highly evocative interior art by the
young artist Erin Wells. All devotees of Lovecraft will find many vivid echoes
of their idol in this enthralling novella.
Barker and Pugmire’s In the Gulfs of Dream and Other Lovecraftian Tales (Dark
Renaissance Books, 2015) is one of those rare volumes where a joint byline is
fully deserved. By that I mean that each author appears to have contributed
almost the exact number of items and nearly the same wordage to the book. Only
two stories are actually billed as explicit collaborations; the other twenty-four
stories, prose-poems, and vignettes are clearly attributed to one author or the
other on the table of contents, and each has written twelve. In terms of pages,
David Barker’s share of these solo items amounts to 92 pages, while Pugmire’s
comes to 87.
The most notable item in the book is of course the title story, which fills a
grand total of 57 pages. A systematic reading of the entire book makes it quite
clear who wrote which of the fifteen sections of this novella: Pugmire wrote the
odd-numbered sections and Barker the even-numbered ones. This becomes
evident chiefly, but not solely, because of the substantial difference in style
between these two portions: Pugmire infuses his segments with the perfumed
imagery and evocative idioms that has made him one of the great prose-poets of
our time; Barker, writing in a generally more contemporary style, advances the
plot a bit more crisply and efficiently. Even though the tale begins in Sesqua
Valley, Pugmire’s richly textured re-creation in the Pacific Northwest of the
New England topography that H. P. Lovecraft invented in his tales, we are
quickly taken to Lovecraft’s dreamworld for two parallel narratives, involving
entirely different characters, that ultimately fuse. Overall the tale is highly
effective, although Barker’s segments at times contain some jarring language
that mars the atmosphere of dreamlike fantasy that the authors are so laboriously
working to establish.
The other collaborative title, “The Stairway in the Crypt,” is a slighter item,
but does contain an engaging dispute between two writers about the relative
merits of Poe and Lovecraft, as well as about the travails of collaboration—an
amusing metafiction indeed!
Otherwise, the volume is filled with a brace of exquisite and powerful riffs
on some of Lovecraft’s most hallowed narratives, as well as those by some
related authors. Comparisons are odious, but I think Pugmire comes out slightly
—and only slightly—ahead of Barker in this informal and unintentional contest.
Some of Pugmire’s narratives seem on the surface insubstantial—“A Thousand
Smokes,” a brief tale about Dunwich; “Through Sunset’s Gate,” a delicate

vignette about Irem, the City of Pillars, in Arabia; “An Unearthly Awakening,” a
prose-poem inspired by “The Shunned House” (and by Pugmire’s own visit to
the house in Providence, Rhode Island, that inspired the story)—but each
embodies an absolute immersion in the essence of Lovecraft’s work, something
that Pugmire glories in. For him, Lovecraft is not merely a writer to be
mechanically imitated; instead, he is a touchstone and a springboard for
imaginative ruminations that gain their strength precisely through their deep ties
to the writings of the dreamer from Providence.
And consider such a tale as “Elder Instincts,” which proves to be a prose
adaptation of one of Lovecraft’s most evocative poems, “The Ancient Track.”
This single item encapsulates both Pugmire’s originality and his genuflection to
everything Lovecraft stood for. While the story repeatedly incorporates
variations of the imperishable opening lines of the poem (“There was no hand to
hold me back / That night I found the ancient track”), it unexpectedly veers into
a paean to Jesus Christ. As a devout Mormon, Pugmire regards the divinity of
Jesus as axiomatic. I am half inclined to believe that this story features the most
exquisitely modulated prose in his entire corpus. The last paragraph can only be
quoted: And then I see her, bathed in a sheath of starlight that flows through the
cavity where once a stained-glass saint had worn a heart. Ah, sweet Pieta, how
beauteous you are, enhanced in cosmic light. And yet, what a forlorn image you
present, on this day of your infant’s rumored birth; for you are alone, your lap is
vacant, you hold no holy corpse in your embrace. Lady, let me lie upon your lap
and press my head against your marble breast, beneath which I seem to hear
strange palpitation. My diadem has lightened, and when I touch my hand to it I
find that it has withered into a thorny crown that pricks my palm. Ah, sweet
saint, how your jeweled eyes gleam in shafts of starlight, as I lift to you my
wounded palm, the stigmatic stain of which you bend to sup upon. Happy, happy
holiday.
Not every one of Pugmire’s tales derives directly from Lovecraft. “Your
Ivory Hollow” tells of what happens when a mad poet finds the skull of the
marquis de Sade—a reference to the well-known story by Robert Bloch, an old
friend of the author’s and to whom the story is dedicated. “The Quickening of
Ursula Sphinx” is a mad story, loosely connected to Lovecraft’s “The Dunwich
Horror” and “The Whisperer in Darkness,” about an ancient film actress and an
old movie in which she appeared decades before. Pugmire’s most substantial
contribution in the book, aside from the collaborative novella, is “A Presence of
the Past.” Here he boldly rewrites the basic narrative of “The Lurking Fear” (its
actual chapter titles are used, along with some from “Herbert West—
Reanimator”) while transferring it to a “peculiar ancient mansion” in Sesqua

Valley. I’m not sure the result is a total success, but it remains an engaging
narrative.
Barker’s contributions are, as I’ve suggested, more plot-driven, more
contemporary in their settings, and in that sense more remote from their root
inspirations, whether it be Lovecraft or other writers. For example, “The Temple
of the Worm,” about a man seeking to escape an unholy cult, features subtle
echoes of “The Music of Erich Zann”—but is set in West Los Angeles, very
remote from the Paris setting of Lovecraft’s tale. This is worth comparing to
Pugmire’s “Within One Ruined Realm,” also a riff on “The Music of Erich
Zann,” but one that hews somewhat more closely to the original. The same could
be said of Barker’s “The Recluse” and Pugmire’s “Descent into Light and
Darkness.” Both tales play variations on Lovecraft’s “The Outsider,” but here
Barker may be said to prevail by departing a bit more from the original scenario
and infusing his tale with imaginative elements from the Cthulhu Mythos.
Pugmire’s tale, while always mellifluous in its prose, seems just slightly less
imaginative.
Several Barker tales later in the volume exhibit the influence of Clark
Ashton Smith—and in these tales the author seems to come into his own. It is
here that he engages in the elegant prose-poetry that distinguishes Pugmire’s
work. Barker begins with “A Dweller in Martian Darkness,” an adaptation of
Smith’s “The Dweller in the Gulf” (first published as “The Dweller in Martian
Depths”). “The Ghoul God’s Bride” also seems to echo Smith while being
distinctively original in its basic thrust: a musician, Xanivar, yearns for a
concubine, Omalpha, but is scorned by her, and so he engages in a campaign to
bolster his résumé by using reanimated corpses to build a massive palace that
Omalpha might find fit for her exalted status as the “odalisque” of the emperor
Zuugutoo. In “The One Dark Thought of Nib-Z’gat” Barker makes so bold as to
imitate Smith’s prose-poems (he may well be the greatest master of that form in
English), and does so creditably; while “The Dead City” and “The Grasses of
Mahspe” continue the elaboration of Smithian motifs in highly effective ways.
Barker also writes several tales whose literary inspiration is more oblique.
“The Urus” might be thought generally Lovecraftian in its emphasis on
archaeological horror (an explorer sees visions of the destruction of an ancient
civilisation—and then plans for its possible resurrection in the future), but the
working out of the idea is Barker’s own. In “Mural” a man becomes fascinated
with a lewd and horrific mural in the basement of his decrepit house, with
loathsome consequences. And “Among the Ghouls” may loosely be tied to the
Lovecraftian motif of ghouls (as found in “Pickman’s Model” and The Dream-
Quest of Unknown Kadath), but again the treatment is distinctively original.

These two authors, who began their collaborative work with a striking
novella, The Revenant of Rebecca Pascal (Dark Renaissance Books, 2014),
seem to have found a highly felicitous way of uniting their contrasting but
mutually harmonious talents—either by actual collaboration or merely by the
juxtaposition of their works one against the other. If it be said that their
inspirations are at times too patently literary, it can also be said that in the best of
their work they use prior literary works as only the core inspirations for
narratives that engage the best facets of their own imaginations. Every reader of
Lovecraftian or weird fiction should look forward to more tales from their pens,
singly or jointly.

Darrell Schweitzer and the Mythos
There is something to be said for the view that Darrell Schweitzer is, at least in
the realm of imaginative fiction, something of a Renaissance man. Here is
someone who, over the past forty years or more, has written novels, stories,
poems, critical essays, monographs, interviews, and reviews; someone who has
spanned the genres of fantasy, supernatural horror, and science fiction; and who
has exhibited a comprehensive knowledge of writers ranging from H. P.
Lovecraft to Lord Dunsany to Mervyn Wall; who has edited magazines (most
notably Weird Tales for nineteen years), anthologies of fiction, and anthologies
of critical and scholarly essays. To put it mildly, Schweitzer has as impressive
and diverse a résumé as any figure in contemporary weird fiction.
His engagement with Lovecraft dates to as early as the slim anthology
Essays Lovecraftian (1976), published when he was only twenty-three. It was
perhaps the first volume that fully exhibited the work of a new generation of
Lovecraft critics and scholars who challenged the dogmas set forth by
Lovecraft’s self-styled disciple and interpreter, August Derleth, whose seriously
erroneous views about the life and work of the writer he professed to admire
inhibited the proper understanding of Lovecraft for decades. Subsequently
revised and expanded several times, Essays Lovecraftian, in its current
incarnation (as Discovering H. P. Lovecraft), remains a valuable guide to the
inexhaustibly rich work of the Dreamer from Providence.
Schweitzer himself has written numerous critical essays on Lovecraft, but in
many ways his most interesting interpretations of that writer’s work are found in
a brace of short stories that elaborate upon the Cthulhu Mythos. And the key
word here is elaborate: unlike so many of his predecessors (and, indeed, his
contemporaries), Schweitzer has learned that simple pastiche—the mere
rewriting of Lovecraft’s own stories—serves little purpose; something more
must be done to create a literary work that can stand on its own while at the
same time reflecting its inspiration from a writer now nearly a century in his
grave.
What Schweitzer has done, in effect, is to fuse Lovecraftian cosmicism with
the contemporary focus on intimate human relations and the complexities of
human psychology. Lovecraft himself deliberately eschewed this kind of fusion:
“Individuals and their fortunes within natural law move me very little. They are
all momentary trifles bound from a common nothingness toward another
common nothingness. Only the cosmic framework itself—or such individuals as

symbolise principles (or defiances of principles) of the cosmic framework—can
gain a deep grip on my imagination and set it to work creating.” This is all well
and good, and it works for the kind of story he wrote; but even Lovecraft on
occasion came close to addressing the human tragedy behind or beneath the
cosmic forces he put on display, as in “The Shadow over Innsmouth” and “The
Shadow out of Time,” both of which feature a goodly dose of existential terror
focused on a solitary individual subjected to the buffetings of entities
incalculably more powerful than himself.
It is this kind of melding of external and internal horror that Schweitzer has
featured extensively in his Lovecraftian tales. This may come as a bit of a
surprise to those of us who know him as an irrepressible and irreverent jokester
—and, to be sure, he doesn’t always take Lovecraft seriously, as can be seen in
his numerous Lovecraftian limericks and other tales where humor and parody
come to the fore. But in the solitude of his study, Schweitzer draws upon deeper,
more disturbing emotions—the emotions of regret, envy, sorrow, fear, and
resentment—to produce that most unusual of hybrids: the Lovecraftian tale with
profound emotional resonance. We now see the results in his volume of
collected Cthulhu Mythos tales, Awaiting Strange Gods (Fedogan & Bremer,
2015).
There is, in tales like “Howling in the Dark” and “Those of the Air,” a
pervasive atmosphere of melancholy that in some strange way actually enhances
the horror of the scenario. In the latter tale, a member of the Whateley clan
struggles to retain emotional bonds to a brother who has become a hideously
alien monster. How can we be immune to the exquisite plangency—and
incongruity—of the monster wearing a Philadelphia Eagles sweatshirt? Or
consider “Innsmouth Idyll.” What seems on the surface merely a rewriting of
“The Shadow over Innsmouth” proves to be a sensitive portrayal of young love,
not without its moments of terror.
Schweitzer can draw upon the most common features of our daily lives and
insidiously insert a Lovecraftian subtext that teases out both the horror and the
human tragedy inherent in the situation. “Class Reunion” tells the seemingly
mundane story of a reunion of aging former classmates at a prep school—but
this school is the Orne Academy in New England, where the supernatural is
never far away. “Spiderwebs in the Dark” begins innocuously with a chance
encounter in a used bookstore. “Why We Do It” is another tale of a young man’s
yearning for love, this time set vividly in an Amish area of Pennsylvania; but it
quickly turns horrific with the evocation of Lovecraftian gods.
And yet, Schweitzer is also a master of historically and topographically
exotic settings. “Stragglers from Carrhae” is one of several tales that draw upon

the author’s exhaustive knowledge of history, in this case the aftermath of the
disastrous battle of Carrhae. (For the uninitated, the battle of Carrhae took place
in 53 B.C.E. between the Romans and the Parthians, in an area on the border
between modern-day Turkey and Syria. It constituted one of the worst defeats
the Roman Army ever suffered; the leader of the Roman forces, the wealthy
general Marcus Licinius Crassus, died shortly after the battle.) Other tales
continue the fusion of history and horror. In “The Eater of Hours” we are in the
time of the Crusades; “The Runners Beyond the Wall” and “On the Eastbound
Train” are set, respectively, in the early nineteenth and early twentieth centuries
and draw subtly upon Lovecraft’s The Case of Charles Dexter Ward. In a sense,
Schweitzer’s engagement with history comes full circle in “Ghost Dancing,”
where we are presented an appallingly vivid picture of the state of the world
after the Lovecraftian gods have taken over.
Two stories inspired by the work of Clark Ashton Smith—“The Last of the
Black Wine” and “In Old Commoriom”—take us into the realms of fantasy,
where Schweitzer (perhaps drawing upon his deep knowledge of the world’s
greatest fantaisiste, Lord Dunsany) is eminently comfortable. “The Last of the
Black Wine” is, indeed, a sustained prose-poem whose exquisite modulations of
prose rhythm are fully equal to the best of Smith’s own prose-poems. In “Old
Commoriom” we encounter one Paliphar Vooz (perhaps related to the Ralibar
Vooz of Smith’s “The Seven Geases”) as he appears to learn the secrets of the
universe. Here too the stateliness of Schweitzer’s prose engenders exactly the
kind of incantatory effect that Smith was aiming for, as he stated in a letter to
Lovecraft: “My own conscious ideal has been to delude the reader into accepting
an impossibility, or series of impossibilities, by means of a sort of verbal black
magic, in the achievement of which I make use of prose-rhythm, metaphor,
simile, tone-color, counter-point, and other stylistic resources, like a sort of
incantation.”
For every one of Schweitzer’s tales that draws upon some specific tale of
Lovecraft—say, “The Warm,” which turns “Pickman’s Model” on its head by
being told from the perspective of a ghoul—we have stories like “Spiderwebs in
the Dark” or “The Clockwork King, the Queen of Glass, and the Man with a
Hundred Knives,” where the Lovecraftian influence is only faintly evident in
suggestions of a disturbing rent in the fabric of our universe that might lead us to
realms of terror and wonder beyond our imagining. “Jimmy Bunny” is a
powerful tale of a revenant with only the slightest hints of a Lovecraftian
substratum (the motif of the forbidden book). What this means is that, in contrast
to the mechanical pastichist, Schweitzer is a genuine writer of weird fiction who
has used Lovecraft, Smith, and other writers as springboards for the evocation of

his own ideas, motifs, conceptions, and moods.
Schweitzer is, indeed, a master technician of the short story. He knows how
to grab the reader by the throat and never let go. (Consider the opening sentence
of “The Runners Beyond the Wall”: “Reader, I address you as a dead man, as
one who died on a terrible night in October of 18— . . .”) His narrative pacing is
almost always flawless, and such tales as “The Scroll of the Worm” exhibit a
sustained and cumulative terror that plunges the reader deeper and deeper into
the mental and physical agonies suffered by the protagonist. I would draw
particular attention to Schweitzer’s meticulous and telling use of italics, which
are designed to signal exactly those moments where the supernatural has entered
or where the characters are experiencing their most poignant moments of
emotional torment.
A number of the tales in this book were written for Lovecraftian “theme”
anthologies. Schweitzer himself has edited two of the more notable of these
(Cthulhu’s Reign and That Is Not Dead), and I myself am proud to have
published a number of the stories included here. And yet, it is remarkable how
well these tales stand on their own, outside the contexts of the (at times artificial
and contrived) “themes” dictated by the anthologies in question. Darrell
Schweitzer has proven himself to be one of the most vibrant and imaginative
creators of Lovecraftian fiction in recent years, but his range is far broader than
that. I suspect he would find himself in substantial agreement with Lovecraft’s
heartfelt comment: “There is no field other than the weird in which I have any
aptitude or inclination for fictional composition.”

“Life Is More Horrible Than Death”
The appearance of H. P. Lovecraft (1890–1937) as a character in fiction goes
back a surprisingly long way. In a sense we could trace it to as early as 1921,
when Edith Miniter, one of Lovecraft’s colleagues in the amateur journalism
movement, wrote an exquisite parody of his work, “Falco Ossifracus: By Mr.
Goodguile,” in which the central figure was a send-up both of Randolph Carter
(in “The Statement of Randolph Carter”) and of Lovecraft himself. In recent
decades, such authors as Richard A. Lupoff (Lovecraft’s Book [1985]), Peter
Cannon (Pulptime [1984], The Lovecraft Chronicles [2004]), and many others
have tried their hand at depicting Lovecraft as the focal point of adventures both
natural and supernatural. Even the eminent Lovecraft biographer S. T. Joshi has
written a silly thing called The Assaults of Chaos (2013).
It is safe to say that most of these works are, in large part, good-natured jeux
d’esprit, filled with all manner of winks to Lovecraft devotees but being
fundamentally unserious in theme and spirit. That is the last thing that can be
said of award-winning Canadian novelist Jacqueline Baker’s The Broken Hours:
A Novel of H. P. Lovecraft (Talos Press, 2016), an extraordinarily poignant and
moving narrative that envisions a Lovecraft weighed down by a lifetime of
sorrows and disappointments, and who in turn casts a pall of melancholy on all
those around him.
There are several ways one can review such a book. A literalist approach,
from the perspective of the book’s perceived “accuracy” in treating its main
subject, would find a fair number of errors and deficiencies. The very premise of
the book defies credulity. We are asked to believe that, in the spring of 1936,
when Lovecraft was living with his aunt, Annie E. Phillips Gamwell, at 66
College Street in Providence, he hired a secretary to handle the typing of his
manuscripts and correspondence while Annie was in the hospital (supposedly for
a case of “grippe”—an old-fashioned term for the flu—but in reality for a
mastectomy to stem her breast cancer). The idea that the impoverished
Lovecraft, earning virtually nothing and facing the crippling medical bills
necessitated by Annie’s illness, could have afforded such an amanuensis would
make any Lovecraftian laugh; and most devotees also know that, while
Lovecraft did indeed develop a kind of phobia of the typewriter, he rarely typed
(or had others type) his correspondence, most of which exists in thousands upon
thousands of pages of tiny, spidery handwriting.
But there is no question that Baker knows all this, for this implausible

premise is only the springboard to introduce the protagonist, one Arthor [sic]
Crandle, a man of Irish ancestry from Fall River, Massachusetts, who is himself
down on his luck. Crandle is married to a woman named Jane, and that they once
had a daughter, Molly, who died as a child; although Arthor sends money back
to Jane, their marriage is clearly strained.
Arthor settles into an attic room (Baker is no doubt aware that Lovecraft,
when moving into 66 College Street in 1933, had taken the “upper flat” for
himself and his aunt, and that it contained, as he wrote in a letter, “5 rooms
besides bath & kitchenette nook on the main (2nd) floor, plus 2 attic storerooms
—one of which is so attractive that I wish I could have it for an extra den!”) and
gets down to work. One of the first things he is to type is a new story that
Lovecraft has written, about a chambermaid in a hotel “down on Benefit Street
near the waterfront.” (I’m not entirely sure there was ever any hotel on Benefit
Street at the time, nor is the street particularly close to the waterfront.) In all
frankness, the story as Arthor describes it doesn’t sound notably Lovecraftian,
but its effect upon him is profound: I could not help but wonder at the kind of
imagination—the kind of man—who would not only read but write such, well, I
scarcely knew what to call it. Horror, I supposed. But not quite that, either.
There was something about the world he depicted, the coldness of it, the
meaninglessness, which disturbed me. There was nothing of humanity in it.
Nothing of goodness. Nothing of hope. There was something dreadful and empty
at its heart and, therefore, I imagined, at the heart of its author.
To be the creator of all that hopelessness—well, how could one live with
oneself? Darkness, I knew too well, begat only darkness. One way or another.
Perhaps this is an exaggerated portrayal of the effect of Lovecraft’s own writings
upon sensitive readers. And yet, when one reads such sentences as this one from
“The Call of Cthulhu” (quoted by Baker later on in her novel)—“I have looked
upon all that the universe has to hold of horror, and even the skies of spring and
the flowers of summer must ever afterward be poison to me”—perhaps Arthor’s
reaction is not so exaggerated after all.
One ray of sunshine in this otherwise dispiriting book is Flossie Kush, a
young woman who has sublet the first-floor apartment at 66 College. She is an
aspiring actress who, throughout the novel, engages in a kind of flirtatious dance
with Arthor, even though she knows he is married. Arthor himself is strongly
attracted to her, although he has begun his relationship by deceiving Flossie as to
his very identity, portraying himself as his employer.
The more Arthor learns about Lovecraft, the more disturbed he is—to the
point that he begins to think of him as a “monster.” Anticipating the howls of

Lovecraft’s posthumous partisans, Baker allows Arthor to have several
enigmatic talks with Lovecraft in his darkened study, with the result that Arthor
takes a very different view of his employer. Lovecraft tells Arthor the sad tale of
his life: his father, Winfield, stricken with “paralysis” (in fact, it was syphilis)
and spending the last five years of his life in Butler Hospital for the Insane; his
mother, Sarah Susan (“Susie”), ending up in that same institution twenty years
later, dying there in 1921; and in general the lot of a man and writer who was
hailed as a prodigy in youth but who, at least by his own reckoning, had
amounted to little now that his life was flickering to a close. Arthur is deeply
moved by Lovecraft’s confession: “I had seen into the heart of a stranger—a
monster—and found it filled with such familiar longing and disappointment and
despair that it might have been my own. How alike we all are. How broken.”
Later, after being disguised by some of the lurid stories by Lovecraft and others
in Weird Tales, Arthor concludes with what could well be the overriding theme
of the novel: “Life, in my experience, provides all we need of horror.” Or, as
Lovecraft wrote in a plot synopsis for a story he may or may not have written:
“Life is more horrible than death.”
There is a wispy thread of supernaturalism in The Broken Hours—the
apparent ghost of a little girl whom Arthor and others see from time to time. At
first Arthor wonders if it could the ghost of his own Molly, but then decides it
cannot be. The revelation of the ghost’s true identity is one of the many quietly
terrifying—and plangent—moments in this work. Susie Lovecraft, although she
has been dead for fifteen years when the novel opens, also becomes a strangely
disturbing character, as Baker tries to make sense of how this woman could have
told people that her own son had a “hideous face.”
If any criticism is to be made of The Broken Hours, it is that its various
incidents don’t seem to hang together very well. There is an episode where
Arthor finds a group of people gathered around a beach at Narragansett Bay,
where a sixteen-foot tentacle—severed from some immense creature—has
drifted ashore; but nothing is made of this. Nor is it clear why so much is made
of a person named Helen, from whom Flossie sublet the apartment, and whose
funeral Flossie later attends. Arthor’s wife, Jane, vows to pay him a visit, but
then never arrives.
But these events, even if they have no direct bearing on the central plot, all
contribute to the profound and pervasive atmosphere of sadness that every page
of the novel emphasizes. The Broken Hours does not depict Lovecraft as he
“really” was, but uses him as a metaphor for the grim tragedy of human life; a
tragedy whose anguish can only be allayed—if, indeed, it is not augmented—by
being captured as weird fiction. No reader can fail to be moved by the lapidary

fluency of Baker’s prose, by her loving portrayals of her troubled characters, and
by the cumulative power of a narrative that can only end in horror and bitterness.
It is a triumph in every way.

Conflicted about Lovecraft
I think it is safe to say that “The Horror at Red Hook” is close to the nadir of
Lovecraft’s fictional output. This is not merely, or chiefly, because of its openly
racist substructure; “The Shadow over Innsmouth” is also founded, at least
indirectly on racist presuppositions (the evils of miscegenation), and yet it
remains a towering masterpiece of regional decay and cosmic horror. The
weakness of “Red Hook” lies in the disappointing unimaginativeness of its
horrific scenario—conventional Satanism, with many details taken directly from
the Encyclopaedia Britannica—and an uncharacteristic confusion as to what
actually happens in the story. Its poor prose style doesn’t help. I recall pleading
with the Library of America to omit this story from its edition of Lovecraft’s
Tales (2005)—I couldn’t imagine why Peter Straub had chosen it. I told the
Library of America editors that, if anything, “Cool Air” was a better example of
Lovecraft’s “New York stories.” The end result was that the volume included
both “The Horror at Red Hook” and “Cool Air.”
Given the shoddiness of “The Horror at Red Hook,” it would not seem
difficult for a contemporary writer to refashion the tale in a superior manner.
And yet, I am not convinced that Victor LaValle—a young African American
writer who has previously written three novels and a short story collection—has
done the job in The Ballad of Black Tom (Tor, 2016). This little book is scarcely
a novella; by my estimate, its total wordage is about equivalent to that of At the
Mountains of Madness. And although LaValle has poignantly dedicated the book
to “H. P. Lovecraft, with all my conflicted feelings,” I find myself regretting the
missed opportunity to make something new and vital out of inferior subject-
matter.
We are here introduced to Charles Thomas Tester (who generally calls
himself Tommy), a twenty-year-old African American living in Harlem.
Gradually we learn that the tale takes place in 1924, a year before “The Horror at
Red Hook” was written. (Curiously, the exact date of the events in Lovecraft’s
story is not specified.) Tommy is struggling to make a living as a singer and
guitar player when he meets Robert Suydam at the Dutch Reformed Church in
Brooklyn. Suydam invites Tommy to play and sing at a party scheduled at his
house a few days hence, offering him the fabulous sum of $500 for the gig. The
attendees of the party will be suitably heterogeneous, as Suydam explains: “And
the guests will be men like you. Negroes from Harlem, Syrians and Spaniards
from Red Hook, Chinese and Italians from Five Points, all of them will be here

at my invitation.”
Not long thereafter, Tommy has an unpleasant encounter with police
detective Thomas F. Malone and a private detective (later named Ervin
Howard), who, as Suydam explains, are “collecting proof of my mental
inferiority.” But Suydam himself has bigger fish to fry than merely dealing with
hostile relations; he maintains that his ultimate purpose in pursuing his occult
researches is nothing less than to establish contact with “a King who sleeps at
the bottom of the ocean.”
It is not surprising that LaValle draws upon the Cthulhu Mythos in
refashioning “The Horror at Red Hook,” since the original story’s confusing and
hackneyed use of standard occultism is imaginatively stultifying. Whether
LaValle knows that, less than two weeks after writing “The Horror at Red Hook”
on August 1–2, 1925, Lovecraft devised a detailed plot synopsis for “The Call of
Cthulhu” is unclear. At any rate, LaValle exercises admirable restraint in not
explicitly mentioning Cthulhu until the very end—although it is unlikely that
any well-versed reader will have failed to guess who the “Sleeping King”
repeatedly cited in the text could be.
The figure of Ervin Howard is of some little interest. He is perhaps a fusion
of Robert E. Howard and Lovecraft himself, uttering conventional racist
sentiments that are apparently meant to be representative of the period. More
dramatically, at one point he and Malone burst into the apartment of Tommy’s
father, Otis, and Howard shoots him repeatedly in the mistaken belief that Otis
was pointing a gun at him; in fact, it was only a guitar. I imagine we are to see
this killing both as symbolic of the evil of Lovecraft’s racism and as a nod to the
distressing number of black men killed by white police officers in our own day.
Howard blandly states: “I felt in danger for my life. . . . I emptied my revolver.
Then I reloaded and did it again.”
The second half of the novella is narrated from Malone’s point of view. He
becomes alarmed when he hears that Suydam has purchased a block of three
tenements at Parker Place in Red Hook and transferred his entire collection of
occult books there. He also learns that Suydam’s second-in-command is
someone named Black Tom—who can be none other than Tommy Tester.
Malone rounds up a large police force to raid the tenements. They bring heavy
weaponry and begin firing seemingly indiscriminately at the buildings, while
Malone has a tense encounter with Tommy and Suydam in the basement. The
upshot is that, to Malone’s horror, Tommy has sided not only with Suydam
(who, in fact, he casually kills by slitting his throat) but with Cthulhu himself:
“I’ll take Cthulhu over you devils any day.” The novella ends with Tommy
looking forward to the time, whenever that will be, when Cthulhu will have

cleared off humanity from the planet.
On the whole, The Ballad of Black Tom seems routine and mechanical. It
seems as if LaValle is merely going through the motions—the motions of
adapting a Lovecraftian theme, of revisioning Lovecraft’s racism through his
own perspective as a person of colour, and of expressing Lovecraft’s signature
theme of cosmicism. None of the characters are well developed, and several (like
Ervin Howard) are mere caricatures. The work should have been expanded into a
full-length novel. As it is, it gives the impression of hasty and not very engaged
composition. There is abundant room for a re-imagining of Lovecraftian motifs
from the point of view LaValle has adopted, but he hasn’t come through on the
task. The Ballad of Black Tom is, in its way, scarcely less conventional than the
story it seeks to supplant.

Sources
I. The Classics
“From Gothic to Weird.” “Foreword” to 21st Century Gothic: Great Gothic
Novels Since 2000, ed. Danel Olson (Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 2011).
“The Canon of American Weird Fiction.” Review of American Fantastic
Tales, ed. Peter Straub. Dead Reckonings No. 6 (Fall 2009).
“Weird Poetry, Then and Now.” Review of Matthew Gregory Lewis, Tales of
Wonder; Last Flowers: The Romance and Poetry of Edgar Allan Poe & Sarah
Helen Whitman, ed. Brett Rutherford; Brett Rutherford, Whippoorwill Road:
The Supernatural Poems of Brett Rutherford. Dead Reckonings No. 12 (Fall
2012).
“Poe as Revolutionary.” “Introduction” to Edgar Allan Poe, The Raven: Tales
and Poems (Penguin, 2013).
“The Life and Work of Ambrose Bierce.” Review of Morris, Roy, Jr.,
Ambrose Bierce: Alone in Bad Company. Necrofile No. 20 (Spring 1996).
“A Biography of the Mind.” Review of Jonathan R. Eller, Becoming Ray
Bradbury. Dead Reckonings No. 10 (Fall 2011). Review of Jonathan R. Eller,
Ray Bradbury Unbound. Dead Reckonings No. 17 (Spring 2015).
“Shirley Jackson as a Classic.” Review of Shirley Jackson’s Novels and
Stories. Dead Reckonings No. 8 (Fall 2010).
II. Some Contemporaries
“Terror in the Northwest.” Review of Laird Barron, The Beautiful Thing That
Awaits Us All. Former People (http://formerpeople.wordpress.com/2013/
10/30/a-northwesterly-chill/).
“Campbell and Lovecraft.” Review of Ramsey Campbell, The Inhabitant of
the Lake and Other Unwelcome Tenants. Dead Reckonings No. 11 (Spring
2012). Review of Ramsey Campbell, Visions from Brichester. Dead
Reckonings No. 18 (Fall 2015).
“Rain, Rain Everywhere.” Review of Ramsey Campbell, Creatures of the
Pool and Just Behind You. Dead Reckonings No. 7 (Spring 2010).

“Fifty Years of Ramsey Campbell.” Review of Ramsey Campbell, Ghosts
Know. Dead Reckonings No. 11 (Spring 2012). Review of Ramsey Campbell,
Holes for Faces, The Kind Folk, and The Last Revelation of Gla’aki. Dead
Reckonings No. 14 (Fall 2013).
“Terror in a Sentence.” Review of Think Yourself Lucky. Dead Reckonings
No. 17 (Spring 2015).
“The Sublime and the Ridiculous.” Review of Dennis Etchison, Got to Kill
Them All, and Ray Garton, Silvers of Bone. Dead Reckonings No. 3 (Spring
2008).
“Just Like the Movies.” Review of Orrin Grey, Painted Monsters & Other
Strange Beasts. Dead Reckonings No. 19 (Spring 2016).
“A Modern ‘Heart of Darkness.’” Review of Caitlín R. Kiernan, The
Ammonite Violin and Others. Dead Reckonings No. 9 (Spring 2011).
“Sculptures in Prose.” Review of Caitlín R. Kiernan, The Red Tree. Dead
Reckonings No. 6 (Fall 2009). Review of Caitlín R. Kiernan, Tales of Pain
and Wonder, rev. ed. Dead Reckonings No. 4 (Fall 2008).
“The Mystery Man of Weird Fiction.” Review of Born to Fear: Interviews
with Thomas Ligotti, ed. Matt Cardin, and Thomas Ligotti, The Spectral Link.
Dead Reckonings No. 16 (Fall 2014).
“Spanning the Genres with William F. Nolan.” Review of William F. Nolan,
Like a Dead Man Walking. Dead Reckonings No. 15 (Spring 2014).
“Of Revenants and Seedy Taverns.” Review of Reggie Oliver, The Sea of
Blood. Dead Reckonings No. 18 (Fall 2015).
“Road Dogs and Iron Dead.” Review of Norman Partridge, Lesser Demons.
Dead Reckonings No. 7 (Spring 2010).
III. Some Anthologies
“Driven to Madness with Fright.” Review of Shadows Edge, ed. Simon
Strantzas, and A Season in Carcosa, ed. Joseph S. Pulver, Sr. Dead
Reckonings No. 13 (Spring 2013).
“A Smorgasbord of Weird.” Review of Dark Fusions: Where Monsters Lurk!,
ed. Lois H. Gresh. Dead Reckonings No. 14 (Fall 2013).
“Chambers, Lovecraft, and Pastiche.” Review of In the Court of the Yellow
King, ed. Glynn Owen Barrass, and Letters to Lovecraft, ed. Jesse Bullington.
Dead Reckonings No. 16 (Fall 2014).
“The Anthologies of Jason V Brock and William F. Nolan.” “Foreword” to
The Bleeding Edge, ed. William F. Nolan and Jason V Brock (Cycatrix Press,
2009). “Foreword” to The Devil’s Coattails, ed. Jason V Brock and William F.

Nolan (Cycatrix Press, 2011).
IV. H. P. Lovecraft: His Disciples and His Critics
“The Emergence of H. P. Lovecraft.” “Foreword” to New Critical Essays on
H. P. Lovecraft, ed. David Simmons (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013).
“How Not to Edit Lovecraft.” Review of H. P. Lovecraft, The Classic Horror
Stories, ed. Roger Luckhurst. Lovecraft Annual No. 7 (2013). Review of H. P.
Lovecraft, The New Annotated Lovecraft, ed. Leslie S. Klinger. Lovecraft
Annual No. 8 (2014).
“The Derleth Mythos.” Review of John Haefele, A Look behind the Derleth
Mythos. www.stjoshi.org.
“The Lovecraft Cult.” Review of Kenneth Hite, Tour de Lovecraft, and Robert
M. Price, Blasphemies & Revelations. Dead Reckonings No. 5 (Spring 2009).
“The World of Lovecraft Fandom.” Review of Jack Koblas, The Lovecraft
Circle and Others as I Remember Them. Lovecraft Annual No. 8 (2014).
“The Return of Cosmic Horror.” Review of Dead But Dreaming 2, ed. Kevin
Ross. Dead Reckonings No. 2 (Fall 2011).
“Old and New Cthulhu.” Review of The Book of Cthulhu, ed. Ross E.
Lockhart, and New Cthulhu, ed. Paula Guran. Dead Reckonings No. 11
(Spring 2012).
“Is the Well Running Dry?” Review of Cthulhu Fhtagn!, ed. Ross E.
Lockhart. Dead Reckonings No. 19 (Spring 2016).
“A Distinctive Talent.” Review of W. H. Pugmire, The Strange Dark One:
Tales of Nyarlathotep; Bohemians of Sesqua Valley; Encounters with Enoch
Coffin (with Jeffrey Thomas). Dead Reckonings No. 13 (Spring 2013).
“Working Together.” Review of David Barker and W. H. Pugmire, The
Revenant of Rebecca Pascal. Dead Reckonings No. 16 (Fall 2014). Review of
David Barker and W. H. Pugmire, In the Gulfs of Dream and Other
Lovecraftian Tales. Dead Reckonings No. 18 (Fall 2015).
“Darrell Schweitzer and the Mythos.” “Introduction” to Darrell Schweitzer,
Awaiting Strange Gods: Weird and Lovecraftian Fictions (Nampa, ID:
Fedogan & Bremer, 2015).
“‘Life Is More Horrible Than Death.’” Review of Jacqueline Baker, The
Broken Hours: A Novel of H. P. Lovecraft. Dead Reckonings No. 19 (Spring
2016).
“Conflicted about Lovecraft.” Review of Victor LaValle, The Ballad of Black
Tom. Lovecraft Annual No. 10 (2016).

[1]. I have since learned from Straub that he had indeed wished to include
several of these individuals—including Etchison and Wagner—but was
inexplicably overruled by some nameless underlings at the Library of America,
who apparently have little awareness of the significant contemporary writers of
our field.
[2]. It is worth pointing out that Campbell pronounces this name as BRICH-ester
(with a short i, as in pick).
[3]. See Letters to Arkham: The Letters of Ramsey Campbell and August
Derleth, 1961–1971, ed. S. T. Joshi (PS Publishing, 2014).
[4]. See A Weird Writer in Our Midst: Early Criticism of H. P. Lovecraft, ed. S.
T. Joshi (New York: Hippocampus Press, 2010), 48–49.
[5]. William Bolitho, “Pulp Magazines” (New York World, 4 January 1930); J.
Randle Luten, “What Makes a Story Click?” (American Author, July 1932); in A
Weird Writer in Our Midst, 231 and 56–62.
[6]. [Unsigned], “Horror Story Author Published by Fellow Writers”
(Publishers’ Weekly, February 24, 1940), in A Weird Writer in Our Midst, 180–
82.
[7]. A Weird Writer in Our Midst, 183.
[8]. Wilson’s article is reprinted in H. P. Lovecraft: Four Decades of Criticism,
ed. S. T. Joshi (Athens: Ohio University Press, 1980), 46–49.
[9]. Fred Pattee, review of Supernatural Horror in Literature, American
Literature (May 1946); A Weird Writer in Our Midst, 207.
[10]. Joseph Henry Jackson, “A Bookman’s Notebook” (San Francisco
Chronicle, January 6, 1950); A Weird Writer in Our Midst, 222.
[11]. See my Rise and Fall of the Cthulhu Mythos (Poplar Bluff, MO: Mythos
Books, 2008; rev. ed. New York: Hippocampus Press, 2015 [as The Rise, Fall,
and Rise of the Cthulhu Mythos]).
[12]. Review of Donald R. Burleson’s Lovecraft: Disturbing the Universe,
American Literature 63 (1991): 374.

