Dynamical Symmetries | Asynsis: 
Sustainable Emergent Critical Design 
The areas of synthesis between Complexity 
Sciences, Fractal Geometry and the Golden 
Mean: 
leading 
to 
an 
argument 
for 
an 
architectural design approach based on analogy, 
synesis 
and 
optimisation 
via 
emergent, 
contextual, vernacular-informed contemporary 
environmentally sustainable design 
 
 
  
 
 
Nigel Anthony Reading ARB-UK RIBA 
asynsis@me.com 
 

Dynamical Symmetries | Asynsis:  
A new icon for Sustainability 
 
HONG KONG SPIN is a landmark observation 
wheel proposal for Hong Kong in the form of the 
Greek letter Phi and the Chinese character 
Zhong, that is renewables-powered, carbon 
offset and designed to become an iconic city 
brand for the future financial centre of Asian 
international carbon-trading.  
 
NB: To improve reading flow, rather than use footnotes & bibliography, I 
ask the reader to simply consult the ultimate library of the web. 

Ta panta rei --- all is flux 
Heraclitus of Ephesus, sixth century B.C.  
Maximise the value of your action (on the meaning of existence). 
 
Stephen Hawking, 2011 
Morphology is not only a study of material things and of the forms of material things, 
but has its dynamical aspect ... in terms of force, of the operations of energy. This is a 
great theme. Boltzmann, writing in 1886 on the second law of thermodynamics, 
declared that available energy was the main object at stake in the struggle for 
existence and the evolution of the world. 
D'Arcy Thompson, On Growth and Form, 1917  
...to (in)form buildings with thematic meaning, they must convey a gestalt, the whole 
must be more than the sum of the parts, and there must also be an ambiguity and 
paradox immanent within that gestalt, as a tension. (And quoting Heckscher on 
composition...) It is the taut composition which contains contrapuntal relationships, 
equal combinations, inflected fragments, and acknowledged dualities. It is the unity 
which maintains, but only just maintains, a control over the clashing elements which 
compose it. Chaos is very near, its nearness, but its avoidance, gives ...force. 
Robert Venturi, Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture, 1966 
The following review is the product of my reading widely across the arts and sciences 
over the last 20 years, my training and experience as an architect, particularly in 
holistic thinking, combined with my studies in fractal geometry and dynamical systems 
at the engineering and computer science faculty of the University of Westminster, 
London. It is based entirely on my own intuitions following the specialist expert 
research of many others in numerous fields of inquiry. Their maths and physics as 
cited should all be accurate (as they have been peer reviewed and published). Their 
research has prompted my speculations which I stress are often on a poetic and 
allegorical level more akin at times to a fusion of western and eastern philosophy. 
Please read the following therefore as entirely the amateur speculations of an 
experienced design professional who feels we have now revealed (through the new 
Complexity sciences), that one of the paradigms of classical geometry，art and 
architecture, Phi: to be also a new icon for the contemporary and contextual practice 
of architecture and for  the sustainable development of human civilisation. 
Nigel Anthony Reading - Architect Principal: Asynsis Architecture + Design        
BA Diploma Architecture ARB RIBA, Shanghai, China 2011 

         
 
The Big Picture 
Physics tells us that the Universe is constantly seeking to lower it's energy (like 
a stream meandering down a valley, sometimes becoming rapids or cataracts), 
as it continually breaks it's initial higher (energy and dimensioned) symmetry. 
This symmetry-breaking can be pictured as bifurcating branches of 
probabilities, of chance and causality intertwined. The reason for this is that 
the higher energy/assumed extra dimensions of the Universe's origin were 
also highly symmetrical, which paradoxically, means that they were also 
extremely unstable. Highly symmetrical objects are unstable (imagine the 
beginning of the universe as being like you sitting on a perfect, highly polished 
sphere), and have a high probability for instability because any deviation by 
you from the sphere’s north pole will have you rapidly slipping off. Here, 
gravitational instabilities quickly break your symmetrical position at the north 
pole and pull you to a lower gravitational potential energy state. So small initial 
deviations in unstable, far from equilibrium situations can lead through what is 
known as the Uncertainty Principle, to massive, even cosmological 
consequences. The fabled Butterfly effect (the icon of Chaos theory also 
known as sensitive dependence on initial conditions in Classical-scale 
physics, where small changes in unstable circumstances can lead to large 
effects: the butterfly wing flaps in Shanghai causing a Hurricane in Cuba), can 
therefore have fractal analogues at both the Quantum and Relativistic scales, 
making it literally, Universal. 
  
               
 

Ludwig Boltzmann is known to us as the first to provide a probabilistic, 
statistical interpretation of Entropy. This is simply the tendency of everything 
in the Universe to cool to a minimum energy or temperature --- known as 
thermal equilibrium. The route to this Second Law of Thermodynamics is via 
increasing disorder in information, ie: in the organisation of energy and matter. 
Claude Shannon coined a measure of information entropy that refers to the 
level of compressible information content rather than order of matter and 
energy. The latter is measured as a function of energy divided by temperature 
(tendency towards thermal equilibrium and increasing disorder), whilst the 
former is measured in terms of dimensionless bits of information, as if the 
universe was a computer. The Holographic principle states that the two are 
really in synesis: so the informational/thermodynamic entropy of ordinary mass 
(including black holes) is also proportional to surface area and not volume; that 
volume itself is illusory and the universe is therefore really a 4 dimensional 
hologram which is isomorphic to the information emerging on the surface of its 
boundary. A holographic, analogical approach is taken in this review.  
The current ongoing, evolving Universe is symmetry-breaking from the initial 
condition known as the Big Bang. The process leads therefore, from a highly 
symmetrical, ordered and energetic state towards the opposite, an 
asymmetrical, disordered and lower energy one; from a low entropy Big Bang 
to a higher entropy present and future. This is known as the Arrow of Time, or 
what Einstein told us was the way nature prevented “everything from 
happening all at once.” It is also an evolution to higher probability spaces of 
greater potential complexity, as Shannon would have it. 
The great paradox then of the Second Law, is the evident, increasingly 
complex, emergent and hierarchical order we see all about us. How is this 
ordered, structured information (expressed in constantly oscillating patterns of 
matter and energy) allowed to improbably coalesce and persist from this 
highly probable tendency towards the random --- towards increasing entropy? 
Dynamical systems theory also deals with probability and can therefore allow 
us to synthesise thermodynamics and so-called "Chaos", (which is really a 
highly complex form of fractally self-similar, hierarchical, enfolded order that 
just appears to be disorder due to it’s complexity). The really interesting area of 
investigation by numerous researchers using iterative, feedback-led computer 
simulations and modeling in diverse fields, is the behaviours and structures 
found at the transition zone between ordered, stable systems at equilibrium 
(maximum entropy) and "disordered" (but complex) and unstable Chaotic 
(minimum entropy) ones. According to the Nobel laureate Ilya Prigogine (after 
Schrödinger's paradox), these far from equilibrium dissipative systems locally 
minimise their entropy production by being open to their environments --- they 
export it in fact, back into their environments, whilst importing low entropy. 

Low-entropy is analogous to higher energy or order/symmetry so “islands of 
ordered energy” in the flux of the expanding, cooling universe allow for local, 
temporary increases in order that are “borrowed” from the sea of Chaos 
around them. Globally, overall system entropy increase is nevertheless 
preserved, with the important result that the dissipative system concerned 
often experiences a transient increase (or optimisation) of its own complexity, 
or internal sophistication, before it eventually subsides back into the flux. 
In other words, small islands of order can emerge and persist in a sea of 
disorder, for extended but transient periods by being associated with local 
energy pockets, transforming that energy into structured energy flows and in 
some cases, be also condensed into matter. This behaviour is studied using 
models of physical reality within computer simulations to find the axioms 
behind the patterns. We are finding the patterns are often random, but with 
dimensionally contingent, intrinsically geometric rules or symmetries behind 
them.  
 
These studies are known as the region of alternatively, Emergence, Maximum 
Complexity, Autocatalysis, Self-organised Criticality, Autopoiesis, or the Edge 
of Chaos. (Nascent science debates labels routinely - and appropriately, in this 
case, the crucial point being that they are all different terms for essentially the 
same phenomena.) 
  
       
 

Theories of Everything, Quantum physics, Celestial mechanics, Global 
climate, Plate tectonics, Lifeforms, Ecosystems, Human cultures, 
Economies, History and societies, even Consciousness itself - all can 
reveal patterns that manifest this feedback-led, reflexive behaviour; the 
systems concerned appear to optimise their adaptive capacities by 
entering this region of (maximum) complexity on the edge of Chaos, 
especially whenever they are pushed far from their equilibrium states, 
thereby trending over time towards incrementally increasing their 
internal complexity. 
Remarkably, this transition zone is geometrically and mathematically 
best approached by the dynamic (temporal) behaviour of The Golden 
Section, Ratio or Mean. This famous classical geometrical ratio seems to 
also act as an optimised iterative Laplace/Poisson operator, (a 
differential equation that can act as an n-dimensional oscillating binary 
switch), whenever we observe the quasi-periodic evolution of a 
dynamical 
system. 
It 
appears 
in 
fact, 
to 
be 
the 
optimal, 
energy-minimising route to the region of maximum algorithmic 
complexity, and to be a basin of attraction for the period doubling route 
to the edge of Chaos or self-organised criticality.  
     
      
 
    
In this review, we shall cover some demonstrations of this behaviour, and seek 
to understand its role. 

Form fulfils Function 
As far as architectural application is concerned, we must look at the temporal 
as well as the spatial, at how quite literally, the dynamics (of systems 
applications – the Functions) can inform the statics (Forms) of building. Using 
the aesthetics of fractal geometry in the decoration of the facades or interiors 
of buildings is certainly relevant to expressing nature’s geometry in the statics 
of architecture but this is only part of the story. From the Egyptians to the 
Greeks, Gothic to the Renaissance and the Modernists in the Western tradition, 
and especially in Hindu, Islamic, Buddhist and Meso-American aesthetics, 
fractal structures or axioms (such as the regulating lines of Le Corbusier or his 
Modular based on the "Divine" Golden Mean), Spinade and her Metallic Means, 
have shown that intuitively, the best architecture and design has understood 
and represented the true geometry of nature as more than just decoration - but 
as pure, optimal structure and form, that allows the thematic, historic and 
actual physical forces and loads being carried to be read as a tension, as a 
dynamic equilibrium - from the scaled arches of Roman aqueducts to the tiered 
flying buttresses at Chartres, Brunel’s Vaults in Paddington Station to the 
contrapuntal three-pin arch of Grimshaw's Waterloo International in London, 
and perhaps most appositely in recent times, the structures of Calatrava, 
Hopkins, Piano, Rogers and Foster we see the same themes and tropes. Most 
of the most intuitively compelling architecture has always poetically expressed 
forces and loads carried; it’s physical structure is seen to have been taken 
from nature's own geometrical template. 
  
  
 
Aristotle implied over two millennia ago that the proper investigation required 
of morphology was of Telos, the "final cause" of morphology, of form being the 
result of the processes that engendered it. 
His "final cause" of morphogenesis suggests an imperative behind any 
generative process that has often been interpreted as having theological (as 
well as teleological) connotations. Here, we shall take a more determinist route, 
and look for the physical processes at work in line with his mentor Plato's 
definition of the Logos, as reason, as the "proportion, and analogy " which was 
commensurate in square, which best squared the circle, or presented a unity 
that was more than the sum of its parts. His predecessor Heraclitus first coined 

the term Logos around 600 BC to designate the principle of order and 
knowledge which coordinates the entire universe. 
Eastern philosophers including Siddhartha Gautama, Lao Tze, Confucius and 
his Song dynasty follower, Zhu Xi allude to a middle path, the Tao, and also to 
a “Golden Mean” as (non-mathematical), allegorical intuitions about the nature 
of reality itself. The latter in synthesising much of his predecessors’ work refers 
to a (Chinese: 中庸; pinyin: Zhōng Yōng), or Middle Way that was a 
harmonic balance or resonance between two reciprocal (rather than opposing), 
forces in nature. The term he used for this balance was: “The Taiji” or 
“Supreme Ultimate”, and is the basis of the Yi Jing. In the east, the dualism 
behind the forces of Li (Principles) and Qi (Life energy), are fundamentally 
integral to the Taiji and nature, which must be kept in complex dynamical 
balance, whilst still admitting the contrapuntal or contradictory, within that 
harmony. This ethos is paradigmatic to eastern philosophy, to its people’s 
concept of reality as a “Wan Xiang” (an infinity of phenomena derived from the 
Taiji) and to their social and economic practice. 
A more prosaic, analogous but empirical western approach would be that of 
the contemporary economist behind the book “Freakonomics”, Steven Levitt: 
contrasting a Li: “Morality” with Qi: “Incentives” in looking for the hidden 
patterns or symmetries behind complex market behaviours such as the 
prevalence of corruption in our societies. 
So, returning to dynamical systems, it will be suggested that this imperative 
behind form generation (as static, precipitate matter resulting from dynamic 
flows of energy) is certainly nothing to do with the metaphysical, but simply the 
result of the way nature deterministically breaks symmetry while minimising 
energy waste (entropy production), also known as the principle of least 
action - and that one way of mathematically representing this behaviour 
appears to be analogous to the geometric and dynamical behaviour of the 
mathematical constant known as the Golden Ratio or Mean: 
     
 

The figures above illustrate the geometric relationship that defines this 
constant. Expressed algebraically: 
 
This equation has one positive solution in the set of algebraic irrational 
numbers: 
 
 
List of numbers – Irrational and suspected irrational numbers
γ – ζ(3) – √2 – √3 – √5 – φ – ρ – δS – α – e – π – δ 
Binary 
1.1001111000110111011… 
Decimal 
1.6180339887498948482… 
Hexadecimal 
1.9E3779B97F4A7C15F39… 
Continued fraction
 
Algebraic form 
 
Infinite series 
 
Two quantities a and b are said to be in the golden ratio φ if: 
 
This equation unambiguously defines φ. 
The fraction on the left can be converted to 

 
Multiplying through by φ produces 
 
which can be rearranged to 
 
The only positive solution to this quadratic equation is 
 
So how does nature manifest this ultimate limiting principle in a way that still 
allows for the immense emergent complexity we see, or to put it another way, 
how can we demonstrate that in dynamical systems least action behaviour 
acts as a local energy-bank or attractor for Complexity and self-organising 
Emergence, whilst also (paradoxically) globally symmetry-breaking to lower 
energy states, towards the edge of Chaos? 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 

Fractals and Phi   
All Fractal forms, be they inert (clouds, landscapes, galaxy clusters) or 
animate (plants, animals), have a self-similar scaled structure and be 
non-integral (be between dimensions); chaotic systems (climate, the solar 
system, the stock market) also always possess this fractal quality, but taken to 
the paradoxical extreme of having infinite trajectories within a finite boundary. 
To produce these forms, an iterative, recursive feedback regime must be 
operating. Feedback (encoding similarities) underlies the entire subject, and is 
the basis of my 1995 Diploma thesis research (undertaken at the Engineering, 
Computer Science and Architecture Faculties, University of Westminster, 
London) that underlies this review. 
  
 
This research began several years earlier (during the degree at Kingston 
University), as an intuition that The Golden Mean, or Phi for short, (as a 
scaling, self-similar ratio named after Phidias, the master Greek sculptor) 
must have been fractal in nature. By extension, it seemed plausible that Phi 
may also have been embedded in higher dimensional, dynamical systems as 
an attractor of some kind, since complex dynamical systems always have a 
fractal temporal structure as they evolve over time. 
A major clue leading to the above interpretations can be seen in the fact that 
Phi is simultaneously both an arithmetic and geometric expansion of itself and 
One of the simplest possible kind. This immediately places it in both the linear 
(arithmetic progression) and non-linear (geometric progression) realms, and 
as an effective bridge, operating between the two. It is also the hardest 
irrational number to approximate with rational numbers, which has interesting 
manifestations in the complex plane, particularly when we look at some 
archetypal fractals known as Julia sets. 

Derivation from irrationality of √5 
Another short proof—perhaps more commonly known—of the irrationality of 
the golden ratio makes use of the closure of rational numbers under addition 
and multiplication. If 
 is rational, then 
 is also 
rational, which is a contradiction if it is already known that the square root of a 
non-square natural number is irrational. 
Alternate forms 
The formula φ = 1 + 1/φ can be expanded recursively to obtain a continued 
fraction for the golden ratio: 
 
and its reciprocal: 
 
The convergents of these continued fractions (1/1, 2/1, 3/2, 5/3, 8/5, 13/8, … , 
or 1/1, 1/2, 2/3, 3/5, 5/8, 8/13, …) are ratios of successive Fibonacci numbers. 
The equation φ2 = 1 + φ likewise produces the continued square root, or 
infinite surd, form: 
 
 
In other words, Phi is also the only possible geometric and arithmetic, 
expansion and partitioning of One. 
 

Virtually every aspect of fractal geometry and type of dynamical system can be 
expressed by variations upon the simple quadratic iterator:  
  
which expresses the particular type of feedback being examined, Phi can be 
expressed by a related but more archetypal variation to derive the Fibonacci 
series:  
   
which incrementally gravitates towards a particular ratio which possesses 
unique qualities. Numerically, it can be derived from the relation:  
  
For example, if one diminishes Phi by Unity you derive its reciprocal. 
Golden ratio conjugate 
The negative root of the quadratic equation for φ (the "conjugate root") is 
 
The absolute value of this quantity (≈ 0.618) corresponds to the length ratio 
taken in reverse order (shorter segment length over longer segment length, 
b/a), and is sometimes referred to as the golden ratio conjugate. It is denoted 
here by the capital Phi (Φ): 
 
Alternatively, Φ can be expressed as 
 
This illustrates the unique property of the golden ratio among positive numbers, 
that 
 

or its inverse: 
 
This means 0.61803...:1 = 1:1.61803... 
This leads us to the other cardinal feature of Phi. There is only one 
proportional division of One possible using two terms, with the third 
being One itself. From Euclid's ELEMENTS Book Five, Theorem Three 
(Alexandria, 3rd century B.C.): 
"A straight line is said to have been cut in extreme and mean ratio when, 
as the whole line is to the greater segment, so is the greater to the less." 
The Golden Mean then, is an archetypal fractal in that it preserves its 
relationship with itself (its inherent similarities under scaling are 
conformal symmetries - with topological consequences, that are 
invariant about themselves), in the most mathematically robust, 
economical but also elegant, way. It is analogia exemplified. 
     
 
As we shall see, this reciprocal, squaring behaviour about One, or Unity, as it 
is more properly termed, is far from being mathematically trivial. 
Feedback and Celestial Mechanics 
All feedback loops deterministically involve the passage of time. The quadratic 
iterator is derived from Newton's differential calculus, and from a period when 
nature was seen as a mechanistic and time-reversible automaton. Recent 
science demonstrates that in fact it consists of both the above and irreversible 
processes, known as the entropy barrier, or the arrow of time. The Golden 
Mean can also be seen as mathematically (because of the above) the simplest 
and most stable way of communing or mediating between the two, as we shall 
see. 

As mentioned, iterated recursive loops (feedback), must occur over a certain 
time interval and have a beginning and an end. To give a basic example, this is 
analogous (derived from the Greek for "proportional action", better known to us 
as self-similarity) to the initiation of a system at the apex of a space-time light 
cone, and a progressive winding around its extruding surface (with cone length 
being the age of the system). The resulting two-dimensional spiral inscribed on 
the cone surface represents an extruded origin, being One, constantly growing 
over time but never changing its shape, an example of its optimum stability (for 
a logarithmic spiral, rotation and scaling are identical). The world line of this 
space-time system heads from the apex to the origin of the disk-base and is 
irreversible. However, there is mathematically, the reciprocal case: another 
world line heading in the opposite direction, at all times, producing together, a 
spindle form, with an infinitely thin pinch-point joining them and jointly, 
corresponding to a time-reversible scenario. In nature, we in fact only see 
measurable irreversible behaviour at all scales, which is derived from light 
having a fixed, finite speed and from wave-function collapse. 
 
 
 

This reciprocality can be seen explicitly in the Complex plane (a 
dimension-shifting mapping), as we shall see. This is how Phi mediates 
between 
the 
finite 
and 
infinite 
attractors, 
and 
allows 
for 
infinite 
co-dimensionality (scale and dimensional variations) and mathematically 
reversible/irreversible processes in its action. Some of the common 
mathematical tools for probing natural behaviours (best thought of as 
self-consistent logical structures expressed in algebraic symbolic or geometric 
forms), are known as renormalisation operators, hamiltonian systems and 
eigen functions, as we shall develop upon. 
 
      
 
The feedback loop which describes Phi is an arithmetic linear operator, 
(like a binary switch: 0 or 1, off or on) representing the winding or 
rotation number of the inscribed spiral, which is conventionally 
represented as a multiple of 2π;. This is superposed with its expansion 
ratio; 1:1.618 ... which is geometric (logarithmic) and therefore non-linear. 
This can be represented using the polygonal spiral that preserves the 
circle in half-radians (π/2) in a manner reminiscent of the action of i 2 = −1, 
the imaginary number (See below, re: the Complex plane). Note that the 

natural logarithm e, i and π are in the following relationship: 
. 
The linear can be considered analogous to the reversible (and finite) 
whilst the non-linear to the irreversible (and infinite --- being numerically 
irrational). Phi is in fact the most difficult irrational to approximate with 
rational numbers, making it the last KAM torus (a model of multi-body 
dynamics), to collapse before the onset, or edge of Chaos. 
   
    
 
This quasi-periodic Phi toroid geometry is therefore paradoxically, the 
most stable (under perturbation), despite also being on the edge of 
Chaos. This is reminiscent of non-linearities damping dissipation in soliton 
behaviour. Solitons are persistent travelling waves which trade dissipative 
(resonant) effects off against inherent non-linearities, in a way that cancels 
each other out, (a flame being a very simple example). 
       
 
KAM (after Kolgomorov, Arnold, Moser), tori themselves are computer 
simulations, geometric models that have been used to solve many-body 
problems in physics, such as planetary dynamics: it has been suggested that 
the entire solar system is in this edge of Chaos scenario, as a global 
spatial/temporal harmonic entity - whilst allowing for local spatial/temporal 
chaotic instabilities, known as resonances, which could be seen as fine 
adjustments to the overall dynamic, (such as the orbital gaps between the 
planets, moons and within ring systems; or the periodic ejection of asteroids 
from their usual orbits). 

  
 
      
 
   
 
This binary switching process, unique to Phi, which as noted, is reminiscent of 
the action of an eigen, rescaling or renormalisation operator, is analogous to 
the tossing of a coin, a chance or stochastic process, that allows a 
dynamical/probabilistic interpretation. This mathematics (with appropriate 
variations) and revealed geometries, is also the basis of quantum mechanics 
(Laplace operator), classical dynamical systems, and the relativistic (Poisson 
operator - but with appropriate super-positions) or in other words, the maths of 
random walks, of chance, for the linear Schrödinger probability equations of 

the quantum, or causality for the arbitrarily large velocities and mass/energies 
expressed by the non-linear Lorentz transformations of the relativistic worlds. 
However, chance even enters the equations for relativity, since the Lorentz 
transformations that Einstein used to link space and time in Pythagorean 
relationships lead to singular points, where spacetime must end. A spacetime 
singularity could be seen as an infinity of sub-quantum, stochastic, 
hyper-chaotic events; whilst a mathematical singularity could be seen as an 
infinity of iterations of a certain logical structure, which approach infinity with 
arbitrary rapidity. To our current knowledge, the Universal limits of the Big 
Bang and Black Holes are the defining spacetime singularities of our cosmos. 
Mathematical singularities (fortunately), are more readily approached, thanks 
to the dynamical behaviour of the Golden Mean, as we shall see. 
       
                      
Causality also enters the quantum world only at its limits too: this is when the 
famous "collapse of the wavefunction" occurs, and a measurement is made (or 
interference occurs), from the world of the classical-scale dynamical system. 
The classical-scale that we humans are most familiar with, is where 
deterministic Chaos (both chance and causality in fluid synthesis), is the rule. 
            
        
 
 
 

These Phi-analogous stochastic operator behaviours have been shown by 
physicists to be super-stable processes (in systems that are most resistant to 
perturbation) by which simulated classical systems can evolve increasing 
complexity of information structure over time. This robust stability seems to be 
due to their optimising geometric scaling of themselves and begins to suggest 
Phi-operator equations are imbedded within the study of classical dynamical 
systems - and quite possibly within the larger body of quantum and relativistic 
physics as well. This imbedding appears as harmonics or resonances that best 
resist dissipation, and that minimise energy: hence emergent phenomena such 
as quantum wavefunction collapse from probability and energy waves to 
massive point particles, then classical solitons, and finally to mass or 
acceleration generating relativistic spacetime curvatures - and all the varied 
structures that evolve from them. 
 
So Phi-dynamics is a paragon of Telos, it is the epitome of reflexiveness, of 
itself as it’s own self-generative process translated in scale, over time. It is a 
conformally symmetrical recursive/invariant feedback loop acting as a 
archetypal mathematical self-replicating geometric “memory machine” – or 
algorithm: (it reiterates its uniquely optimal relationship to, and between, Unity 
and itself - archetypal renormalisation), that therefore allows a manifestation in 
the linear and non-linear, at all scales, and in any higher dimensions. It 
therefore should also epitomise the principle of least action as its imperative, 
because this optimal operator should inevitably become the attractor for 
minimising entropy production/energy corruption. Consequently, with Phi 
dynamical behaviour, it seems that it’s iteration (as a system evolves over 
time), ensures that information degradation (entropy), is minimised, while 
system complexity is also maximised. 
 

Prime numbers have been described as the building blocks of mathematics, I 
would suggest that Phi (as the Greeks intuited), is also the architectural Telos 
of geometry. 
   
 
 
We can perhaps confirm these above conjectures by first noting that we can 
use the quadratic iterator to demonstrate not only the pervasive nature of Phi 
operation, but also its intrinsic relationship with dynamical systems. We 
already see that it is an archetypal feedback system that in turn generates a 
protofractal spiral that is literally linear (one dimensional), in form. This is 
seemingly paradoxical because to be fractal a form must be of non-integral 
dimension (between dimensions), in fact. However, the non-linearity is found in 
the scaling/rotation of the spiral, which is logarithmic power-law (self-similar 
under transformation) behaviour. All fractals have this power-law invariance. 
     
 
 

Circularity 
Its dual linear and non-linear expansion of Unity is unique and also paradoxical, 
as we shall now explore through the simple feedback loop equation for a circle:  
 
   
 
with C = -1, produces what is known as the super-attractive case. Here we 
derive a Period 2 orbit, which rapidly settles to two values, being: 0 and -1. 
When we alter values for Z by iteration, we derive the following results.  
When C = -1, the two solutions are:  
   
Phi and its negative reciprocal (Φ and -1/Φ). 
These values represent repelling fixed points. If we start with Z0 = 0, we get 
the P2 cycle of 0, -1. However, if we instead start with a value close to 0, say 
0.1 we get an orbit which converges to the P2 cycle of 0, -1. This is why it’s 
called attractive. On the other hand - to consider the fixed repelling point  Φ, if 
we start close to but not on it, the orbit will be repelled away from Φ. In fact, if 
we start at just less than Φ the orbit will converge to the P2 (0, -1); but if we 
start at just greater than Φ the orbit will diverge to infinity (+∞). 
This C = -1 Φ (Phi) scenario is more special though in that it is actually super- 
attractive because the critical point (more later), coincides with one of the 
periodic points in the case where the attractive Period 2 cycle is generated. 
This super-attractive nature (also known as the period doubling route to 
chaos and the golden mean winding number route to chaos), makes the 
resulting attractive periodic orbit as resistant to perturbation as is possible; 0 
and -1 represent the two basins of attraction for the equation (between the 
finite, converged P2 orbit case and the diverged, infinite case). The orbit itself 
is strictly periodic but of the lowest dynamic period possible (being two) and 
therefore crucially, consumes the least energy to maintain. (Oscillation is 
also more economical than rotation, and higher periods consume yet more 
energy.) 

This is why Phi's deterministic switching action under infinite iteration, must 
also have, following Boltzmann, a thermodynamic interpretation; (after Roger 
Penrose) where: 
entropy = k log V  
(with Boltzmann's constant (k) as Unity and the volume of the phase space (V) 
as increasing, arithmetically and geometrically). 
So 
the 
constant 
C 
= 
-1 
represents 
a 
super-attractive 
periodic 
orbit 
of 
optimal 
stability preceded by aperiodic stasis, then 
surrounded by higher period zones and further 
beyond - a seething maelstrom of Chaos.  
Solving the paired equations for the system 
(known as a two-step loop) produced: 
Z1 : 
  
Z2 : 
  
which 
is 
the 
positive/negative 
reciprocal 
equation for the Golden Mean.  
Period 2 cycles are also achievable within the 
range of C = -1.25 to -0.75, but none of them are 
super attractive. Only the C = -1 Phi scenario is. 

This 
therefore 
explicitly 
confirms 
Phi 
as 
manifesting the mathematical behaviour that is 
the lowest energy periodic route toward the 
onset of Chaos. This is, considering the 
attractive 
orbit’s 
super-stability 
and 
super-attractive least-action nature, a seemingly 
remarkable result --- which has been confirmed 
by several mathematicians and physicists in 
numerous and diverse fields of inquiry.  
This point is of the highest significance for renovating our 
understanding of the archetypal fractal recursion and feedback operator 
Phi in terms of its fundamental relationship with geometry, dynamical 
systems 
and 
the 
immanent 
symmetry-breaking 
action 
of 
thermodynamics, from which our physical reality or Logos, is derived. 
 
          
 
 

A summary of recent developments from Wikipedia - Golden Ratio: 
  
 
 
In 1974, Roger Penrose of Oxford university discovered a symmetrical pattern 
that uses the golden ratio in the field of aperiodic tilings, which led to new 
discoveries about quasicrystals. 
In 1992, Peitgen, Jurgens and Saupe publish Chaos and Fractals, where they 
illustrate the role of the golden ratio within Julia and Mandelbrot sets. They 
describe the dynamics of angle doubling/squaring and repelling Phi fixed 
points on the fractal boundary for the Julia set. For the Mandelbrot set Phi 
action generates paradigmatic super-attractive period two orbits. 
In 2003, Volkmar Weiss and Harald Weiss analyzed psychometric data and 
theoretical considerations and concluded that the golden ratio underlies the 
clock cycle of brain waves. In 2008 this was empirically confirmed by a group 
of neurobiologists. 
In 2009 Dario Benedetti, a physicist at the Perimeter Institute for Theoretical 
Physics in Waterloo, Ontario, has investigated two possible examples of 
spacetime with scale-dependent fractal dimensions deviating from classical 
values at short scales. More than being just an interesting idea, this potentially 
Holographic universe approach might provide insight into a quantum theory of 
relativity, which also has been suggested to have scale-dependent 
dimensions. 
In 2010, the journal Science reported that the golden ratio is present at the 
atomic scale in the magnetic resonance of spins in cobalt niobate crystals and 
that this symmetry is related to the E8 Lie group-based Exceptionally Simple 
Theory of Everything of A. Garrett Lisi (of which, more later).  
Several researchers have proposed connections between the golden ratio and 
human genome DNA.                                               
The golden ratio and related numbers are used in the financial markets. It is 
used in trading algorithms, applications and strategies. Some typical forms 
include: the Fibonacci fan, the Fibonacci arc, Fibonacci retracement and the 
Fibonacci time extension. 

Symmetry Breaking 
 
The Cantor Set is simply the equal division of a line or plane into three parts, 
with the middle third being removed, scaling down to infinitely many intervals 
of finite length. It is the three-term division of One, as opposed to the two-term 
division of One by Phi. It underlies all Chaotic dynamics, in concert with Phi's 
switching action. This is because it has both a binary and ternary expansion --- 
and because it, too, communes between finite and infinite attractors. 
Chaotic systems behave in a kneading fashion, mixing-in infinite permutations: 
known as ergodic behaviour through iteration. This can again be described by 
a Phi binary operator. When we examine the Feigenbaum diagram of systems 
symmetry breaking by period-doubling into Chaos we find not only the Golden 
Mean to be a paradigm for all the bifurcations in it (a bifurcation is a Period 
Two event, and Phi is the super-attractive locus of Period Two behaviour) --- 
but also, that at the edge of Chaos, known as the Feigenbaum Point, the Phi 
operator produces an infinite Cantor Set, but crucially - with Phi proportions. 
The initial operations are illustrated, in Architectural Design Magazine 
November 1995 (Academy Editions, London and New York), which this review 
is a development upon. 

  
                  
 
 
This Phi Cantor Set is a mathematical singularity (see above), analogous to an 
undecidable universal Turing machine. A Turing machine is a symbol-string 
abstraction that expresses dynamics as a form of infinite feedback of 
computational, reflexive information-processing. Here in this zone on the edge 
of Chaos, entropy is minimal compared to the richness of information available; 
Ilya Prigogine described behaviours in this region as "the minimal entropy 
production (minimum energy loss), of far from equilibrium dissipative systems", 
and it can be seen as a typical example of the least action principle, in 
operation. 
To speculate again, bands of order in the Feigenbaum diagram occur at a fixed 
scaling ratio, and correspond exactly to super-attractive periodic fixed points 
like those mentioned above. The bifurcations again, implicitly contain Phi. In 
fact, all the various universal constants found within the Feigenbaum diagram 

are derived from the Golden Mean's deterministic rescaling operation. This is 
how Phi is imbedded within dynamical systems, as a universal binary shift 
operator, or primary eigenfunction. All constants so derived are eigenvalues 
(resonances and harmonics), of this operator as it is constantly reiterated and 
superposed. I would suggest that this is also the case with the physical 
constants in nature. They are emergent (but not necessarily predictable) 
properties of the Universe’s initial broken symmetries and phase transitions: 
that in this universe have resulted in increased complexity. The further we 
move from the static, single-trajectory equilibrium state, to the left of the 
diagram, towards dynamic, recursive, periodic behaviours, the more 
symmetry-breaking fractal structure and emergent complexity we see. 
The Feigenbaum diagram is also analogous to the symmetry-breaking 
behaviour of the early Universe as it lost energy and symmetry from its initial 
unstable, highly symmetrical, far from equilibrium state. The critical difference 
is that such symmetry-breaking represented energy loss, whilst the 
Feigenbaum diagram describes the partial, local and temporary regaining of 
this lost energy - by temporarily returning to a more non-equilibrium, energetic 
and therefore, more symmetrical (and sensitive dependant, Chaotic), scenario. 
(The cosmologist father/son team of Andre and Dmitri Linde have actually 
proposed that the putative Chaotic initial condition of the Universe inevitably 
seeds an infinite, fractal Multiverse.) 
 
Finally, it’s amusing to note that both Feigenbaum and Fibonacci (the 
originator of the series 0,1,1,2,3,5,8..., from which the Phi-ratio can be derived, 
nearly a millennium ago), are describing population dynamics, that of rabbits in 
the latter's case. 
 

Strangely Attractive 
   
                
 
The Rössler strange attractor (essentially an archetypal picture of a Chaotic 
system in four dimensional phase-space, like a section through a KAM torus) 
is used to model autocatalytic, far from equilibrium, self-organised sets such as 
the famous Belousov Zhabotinski chemical reactions seen at the Architectural 
Association's 1995 Complexity conference in London (I was later privileged to 
give a seminar on my work to students there courtesy of Tom Verebes and 
Michael Hensel, of the Design Research Lab). Autocatalysis is the key to life's 
processes and it's initial and continuing evolution because it occurs on the 
edge of Chaos, where there is the greatest computational adaptability for the 
system, and where an emergent morphology can be best self-organised and 
then maintained over time, despite being immersed in constant environmental 
flux. The condition for such homeostasis being that for the reactions/entity to 
persist, reactants (potential or actual (low-entropy) energy/resources) must be 
constantly added from that environment, and (high entropy) wastes returned to 
it - if it sounds familiar, it should: individual cellular organisms, their colonies, 
metabolisms in multicellular organisms like ourselves, groups of organisms, 
ecosystems, our entire human civilizations - and the planetary biosphere itself, 
display analogous, scaled-up versions of this behaviour. 
Note the Phi spirals in the cellular automaton 
model. The attractor is a Cantor Set in 4D, over 
time --- and is another means of representing Phi 
behaviour in phase-space at the Feigenbaum 
Point, on the edge of Chaos.  

   
  
 
Game, Set (theory) and Match 
The Complex plane can be likened to the mapping of a sphere onto a plane 
and is derived from the curved Riemannian geometry used to model quantum 
and relativistic behaviour. A dimension shift is implicit here, as any triangle 
inscribed on a curved surface will have the sum of its internal angles add to 
more than 180 degrees. To move from one spatial dimension to another 
requires this type of operation. Theorised higher dimensions are believed to 
reconcile physical laws to the extent that a unified theory of particles and 
forces linking the quantum and relativistic now seems within our grasp. These 
are the same higher energy/symmetry, unstable dimensions referred to at the 
beginning of this review when we looked at the Universe as an initial highly 
symmetrical, low entropy but high energy sphere that broke its symmetry. 
  
 
 
Complex numbers have a real and imaginary component, so as to express 
planar co-ordinates, to higher, lower, (or between) dimensions - in a more 
complete way. (Imaginary numbers when squared, can still yield negatives.) If 
we then place two basins of attraction (imagine a pendulum and two magnets) 
in this plane we can perhaps simulate the behaviour of Phi at all scales and 
dimensions. We know the Golden Mean acts as a super-attractive period two 
orbit generated by two repelling fixed points on the boundary between finite 
and infinite sets, so if we again run feedback iterations of the equation for the 
circle, with C = -1 (-1 being i, the imaginary number, squared), we produce a 
Julia Set, a fractal in the complex plane, (named after its originator), for the 
Golden Mean. 
This fractal reveals a dark finite prisoner set surrounded by an infinite escape 
set with an infinitely long and varied, self-similar boundary. 

 
The Mandelbrot Set (named after the father of fractal geometry, Benoit 
Mandelbrot), is the encyclopaedia of all Julia Sets; it has been called the most 
complex geometric entity ever seen and is also paradoxical in that it too has a 
finite area with an infinite boundary of astounding variety and self-similarity. It 
too explicitly confirms Phi as of critical significance in its morphology. 
 
 

Again, with C = -1 we see Phi is located exactly at the super-attractive 
origin of the Period Two Disk of the Mandelbrot Set. 
Geometrically, we are looking at sets with two basins of attraction: the infinite 
(white ground) "escapee" set and the finite (black figure) "prisoner" set. 
Iterating the equation yields one of these two results - points graphed to the 
complex plane land in either of these sets, to infinite scales and revealing 
infinitely changing details at their boundaries. Their boundaries are not only 
infinite, and infinitely complex--- but also contain self-similar, slightly mutated 
copies of the whole set. This boundary therefore, is the site of the instabilities 
between the two sets of figure and ground, which in turn yields new structures; 
it is the locus for the creativity of this set when viewed as either a static entity 
or as a dynamical system, and is an apt metaphor for the behaviour of fractal 
dynamical systems in nature itself. 
The Period Two Disk itself (centred on the Phi Julia set) acts as a 
geometric oscillator in dynamic equilibrium, between the positive 
feedback of the infinite escape set, and the negative feedback of the 
finite prisoner set. 
The Heart/Cardoid is Period One, representing equilibrium and stasis, 
confirming that the lowest dynamic (time-evolving) period next to stasis 
is Period Two. The other Buds are all smaller, having higher periods, less 
probability and which again, consume higher energy to sustain. 
 
 
 

Quantum Stringy Speculation 
To speculate allegorically, is it possible that quantum complementarity 
(particle/wave duality) and uncertainty (between position/momentum and 
energy/time) are artifacts of an analogous dynamic equilibrium that has been 
perturbed beyond the sustainable, emergent critical boundary between the 
finite and infinite? For example, between the finite attractor of the period two 
evolution of the wave function of the probability amplitude for a particle, and 
the infinite attractor of the probability field it exists in, in terms of 
complementarity. 
For uncertainty, when you have infinite knowledge of a particle's position - you 
will have finite (zero) information about its momentum (incidentally, infinity is 
the mathematical reciprocal of zero). This is now known to be an inherent 
property of the quantum world, and not merely an observer-based artifact. 
Light behaves as either a massless photon particle or a wave, depending 
entirely on how we perturb (i.e.: observe) it. Perhaps the quantum world is only 
seen to be paradoxical and anomalous by us because we are constantly 
seeing it being perturbed from an ideal ground (minimum energy) state by its 
inherent fluctuations; for every metastable state, there always appears to be a 
yet more stable scenario, hence phenomena such as quantum tunnelling to 
lower energy states (as the least action principle in nature would suggest). 
  
      
 
  
 

String and Membrane theory are based on the least action principle because 
of its mathematical elegance and beauty, and express both matter particles 
(fermions) and energy/force particles (bosons) in higher dimensions (and at 
cosmological initial-condition energies - reproduced at their 10 to the minus 33 
cm Planck scale/energy size, because of Heisenberg uncertainty at this 
smallest possible scale), as rotations, resonances and harmonics of vibrating 
entities that are both energy/matter and space/time. The quantum and the 
relativistic are therefore united by these entities; whose harmonics are now 
seen to be directly analogous to solitons (persistent traveling waves), which at 
classical scales are only found on the edge of Chaos. 
 
 
 
The implication here, is that scaling up from Planck scales, the quantum 
collapse of the wave function is analogous, by scaling, to classical irreversible 
non-linearities, as both require the disruption of a system from a dynamical 
equilibrium, thereby increasing their entropies. Wavefunction collapse 
therefore may in a certain sense, be a quantum precursor of the 
classical-scale bifurcation in dynamical systems, leading eventually to the 
edge of Chaos. This may be why trying to find full Chaos at the quantum scale 
is proving fruitless, the causal direction of emergent non-linearity probably 
needs to be reversed: String/Membrane soliton harmonics (plus E8 Lie group 
geometries – more later), yield quantum uncertainty/complementarity, which in 
turn, symmetry-break to classical instabilities and Chaos, (and therefore the 
creation of emergent, self-organising information structures of mass/energy on 
its edge), not the other way round. This is the dance of chance and causality 
that 
leads 
inexorably 
to 
Sustainable 
Emergent 
Criticality.             
Bifurcations themselves increase in complexity and recursive feedback 
capacity as the systems they occur in also become more complex. 
 
 

Each increase in scale over time, yields emergent patterns of mass/energy, 
that although outwardly unrelated, display the same underlying metapattern - 
because, following String theory: an increase of scale is also evidently, an 
energy minimising, symmetry-breaking, dimension-compactifying process. 
An alternative new theory refers to Spacetime having a fractal non-integral 
dimensional structure where (unlike String-Membrane theory), dimensions 
reduce from four progressively, rather than increasing. This approach (which 
is related to the Holographic universe theory), may yet also yield a theory of 
quantum gravity, but is still at a very early stage. 
Mandelbrot and Julia dance the Tango 
If we now look closely at the Phi Julia Set, we can observe in its proportions 
that the golden ratio and inverse golden ratio 
 have a set 
of symmetries that preserve and interrelate them. They are both preserved by 
the fractional linear transformations   x,1 / (1 − x),(x − 1) / x, – this fact 
corresponds to the identity and the definition of the quadratic equation. Further, 
they are interchanged by the three maps 1 / x,1 − x, x / (x − 1) – they are 
reciprocals, symmetric about 1 / 2, and (projectively) symmetric about 2. So we 
see in its proportions; exactly Phi's reciprocal, quadratic action.  
The Complex plane itself can be mapped by a system analogous to 
electromagnetic/gravitational force equipotentials and field lines. When we 
describe the Phi Julia Set fixed point behaviour, we see two field lines landing 
on 
the 
pinch-point 
(evoking 
the 
cones/spindle 
example) 
for 
  representing an angle doubling or transformation from 
1/3 to 2/3 of 2π. Now, angle doubling in the Complex plane is equivalent to 
squaring in the Cartesian plane, and to an oscillation of the binary shift 
operator. This action should therefore suggest Phi's behaviour, represented 
as an operator equation (Schrödinger for quantum and Lorentz for 
relativistic – with appropriate superpositions), to be applicable to the 
quantum and relativistic (linear and non-linear) domains as well as within 
dynamical systems, at the so-called classical scale. (Note that space-time 
has fractal structure: it is curved and non-linear. For example, the 
inverse-square law of gravitational force versus distance is a simple fractal, 
and therefore self-similar, power law. Gravity is space-time curvature - caused 
by mass/energy – without external forces applied, its manifolds are traversed 
in minimum-entropy geodesics, lines of least distance; again, just as water 
flows through the lowest points in a valley, thereby minimising its gravitational 
potential energy.). 

 
Returning to the Phi Julia Set itself, we see that both the key repelling fixed 
points (Z1 and Z2) referred to above are on the infinite mathematical 
singularity of the boundary between the finite prisoner and infinite escape sets, 
on the edge of Chaos, in fact. The Golden Mean is therefore intrinsically 
dynamic here, its action is one of perpetual reciprocal oscillation, also exactly 
and uniquely replicating the dynamics of the unit circle. The Phi Julia Set, is 
centred at the origin of Period Two dynamics (the Period Two bud of the 
Mandelbrot set), which is the location of lowest possible dynamic period 
(namely, Period 2).  
In other words, it’s an archetypal bifurcation that allows access to zones of 
maximum complexity at the least energy or iterative cost. Or to put it another 
way, Phi action allows maximum Shannon entropy (high algorithmic 
complexity of information content) for minimal Boltzmann entropy (lowest 
thermodynamic disorder in energy/matter), when iterated over time. 

  
 
Looking at the above Julia set for C = -1 we see the two points; Z1 and Z2, are 
on the boundary (Z1 is on an infinitely thin pinch point where the field lines of 
1/3 and 2/3 angle double or transform) while Z2 is on the end of the right hand 
bulb). After we run the iteration for: Z1, Z2 
Z1 : 
  
Z2 : 
 
We see that both Z points are repelling with the Z1 orbit heading to infinity 
while the other: Z2, settles into a steady, attractive Period 2 orbit: 
0…., -1…, 0…, -1…, 0…  
All initial values of the interior “prisoner” set are attracted by this orbit and the 
Julia set is the boundary of this basin of attraction. 
In fact, for all C parameters from the Period 2 disk interior we find an attractive 
Period 2 orbit.  
However, this Period 2 Phi Julia set scenario, with C = -1 is special. Here the 
critical point (allowing for scenarios where Cantor sets, that commune 
between finite and infinite attractors, and mathematical phase transitions can 
occur), coincides with one of the periodic points. Cantor sets are located at 
the edge of chaos scenario, as are symmetry-breaking phase transitions, 
which are intimately related through dimension, scale and symmetry invariant 
power laws (known as Universality), and renormalization group theory to the 
evolution 
of 
sustainable, 
emergent 
self-organised 
critical 
systems.               
Therefore this critical-periodic point locus is rightly called super attractive.  

This again, means Phi behaviour seems to be able to operate at all scales 
and in any dimension, and also confirms it as when infinitely iterated, the 
mathematically most stable attractive orbit for achieving a mathematical 
singularity. The fixed points themselves confirm the orbit between the finite 
(Z2) and infinite (Z1) attractors. The finite attractor here is the period two orbit, 
analogous to a graph of: y = sin x. The infinite attractor is that same orbit as the 
graph of the reciprocal: y=sin(1/x).  
Speculating again, these graphs of simple harmonic motion can be used to 
describe the curvature of space-time in approaching the speed of light. 
Relative to an outside observer, (i.e.: the rest of the Universe), time for you 
stops, you compress to finite size, as one dimension compactifies, but you 
gain infinite mass (unless you are initially massless, like a photon). On the 
approach to a space-time singularity such as a Black Hole (when time also 
stops) – the same occurs. It is theorised that the reciprocal process occurred at 
the Big Bang. They are also intriguingly (and perhaps non-coincidentally), time 
reversals of each other. 
    
  
 
Mandelbrot set Period 2 Julia set dynamics in the Complex plane place Phi in 
a unique and special position, which I suggest confirms the Golden Mean's 
profound dynamical and symmetric action, and potential mathematical 
application to quantum (linear) and relativistic (non-linear) physics, the binding 
limits below and above the classical. The classical-scale itself, combines both 
linear and non-linear behaviours to realise the most real complexity in natural 
dynamical systems for extended, but transient periods. 
Of course, the very small and the very big, the quantum and the relativistic, are 
as stated above, believed to be linked by String/Membrane theory: together 
producing a Theory of everything, more specifically: a unified formulation of 
quantum gravity. 
This theory is essentially geometric (specifically topological), always dealing 
with minimal surfaces, albeit in extra ten, five or other dimensions for String 

and 
eleven 
dimensions 
for 
Membranes, 
and 
are 
predicated 
on 
energy-minimising processes. 
The major outstanding issue in String/Membrane theory is how these extra 
dimensions compactify (since we only actually experience four - three spatial 
and one temporal): how do they break symmetry and bifurcate, minimising 
their energy to produce the stable charges and masses of the elementary 
particles and the physical constants within our four dimensional space-time. 
        
 
To speculate, one could hazard that the current, unfolding dynamical process 
of the Universe itself as it evolves through time is an edge of Chaos scenario 
(also 
known 
as 
Emergence 
and 
self-organised 
Criticality): 
with 
phenomenological examples or empirical proofs possibly being in the evidence 
of criticality in static states: such as finding Phi proportions in the vascular 
distribution, structural organisation, and space compactifying of organisms 
(which we do), the root-five symmetries of the DNA molecule (ditto), or other 
physical permutations of Fibonacci numbers and their complements, the Lucas 
numbers, or self-organised critical, power-law behaviour - in dynamic 
processes. 
  
  
 
Remarkably, via E8 Lie group geometric analysis Phi does crop up in various 
analyses of the charge relationships of the elementary particles - but also 
(scaling up again), in solar system orbital relationships (such as the main gap 
in the rings of Saturn). Self-organised criticality is revealed by the soliton on 
Jupiter, better known as the Great Red Spot, or by the Sun's dynamical 
behaviour, or by the x-ray emission spectrographs of Black Holes devouring 
matter from their accretion disks. Galaxy spiral arms are actually waves of 
auto-catalytic mass star formation, much like the self-organised critical BZ 
reactions referred to earlier. 

     
 
    
 

 
        
        
 

Perhaps to speculate, even the non-locality, the global mathematical 
singularity features of the edge of Chaos region, could hint at an answer 
involving quantum-scale time-reversibility for the famous EPR paradox - 
relating to quantum-entangled elementary particles appearing to be 
instantaneously in touch with each other without any time delay and over 
apparently cosmological distances?  
 
Phi has also been found at the quantum level (just recently in 2010), through 
direct experimentation rather than modeling (more later). Intriguingly, as 
alluded to above, the underlying geometries at the heart of the E8 Lie 
group-based “Exceptionally Simple theory of Everything” of Garret Lisi are also 
Golden Mean related.  
Perhaps we now have a good reason why. Perhaps we are observing 
fundamentally, various harmonics and resonances of the string/membranes 
(behaving analogously to classical KAM tori), that display the most 
self-organised stability for the least energy, at Emergent Criticality, 
analogous to the classical edge of Chaos. These are mathematical laws (or 
relationships), that can for the condition known as Universality, allow 
thermodynamical behaviour near phase transitions, to be scale, dimension and 
symmetry invariant, despite variance in the actual properties of the 
microscopic system. 
Perhaps the complex geometrical relationships between all the (nested) “tori” 
due to the broken symmetries of our energy-minimising, non equilibrium 
Universe yield the various resonances, harmonics, (particle charges, masses 
and physical constants) of our world, whether we are discussing Planck, Plate 
Tectonic, or Parsec scales. These same rules also seem to apply to 
Protoplasm, Punctuated equilibria, Politics and the Price mechanism (see 
Mandelbrot on cotton prices) - and are therefore about as universal (and as 
relevant to cultural production such as architecture), as they could get. 
Perhaps our wan ember of a Universe is continually evolving at Criticality, 
and maybe it has self-organised itself at multiple scales, dimensions, 
symmetries and physical locations to an Emergent Critical state on the cusp 
of a Chaotic, infinite possibility space via its symmetry-breaking, 
energy-minimising, unfolding journey from the highly energetic, low entropy, 
supersymmetrical - but chaotically unstable conflagration of the Big Bang? 

Sets and Dynamics 
If we then compare the Mandelbrot Set with the Feigenbaum Diagram we 
can see how the Period One Cardoid of the former corresponds exactly 
with the single, equilibrium trajectory of the latter. The Period Two Disk 
with Phi as its super-attractive centre, exactly matches the first 
bifurcation --- confirming Phi, geometrically as the paradigm for 
deterministic bifurcation. All the subsequent bands of order in the latter 
(which occur at a fixed scaling ratio derived from Phi-action), precisely 
match the micro Mandelbrot Sets along the horizontal, real-number axis 
of the Set. 
 
 
This explicit geometric evidence appears to define Phi then, as the 
optimum oscillating operator that mediates between ordered, equilibrium 
systems and disordered, non-equilibrium ones. It allows an oscillating orbit 
to access the infinitely fecund chance morphologies of Chaos, recapitulate 
them back into its super-attractive, causal orbit: access Universality and 
therefore yield system growth and morphogenesis. It is the paradigm for 
systems evolution: for the emergence of global, causal complexities from 
local chance simplicities - for bottom-up evolution based on hierarchies of 
increasing sophistication, themselves engaged in continual feedback, 
catastrophes and transient stabilities. For Phi behaviour then, chance and 
causality, Chaos and Cosmos (the Greek for order), are in the tension of a fluid, 

evolving dynamical equilibrium; an equilibrium that creates the unexpected 
and the emergent, which with each symmetry-broken hierarchy, yields 
transient morphologies of occasionally extended, increased complexity. 
The Golden Mean therefore appears to represent absolute global 
deterministic 
Order, 
as 
an 
iterated 
period-doubling 
(bifurcating/symmetry-breaking) system, but over time, also allows for 
local, stochastic Chaos (mathematical singularity events), or chaos 
which can, when the system is far enough from equilibrium and 
dissipatively open, also create. 
Phi thereby facilitates the creation of archetypal, fractal, self-similar 
echoes (mathematical singularities), of the initial condition (or 
space-time singularity event), otherwise known as the prime thermally 
non-equilibrium event of the Big Bang. 
Since the journey to thermal equilibrium is governed by the second law of 
thermodynamics, which is responsible for irreversible processes (beyond the 
reversible and linear quantum world), this also makes Phi behaviour the 
optimum operator for both linear reversibility and non-linear irreversibility. For 
a system to reach and maintain maximum complexity as entropy increases, 
(something which is progressively harder in energy terms when scaling up 
from the linear, reversible quantum world), the optimal route through 
ever-increasing resonances, interference and instabilities, is to preserve a 
Golden Mean minimum-entropy trajectory. The Golden Mean in effect, allows 
an infinite fractal (the Cantor Set mentioned earlier) to tap the creativity of 
Chaos, for the use of order, an order which is almost a free loan, (except for 
the interest of entropy), making us both part of an implicate unfolding - as well 
as the result of an explicate vicissitude of the cosmological casino. This 
transaction occurs where the algorithmic complexity of a system is maximized 
at Emergent Criticality, on the edge of Chaos; so, if maximum Complexity is 
(to use a surfing analogy), the board which surfs the wave of inexorable 
entropy increase, then the Golden Mean is the (least-action) optimum, most 
elegant, economical and energy-minimising path along the face of that wave.  
 

Game On 
 
Various cellular automata (dynamic heuristic pixel matrix) simulations 
also may confirm Phi's system structure-enhancing evolutionary action, 
to the point of researchers seeing this binary-switching behaviour as an 
inevitable target for natural selection.  
Stuart Kaufmann, biologist and computer scientist at the Santa Fé Institute, in 
promoting his view that Complexity explains evolution as a relationship 
between Darwinian selection and Lamarckian self-organisation; and the order 
in the genome and the emergence of life itself; cites binary arrays displaying 
apparent period two behaviour as those allowing "broad boulevards of 
possibilities - rather than back alleys of thermodynamic improbability." 
Kaufmann's CA's place the regions of maximum complexity, islands or 
peninsulas of stable pixels surrounded by chaotic switching ones ("frozen 
cores" in his terminology), firmly in the self-organised critical/edge of chaos 
region. This behaviour, used to (accurately) predict genotypes for organisms of 
different complexity, results when his arrays are linked together in which each 
pixel responds to the input from two others, but no more nor less - (less 
produces stasis, more: increasing chaos).This period two-analogous 
behaviour, in what he calls his Boolean NK nets, I submit shows Phi in action 
yet again: this time, in silica - mirroring the in vivo of real living systems. His 
work extends to whole ecosystems, and includes the realms of fitness 
landscapes and simulated annealing, where robust, energy-minimising (fitness 
enhancing) strategies are all revealing deep links between ecology and 
economics. 

 
The same can be said for various investigations into plasma and 
quantum-scattering physics, pure maths of dynamical systems, fractal 
dimension, and ecosystem simulations --- to name a few. All cite Phi-behaviour 
as an invariant attractor behaving in some or all of the ways described above.  
The physicist Per Bak models Self-Organised Criticality, a term he coined. In 
these simulations he observes reciprocal squaring, power-law behaviour. This 
law is ubiquitous in nature, whether it is sand-pile avalanches, earthquake 
intensity over frequency, neurone firing patterns during consciousness, stock 
market behaviour, or the previously mentioned celestial, Black Hole 
pyrotechnics. (This is the remarkable feature of Complexity incidentally, that 
the hitherto unrelated: the inert and animate, natural and human-metabolic or 
cultural phenomena, all seem subject to the emerging new paradigm of 
criticality on the edge - all are linked in a new universal paradigm, one that I am 
now calling Sustainable Emergent Criticality.) This behaviour is also 
self-similar at all scales, and is reputed to display energy-minimising behaviour 
as it gravitates towards edge of Chaos criticality, and so it seems reasonable 
to intuit it to be another manifestation of Golden Mean dynamical behaviour. 
                                
 

Chris Langton, also of the Santa Fé Institute, dedicated exclusively to 
Complexity research, likens order to a solid (like ice), disorder to a gas (steam), 
and believes a liquid (water) form of Complexity occupies a phase-transition 
region between the two. The Institute is essentially exploring this region first 
popularised as the edge of Chaos by Langton, by means of various computer 
simulations, seeking a putative new formulation of the second law of 
thermodynamics, (a search this review refers to, whilst also hopefully adding a 
architectural, holistic, allegorical and strictly speculative commentary). What 
the Institute finds is that the liquid/phase transition region behaviours are 
the most complex, the most stable under perturbation, display non-local 
(global) behaviours, and are capable of universal computation - with 
extended, transient entities emerging spontaneously from them that 
inevitably, because of their qualities, have been dubbed "artificial life". 
Since life is the most complex known feedback-led process in the 
Universe, and consciousness the apotheosis of these processes: the 
simulations of artificial life could be extremely promising in promoting 
our understanding of how such global complexities can emerge from 
local simplicities. 
Complexity science encourages cross-fertilisation between fields, so for 
parallels in other branches of science: non-locality is a proven riddle of the 
quantum world (paired, entangled particles behave as if in instantaneous 
communication – an apparent violation of the speed limit of light); and 
additionally, the phase transition is integral to inflationary theories of the 
symmetry-breaking expansion of the early Universe. Complexity science 
allows these holistic fusions as we start to see metapatterns linking hitherto 
unrelated fields. 
Langton cites the phase transition zone as that containing the most potential 
complexity for the entropy generated. This is because the cellular automata 
used then behave as undecidable universal Turing machines, as universal 
computational singularities, exactly replicating the Feigenbaum Point 
dynamics referred to above. We then are in the number theory realms of the 
NP problem, Riemann’s Zeta Function and Chaitin's Omega. Considering the 
evidence above, it is likely that Golden Mean behaviour will be found to be a 
significant part of these explorations. This is because the Mean appears to 
allow just that: an emergent optimum oscillator in dynamic equilibrium between 
entropy 
increase 
(information 
transmission), 
and 
entropy 
decrease 
(information storage), thereby sustaining maximum complexity in a 
computation, over time. In terms of coin-tossing behaviour (50/50 stochastic 
binary-switching), Omega appears to be analogous to Mean dynamics at the 
Feigenbaum point: and potential further evidence that (for this case), 
NP-complete problems are intractable, universal Turing machine halting is 
undecidable, algorithmic complexity is non-computable, and of course, that 
this situation conforms to Gödel's incompleteness theorem. 

Number theory therefore also appears to confirm the Golden Mean to be on 
the very cusp of Chaos, but also the quantum, via Riemann's zeta function, in 
quantum scattering. 
    
   
 
Essentially, all the above number theory results point to the inherent limitation 
that to be self-consistent, mathematics must admit the random - that not all 
unproved statements are provably unprovable ("All Cretans are liars", spoken 
by Epiminedes, a Cretan). Sometimes a statement (e.g.: “this statement is 
false”), is too complex and reflexive to be proven - one falls prey to tautology 
and paradox. Nature is subtle - but not malicious, to paraphrase Einstein. 
Incidentally, he told Corbusier that his Modular, based on the Mean, "made a 
difficult job more easy". Who’s job, we may ask? The same God that 
“…doesn’t play dice”, perhaps? 
Causality must (pro)create with Chance 
Local chance events underlie and create our apparent reality in the most 
fundamental of ways, and yet they paradoxically are the basis for the global 
causality we see all about us. For Prigogine, the Logos, the true nature of 
reality, the new paradigm - is the best of both worlds: somewhere in dynamic 
equilibrium between. Pure Newtonian causality is an incorrect (finite) view, but 
then again, so is the aspect of complete Heisenbergian uncertainty and 
(infinite) chance: our world is a dancing, unfolding, dynamic synthesis of the 
two. 
In dynamical systems, the edge of Chaos region is therefore the most globally 
stable (remember, the cellular automata reveal sustainable structures known 
as extended transients in this phase-transition zone), but it is also the most 
locally creative. Phi resides in this optimum boundary zone: between the 
causality of the bifurcation branches, and the chance of the bifurcation points 
themselves: between the result of the coin-toss and the initial toss itself. In 
terms of Phi-Julia Set behaviour, its super-attractive (global) orbit is optimally 
stable because it is oscillating between those two optimally unstable (local) 
repelling fixed points that commune between the finite and infinite attractors in 
the uniquely shared, fecund critical/periodic zone where phase transitions, 
power law symmetry-breaking and Cantor sets emerge. 

This local energy-minimising behaviour, when applied to the arbitrarily large 
numbers of shift-operations implicit within say, the complex neural and 
metabolic processes of individual organisms - allows global stability to be 
maintained in the face of an environment in constant flux. This stability has just 
enough creativity in it to deal adaptively with new situations. This might be on 
the scale of an individual organism such as an Echidna, or its staple prey, an 
ant colony. A flux between order and randomness, with not too much of either 
extreme, is the key to both evolutionary adaptivity and/or homeostasis. 
On evolution theory itself, Darwin fitness needs to be combined with 
Lamarckian programming, phenotypes feedback into genotypes far more than 
is currently being recognized. Dynamical systems retain fractal memories of 
their structure, which are then often repeated (perhaps with some variations), 
in subsequent iterations. The best analogy is the Mandelbrot set when iterated. 
 
 
 
Consciousness itself might well be a form of optimal, adaptive information 
processing, a learning, fluid homeostasis of symphonic neurone-firing, one 
which has been theorised in the Institute's journal, titled "Artificial Life", (and 
endorsed by Roger Penrose), to be further based on the quantum switching of 
single electrons on dimer "switches" located like cellular automata pixels on 
microtubules, filamentous structures that are purported to be the combined 
superstructure and nervous systems of individual cells. Such CA simulations 
display edge of Chaos extended transient, glider and other complex 
(specifically,) behaviour typical of the other CA simulations listed above. 

     
 
 
Phi Dynamical Quadtych 
It seems clear now that the Golden Mean can certainly be reconciled with the 
new sciences, which reveals a profound dynamical aspect to its action. The 
Mean can be found to mathematically describe the dynamical behaviour of 
nature in these four key idealised models. 
Firstly, the final Phi-stability of quasi-periodic KAM tori, just prior to collapse 
into chaos (applicable to celestial mechanics). 
 
          
      

Secondly, the universal behaviours, Phi-Cantor set at the Feigenbaum point 
and constant scaling relationships of the period-doubling Feigenbaum diagram 
(applicable to population dynamics). 
 
Thirdly, the most complex, liquid/phase transition region of cellular automata 
behaviours, displaying quasiperiodic, period two and therefore, Phi 
extended-transient 
structures 
(applicable 
to 
organisms, 
ecosystems, 
economics and consciousness). 
 
 

Fourthly, the dynamic switching behaviour of the C = -1 Phi Julia set where two 
repelling fixed points create both an infinite and super-attractive P2 orbit on the 
boundary between the finite prisoner and the infinite escapee sets: where 
periodic and critical points coincide: yielding a geometric and mathematical 
singularity.  
 
All reveal Phi behaviour as the period two (minimum energy dynamically 
periodical), route to the edge of Chaos, as an emergent property that accesses 
maximum complexity - for minimal energy/information waste, or entropy 
production. 
The Mandelbrot Set is the geometric icon that links all four in a lapidary, 
metaphorical, almost mandala-like sense. It is itself, also generated by 
equations that tell the same story, by dynamically zooming to different scales 
in the complex plane. 
  
             
  

Number theory is also saying that this is the ultimate, profound message 
contained in mathematics: that within all self-consistent logical structures, in 
the relationship of relationships (as mathematics has also been poetically 
called), causality and chance - dance on the cusp, creating the increasingly 
complex in their fractal, resonant wake. 
So we now also know that causality and chance, Cosmos and Chaos if you 
prefer, do not waste precious energy/mass (it is minimised), symmetry (it is 
broken), dimensions (three spatial dimensions are the liquid/complex region in 
random walks: less, and not much interesting happens - more, and you get 
hopelessly lost), nor time. Time breaks directional symmetry above the 
wave-function collapse (increasing entropy and lowering its energy) - and is 
linked with the three spatial dimensions in geodesic curves that express 
energy/mass as the weakest known force - gravity. 
Interestingly, the Garrett Lisi E8 Theory of Everything mentioned earlier also 
derives gravity from the geometric relationships of space-time but without 
requiring extra curved dimensions whilst still avoiding quantum infinities. The 
8-dimensional (248-symmetry) geometric shape at the heart of his 
Exceptionally Simple Theory of Everything of 2007 (based on the E8 Lie 
group), is able to represent all the known forces and particles and their correct 
charges (as well as predict 22 new particles that may be testable using the 
Large Hadron Collider at CERN).  
Phi itself has also just been found experimentally to be associated with 
E8 in the phase transition state known as quantum criticality: 
Quantum Criticality in an Ising Chain: Experimental Evidence for Emergent E8 
Symmetry. Article in Science, DOI:RE1180085/JEC/PHYSICS 
Coldea et. al. 2009 Science 327 177-180 (DOI: 10.1126/science.1180085). 
Abstract 
Quantum phase transitions take place between distinct phases of matter at 
zero temperature. Near the transition point, exotic quantum symmetries can 
emerge that govern the excitation spectrum of the system. A symmetry 
described by the E8 Lie group with a spectrum of eight particles was long 
predicted to appear near the critical point of an Ising chain. We realize this 
system experimentally by using strong transverse magnetic fields to tune the 
quasi–one-dimensional Ising ferromagnet CoNb2O6 (cobalt niobate) through 
its critical point. Spin excitations are observed to change character from pairs 
of kinks in the ordered phase to spin-flips in the paramagnetic phase. Just 
below the critical field, the spin dynamics shows a fine structure with two sharp 

modes at low energies, in a ratio that approaches the golden mean predicted 
for the first two meson particles of the E8 spectrum. Our results demonstrate 
the power of symmetry to describe complex quantum behaviors.  
In January 2010 Science Daily and Physics World announced the discovery of 
this hidden Phi symmetry in solid state matter.   
R. Coldea, D. A. Tennant, E. M. Wheeler, E. Wawrzynska, D. Prabhakaran, M. Telling, K. 
Habicht, P. Smeibidl, K. Kiefer. Quantum Criticality in an Ising Chain: Experimental 
Evidence for Emergent E8 Symmetry. Science, Jan. 8, 2010 
As explained in the Science Daily article: 
"On the atomic scale particles do not behave as we know it in the 
macro-atomic world. New properties emerge which are the result of an effect 
known as the Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle. In order to study these 
nanoscale quantum effects the researchers have focused on the magnetic 
material cobalt niobate. It consists of linked magnetic atoms, which form 
chains just like a very thin bar magnet, but only one atom wide and are a useful 
model for describing ferromagnetism on the nanoscale in solid state matter. 
When applying a magnetic field at right angles to an aligned spin the magnetic 
chain will transform into a new state called quantum critical, which can be 
thought of as a quantum version of a fractal pattern. Prof. Alan Tennant, the 
leader of the Berlin group, explains "The system reaches a quantum uncertain 
-- or a Schrödinger cat state. This is what we did in our experiments with cobalt 
niobate. We have tuned the system exactly in order to turn it quantum critical." 
 
By tuning the system and artificially introducing more quantum uncertainty the 
researchers observed that the chain of atoms acts like a nanoscale guitar 
string. Dr. Radu Coldea from Oxford University, who is the principal author of 
the paper and drove the international project from its inception a decade ago 
until the present, explains: "Here the tension comes from the interaction 
between spins causing them to magnetically resonate. For these interactions 
we found a series (scale) of resonant notes: The first two notes show a 
perfect relationship with each other. Their frequencies (pitch) are in the 
ratio of 1.618…, which is the golden ratio famous from art and 
architecture." Radu Coldea is convinced that this is no coincidence. "It 
reflects a beautiful property of the quantum system -- a hidden symmetry. 
Actually quite a special one called E8 by mathematicians, and this is its first 
observation in a material," he explains. Radu believes that this discovery has 
wider implications for quantum physics. "The results suggest that similar 
hidden symmetries may also govern the physics of other materials near 
quantum critical points where electrons organise themselves according to 
quantum rules for strong interactions," he said. " 

   
      
 
            
 
I submit that what we are just beginning to see in real physical experiments 
(rather than just the maths, geometry and four computer simulations I cited 
above as evidence of Phi behaviour in nature), is the geometric symmetry 
signature of Phi at the phase transition of quantum criticality, at the very 
moment of wavefunction collapse – or if you prefer, the moment it emerges 
into the classical scale and has the potential to become matter. It is the tuned 
moment it coalesces from a dynamical process (or quantum spin alignment), to 
a fixed resonance or state. 
To repeat and develop my previous speculation: 
The implication here, is that scaling up from Planck scales, the quantum 
collapse of the wave function is analogous, by scaling, to classical irreversible 
non-linearities, as both require the disruption of a system from a dynamical 
equilibrium, thereby increasing their entropies. Wavefunction collapse 
therefore may in a certain sense, be a quantum precursor of the 
period-doubling classical-scale bifurcation in dynamical systems, leading 
eventually via the edge of Chaos, to Sustainable Emergent Criticality. 
As you can imagine, after exactly 20 years since my first intuitions in this 
regard (during the writing of my BA in Architecture thesis Harmonic Chaos 
Architecture at Kingston University, London, 1991), this resonant, quantum 
neo-Pythagorean “music of the spheres” is literally, soaring music to my ears. 

 
A Golden Ratio construction of the 240-vertex E8 
lattice 
from the 24-cell D4 lattice 
by Tony Smith 
First, recall that the Golden Ratio, or Golden Mean,  
is PHI = (1 + sqrt(5))/2.    
PHI is given by the continued fraction  1 + 1/ 1 + 1/ 1 + 1/ 1 + 1/  ...   
PHI is also given by 1 + PHI = PHI^2.   
Even though PHI is algebraic, and not transcendental,  
it is the most irrational number.  
PHI is related to the pentagon,  
the ratio of adjacent numbers in  
the Fibonacci sequence 1 1 2 3 5 8 13 21 ... ,  
and closed systems like:   
a harmonic pentatonic musical scale;  
Le Corbusier's Modulor; and  
single-layer icosahedral crystals.  

  
Take the 24-cell, and its 24 vertices. Also, take its dual 24-cell. 
Take the 96 edges of the dual 24-cell and pick a point on each edge that 
divides the edge into a Golden ratio. 
In a way that is similar to the construction of  
the 12 vertices of an icosahedron  
from Golden ratio points on the edges of an octahedron  
 
this produces 96+24 = 120 vertices of a 600-cell  
 
which is dual to the 120-cell  
 
You can pick Golden ratio points consistently in more than one way, which 
should correspond to the 7 ways you can construct the 240-vertex 
8-dimensional real version of the Witting polytope. 
Then (since the Golden ratio contains sqrt(5)) extend the integral quaternion 
D4 lattice of the 24 vertices of the 24-cell from a 4-dimensional rational space 
to an 8-dimensional space that is the extension of the rational numbers by the 
irrational sqrt(5) of the Golden ratio; 

THEN 
the 24 vertices of the 24-cell which are in the 4-dimensional rational subspace 
of the 8-dimensional sqrt(5) extension of the 4-dimensional rational space, 
plus 
the 96 Golden points on the edges of the dual 24-cell, which are in the 
4-dimensional sqrt(5) irrational part of the 8-dimensional space 
EXACTLY MAKE 
120 points that, in the extended 8-dimensional space, are half of the 
240-vertex real version of the Witting polytope and generate an E8 lattice. 
 
                         
 

                                    
 
 
            
 

   
 
  
What of Architecture?  
Form fulfils Function：ASYNSIS: Sustainable Emergent Critical Design 
So to now move from the universal architectures above to those we inhabit, 
here are some brief examples of how the assimilation of this new knowledge of 
dynamical systems, geometry and physics, married with new environmental 
and structural engineering, materials science and information technologies, 
might reinvent the statics of architecture. This can be done without only 
resorting to static proportional applications of the Golden Mean, which are 
always distorted by the fractal scaling of perspective anyway, or to simply 
imitating or pastiching past aesthetics: 
The first dynamic, emergent feedback-led application is in the design process 
itself; the Logos or Telos, the form(al cause) of a building being the result of 
the consultative process and the cultural milieu that informed it. If this process 
fully involves the user and all other concerned parties, and takes full note of all 
the client brief and site constraints and histories; a plural democracy of rich 
mutual feedback will result. The architect can then fully act as mediator, 
curator and (auto)catalyst for the emergent, complex form that arises, which 
appropriately should epitomise the "final cause" of least action in being the 
optimum artifact for its role, (and ideally by also being energy-efficient, 
wherever possible). Speaking metaphorically, one could say that the 
architect through their role in the design and production process, almost 
personifies the optimising imperative of Phi – as initial concept design 
progenitor and preserver/expeditor of the design intent information as it 
is documented and delivered at all scales and levels of detail.      
The latest manifestation of this process includes the increasing 
integration of computation in the design process, beginning with 
Parametric 
design 
and 
continuing 
with 
Building 
Information 
Management software that allows architecture, structural and services 
information to be integrated into the one shared, virtual model during the 
design and documentation process. 

Putting the “ingenious” back in “engineer” 
Climate control will increasingly become a hybrid of mixed-mode feedback 
between active elements, such as mechanical HVAC, and the passive, such 
as natural ventilation. Low-tech, vernacular-inspired strategies for climate 
control, such as the atrium, fused with the higher technology of computerised 
brise soliel, solar-gain louvres with façade and roof integrated photovoltaics, 
for example, are becoming increasingly predominant. Allowing the users to 
have a more active role in the control of internal climate performance of a 
building is also becoming prevalent. The collateral benefit of people being able 
to open their own windows and control their local airconditioning has also been 
marked reductions in “sick-building” syndrome.  
A cleaner internal environment free of volatile inorganic compounds, full of 
natural light and furnished with real plants has also had similar positive results 
The future therefore is dynamic, adaptive Sustainable Emergent Critical 
green building. 
Passive strategies such as convective stack-effect, evaporative cooling, cross 
ventilation, solar chimneys, wind towers, buffer zones in the multiple skins of 
building facades, plant biomass evapo-transpiration (also enhancing 
homeostasis of oxygen/CO2, expressing seasonal variations - and their own 
beautiful fractal structures), and even aerodynamics - are some of the hybrid 
strategies currently in use. Note that all the above are metabolic, they are 
dynamic services systems (or functions) leading a sustainable, emergent 
critical form. They are clearly sustainable because they reduce energy use 
(embodied and actual life-cycle), but also emergent in that they arise from 
the context and design process and critical in that they are ideally, the optimal 
culturally analogous artifacts for the available budget and schedule. 
A facade incorporating electrochromic glass that is linked to an automated 
Building Management System hosting a parallel-processing neural network 
can instantaneously regulate solar gain by adjusting facade opaqueness, 
depending on its orientation. That BMS network can also minimise overall 
building energy load by only lighting, ventilating, heating or cooling occupied 
spaces. Such systems may display a form of metabolic homeostasis known in 
artificial intelligence circles as again, emergence; also allowing for simple 
system-memory and learning capacities. From the invention of the thermostat 
to the advent of the highly sophisticated BMS, these strategies have 
everything to do with emergent, recursive feedback loops being employed in 
environmental services design. Clearly, through a building’s environmental 
services or metabolism, dynamics can synthesise with statics. The relevant 
question is one of the appropriate balance between automation and manual 
user interface, and how they impinge on the static form of the building. 

Polyvalent facades will by day, using liquid crystal technologies (glass is made 
from silica --- as is the LCD and the silicon chip) convey graphic information on 
the skins of buildings for the external world to observe, or regulate their 
transparency for privacy considerations. Chameleon buildings will for example, 
be able to react to passing clouds, altering facade U/R-values and those for 
solar gain, to compensate for those clouds, or the tracking shadows cast on 
them by neighbouring buildings. Photovoltaic glass now under development 
will allow entire tinted or even clear curtain wall facades to generate electricity 
for a building’s use. LED-integrated aluminum and glass curtain wall facades 
by night, such as on one of my projects; the integrated resort at City of Dreams 
Macau, China, are living dynamic screens or signs at whole building scales. 
 
 
 
Smart and composite materials that might change shape, rigidity, porosity, 
texture or colour - and later nanotechnologies, will completely transform the 
abilities of buildings to adapt to their internal and external environments, 
developing cladding more like the skins of organisms. The pixel-like elements 
of a facade might then communicate ambiently with themselves or with others 
in the manner of some cellular automata, sometimes arriving at criticality, at 
edge of Chaos levels of complexity, appearing to reflect the "state of mind" or 
"mood" of the building, feeding back continually with internal/external stimuli. A 
similar ambient music real-time soundscape played over a PA system might 
therefore truly "melt" the "Frozen Music" of architecture: defining an individual 
building as a musical instrument itself, as played by its internal and external 
environments. Music itself is a form of power law 1/f noise, so it too inhabits the 
scaled, rhythmic auditory region poised between order and disorder - and 
perhaps might then be more properly termed a form of "Liquid Architecture", 
To think that Pythagoras is credited with discovering the musical scale, 
conceptualizing the music of the spheres and defining the golden mean is 
therefore really quite remarkable, especially if architecture (as civilisational 
construct) can represent aspects of all three. 
  
  
  
 

Internet cloud-based intelligent agents hosted in the electronics of a building, 
its interiors and fixtures, will become another ambience that fills inhabited work 
and living space with continual feedback between agent, environment and 
occupant, making the experience of that space become a form of customised, 
cybernetic extension of the habits, preferences and consciousness of the 
users. 
A networked world will allow generic spaces like hotel rooms be customized to 
our individual profiles as we roam, allowing family pictures and our favourite 
refreshments to be waiting for us before we even swipe the door card.  
Identity and Meaning in a generic globalised world 
A major design constraint (and therefore, opportunity) for passive climate 
control is that strategies and final design solutions must adapt to the local 
climates (and therefore inevitably, the cultural readings) of sites: hence the 
earlier use of the term "Vernacular", as a methodology, (but not an aesthetic of 
pastiche), for Complexity. Sustainable Emergent Critical Design (ECD), as 
applied to an autocatalytic architecture, that conveys thematic and structural 
analogy (societal, cultural self-similarity), and informational (historical) depth is 
more powerful for the simple reason that people can more readily identify 
and empathise with a building that is derived from and integral to it’s 
cultural and climatic environment. It has a definable, unique Genius Loci, 
or sense of place. 
Vernacular buildings saved energy (and were generally not profligate with 
materials nor structure), so as to create a sustainable living and working 
environment. They were appropriate, assembling culturally and climatically 
specific responses with available materials and forms that connoted a cultural 
response to a particular environment. The vernacular was emergent, 
bottom-up, distributed and parallel, hence its veracity. It conveyed an 
irreducible order: making the whole “greater than the sum of the parts”, a 
Gestalt in effect. Therefore, a holistic fusion: a sustainable combination of the 
emergent bottom-up and the critical top-down (which is more the imposed 
solution based on the personal visions of client, planners and architect), would 
therefore, seem the right combination for the design of most contemporary 
human environments. Sustainable, emergent critical design is therefore (in 
a poetic, allegorical sense), the epitome of the arithmetic and geometric 
representation of nature, in that it best yields Genius Loci and Gestalt. 
A functioning, built work of architecture can also be seen as a dissipative, open 
system, just like an organism: which has a limited lifespan, which consumes 
(for example), low entropy electricity to produce high entropy heat, as an act of 
metabolism.  

The less entropy produced, the less energy wasted. This can be achieved by 
an apt mix of technologies and materials, for the local benefit of the immediate 
users, but also for that of the global environment. Since the energy servicing 
of buildings (especially heating, cooling, ventilation and lighting), 
produces 30 % of all global greenhouse gases - these issues are hardly 
trivial, and will with time, become unfortunately, even less so. We frankly 
need to buy our civilization time by mitigating this 30 % figure, especially 
considering 70 % of this CO2 production is from the full life-cycle 
environmental servicing component only, not the initial construction and 
materials, know as embodied energy. 
Virtual water is the amount of water used to construct a product, this 
audit, along with the product carbon footprint, is vital for us to really 
measure and moderate our true use of planetary resources. All buildings 
must also be measured using these criteria, with government being 
crucial in creating incentives and subsidies to encourage the market to 
find real economies in practicing Sustainable Emergent Critical Design. 
The time saved will allow us to transcend the Carbon age before the 
positive feedback we are already seeing in the non-linear dynamical, far 
from equilibrium (semi-)open dissipative system of Earth’s climate 
violently convulses into a new, different and far less clement basin of 
attraction. James Lovelock, father of this Gaia theory (where the 
biosphere is self-regulating, like our own autonomic systems), already 
believes we are too late to save ourselves unless we resort to planetary 
geo-engineering. 
Still, green architecture can play a significant role in giving Gaia 
breathing space before ecocatastrophe. As a reminder of how close we 
are to a massive system bifurcation or “tipping point”, witness just some 
of the ominous warning signs: Hurricane Katrina in New Orleans, 
mile-wide tornadoes in Tennessee, massive desertification in China, 
floods creating inland seas the size of France in Queensland (after 
record droughts), coral-bleaching, sea-acidification, massive forest fires 
in the Amazon – one of our prime terrestrial carbon sinks, the list is 
frighteningly long and growing each day that passes. All these omens 
are signs of the non-linear dynamical system of our planet twitching as it 
gets pushed out of its normal human-civilisation friendly attractor. If it 
does jump into another attractor, it will be much quicker than we think (a 
geological eye-blink), and far less comfortable for humanity.  

 
    
 
    
    
 
The runaway positive feedback at the poles, with the Arctic permafrost 
melting millennia worth of methane in months, is just another warning 
sign 
that 
Lovelock 
is 
warning 
of.               
Any architecture that minimises local (and thereby global) entropy-production 
(information and energy waste), by fusing passive/active strategies to optimise 
energy load; through Sustainable Emergent Critical Design is facilitating 
optimised emergent Complexity (and Contradiction, if we follow Bob 
Venturi). Be it fractal detail for the eye at different scales, or minimum structure 
for maximum strength - or opposing tensile with compressive elements, the 
dynamic against the static; it will be more likely to succeed in its purpose. It will 
form a better cultural response, a more apt metaphor and analogy of our 
understanding of physical reality itself; which is surely the ultimate goal of all 
art and science - which ideally, architecture should epitomise. 

It must be stressed that this is not an appeal for the strict imitation of the 
vernacular but rather a recognition that just as in the past, differing climates 
and cultures should naturally (using available materials), produce a variety of 
design solutions, and produce distinctive, discrete "bioclimatic" architecture 
appropriate to their climatic and cultural environment. This has begun to 
produce a distinct, profound regional identity and variety for architectural 
function and design form throughout the world, which should be strongly 
encouraged on both cultural and sustainable development grounds. 
The Modern Movement's main failure for much of the 20th century was that it 
became a metaphor for the hubris of the Newtonian mechanistic paradigm. It 
imposed an anonymous, excessively top-down homogeneity worldwide (the 
International Style is also the most internationally loathed – and with good 
reason). It ignored a global, vernacular architectural diversity of cultural 
response; to a plethora of environmental constraints --- and so local identity 
was neglected in the age of globalisation. How then do we transcend this 
failure --- and restore architectural cultural identification (which is a form 
of empathic self-similarity)?  
What this investigation of the dynamics of the Golden Mean tells us is that it is 
an analogical, optimum mathematical paragon of energy and information 
efficiency: and that this is achieved as an ultimate means of generating the 
maximum complexity of information structures of energy and matter, at the 
lowest energy/information-loss cost.  
So, rather than just utilising the statics of geometrical proportions, we are now 
also liberated to epitomize Phi, the Golden Mean through elegance of: 
structure (the optimal bearing of dynamic forces in compression and tension), 
efficiency of organisation, gestalt, contrast, congruity thematic/contextual 
resonance, reflexiveness, ambiguity, irony - and critically, the modus and 
economies of vernacular-informed green architecture.  
Sustainable, Emergent Critical Design is not only the best way to achieve 
this but is a planetary, moral imperative to our progeny. The architect as 
the leader of their profession and industry has the moral and intellectual 
responsibility to lead and the techniques and knowledge to do so. We 
have got to stand up and partner with clients and government to not just 
point out the civilisational imperative of green design but also the 
advantages of thinking of “people, planet and profit”. 
Green buildings like my recent project with KPF, the Kerry Parkside 
Shanghai (which applied for, and gained two LEED Gold ratings at my 
instigation), allow the operator, Shangri-La to minimise their utility bills 
for water, electricity and gas over the 24/7 operation of their development. 
They can charge higher rentals and increase sale prices to tenants and 

investors while also benefiting from the collateral kudos of an enhanced 
public relations image and perception of corporate social responsibility. 
This is a win-win for all parties that profits all, reduces the life-cycle 
carbon footprint of the development, shows exemplary leadership by the 
client and benefits the one planet we call home.  
 
  
  
 
(For more folio information on some of the other green LEED and BREEAM 
projects such as Maitreya Buddha and BBC White City or proposals such as 
Hong Kong Spin with Aedas + Arup – the tower in the form of Phi, that I have 
designed and managed, please refer to the Asynsis.com website.) 

This is the methodological genius loci of Complexity; of emergence, of 
celebrating diversity and contextual veracity over generic anomie, of the 
rational pursuit of the irrational, the poetic synthesis of the pragmatic, of 
applying engineering elegance and efficiency as the proper syntheses of 
the dynamics of function with the statics of form.  
The role of an architect is to catalyse the emergent form of a building or a 
website (or any designed, complex virtual or real entity), from a 
possibility-space that yields the optimal complexity (or algorithmic depth, if you 
like), required for that particular project. Because the constraints generating 
that complexity can be wildly divergent (just like symmetry-breaking and the 
instabilities found far from equilibrium), this can be a challenge, to say the least, 
analogous to that of reconciling art with science, or as that Nazarene 
architekton was reputed to manage: turning water to wine! 
Architects have to relate the most divergent of constraints, from applied 
science and physics and engineering to conceptual art, from mathematics to 
colour theory and psychology; from administration to surveying to law, from 
projective geometry and computer science to graphic design, to name a few. 
This also makes producing truly great, transcendent architecture one of the 
hardest tasks in the world, because there are so many conflicting constraints.  
The fact is, the accuracy and iterative power of computers have allowed us to 
reveal the true, vastly rich temporal structure of dynamical systems - making 
this review possible, but they have also brought the two cultures of art and 
science much closer together - back towards perhaps, Renaissance (if not 
Pythagorean!) levels, where both again can use the same language of 
geometry, harmonic, resonant process and the empirical interpretation 
conceptual model. Both art and science now construct simulations and 
simulacra, both map parametric nets of knowledge, and create models, or 
archetypes of reality before we actually create those realities as buildings or 
other cultural artifacts. Intellectually, it is therefore incumbent on architects (for 
the practitioners of cultural production as realised spatio/temporal geometries), 
to also robustly engage in the debate around functional geometry and concept 
on one the side and formal built reality on the other. 
In terms of that reconciliation of the two cultures, you could say that this is the 
modus operandi of much of Parametric design: from the simulation of 
increasingly natural geometries to their actual construction. 
Complexity makes this more possible because less is lost in translation: the 
two languages (of the two cultures), are being synthesised, through an 
increasingly shared use of the common languages of geometry and analogy. 
Complexity synthesises the sciences, be they physics, chemistry, biology, 
ecology or economics, history, politics or cultural studies, physical or life 

science, "hard" or "soft." It does this by using mathematical-geometrical 
models (with parameters partially based on intuition), as a codified geometry - 
so simulating and testing archetypal models of natural systems rather than 
actually experimenting on the systems themselves (because of their high 
complexity). This has brought science far closer to the intuitive, conceptual and 
visual 
language 
of 
art 
than 
ever 
before 
in 
modern 
history.              
So perhaps architects can (at least intellectually), find that less will be lost in 
their translations between the two cultures. 
Analogous to Creation 
 
 
 
A work of art is deemed beautiful and powerful if it possesses a gestalt, 
possesses some form of symmetry, is seen as more than the sum of its parts, 
(be they simple or complex), if it is conceptually paradoxical or analogous 
and/or sometimes also physically fractal. 
Science tells us the universe is emergent and whenever observed is often in 
an analogical self-organised critical state, with the emergence process having 
a fractal spatio-temporal structure. The knowledge system of human culture 
and science that allows the universe to “know itself”, intrinsically has this same, 
nested structure. 
Both self-organised critical state and emergent process are found in the 
approaches to and in the actual basin of attraction at Chaos's cusp. 
The sciences of complex dynamical systems show how appropriate it is to 
perceive our age as one of information: one which increasingly acts through 
the sciences of information technology to exchange and enhance pure 
information to higher levels of complexity at minimal expense (recall the global 
internet itself, initially priced at close to local phone rates). This is just as the 
irreversibility-driven evolution imperative of the Universe and of life itself 
behaves. We are often at our best when we emulate nature. 

Architecture, as a prime civilisational artifact that inevitably will be imbued with 
this current Information Age zeitgeist, should assimilate as much of the 
implications of Phi-Chaos dynamical symmetry as its procurers, practitioners 
and pedagogues will allow. We have the opportunity to (re)present the Golden 
Mean to architecture and society in entirely novel ways, to develop our 
understanding beyond static geometries of Pythagorean pentagrams and 
pentagons, geometric analyses of the Great Pyramid or the Parthenon, or 
Euclid and his geometries, or Fibonacci, Leonardo and the Divine Proportion, 
Alberti and his Florentine churches, or Piero della Francesca or Kepler and 
Platonic planetary orbital ratios, Cook and plant phylotaxis, or Hambridge and 
his Dynamic Symmetry, Le Corbusier and his scheme to replace both imperial 
and metric systems with his Modular, Cartier-Bresson with his "decisive 
moments" and classical composition of his reportage photographs; beyond 
statics and state, but rather via dynamics and process (as Cartier-Bresson 
intuits): as tension, as paradox, as a dynamical unity of opposites (finite and 
infinite), fusing the linear with the non-linear, the ordered with the random - and 
causality with chance, to create the emergent and unexpected. 
      
      
 
Poetically, this is the (ana)Logos of Heraclitis of Ephesus, or the Tao of Lao 
Tsu. These concepts seem to be part of a universal global archetype, in the 
Jungian sense and to have been already intuited separately by many cultures, 
at various times. 
More pertinently, James Lovelock's Gaia hypothesis, (where the biosphere of 
the planet itself is self-organised), is a paradigm for a truly global homeostasis 
based on Complexity, where the whole planet is posited to autonomically 
minimise its entropy-production at the edge of Chaos, (fixing gas proportions at 
non-equilibrium levels suitable for life, for example), because of the cellular 
automata-like intelligent computing action of the biosphere. 
We have a moral and ethical duty to future generations to learn from 
Gaia-esque concepts; to preserve humanity, its cultures, and the global 
ecosystem (and their respective diversities), to live by the maxim of 
sustainability, which is to: "not make the world a worse place for our children 
by our current actions or inactions".  
 

We have a moral responsibility to our children of course, but I would argue that 
we also have one based on our onus to safeguard the myriad complexity and 
diversity of the only known seat of intelligent life in this Universe: our turquoise 
lonely island in space, Planet Earth.  
We and our world are like real-world examples of the Mandelbrot Set: both in 
their ways, the most complex and diverse known entities in existence. The 
Golden Mean, because of its supreme economy, elegance and capacity 
for analogy, because it also resides where it does in dynamical systems 
behaviours (facilitating universal computation), such as those within the 
biosphere, is therefore also the ultimate metaphor for Complexity and for 
Sustainability.  
Etymologically speaking, the architect is an architekton: a "fabricator of 
archetypes". We should live up to the name the Greeks so wisely gave us. 
The ideas and issues as discussed above are as profoundly relevant as they 
are pressing. If we are to mitigate our worst ecological excesses (in better 
understanding and replicating nature, we can better preserve her), or to 
create better examples of what we can call Asynsis (from the Greek: Analogia 
and Synesis – Proportion and Unification) or Sustainable Emergent 
Criticality: better metaphors and analogies of reality (with these archetypes), 
then we must assimilate the lessons of the sciences of Complexity, for they are 
the laws and emergent properties of nature herself.  
Suffice it to say, maximum Complexity is realised via 
self-organised sustainable emergent criticality at the edge of 
Chaos, which is epitomised by the resonant symmetries of the 
Golden Mean, as the emergent geometric properties of the 
principle of least action: therefore its full temporal-spatial 
manifestation is analogous to creation itself.  
                            
 
Dynamical Symmetries: Asynsis - End 

