ETHICS IN SCIENCE AND ENVIRONMENTAL POLITICS
Ethics Sci Environ Polit
Vol. 13: pp5, 2013
doi: 10.3354/esep00137
Published online November 29
UNIVERSITIES AND PUBLIC INTERESTS
The history of Universities shows that they have
varied in their purposes historically1, although they
have always been ‘communities of scholars’ who
worked to defend their academic freedom (Hamlyn
1996). Independence of intellectual thought is thus
a defining attribute of Universities, enabling schol-
ars to pursue research and teaching outside the
control of powerful interest groups (Newman
1852)2. That is why Newman, in his enunciation
of ‘The Idea of a University’, was adamant that
the university ‘contemplates neither moral impres-
sion nor mechanical production’ (Newman 1852,
© Inter-Research 2013 · www.int-res.com
*Email: kathleen.lynch@ucd.ie
New managerialism, neoliberalism and ranking
Kathleen Lynch
Equality Studies Centre, School of Social Justice, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland
ABSTRACT: This paper analyses the ranking of universities within the socio-political context of
neoliberalism and the organisational context of new managerialism. It examines the forces that
have facilitated the emergence of the ranking industry and the ideologies underpinning the
so-called ‘global’ university rankings. What the paper shows is that rankings are a politically
inspired mode of governance; they are designed to ensure that universities are regulated and con-
trolled in accordance with market values. The seemingly objective character of rankings, in par-
ticular the use of numbers, creates an impression that what is of value in education can be simply
counted, hierarchically ordered and uncontrovertibly judged. The simplicity and accessibility of
rankings deflects attention from their political and moral purposes. Rankings are reconstituting
the academy, for both academics and students; they are a new mode of external governance
through which market values are reframing the social relations of education. They have altered
the cognitive and moral frames through which university education is being appraised. The paper
calls for a debate on the public interest objectives of universities in the context of growing market
regulation.
KEY WORDS:  New managerialism · Neoliberalism · Public Interests · Markets · Ideological tool ·
Culture · Measurement
Resale or republication not permitted without written consent of the publisher
FREE
REE
 ACCESS
CCESS
Contribution to the Theme Section ‘Global university rankings uncovered’
2The purpose of the university is: ‘To open the mind, to correct
it, to refine it, to enable it to know, and to digest, master, rule,
and use its knowledge, to give it power over its own faculties,
application, flexibility, method, critical exactness, sagacity,
resource, address, eloquent expression, is an object as intelli-
gible (for here we are inquiring, not what the object of a Lib-
eral Education is worth, nor what use the Church makes of it,
but what it is in itself’ (Newman 1852, p. 122−123). He goes
on to say ‘…a University, taken in its bare idea, ….has this ob-
ject and this mission; it contemplates neither moral impres-
sion nor mechanical production; it professes to exercise the
mind neither in art nor in duty; its function is intellectual cul-
ture; …It educates the intellect to reason well in all matters,
to reach out towards truth, and to grasp it.’ Newman 1852/58:
Discourse 6. Knowledge Viewed in Relation to Learning,
p. 125−126). Available at www. newmanreader. org/ works/
idea/ discourse6. html (accessed August 6, 2013).
1Universities changed from being centres for the study of the-
ology, law and medicine in the Middle Ages to incorporating
the arts, philosophy and sciences in the Renaissance period.
They slowly opened to new disciplines like sociology and
economics in the 19th century. The formal linking of scholar-
ship and teaching was particularly developed in Germany at
the University of Berlin in 1910, under Von Humboldt and his
colleagues, and with the support of the Prussian government
(Hamlyn 1996, p. 205−206)

Ethics Sci Environ Polit 13: pp5, 2013
p. 125−6). It is expected to be a watchdog for the
free interchange of ideas in society and is licensed
accordingly to protect freedom of thought, including
the freedom to dissent from prevailing orthodoxies.
The University is presumed to serve the public
good and to equate its own self-interest, in research
and education terms, with the public interest
(Lieberwitz 2005). While the public know that
knowledge and research conducted by profit-
driven operations and/or by other powerful interests
within the State can be and are often subject to
political influence, it is assumed that this is not the
norm in the university. The status and credibility of
scholarship in universities therefore stems to a con-
siderable extent from its disinterestedness and
detachment from the powerful (De La Fuente 2002,
Lieberwitz 2005). Consequently, university teaching
and research has been largely funded from the
public purse in Europe (ECOFIN 2010). Even in
pro-market countries such as the USA, between 70
and 80% of university life sciences research is pub-
licly funded (Lieberwitz 2005).
MAKING MARKETS IN HIGHER EDUCATION
Over the last 20 yr, there has been a global move-
ment to radically alter the role of the university
(Robertson et al. 2002, Angus 2004, Bullen et al. 2004)
and in particular to reduce the amount of public in-
vestment in higher education generally. There is a
growing expectation that universities should be self-
financing through external collaborations with busi-
ness in particular (Europa 2011, p. 1)3. In the United
Kingdom (UK), private higher education providers
are regarded by government as a mechanism for re-
ducing the cost of higher education to the exchequer
(Ball 2012, p. 21), and university education is increas-
ingly defined as a market commodity (Slaughter &
Leslie 1997). Universities have been transformed into
powerful consumer-oriented corporate networks,
where public-interest values are seriously challenged
(Rutherford 2005, Ball 2012). The factors that have
contributed to corporatisation and commercialisation
are notable, not only in and of themselves, but also
because of how they have reframed the orientation
and purposes of higher education.
Multilateral agencies including the Organisation
for 
Economic 
Co-operation 
and 
Development
(OECD) and the World Bank, and political institu-
tions such as the European Union (EU), exercise
increasing influence over national education policies.
Control and regulation is often indirect, as in the
form of ‘advice’ from the World Bank or the OECD:
the ‘Country Reports’ of the OECD are thinly dis-
guised ‘surveillance’ procedures promulgating a new
market instrumentalism in education under the guise
of ‘independent’ expertise (Henry et al. 2001). While
control may be exercised as ‘soft’ power in higher
education, it is real power nonetheless (Lo 2011).
The World Bank was one of the first major bodies to
promote higher education as a marketable commod-
ity4. It heralded this development in the early 1990s
in Higher Education: The Lessons of Experience
(World Bank 1994). The 1994 report promoted the
idea of developing private universities, making pub-
lic funding for universities subject to performance,
and encouraging greater reliance on private funding
for higher education. While many working in West-
ern and Northern universities took little notice of
either the 1994 report or the 1998/99 World Develop-
ment Report: Knowledge for Development, assuming
these to apply to African and other poorer countries,
they were a portent of what was to apply to all uni-
versities (World Bank 1998). Follow-up World Bank
reports, Constructing Knowledge Societies (World
Bank 2002) and The Challenge of Establishing World
Class Universities (World Bank 2009), have consoli-
dated the market-led view of universities globally.
New mechanisms of control and regulation of Uni-
versities’ productivity were developed, not only
within, but between countries (Hazelkorn 2011);
rankings became an integral part of a new mode of
market governance (Marginson 2007a).
One other very important factor contributing to the
marketisation of higher education lies deep within
the dynamics of globalisation and the changing rela-
tionship between the services, manufacturing and
agricultural sectors of the economy. The investment
returns from manufacturing have declined signifi-
2
3OJC 372/36, the Official Journal of the European Union,
20.12.2011, p. 1, reported that there was a need to reform fur-
ther the governance and financing structures of universities
allowing for greater autonomy and accountability, so as to fa-
cilitate a more diversified revenue stream and more effective
collaboration with the business world and to equip universi-
ties to participate in the knowledge triangle on a global scale.
4The World Bank is the largest multilateral source of funding
for education in the world and as such plays a key role in
framing education policies globally. ‘However, the World
Bank is not bound by international law nor does it acknowl-
edge that education is a human right’ (Tomasevski 2005,
p. 6). The reason for this anomalous situation is explained in
Tomasevski (2005, footnote 15, p. 6).

Lynch: New managerialism, neoliberalism and ranking
cantly in rich capitalist economies in recent decades,
for a range of complex reasons, not least of which is
the emergence of a large, non-unionised labour pool
for manufacturing in South East Asia. Agriculture,
already a relatively minor player in employment
terms in Western and Northern economics, could not
provide alternative forms of employment to manufac-
turing. The focus shifted to trade in services, includ-
ing trade in some or all of particular public services.
The pressure to move education from a public serv-
ice to a tradable service was also very much part of
the ideology of the General Agreement on Trade and
Services (GATS) agreement, the purpose of which is
to liberalise all services in all sectors of the economy
globally (Roberston et al. 2002, Tomasevski 2005).
The rationale for making education a tradable serv-
ice was articulated by Merrill Lynch5 in The Book of
Knowledge in 1999. It defined education as a service
that presents major new opportunities for investors in
profit terms (Moeet al. 1999). In 2000, UNESCO esti-
mated that education was a $2 trillion global ‘indus-
try’, so there was potential for profitable returns if
such a service could be traded, especially among
those sectors of society that could afford to pay for it.
Globalisation (which involves interaction across
national borders unmediated by the state) also had
far-reaching direct effects on higher education.
When aligned with the deregulation of trade in serv-
ices under the GATS, globalisation enabled the con-
vergence and integration of markets, including mar-
kets in higher education. Global technologies
facilitated instant communication and the transporta-
tion of ideas, money and students across national
borders with increasing ease (Hazelkorn 2011). Dis-
tances of time and space were compressed and de-
regulation facilitated trading in knowledge and uni-
versity degrees as commodities. Part of the trade
involved trading images and rankings of individual
universities. What was national and private, was
made public and global.
The rise of influential and financially endowed
social movements in the USA to promote for-profit
higher education in particular (Covington 2001), and
the fact that there are now several hundred for-profit
colleges and Universities across the world, are indi-
cations that for-profit trading in higher education is
also well established (Hill 2005). Private higher edu-
cation is worth an estimated $400 billion globally and
about one quarter of all higher education students
are in private colleges (Ball 2012, p. 20). The services
sector, including the sale of education, has gradually
begun to make up the employment deficit of manu-
facturing (D’Agostino et al. 2006), and both the EU
and the USA have seen a rise in a range of tradable
services in recent decades6.
As the State was and is a major player in the econ-
omy, it also began to explore what services it could
sell. Services that were defined as rights under one
code of ethics (notably health and education)
mutated to being marketable commodities under
another (Tomasveki 2005). Higher education was
increasingly defined as a private rather than a public
good (Chubb & Moe 1990, Tooley 2000), and as such
was tradable.
At an ideological level, a not insignificant factor
precipitating the marketisation of higher education
was the ascendancy of neoliberal capitalism from
the later 1980s. The hegemony of liberal democracy
and free market capitalism that ensued from the
demise of communism brought with it widespread
allegiance to the liberalisation of trade and services
(Fukuyama 1992). Neoliberalism, which had been
nascent but not global under the influence of Hayek
and Friedman, was given a new lease of life, a life
that was deliberatively planned and orchestrated at
a political level from the 1970s onwards, especially
in the USA (Harvey 2005, p. 39−63). With its explicit
anti-redistributive goals and its legitimation of non-
redistribution through the powerful ideologies of
possessive individualism and choice, neoliberalism
paved the way for reducing public expenditures on
education, including higher education. The rise of
the ‘small state’ ideology led to a declining commit-
ment to invest in public services, including higher
education, at a time of expansion. The discourse
around education changed from one focused on
rights and needs to one focused on markets and
choices. This had adverse effects on poorer people,
as paying even for compulsory education became
normalised in many states in Asia, South America
and Africa (Tomasevski 2005). As cash-strapped
governments recognised the potential of higher
education to become a net contributor rather than
cost to the exchequer, the marketisation for higher
education through trading on identities, brands and
rankings was inevitable.
3
5Merrill Lynch is a USA-based Global Financial Management
company with offices in 36 countries.
6These included community, social and personal services, re-
tail and wholesale services, including hotels, restaurants,
transport and communication services, financial services, in-
cluding insurance and real estate much of which was highly
speculative and unproductive in real service terms.

Ethics Sci Environ Polit 13: pp5, 2013
The response to the marketising of higher education
has been immediate and dramatic. Australia increased
its overall share of the world’s population of cross-bor-
der students from 1 to 9% between 1990 and 2003
(Marginson 2007b, p. 8). Education is now one of its
biggest exports, estimated to be valued at Aus$17.2
billion in 2008 to 2009, or about 1.4% of GDP (OECD
2013). In the UK, the export of education services by
universities amounted to £23.4 billion (US$43 billion)
in 2007 to 2008. In gross output terms, this was equal
to the output of the ‘printing and publishing industry,
and considerably larger than the pharmaceuticals in-
dustry’ (Marginson 2007b, p. 8). ‘If higher education
were an industry, it would be one of the world’s
biggest and most dynamic’ (OECD 2013).
Fed by rankings and marketing, student flows are
increasing around the world. The numbers of stu-
dents who are studying outside their own countries
has increased by 2.7 million or 50% since 2000. ‘If
current trends continue by 2025, almost 8 million stu-
dents will be studying outside their home countries’
(Ball 2012, p. 20). The economies of English-speak-
ing countries (and English-based programmes within
countries) remain the principal beneficiaries of the
new higher education trade. In the mid-2000s, 46%
of the students who crossed borders to study moved
from China, India and other Asian countries to OECD
countries, mostly to English-language based educa-
tion systems (Marginson 2007b, p. 9). Rankings
played a major role in determining the new patters of
trade, a business that many regard as a form of re-
colonisation in cultural terms (Deem et al. 2008).
UNIVERSITY DYNAMICS AND MARKETISATION
The regulation of universities through rankings
was also enabled by the internal dynamics of univer-
sities themselves. Although universities are public
interest bodies, they have not always honoured their
public interest commitments (Harkavy 2005). Years
of research evidence on the patterns of class inequal-
ity in education have shown that not only has higher
education done little to challenge class inequality in
education over many decades (Shavit & Blossfeld
1993, Clancy 1995, 2001, Gamoran 2001, Archer et
al. 2002, Rumberger 2010, Sianou-Kyrgiou 2010), but
there is also little hope of social mobility through
education henceforth, even in prosperous countries
like the USA (Gamoran 2001, Marsh 2011). More-
over, universities have often been party to the per-
petuation of social inequalities. While they played a
key role in forming the professional classes of the
post-World War II welfare states (Hanlon 2000), they
did not challenge the exclusionary practices of pro-
fessional associations in the educational field. Rather,
they worked with the professional elite to maintain
their social class standing. A series of national studies
of entrants to higher education in Ireland spanning
almost 20 yr shows that students entering the profes-
sional faculties of law, medicine, dentistry, architec-
ture and veterinary science have been drawn dispro-
portionately from the middle and upper middle
classes (Clancy 1995, 2001). Elite universities of the
UK and USA show a similar pattern of exclusivity
(Reay et al. 2010, p. 2)7. The universities’ relative
indifference to wider societal injustices in terms of
access to higher education has meant that they had
limited moral standing, and even less public sympa-
thy, when their budgets were cut and they were reg-
ulated through ranking.
In their internal operations too, the history of uni-
versities shows that they have been hierarchical,
patriarchal and, at times, nepotistic (Wenneras &
Wold 1997, Knights & Richards 2003, Morley 2003,
O’Connor 2012). They have not been models of
enlightened organisational practice. While there
have been critical voices in higher education, critical
of its pedagogy and its exclusivity (most notably
influenced by the work of the renowned Brazilian
philosopher Paulo Freire 1970), dissenters have also
been minority voices, often working against the tide
even in pre-neoliberal days (Lynch 1995). The claim
of the academy that its public-interest functions are
being undermined by the neoliberal agenda can ring
hollow to those who have lived for generations with-
out the privilege of higher education, and who, with
justification, regard universities as sites for the repro-
duction of the elite, nationally and globally.
NEW MANAGERIALISM
Neoliberalism is premised on the assumption that
the citizen’s relationship to the State and others
is mediated via the market. New managerialism is
the mode of governance aligned with neoliberalism:
4
7A study by the Sutton Trust (2007) of the top 13 universities in
the UK as measured by press rankings found that, of the
300000 of the nation’s university applicants from less affluent
social backgrounds, just over 1% get into one of the top 13
universities. There are similar concerns in the USA where,
in the year 2000, students from families in the bottom 50%
of the income distribution made up 10% of first years at
Princeton and 12% at Harvard, 2 of the US elite universities
(Karabel 2005).

Lynch: New managerialism, neoliberalism and ranking
it involves governing through enacting technical
changes imbued with market values.
New managerialism is not a neutral management
strategy, however. Its expressed purpose is to institu-
tionalise market principles in the governance of all
organisations (Clarke et al. 2000, p. 7). It involves the
inculcation of market values and practices into the
regulation and organisation of public services in par-
ticular (Farrell & Morris 2003). Consequently, when
and where it is implemented in the public sector, new
managerialism focuses service providers on outputs
measured in terms of performance indicators and
rankings (often regardless of inputs or resources); it
emphasises the language of choice, competition and
service users; it promotes the decentralisation of
budgetary and personal authority to line managers,
and project-led contractual employment arrange-
ments rather than permanency (Clarke & Newman
1997, Clarke et al. 2000 p. 6, Docking 2000, Chandler
et al. 2002, Court 2004, Hill 2005). And it endorses
strong market-type accountability in public sector
spending. The net effect is that meeting financial and
other targets is a priority, and success in meeting tar-
gets is measured through public audits. The develop-
ment of quasi-markets for services is also a key goal
and rankings feed directly into this process; markets
operate as a further form of control through competi-
tion and public surveillance of public sector services
(Clarke et al. 2000).
What is important about new managerialism is that
it was not only exported between countries as a mode
of governance (Harvey 2005) but also within coun-
tries from the private to the public sector (Boltanski &
Chiapello 2005, Lynch et al. 2012).
NEW MANAGERIALISM AND RANKING
Rankings are an inevitable output of new manage-
rialism as they are integral to audit and surveillance
systems of regulation and control. They alter the
internal culture of universities in terms of what they
measure (Sauder & Epseland 2009). They put univer-
sities on public display, pressurising them to change
from being ‘a centre of learning’ to being ‘a business
organisation with productivity targets’. They are
expected to transfer allegiance ‘from the academic to
the operational’ (Doring 2002, p. 140). Treating change
as a purely ‘technical matter’, means that market val-
ues can be encoded in the heart of the university’s
operations without reflection. New organisational
forms are classified as technical shifts, a change in
language and style but not in substance.
However, language does not simply name the
world, it defines it. New languages signify much
more than a change in terminology. When students
become ‘customers’ this changes their relationship to
teachers from one of education to one of market serv-
ice: they mutate silently from people with rights to
education, to customers with preferences (Lolich
2011). When universities focus on ‘key performance
indicators’ this directs attention to measured outputs
rather than processes and inputs within education,
including those of nurturing and caring (Lynch
2010a).
Much of the power of ranking rests in the neutral-
ity of nomenclature within which it is embedded.
The positive connotations of ‘modernising universi-
ties’, introducing new ‘management systems’ and
offering ‘students choices’ fail to signal the new
modes of governance and moral regulation such
changes entail. They do not foretell how efficiency
and effectiveness can gain hegemonic status at the
expense of more broadly based moral and social
values related to care, autonomy, respect, trust and
equality.
But focusing on measurable outputs has the ulti-
mate impact of defining human relationships in the
university in transactional terms, as the means to an
end — the end being that of high performance and
productivity. This reduces first-order social and moral
values to second-order principles; trust, integrity,
care and solidarity are subordinated to regulation,
control and competition. When managerialist prac-
tices achieve hegemonic control, they parasitise and
weaken those very values on which the university
organisation depends. While few would question the
value of efficiency, in terms of maximising the use of
available resources, the difficulty with managerial-
ism is that it does not just prioritise efficiency, it sup-
presses other organisational values so that they
become incidental. The net effect of the devaluation
of moral purposes in and of themselves is that public
services, such as education, are no longer defined as
capacity-building public goods.
The first order effect of performativity is to re- orient
pedagogical and scholarly activities towards those
which are likely to have a positive impact on measure-
able performance outcomes and are a deflection of
attention away from aspects of social, emotional and
moral development that have no immediate measure-
able performance value. The second order effect of per-
formativity is in the possibilities it creates to replace
commitment with contract. That is to say, to the extent
that HE practices — teaching, writing and research —
can be rendered into  calculabilities, they can be re-writ-
ten as contracts of performance that can, at some point,
be put out to tender. (Ball 2012, p. 20)
5

Ethics Sci Environ Polit 13: pp5, 2013
THE SELECTIVITY AND ARBITRARINESS OF
RANKING SYSTEMS
Comparing universities nationally and internation-
ally in terms of prestige and power is not a new phe-
nomenon. The development of scientific databases,
including the Science Citation Index and the Social
Science Citation Index, involving bibliometric meas-
ures to assess and rank academics and programmes
date back to the 1960s (Amsler & Bolsmann 2012).
The USA published a list of the ‘best colleges in the
country’ in the US News & World Report in 1983
(based originally on the opinions of college presi-
dents but now expanded to other criteria). In these
earlier periods, rankings were person- and subject-
specific in the cases of the citation indices, and
national in terms of university rankings, being con-
fined to comparisons within nation states. When
higher education was defined as a globally traded
commodity, and a global market was created for
higher educational services, then new modes of
ranking were inevitable.
Ranking universities has become big business, not
only in marketing universities but also in promoting
journals and selling news reports (Lynch et al. 2012,
p. 205−224). A wide range of ranking schemes have
been devised, not only within countries, but more
importantly between them (Salmi 2009, Hazelkorn
2011, Lo 2011, Huang 2012). The power and influ-
ence of rankings is reflected in the fact that the Euro-
pean University Association has undertaken a series
of studies of rankings and produced 2 major reports
on their impact (Rauhvargers 2011, 2013)8 with fur-
ther reports planned.
Amongst the best known global rankings (all of
which use different criteria and rank subjects dif-
ferently, and all of which are changing regularly)
are the ARWU (Academic Ranking of World Uni-
versities, sometimes known as the Shanghai Jiao
Tong University Ranking), the Times Higher Edu-
cation World University (THE) rankings, and, since
they separated from the THE in 2010, the QS
(Quacquarelli Symonds) rankings (within which
there are a number of different rankings). Apart
from the 3 major ranking systems there are also
other rankings, including the CWTS Leiden Rank-
ing system (bibliometric only), the NTU (Taiwan
National University Ranking) (ranking of scientific
papers) and the German CHE (Centrum für
Hochschulentwicklung) based on multiple criteria.
China, Spain, Macedonia and a range of other
countries also have their own ranking systems
(Huang 2012, Rauhvargers 2013)9.
Both the THE and QS rankings give a heavy
weighting (40% in QS and 34.5% in THE in 201210)
to what is called reputational ranking based on
online surveys to academics11. There are a range of
problems with such ‘surveys’, as they are not based
on stratified random samples of academics from
across the world or across disciplines, and there is an
inherent bias towards English-speaking countries in
both the THE and QS surveys (Huang 2012, Kaba
2012, Rauhvargers 2013).
The ARWU does not use reputational surveys to
assess rank, nor does it include the humanities and
most social sciences in ranking universities12.
Although some ranking schemes do include humani-
ties and social sciences, ‘the arts and humanities, and
to a large extent the social sciences remain under-
represented in rankings. The relative neglect stems
from persistent biases that remain in bibliometric
indicators and field-normalised citation counts…In
the arts, humanities and the social sciences, pub-
lished research output is concentrated in books’
(Rauhvargers 2013, p. 18−19) and these are not
counted effectively in the major databases used to
assess citations, namely Thompson Reuters and Else-
vier (Rauhvargers 2013). The net effect of this is that
universities with strong traditions in the arts, human-
ities and social sciences cannot feature highly on
global rankings.
A further issue is that even those rankings that pur-
port to be ‘global’ do not rate over 90% of the world’s
15 000 universities (Hazelkorn 2011). The most influ-
ential global rankings, such as the THE ranking (first
published in 2004) and the ARWU (first published in
2003), rate only between 2 and 5% of the world’s uni-
versities (Hazelkorn 2011). None of the major so-
called global rankings (THE, ARWU or QS) survey
the student population regarding their educational
experience in a given year; as education is a major
object of universities, this is a notable omission13.
There is also the problem of vested interests in
rankings. The ARWU is only science-focused, and
6
9Hazelkorn (2011) also has an extensive comparative review
10As the weighting given to different criteria is changing reg-
ularly among the ranking agencies (Rauhvargers 2013),
these figures only apply to 2012.
11QS ranking criteria and weighting: www. iu. qs. com/
university-rankings/rankings-indicators/ (accessed April 28,
2013). Times Higher Ranking: www. times higher education.
co. uk/ 413382. article (Times Higher Education Supplement,
September 7, 2010 scheme; accessed April 28, 2013).
12ARWU−Shanghai Jiao Tong ranking: www. university ran
kings. ch/ methodology/ shanghai_ jiao_ tong (accessed April
28, 2013).

relies heavily on Thompson Reuters for its data which
is entirely journal-based. The THE also uses data
provided by Thompson Reuters. QS uses data from
Scopus, which is part of Elsevier. As both Thompson
Reuters and Elsevier are major publishers of journals,
each has an interest in encouraging the ranking of
universities based on journals (Amsler & Bolsmann
2012, p. 286). An indirect effect of ranking by the sta-
tus of journal publications is the undermining of new
disciplines and fields of scholarship (especially as
these cannot have ‘elite’ journals in their develop-
mental phase). Thus, the business of university rank-
ing is governed by values and interests other than
those of assessing the quality of research and teach-
ing. Given this, the role that the publishing industry
plays in determining and advancing university rank-
ings needs to be further investigated.
While universities are global in their relations,
those that are publicly funded (which are the major-
ity of universities in Europe) have to serve regional
and national objectives. They are not research insti-
tutes but universities and as such have an educa-
tional remit (Newman 1852). As teaching institu-
tions they have obligations to uphold International
Treaties granting people equal access to education,
including higher education14. Given that most nation
states15 have ratified the International Convention on
Economic and Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR),
and that Article 13.2 (c) of the ICESCR obliges State
parties to work to ensure that, ‘Higher education
shall be made equally accessible to all, on the basis of
capacity, by every appropriate means, and in partic-
ular by the progressive introduction of free educa-
tion’ and that the UNESCO Convention against Dis-
crimination in Education (1960, Article 4) also
commits States to ‘make higher education equally
accessible to all on the basis of individual capacity’, it
is clear that universities should uphold the right to
equal access to higher education even if this
adversely affects rankings. Unfortunately, there is
evidence that this does not happen. Higher edu -
cation has been the preserve of the elite in many
countries and this trend is persistent over time (Duru-
Bellat et al. 2008, Sianou-Kyrgiou 2010, McCowan
2012). Rankings are likely to exacerbate inequality
of access to higher education even further (Hazel -
korn 2011).
A further issue with ranking is that the determina-
tion of being ‘world class’ is based on criteria set by
the existing academic elite: being able to acquire or
retain academics with Nobel prizes or Field Medals,
or to determine what constitutes elite journals, or to
exclude disadvantaged students, and/or operate low
staff-student ratios, are measures of worth that are
only available to those that have an accumulated his-
tory of privilege, power and money. Meeting the
budget target to be world class is estimated to be
US$1.5 to 2 billion per year (or €1.3 to 1.7 billion),
funding that is far beyond the national budgets of
many nation states (Hazelkorn 2011, p. 197).
Endowments also play a crucial role in determining
ranking, effectively making it impossible for excel-
lent universities without significant endowments to
compete for a high rank. Data on the US universities
shows that the larger the amount of an institution’s
endowment, the more likely it is to be ranked in the
top 200 universities in the world (Kaba 2012, p. 26−29):
Harvard’s endowment in 2007 was US$34.6 billion;
Yale’s was US$22.6 billion while Stanford’s was
US$17.1 billion (Kaba 2012). As the cumulative en -
dowments of these elite universities (over US$74 bil-
lion) are in excess of the entire tax income of many
small nation states, it is evident how elite universities
can retain their ranking year-on-year, while those
‘below the bar’ enter a cycle of disadvantage (Hazel -
korn 2011, p. 93). The endowments allow elite uni-
versities to offer highly competitive salaries to attract
highly cited faculty members from within the global
academic market, and it enables them to give attrac-
tive scholarships to young graduates, thereby buying
up the ‘talent’ of early stage researchers globally
(Marginson & van der Wende 2007).
As the ranking of universities is aligned with the
ranking of individual academics, a new form of indi-
vidualised academic capitalism is working out
within higher education (Slaughter & Leslie 2001),
creating a highly competitive culture where colle-
giality is seriously undermined (Lynch 2010a, Ball
2012). Both individual and institutional ranking
exacerbate the stratification of universities; this
works to the detriment of the autonomy of universi-
ties in defining their own mission and purposes
(Deem et al. 2008).
Lynch: New managerialism, neoliberalism and ranking
7
13The German CHE system does include student evaluations
but this is a within-state evaluation system and does not
claim to be global. CHE (Centrum für Hochschulentwick-
lung): www. che-ranking. de/ cms/ ?getObject = 644 & get Lang
= (accessed April 28, 2013).
14Higher education is part of the general right to education
under the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights
(UDHR), the International Covenant on Economic, Social
and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) of 1966, the Convention on
the Rights of the Child (CRC) of 1989 and the UNESCO
Convention against Discrimination in Education (1960)
(McCowan 2012, p. 113−114).
15But not the USA.

Ethics Sci Environ Polit 13: pp5, 2013
Rankings are a type of ‘consumer product ratings
system’, a contest in which those not listed, or listed
very low down, are not in a position to establish
themselves as premier institutions in any meaningful
sense. When reputation is heavily weighted towards
prestige, power and money, much of which is histori-
cally established, newer players cannot enter the
race, or if they do, they enter and compete on terms
that are not of their making and on which they can-
not succeed.
RANKING AND THE ‘WAR FOR TALENT’
Despite claims to the contrary, university rankings
were never about meeting ‘consumer’ (student)
needs for information in making choices in the
internal education markets of higher education
within nation states. Most students are allocated to
universities on the basis of prior academic perform-
ance, and those who have a choice, either must
have a very high performance (itself social class
and racially biased) or be well enough resourced
through their families to make choices (Reay et al.
2005). Even within the USA, where the US ranking
scheme does influence internal choices, especially
at graduate level, the choices are limited for those
outside a small elite (Karabel 2005, Epseland &
Sauder 2007).
One of the core functions of university ranking,
therefore, is to facilitate the international marketing
of prestige programmes to elite students in highly
selective and elite universities. Rankings facilitate
the development of a global meritocracy at a time
when ‘talent’ (however vaguely defined) is seen as
the ‘new oil’ (Brown & Tannock 2009) and ‘knowl-
edge’ as the new capital. Rankings are a mechanism
for ordering what has become known in popular
parlance as the ‘war for talent’. And stratification
and selection of universities and programmes is
strongly endorsed by global capitalist players such
as McKinsey Consulting (Michaels et al. 2001),
Microsoft and Dell (Brown & Tannock 2009).
The discourses of the ‘knowledge economy’ are
not just about promoting nation state economies
built on highly educated workers, they are about
creating banks of highly skilled workers who can
and do move globally to service capital. The
bonuses and salaries available to elite workers
within powerful capitalist states compared to com-
parably skilled workers in poorer and/or smaller
economies are enormous; the outcome is migration
of the educated elite to the rich states. Conse-
quently, poor countries experience a huge loss of
highly educated workers: it is estimated that Sierra
Leone has lost over 50% of its college-educated
workers, while some 60% of those with higher edu-
cation have emigrated from Cape Verde and Gam-
bia and over 80% from Haiti and Jamaica over
recent decades (Brown &Tannock 2009, p. 382)16.
The net beneficiaries of inward migration of highly
educated workers from elite universities are power-
ful capitalist states that can afford to offer globally
competitive salaries and working conditions (Brown
& Tannock 2009).
RANKINGS AS AN IDEOLOGICAL TOOL: 
QUANTIFICATION, SIMPLIFICATION AND
SELF-FULFILLING PROPHECIES
In sociological terms, rankings operate as a type of
politicised technological ideology that labels and
stratifies a complex higher education system through
simple rank ordering (Amsler & Bolsmann 2012,
p. 288). What rankings succeed in doing is providing
an ostensibly ‘objective’ measure, a ‘common cogni-
tive space’ in which the value of universities can be
appraised, even if the means of achieving it is arbi-
trary, selective and problematic in scientific terms
(Borer & Lawn 2013, p. 49). The newspaper/online
reader or television viewer is allowed to ‘know’ the
value of a university in an instant, just by reading
the rank. There is no effort involved; it is a simple
accessible process. The net result is that ranks be -
come naturalised, normalised and validated, through
familiarity and ubiquitous citation, particularly
through recitation as ‘facts’ in the media. Rankings,
thus, attain an unwarranted truth status that makes
them self-fulfilling by virtue of their persistence and
existence. They create what they purport to measure:
in-depth research on the impact of the US News and
World Report Rankings on the US Law schools
shows, for example, that both the status of Law
schools and student choices are strongly determined
by their annual ranking in USN. The rank frames the
schools and the school (re)defines itself in terms of
the rank (Epseland & Sauder 2007).
8
16Globally, high skilled migration increased at a rate 2 and a
half times faster than low skilled migration between 1990
and 2000. By 2000, the college-educated made up 34.6% of
immigrants to OECD countries, up from 29.8% in 1990, and
far out of proportion to the 11.3% of the world’s overall
labour force that they represent (Brown & Tannock 2009
 citing Docquier & Marfouk 2005, p. 167−168).

Lynch: New managerialism, neoliberalism and ranking
Rankings are, in theory, an apolitical act, yet they
are profoundly political. Educational outcomes and
experiences have to be reduced to a numerical signi-
fier, no matter how inappropriate that might be.
Once enumerated, quality and value can only be
challenged by new ‘numbers’ and those activities
and people that cannot be enumerated cannot be
included in the appraisal of quality and value (Epse-
land & Sauder 2007). Whether intended or not, rank-
ings denigrate by exclusion those activities that can-
not be counted in the ordering of things.
The role of numbers in rankings is crucial to the
generalised acceptance of their validity and to politi-
cal disengagement from their dynamics. Numbers
are unassailable to the mathematically uninitiated in
a way that is not true of words; truth in numbers has
a higher status, and is seen as less contestable than
truth expressed in narrative form. The fear that peo-
ple have of mathematics (Boaler 2008) feeds into feel-
ings about numbers and this, in turn, feeds into the
ranking industry. Fear of being ‘wrong’ in interpret-
ing statistical data on rankings silences dissent from
the general public, especially the media, not least
because so many media personnel tend to be drawn
from the non-mathematical fields, especially the
humanities. They frequently lack the skills to exam-
ine the assumptions of data and numbers hidden
within the ranking systems17.
On the surface, the simplicity of numerical order-
ing appears to remove any sense of arbitrariness from
the process of university rankings. It creates an
impression that what is of merit can be hierarchically
ordered and uncontrovertibly judged. Numbers have
an aura of mystery and power and are assumed to be
without ideological bias. Yet, numbers are no differ-
ent to words; they come from a standpoint, a political
and intellectual position and are open to interpreta-
tion (Borer & Lawn 2013).
IMPACT OF RANKING ON THE CULTURE OF
THE UNIVERSITY
There is a relatively silent colonisation of the
hearts and minds of academics and students hap-
pening in universities, albeit coded in the language
of accountability, progress and efficiency (Giroux
2002). The blandness and simplicity of rankings
deflects attention from the ways in which they are
changing higher education, both academics and
students, from the inside out (Ball 2012). Constant
appraisal leads to the internalisation of an actuarial
and calculative mind set both at the individual and
collective levels.
As rankings form public perceptions of universi-
ties, senior administrators have to manage their rank-
ing whether they wish to or not (Farrell & van der
Werf 2007). Thus, a range of ‘gaming strategies’ are
deployed to advance university position in rankings
(Epseland & Sauder 2007). Rankings induce reactiv-
ity that, in turn, alters patterns of investment, intake
and outputs of higher education. Universities can and
do improve or retain their ranks by excluding risk
factors that would downgrade their status. One of the
most notable of these responses is the increased
funding for ‘merit’ scholarships to attract elite stu-
dents (Epseland & Saunder 2007). Merit scholarships
work to the advantage of the already privileged
applicants for a number of reasons, mostly because
educational attainment is, in the first instant, highly
dependent on the expenditure of resources in a com-
petitive system. Parents can and do use private
resources to the advantage of their own children in
economically unequal societies (Marsh 2011); merit
scholarships merely reinforce privilege.
Ranking, auditing and measuring is also a recipe
for self-display and the fabrication of image over sub-
stance among staff (Ball 2003). The heavy focus on
citations as a measure of individual academic worth
encourages ‘gaming’ or the manipulating of citation
indices at the personal level (Todd & Ladle 2008).
Ranking also endorses a type of Orwellian surveil-
lance of one’s everyday work that is paralleled with a
reflexive surveillance of the self. One is always meas-
uring oneself up or down, yet there is a deep alien-
ation in constantly living to perform (Leathwood
2005).
As trust in professional integrity and peer regula-
tion has been replaced by performance indicators,
the quality of peer relations is also diminished. Relat-
ing through audits and appraisals enhances hierar-
chies and diminishes goodwill and collegiality. Feel-
ings of personal inauthenticity also emerge within a
culture of compliance where one is forced to live by
values and norms to which one does not subscribe
(Blackmore & Sachs 2007, Lynch et al. 2012).
Rewarding staff on a measurable item-by-item per-
formance basis also leads to a situation where per-
sonal career interests increasingly govern everyday
academic life. As there are opportunities in the mar-
ket for commercialised professionals and academics
9
17This observation was made by the author in an interview
with the Editor of the Irish Times (Ireland’s most prestigious
newspaper) at a meeting in May 2013 and also by the Press
Ombudsman for Ireland at a separate meeting in 2012.

Ethics Sci Environ Polit 13: pp5, 2013
(Hanlon 2000), internal divisions between staff in the
universities are inevitable and open to exploitation
by management. Academic capitalism brings highly
individualised rewards to those who engage (Slaugh-
ter & Leslie 2001).
Focusing on measured performance also impacts
on the cultural life of students as they are directed
increasingly to economic self-interest and credential
acquisition (Lolich 2011). Student and staff idealism
to work in the service of humanity or in public service
is seriously diminished when universities operate as
entrepreneurial, purely competitive, business- oriented
corporations (Elton 2000) As noted by Harkavy (2006,
p. 14):
When universities openly and increasingly pursue
commercialization, it powerfully legitimizes and rein-
forces the pursuit of economic self-interest by students
and contributes to the widespread sense among them
that they are in college solely to gain career skills and
credentials.
The merging of commerce and research is a fur-
ther consequence of marketisation. While the uni-
versity has both a need and a responsibility to work
with a wide range of public and private sector inter-
ests, the interests and values of business cannot
drive university research, as the ethical principles
and priorities of the business sector are not synony-
mous with those of a university (Eisenberg 1987). If
universities become too reliant on industry-funded
research, or too indebted to the business-driven
agenda of the government of today (even if it comes
coded in the guise of advancing science), there is a
danger that the interests of the university become
synonymous with powerful vested interests. This
will undermine the purposes of the university as a
research institution serving the good of humanity in
its entirety and the very independence of thought
that is the trademark of university research (Lieber-
witz 2005). There is evidence that this is happening
already in sensitive areas such as food production,
genetics, biotechnology and environmental protec-
tion (Monbiot 2000). University departments are
increasingly reliant on research funding from com-
mercial operations to fund posts, especially in fields
like the biosciences and engineering (Bok 2003,
Washburn 2005). Given the fact that the Bayh-Dole
Act (1980) in the USA allows universities and aca-
demics to benefit from patents, those academics and
departments that are funded are inevitably tempted
by the lure of money to compromise on ethical stan-
dards, and to defer to industry requests to control
access to, or even manipulate, clinical trial data and
results (Washburn 2005).
As managerial principles originated in a commer-
cial context where process is subordinated to output
and profit, managerialist values manifest themselves
in education through the promotion of forms of gov-
ernance (i.e. measurement, surveillance, control,
regulation) that are often antithetical to the caring
that is at the heart of good education. While the nur-
turing of learners has an outcome dimension, gains
are generally not measurable in a narrowly specifi-
able time frame. The gains and losses from having or
not having care and nurture in education are only
seen over time. Moreover, the caring dimensions of
education are not open to measurement in terms of
quality, substance and form within a metric measure-
ment system. Even if caring could be monitored and
measured through matrices, the very doing of this
would force people into the calculation of other-cen-
teredness that would undermine the very principle of
relatedness and mutuality that is at the heart of
teaching and learning (Lynch 2010a).
CONCLUSIONS
Rankings have become normalised and regarded
as inevitable even among those who recognise their
many limitations (Hazelkorn 2011). Even powerful
multilateral agencies, such as the European Commis-
sion, have accepted rankings as a given: it initiated a
project in 2008 to develop a new ranking system that
would be more comprehensive than those currently
in use. It planned to have ranked 500 universities on
multiple criteria by 2014 (www.u-multirank.eu).
What is significant about the latter development is its
‘methodological fetishism’ (Amsler & Bolsmann 2012,
p. 292). The focus is on getting the rankings correct,
even though the task of ranking incomparable insti-
tutions on multiple criteria across different countries
and continents is challenging, highly risky and,
arguably, of primary value to the wealthier students
within a given state who can choose which university
to attend (Clancy 2001, Archer et al. 2002, Karabel
2005, Epseland & Sauder 2007).
Rankings are also problematic because their seem-
ingly objective character conceals their serious polit-
ical import. What Hacking (1990, p. 1−10) termed
‘the avalanche of numbers’ has ‘profoundly trans-
formed what we choose to do, who we try to be, and
what we think of ourselves’ in higher education.
‘Assessment measures permit the easy conflation of
what is with what ought to be, of what normal is in
the statistical and moral sense’. The blandness of sta-
tistical measures, their perceived neutrality ‘deflects
10

Lynch: New managerialism, neoliberalism and ranking
attention from their capacity to change the places
and people that use them’ (Epseland & Sauder 2007,
p. 36).
One of the most serious implications of rankings is
that they direct our attention into a different cogni-
tive and normative order when evaluating higher
education. Questions regarding the value, purpose
and politics of higher education and rankings get
swept aside in the bid to find the best ‘method’ of
ranking. Social justice debates about access, par -
ticipation and outcomes from higher education are
side-lined in the ‘positivist drive to make ranking
technologies more and more “objective”’ (Amsler &
Bolsmann 2012, p. 292).
One of the unforeseen consequences of the new
cognitive spaces where ranking has led academics is
the undermining of their role as public intellectuals.
There is no measure for this in the rankings. Once
universities and academics are ranked for only com-
municating with other academics (now primarily via
a limited range of elite journals), and are left increas-
ingly reliant on commercially funded research, pub-
lic intellectual work is inevitably devalued. There is
little incentive to invest personal time with students,
to be a public intellectual and/or to investigate the
vested interests behind one’s own research funding.
The increased elision of differences between market
and public interests, and the disincentive to be either
a caring teacher or public intellectual, not only priva-
tises knowledge to closed groups, it also forecloses
the opportunity to have hypotheses tested or chal-
lenged from experiential (disinterested) standpoints
outside the academy. It limits the opportunities for
learning that occurs when there is a dialogue
between experiential and theoretical knowledge.
Rather than being bewildered and overwhelmed
by the rhetoric of ranking, academics need to build a
counter-hegemonic discourse to managerialism and
neoliberalism in higher education, a discourse that is
grounded in the principles of democracy and equal-
ity that are at the heart of the public education tradi-
tion. Academics need to reinvigorate the vision of the
university as a place for universal learning and for
challenging received orthodoxies (Lynch 2010b).
There is an urgent need to commence a debate about
the public interest values of the university (Harkavy
2006).
Acknowledgements. I thank the editor, K. Stergiou, for his
exceptionally helpful comments and editorial guidance in
preparing the paper for publication. I also express my
appreciation to the anonymous reviewers for their feedback
and direction.
LITERATURE CITED
Amsler SS, Bolsmann C (2012) University ranking as social
exclusion. Br J Sociol Educ 33: 283−301 
Angus L (2004) Globalization and educational change;
bringing about the reshaping and re-norming of prac-
tice. J Educ Policy 19: 23−41 
Archer L, Gilchrist R, Hutchings M, Leathwood C, Phillips D,
Ross A (2002) Higher education and social class:  issues of
inclusion and exclusion. Falmer Press, London
Ball SJ (2003) The teacher’s soul and the terrors of performa-
tivity. J Educ Policy 18: 215−228 
Ball SJ (2012) Performativity, commodification and commit-
ment: An I-spy guide to the neoliberal university. Br J
Educ Stud 60: 17−28
Blackmore J, Sachs J (2007) Performing and reforming lead-
ers:  Gender, educational restructuring and organiza-
tional change. State of New York Press, New York, NY
Boaler J (2008) Helping children learn to love their least
favorite subject — and why it’s important for America.
Penguin Books, New York, NY
Bok D (2003) Universities in the marketplace:  the commer-
cialization of higher education. Princeton University
Press, Princeton, NJ
Boltanski L, Chiapello E (2005) The new spirit of capitalism.
Verso, London
Borer V, Lawn M (2013) Governing education systems by
shaping data:  from the past to the present, from
national to international perspectives. Eur Educ Res J
12: 48−52 
Brown P, Tannock S (2009) Education, meritocracy and the
global war for talent. J Educ Policy 24: 377−392 
Bullen E, Robb S, Kenway J (2004) Creative destruction: 
knowledge economy policy and the future of the arts and
humanities in the academy. J Educ Policy 19: 3−22 
Chandler J, Barry J, Clark H (2002) Stressing academe:  the
wear and tear of new public management. Hum Rela-
tions 55: 1051−1069 
Chubb J, Moe T (1990) Politics, markets and America’s
Schools. Brookings Institute, Washington, DC
Clancy P (1995) Access to college:  patterns of continuity and
change. Higher Education Authority, Dublin
Clancy P (2001) College entry in focus:  a fourth national
study of access to higher education. Higher Education
Authority, Dublin 
Clarke J, Newman J (1997) The managerial state. Sage,
London
Clarke J, Gewritz S, McLaughlin E (2000) New managerial-
ism new welfare? Sage, London
Court M (2004) Talking back to new public management
versions of accountability in education. Educ Manag
Administ Leadership 32: 171−194
Covington S (2001) Moving a public policy agenda. Report
for the National Committee for Responsive Philanthropy: 
Washington, DC
D’Agostino A, Serafini R, Ward-Warmedinger M (2006) Sec-
toral explanations of employment in Europe:  the role of
services. European Central Bank, Working Paper Series
625 (May 2006)
De La Fuente JR (2002) Academic freedom and social
responsibility. Higher Educ Policy 15: 337−339 
Deem R, Mok KH, Lucas L (2008) Transforming higher edu-
cation in whose image; Exploring the concept of the
‘World Class’ university in Europe and Asia. Higher Educ
Policy 21: 83−97 
11
®
®
®
®
®
®
®
®
®

Ethics Sci Environ Polit 13: pp5, 2013
Docking J (2000) New Labour’s policies for schools:  raising
the standard? David Fulton Publishers, London
Docquier F, Marfouk A (2005) International migration by
education attainment, 1990−2000. In:  Özden Ç, Schiff M
(eds) International migration, remittances and the brain
drain. World Bank, Washington, DC, p 151−99
Doring A (2002) Challenges to the academic role of change
agent. J Further Higher Educ 26: 139–148
Duru-Bellat M, Kieffer A, Reimer D (2008) Patterns of social
inequalities in access to higher education in France and
Germany. Int J Comp Sociol 49: 347−368
ECOFIN (2010) Efficiency and effectiveness of public
expenditure on tertiary education in the EU. European
Commission, Brussels
Eisenberg RS (1987) Propriety rights and the norms of
 science. Yale Law J 97: 177−231 
Elton L (2000) The UK research assessment exercise:  unin-
tended consequences. Higher Educ Quart 54: 274−283 
Espeland WN, Sauder M (2007) Rankings and reactivity: 
how public measures recreate social worlds. Am J Sociol
113: 1−40 
Europa (2011) Council conclusions on the modernisation of
higher education. Official Journal of the European
Union, OJC 372/36, 20.12.2011
Farrell CM, Morris J (2003) The neo-bureaucratic state:  pro-
fessionals, managers and professional managers in
schools, general practices and social work. Organization
10: 129−156 
Farrell E, van der Werf M (2007) Playing the rankings game.
Chronicle of Higher Education, May 25. Available at
chronicle. com/ article/ Playing-the-Rankings-Game/ 4451/
(accessed May 8, 2013)
Freire P (1970) Pedagogy of the oppressed. Penguin, London
Fukuyama F (1992) The end of history and the last man. Free
Press, New York, NY
Gamoran A (2001) American schooling and educational
inequality:  a forecast for the 21st century. Sociol Educ
Spec Issue 74: 135−153 
Giroux HA (2002) Neoliberalism, corporate culture, and the
promise of higher education:  the university as a demo-
cratic public sphere. Harvard Educ Rev 72: 1−31
Hacking I (1990) The taming of chance. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge
Hamlyn DW (1996) The concept of a university. Philosophy
71: 201−218
Hanlon G (2000) Sacking the new Jerusalem? The New
Right, social democracy and professional identities.
Sociol Res Online 5. Available at www. socresonline. org.
uk/ 5/ 1/ hanlon.html (accessed August 9, 2013)
Harkavy I (2006) The role of the universities in advancing
citizenship and social justice in the 21st century. Educa-
tion, Citizenship and Social Justice 1: 5−37 
Harvey D (2005) A brief history of neoliberalism. Oxford
University Press, Oxford
Hazelkorn E (2011) Rankings and the reshaping of higher
education: the battle for world class excellence. Palgrave
Macmillan, Basingstoke
Henry M, Lingard B, Rizvi F, Taylor S (2001) The OECD: 
Globalisation and education policy. Pergamon, London
Hill D (2005) Globalisation and its educational discontents: 
Neoliberalisation and its impacts on education workers’
rights, pay and conditions. Int Studies Sociol Educ 15: 
257−288 
Huang H (2012) Opening the black box of QS World Univer-
sity Rankings. Res Evaluation 21: 71−78 
Kaba, A J (2012) Analyzing Anglo-American hegemony in
the Times Higher Education rankings. Education Policy
Analysis Archives 20: 1−49
Karabel J (2005) The chosen:  the hidden history of admis-
sion and exclusion at Harvard, Yale and Princeton.
Houghton Mifflin, Boston, MA
Knights D, Richards W (2003) Sex discrimination in UK aca-
demia. Gender, Work and Organization 10: 213−238 
Leathwood C (2005) Assessment policy and practice in
higher education:  purpose, standards, and equity. Assess
Evaluat Higher Educ 30: 307−324 
Lieberwitz R (2005) Confronting the privatization and com-
mercialization of academic research:  an analysis of
social implications at the local, national, and global
 levels. Indiana J Glob Legal Stud 12: 109−152 
Lo WYW (2011) Soft power, university rankings and knowl-
edge production. Comp Educ 47(2): 209−222 
Lolich L (2011) And the market created the student to its
image and likening:  neo-liberal governmentality and its
effects on higher education. Irish Educ Stu 30: 271−284 
Lynch K (1995) Equality and resistance in higher education.
Int Stud Sociol Educ 5: 93−111 
Lynch K (2010a) Carelessness:  a hidden doxa of higher edu-
cation. Arts Humanities Higher Educ 9: 54−67 
Lynch K (2010b) Lessons for higher education:  the university
as a site of activism. Br J Sociol Educ 31: 575−590 
Lynch K, Grummell B, Devine D (2012) New managerialism
in education:  Gender, commercialization and careless-
ness. Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke
Marginson S (2007a) Global university rankings:  implica-
tions in general and for Australia. J Higher Educ Policy
Manag 29: 131−142 
Marginson S (2007b) Global position and position taking: 
the case of Australia. J Studies Int Educ 11: 5−32 
Marginson S, van der Wende M (2007) To rank or to be
ranked:  the impact of global rankings in higher educa-
tion. J Stu Int Educ 11: 306−329 
Marsh J (2011) Class dismissed:  Why we cannot teach or
learn our way out of inequality. Monthly Review Press,
New York, NY
McCowan T (2012) Is there a universal right to higher edu-
cation? Br J Educ Stud 60: 111−128 
Michaels E, Handfield-Jones H, Axelrod M (2001) The war
for talent. Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA
Moe MT, Bailey K, Lau R (1999) The book of knowledge: 
investing in the education and training industry. Merrill
Lynch, New York, NY
Monbiot G (2000) The captive state. Macmillan, London
Morley L (2003) Quality and power in higher education.
Society for Research into Higher Education and Open
University Press, Milton Keynes
Newman JH (1852) The idea of a university:  defined and
illustrated. Available at www. newmanreader. org/ works/
idea/ (accessed August 6, 2013)
O’Connor P (2012) Irish universities:  male dominated?
Equality, Diversion and Inclusion 31: 83−96 
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Devel-
opment) (2013) The globalisation of higher education.
OECD Observer. Available at www. oecdobserver. org/
news/fullstory.php/aid/3731/The_globalisation_of_higher_
education.html (accessed April 27, 2013)
Rauhvargers A (2011) Global university rankings and their
impact. European University Association, Brussels. Avail-
able at www. eua. be/ pubs/ Global_ University_ Rankings_
and_Their_Impact.pdf (accessed August 9, 2013)
12
®
®
®
®
®
®
®
®
®
®
®
®
®
®
®
®
®
®
®
®

Lynch: New managerialism, neoliberalism and ranking
Rauhvargers A (2013) Global university rankings and their
impact. Report II. European University Association, Brus-
sels. Available at www. eua. be/ Libraries/ Publications_
homepage_list/EUA_Global_University_Rankings_and_
Their_Impact_-_Report_II.sflb.ashx (accessed August 1,
2013)
Reay D, David M, Ball SJ (2005) Degrees of choice:  Class,
race and gender in higher education. Trentham Books,
London
Reay D, Crozier G, Clayton J (2010) ‘Fitting in’ or ‘standing
out’: working class students in UK higher education. Br
Educ Res J 31: 1−19
Robertson SL, Bonal X, Dale R (2002) GATS and the educa-
tion service industry:  The politics of scale and global
reterritorialization. Comp Educ Rev 46: 472−496 
Rumberger R W (2010) Education and the reproduction of
economic inequality in the United States:  An empirical
investigation. Econ Educ Rev 29: 246−254 
Rutherford J (2005) Cultural studies in the corporate univer-
sity. Cultural Stud 19: 297−317 
Salmi J (2009) The challenge of establishing world-class
 universities. The World Bank, Washington, DC
Sauder M, Epseland WN (2009) The discipline of rankings: 
tight coupling and organizational change. Amer Soc Rev
74: 63−82 
Shavit Y, Blossfeld H (1993) Persistent inequality:  changing
educational attainment in thirteen countries. Westview
Press, Boulder, CO
Sianou-Kyrgiou E (2010) Stratification in higher education,
choice and social inequalities in Greece. High Educ Q 64: 
22−40 
Slaughter S, Leslie L (1997) Politics, policies and the entre-
preneurial university. John Hopkins University Press,
Baltimore, MD
Slaughter S, Leslie LL (2001) Expanding and elaborating the
concept of academic capitalism. Organization 8: 154−161 
Sutton Trust (2007) University admissions by individual
schools. Sutton Trust, London
Todd P, Ladle RJ (2008) Hidden dangers of a ‘citation cul-
ture’. Ethics Sci Environ Polit 8: 13−16 
Tomasevski K (2005) Globalizing what:  education as a
human right or as a traded service. Indiana J Glob Legal
Stud 12: 1−79 
Tooley JN (2000) Reclaiming education. Cassell, London
Washburn J (2005) University Inc.:  the corporate corruption
of higher education. Basic Books, New York, NY
Wenneras C, Wold A (1997) Nepotism and sexism in peer
review. Nature 387: 341−343
World Bank (1994) Higher education: the lessons of experi-
ence. The World Bank, Washington, DC
World Bank (1998) World development report: knowledge
for development 1998/9. The World Bank, Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Washington, DC
World Bank (2002) Construction knowledge societies: new
challenges for tertiary education. The World Bank,
Washington, Washington, DC
World Bank (2009) The challenge of establishing world class
universities. The World Bank, Washington, DC
13
Editorial responsibility: Konstantinos Stergiou,
Thessaloniki, Greece
Submitted: May 13, 2013; Accepted: August 29, 2013
Proofs received from author(s): November 8, 2013
®
®
®
®
®
®
®
®
®

