

Early Intervention 
Games


B A R B A R A  S H E R
I L L U S T R A T I O N S  B Y 
R A L P H  B U T L E R
Early Intervention 
Games
Fun, Joyful Ways to Develop Social and Motor 
Skills in Children with Autism Spectrum or  
Sensory Processing Disorders

Copyright © 2009 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by Jossey-Bass
A Wiley Imprint
989 Market Street, San Francisco, CA 94103-1741—www.josseybass.com
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form 
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as 
permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior 
written permission of the publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee 
to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400, fax 
978-646-8600, or on the Web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the publisher for permission should be 
addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, 
201-748-6011, fax 201-748-6008, or online at www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Readers should be aware that Internet Web sites offered as citations and/or sources for further informa-
tion may have changed or disappeared between the time this was written and when it is read.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts 
in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy 
or completeness of the contents of this book and speciﬁ cally disclaim any implied warranties of 
merchantability or ﬁ tness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales 
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable 
for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the publisher nor 
author shall be liable for any loss of proﬁ t or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to 
special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
Jossey-Bass books and products are available through most bookstores. To contact Jossey-Bass directly 
call our Customer Care Department within the U.S. at 800-956-7739, outside the U.S. at 317-572-3986, 
or fax 317-572-4002.
Jossey-Bass also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print 
may not be available in electronic books.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Sher, Barbara.
  Early intervention games : fun, joyful ways to develop social and motor skills in children with autism, 
 spectrum, or, sensory processing disorders / Barbara Sher.
   p. cm.
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-0-470-39126-6 (pbk.)
   1. Autistic children. 2. Children with disabilities—Development. 3. Motor ability in children. 
 4.  Social skills in children. I. Title. 
 RJ506.A9S526 2009
  649’.154—dc22
 
2009023238
Printed in the United States of America
first edition
PB Printing  10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

v
Contents 
Preface 
xi
Acknowledgments 
xiii
Introduction 
1
CHAPTER 1  Understanding Sensory 
Processing Issues 
9
CHAPTER 2  How the Games Help Sensory 
Processing Challenges 
19
CHAPTER 3 Social Gross Motor Games 
51
 
A Kid Sandwich 
51
 
Are You My Mummy? 
54
 
Balloon Baseball 
55
 
Blanket Ride 
57
 
Boat Ride 
59
 
Box Ride 
61
 
Going Through the Tunnel of Legs 
63
 
Hammock Swing 
65
 
Hit the Homemade Piñata 
67

vi  Contents
 
“I’m Here!” 
69
 
Jump to Colors 
71
 
Leap the Shoes 
73
 
Massages 
75
 
Name Game 
77
 
Obstacle Course 
79
 
Races 
82
 
Rolling Children 
83
 
RurRurRurRurRUN! 
85
 
 Sausage Roll (or Sushi Wrap, Hot Dog, 
Burrito . . . ) 
86
 
Scarf Toss 
89
 
Shape Targets 
90
 
Stack the Cans 
92
 
Stop and Go 
94
 
Target Games 
96
 
Throw the Balls into the Box 
98
 
Throwing into the Tubes 
101
 
Throwing Through the Tube 
103
 
Tug-of-War 
105
 
Walk with Rhythm 
106
 
We Are Rocking 
109
 
Who Is This? 
111
 
Who’s in the Box? 
112
 
Wiggling Snake 
114
CHAPTER 4 Social Fine Motor Games 
117
 
Bingo Game 
117
 
Bubble Blowing 
119
 
Cereal Box Puzzles 
121

Contents  vii
 
Cereal Necklace 
123
 
Colored Slots 
125
 
Drawing Faces 
127
 
Dump and Fill 
128
 
Eyedropper Squirts 
130
 
Feather Blowing 
132
 
Listening Game 
134
 
Lost in Rice 
135
 
Penny Flick 
137
 
Point to the Cup 
139
 
Pudding Party 
141
 
Secret Message 
142
 
Sink the Boat 
144
 
Smelling Game 
146
 
Sound Makers 
147
 
Straw Sucking 
149
 
Styrofoam Hammering 
151
 
Tile Painting 
153
 
Toothpick Treats 
155
 
What’s in the Sock? 
156
 
Yes-No Game 
158
CHAPTER 5 Water Games 
161
 
Blow Bubbles and Hum 
162
 
Boogie Board Ride 
164
 
Bury the Body 
165
 
Catch a Fish 
167
 
Choo-Choo Train 
169
 
Fill the Bucket 
171
 
Floating on Your Back 
174

viii  Contents
 
Gecko Walking 
176
 
In and Out Crash 
178
 
Into the Hole 
179
 
The Kids in the Water Go Splashy Clap 
182
 
The Little Dutch Boy 
185
 
Little Jumps, Big Jumps 
186
 
London Bridge 
188
 
Make a Pond 
190
 
Monkey Walking 
192
 
One, Two, Three—Change 
194
 
Parallel Swim 
196
 
Ping-Pong Play 
198
 
Ready? Set. Jump! 
200
 
Riding the Horse Noodles 
202
 
Ring-Around-a-Rosy 
203
 
Save Your Life 
205
 
Shark Attack 
207
 
The Sponge Pass 
209
 
The Squirting Game 
212
 
Tug the Tube 
214
 
Wa-Wa-Wa-Water! 
215
Appendix I  Index of Games by 
Sensory System or 
Skill Stimulated 
219
Appendix II Additional Resources 227

Contents  ix
The Author 
231
Bibliography 
233


xi
Preface 
   Attitudes toward autism have gone through many changes. In my first 
twenty years as an occupational therapist, I had two clients with Autism 
Spectrum Disorder (ASD). They were considered exotic birds; their rocking, 
spinning, and hand ﬂ apping were called  “ self - stimming; ” and their behav-
ior was blamed squarely on the coldness of their  “ refrigerator moms. ” 
 Now, these once atypical children are common in my caseload, and 
self - stimulating behavior is more accurately acknowledged as self - calming. 
Instead of being blamed, their moms are honored for their ability to cope 
with their sensitive children. 
 The jury is still out on the cause of autism, but what is apparent is that 
the brains of these children process information differently. Now that we 
understand the plasticity of the brain, modern therapies are aimed toward 
helping these children connect the dots in ways that other children do, so 
they can better ﬁ t into our world. 
 There are even people nowadays who propose that children on the spec-
trum and with Sensory Processing Disorders (SPD) are more rather than 
advanced less than their peers. A growing awareness of autistic savants, 
with genius mixed into their social differences, adds some muscle to that 
theory. 
 It ’ s an interesting thought. I think of Reggie, one of  “ my ” kids. I was 
watching him blow bubbles recently and saw him mesmerized by the way the 
light refracted off the iridescent bubbles. If you really pay attention, bubbles 
 are  amazingly beautiful, and Reggie was just as delighted and appreciative 
of the fortieth bubble blown as he was of the ﬁ rst. (Talk about being in the 
present moment!) Reggie ’ s ability to notice details also makes him the only 
one in his pre  school class to know the names and sounds of every letter in 
the alphabet. I envy his contentment in solitary play and his not seeming to 
care or notice what others think of him. 

xii  Preface
 What would it be like if kids like Reggie were just seen as one in a vari-
ety of human possibilities? I won ’ t be surprised if sometime in the not too 
distant future, it might be considered  “ cool ” to be autistic or to have unique 
ways of processing the world. Such terms as Sensory Processing  Difference s 
will be used instead of  Disorders , and we  all will learn to be sensitive to our 
needs and how to regulate and calm our systems. 
 Meanwhile, we parents and therapists and friends who love these chil-
dren can make them feel welcomed and find ways to help them acquire 
needed skills. One way will always be playing. Play is the brain ’ s way of 
learning and our way to enjoy our lives and to give love to each other. Daniel 
Tammet, an autistic savant points out in his book,  Born on a Blue Day , that 
what made his childhood miserable were the children who couldn ’ t accept 
him as he was, but what made his development ﬂ ourish were his parents 
who did. 
 May the games in this book bring you and yours many loving, playful 
moments. 
 Barbara Sher 

xiii
   Acknowledgments  
 It ’ s one thing to come up with games to play with children and another to 
ﬁ nd a staff willing to play with you. Playing requires willingness to break 
into song at any moment and being alert, innovative, and ﬂ exible to each 
child ’ s unique needs. Our Early Childhood and Special Education staff of 
aides, teachers, and therapists in the CNMI public school system feel so 
good about the progress we ’ ve seen in  “ our ”  children that we modestly call 
ourselves the Dream Team. 
 To honor our staff ’ s playfulness and competence, I dedicate this book 
to them. It was their willingness to happily play every game, many times, 
which gave me the ability to make games that work best. 
 Thank you, Joe Cruz, Yoli Lely, Mercy Tisa, Melinda Diaz, Jacob 
Villagomez, Mark and Patty Staal, Jerry and Rose Diaz, Dora Won, and Judy 
Hawkins, and helpers, Rita Olipai and Reyda Calibo. 
 I also want to express special appreciation to early intervention teacher 
Mark Staal, who had the vision and was instrumental in setting up the local 
program for children with ASD and SPD. He and Jerry Diaz made impor-
tant suggestions about aspects to include in the book. 
 Huge acknowledgment also goes to fellow occupational therapist and 
dear friend, Karen Beardsley. Karen has a wide range of therapeutic experi-
ence, and I was thrilled when she agreed to be my ﬁ rst reader. She assidu-
ously went through the text and, in her characteristically intelligent style, 
added a sentence, a thought, or a clearer articulation of a therapeutic inter-
vention. For this, I ’ m very grateful. 
 Along with Karen's, I received helpful feedback from Carol Kranowitz 
and Mary Sue Williams, both authors and outstanding professionals in the 
ﬁ eld. Their comments were invaluable. 

 I also truly appreciate Kate Bradford, my editor, who did her usual 
meticulous and thoughtful tidying and rearranging to add the spit and pol-
ish to my vision. 
 And always I ’ m grateful to my illustrator, Ralph Butler, who knows to 
include the wide swath of cultures in his lively illustrations. He knows how 
to exemplify so clearly in pictures what I say in words. 
 I appreciate the strong support given to me by my new friend and 
kindred soul, Ida Zelaya. With her pulse on parental needs through her 
 sensorystreet.com Web site, she understands the power of play with chil-
dren who have sensory processing differences and shares my words with 
other parents. 
 My appreciation wholeheartedly extends to the people in my life who 
have always given me love, applause, and unending encouragement — my 
family. My daughters, Roxanne and Marissa, are my continual source of joy, 
including their husbands, Ehren and Mark, and, especially, my grandson 
Oliver. I so appreciate my brother Monty and sister - in - law Glo my sisters 
Bonnie and Trisha, and brother - in - law David, my stepdaughter Jessica, and 
Stuart, Max, and Griff. Also, sweet thanks to my Mom and, in spirit, my Dad 
and my Richard. I adore them all. 
 It takes a gazillion hours to birth a book, and each time I ’ m ﬁ nished, I 
forget, like a woman after labor is over, how much effort it “was  . . .  until” 
I have already joyously begun the next book. It ’ s easy to see why I ’ m espe-
cially glad for my loving partner and favorite playmate, Don Cohen, who 
keeps me company and well fed when I ’ m writing and joins me on fun 
outings when I ’ m not. He is a joy and a comfort for me, and I am deeply 
appreciative and pleased.     
xiv  Acknowledgments

Early Intervention 
Games


1
Introduction
Kids who are diagnosed with an Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) 
or Sensory Processing Disorder (SPD) come in all shapes, sizes, and 
strengths. Like children everywhere, they are all uniquely themselves, 
with their own preferences, their own needs, and their own sensitivities. 
A difference between typically developing children and these children is 
that children with ASD or SPD let you know, without a doubt, what their 
preferences, needs, and sensitivities are. They wear their needs on their 
sleeves.
If Joseph doesn’t like loud noises, you know it. Maybe he will quietly 
put his hands over his ears, but he’s just as likely to have a screaming melt-
down. If Jason doesn’t want to be disturbed and prefers to be left doing 
what he’s doing, you’re going to have a hard row to hoe getting him to do 
what you want. Susie doesn’t like to be touched and she’s not kidding. You 
get the idea. Typical children might be more willing to go along with your 
program, even if it’s not their ﬁ rst choice, partly because they want to please 
or get praised. Children identiﬁ ed with autism spectrum or sensory integra-
tion issues can’t always let your needs override theirs. If you want peace, you 
must pay attention to their needs. The challenge for parents, therapists, and 
others, including the child, is to ﬁ gure out what the needs are.
You need to notice many things, such as:
Is there a sensation alarming my child and can it be modiﬁ ed or over-
ridden by another sensation?
What in the environment is setting my child off and can I change it?
Is there something in his diet that has a negative effect on him?
What is her emotional state and how can I help calm her?

2  Introduction
Can I help him cope by desensitizing, modifying, overriding, or avoid-
ing something?
Would it be more helpful to distract my child’s attention from her 
anxiety by helping her focus on something that calms her, or to 
change the situation?
We also need to notice and pay attention to ourselves. We all know what 
it feels like to not be able to think clearly because the radio is too loud, or to 
feel irritated by glaring headlights, or overwhelmed and even frightened by 
a jostling crowd. Usually, we are able to block out annoying sensations and 
focus on what is in front of us, but not always. Understanding the effects 
of such assaults on our sensory system helps us to have more compassion 
for the many people who can’t tune them out and thus react negatively. To 
paraphrase the Serenity Prayer, we need to learn to control the sensations 
we can, avoid the ones we can’t, and develop the wisdom to know the dif-
ference.
We need to learn to help those who can’t do this by noticing their reac-
tions to different stimuli and, when wanting assistance, to seek out inter-
vention by occupational therapists or other professionals trained in treating 
sensory issues. Understanding of the child’s needs is increased when par-
ents, family members, therapists, and the educational team can brainstorm 
together and share their insights.
If there could be said to be a silver lining in this sudden increase in 
the incidence of autism and SPD, then it must be that we’re producing a 
large group of parents and professionals who are increasingly sensitive to 
the needs of children. As this awareness grows, this increased knowledge is 
spreading. People are sharing their ideas in the neighborhood, in magazines 
and books, and on the Web. More people are understanding and trying new 
ways to help their youngster modify, cope, and deal with the world so that 
joy, not pain, is the main sensation of their lives.
Besides enlarging our sensitivity, these children are inﬂ uencing one of 
the main challenges of this point in our history: accepting diversity. We’re 
working on accepting diversity in terms of religion, ethnicity, and sexual 

Introduction  3
orientation. People are now beginning to call for a greater acceptance of 
neurological diversity.
Zosia Zaks, an adult on the autism spectrum and the author of Life and 
Love: Positive Strategies for Autistic Adults, adds to this perspective, writing 
on her Web site (www.autismability.com):
Most Autistic people do not want to be “cured” per se. We do not 
want our Autism magically erased, or erased over time via some 
method. You would wind up washing away who we are. This is 
important to understand. Many people across the spectrum, with 
a wide range of skills, talents, challenges, issues, and interests, are 
speaking out for a new understanding, are working hard to promote 
the beneﬁ ts of neurological diversity. The goal should never be to 
make an Autistic person “normal” or “typical” or “just like his peers” 
because Autism is biological—neurological—and therefore Autistic 
people will always “be built” Autistic. Instead, try to work with us, 
as we are, so we can learn new skills, communicate, and enjoy our 
lives.
She also points out the importance of appreciating strengths:
For example, many of us absolutely love color. We can have strong 
aesthetic ideals. Some of us are entranced by sounds, textures, and 
images and this leads to an amazing depth of artistic talent in our 
community. Think of Einstein standing there “stimming out” visu-
ally on the trains that gave him the idea for relativity. Many of our 
sensory-bound challenges mirror sensory-bound insights that can 
have incredible impacts on art, science, music, and engineering.
Daniel Hawthorne, another adult with autism, says in his book, A Reason 
for Hope, “There are two things I would want to tell parents. One is to be 
attentive to helping their children work from their strengths, using their 
own unique talents to meet life’s challenges, rather than trying to constantly 

4  Introduction
compensate for their weaknesses. Everyone has his own unique strengths 
and weaknesses, and autistic individuals are no different. If they can learn 
how to best use their unique strengths, then they will live happier lives 
for it.”
I hope that the ideas in this book give you more ways to help children 
enjoy their lives and their own unique strengths.
The Games
The games in this book can be done in a classroom with many kids of dif-
ferent abilities, at home with one child and a parent, or with friends and 
siblings. Some of the aquatic therapy games can be done with just a water 
table or kiddie pool, but a few require a real pool, lake, or ocean. Some of 
the aquatic games can also be done on land instead.
Each game has the format described below:
T I T L E
Some titles are chosen because they explain the game, as in Blanket Ride, 
and others because they are cute (if you think A Kid Sandwich is cute). Feel 
free to change the name to ﬁ t your group. Some names can be changed to 
be more appropriate for different cultures. For example, Sushi Roll gives 
an Asian ﬂ avor whereas Burrito Roll would make a clearer image in a Latin 
culture.
G O A L S
This section lists the social, motor, and cognitive goals being encouraged, as 
well as the sensory system being stimulated.
M A T E R I A L S
This section lists any material needed for the games. All of the materials are 
easy to ﬁ nd, and include recyclables.

Introduction  5
S E T U P
This section describes the kinds of things to do or to have ready to make 
the game go smoothly—For example, if children and adults need to be in a 
circle, or whether you need to have a pile of shoes nearby.
D I R E C T I O N S
This Explains how the game is played.
V A R I A T I O N S
Variations can include different materials to use or other skills to be devel-
oped.
W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D
This explains the various lessons that are being addressed.
M O D I F I C A T I O N S
This section suggests ways to modify the game to help children with speciﬁ c 
abilities or sensitivities.
Individualizing the games maximizes your child’s social success because 
you modify games according to your child’s learning proﬁ le and skill level. 
One way to create a proﬁ le for your child is to use a Social Skills Proﬁ le, such 
as the easy-to-use one provided in an excellent resource, Building Bridges 
Through Sensory Integration (see the bibliography at the end of the book). 
This, along with continuing observations, gives you a picture of the child’s 
skills so you can see how you might modify the game.
For example, Lenny’s proﬁ le indicated that he
 1. Avoids playing near other children
 2. Wants to be in control
 3. Seeks out deep pressure, hugs, excessive movement, frequent jumping 
and banging into things
 4. Has a tendency to stare off into space

6  Introduction
 5. Has limited visual tracking and does not use his eyes to guide movement
 6.  Is oversensitive to the sounds of others and often covers his ears
In playing the boisterous game below with Lenny, modiﬁ cations had to be 
made at ﬁ rst until the game had been played often enough to become famil-
iar and comfortable. With the initial modiﬁ cations, the game does not alert 
his defenses and he can begin with a positive, nonthreatening  experience.
The Game: Throw the Balls into the Box
In this game, children gather around a cardboard box on the ﬂ oor (with its 
ﬂ aps open on the bottom). Each child is given a ball to throw in the box as 
the group sings to the tune of “London Bridge Is Falling Down”:
Throw the ball into the box
Into the box
Into the box
Throw the ball into the box
Where did the ball go?
Then, when all the balls are in the box, say, “Are they behind the box?” 
(exaggerate looking behind the box); “Are they beside the box?” (again, exag-
gerate looking beside the box); “Are they in the box?” (then pick up the box, 
and since the bottom ﬂ aps are loose, all the balls fall out!).
Children are delighted by the surprise of the balls falling out and are excited 
to grab a ball and do it again, but some children need the activity modiﬁ ed.
The following modiﬁ cations to the game could be made to ﬁ t Lenny’s 
proﬁ le.
 1. Avoids playing near other children
When playing a variation of the game where children take turns, let 
him throw ﬁ rst so he can then back away from the group into a 
more comfortable space.

Introduction  7
Make a stool available for him to use if he wants to be away from the 
group but still see what is going on.
Give him direct feedback that speciﬁ cally describes things he did well 
to reinforce a positive sense of self. The more comfortable he gets 
in his own skin, the easier it is to be with others.
 2. Wants to be in control
Let him have some time with his favorite toy after he ﬁ rst throws the 
ball.
During some of the group playtime, follow his lead. For example, if 
you know he loves airplanes, make paper airplanes and let him 
and the others throw them into the box instead of balls.
As he becomes more at ease, let him sometimes be the one who gets 
to lift the box at the end and shake the balls loose.
If he is having a bad day and wants total control and refuses to play, 
make sure he either stays and watches one game or does one 
action and then uses his words to say, “I want to go.” When he 
does this, hug him goodbye (if he likes hugs) and allow him to go 
play with his favorite toy nearby.
 3. Seeks out deep pressure, hugs, excessive movement, frequent jumping 
and banging into things
Give him a congratulatory hug every time he throws the ball in the 
box.
When he is standing in the crowd, give him a deep-pressure, comfort-
ing touch to his shoulders and upper arms.
Give him a weighted vest or other compression orthotic to wear.
 4. Has a tendency to stare off into space and tune out
Cover the box in a bright color and sparkle it up to gain his attention.
Position him so that he can see the group leader and the box better.
Use his favorite things to bring him back to the here and now. For 
example, if he loves Spiderman, let him pretend to be Spiderman 
as he participates in the game.

8  Introduction
 5. Has limited visual tracking and does not use his eyes to guide 
 movement
Verbally encourage him to look at the box when he is throwing and 
sometimes do a hand-over-hand prompting. Later this can be 
reduced to just a simple touch prompt with a gestural cue.
You could also try using a made-up hand signal or signing along with 
speaking to reinforce his vision.
 6.  Is oversensitive to the sounds of others and often covers his ears
Until he gets used to the game, keep the singing soft or have the kids 
quietly take turns throwing.
 Sometimes use the games as a starting point. If your child is throwing 
at a bowl in the Target Game and starts to throw the ball high in the air, 
modify the game to a basketball game. Lift the bowl high and have kids 
take turns making the basket. Or have one child toss the ball up, and you or 
another can have fun trying to catch it in the bowl on its way down.
For many more ideas on strategies and activities, see Appendix II and 
the Bibliography, where you’ll ﬁ nd some wonderful, user-friendly books, 
Web sites, and listservs, such as Carol Kranowitz’s The Out-of-Sync Child 
Has Fun: Activities for Kids with Sensory Processing Disorder; Dr. Lucy 
Miller’s Sensational Kids; Mary Sue William and Sherry Shellenberger’s 
Alert Program; Tools for Tots: Sensory Strategies for Toddlers and Preschoolers 
by Diana Henry et al.; and Ida Zelaya’s www.sensorystreet.com Web site 
where parents trade ideas.

9
 Understanding 
Sensory Processing 
Issues   
 S
ensory integration is an important consideration when working with chil-
dren with Sensory Processing Disorder or sensory processing problems. 
Research shows that the majority of children on the autistic spectrum 
also have sensory problems, especially with hearing, touch, and vision. It ’ s esti-
mated that there is one child with sensory issues in every regular classroom, and 
somewhere between 50 and 80 percent of children have some degree of sensory 
problems in a classroom of children with Autism Spectrum Disorders. 
 Sensory processing is the ability of the brain to correctly integrate informa-
tion brought in by the senses. The information we take in through the senses 
of touch, movement, smell, taste, vision, and hearing are combined with prior 
information, memories, and knowledge already stored in the brain to make 
sense of our world. In people without Sensory Processing Disorders, all the 
sensory input from the environment and all the input from our bodies work 
together seamlessly so we know what ’ s going on and what to do. Without con-
scious effort, we are ﬁ ltering out sensations that are not important. 
C H A P T E R  1

10  Early Intervention Games
 Sensory processing occurs ﬁ rst by registration, when the child becomes 
aware of the sensation. The second stage is orientation, which enables the 
child to pay attention to the sensation. Next comes interpretation; the child 
has to somehow understand the information coming in. Finally comes 
organization, when the child uses the information to elicit a response. This 
can be an emotional behavior, a physical action, or a cognitive response.  
 Sensory Processing Disorder 
 When sensory input is not integrated or organized appropriately in the 
brain, children experience the world differently. They ’ re not always get-
ting an accurate, reliable picture of their bodies and the environment, and 
this misperception produces varying degrees of problems in development, 
information processing, and behavior. Because they are not always able to 
process information received through the senses, they cannot easily adapt 
to a situation. The neurobiology of the sensory systems is dysfunctional 
and therefore distorts the individual ’ s ability to perceive the world cor-
rectly. People must be able to perceive, interpret, and process information 
so that they can learn about the world around them. If they are unable to 
do so, they can feel uncomfortable, which may show itself in such behaviors 
as tuning out or hand ﬂ apping. 
 Children with Sensory Processing Disorder may have difﬁ culty  “ reading 
cues, ”  either verbal or nonverbal, from the environment. Dysfunction in this 
area makes it difﬁ cult for people to adapt to their environment and func-
tion as others do. They may be hypersensitive to sound or touch, or unable 
to screen out distracting noises or clothing textures. Their response to these 
stimuli might be impulsive motor acts, making noises, or running away. 
 This hypersensitivity is also known as overresponsivity or sensory 
defensiveness. Children with this response may complain about how cloth-
ing feels, the annoyance of a tag, or how their socks have to be on just so. 
They could be picky eaters and get stuck on one certain food, making it 

 impossible to get them to eat anything else. They might walk on their toes 
to avoid sensory input from the bottoms of their feet. They may not be 
able to tolerate normal lighting in a room. They may be so oversensitive to 
smells that, for example, a trip past the meat department at a supermar-
ket is unbearable. Some children are oversensitive to sounds and will fre-
quently cover their ears, even when listening to what is generally perceived 
as a pleasant sound. They usually feel uncomfortable with the noise in a 
group setting and often tune out. Children who are hypersensitive are on 
alert to protect themselves from real or imagined dangers in an unpredict-
able world. Their behavior might seem anxious, self - absorbed, or stubborn 
because the imagined danger is very real to them. 
 Children with sensory processing problems might also have the opposite 
response and be underresponsive. This hyposensitivity is characterized by 
an unusually high tolerance for environmental stimuli. Rather than avoid-
ing smells, they seek to increase them by snifﬁ ng people, objects, and food. 
Rather than avoiding touch or touching, they will constantly be crashing into 
things or stamping their feet, seeking extra stimulation. Rather than avoid-
ing motion and fatiguing easily, they may excessively crave intense move-
ment and love to spin, swing, and jump, and can be in constant motion. 
They may get dizzy easily — or never at all. They may appear restless and be 
overactive because they are hyporesponsive and are trying to increase their 
alertness by seeking out sensory stimulation. When children are hypore-
sponsive to sensations, they are not defensive enough and are more likely 
to do things that put them in harm ’ s way, such as running into the street or 
jumping from high places. They often have a high pain threshold and can 
become injured and not realize it. 
 In addition, some children may ﬂ uctuate between these extremes. Their 
arousal level is erratic and not necessarily relevant to the stimuli itself. This 
means that it would be very hard to predict how they might react. 
 As Carol Kranowitz points out in her book,  The Out - of - Sync Child 
(2005, p. 78),  “ The child may be both over - responsive and under - responsive 
in one sensory system, or may be over - responsive to one kind of sensation 
and under - responsive to another, or may respond differently to the same 
Understanding Sensory Processing Issues  11

12  Early Intervention Games
stimulus depending on the time and context, ﬂ uctuating back and forth. 
Yesterday, after a long recess, he may have coped well with a fire alarm; 
today, when recess is cancelled, he may have a meltdown when a door clicks 
shut. Context makes a huge difference. ” 
 Types of Sensory Processing 
Disorders 
 Stanley I. Greenspan, MD and Lucy J. Miller, PhD, OTR further delineate 
sensory integration issues into categories. Sensory Processing Disorder is 
being used as a global umbrella term that includes all forms of this disorder, 
including three primary diagnostic groups. 
 T Y P E  I .  S E N S O R Y  M O D U L A T I O N 
D I S O R D E R  (  S M D  ) 
 Sensory modulation refers to the process by which messages from the sen-
sory system convey information about the intensity, frequency, duration, 
complexity, and novelty of sensory stimuli. Usually we respond with an 
appropriately graded reaction, neither underreacting nor overreacting. 
 Miller, in her book  Sensational Kids , describes Sensory Modulation 
Disorder (SMD) as one that makes it hard for kids to match the inten-
sity of their response to the intensity of the sensation. It takes the form 
of sensory overresponsivity which causes children to be more alert than 
most people.  “ Even when asleep, [their]  ‘ engine ’  is running too fast, the 
way a car ’ s engine does when the idle is set too high. This causes sounds 
and other sensations to seem more intense  . . .  than they would to a typi-
cally developing child. Even something as innocent as  . . .  [a door] slam-
ming can jolt [a child] into instant and complete alertness the way a big 
BOOM coming from the furnace room of the house would alarm you or 
me ” (p. 98).  

Understanding Sensory Processing Issues  13
 T Y P E  I I .  S E N S O R Y  -  B A S E D  M O T O R  D I S O R D E R 
(  S B M D  ) 
 This dysfunction occurs when the sensory input of the proprioceptive and ves-
tibular system is misinterpreted or incorrectly processed. The  proprioceptive 
system lets us know what our body parts are doing, even in the dark when 
we can ’ t see them, and how much strength we need to do speciﬁ c tasks. The 
vestibular tells us if we are tilting or if our bodies are balanced. (Because 
the input from these systems is so crucial, they are a major factor in the design 
of the games in this book and are discussed in more detail below.) 
 When the child ’ s central nervous system has difﬁ culty making use of the 
sensory information from these systems, he can exhibit a subtype of SBMD 
called dyspraxia, which is the inability to carry out a sequence of actions 
that are necessary to do something the child wants to do, such as imitate 
actions, play sports, get on a bike, or climb a ladder. Children with SBMD 
are often clumsy, unintentionally breaking toys, or tripping over things. 
This may also show itself as a child who prefers sedentary fantasy play over 
playing sports. 
 Postural Disorder is another subtype whereby the child seems weak, 
tires easily, or doesn ’ t consistently use a dominant hand or cross midline. 
 T Y P E  I I I .  S E N S O R Y  D I S C R I M I N A T I O N 
D I S O R D E R  (  S D D  ) 
 This is the inability to distinguish between similar sensations. Sensory dis-
crimination is the process whereby we take the information our senses deliver 
and we integrate, interpret, analyze, and associate it with all the data we have 
already stored, and make good use of the information. This enables us to 
know what is in our hands without looking, to ﬁ nd things by touch alone, 
to organize writing on a page, to differentiate between textures or smells, or to 
hear what is being said if there is background noise. This disorder can show 
itself as inattentiveness, disorganization, and poor school performance. 
 Sensory issues can be on a spectrum and as unique as ﬁ ngerprints. Being 
annoyed by the scratchiness of a sweater is considered to be a typical sen-
sory response for anyone. However, when a child is so strongly affected by 

14  Early Intervention Games
tactile sensations or other sensory input that he totally withdraws, becomes 
hyperactive, or lashes out, the child ’ s sensory issues are severe enough to 
warrant intervention. 
 The Three Major Sensory Systems 
 Dr.  Jean Ayres, an occupational therapist, was the pioneer who formu-
lated a theory of sensory integration that led to identiﬁ cation of Sensory 
Processing Disorders and to their therapeutic intervention. 
 In therapy, Ayres focuses primarily on three basic senses — tactile, ves-
tibular, and proprioceptive. Although these three sensory systems are less 
familiar than vision and audition, they are critical, because they help us to 
experience, interpret, and respond to different stimuli in our environment. 
Their interconnections start forming before birth and continue to develop as 
the person matures and interacts with her environment. These three senses 
are not only interconnected but are also connected with other systems in 
the brain and will be discussed in detail below. Many of the motor activi-
ties used in the games in this book are designed to integrate, challenge, and 
stimulate these systems. 
 T H E  V E S T I B U L A R  S Y S T E M 
 The vestibular system is found in the inner ear (the semicircular canals) 
and detects movement and changes in the position of the head. It is how 
we relate in space. It is a foundation for muscle tone, balance, and bilateral 
coordination. All other types of sensation are processed according to ves-
tibular information, so it is a unifying system in our brains. 
 Children who are hypersensitive to vestibular stimulation may have a 
 “ ﬁ ght or ﬂ ight ”  response that would cause them to be very frightened or 
want to run away or strike out at others. They may have a fearful reac-
tion to ordinary movement activities and seem anxious in space and appear 
clumsy. They will shun playground equipment and riding in elevators or 

Understanding Sensory Processing Issues  15
escalators, and sometimes even in cars. They may refuse to be picked up or 
to ever let their feet leave the ground. 
 Children with a hyporeactive vestibular system may purposefully seek 
excessive body movements, such as whirling, jumping, spinning, hanging 
upside down, swinging for long periods, constantly moving, or just con-
tinually ﬁ dgeting. They may rock when upset; this is a kind of tranquilizing 
self - therapy. They are trying continuously to stimulate their vestibular sys-
tems in order to achieve a state of quiet alertness. 
 Temple Grandin, whose landmark book,  Seeing in Pictures , made her 
famous as one of the ﬁ rst people to write about having autism, invented 
a  “ squeeze machine. ”  This machine put pressure on her trunk, similar to a 
ﬁ rm hug, which brought her comfort and relief.  
 T H E  T A C T I L E  S Y S T E M 
 The tactile system is the largest sensory system in our body and is composed 
of receptors in the skin, which send information to the brain regarding such 
factors as light, touch, pain, temperature, and pressure. This input gives 
form to body and spatial awareness and plays an important role in perceiv-
ing the environment and in establishing protective reactions for survival. 
There are two components to the system: protective, which is defensive; and 
discriminative, which is discerning. These two must work together to enable 
us to function and perform everyday tasks. 
 Hypersensitivity in the tactile system, also called tactile defensiveness, may 
lead to a misperception of touch and can be seen in the affected child’s with-
drawing when being touched, avoiding groups, refusing to eat certain foods, 
wearing certain types of clothing, avoiding getting his hands dirty, or using his 
ﬁ ngertips rather than whole hands to manipulate objects. The child with tactile 
dysfunction will often curl her hands into loose ﬁ sts to avoid touching; keeping 
her hands in that position can affect her ﬁ ne motor skills. This dysfunction may 
also display itself in behavior where children try to isolate themselves or are 
generally irritable. This is where you might see the  “ ﬁ ght or ﬂ ight ”  response. 
 Hyposensitivity is seen in children who are undersensitive or unaware 
of pain, temperature, or how some objects feel. Sometimes they seek more 

16  Early Intervention Games
 stimulation and may paw through toys, chew on objects, or bump into people 
or furniture. Painful tactile stimulation may not be felt, easily leaving the child 
defenseless or vulnerable to dangerous situations. Intervention needs to include 
intense touch stimulation to help them adequately process the information.  
 T H E  P R O P R I O C E P T I V E  S Y S T E M 
 The proprioceptive system lies along muscle ﬁ bers and in the tendons and 
ligaments that provide a person with a subconscious awareness of body 
position and how it is moving. It allows us to automatically adjust in dif-
ferent situations, such as stepping off a curb, sitting in a chair, or staying 
upright on uneven surfaces. Even ﬁ ne motor tasks, such as writing, using a 
soup spoon, or buttoning a shirt, depend on an efﬁ cient proprioceptive sys-
tem. This system helps to develop adapted responses to our environment. 
 When the proprioceptive system is hypersensitive, there is difﬁ culty 
receiving information from the muscles and joints. The affected person is 
unable to properly interpret the feedback about movement and will often 
have poor body awareness. Signs of dysfunction are clumsiness, a tendency 
to fall, odd body posturing, messy eating, and difﬁ culty manipulating small 
objects, such as buttons and snaps. Children may put too much or too little 
pressure on objects and break toys without meaning to do so. They may 
resist new motor movement activities because they have been unsuccessful 
with imitating movements in the past. 
 Likewise there may be hyposensitivity, in which there is an underlying 
high pain threshold and the affected person needs more input to gain sen-
sation. Behaviors seen may be excessive crashing or bumping into things, 
biting or teeth grinding, head banging, and so on. 
 Another dimension of proprioception is where we ﬁ nd the dyspraxia 
problems mentioned above. Praxis or motor planning is the ability to plan 
and execute different motor tasks, such as imitating another ’ s movements, 
climbing a tree, or copying words from a blackboard. In order to do this, 
the system needs accurate information from the sensory system. The child 
with dyspraxia has difﬁ culty using sensory information to plan and orga-
nize what needs to be done and may not learn easily. 

Understanding Sensory Processing Issues  17
 V I S U A L  A N D  A U D I T O R Y  P R O C E S S I N G 
 In order to understand the children ’ s reactions when we are playing games 
with them, we also need to understand something about problems with 
visual and auditory processing. 
 Visual processing deﬁ cits do not mean that those affected cannot see. 
Rather it means that their brains are not processing what they are seeing. It 
is a very complex system. If asked to go get an object, they might look right 
at it and then say they can ’ t ﬁ nd it. They might also have a hard time ﬁ nd-
ing the words for objects they are viewing. They may exhibit poor spatial 
awareness, lack coordination, and have overall learning problems as well. 
The vestibular system and vision work collaboratively in order to maintain 
posture and balance. 
 Similarly, auditory processing deﬁ cits are not about problems with hear-
ing, but about processing the information heard. The child may hear what 
you say, but the brain may not integrate and assimilate your words. It ’ s not 
that the child doesn ’ t understand — it simply may take a moment or more 
before it clicks in. 
 Auditory processing has also been associated with the vestibular system. 
Some children may have auditory defensiveness and may become anxious or 
sensitive to certain sounds and frequencies. Likewise, they may be hyposensitive 
and ﬁ nd ways to seek out and repeat certain noises, or may ﬁ xate on them.  
 How Sensory Processing Disorders 
Affect Socialization 
 Sensory difﬁ culties may show up in academic underachievement; problems 
with peer interaction, attention, gross and ﬁ ne motor coordination, and 
activity level; developmental difﬁ culties; poor self - esteem; and speech or 
language delays. Behaviors are almost always affected, and the child may 
be impulsive, aggressive, distractible, fearful, withdrawn, or  “ in his or her 

18  Early Intervention Games
own world ” ; may show a general lack of planning, and may have difﬁ culty 
adjusting to new  situations. 
 Sensory Processing Disorders can take many forms, but almost always 
show up in social activities. What other children find enjoyable can be 
extremely uncomfortable for kids with sensory processing issues. Other 
children might be having fun playing ball in the ﬁ eld, trading gossip, and 
joyfully squealing or shouting. But for children with sensory issues, the 
playground can be an unpredictable, scary, confusing, and dangerous place. 
The noise levels are too loud, the visual clutter of running children is disor-
ganizing, and the possibility of being bumped, or of even just inadvertently 
touching something, can be frightening. If being touched is an issue, if the 
sensory systems that give one a sense of balance and body awareness are not 
aligned, if being in crowds produces anxiety, then it makes sense that social 
situations would be difﬁ cult. 
 The child ’ s social behavior may look  “ odd, ”   “ geeky, ”  “ babyish, ” or 
 “ weird. ”  Children who are trying to protect themselves by stubbornly refus-
ing to do things might be seen as  “ problem ”  kids with  “ an attitude. ”  For 
example, if the child is trying to calm himself by ﬂ apping his hand or twirl-
ing, others might see him as odd and avoid his company. Or the child might 
be ostracized because she doesn ’ t understand the rules of social space and, 
seeking sensory input, gets right into another ’ s face, touches too much, or 
bumps into others too often. 
 Having trouble with transitions—going from one activity to the next—
makes school routines a problem and may cause these children to act out, 
thus making them different from the others. You may see such social behav-
iors as anxiety, withdrawal, anger, deﬁ ance, and defensiveness, which make 
it difﬁ cult for children with Sensory Processing Disorders to be accepted by 
other children. 
 When sensory information is unpredictable, it ’ s easy to see why some 
of these children prefer facts and information and putting objects in order. 
These things are completely stable and predictable and do not change 
according to one ’ s arousal state. 

19
C H A P T E R  2
How the Games Help 
Sensory Processing 
Challenges
C
arol Kranowitz, author of  The Out-of-Sync Child , the popular book 
for parents on Sensory Processing Disorder, commented, “Until I 
learned about sensory integration dysfunction, I could not ﬁ nd a pat-
tern in the children in my classroom that were different from the others. The 
only common thread—and this is what troubled me the most—was their 
sadness. Whether their modus operandi was hostility, aggression, anger, 
frustration, tuning-out, whining, silliness, or wildly inappropriate gusto, 
they all seemed to sense that they weren’t like the other kids. They didn’t 
feel a sense of belonging.”
The games in this book are designed to address the sensory system and 
give children that sense of belonging. They are designed to help children 
develop motor skills so that they can be successful in the playground. They 
are planned to help children be more sensitive to some systems and less 
sensitive to  others.
But mainly, the games are played so that these children can see that being 
with other people can be fun.

20  Early Intervention Games
Goals and Methods of Early 
Intervention Games
Chris came into the school’s playroom reluctantly. He tended to be reluctant 
about most activities in which he wasn’t the initiator and showed his discom-
fort by standing by the glass door, with his back to us, looking out.
In the middle of the room was a huge cardboard box, and because it was 
an unusual thing to see in the classroom, we were able to persuade him to come 
over and have a look at it. He looked inside and then stood aside and watched 
as his schoolmate, Kaya, got placed inside the box. We loosely closed the top 
ﬂ aps and crooned, “Who’s in the box? Who’s in the box? Knock knock knock. 
Who’s in the box?” We opened the ﬂ aps, Kaya popped her head out, and we 
said, “It’s Kaya!” We gave Kaya and Jimmy and Damion turns while Chris 
watched and even knocked on the box.
“It’s Chris’s turn,” we said enthusiastically, but not at all sure about 
how he would feel about getting in the box. To our delight, he let us put him 
inside and immediately sat down, so we closed the ﬂ aps. Again we crooned 
our tune and knocked softly on the box in case the noise would irritate him. 
When we opened the ﬂ aps, there he was with a huge grin on his face.
Chris wanted several more turns, and then was in such a good mood that 
he was willing to play the next game when we turned the box on its side, opened 
up all the ﬂ aps, and the children crawled through the “tunnel.”
Chris and the others were at what we call “Social Club.” The group is 
mainly made of Head Start preschool kids who have been diagnosed with 
Autism Spectrum Disorder or Sensory Processing Disorder, or both, but also 
includes children with other needs, and often a couple of typically devel-
oping children. Our classroom is set up with basic motor equipment, such 
as a small trampoline and balance beam, and other play materials, mostly 
things easily found or made. We start the session in a predictable pattern: 
ﬁ rst singing a couple of familiar songs, doing a jumping game, and going 
through the obstacle course. Then we introduce new games or  variations 

How the Games Help Sensory Processing Challenges  21
of old games. For example, instead of getting or giving rides inside a box, 
the children get pulled or help pull others who are sitting on a blanket. Six 
or more gross motor games are followed by some ﬁ ne motor activities. The 
class ends with the familiar goodbye song.
On another day of the week, the same gang meets, but this time at a 
pool for aquatic therapy. There we mix familiar activities with the new ones. 
We start the session in a small “hot tub” ﬁ lled with lukewarm water and sing 
a variety of songs and play games. Then we move to the big pool to play 
more games. We end with the same familiar goodbye song.
Are the groups successful? Kids like Chris who were hesitant at ﬁ rst soon 
began to run to the classroom, excited to begin the sessions. Children who 
were initially fearful of the water began smiling when the school bus arrived 
at the pool site. The children, each in their own way and in their own time, 
began to get the underlying message: playing with others can be fun.
Major Goals of Games
Although each game has its individual set of goals, which are included in 
the descriptions of the speciﬁ c games, there are three major goals for all the 
games.
The first is to encourage the ability to focus on the present moment. 
Children need to attend before they can play socially. There is a level of alert 
energy that needs to be attained before playing can take place. We know 
this from our own lives. If our energy is too low, we’re not in the mood to 
be engaged with others. If our energy is too high, we’re too jittery to focus 
and our attention is scattered. Mary Sue Williams and Sherry Shellenberger 
use the analogy of an engine in their Alert Program to help children understand 
the differences between an engine that is revving, sluggish, or idling nicely.
Children, especially those with hyperactivity, are said to have an “atten-
tion deﬁ cit.” The more descriptive term would be “attention surplus.” Sensory 

22  Early Intervention Games
and kinesthetic information is coming in fast and furious without ﬁ ltering 
as to which is relevant and which is not. Some children react by darting 
here and there and noticing it all. Others deal with the barrage of information 
by shutting down and ignoring it all. Our goal is to help the children ﬁ nd that 
middle ground of alert interest where they are not overwhelmed or under-
whelmed. They need to be in the middle ground where they can see what is 
foreground, or information to notice, and what is background, or  information 
to ignore. It is in this level of alertness that we can elicit “shared attention,” 
when children are able to notice and interact with the same object.
The second major goal is to increase coordination, because one of the 
best ways to play and socially interact with others is to do something physi-
cal together. “Clumsy” is frequently used to describe many of the children 
on the spectrum and with sensory processing problems. The lack of ﬂ uid 
coordination is often a result of poor ideation and motor planning, which 
creates obstacles in executing movements. Difﬁ culties with vestibular and 
proprioceptive systems contribute to poor balance and body awareness. 
Our goal, then, is to help the children develop the foundation for basic 
motor skills so that they can play with others. Through a variety of care-
fully selected games, and while addressing the hierarchical needs of their 
sensory systems, we help them develop the skills they need. We help them 
learn how to throw, jump, run, and stop on a dime so that they can play a 
variety of games.
The third and probably most important goal of therapy is for the kids to 
learn that it’s worth it to pay attention and to engage in back-and-forth play. 
And as their coordination builds, so do their conﬁ dence and their desire to 
repeat these social experiences. The importance of practicing and master-
ing these skills in a safe haven is that the children will ultimately be able to 
transfer them to other situations and interactions outside the group and be 
able to have fun socializing and engaging with peers in the community. In 
Social Club and aquatic therapy, we want to put them in situations where 
they are enjoying themselves, and from this happier place, they can be open 
and less resistant to relating to others. Mainly, we want them to have the 
experiences that show them that relating to others can be fun!

How the Games Help Sensory Processing Challenges  23
Main Methods Used in the Games
To accomplish these goals, we use two main methods.
The ﬁ rst is to provide the appropriate stimulation for the children’s sensory 
systems: visual, auditory, tactile, gustatory, proprioceptive, and vestibular. We 
then observe the actions or behaviors that the children exhibit from these sys-
tems in order to provide the “just right” input or challenge. Are their bodies off 
balance? Can they imitate movements? Do sights or sounds across the room dis-
tract them? Are they covering their ears? The games we select and play support 
these systems to increase the children’s awareness of themselves and their peers. 
The feedback from these systems ultimately begins to help the children under-
stand their surroundings and develop some mastery within their environment.
Exposing children to select sensory experiences can fulﬁ ll two oppo-
site needs. The child who seeks sensory input by, for example, touching 
everything, will have his need honored and satiated by being exposed to a 
variety of textures. The child who is on the other extreme—hypersensitive 
to touch—will learn to begin to tolerate different textures by starting with 
what she can handle. For example, if she were reluctant to touch gooey stuff, 
such as glue, and needs to wash her hands incessantly, she would beneﬁ t by 
beginning to play with sticky labels or other mildly sticky substances. As 
the child’s need for avoiding or seeking out extra stimulation decreases, his 
emotional energy is freed up and more available for socializing.
To be successful with this sensory approach, a second method is crucial: 
we need to respect and pay attention to each child’s uniqueness. We need to 
have a sense of what kinds of activities calm them, which make them uncom-
fortable, and which interest them and increase their alertness. For example, 
is Joey spinning the wheel of the bike repeatedly because he needs to calm 
himself by focusing on only one aspect and in order to ﬁ nd predictability in 
his unpredictable world? If so, our emphasis would be on introducing him 
to other calming objects, such as kaleidoscopes and snow globes, and gentle 
movements to expand his repertoire of ways of dealing with the world.

24  Early Intervention Games
Or maybe he is spinning the wheel because he would like to experience 
going in circles himself. We start slowly and gently ﬁ nding out. He could 
easily be the kind of kid who turns out to love being swirled around because 
his system needs it. By making spinning into a game, he goes from solitary 
play to engaged fun with another.
If he is distressed from imagined dangers set off by the “ﬁ ght or ﬂ ight” 
brain stem response, it’s our job to honor his feelings and help him ﬁ nd ways 
to cope and get relief. Familiarity and graded exposure would be among the 
techniques used to help him later.
Concurrent Therapies
Some of the requisites for playing social games are to be able to imitate the 
actions of others and to have receptive language, starting with understand-
ing simple commands, such as “Come here,” “Sit down,” and “Do this.” 
We help children to learn and practice these skills that reinforce the social 
skills of attending, responding to instruction, communicating, imitating, 
and turn taking. One of the social coaching methods that we use teaches 
children how to play appropriately with toys. Many children with ASD 
initially play repetitively with toys, mouthing them, banging them, or spin-
ning them. Starting with a simple cause-and-effect toy that the child has 
shown to prefer, the trainer says, “Do this” while performing appropriate 
action with the toy. Immediately the toy is handed to the child and he is 
reinforced for correct action; if incorrect, he is prompted to help him get 
it right.
Toys are also used as motivators to teach the skill of taking turns. This 
sequence is begun with a highly preferred toy. The child plays with the toy 
for a bit, and then the adult says, “My turn,” places a hand gently on the 
child’s hand, and helps her release her grasp. The adult keeps the toy for 
just a second and hands it back, saying, “My turn” again as a prompt for the 
child to repeat. This game is continued, slowly increasing the time the toy 

How the Games Help Sensory Processing Challenges  25
is taken. The child soon learns that she will get her toy back and begins to 
tolerate sharing and turn taking.
The gentle, consistent approach of the Star Program, based on American 
Behavioral Analysis (ABA) strategies, helps some children begin to listen, look, 
and follow simple direction. This behavioral work helps set the foundation for 
participating with others, an important component of game playing.
Pivotal Response Training is another aspect of behavioral strategy 
that utilizes a  pivotal  moment during a play session in which the poten-
tial for communication can occur. For example, if a child is enjoying being 
bounced, he is given many moments to enjoy this, and then the movement 
is stopped. The adult then looks expectantly at the child and provides a clear 
verbal model, “Bounce? More?” or “I want bounce?” If the child makes a 
sound, eye contact, approximates the words, or says the words, the bounc-
ing immediately begins again. If there is no response, a moment or two 
passes and the adult models the word “Bounce!” and begins again.
Example of Pivotal Response Training
Ronnie was the new kid at Social Club. I thought I’d win him over right 
away with the day’s plans because it started off with blowing through a 
straw and turning a bowl of water mixed with soap into a mountain of 
bubbles. Playing with sponges at the water table followed this. Kids tend to 
love water play.
Reggie took one look at the water activities and started crying and cling-
ing to his aide, Yoli. “He hates water,” Yoli explained. “We have a hard time 
getting him to wash his hands.”
Well, I thought maybe, for now, we could get him interested in the other 
planned game, which was Hit the Homemade Piñata with a bat. (We call it 
homemade because our piñata is nothing more than a plastic bag stuffed 
with newspaper.) Reggie refused to leave the security of Yoli’s lap to walk the 
ﬁ ve feet to where the piñata hung.

26  Early Intervention Games
I brought the plastic bat over to him, grabbed someone’s keychain, and 
dangled the keys enticingly over his head. He was tempted enough to allow 
Yoli to do a hand-over-hand technique and bat at the keys. When they jan-
gled after being hit, he was willing to do it again a few times. I expanded the 
repertoire by having him hit an empty water bottle instead. When he hit 
the bottle and it went ﬂ ying, he laughed. The next time he laughed louder. 
Ah, I thought, now I’ve got him. For the following turns, I used the Pivotal 
Response to get him to communicate his desire to repeat the experience. 
I held the bottle up and asked, “More?” First I got a nondescript sound. 
The next time I got eye contact, and then the word approximation, “Mo.” 
Each response was rewarded with another chance to knock the bottle out 
of my hand.
With a quick movement, we transferred him to the piñata site and he 
happily whacked away at that for quite a while. Not willing to let go of the 
water plan, I brought him a large, sopping-wet sponge and squeezed it on 
the ground near his feet.
Because of his improved mood; along with his growing sense that maybe 
we might be okay, he took the sponge and squeezed it too. I ﬁ lled it back 
up with water, and we took turns squeezing and dripping and dripping and 
squeezing until it was time to return to class. 
 
Picture Exchange Communication (PEC) can be used with children 
who are delayed in their speech. Once hearing or oral motor problems are 
ruled out or addressed, children are shown how to use pictures as a way of 
communicating and to begin to use simple sentences, such as “I want air-
plane,” to express their needs. Picture schedules are also used to help chil-
dren understand the sequence of activities in their day. Seeing what comes 
next helps eliminate the anxiousness often associated with transitions from 
one activity to another.
Playing on the ﬂ oor with the child many times during the day provides 
important opportunities for him to learn and practice receptive and expres-
sive language, and to have fun doing something that really interests him. 

How the Games Help Sensory Processing Challenges  27
Floortime, which was named and modeled by Dr. Stanley Greenspan, lets 
the child initiate the activity, and then the adult expands and improvises 
on the game to make it a moment of shared attention where they are both 
focusing and relating about the same object or activity. Improvisational 
play, especially during Floortime, provides other opportunities for the child 
to experience back-and-forth play and creative thinking. Dr. Greenspan’s 
work has shown that engaging a child by starting with her interest, then 
challenging and expanding that interest, increases synaptic connection and 
promotes healthy mental development. Greenspan’s research shows that the 
effect of joy and the experience of engaged fun are crucial in developing 
the brain.
Along with concurrent therapies, diet should also be considered. 
According to the Autism Network for Dietary Intervention, current research 
shows that many cases of autism may result from an immune-system dys-
function that affects the body’s ability to break down certain proteins and 
to combat yeasts and bacteria. A gluten-free, casein-free (GFCF) diet can 
improve the symptoms in children whose behaviors are being caused by the 
abnormal breakdown of these proteins. Gluten and gluten-like proteins are 
found in wheat and other grains, including oats, rye, barley, bulgur, durum, 
kamut, and spelt, and foods made from those grains. Casein is a protein 
found in milk and foods containing milk, such as cheese, butter, yogurt, 
ice cream, whey, and even some brands of margarine. A change in diet will 
not work for every child, but a signiﬁ cant number do respond, sometimes 
remarkably.
Numerous studies also show that certain synthetic food additives can 
have serious learning, behavior, and health effects for sensitive people. 
Methods such as the Feingold Diet eliminate these additives from the diet: 
artiﬁ cial coloring, artiﬁ cial ﬂ avoring, aspartame (Nutrasweet, an artiﬁ cial 
sweetener) and the preservatives BHA, BHT, and TBHQ.
To learn more speciﬁ cs about a variety of helpful intervention programs, 
such as Applied Behavior Analysis, Star Program, Floortime, Picture Exchange 
Communication, the Miller Method, Pivotal Response Training, the Feingold 
Diet, and others, please see the Web sites listed in Appendix II.

28  Early Intervention Games
How the Games Address Speciﬁ c 
Characteristics of Children with ASD 
and SPD
Many children on the autism spectrum and with Sensory Processing 
Disorders may be overwhelmed or anxious and use defensiveness as a way 
of protecting themselves. A social situation that we may see as normal can 
have stressful components for them, such as not knowing what will happen 
next or what is expected of them. Any irritating sounds, smells, textures, 
uncomfortable lighting, or loud noises can put their systems on high alert. 
They live in a state of perpetual fear. In this state, they are easily distracted 
and unable to stay focused or to calm themselves. It is imperative to ﬁ gure 
out what is stressing them and address it.
First, it’s important to provide structure. The room should be unclut-
tered, with soft, natural lighting. Providing a picture schedule that visually 
shows what will be happening next can reduce anxiousness. The sessions 
should be familiar and predictable. For example, always start and end with 
the same songs, or start each game session with the same obstacle course 
game before introducing variations.
To reduce children’s anxiety during an activity, tell or show them what 
is expected of them and when it’s going to end, for example, “You have two 
things to do. Write on the paper with this candle and then paint over the 
wax.” Or you might draw a small schedule of the activity. For example, draw 
a picture of writing with a candle, followed by a picture of painting with a 
brush, and then the word “DONE,” or a picture of the child’s favorite toy or 
activity that he can have or do once the work is done.
Along with providing structure, allow some time for free play and 
checking things out. Although you should keep most of the game materials 
out of sight to decrease distraction, put some select ones on the shelves to 
encourage exploration, or set aside a time when children can sit on the rug 
or lie on soft blankets and play with a variety of toys that they choose from 

How the Games Help Sensory Processing Challenges  29
a toy box. Free playtime, perhaps with soft music, should be designed to 
be a calming period before or after structured games to reduce any stress 
that they may be feeling.
Other calming activities in the games include:
Wrapping the child up in a blanket or large soft fabric
Applying bandage wraps to arms or legs (playing mummy)
Wearing weighted items, such as vests, lap blankets, shoulder beanbags, 
plush animals, and wrist or ankle weights
Gently massaging extremities or back with lotion
Slow back-and-forth motion, such as swinging, rocking, or gliding
Aquatic therapy is a wonderful way to work with children with ASD 
or SPD. The games in this book include some you can do in shallow water, 
with a water table or kiddie pool, and others that can be done in deeper 
water, such as a pool or lake, always with adult supervision. As with the 
other games, keep to a predictable schedule, while including the occasional 
new games for variety. Also allow for some time when the children can 
 initiate an activity. In addition to the speciﬁ c games, give the children free 
moments in the water when they can play quietly alone or with another 
under adult supervision. To keep everyone safe and to account for distract-
ibility, always have each child paired with an adult while in the water.
Calming games include massaging, swinging, rocking, squishing, and 
other deep-pressure activities.
D I F F E R E N T  I N T E R E S T S
Children on the autism spectrum can have different interests from typical 
kids, such as lining up objects according to size or repeatedly spinning a 
top—interests that typically revolve around inanimate objects and not peo-
ple. Although it’s ﬁ ne for kids to have their preferences, there are many kids 
on the autism spectrum who would never participate in social activities if 
given the choice. If we want these children to enjoy socializing, they need 

30  Early Intervention Games
to develop the willingness to participate. Because we don’t want to cause 
undue stress in a child, we must ﬁ nd a balance and a compromise.
Provide enough variety so that activities preferred by the children are 
included and new ones can be explored in order to expand their interests 
and make them more social. For example, lining things up according to size 
or color is a calming activity for many kids with ASD. In an expanded and 
social game, use paint samples from the hardware store that have a variety 
of hues. Have another child hand a sample to the player and have him ﬁ nd 
the matching color. The variety of hues expands their matching and sort-
ing skills and honors their need to put their world in a predictable order. 
Another child’s handing him the colors or taking a turn to match adds the 
social element.
If a child wants to repeat an activity, such as jumping off the side 
of the pool many times, give her extra time to do this—unless you think 
that the child is persevering on this activity as a way to avoid other activi-
ties or people. If this is the case, then give jumping as a reward for trying 
another activity in which she is less interested.
Give children opportunities to take the lead. For example, play games in 
which one child performs a movement and the action is “Can you do what 
I do?” imitated by everyone. If Manny is kicking and splashing his feet, we 
all do it too.
D I F F I C U L T Y  W I T H  T U R N  T A K I N G
Turn taking can be a difﬁ cult concept. Children often have a hard time giving 
up a toy. They may feel like they won’t be able to get it back and they see no 
value or purpose for the interaction. Work on “my turn, your turn,” in which 
the child plays with a preferred toy for a bit; then the adult says, “My turn” 
and gestures for the toy or helps the child pass it to her, keeping it only for a 
short time before returning it and saying, “Jenna’s turn.”
Waiting for one’s turn in games that require only one person to go at 
a time is another challenge. There is often an inability to delay gratiﬁ ca-
tion. Many typical preschoolers also have trouble with this and get excited 
about having their turn and frequently “cut” in line. Not uncommon also 

How the Games Help Sensory Processing Challenges  31
is the unawareness that others are having a turn. One strategy is to allow or 
encourage a child to jump in place while waiting his turn. Often an adult 
standing behind the waiting child and compressing his shoulder is effective. 
Also, start with a shorter waiting time so that gratiﬁ cation comes quickly, 
and then gradually increase the waiting time. Singing a song or chant that 
goes with the game also is effective.
Because many of the kids are primarily visual learners, instead of 
using verbal cues, you might use something concrete, such as an egg 
timer or a handheld manipulative, such as a token to indicate whose 
turn it is. In the “pass the token” method, a token is given to the child 
whose turn it is and passed to the next child when the turn is finished. 
When they get the token, they know it’s their turn. If a child jumps ahead of 
the line, gently remind him by asking, “Do you have the token? When you 
get it, then it’s your turn.”
Another strategy is to help the child pay attention to the child before 
him. You could say something like, “This is John. Wait for John to have his 
turn. You go right after him.”
Equally possible is that a child will wander off instead of waiting for her 
turn. Such words as “Don’t miss your turn! Your turn is soon!” while redi-
recting her back can help, or try physically jumping the child up and down 
so that she is active while waiting.
Sitting snugly and comfortably on an adult’s lap also works for kids who 
have a tendency to jump up and grab and who need help to stay seated and 
wait.
The Sponge Pass is an example of a turn-taking game in the water in 
which each child gets a chance to dip and squeeze a sponge before passing 
it on. When we need to shorten the wait we sometimes use two sponges so 
the wait is not as long and everyone has more turns.
M E L T D O W N S
Frustration can result from an inability to communicate or verbally express 
needs; an overload of stress, especially if bottled up for a while, can result 
in unexpected outbursts. Though each child is different, there are some 

32  Early Intervention Games
 commonalities that cause stress. Environmental factors can affect the chil-
dren’s sensory systems and they are often unable to tune out information, 
including irritating noises; unpleasant smells; and uncomfortable textures 
and sights, such as ﬂ ickering lights. Not knowing what lies ahead can also 
be very stressful to a child, as many children have difﬁ culty with transitions 
and changes in activities.
It’s important to give calming input frequently in recurring doses, rather 
than waiting until the child becomes upset. Following a jumping game with 
a deep-pressure wrapping game or a lotion massage provides a calming 
transition period between activities.
Again, the schedule should be consistent and generally predictable: ﬁ rst 
a greeting circle and then the obstacle course, and so on. To help children 
handle change, after you do the predictable sequence of activity, introduce 
a variation on a game that they have already tried. For example, one day 
the children are crawling through a tunnel made by people’s legs, the next 
time they are crawling through a tunnel made from an opened box.
For children who need more preparation for change, have photos of the 
games you will play so they can take turns choosing which game is played 
next. Also, help model behavior to avoid meltdowns due to frustration. For 
example, you might demonstrate not being able to get the large cylinder in 
a hole that is too small and say such words as “Uh-oh! I will do this a differ-
ent way. This way is not working,” and demonstrate ﬁ nding a different way 
without getting upset.
By being alert to possible stresses, you can avoid meltdowns before they 
occur. For some children, this can mean having time alone with only one 
adult, such as by taking a short walk away from the group.
Also encourage children to say what they need if they can or by imitat-
ing words. “I want walk” can be taught to mean the child needs a break from 
the activity. To prevent the child using this cue as a way to always avoid 
activities, the response can be, “First throw the ball and next we walk.”
In aquatic therapy, you should be particularly aware of the environmen-
tal factors. Is the water temperature warm enough? Does the child need more 
shade or more sun? Is the child tired, and does he need to ﬂ oat on his back 

How the Games Help Sensory Processing Challenges  33
for a while rather than join in the splashing game? Or did the splashing game 
scare him, and does he need a gentler version? Is she starting to feel conﬁ ned 
being in the circle, and does she need a moment to move vigorously?
D I F F I C U L T I E S  W I T H  T R A N S I T I O N S
Children with autism can have difﬁ culty with transitions or sudden changes. 
Some children have a hard time transitioning from one activity to another 
or from a familiar adult to an unfamiliar one. Predictable situations are 
comforting but because changes in life are inevitable, it is important to help 
the children deal with them. A predictable structure brings comfort, and so 
does the awareness that one can handle change.
As previously stated, using a picture schedule lets children know what 
is coming next. And consistency in the schedule means the games always 
begin and end in the same fashion. You can also give ample warning about 
what’s coming up. For example, let them know that after the obstacle course, 
you’re going to play the blanket game. Or when giving free time, use a timer 
so the children know that when the buzzer rings, free time ends and a struc-
tured activity begins.
Often, you can reduce the children’s resistance to change by making sure 
the children know that they will return to a preferred activity. For example, if 
a child loves jumping, you could say,  “We are going to do some painting now 
but when we are done you can jump some more.” This way the child feels more 
in control and knows that it’s OK to stop because the activity will be resumed 
later. Sometimes holding on to a preferred object while switching activities can 
add the consistency that is needed to help them make the transition.
Besides a predictable routine, speciﬁ c games can help children deal with 
change. For example, in the game One, Two, Three—Change, children in 
inner tubes are purposely interchanged by the adults in order to develop 
this skill.
A V O I D I N G  E Y E  C O N T A C T
It is often difﬁ cult for children on the spectrum to look and listen at the 
same time. It is too much sensory information to take in at one time and 

34  Early Intervention Games
can be extremely threatening. The noted pediatrician T. Berry Brazelton, 
MD explains this phenomenon in his book  Touchpoints:  “A hypersensitive 
baby can be approached through one modality at a time—either speaking 
softly or looking in her face or rocking her gently—but only one. As she 
begins to assimilate each modality and to respond warily, another modality 
can gradually be added until ﬁ nally all three are together and she is able to 
respond to them” (p. 75).
Don’t insist on eye contact, but do praise it and encourage it. If a child 
looks at you when you are talking to him, you might say, “I like that you 
looked at me” or “It feels nice when you look at me.”
Encourage “shared attention,” where the child looks at the object or 
activity on which everyone is focused. The praise in that situation might 
sound like this: “I liked the way you looked at the box while you were throw-
ing the ball.” In this way you are stating what the child did without subjec-
tive judgment. Instead of saying a generic “Good job” or “Strong work,” 
you are describing what you see. When a nonverbal child is enjoying the 
moment, you might stop the activity and then respond to the child’s eye 
contact as a request for more by restarting the desired activity and modeling 
the word or sign “More!”
You should also be sensitive to the cultural aspects of eye contact. In 
many cultures, such as Asian, direct eye contact from a child to an adult is 
not as encouraged as it is in European or American cultures.
You are more likely to get spontaneous and even prolonged eye contact 
during hydrotherapy, when the body is already softly rocking in the water’s 
current. From that calmer place children are often better able to take in and 
integrate the barrage of visual information. Do calming games in the water, 
such as holding a child so she can ﬂ oat on her back with her head resting 
on an adult’s shoulder. In that calm state, add sound, such as soft crooning. 
Do some high-energy games as well, such as jumping over little waves in the 
ocean. The enjoyment of the movements and the excitement of anticipation 
can put the child in a joyful, accepting mode in which she is willing to seek 
out more input.

How the Games Help Sensory Processing Challenges  35
F O L L O W I N G  V E R B A L  I N S T R U C T I O N S
Children on the autism spectrum can find it difficult to follow verbal 
instructions, as they are unlikely to ask you to repeat or clarify what was said. 
This may result in the child’s following part of your instructions or doing 
nothing at all. The child is not being disobedient, but more likely didn’t 
understand what to do. These children may also have signiﬁ cant auditory 
processing problems or may be selectively choosing what they listen to.
For these children, keep the instructions short and give them one at a 
time. Instead of instructing the children to “Cut the paper and glue it to 
the board,” say, “Cut the paper here.” After the paper is cut, say, “Put glue on 
the paper,” and so forth. You might also have an example of the ﬁ nished 
product to view or a picture aid. As children get more able and more familiar 
with tasks, more than one step may be given at a time. Children who are ver-
bal can be asked to state or repeat the steps of the tasks before they begin.
To help the children who are more visual, you can give picture cues of the 
components of the task and the ﬁ nished product. However, it’s important to 
note that not all children with autism need visuals. As Stephen Shore, an adult 
with autism and author of  Understanding Autism for Dummies , said, “There 
is a myth that all persons with autism have visually based learning styles. . . . 
While most people with autism are visually based not all of us are. Therefore, 
it’s important to be sensitive to the possibility that a person with autism may 
favor the kinesthetic, aural, or other modality for learning. What can be said 
is that whatever the learning style is it will probably be to an extreme.”
Aquatic therapy instructions are generally only one- or two-step pro-
cesses. They are often sung and repeated in song because it is often easier to 
listen to singing than to talking. Singing employs rhythm, which can also be 
very calming. For example, in Fill the Bucket in which children need to ﬁ ll 
their cups and pour the water into a bucket until it’s full, sing the following 
to the tune of “Skip to My Lou”:
Fill your cup and ﬁ ll the bucket
Fill your cup and ﬁ ll the bucket,

36  Early Intervention Games
Fill your cup and ﬁ ll the bucket,
All the way to the top
The words in the song are timed to the action. In this way children hear 
the instructions many times and can visually see when the task is done.
S O C I A L  A WA R E N E S S
The child on the autism spectrum may be eager to join in group sponta-
neous play, but will instead stand on the sidelines, occupying himself and 
ignoring everyone around him. The social world can be a mystery to chil-
dren on the autism spectrum. We all tend to shy away from situations in 
which we feel uncomfortable, but kids on the autism spectrum especially 
need a lot of encouragement and assistance in social interactions. Most 
don’t know how to initiate contact and, because they typically don’t give 
eye contact, they may fail to notice what is going on or how to imitate an 
appropriate action in order to be included.
To encourage socializing, there are games that allow children to do activi-
ties that need others. For example, in Blanket Ride, one or two children are 
placed on a blanket and others have to pull on the blanket to give them a ride. 
Or the Bubble Blowing game, in which children blow through their straws into 
a communal container and make a glorious mountain of bubbles emerge.
If more proprioceptive feedback is needed in order for children to be 
aware of playing with others, try such games as A Kid Sandwich or Rolling 
Children. In these games, children are physically rolled over each other or 
are squeezed together to increase the physical awareness of others.
In ﬁ ne motor games, if a child needs glue, for example, encourage him 
to ask another child to pass it to him rather than have an adult do it. Or have 
two children take turns accomplishing a task, such as putting all the cut-up 
straws back into a container.
You may also want to pair up a child on the spectrum with a friend, rela-
tive, or classmate who will be a good social inﬂ uence. This child might be one 
who is patient or one who is a bit bossy and will be more insistent on interac-
tion. Who the chosen playmate is will depend on what the child needs.

How the Games Help Sensory Processing Challenges  37
In aquatic therapy, because it’s fun to play with and in water, this joyful 
state of mind makes it easier to be open to relating. The repeated reciprocal 
and group interaction games encourage children to try ways to be part of 
the group. For example, in the game in which everyone ﬁ lls their small cups 
and dumps the water into a big bucket, something fun happens for every-
one when the bucket is full. In another game, all the children get the chance 
to squirt water on the adults and each other.
If you play the same games consistently, the familiarity of the games also 
makes it easier to participate.
M O T O R  S K I L L S
Motor skills can be a big problem for kids on the spectrum. Gross motor 
activities requiring coordination, such as various types of sports, or even 
simple tasks, such as jumping forward, can be difficult for a child with 
autism. There are always exceptions to this, and there are some children on 
the spectrum that have excellent balance and motor planning skills. These 
are usually the ones who can climb up precarious heights and perch on 
small areas with no difﬁ culty.
Fine motor skills can also be challenging to those on the autism spec-
trum. Using zippers or buttons, closing and opening items, writing, and 
other tasks requiring detailed motor coordination may not be within the 
child’s capability. As with any feelings of incompetence, gentle encourage-
ment helps best.
When doing games that require ﬁ ne motor activities, help the child feel 
successful by starting the action and allowing the child to complete it. For 
example, loosen the wrapper on a straw but let the child take it off. As much 
as possible, encourage independence in play as in self-care. Or you might 
do a hand-over-hand technique when doing a new task, such as painting, so 
they can feel the motion that is needed.
During gross motor skills games, start from where children can be suc-
cessful. For example, begin to teach eye-hand coordination with targets that 
are close and easy to hit, and then slowly increase the challenge. Also keep 
the games short to avoid frustration and keep them fun!

38  Early Intervention Games
To increase motor control, play games that require changing directions 
or “stop” and “go” movements.
Moving in water is moving against resistance, which increases muscle 
strength. In this way, all activities in the water increase physical strength, an 
important underlying component of coordination. You can’t throw a ball 
well if you don’t have the strength to throw it far. The water also provides a 
haven that supports balance and equilibrium. It helps the child to move in 
a more controlled and ﬂ uid manner, and there is less likelihood that chil-
dren will trip, stumble, and fall.
A T T E N T I V E N E S S
On the one hand, children on the autism spectrum often have poor attend-
ing skills. On the other hand, they can seem to notice everything. They may 
also exhibit “selective attention,” purposely ignoring what they don’t want 
to hear and noticing what they do. They may not hear you calling them to 
wash up for dinner, but they do hear the crinkled paper of the candy being 
unwrapped in the next room. They might be hearing everything, even if 
they appear to be staring out the window or avoiding your gaze and not 
responding.
Paying attention takes energy. Sometimes much of that energy is con-
sumed by ﬁ ltering out excess stimulation around them, and children are not 
able to attend to what you are presenting. Also, if the activity is one they’re 
not interested in, they often have a very short attention span. They might 
concentrate only for a few minutes and then require a break or a schedule 
to get back on track.
If a child is not attending to a task, you could make the object of the 
game more visible, such as by colorfully decorating a box into which they 
are to throw balls. The person giving the instruction might wear a zany hat 
in order to be noticed.
Massaging can be effective prior to an activity by increasing awareness 
and helping the brain and body to self-organize. For example, when the 
children are sitting in a circle before rolling the ball to each other, use deep-
pressure massage while singing such words as “This is the way we squeeze 

How the Games Help Sensory Processing Challenges  39
your arms, squeeze your arms, squeeze your arms. This is way we squeeze 
your arms so early in the morning,” and so on for different body parts. 
Don’t forget to give gentle pressure to hands and soles of feet as well.
If children are distracted during play, you might physically jump them 
up and down, quickly massage and squeeze their muscles, or give a ﬁ rm 
hug to bring them back to the present moment. A ﬁ rm downward pressure 
on shoulders often keeps a child alert and present, especially helpful when 
waiting for a turn. Try to be aware of offending sensory stimuli, and limit 
any that might be distracting.
Before group games in the “hot tub” during which the children are 
required to sit and attend for a prolonged period, massaging can help get 
them ready for social play.
Physical action also helps children to attend. Swirling around in the 
water can bring a child’s attention delightfully back to the activity at hand 
and away from his private world where socializing is difﬁ cult.
A N X I O U S N E S S
Some children on the spectrum are calm in their own world but anxious, 
overactive, or uncomfortably sensitive when aware of the rest of the world. 
Their brains misinterpret sensory input and go into a protective ﬁ ght, ﬂ ight, 
or fright mode even though there is no “real” danger. In this state, the child 
may hit, bite, or yell (ﬁ ght); run away or become hyperactive (ﬂ ight); or 
shut down and appear spaced out or have a glazed internal look (fright). 
When made to interact, the child may get clingy, tearful, or panicked, or 
perseverate in an activity, such as ﬂ apping her hand to self-regulate and 
self-calm.
Such activities as running, jumping, bouncing, lifting, and pushing, and 
other movements that use the large muscles of the body, can help children 
stay calm by stimulating the cerebellum, which releases calming hormones. 
Wearing a weighted vest or carrying a weighted stuffed animal has the dual 
purpose of calming and giving continual feedback so the children can stay 
present. A picture schedule with pictures of the activities that will be pre-
sented can also be helpful to reduce anxieties about the unknown.

40  Early Intervention Games
Allowing children to hold on to a preferred toy or object during a game 
can reduce fear. Being given a toy as a reward after each game can put the 
emphasis on pleasurable anticipation. Their experience of having had fun 
the last time they did the activities also contributes to their ability to stay 
calm. The consistent structure makes them feel safe, and the fun of the 
activities rewards them for staying present.
As stated previously, it’s useful to notice what happened before the child 
showed signs of anxiousness. Look for possible sensory causes, such as sud-
den movement, excess noise, and overreaction to an unstable surface or 
certain smells.
Water provides a consistent gentle, comforting pressure, and the buoy-
ancy provides a repetitive and rhythmical movement, which is calming. 
Being held in the arms of an adult or in the security of a small inner tube 
can also provide comfort. The freedom to move independently in a foam 
padded suit also comforts.
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  S K I L L S
Most of the children with ASD or SPD need help in communicating and 
can present with nonfunctional language skills. They are typically delayed 
in language acquisition and resort to younger forms of communication, 
such as crying, screaming, hitting, and biting. They can be echolalic and 
perseverative as well.
Giving children the methods to express their needs through sign lan-
guage, words, PECs (picture exchange cards), or other augmentative com-
munication is essential to support their individual strengths and help 
decrease their frustration.
It can help to describe what the child is doing and thinking as a “voice 
over” to give him the vocabulary for what he is doing and to help him learn 
the meaningful words in a situation. You can also encourage children to 
respond using the Pivotal Response Training model. For example, when the 
child is fully engaged in an activity, pause the activity so that the child will 
request more. Depending on the child’s skill level, a gesture, an approxima-
tion, a word, or a sentence are encouraged, and the child can see that by 

How the Games Help Sensory Processing Challenges  41
giving a response, she will get what she wants. This shows the child that 
communicating works.
Games that involve pointing an index ﬁ nger can also be helpful because 
pointing is a way of attracting shared attention.
There is a lot of singing and chanting used in the water games. Children 
who don’t have the words to say what they want may sing the tune. For 
example, a child might start to sing the tune of a song we’ve made up, 
“Going to the Pool,” to let us know she is ready to go there.
There are also many moments during the water games when a form of 
communication is needed in order to continue the games. For example, the 
child must place her hand in an open palm gesture or say the word “Please” 
before receiving a wanted water toy.
I N D E P E N D E N C E
Children with ASD or SPD can have difﬁ culty being independent for a vari-
ety of reasons. They might not have the ﬁ ne motor skills to accomplish the 
tasks they need to do to take care of their needs. They might be feeling too 
anxious to be on their own. Or they might not understand what is needed 
to achieve independence in the situation.
When children need things, suggest that they ask a peer so that they can 
begin to see that they can get help, information, and companionship from 
others. Offer options between games on occasion—“Do you want to play 
the jumping game or the throwing game?”—so children can see that there 
are choices when making decisions.
You can use prompts, either visual or physical, to help children under-
stand what to do next. These prompts can then be faded out over time. Fine 
motor games can be used to work on activities of daily living, such as but-
toning, zipping, and snapping.
There are opportunities to teach children self-help skills as they change in 
and out of their swim clothes. Encourage independence by teaching them how 
to do things for themselves. When teaching children to dress themselves, do 
the ﬁ rst steps and let them ﬁ nish the rest so that they are part of the process; 
eventually, step by step, they can learn it all. And try different  modiﬁ cations. 

42  Early Intervention Games
If tying shoes independently seems too difﬁ cult to tackle now, start with shoes 
with Velcro closures.
M A L A D A P T I V E  B E H AV I O R S
As Jene Aviram of Natural Learning Concepts points out on her excep-
tionally autistic-friendly Web site (www.nlconcepts.com), children on the 
autism spectrum often exhibit behaviors that we don’t understand.
He might ﬂ ick his ﬁ ngers through the air, make a ﬁ st and bang his 
knee. And do it again and again. Or, he makes a strange noise every 
time he stands up. The child does not do these behaviors to be dis-
ruptive, but simply because he feels a need to do them. Compare it 
to the compelling behavior many of us have of biting one’s nails, 
twirling one’s hair, or cracking one’s knuckles. While we might be 
confused by their behavior, they are often equally confused by our 
rules and expectations. Children on the autism spectrum are unique 
and they all have different behaviors.
Children also might use the same odd behavior for different reasons. 
Hand ﬂ apping, for example, can give a hyposensitive child the stimulation he 
needs to increase his alertness and wake up his nervous system. Conversely, 
a hypersensitive child may ﬂ ap his hands to block out the external environ-
ment, decrease tension, or release pleasurable endorphins in the body.
Children with ASD might stand apart from other kids but, just like 
everyone else, they want to be loved and accepted for who they are. Try to 
understand what need is being met by the child’s behavior. Consider what 
activity just preceded it. This helps us to develop a sensory diet to apply 
intervention techniques preceding the behavior or in therapeutic doses 
throughout the day. For example, does it appear that Noah started ﬂ apping 
his hand right after a group of children walked into the room? If ﬂ apping is 
a way to self-calm, you can help the child ﬁ nd other, more socially accept-
able ways to self-calm, such as spinning tops or twiddling with a necklace. 
Or you may need to target other sensory systems, such as the vestibular or 

How the Games Help Sensory Processing Challenges  43
 proprioceptive, to help keep the child’s nervous system in a calm but alert state. 
At the same time, you want the child to understand that if ﬂ apping is what he 
needs, it’s okay to ﬂ ap sometimes! (When he’s able to understand, bring in the 
concept of self-advocacy. It’s socially helpful for him to know that ﬂ apping in 
private, such as in the bathroom, can avoid odd looks from others.)
Learning to initiate and sustain social interaction is a complex skill that 
develops over time and affects, eventually, one’s ability to function in a class-
room, hold a job, form satisfying relationships, develop conﬁ dence, and be 
able to explain one’s sensory needs. These skills are the building blocks that 
are laid through early intervention games.
How the Games Address Sensory 
Processing Challenges
When children are exposed to a variety of playful situations, they will begin 
to take risks and do things they might normally avoid. Also, exposing chil-
dren to multiple sensory experiences helps new sensations become more 
familiar. As their need to avoid or seek out extra stimulation decreases, 
their emotional energy is freed up so that more is available for socializing. 
Therapy as play is designed to stimulate and challenge the senses and the 
social needs. The games focus on the varying difﬁ culties the children have 
and address those issues in a variety of ways.
The games use the “just right” challenge. Using observation and expe-
rience, you can use the games to give children just the right amount of 
challenge to motivate them and stimulate changes in the way their systems 
process sensory information, but not so much as to make them shut down 
or go into sensory overload. For example, a child who is tactile defensive 
will often tolerate a deep pressured touch. As his system becomes more 
comfortable with touch, he becomes increasingly open to accepting lighter 
touch and to experimenting with touching.

44  Early Intervention Games
Because each child is unique, each game can be modiﬁ ed to suit indi-
vidual children. Modiﬁ cations are described at the end of every game.
T A C T I L E  D E F E N S I V E N E S S
Children who are hypersensitive to touch will avoid being hugged, touching 
messy materials, and eating certain foods. They may toe walk to avoid touch-
ing the ﬂ oor or use negative behavior to get out of having their hair brushed 
or washed. In more extreme cases, they may even resort to self-injurious 
behaviors. And they may ﬁ nd being close to other children threatening.
This defensiveness can also affect learning skills that require a hand-
over-hand approach. For example, placing a hand over a child’s to help her 
learn how to draw a circle or catch a ball facilitates learning through muscle 
memory. If a child pulls her hand away from such an approach, you need to 
ﬁ nd other methods to help her learn and to help her tolerate touch.
Start by approaching the child slowly and from the front, positioning 
yourself on the same level as the child and allowing her additional personal 
space if needed. You can also allow time for the child to pace the room or 
move freely during activities. If boundaries are required, you can use posi-
tioning tools, such as colored spots, taped boxes, and chalk lines.
Use ﬁ ne motor activities that give children the opportunity to play with 
various textures, such as ﬁ nger painting with puddings and whipped top-
ping; ﬁ lling and dumping out a container of rice, pinto beans, or popcorn; 
tracing in ﬂ our, sugar, and bird seed; and playing with vibrating toys. These 
kinds of activities help children to become capable of adjusting to sensory 
input through repetition and continuous exposure. If a child at ﬁ rst needs 
gloves, “ﬁ nger mittens,” or a stick to touch some kinds of materials, go ahead 
and let her use them. Then gradually encourage the child to use bare hands. 
Unless the child insists on washing, try to gradually lengthen the amount of 
time between touching something and washing it off.
Walking in the warm sand of the beach; playing in dry and wet sand; and 
having parts of the body, such as their feet, buried in sand provide an inter-
esting challenge and also help children enlarge their tolerance. A sustained, 
consistent surrounding pressure is calming to the nervous system and can 

How the Games Help Sensory Processing Challenges  45
help to decrease overall defensiveness. Being close to a body of water allows 
children to wash off when overloaded and then try again. Activities should 
be paced according to the child’s tolerance, such as starting with burying 
only toes in the sand and then rinsing the toes in a nearby bucket of water.
B O D Y  A WA R E N E S S  A N D  C O O R D I N A T I O N
The proprioceptive system receives sensations from joints, muscles, and 
connective tissues that tell us what our bodies are doing. Children who are 
weak in this sensory area are likely to bump into others or things and have 
difﬁ culty staying in line or navigating within a crowd. They don’t have a 
clear sense of their bodies in space and how they relate to other people and 
objects because they aren’t adequately processing the feedback from their 
proprioceptive systems.
Giving them “heavy work” activities provides additional muscle work 
and joint input, which exaggerates feedback to the brain to increase body 
awareness. There are many games that provide proprioceptive input 
through lifting, pushing, and pulling heavy objects, and by engaging in 
activities that compress (push together) or distract (pull apart) the joints. 
Such games as getting wrapped in cloth to make a “sushi,” getting squeezed 
together to make a “sandwich,” pulling others along on a blanket, jumping 
on the trampoline, or playing Tug-of-War can provide children with the 
extra stimulation needed to stay alert and aware of their bodies. Games that 
involve swinging and rocking help children organize their body awareness 
and are also calming. Obstacle courses provide lots of opportunity to go 
over, under, in between, and around different surfaces, including some that 
are moveable. Massaging, brushing, ﬁ rm holds, and loving squeezes all also 
add to body awareness.
The resistance of water provides a continual sense of awareness of body 
movements. Specific games, such as jumping and landing in the water, 
pushing against tubes, being pulled along in a train, dragging boogie boards 
through water, being passed from adult to adult, and being squeezed when 
playing London Bridge, are only some of the many games in which children 
become aware of their bodies in the water.

46  Early Intervention Games
B A L A N C E  I S S U E S
The vestibular system gives us the sense of movement and lets us know when 
we are off center. Children who are less aware of this input have problems 
with balance and are likely to fall more easily, be clumsy, or have poor coor-
dination. Some of these children are said to have “gravitational insecurity” 
and may get upset or even frightened when walking on uneven surfaces or 
at any time their balance is challenged.
These children beneﬁ t from the vestibular input that can be obtained by 
spinning and swinging and, to a lesser extent, any type of movement. Again, 
as in the therapy for proprioceptive awareness, exaggeration and repetition 
increase the possibility for attentiveness.
Such games as spinning in a saucer, being swung like a hammock, 
swinging on swings, or being spun around in carts with wheels all stimu-
late the vestibular system and make children more aware of their centers. 
Children with balance issues may also be very cautious or scared and avoid 
roughhousing, tending to prefer quiet sitting while others play. For these 
children, start movements slowly and gradually increase the tempo. Rather 
than swinging, for example, have these children start off pushing someone 
else before being pushed themselves. Getting rides on blankets and in boxes 
also help incorporate balance in a safe way. Walking backward and running 
games also require concentration in order to keep one’s balance.
As part of an obstacle course, children can learn to walk on a low bal-
ance beam forward, sideways, and backward. The course can also challenge 
and increase a child’s balancing skills through activities that require balanc-
ing on one foot while kicking or hopping, walking across the uneven surface 
of a trampoline, and tiptoeing along a line.
Games that integrate other senses, such as jumping and simultaneously 
throwing a ball at a target, are useful for children who are ready for a higher 
level of sensory integration.
Getting spun around while in an inner tube, being tossed in the air, 
jumping off the side of the pool, twirling in the water, and feeling the wave 
action of the water are all ways children get vestibular input in the water. 

How the Games Help Sensory Processing Challenges  47
When playing on the beach, children have to adjust their balance to stay 
upright on the uneven surfaces of the sand.
V I S U A L  D I S T R A C T I O N
Some children are visually distractible and have difﬁ culty knowing where to 
put their attention. They may not be able to distinguish the dominant ﬁ gure 
from the background of stimuli, other sights may easily distract them, or 
they may not respond easily to visual stimulation because they can’t tolerate 
the glare from the sunlight or the ﬂ ickering from ﬂ uorescent lights.
Simplifying the environment and reducing visual clutter can have a 
calming effect on these children. For example, play on solid-colored rugs 
instead of patterned ones and keep only a few toys in view.
For the child who seems visually “tuned out,” and who has trouble getting 
aroused for play, you might add more noticeable details, such as a brightly 
decorated box for a throwing game and colored rice for a ﬁ ne motor game. If 
playing an imitation game, such as a modiﬁ ed “Simon Says,” “Simon” might 
wear a fanciful hat to call attention to himself as the one to imitate.
Because verbal instructions may require too much concentration and 
get tuned out, use picture cues. For example, in the can bowling game, it 
can be easier to understand what is expected if two pictures are shown: one 
of the cans in a tower formation and then another of a ball knocking them 
down. Children can see what is expected.
The blue color of a pool, the ocean, or a lake naturally provides a stimu-
lating as well as a calming background for water games. Using colorful tubes 
for a target in a throwing game or decorating Ping-Pong balls for a scoop-
ing game add attractive and interesting visual stimulation that help draw a 
child’s attention.
A U D I T O R Y  S E N S I T I V I T I E S
Some children are very sensitive to sounds, tones, and frequencies, and will 
even cover their ears when they hear people singing. Certain sounds and 
volumes can be intolerable. Some children ﬁ nd it difﬁ cult to pay attention 

48  Early Intervention Games
to both their visual and hearing systems; they can’t give eye contact and 
listen at the same time. Often children with hearing sensitivities are delayed 
in their speech because they have blocked out many sounds or may not be 
processing them properly.
For many of these children, hearing instruction in song is an easier way to 
listen and it helps calm and organize auditory input. The volume of the song 
can be adjusted to ﬁ t the tolerance of the children. Sing or chant the words 
to the activities they are doing. “Throw the balls into the box, into the box, 
into the box. Throw the balls into the box. Where did the balls go?”
Children can also experiment with playing a keyboard or making music 
with other instruments.
If normal sounds are a problem, you can try earplugs, earmuffs, or quiet 
time-outs with headphones.
Being out in nature and listening to the birds or going to the beach and 
hearing the waves are gentle ways to encourage listening. Waves and other out-
door sounds can sometimes provide that “white noise” that many of these kids 
ﬁ nd so calming and soothing. Often children with ASD like the hum of the fan, 
the air conditioning, the dryer, the vacuum, and so on because of that constant 
low pitch. To decrease sensitivities, louder noises should be gently approached.
O L F A C T O R Y  S E N S I T I V I T I E S
About 70 to 75 percent of what we perceive as taste actually comes from 
our sense of smell. Taste buds allow us to perceive only bitter, salty, sweet, 
and sour ﬂ avors. It’s the odor molecules from food that give us most of our 
taste sensation. Children with strong sensitivities to smells might also have 
eating issues and would beneﬁ t from a professional evaluation.
For some children with sensory issues, certain odors can stimulate them, 
calm them, or send them into sensory overload. Some children want to 
smell everything in order to stimulate their olfactory sense. Because smells 
give us so much information, children who are not getting enough feedback 
in this area seek more.
Scents can be either soothing or stimulating. Although everyone has dif-
ferent preferences, vanilla and rose are generally calming, whereas peppermint 

How the Games Help Sensory Processing Challenges  49
and citrus are usually stimulating. Play games of identifying smells or simply 
expose children to a variety of smells, such as maple syrup, apple, peanut but-
ter, and soap.
Now that you have a sense of what to look for and an understanding 
of the underlying reasons for what you see, it’s time to play. Your attitude 
affects the ambience, so enjoy yourself, play right along with the kids, and 
take the time to adore them, even when they aren’t being adorable. We are 
all doing our best and we can all learn to get better. Meanwhile . . . let the 
games begin!


51
 Social Gross Motor 
Games  
 A Kid Sandwich 
 Guaranteed to bring giggles, this game is especially liked by children with 
ASD because it stimulates the proprioceptive system and has the delight of a 
group hug. 
 G O A L S  
 Awareness of others 
  Pretend play  
 Following directions 
 Imagination 
 Modulation 
 Tolerating physical closeness 
 Matching pictures 
 M A T E R I A L S 
 Optional: 
 Pictures of sandwiches 
C H A P T E R  3

52  Early Intervention Games
  Picture of a boy eating a sandwich  
  Pictures of sandwich ingredients, such as pickles, cheese, lettuce, and 
so on  
 Masking tape or footprints for the ﬂ oor 
 S E T U P 
 Have the children stand in a circle with the adults. Tell the children they are 
going to make a sandwich. Two children will be the bread. Other children 
will be the ingredients, and some will be the eaters of the sandwich. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Pick one child to stand in the center of the circle and be the bread. Then ask, 
 “ What else shall we put in this sandwich? ”  If the children at ﬁ rst don ’ t come 
up with ideas, suggest some. For example, say,  “ Let ’ s add some cheese ”  and 
then pick another child to be the cheese. Put that child directly in front of 
the child who is the piece of bread. Continue naming and choosing children 
to be the ingredients, such as ham, pickles, tomato, lettuce, and so on, each 
time placing the child in front of the last ingredient. End with another piece 
of bread. You may also ﬁ nd that some children might call out an ingredient 
that isn ’ t usually in a sandwich, such as rice or chocolate. Go ahead and put 
whatever they say in the sandwich! 
 After the sandwich is made, gently squeeze all the ingredients together 
and announce,  “ It ’ s time to eat. ”  Everyone who is not part of the sandwich 
pretends to eat, smacking their lips and making chewing sounds. Yum! 
Then, start all over and make a new sandwich! 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Because the ingredients all get squished together, this game provides 
the proprioceptive feedback that children with ASD often crave, as well 
as the friendliness and warmth of connecting with another human in 
a nonthreatening and silly way. Besides experimenting with a fun way 
to play with and get next to each other, children are playing pretend, an 

 Social Gross Motor Games  53
important skill. Everyone pretending together reinforces their sense of 
being part of the group. 
   Because this is such a novel experience for many, it ’ s an opportu-
nity to modify their responses so that their excitement does not 
make them so wild that they are not able to stand and be part of the 
 sandwich.  
   There is also the culinary lesson being learned about what goes into a good 
sandwich (not including, of course, the rice and chocolate combo!).     
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For children who need visual input, show appropriate pictures of sand-
wiches and ingredients, and place footprints or a line of tape on the 
ﬂ oor to show them where to stand when they are sandwich ingredients. 
You can also place pictures of the sandwich ingredients on the ﬂ oor so 
the child who is a pickle will know where to stand and what he is sup-
posed to be. 
   When asking the children,  “ What else shall we put in this sandwich? ”  
offer several pictures and let them choose the ones they want.  
   For children who are hypersensitive to touch, have them be the bread so 
that they are only touched on one side. Or, if even that is too much, have 
them be the person squeezing the others or have them be the  “ eaters ”  
of the sandwich. 
   For those who are just watching, keep their interest and encourage them 
to stay with the group by giving them pictures of the food to look at, or 
have an adult hold the watching child in a ﬁ rm and comforting embrace 
while commentating on the action he is watching:  “ Now Jacob is pre-
tending to be a piece of cheese in the sandwich. ” 
   For the child who needs more tactile stimulation to stay present, pre-
tend to smear mustard or other condiments on him by rubbing your 
hand down his back. 

54  Early Intervention Games
 Are You My 
Mummy? 
 With a simple piece of material, 
you can turn a child into a fun 
monster. 
 G O A L S  
 Playing with others 
 Proprioceptive stimulation 
 Vestibular stimulation 
 Imagination 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Ace bandages, elastic 
therapy bands, or a long scarf 
 S E T U P 
 Unroll the bandage to get it ready to wrap a child.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Have one child stand still while the other children, with an adult directing, 
wrap the bandage around the child ’ s body. Mime a mummy ’ s stiff - legged 
walk for the wrapped child to imitate. Demonstrate funny sounds to accom-
pany the walk. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Wrap a body part instead and make the activity one of a doctor and 
patient. The doctor is ﬁ xing the patient ’ s arm or leg. 
     2.   Wrap an inanimate object instead, such as a teddy bear, and turn it into 
a mummy that chases after the other kids. 

 Social Gross Motor Games  55
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   The pressure of the bandage can be very comforting to children who are 
seeking proprioceptive input. Having to walk while wrapped challenges 
their balancing skills.  
   Wrapping others up can make them aware that other children have 
similar body parts and that they enjoy the tactile input of touching and 
being touched. 
   If the variations are played, children also get a chance to use their imagi-
nations and pretend to be a doctor, patient, or scared kid running from 
a pretend mummy. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   The temperament of the child determines whether the whole body is 
wrapped, whether the arms are included in the wrapping, or whether 
just one body part is wrapped. Some children seek out deep touch, while 
others avoid it. Let that awareness help you decide what is wrapped, 
who is the wrapper, and who is the wrapped one.      
 Balloon Baseball 
 Balloons are always one of the best toys because they attract attention and are 
light and easy to play with. This game uses the balloon as the ball in baseball. 
The balloon moves so slowly that beginners can more easily hit it. 
 G O A L S  
 Eye - hand coordination 
 Awareness of roles 
 Focusing 
  Motor planning  
 Modulation 
 Spatial awareness 
 Vestibular stimulation 

56  Early Intervention Games
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Newspaper sections 
 Tape 
 Balloons 
 S E T U P 
 Make newspaper bats by rolling up sections of newspaper and taping them. 
The more newspaper sections, the bigger the bat. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 An adult throws a balloon toward the child with the bat. Encourage the 
child to hit the balloon or have an adult stand behind the child and physic-
ally prompt him on timing. When the balloon is hit, encourage the other 
children to try to catch the balloon. Have children take turns being pitcher, 
batter, catcher, and ﬁ elders.  
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning to coordinate their movements and timing to 
connect with the balloon. They can see the results of their movements 
and then modify their actions to get the desired consequence. 
   They are learning that everyone has a different role. Someone throws, 
another bats, and others catch. 
   Their balance and spatial awareness are being challenged as they run 
while looking up to catch the balloon, and to the sides to avoid banging 
into others. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   Some children will have difﬁ culty tracking the balloon in order to catch 
it. They might get distracted or lose interest and need verbal cues to stay 
on task.  
   Children who have difﬁ culty with timing and eye - hand coordination 
will need hand - over - hand assistance. 

 Social Gross Motor Games  57
 Blanket Ride 
 Giving and getting rides on a blanket can be a fun way of being with others. 
In this game, all you need is a sturdy piece of cloth and a smooth ﬂ oor to create 
a nice give - and - take experience. 
 G O A L S  
 Awareness of others 
 Purposeful activity with another 
  Balance  
 Strength 
  Proprioceptive input  
 Vestibular stimulation 
 Awareness of cause and effect 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Small blanket(s) or sturdy piece of material 
 Smooth ﬂ oor 
 S E T U P 
 Clear the ﬂ oor of objects and set one or more blankets or cloths on the 
ﬂ oor.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Put one child on the blanket and have another child and an adult, if help is 
needed, pull it so that the child gets a ride. 
 Swoosh the blanket this way and that way in unexpected directions to 
make the ride more exciting, but make sure the ride doesn ’ t get wild enough 
to throw the child off. Add fun sounds for the kids to imitate. 
 Have the children switch positions. The one who was sitting is now the 
puller and vice versa. 

58  Early Intervention Games
 Sometimes, make it a group activity. Have two or more children riding 
together and two or more pulling! 
 Sometimes, have the children spin the child by running in a circle, rather 
than asking them to pull the blanket. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   A cardboard box works well when one child sits inside and the other 
pushes or pulls it across the ﬂ oor or spins it in a circle. 
     2.   A wagon also achieves these goals, but needs more careful monitoring 
by the adult.  
  3.  An ofﬁ ce chair on wheels also can be used and is great for spinning. 
  4.  A boogie board can also be used, using the leash to pull it. 
     5.   Use several blankets so that many rides are being taken at once, requir-
ing the pullers to watch out for the others and aim for the empty spaces 
in the room. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning that they can be responsible for another person ’ s 
pleasure. They can also see, when being pulled by another, that others 
can be a source of fun for them as well. 
   When children are sitting together and being pulled, they get jostled and 
lean on each other, becoming more aware of the other children. 
   While sitting on a moving blanket, children are getting experience with 
balance. In order to stay seated upright while being jiggled and moved in 
various directions, they have to continually adjust their trunk muscles.  
   Children who are pulling strengthen their muscles, especially those in 
their arms and legs.  
   Spinning is a great source of vestibular input; and if the spinning is 
stopped and started at intervals, it stimulates feedback from the child ’ s 
inner ear. 

 Social Gross Motor Games  59
   If you use several blankets so that many rides are being taken at once, 
help children avoid running into each other by giving the instruction 
 “ Go into the empty spaces. ” 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For children who are generally not aware of other children, emphasize 
what is happening with words and touch. Pull the blanket with your 
learner and walk backward or stop after a few steps and say,  “ Look! 
We ’ re giving Oliver a ride! ”  It generally helps to accompany the words 
with a hug or little squeeze to increase alertness. 
   Riding together and bumping into others may be difﬁ cult for some kids. 
Start them off with only one other child and go slowly. At the other 
extreme are the children who crave a lot of physical touch — riding fast 
with others falling on them and over them is just what they like and 
need. This is a game that can accommodate everyone. 
  Monitor for sensory overload, such as increased distractibility or con-
fusion, rapid breathing, or sweaty skin, and stop the activity if these 
occur. Provide deep-pressure input to normalize the arousal level.  
 Boat Ride 
 Unexpected movements can provide many 
possibilities for fun and motor skill 
development. 
 G O A L S  
 Tolerating the unexpected 
 Pretend play 
 Increasing language skills 

60  Early Intervention Games
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Large box 
 Optional: pictures of a boat (or train, bus, or car) 
 S E T U P 
 Set the opened box on the ﬂ oor.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Announce to the children that it is time for a boat ride and have one or 
more of them sit inside the box. 
 Sing  “ Row, Row, Row Your Boat. ” 
 Say,  “ Uh - oh. There ’ s a storm. Hold on, ” as you start rocking the box 
back and forth. 
 Say,  “ Oh — the waves are big! ” as you rock a little harder. 
 Say,  “ Whew, the storm is over, ” stop rocking, and sing  “ Row, Row, Row 
Your Boat ”  again. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Instead of a boat, pretend it ’ s a train or a bus or a car that is pulled or 
pushed along the ﬂ oor.  
     2.   Instead of rocking, have the train alternate between very fast and very 
slow or between stops and starts. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
  Children are experiencing the unexpected. They are discovering that 
sometimes they have no control over what happens and it can be OK.  
  They are learning such concepts as fast and slow, stop and go, and in and 
out, and if encouraged to say these words to control the activity, they are 
increasing their communication skills. 
   They are, of course, learning to play pretend and imagine that inani-
mate objects are other things.     

 Social Gross Motor Games  61
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
  Begin the rocking slowly to see how it is tolerated. If the children seem 
to enjoy it, increase the rocking. 
   If a large box rocks too much, use a smaller box.  
   If one child seems uncomfortable,  before  he melts down, act as if the 
boat has arrived at a port and one passenger needs to disembark. 
Make his leaving part of the game. Later, make a pretend stop and see 
if he wants to get back on. Or encourage the child to say,  “ Stop! ”  or 
put his hand out to gesture  “ stop, ”  giving him some control over the 
 movement.  
   For children who are new at pretending and building their imagina-
tions, show them a picture of a boat so that they can see that this is not 
a box, but a pretend boat (or train, bus, or car).  
  For the child who has gravitational insecurity and needs stability or tac-
tile pressure, have an adult go in the box if possible to hold him.  
   For the child who is hypersensitive to touch, place him in the boat by 
himself for few sessions before adding others. 
 Box Ride 
 A plain brown box from a local grocery 
store can provide an activity that works 
on motor skills and offers an opportunity 
to move others. 
 G O A L S  
 Turn taking 
 Understanding rules 
 Balance 

62  Early Intervention Games
  Cooperation 
 Awareness of others 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Medium - size cardboard box 
 S E T U P 
 Set the open box on a cleared ﬂ oor.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Put one child in the box. Tell one or more children that they, with your 
help, are going to move the box and give the child a ride by pulling it 
around the room. You can pretend that it ’ s a car getting towed or a boat 
on the water. 
 Depending on the weight of the child, the box can be easy or hard to 
push, and it might work better to pull it. Try it both ways, emphasizing the 
need to ﬁ gure out which way works better. For example, say,  “ Help me push 
the box. Let ’ s give Kailani a ride. Oh, it ’ s too hard to push. How are we going 
to move her? ” 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
    The object of the game is to engage 
the child in problem solving in a 
social situation. How should they 
give the child a ride? Maybe they 
will come up with the solution of 
going in a circle. Or the learning 
can come from watching you solve 
the problem. 

 Social Gross Motor Games  63
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For some children, just sitting in a box or getting in and out of a box is 
plenty of activity. 
   Some children might prefer to turn the boxes over and hide under them. 
You can change the game into hide - and - seek, pretending not to have a 
clue where they hid and then ﬁ nding them! 
 Going Through the Tunnel of Legs 
 This is a good game to get adults involved in the play. Parents and older 
siblings are deﬁ nitely welcomed. All that the big people have to do is stand 
in a line, feet apart, and form a tunnel. The children crawl through the legs. 
The big people have the power, if they want, to make the tunnel narrower 
and narrower. Maybe even take a toll? 
 G O A L S  
  Understanding beginning and end  
 Adjusting one ’ s body to spaces of different sizes 
 Being part of a group 
  Experiencing getting in line behind others  
  Awareness of other bodies and allowing them into their space  
 Increasing proprioceptive input 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Three or more adults 
 S E T U P 
 The adults stand in a line behind each other with their legs open in a 
V formation.  

64  Early Intervention Games
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 The children are encouraged to get on all fours and crawl through the legs 
of the adults. Keep control of the traffic by having another adult at the 
end of the tunnel directing children back to the beginning. Otherwise chil-
dren might try to crawl back the way they came, which makes for an inter-
esting trafﬁ c jam but is less comfortable for the bridge parts. 
 Once the children have the idea of the game, modify it by narrowing the 
stance of the adults so that the space to crawl through is narrower. In order to get 
through, children have to modify their positions and tilt their bodies sideways. 
 Sing a song while children are crawling to whatever tune you want: 
 Crawling through the tunnel 
 Crawling through the tunnel 
 Crawling through the tunnel 
 All the way to the end 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Keep bringing the legs closer and closer together so that the crawlers 
have to turn sideways to squeeze through. 
  2.  Use a line of chairs for the children to crawl under. 
   3.   Use a series of tables to crawl under. 
  4.  Have bigger children make a tunnel for the smaller ones. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning to adjust their bodies to ﬁ t into the space, and if 
they try to walk upright through the tunnel of legs, they won ’ t ﬁ t.  
   If the variation is played in which the tunnel is made smaller, children 
become aware of a difference in space and learn that they need to make 
the physical adjustment in their bodies by turning sideways to ﬁ t.  
   Children are also learning that when something ends, it is possible to go 
back to the beginning and do it again. 

 Social Gross Motor Games  65
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   Some children will try to crawl through the 
tunnel at the same moment as another. 
They might need some physical prompting 
to wait, with encouraging words, such as 
 “ Your turn is coming. Almost your turn. 
Now, it ’ s your turn. Good waiting! ” 
   Some children will need help turn-
ing their bodies sideways when 
the opening is narrowed, or they 
will keep jamming their shoulders 
against the legs and not understand 
why they can ’ t go forward. 
   It ’ s also important to have an adult 
at the end directing the children 
back to the beginning to prevent 
the children who get easily distracted from leaving the game. 
 Hammock Swing 
 There ’ s a reason why infants like to be rocked. It ’ s very soothing. This game can 
elicit that calming feeling or be a source of alert, wild delight. The kids decide. 
We comply. 
 G O A L S  
 Trusting others 
 Helping others have a pleasant experience 
 Waiting for one ’ s turn 
 Gaining strength 
 Vestibular input 

66  Early Intervention Games
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Blanket or sturdy cloth 
 S E T U P 
 Lay the blanket on the ﬂ oor.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Have two adults hold either side of the blanket. Have one child lie on the 
cloth. The adults pick up the cloth so that the child is suspended, then slowly 
rock the cloth from side to side. 
  Other children are encouraged to help hold the cloth and rock 
the child. 
 Sing  “ Rock - a - Bye Baby ” as you rock. 
  On the words  “ Down will come baby, cradle and all, ”  gently lower the 
child to the ground. 
 Give the next child a turn. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   For the child who enjoys unexpected movements, jiggle the ham-
mock in unexpected ways and increase the speed. Try different varia-
tions and see which ones bring on calmness and which ones produce 
 giggles.  
  2.  Let two children swing in the hammock together. 
     3.   Instead of swinging or jiggling, bounce the child up and down as if on 
a trampoline. 
     4.   You and the child can give a teddy bear or other toy a hammock ride. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   While being rocked gently, children who tend to be anxious are pro-
vided an opportunity to know what being calm feels like. 

 Social Gross Motor Games  67
   Children are also having the experience of trusting others and learning 
that other people can be a source of pleasure and fun.  
   If they help hold the blanket to rock another, they are increasing their 
awareness of their ability to give pleasure to others. They are also gain-
ing muscle strength from holding the blanket. (So are the adults. Who 
needs to lift weights at a gym?)  
   Children may clamor to have turns, which makes this another good 
opportunity to experience waiting for one ’ s turn. And while wait-
ing, they can be providing the fun for another by helping to rock the 
 hammock. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   The children who are helping to rock may need a lot of physical guid-
ance on how to rock the blanket in ways that are soothing to everyone. 
   A child who feels insecure lying down may feel more in control if sitting 
on the hammock while being gently and slowly rocked. Swinging that is
slow and rhythmic is usually calming, whereas fast, erratic swinging 
is alerting to the nervous system. If slow and rhythmic is best, sing lul-
laby songs to set the pace. 
   Monitor the child ’ s reaction. Stop the swing sometimes to allow her to 
integrate the sensations from her inner ear. A child who is underreactive 
to her vestibular system may want a lot of fast movements and then may 
become overloaded. By paying attention to her reaction, you can stop 
before she reaches that point. 
 Hit the Homemade Pi ñ ata 
 Hitting a pi ñ ata is an activity commonly associated with a ﬁ esta, and players 
wear a blindfold. This version can be played any time and players can watch 
what they are doing! 

68  Early Intervention Games
 G O A L S  
 Focusing 
 Accomplishing a goal 
 Eye - hand coordination 
 Playing with others 
 Turn taking 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Newspaper 
 Plastic bag 
 Rope 
 Newspaper bat  
 Optional: bells 
 S E T U P 
 Squish up some newspaper and put it in a plastic bag to form a round shape. 
Hang it up from a piece of rope so that the bag hangs free. 
 Roll up newspaper and tape it closed to form a bat. 
 If you use bells, hang them on the rope so that they jingle when the bag 
is hit. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Have children take turns hitting the pi ñ ata with the newspaper bat. 
Encourage the others to say,  “ Hurray ”  or clap when the batters are success-
ful and to use phrases like  “ Good try! ” or  “ Try again! ” if they are not. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Hang a beach ball instead of a newspaper pi ñ ata if you want something 
more colorful.  
     2.   Hang a smaller item inside a clear plastic bag if you want to increase the 
challenge. 

 Social Gross Motor Games  69
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D 
 Children are learning to take turns, to notice what others are doing, and to 
encourage them. They are getting practice in eye - hand coordination and 
getting the satisfaction of accomplishing a goal. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S 
 Use a hand - over - hand approach for children who are not able to do this 
independently by standing behind them and placing your hands over theirs 
on the bat. 
 Hang bells or other noisemakers on the rope to increase the feedback 
for children who need additional feedback. 
 “ I ’ m Here! ” 
 It is difﬁ cult for many children with autism to learn to respond to being called 
by name, to call others, and to greet others. In this game, this social skill can be 
practiced in less confusing situations. 
 G O A L S  
 Name recognition 
 Social response 
 Auditory and visual stimulation 
 Increasing language skills 
 M A T E R I A L S 
 Large appliance box or large piece of material, such as a sarong or curtain 
 S E T U P 
 Set up the large box or hang the curtain to block off one part of the room. 
An adult should then hide behind the box or curtain before the children are 

70  Early Intervention Games
there. When the children come into the room, have them, and at least one 
other adult, sit facing the curtain or box. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 An adult in the group models words by calling out to the person who is 
behind the box or curtain. The name is called with a melodic inflec-
tion:  “ Marissa, where aaaaare you? ” Marissa appears and says,  “ I ’ m here! ” 
Everyone claps and smiles and says,  “ Hi Marissa!” 
 Do this with several people to provide a model and then have each child 
take a turn.  
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  Use stuffed animals hiding behind a box and call out,  “ Giraffe, where 
aaaaare you? ” and bring it in front of the box and say,  “ Hi! ” 
  2.  Use a book of animal pictures and call out each name,  “ Polar bear where 
aaaaare you? ”  Open the page to the polar bear picture and say hello or 
kiss the picture. Or, have a child look through the book and ﬁ nd the 
picture. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning a social response of greeting by saying,  “ Hi ”  when 
someone appears. They are getting an opportunity to practice anticipat-
ion. When they hear the words  “ Where are you? ”  they learn to expect 
that someone will appear. They are also learning what words to say when 
they are looking for someone. 
  Having the group give a rousing cheer when she appears also has the 
beneﬁ t of making the child feel noticed, appreciated, and loved.     
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For the child whose attention might be distracted, increase his aware-
ness of a person appearing from behind the curtain or box by having 
that person greet the child with a hug or ﬁ rm touch. Or have the person 

 Social Gross Motor Games  71
dance out, use some unusual movement to attract attention, or wear a 
funny hat. 
   Children who are unclear on how the game works will need an adult to 
go behind the curtain with them when it ’ s their turn to hide. The adult 
should exaggerate listening to the call, such as by turning his head, put-
ting his hand behind his ear and making a listening face, and so on. The 
adult could also say such words as  “ Why, that ’ s your name. They are 
calling for you. Let ’ s go! ” Then prompt the child to appear. 
   Be aware of the child who reacts badly to sudden noises and, instead of 
clapping, use the sign language for applause and wiggle all ten ﬁ ngers. 
 Jump to Colors 
 Noticing that things are different colors and learning that colors have different 
names are high on the list of children ’ s ﬁ rst cognitive and visual awareness. This 
game reinforces that awareness by adding the fun of movement. 
 G O A L S  
 Eye - foot coordination 
 Vestibular stimulation 
 Color identiﬁ cation  
 Turn taking 
 Spatial awareness 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Sheets of colored construction paper in two colors 
 S E T U P 
 Tape the sheets of colored construction paper on the ﬂ oor in a vertical line, 
alternating the colors. For example, a red sheet, then a blue one, then red 

72  Early Intervention Games
again, and so on, repeating the pattern. Leave a one - inch space between 
each paper. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Have children start by taking turns jumping from one color to the next 
saying the names of the colors they are jumping on. Or have an adult say, 
 “ Jump to the red. Now jump to the blue, ”  and so forth. Next, children are 
encouraged to jump to sheets that are all the same color — for example, 
jumping only on the red ones. 
 If doing this in groups, verbally or physically prompt the players to 
return to the beginning and start again so that they don ’ t turn around and 
run into another child. 
 Increase the challenge by changing the colors or adding a third color so 
that jumping to all the green ones can be tricky. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
    1.   Draw shapes and tape them on the ﬂ oor in different patterns.  “ Jump to 
the square. Now jump to the circle. Now jump to the triangle. ” 
    2.   Draw faces.  “ Jump to the sad face. Now jump to the mad face. Now 
jump to the happy face. ” 
    3.   Have two children jump together.     
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Besides becoming more aware of differences in color, children are learn-
ing to jump forward different distances. Jumping up and down in place is 
motorically different from jumping forward. Jumping forward requires an 
awareness of the extra energy it takes to move the body forward, as well as 
the use of body positioning. Accomplishing this task increases children ’ s 
ability to utilize both their proprioceptive and vestibular (balance) sense. 
  By returning to the beginning of the line each time, they are developing 
their spatial awareness. They are seeing the difference between the begin-
ning and the end. Waiting for one ’ s turn is also an element of this game.  

 Social Gross Motor Games  73
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
  Be prepared to help a child jump using a variety of methods. 
   For some children, just jumping forward from color to color is 
enough for now, because their work is in developing the ability to 
jump rhythmically.  
   For the children who cannot yet  “ catch air ”  beneath their feet when 
jumping, stand behind and physically lift them up while you both are 
jumping forward. For the children who are able to jump up but not 
yet forward, stand beside them, holding hands and jumping together. 
Repeating rhythmic clues, such as  “ One, two, three, jump, one, two, 
three, jump! ” can help some children get cognitively ready to move. 
   If you have an older or more motorically skilled child in the group, have 
her partner with another by holding hands. The more advanced child 
jumps backward while the other jumps forward. 
 Leap the Shoes 
 I like this game because shoes are always around. You can make the game easy 
with just a few shoes or quite challenging with a pile of them, so that the game 
ﬁ ts the child ’ s skill level. Remember: always start below a child ’ s level. Make it 
too easy at ﬁ rst. This promotes conﬁ dence and self - esteem and is a good warm -
 up for the body. 
 G O A L S  
 Tolerating being the center of attention 
 Adjusting movements to leap longer distances and higher heights 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Shoes 

74  Early Intervention Games
 S E T U P 
 Line the children up, one behind the other. Put one shoe in front of the ﬁ rst 
child. Keep other shoes nearby in easy reach. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Ask the children to jump over the one shoe. Then, for the next turn, add 
another shoe and have them leap over two shoes. Then three, and so on, 
until the line of shoes is too long to leap over. 
 At this point, change the game by making a pile of shoes in the mid-
dle of the ﬂ oor. Now, instead of leaping forward over a line of shoes, they 
are jumping up over the height of the pile and, instead of standing in one 
place and jumping over, they are taking a running start. Mark the spot in 
which to begin the run with a piece of tape. Provide an example by having 
an adult take a running start and model jumping over the whole pile. 
 To add to the excitement while someone is running and jumping, have 
the others do an accompanying drumroll by slapping hands on the ﬂ oor, 
table, or knees; say the name of the person when she takes off; and applaud 
when she lands. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Use other materials instead of shoes, such as empty milk or juice 
 cartons.  
     2.   Stack cartons in a tower or wall and have each child run and kick it 
down rather than jump over it. Children can take turns stacking the 
cartons back up. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   On the motoric level, children are learning how much energy they need to 
use in order to leap off the ground. They learn to anticipate at which point 
in their running stride they need to take off in order to make the leap. This 
awareness teaches them self - regulation as well as praxia, the ability to plan 
one ’ s movements.  

 Social Gross Motor Games  75
   If they are doing drumrolls, they 
are getting an experience in 
making rhythm, and if they 
jump at a consistent 
moment, they are learn-
ing about timing.  
   On the social level, chil-
dren are learning to take 
turns. They are also enjoy-
ing being, or allowing 
themselves to be, the center 
of attention. The experi-
ence of everyone watching 
them and calling their 
names can make them feel 
very noticed and  special.     
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   Some children will need 
one or two adults or other children to run with them to give them the 
feeling of how fast to run and when to leap.  
   Some children will straddle the pile rather than jump over it or leap 
beside it. They may be lacking in strength and coordination. Give these 
kids extra practice on other days with smaller piles. 
 Massages 
 Massaging is an effective way to help the mind - brain - body self - 
organize. Massaging is done in long, ﬁ rm strokes to the children ’ s arms, legs, 
and backs to increase their awareness of their bodies, stimulate their tactile 
systems, and to help them be mindful of the moment. 

76  Early Intervention Games
 G O A L S  
 Tactile stimulation 
 Decreasing tactile defensiveness 
 Body awareness 
 Mind - body organization 
 Calming  
 M A T E R I A L S  
 None 
 S E T U P 
 The adult is sitting on the ﬂ oor, and the child is sitting comfortably between 
the adult ’ s legs. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Starting at a shoulder, stroke your hand downward toward the hand while 
singing (to the tune of  “ Here We Go  ’ Round the Mulberry Bush ” ): 
 This is the way we rub our arms 
 Rub our arms, rub our arms 
 This is the way we rub our arms 
 Early in the morning 
 Continue with the other arm, and then the hands, legs, feet, and back. 
Change the words to the song accordingly.  
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Have the child massage the adult, encouraging him to stroke the part of 
the body named in the song. 
     2.   Have children massage each other with help from the adult, if needed. 
  3.  Use such materials as a loofah or nylon bath scrubby. 

 Social Gross Motor Games  77
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Massages used at the beginning of the session can help the mind - brain -
 body self - organize by stimulating the peripheral nervous system. This 
helps improve the ability to pay attention. 
   Massages tend to be calming and organizing to a child ’ s central ner-
vous system. As the child receives deep-touch pressure to the skin, the 
tactile receptors that are overresponsive to light or touch are depressed. 
In time, the child who is tactilely defensive may respond more appro-
priately to overall tactile stimulation, and can then enjoy such activities 
as playing with Play - Doh, ﬁ nger painting, and so on, as well as being in 
closer proximity to other children. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For children who are uncomfortable with being massaged, try gently 
squeezing the arms and leg muscles instead. 
   Monitor the child ’ s reaction so that she is never pushed past her limits 
of tolerating the activity. 
   To encourage more communication and allow a child more control, ask 
which body parts he wants massaged next. Use a picture board, gestures, 
or pointing if speech is delayed. 
 Name Game 
 Being aware of others can start with the awareness that others have names. 
This game uses a ball to encourage this awareness. 
 G O A L S  
 Awareness of others 
 Proprioceptive stimulation 
 Attentive endurance 

78  Early Intervention Games
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Ball 
 S E T U P 
 Have the players sit in a circle. If physical prompting is needed, have a child 
sit between an adult ’ s legs, or beside an adult or other child.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Players roll a ball to each other. Before rolling the ball, each player says the 
name of or looks at the person the ball is being rolled to. 
 V A R I A T I O N S 
 Use the same method of saying each player ’ s name before the following 
actions: 
  1.  Stand in a circle and bounce 
the ball to each other.  
  2.  Stand in a circle and pass the 
ball to the person on the right. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G 
L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning the names 
of others in the group. They are 
learning to stay attentive for 
longer periods as they watch 
and wait for their turn.  
  Motorically, they are learning 
which muscles are needed to roll 
the ball in the direction desired. 
They are experiencing rolling (or 
throwing or bouncing) the ball 
in the correct direction through 
the proprioceptive feedback.  

 Social Gross Motor Games  79
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   Some children have difﬁ culty staying seated. To help, apply some pres-
sure when they are sitting between your legs so that they are sitting 
snugly and will be less likely to get distracted and leave the area. The 
snugness gives their body feedback and helps them attend. 
   If sitting is still a problem, stand up to play the game and help the child 
jump up and down while waiting for a turn. Jumping releases excess 
energy and makes it easier to stay with an activity. 
   In the beginning, especially, it will be necessary for the adult to say the 
names and help some children throw in the correct direction. 
 Obstacle Course 
 Moving one ’ s body in a variety of ways is what develops ﬂ exibility and motor 
planning. In setting up this obstacle course, think prepositionally and have 
things to go over, under, around, and through. 
 G O A L S  
  Motor planning  
 Flexibility 
 Understanding prepositions 
 Balance 
 Discrimination 
 Modulation 
 Changing positions 
 M A T E R I A L S 
 There are many obstacle course options. Here are a few of them: 
  A short balance beam or a 2    4 or 2   6 board 
 Object to climb over, such as a chair, stool, or pile of cushions 

80  Early Intervention Games
 Object to crawl under, such as a table or rope 
 Object to crawl through, such as a hula hoop on its side or cloth 
 tunnel 
 Objects to jump on, such as colored paper and small trampolines 
 S E T U P 
 Arrange the objects in such a way that children go directly from one obsta-
cle to another and end up back at the beginning so they can do it again. 
A balance beam is a good piece to begin with. Then have children go from 
there to, for example, a short stool that they need to step up on and jump 
down from. Next have a table, which they will need to crawl under. Then 
set up a hula hoop or box propped on its side, which they will need to bend 
down to go through, ending up back at the balance beam. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Have children start at the ﬁ rst obstacle and, for each object, tell them or 
model how to go over, under, through, and so forth. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  Use different movements, such as walking sideways or backward. 
     2.   Change the obstacles once a month to present new challenges or 
 rearrange the obstacles in a different conﬁ guration.  
     3.   Increase the social aspect by having children hold hands and go together. 
Or have the children stand in a line behind each other with hands on 
the shoulders or around the waist of the person in front.  
  4.  Let the children rearrange the objects to make up their own course. 
  5.  Add a ﬁ ne motor activity, such as stacking blocks using tongs, in the 
middle of the course so that children interrupt their gross motor activ-
ity to do something that requires ﬁ nesse. A cognitive activity, such as 
matching colors, could be used instead. 

 Social Gross Motor Games  81
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   There is so much learning taking place in an obstacle course. Every time 
the children have to adjust their posture to make a new move, they are 
increasing their balance, ﬂ exibility, and ability to distinguish between 
similar movements and modulate accordingly. For example, jumping 
forward and jumping on a trampoline are both jumping skills that use 
slightly different movements. 
   Their understanding of language increases by physically experiencing, 
for example, the difference between under and over. Verbal requests, 
such as  “ Please get the ball that ’ s under the shelf, ”  will thus have more 
meaning. 
  If you send children through the obstacle course fairly quickly one after 
the other, every time someone moves too quickly or too slowly, they 
learn about spatial relationships where only one person can be in a 
space at a time! 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   Children can be given as much or 
as little assistance as needed. Some 
children will need such help as sup-
porting arms around their waist or phys-
ical and verbal prompts to bend down, stand 
up, or climb on. 
   Other children will need to be more challenged 
so they won ’ t be bored. Have them walk and 
jump and bend backward or do the whole 
course with their hands in their pockets .  
   Children who need heavy work to 
feel calmer should be encouraged to 
move the obstacles to make up their 
own course or help you set up the 
course. 

82  Early Intervention Games
 Races 
 This is an everyone - wins race. 
 G O A L S  
 Following directions 
 Anticipating a goal 
 Motor planning (conscious use of muscles to achieve a goal) 
 Awareness of others 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 None 
 S E T U P 
 If this game is played with two adults, the adults face each other with the 
child standing in front of one adult and facing the other. 
 If played in a small group, the adults form parallel lines. The children 
stand in front of one line of adults, facing the other line. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Give the instruction  “ Run to  . . .   ”  using whatever name identiﬁ es the other 
adult. 
 Give as much or as little help as needed to propel the child in the right 
direction, while the other adult also does encouraging sounds and move-
ments, for example, holding her arms open at child ’ s level, calling the child ’ s 
name, and so on. 
 When the child reaches the goal of arriving at the other person, make a 
big deal.  “ You did it! ”     “ Good running! ”     “ Yea! ”  
 Have the child run back and forth between the adults for a while. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  In subsequent sessions, enlarge the distance between the adults. 
     2.   Change the movement, such as jumping between adults or running 
backward. 

 Social Gross Motor Games  83
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   The child is having the experience of following directions, achieving a 
goal, and having that success recognized by the hoots and hollers of the 
adults. There is increased social awareness in both pleasing others and 
the pleasure of receiving praise. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
  Children who are hypersensitive to sounds may need to have the hoot-
ing and hollering toned down or to receive other forms of praise, such 
as a ﬁ rm hug. 
 Rolling Children 
 You ’ d think having a body roll over yours would feel uncomfortably heavy. But, 
for many children, the temporary weight can instead be a form of  comfort. 
 G O A L S  
 Awareness of others 
 Proprioceptive feedback 
 Experiencing novelty 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Carpeted ﬂ oor 
 S E T U P 
 Have children lie on their backs, lined up next to each other with the sides 
of their bodies touching. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Roll the child from one end, on top of all the other children, to the other 
end of the line. Then roll the next child over all the others. Continue until 
the ﬁ rst child is at the beginning of the line again. Then reverse direction 
and repeat the game, returning to the original positions. 

84  Early Intervention Games
 Sing or chant simple words while the child is rolling, such as: 
 Rolling, rolling, rolling, 
 All the way to the end. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Play this game with a theme, such as Rolling Logs to Market. Or, if 
played on a special occasion, such as Halloween, Pumpkin Rolling in 
the Field.  
     2.   Have the child lie on top of the others and perpendicular to them. Then 
have the children on the bottom all roll in the same direction. This will 
cause the child on top to move.     
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
  Brieﬂ y feeling the weight of the passing body gives children propriocep-
tive feedback that increases their awareness of others and can produce a 
calm alertness or a giggle ﬁ t.  
   Experiencing the novelty of the new situation also captures children ’ s 
attention and lets them see that they can do something completely new 
that could be a positive experience. 
    The game also could help them feel 
that they are part of a group as they 
each have a turn experiencing all 
the others rolling over them. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   The child who is 
hypersensitive to touch, 
possibly making him 
very uncomfortable in 
this situation, can be 
 encouraged to sit and 

 Social Gross Motor Games  85
watch and sing. An adult can be with this child, describing the action:  “ Jay is 
going to roll next. ”  Or use this as an opportunity for the child to identify his 
classmate:  “ Who ’ s rolling now? You ’ re right, it ’ s Jay! ”  
 RurRurRurRurRUN! 
 The anticipation of taking off at a fast run can be as enjoyable as the run itself. 
 G O A L S  
 Imitation 
 Listening for cues 
 Vestibular, auditory, and proprioceptive stimulation 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 None 
 S E T U P 
 Stand children in a line between the adults and have everybody hold 
hands. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Have adults paw the ground with one foot while repeating the phonetic sound 
of   “ R ”  ( “ RurRurRurRur ” ). Exaggerate the sound and the movement to capture 
the children ’ s attention. Ask children to imagine they are horses pawing the 
ground in anticipation of a run. After four or ﬁ ve paws, say, or shout,  “ RUN! ”  
 Have everyone together run a short distance and then say,  “ STOP! ”  
 Repeat the game several times, pawing the ground between runs. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Vary the amount of pawing so the children have to listen for the word 
 “ Run! ” 

86  Early Intervention Games
  2.  Vary the number of repetitions and the distance to run. 
     3.   Instead of a group line, play the game with separate pairs or threesomes 
so that children with similar energy levels can play together. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning to watch what others are doing and imitate that 
movement. 
  They are learning to anticipate what is going to happen next. 
  They are also learning how to watch for cues to give them information. 
   The sudden stops and anticipatory starts alert the children ’ s sensory sys-
tems and promote attention. 
   The predictability of the game (movement follows the pawing) also 
promotes a sense of familiarity that is reassuring.     
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For very active children who seek increased sensory input, individually 
running further and faster with them is a good way to use up a lot of 
their excess energy. 
   Children who have a lower response to movement or are unsure how 
to move on cue can run between two adults or other children, or 
they can jump instead of running to give them more proprioceptive 
 feedback.  
 Sausage Roll (or Sushi Wrap, Hot Dog, 
Burrito . . .  ) 
 Young babies are swaddled because it can remind them of the time when they 
were snug in the womb. This game can bring similar pleasure. Use whatever 
name is most familiar to each child ’ s culture. 

 Social Gross Motor Games  87
 G O A L S  
 Vestibular, proprioceptive, and tactile stimulation 
  Body awareness  
 Joint attention 
 Playing pretend 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Sturdy piece of cloth 
 S E T U P 
 Lay the cloth down on a rug. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Have one child lie on one end of the cloth. Get the other children to help 
roll the child from one end of the cloth to the other so he ends up rolled 
nice and snug inside the cloth. 
 Sing a song while rolling, such as this one, to the tune of  “ Row, Row, 
Row Your Boat ” : 
 Roll, roll, roll you up 
 Roll and roll you up 
 Roll and roll and roll and roll 
 Into a delicious sausage [or sushi or tamale . . . ] 
 Then, if you think the child will be amused (as opposed to scared!), have 
others pretend to eat them up, with adults modeling movements. 
 “ Yum yum! ” 
 Next ask the child,  “ Ready to be unrolled? ” 
 When ready, gently lift one end of the cloth so the child slowly rolls out 
onto the rug.  
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  Do the game standing up. 
  2.  Wrap up two children together. 

88  Early Intervention Games
     3.   Have several children stand and do a group hug. Then wrap them all up 
in a large piece of cloth that will go around them more than once. 
     4.   If you pretend they are hot dogs, pretend to rub them with a variety of 
condiments, such as mustard and relish, using different ways of rub-
bing for each kind. A sushi roll might have soy sauce and wasabi; bur-
ritos, hot sauce and grated cheese. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children with ASD often really enjoy being snug and cozy in enclosed 
places. You are recreating that sense of containment and familiar com-
fort that babies have in the womb. This experience can reinforce that 
feeling, so that when the child is upset, he can learn to seek out a cozy 
spot to self - calm. 
   This is a game that can be used individually, as needed, for a child who is 
feeling disorganized and is being a loose cannon in the room. This game 
will give her a moment to get reorganized. 
  The children who are rolling the  “ food ” can see 
how they can help another have fun. 
       If they pretend to be eating the sausage or other 
 “ food, ”  children can get more experience in play-
ing pretend and using their imaginations.     
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
       For a child with vestibular issues who 
may not be sufﬁ ciently aware of her 
head position to adjust it accordingly, 
take care that her head doesn ’ t get 
banged when unrolling. 
    Some children would prefer to have 
their whole bodies wrapped, includ-
ing their heads, to enjoy the feeling 
of dark enclosures. 

 Social Gross Motor Games  89
   If a child is at ﬁ rst hesitant with this game, try rolling him in a cloth 
while standing so he can see if he wants the feeling of snugness. 
 Scarf Toss 
 Catching a ball can be difﬁ cult for a child just learning eye - hand coordin-
ation. Catching a falling scarf, which moves so much more slowly than a ball, 
is a better way to practice catching. 
 G O A L S  
 Eye - hand coordination 
 Playing with a partner 
 Back - and - forth exchange 
 Vocabulary 
 Visual and proprioceptive stimulation 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Scarf 
 S E T U P 
 Sit directly in front of a child and toss the scarf up. Catch it and say,  “ I 
caught it. ”  Do this several times.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Toss the scarf up in the air again and ask the child to catch it. When she 
catches it, say,  “ You caught it! ” 
 Start by keeping the tosses low so that the scarf always stays in view as 
it ﬂ oats down. Later, toss higher so that the child has to follow the scarf by 
looking up. 
 Work toward tossing the scarf back and forth between you. Let her also 
experiment with tossing the scarf to herself. 

90  Early Intervention Games
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Rather than catching the scarf, let it float gently down into waiting 
hands. 
     2.   Play the game standing and encourage jumping up to get the scarf while 
it is still overhead. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning about timing as well as eye - hand coordination. 
They have to attend to the trajectory of the falling scarf and ﬁ gure out 
when it ’ s the right moment to catch in order to be successful. Later, they 
will transfer that awareness and timing to catching a ball. 
   They are experiencing a back - and - forth exchange with another as a 
form of taking turns. First they have a turn to catch and then a turn 
to toss. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For the child who gets distracted, use verbal cues to keep the child focused 
on the scarf. Remember to start low so that, at first, the scarf is always 
close to the child ’ s eye level. If needed, have another adult sitting behind the 
child to do a hand - over - hand approach to help catch the scarf.  
   For the child who takes longer to process instructions, keep the verbal 
instructions simple, such as  “ Catch scarf ” and  “ Toss scarf. ” 
 Shape Targets 
 Examples of shapes are everywhere. In this game, children see the shapes in 
everyday things and get a chance to identify them by doing a favorite kid 
action, throwing. 

 Social Gross Motor Games  91
 G O A L S  
 Identifying shapes 
 Increased awareness of environment 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Cut - out side of a large cardboard box 
 Colored markers 
 Ball (size depending on skill level of child) 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Draw lines on the cardboard box side to divide it into four sections. In 
each section draw a shape. Use shapes that include those your child already 
knows and one or two new ones. Add details that make the shape into com-
mon sights such as: 
 A circle could be a sun 
 A triangle, the sail of a boat 
 A rectangle, a window 
 A square, a present with a bow  
  An oval, a face  
 An octagon, a stop sign 
 A trapezoid, the roof of a house 
 A star, a starﬁ sh 
 Give a child the ball and ask her to try to hit a particular shape.  
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  Use chalk and draw the shapes on a sidewalk or concrete wall. 
  2.  Have children draw pictures of shapes on paper and tape the papers on 
the wall. 

92  Early Intervention Games
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning to notice details and see how the information 
they are learning relates to their lives. This can lead to excitement about 
looking for other shapes in their lives.  
   The distance from the shapes and the size of the ball affect the extent of 
the challenge to eye - hand coordination. Always start at or below their 
skill level and make it increasingly harder. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   When first presenting the game to someone who doesn ’ t know the 
shapes yet, name the object she is to throw at instead, for example, 
 “ Throw your ball at the sun. ” 
 Stack the Cans 
 There are many ways to use the simple and ubiquitous soda can. A pile of cans 
is easy to collect, and they can provide many moments of group fun as well as 
a physical challenge. 
 G O A L S  
 Working cooperatively 
 Awareness of cause and effect 
 Eye - hand coordination 
 Modulation 
 Awareness of others 
 Visual discrimination 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Ten clean, empty aluminum cans 
 Ball 
  Basket, such as a laundry basket, or a box     

 Social Gross Motor Games  93
 S E T U P 
 Put the cans in the basket or box. Make sure there are no sharp edges on 
the cans. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Give each child a can. Have children stack cans on top of each other to form 
a tower. Encourage children to take turns putting a can on the stack and get-
ting another can from the basket. Once the cans are stacked, choose a child 
to knock them down by rolling the ball. If he knocks them down, applaud 
and praise him. If he misses, say,  “ Almost did it! Try again. ”  
 After everyone stacks them back up, another child gets a turn to roll the 
ball. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Use balls of differing sizes to increase the challenge. A large therapy or 
exercise ball will require less skill than a beach ball. A tennis ball is more 
challenging. 
     2.   Put the cans in different positions. For example, place the cans indi-
vidually on the ﬂ oor, spaced a little bit apart so that each can needs to 
be knocked down separately. Or stack the cans like a wall, three tiers 
high, to make it easy to hit. 
     3.   Use empty plastic water bottles instead of aluminum cans and place the 
bottles in a line or pyramid formation (as in a real bowling game).  
  4.  Have children kick the cans down instead of using a ball. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning to do an activity with others to accomplish a goal. 
First they stack the cans and then they each get a turn to knock them 
down. They are noticing the success of another and learning the socially 
appropriate responses of applauding or vocally praising. 

94  Early Intervention Games
   They are learning to stack the cans in a stable tower, which requires that 
they pay attention to the visual information of seeing whether the cans 
are aligned.  
  They are learning to control the direction of a rolled ball. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For children who need more visual information to understand the 
goal, show them a picture of what the cans will look like when they 
are stacked (or placed in a pyramid formation) and then a picture of the 
cans being knocked down by a ball. 
   If children have a hard time waiting for their turn to 
knock the cans down, use a smaller number of cans 
so they can ﬁ nish the stacking more quickly. Or do 
several towers so everyone can knock the cans 
down at once. 
    Some children who prefer solitary activities 
will want to make their own can towers. Try 
to interrupt and add one or two cans to their 
towers to help them tolerate allowing others 
to be part of their activities.  
    If one or more of the children are 
more advanced in their social skills, 
assign them the job of passing out 
the cans to the other  children. 
 Stop and Go 
 This game helps teach the ability to stop and start movement quickly, which is 
crucial to a child ’ s ability to respond to a warning to  “ Stop! ” 

 Social Gross Motor Games  95
 G O A L S  
 Motor control 
 Listening to instruction 
 Imitation of others 
 Moving in unison with others 
 Vestibular, auditory, visual, and proprioceptive stimulation 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Optional: stop sign, green and red colored cloths, bell 
 S E T U P 
 Children and adults are holding hands while standing in a line. One adult, 
the leader, is facing the line. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 The leader says,  “ Go ”  and begins to walk backward while everyone in the line 
moves forward at a normal pace. She then says,  “ Stop ”  and everyone stops 
immediately. The leader continues these calls while varying the amount of 
time spent walking or stopping. 
 This game is especially fun if the adults exaggerate their stopping and 
starting by coming to an abrupt halt or a speedy start. Because you are hold-
ing hands, children can feel the suddenness of the movements. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   The speed of the movement can also be varied depending on how 
quickly the leader can run backward! 
   2.  Very slow motion is also fun. 
  3.  Try this game in sand at the beach for a different level of challenge. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   This game encourages children to listen to directions, watch what others 
are doing, and imitate them.  

96  Early Intervention Games
   They are learning to control their bodies better by being able to start 
and stop on cue. 
   They are also experiencing being part of a group and being in sync with 
others. 
   If you do this game at the beach, the unevenness of the sandy terrain chal-
lenges their ability to balance and stimulates their vestibular  systems.     
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   Some children may need additional verbal or auditory cues, such as hav-
ing the other adults repeating the words  “ Go ” or  “ Let ’ s go! ” and  “ Stop ” 
or  “ Time to stop! ” after the leader says them. 
   Children who respond more to visual cues may do better if a red scarf 
is waved or a stop sign held up when it is time to stop, and a green scarf 
or sign is used when it is time to go.  
   Children who are more independent can be allowed to play without 
having their hands held.      
 Target Games 
 The eye - hand coordination required for throwing is one of the most basic motor 
skills. For children with ASD, who especially need to learn how to transfer their 
knowledge from one activity to many, throwing games can be done in a variety 
of ways. This game provides that variety. And doing this skill with others can 
increase the fun factor, because there is excitement in the air when the ball suc-
cessfully hits the target. Even adults know the thrill of getting a scrunched - up 
paper into a wastebasket. 
 G O A L S  
 Increasing eye - hand coordination 
 Improving muscle control 
 Achieving goals 

 Social Gross Motor Games  97
 Awareness of others 
 Visual, proprioceptive, and vestibular stimulation 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Containers, such as open cardboard boxes, plastic bins, or buckets 
 Objects to throw, such as balls, beanbags, and so forth 
 S E T U P 
 Set a few containers on the ﬂ oor and have handy the objects to throw.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Have each child stand in front of a target, or have all the children sit in a 
circle with the target in the middle. Give each child in turn an object to 
throw, and have her throw it into or at the target of her choice. 
 Make each game easier or harder by adjusting the distance between the 
thrower and the targets.  
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  Use socks as balls and buckets or dishwashing tubs as the containers. 
  2.  Have children throw checkers into basins. This requires throwing a 
smaller object, but using a dishwashing basin or tub that has a wide 
opening makes it easier. 
  3.  Use beanbags and boxes of different sizes. 
  4.  Use Ping - Pong balls and large cans. 
     5.   Use balls and paper targets on the wall.     
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning that it is necessary to look at an object in order to 
be able to throw at it. They are learning the importance of letting their 
eyes guide their hands in this eye - hand coordination game.  
   They are also learning how to control and grade their muscle strength 
to achieve speciﬁ c physical goals of throwing farther, higher, or harder. 

98  Early Intervention Games
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
  Some children will only throw by walking up to the target and dropping 
it. They have not yet learned how to use their arm to project. Help them 
learn by holding them a short distance from the object and, using hand -
 over - hand, guide their hands through the throwing motion. Give verbal 
cues for letting go of the ball at the right moment by saying,  “ Open your 
hand. ” This is a more concrete clue than  “ Let go. ” 
   Some children look in directions other than where they are throwing. 
Give them the verbal cue,  “ Look at the box [or name of target]. ”       
 Throw the Balls into the Box 
 This game has the element of surprise. At ﬁ rst the kids are surprised when a bar-
rage of balls appears out of the bottom of the box. Even after this effect is long 
gone, the anticipation of the next round makes the experience even more fun. 
 G O A L S  
 Anticipating results 
 Understanding prepositional concepts of inside, behind, beside, and so on 
 Increasing eye - hand coordination 
 Tolerating the unexpected 
 M A T E R I A L S  
  At least two balls per player (children can make their own homemade 
balls out of newspaper) 
 Medium - size cardboard box 
 S E T U P 
 Give each child a section of newspaper to scrunch up into a ball. Put tape 
around the ball to keep its round shape. Remove the tape from the bottom 
ﬂ aps of the box and then loosely close them. 
 Open the top ﬂ aps of the box. Place the open box on the ﬂ oor.  

 Social Gross Motor Games  99
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Sing the song below, or your own version, and while singing, have the chil-
dren throw the balls into the box. Allow them to stand as close or as far away 
from the box as needed to be successful.   
 (Sung to the tune of  “ Mary Had a Little Lamb ” ) 
 Throw the balls into the box 
 Into the box 
 Into the box 
 Throw the balls into the box 
 Where did the balls go? 
 After all the balls are in the box, ask the children, 
 “ Where are the balls? ” 
 “ Are they in front of the box? ” (Exaggeratedly look in front of the 
box.) 
 Other adults, if needed, cue the kids to say,  “ No . . .  ” 
   “ Are they beside the box? ”  (Again do the same miming on either side 
of the box.)  “ No . . . ” 
 “ Are they behind the box? ”  “ No . . . ”  
 “ Are they inside the box? ” (On these last words, lift the box and shake 
it so all the balls fall out of the bottom of the box. If they don ’ t fall 
out right away, you may have to give the ﬂ aps a little pull, and fold 
them more loosely next time.) 
 “ Yes! ” 
 The children then run around and collect all the balls. Set the box down 
again, its bottom ﬂ aps loosely folded, and begin the game again. Continue 
for a few rounds. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Play this game in the pool using stacked-up inner tubes instead of the 
box (see next game,  Throwing into the Tubes ). 

100  Early Intervention Games
  2.  Use smaller and smaller boxes to challenge the children ’ s eye - hand 
coordination. 
     3.   Place the box at different distances away from a throwing line (a piece 
of masking tape or string on the ﬂ oor could mark a throwing line). The 
farther away, the greater the skill needed. 
  4.  Use other things to throw: beanbags, Ping - Pong balls, shoes, rolled - up 
socks, and so on. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   On the most basic level, children are practicing their eye - hand coordina-
tion and learning the concepts of in front, behind, inside, and beside.  
    The more important element, however, is that children 
are experiencing surprise. Many children with ASD do not 
take kindly to surprises and prefer expected routine. In this 
game, the unexpected is delightful and can help children 
learn that surprises can be good.  
    After playing the game the ﬁ rst time, the anticipation 
of the surprise enters into the mix, which 
adds to the pleasure. Of course, some chil-
dren, like one I worked with once, will not 
get the point of repeating the game and 
have to explain to you matter - of - factly that 
of course the balls are in the box! For chil-
dren like this it ’ s best to move on to another 
game before they lose all respect for your 
intelligence.     
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
      This game can get pretty rowdy and exciting, 
and could be difﬁ cult for children who have 
severe auditory sensitivities. You might 

 Social Gross Motor Games  101
consider using an audible whisper for the singing and the response to 
make it a quieter but still very effective game.  
   The game can also be made quieter if children are asked to stand in 
speciﬁ c places, and then each child takes a turn to throw. 
 Throwing into the Tubes 
 If you played   Throw the Balls into the Box,   here ’ s a way to transfer that skill to 
a different setting. 
 G O A L S 
 Playing with others 
 Eye - hand coordination 
 Reinforcing object permanence 
 Call and response 
 M A T E R I A L S 
 Three child - sized inner tubes 
 Small balls, such as rubber or plastic balls — at least two per child  
 S E T U P 
 Pile the inner tubes on top of one another in the center of the circle to form 
a column of tubes with a hole down the center of the column. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Give each child two balls and sing or chant this song (to the tune of  “ London 
Bridge Is Falling Down ” ): 
 Throw the balls into the tube 
 Into the tube 
 Into the tube 

102  Early Intervention Games
 Throw the balls into the tube 
 Where did the balls go? 
 Then lift up the ﬁ rst inner tube and say,  “ Are they here? ” 
 Model for the kids to respond,  “ No! ” 
 Then lift the next tube, and ask again,  “ Are they here? ” 
 “ No! ” 
 Then lift the last tube, which will reveal all the balls. Ask,  “ Are they here? ”  
 “ Yes! ” 
 The children then grab for the balls, and the tubes are replaced so the 
game can be played again.  
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Throw the balls into a plastic sack. Put a hole in the bottom of the sack 
and lift the sack to let the balls tumble out. 
  2.  Throw the balls into a bucket. Lift up the full bucket and pretend to 
look under it ( “ Are they here? ” ). Then turn the bucket upside down and 
dump the balls ( “ Are they here? ”  “ Yes! ” ) .
     3.   Pile the tubes on the water in a pool so that when the last tub is picked 
up, the balls ﬂ oat free. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are participating in a group activity with the goal of throwing 
all the balls into the column of tubes. They are learning that there is a 
sequence to the game that includes a call and response. An adult asks, 
 “ Are the balls here? ” and the response is  “ Yes ” or  “ No. ” They are learning 
to anticipate the lifting of the last tube and getting the excitement of the 
last tube’s being lifted and all the balls’ being revealed. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   Children who don ’ t have the coordination or who are easily distracted will 
need a hand - over - hand approach to throwing the balls into the tubes.  

 Social Gross Motor Games  103
   For the child who might throw the balls in other directions than toward 
the tubes, such as at other children, make sure you are using lightweight 
balls that will not hurt. Tennis balls should not be used. 
   A child who is overstimulated by all the excitement can be ﬁ rmly and 
lovingly held on an adult ’ s lap to help him stay calm and to provide a 
safe harbor from which he can participate or watch the action. 
 Throwing Through the Tube 
 When you narrow the focus of where to throw, it can be easier to hit the mark. 
If you have a pool, this game is also lots of fun in the water. 
 G O A L S  
 Awareness of others 
 Anticipating action 
 Eye - hand coordination 
 Focusing 
 Visual and proprioceptive stimulation 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Beach ball 
 Inner tube 
 S E T U P 
 Two adults hold up the inner tube. Have the children stand on either side of 
the inner tube, facing the hole. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Give one of the children the beach ball and encourage the children to 
throw the ball back and forth to each other through the tube. Children 
new at throwing will often throw the ball every which way. The hole in the 

104  Early Intervention Games
tube gives each thrower a clear direction. And when a player throws into 
the hole, the player on the other side of the tube is in a good position to 
receive it. 
 Adults should give as much or as little help as is needed for both catch-
ing and throwing. 
 Because the beach ball is light, there is less fear of being hit. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  Use a hula hoop instead of an inner tube for a larger target. 
  2.  Use a smaller ball to increase the challenge. 
  3.  Do this activity in a pool. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are getting the experience of having back - and - forth play 
with another. The rules of the game are clear and deﬁ ned by the inner 
tube. The enthusiasm of the adults can also add to children’s feelings of 
accomplishment as they successfully catch the thrown ball or accurately 
throw the ball. 
   Throwing and catching a ball, even a light one, is  “ heavy ”  work that 
increases the child ’ s alertness and body awareness. 
   If the other children respond happily, the game gives experience in the 
joy of making others happy. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   If you do this in the pool, the adults may need to physically hold some 
children up and out of the water so that their arms are in a better posi-
tion to throw. 
   Children who need more stimulation to stay alert while waiting for the 
ball to be returned can subtly have their shoulders and arms squeezed 
and shoulder joints compressed. 

 Social Gross Motor Games  105
 Tug - of - War 
 This age - old game is a fun way to get to use all your strength and be part of 
a team. For the child who already has difﬁ culty  “ pulling his punch, ”  this is a 
chance to shine by pulling with all his might! 
 G O A L S  
 Vestibular and proprioceptive stimulation 
 Awareness of others 
 Developing strength 
 M A T E R I A L S 
 Rope or long, sturdy scarf  
 S E T U P 
 Children are divided into two groups, one group on each end of the rope. 
Each player puts both hands on the rope. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 When children are in position, call out the verbal cues,  “ Pull ”  or  “ Pull on 
your rope. ”  Adults on both sides can model the movement and encourage 
their respective groups to pull hard. 
 There can be a line on the ﬂ oor, and the group that crosses it loses. 
But it ’ s just as fun to pull for the sake of using lots of muscles and to stop 
when tired!  
 V A R I A T I O N S 
 There is only one way to play Tug - of - War, but there could be a variety 
of things to tug, such as an inner tube or four or ﬁ ve hula hoops tied 
together so that they don ’ t bend; kids and adults gather around for a 
group pull.  

106  Early Intervention Games
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are experiencing what it feels like to use a lot of their strength. 
This intense use of their muscles increases awareness of their bodies and 
alerts them to the moment. 
   They are also getting an opportunity to challenge their sense of balance 
and learn how to adjust their stance to give themselves support. 
   Socially, they get the experience of being part of a group and working 
together. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   This is a particularly good activity for children who are very active, 
because it gives them a valid place to put their excess energy. If it is dif-
ﬁ cult for them to not be too rowdy, set up a two - person Tug - of - War and 
pair two high - energy people together. 
 Walk with Rhythm 
 Rhythm is the basis for all smooth movements. Walking to a particular rhythm 
is a good way to practice rhythmic movement and to become more aware of 
one ’ s body. 
 G O A L S  
 Motor control 
  Differentiating between fast, slow, and stop  
 Listening to verbal cues 
 Imitating body movements 
 Using excess energy 
  Proprioceptive and vestibular stimulation  
 Balance 
 Feeling part of a group 

 Social Gross Motor Games  107
 M A T E R I A L S 
 None 
 S E T U P 
 Everyone forms a line, holding hands with adults at both ends of the line 
and in the middle. The adult in the middle is the leader. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 The leader says,  “ Walking, walking, walking ”  while walking slowly forward. 
When everyone is walking, the leader stops and says,  “ Jump, ”  demonstrating 
and, as needed, helping others to jump. 
 Next, establish a rhythm to this game. If your group is very active and 
good at jumping, do a faster four - beat rhythm, such as: 
 Walking 
 Walking 
 Walking 
 Jump! 
 A group that needs to do transitions more slowly might do better with 
an eight  - beat rhythm, such as: 
 Walking 
 Walking 
 Walking 
 Walking 
 Walking 
 Walking 
 Walking 
 Jump! 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  The speed can be anywhere from slow motion to very fast. 
  2.  Movement can also be backward or sideways. 

108  Early Intervention Games
     3.   Sounds could be used instead of words in order to work on different 
phonics or to include a child who is at a nonverbal level. For example, 
 “ La la la la boing! ”  (repeat, repeat).  
  4.  Use other commands, such as  “ Running, running, running, stop ” or 
 “ Turning, turning, turning, drop! ”  (Never underestimate a child ’ s 
delight in falling to the ground. Adults don ’ t always share it!)  
  5.  Try this game in the sand at the beach. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   On a motoric level, children are learning which muscles are needed to 
purposely stop one movement and do a new one. This kind of muscle 
control helps them to move more smoothly.  
   On an emotional level, being part of a group, even if it ’ s not yet a cogni-
tive perception, is still felt in the body and can give children a sense of 
positive connection with others. Chanting sounds or the words together 
also add to that feeling of camaraderie. 
   Children who are more aware can be given the role of changing 
the rhythm or using words of their own to give them a sense of 
 leadership.  
   When this game is played on the sand or on uneven terrain, the children 
also get an opportunity to challenge their senses of balance. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   This game is especially good for children who tend to be clumsy and 
need more work on body awareness. If the variations are also played, it 
will deepen their awareness. 
   Children who tend to be anxious about new experiences will begin to 
calm when the rhythm gets predictable and they can relax in the famil-
iarity. Such variations as walking backward can be done later with the 
same rhythm so that they can transfer and expand their skills within 
their new comfort zones. 

 Social Gross Motor Games  109
 We Are Rocking 
 Children who enjoy repetitive motion will especially like this game because it 
takes them beyond where they could go on their own. 
 G O A L S  
 Stimulating the vestibular system 
 Understanding the concepts of fast and slow 
 Understanding the physical sensation of  “ stop ” 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 None 
 S E T U P 
 Have children stand up with an adult behind each of them. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Holding the child ﬁ rmly by the hips or trunk, chant the words below while 
ﬁ rst rocking the child from side to side and, in the second round, forward 
and backward. 
 Rock the child just enough to give him the sensation of being off center 
during the side - to - side and back - and - forth movements and then directly 
on center on the word  “ Stop. ” 
 (Sung to the tune of  “ Fr è re Jacques ” ) 
 We are rocking, rocking, rocking 
 We are rocking 
 Now we stop! 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  Do another round of the side - to - side and back-and-forth movements but 
do it faster. Precede this change with the words  “ Ready to go faster? ”   

110  Early Intervention Games
     2.   Do another round but this time go very slowly as if in slow motion. Precede 
this change with the appropriate announcement,  “ Let ’ s go slower. ”   
  3.  Play the same game with the child sitting or kneeling. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning where their centers are by experiencing how it 
feels to be off center. This information is stored in the inner ear and 
they begin to process the input, learning to make adjustments to their 
movements when they feel they are off center and about to fall. This 
awareness, coming from two kinds of movement, is doubly helpful.  
   For children who are hyposensitive to this information, having it pre-
sented so dramatically increases their awareness. 
   Children are also experiencing the meaning of  “ Stop ”  and what that 
feels like, so that when they are told to stop (!) at other times in their 
lives, they will have an internal sense of what that feels like and what 
is expected.  
   The game has the concepts of both unpredictability and predictability. 
As the children get familiar with the game, they know a stop is coming. 
The unpredictability is in not knowing how fast or how slow the move-
ments will be. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   The forcefulness or the gentleness of the movements can be adjusted to 
ﬁ t individual children. Children who crave more proprioceptive input 
will like it to be more forceful and will ﬁ nd this movement especially 
calming and satisfying. 
   Children who are more defensive will prefer a gentler rocking or would 
prefer to rock themselves.  
   Children who want to be independent but find balance a challenge 
might be more comfortable playing this game while sitting or kneeling 
rather than standing. 

 Social Gross Motor Games  111
 Who Is This? 
 Recognizing and enjoying one ’ s own reﬂ ection and being noticed by others are 
the essence of this game. 
 G O A L S  
 Recognizing one self in the mirror 
  Experiencing the surprise of seeing one ’ s reﬂ ection 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Mirror 
 Scarf 
 S E T U P 
 Have children sit in a circle and place a mirror in front of one child. Cover 
the mirror with the scarf.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 After the cloth is placed over the mirror, the group chants: 
 Who is this? 
 Can anybody tell? 
 This is (pull the cloth off the mirror and say the child ’ s name)  ______
 And we like her (him) very well! 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Place a scarf over a child ’ s head instead, and after the song is sung, the 
scarf is removed to reveal the child.  
     2.   Use stuffed animals instead of children and cover one up at a time.     

112  Early Intervention Games
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are beginning to notice more facial details so that they can 
identify and distinguish differences between the people in their lives. 
Noticing their own facial details is part of this process. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
  For children who have difficulty focusing, bring the covered mirror 
closer or use a larger mirror to capture their attention.  
   Children who are uncomfortable making eye contact with others might 
ﬁ nd it easier to look in the mirror. Looking in their own eyes is a good 
way to practice making eye contact. 
 Who ’ s in the Box? 
 If you want a group game that is sure to interest young bodies, bring around a 
large box and let the fun begin. In this game, children can get the comfort of an 
enclosed space and often don ’ t mind sharing it. 
 G O A L S  
 Awareness of others 
  Learning that others have different names  
  Enhancing sense of self  
 Reinforcing object permanence 
 Learning to enjoy a novel experience 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Large, empty box, such as the kind that appliances come in 
 S E T U P 
 Place the large box in full view of the children and encourage them to gather 
around the box and check it out. 

 Social Gross Motor Games  113
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 After the children have checked the box out, put one child inside the box 
and have him squat down so you can close the top ﬂ aps of the box. 
 Have the other children gather around the box and chant along with 
the adults: 
 Who ’ s in the box? 
 Who ’ s in the box? 
 Knock, knock, knock 
 Who ’ s in the box? 
 Children knock on the box on the words  “ Knock, knock, knock. ”  When 
the ﬁ nal  “ Who ’ s in the box? ”  is said, the top ﬂ aps are opened and the child 
pops up and everyone says that person ’ s name: 
 “ It ’ s Justin! ” 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  Put more than one child in the box at one time. 
     2.   Instead of putting the child in the box from the top, cut a door in the 
side and play the same game. 
  3.  Jiggle the box while the child is inside for extra stimulation. 
     4.   Put large holes in the box so kids can stick an arm out or peer through 
at the audience. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   The game is designed to make children aware that there are other chil-
dren in the group and that each child has a name. 
   The game also promotes listening and responding to verbal cues (pop-
ping up after hearing,  “ Who ’ s in the box? ”  and knocking on the box 
after hearing the words  “ Knock, knock, knock ” ). 

114  Early Intervention Games
  This box game also allows children to experiment with 
getting in a new enclosed space and tolerating the newness 
of the experience.  
    The children are also reminded that when people 
aren ’ t seen, they still exist. This awareness can help 
them become more tolerant of being separated from 
parents during the day.  
    Because the game requires turn taking, the children 
have to learn to wait for their turn and to under-
stand the concept that their turn is coming again.  
    Because everyone is encouraged to say the name 
of the child, this game can contribute to the 
child ’ s sense that he is happily noticed!  
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   If a child has a hard time waiting for his turn, consider putting two or 
more children in at the same time. We ’ ve put as many as four in a box 
with great success. 
    If a child is afraid of the box, place the box on its side and let the child 
explore it before the game starts. 
    If a child is anxious about being in the box, modify the game. Start with 
closing the ﬂ aps for only a second and when opening them say,  “ Peek - a -
 boo. ”  This makes the game feel more familiar if they have played peek -
 a - boo games in the past. 
  Once the comfort level is increased, introduce the longer version. 
 Wiggling Snake 
 This can be a very spontaneous game. Although usually played with a rope, it 
can be played with a string, a cord, or even a long scarf or ribbon. It also can 
be made to be very easy or very challenging depending upon how quickly you 
can move! 

 Social Gross Motor Games  115
 G O A L S  
 Shared attention 
 Eye - foot coordination 
 Timing 
 Visual, proprioceptive, and vestibular stimulation 
 Spatial awareness 
 M A T E R I A L S  
  Small piece (around two or three feet) of rope, string, cord, scarf, or 
ribbon 
 S E T U P 
 Lay one end of the rope ﬂ at on the ﬂ oor. Hold the other end in your hand.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Challenge your player(s) to step on the end of the rope. When they try, 
wiggle it quickly out of the way. Keep challenging them until they step on 
the rope. 
 Move the rope as swiftly or as slowly as needed to keep the players inter-
ested, but also successful. Remember to keep one end of the rope always 
touching the ground to avoid a swinging, uncontrolled movement. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  Have the children take turns being the one who holds the rope. 
     2.   When the rope is stepped on, encourage the child to keep it down with 
his foot while you try to pull it away. This adds the challenge of main-
taining balance. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   The game encourages children to stay visually focused on the string and 
on their attempts to step on it and stop its movement. 
   Children are learning to coordinate their vision with their body move-
ments in order to step on the rope at just the right moment.  

116  Early Intervention Games
   When more than one child is playing at a time, the game encourages 
awareness of others in their space. Bumping into others gives them the 
clear tactile awareness that one space cannot be shared. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
  For the child who has difficulty following the movements, start by 
encouraging her to step on the rope as it moves forward in a predictable 
slow movement. 

 Social Fine Motor 
Games  
 Bingo Game 
 At last, a bingo game where no one dreads someone yelling,  “ Bingo! ”  because 
everyone wins. 
 G O A L S  
 Increasing ﬁ ne motor skills 
 Focusing 
 Eye - hand coordination 
 Visual stimulation 
 Awareness of others 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Colored construction paper 
 Poster board or cardboard 
  Poker chips or Styrofoam packing peanuts, cut - up pieces of cardboard, or 
any material of a similar size to be used as markers 
C H A P T E R  4
117

118  Early Intervention Games
 S E T U P 
 Make bingo cards by cutting a long, thin rectangle out of heavy cardboard 
or poster board around 12    4 inches. Paste four or ﬁ ve shapes, such as 
circle,  triangle, square, star, and heart, on each card. Make each shape the 
same color, and place the same shapes on each card, but in a different order. 
Make an extra set of shapes as demonstration models.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Have the children sit at a table and give each player a card. Have a leader 
hold up one of the demonstration cards, point to a shape, name it, and 
encourage the players to say the name and ﬁ nd the same shape on their own 
cards. When they have found the shape, they should cover it with a marker. 
Continue to hold up each shape until each child has each shape covered 
with a marker. Point out the success of each choice, even if assisted,  “ You 
found the circle; you found the same shape! ”  
 When all of the shapes have been covered, everyone gets to say, 
 “ Bingo! ” 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Use circles of different colors instead of different shapes to teach color 
matching. 
     2.   Use numbers for number recognition. Children have to put one marker 
on the number 1, two markers on the number 2, and so on. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning to follow a two - part direction. They need to ﬁ rst 
ﬁ nd the correct shape and then place a marker on it.  
   The activity gives children more experience in matching, which can be 
expanded to include color, number, and letter recognition.     

 Social Fine Motor Games  119
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   Children who have difficulty looking 
at an object at a distance 
and then ﬁ nding the match 
nearby will do better if the 
demonstration shape is held 
next to each shape on their 
board. For example, holding 
the heart shape next to the 
square shape, ask,  “ Is this the 
same? ” 
   Adding a tactile sensory com-
ponent, such as making the shapes out of heavy card-
board so they can be felt as well as seen, can also be helpful for 
children who need more tactile than visual input. 
 Bubble Blowing 
 Take out a bubble wand, a jar of bubbles, and blow — and every kid 
(and grown - up) is captivated. In this game, the children can make all the 
bubbles they want with just a straw and some soapy water and then see those 
bubbles form designs on paper. 
 G O A L S  
 Breath control 
 Working in a group 
  Realizing consequences of actions  
 Visual stimulation 

120  Early Intervention Games
 M A T E R I A L S  
  Bowl  
 Dish detergent  
 Food coloring 
 Straws 
 S E T U P 
 Fill a bowl halfway with water. Add two or three tablespoons of dish deter-
gent and some food coloring. Place the bowl in the middle of a small table. 
If inside the house, ﬁ rst put a plastic sheet over the table to keep it from 
getting wet. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Have the children sit around the table so that they can all reach the bowl 
with the straw when they lean in. Give each child a straw to place in the 
bowl and have the children blow bubbles in the water. When a large amount 
of bubbles are on top of the water, place a sheet of white or colored con-
struction paper on top of the bubbles. The bubbles will pop on the paper, 
making a beautiful circular design. 
 To prevent a child from sucking the bubble solution up the straw, poke 
a few small holes in the straw one inch from the top.  
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Use an eggbeater instead of straws and have each child take a turn 
using it. 
     2.   Use the paper to form cards that the children can draw or scribble on 
and give to parents. 
  3.  Scoop up some bubbles and place them on your chin to make a 
 “ beard. ” 
  4.  Scoop up some bubbles and place them on the table. Lightly blow on 
the top bubble and watch it expand. 

 Social Fine Motor Games  121
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning breath control. The 
harder they blow, the more bubbles they will 
get. They see the consequences of actions 
when they make the bubbles and when 
they see what happens when the paper is 
placed on the bubbles. 
   They are all doing the same thing 
together. Being aware of this adds to 
the feeling of fun. Encourage this by 
saying,  “ Everyone is making bubbles. 
Let ’ s all make even more! ” 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For the child who cannot sustain 
an interest in blowing, have him 
help put the paper on top and see the results. 
 Cereal Box Puzzles 
 Cereal and cracker boxes can be used to make an instant puzzle. This is a good 
way to recycle, reuse, and educate. 
 G O A L S  
 Noticing parts of a whole 
 Visual stimulation 
 Spatial awareness 
 Increasing ﬁ ne motor control 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Cereal boxes 
 Scissors 

122  Early Intervention Games
 S E T U P 
 Cut out the front and back of the cereal box. Cut each side in half, forming 
two large rectangles. 
 Make a few sets of puzzles so each child in the group can have his own. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Show children how the two parts can be put together to make a whole pic-
ture again. Then let them try it on their own. Provide assistance as needed. 
Once the children accomplish the task a few times, have them trade puzzles 
with another child. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   After the children have mastered this game, you can cut or have them cut 
the halves in half again so that there are now four pieces to each puzzle. 
     2.   Cut another box side with a diagonal cut this time so that you have two 
triangular halves instead of two rectangles. 
     3.   When the children are ready for an added challenge, cut the pieces in 
abstract shapes rather than just squares, triangles, or rectangles. If your 
child needs help with this type of puzzle, you can lay the puzzle on a 
piece of paper and outline each piece so he can see more clearly how the 
shapes ﬁ t together.  
     4.   You can also make a more attractive (and less commercial - looking) puz-
zle by pasting a picture from a magazine on a piece of cardboard instead. 
Pictures from  National Geographic or  Smithsonian magazines work well.  
     5.   If you want to reuse the puzzles, they keep nicely in a brown mailing 
envelope. Or poke a hole in the corner of each puzzle piece, stick a 
paper clip through the holes, and hang them up on a cup hook.     
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Puzzles encourage children to notice similarities, such as how the color 
red or the bold line in one piece match up to the same features in another 
piece. 

 Social Fine Motor Games  123
   When children try more than one puzzle, they are learning to transfer their 
knowledge from one experience to a similar one.  
   By trading puzzles with classmates, they are learning the upside of shar-
ing: that it enlarges your experience. In other words, if you share, then 
you get more  puzzles. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For children who have 
motoric difficulties and 
tend to be clumsy with their 
hands, lay down a nonslip mat so 
the cardboard puzzle pieces will stay 
put while the other piece or pieces are 
being added.  
   To help children understand the concept 
of putting parts together to make a whole, 
make sure that they are part of the process by 
either letting them see the picture on the whole side 
of the box before you cut it, letting them help you cut the 
box, or letting them cut the box in half themselves.  
 Cereal Necklace 
 Art can be beautiful and art can be functional, but isn ’ t it nice when it ’ s also 
edible? 
 G O A L S  
 Increasing ﬁ ne motor skills 
 Focusing 
 Eye - hand coordination 
 Visual and proprioceptive stimulation 

124  Early Intervention Games
 M A T E R I A L S  
  Yarn, string, or ﬁ shing line  
  Cereal that has holes in the middle  
 Optional: tape 
 S E T U P 
 Give each child a piece of yarn, string, or ﬁ shing line that is long enough to ﬁ t 
over her head when tied. If you use yarn or string, it can be helpful to younger 
ones if you put a piece of tape on the stringing end so that it ’ s ﬁ rmer and goes 
more easily through the hole in the cereal.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Encourage the child to put the cereal pieces on the string. Give whatever 
assistance is needed to be successful. Tie the ends of the yarn together when 
she ’ s done to make a necklace. Have your child count how many pieces of 
cereal are on the string. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  After the child counts the number of cereal pieces on the string, let 
him eat some and then count how many pieces are left. Can your child 
 ﬁ gure out how many were eaten? 
     2.   If you want your necklace to be lasting, instead of edible, string other 
things, such as buttons, short pieces of colored straws, or macaroni and 
other hollow pasta shapes. 
     3.   Instead of string or yarn, you could use pipe cleaners and turn the proj-
ect into rings for the ﬁ ngers or loops to hang around the ears.     
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are getting practice in focusing on small objects and directing 
their ﬁ ngers. They are also getting practice in counting and, for some, 
the concept of subtraction. 

 Social Fine Motor Games  125
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For children who are not yet able to coordinate both hands working 
together, have an adult or other player hold the string steady. 
 Colored Slots 
 It takes a variety of methods to learn colors. This way encourages dexterity and 
socializing as well. 
 G O A L S  
 Turn taking 
 Focusing 
 Eye - hand coordination 
 Matching 
 M A T E R I A L S  
  Can with plastic lid (such as a coffee can)  
 Colored construction paper in four different colors  
 Tape 
 Scissors 
 S E T U P 
 Make four slits in the plastic lid of a coffee can. 
 Tape a piece of different colored paper above each slit in the lid (see 
illustration). 
 Cut sheets of construction paper in the corresponding colors into small 
slips that will ﬁ t into the slits in the lid. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Show children how to put the slips of paper into the slits that have the 
matching color above it. Once the game is learned or almost learned, 

126  Early Intervention Games
encourage children to play the game together, taking turns putting the slips 
of paper into the correct slits. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Add more variations in color or more subtle differences in shade 
between the colors for the children who are already good at matching 
primary colors. 
  2.  Play a similar game using shapes rather than colors. 
     3.   Use playing cards and have larger slots labeled as hearts, diamonds, 
clubs, and spades. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
  Children are learning how to match colors (or shapes or patterns). 
   If children play the game together, they are also learning how to wait for 
their turns and to be aware of another. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
    If the child has trouble playing with another child, 
you can take the place of the other child until they 
are ready. 
    For the child who needs more structure, do not 
put the paper in a pile within easy reach, but 
instead hand the papers out one by one to each 
child as he takes his turn. This will prevent 
one child from grabbing them all 
up and not taking turns. 

 Social Fine Motor Games  127
 Drawing Faces 
 The world is full of happy faces, but some children have difficulty reading 
expressions. By drawing smiling faces and other simple versions of emotions, 
we can open awareness to feelings. 
 G O A L S  
 Awareness of emotion 
 Fine motor skills 
 Practicing reading facial expressions 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Paper 
 Pens 
 S E T U P 
 Have one adult working with each child.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Use one piece of paper per adult - child pair. Give each person a pen. The 
adult in each pair should draw a basic smiley face. Say,  “ A happy face ”  and 
smile at the child. The child should be encouraged to copy the adult ’ s draw-
ing, facial expression, or both. 
 Make a new drawing, but this time with a turned - down mouth to show 
a frown, and add tears to the eyes. Say,  “ A sad face ”  and make a sad face. 
Again, encourage imitation. Continue by drawing other basic facial expres-
sions, such as a jagged mouth indicating a scared face and a flat mouth 
indicating an  “ OK ” face. 

128  Early Intervention Games
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  Add variations to the eyebrows. For example, high or slanted inward for 
scared and slanted outward for sad.  
     2.   Add body language to these expressions. Ask the children to guess which 
emotion you are feeling by your posture. Ask the children to take turns 
modeling a posture for others to identify. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
    Children are learning how to read facial 
expressions and body language so that 
they can better understand social cues. 
     By drawing and seeing a drawing of a 
facial expression, they are able to iden-
tify the difference in mouth positions 
and, if doing the variation, the eyebrow 
positions.     
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For children who do not yet have the hand control to draw, do a hand -
 over - hand drawing with them so they can feel what motions are used to 
draw these lines. 
   Exaggerate the expressions to make them more apparent to the child 
who cannot yet read facial expressions. 
   For children who seem oblivious to the different expressions, give added 
sensory or tactile input on the differences; encourage them to feel your 
sad (happy, scared, OK) face with their ﬁ ngers. 
 Dump and Fill 
 Enjoying ﬁ lling and dumping out objects is a stage in every child ’ s develop-
ment. In this game it ’ s the ﬁ lling step that is the changing challenge. 

 Social Fine Motor Games  129
 G O A L S  
 Eye - hand coordination 
 Fine motor skills 
 Tactile and proprioceptive stimulation 
 Turn taking 
 M A T E R I A L S  
  Marbles and a coffee can  
 or 
 Cut - up straws and a water bottle 
 or 
 Poker chips and a yogurt container 
 S E T U P 
 If you use a coffee can, cut a hole in the plastic top that is slightly smaller 
than the marbles. 
 If you use a yogurt container, cut a slit in the top to ﬁ t the poker chip. 
 If you use a water bottle, remove the lid or make a tiny hole in the lid. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Have two children play this game together, or an adult can play with a child. 
One person hands a marble to the one with the coffee can, who has to push 
the marble into the hole until it falls through to the can, making a satisfying 
 thunk . 
 Let the children take turns being the one who puts the marble, straw, or 
poker chip into the appropriate container and the one who hands it to him. 
They also take turns dumping the container to start over. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Put all three choices in front of the child so he has to select the correct 
container for the object he is handed.  
  2.  Have the child do the game with eyes blindfolded. 

130  Early Intervention Games
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning to take turns and be a source of fun for each 
other. 
   They are learning the basics of ﬁ ne motor control, as it takes a pincer 
grasp to hold the objects, as well as eye - hand coordination in order to 
get the item in the hole.  
   Because the hole for the marble is a little small, they are practicing 
their ﬁ nger strength and their ability to move past a little frustration to 
 success. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   If your player is likely to put objects in his mouth, don ’ t use the marble 
game, but do use the poker chips and make the straw pieces too big to 
swallow. 
   If your player is not ready for the ﬁ ne motor aspects, remove the tops 
of the containers and let him just put it in and dump it out without the 
additional challenge. 
 Eyedropper Squirts 
 Here is a game that has three important elements. It takes ﬁ ne motor skills 
to work the eyedropper, cognitive skills to understand the principle of ﬁ ll and 
release, and a sense of fun to squirt another. 
 G O A L S  
 Playfulness 
 Awareness of others 
 Fine motor control 
 Cognition of a two - step process 
 Tactile stimulation 

 Social Fine Motor Games  131
 M A T E R I A L S  
  One eyedropper per child  
 Pail of water or a smaller container of water for each child     
 S E T U P 
 Give each child an eyedropper and a separate container of water, or put the 
one pail of water in the middle of a circle for them all to share. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Show each child how to ﬁ ll the eyedropper with water by using a four - part 
sequence: 
 First, squeeze the top closed. 
 Second, place the eyedropper in the water. 
 Third, stop squeezing the top of the eyedropper and watch the water 
come up the tube. 
 Fourth, take it out of the water, squeeze the top again, and squirt the 
water (on each other!). 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  Squirt water on speciﬁ c body parts, as in  “ Let ’ s squirt water on my (or 
your) hand. Now on your elbow. ”   
     2.   Use paints instead of water and squirt paint on paper. Have differ-
ent colors in separate eyedroppers or clear the eyedropper with water 
between colors. 
     3.   Using paint, drop paint from higher and higher distances to get differ-
ent effects in the paint splotches on paper.     
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
  By squirting water at each other, children are becoming more aware of 
each other and enjoying the silly give - and - take of the situation. They 
also gain experience in motor planning as they modify the squirt to aim 
it up and out and connect with the person they are aiming at! 

132  Early Intervention Games
  If they squirt their different body parts, they are increasing their aware-
ness of the parts of their bodies and the names of those parts. 
   If they drop paint from the dropper onto paper they get the fun of 
experimenting with color. They get to see how different colors look next 
to each other and how the paint forms a different design when dropped 
from higher distances. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
  Tactilely defensive children might have difﬁ culty with a sudden burst of 
water squirted out. Instead, dribble the water slowly on different body 
parts to help increase their tolerance.  
   If the child can ’ t handle that amount of touch yet, you can both squirt 
water at something else, such as at your reﬂ ections in the mirror. 
 Feather Blowing 
 Watching feathers can be fascinating because they move slowly and respond to 
the slightest current. 
 G O A L S  
 Eye - hand coordination 
 Partner play 
 Breath control and modulation 
 Visual, proprioceptive, and vestibular input 
 M A T E R I A L S  
  Small feathers     
 S E T U P 
 If two children play together, have them stand close, facing each other. If it ’ s 
an adult and a child, the adult should be at the child ’ s level. 

 Social Fine Motor Games  133
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Show your partner how to cup her hands in anticipation of catching a ﬂ oat-
ing feather. Softly blow a feather and have your partner catch it. Give as little 
or as much help as is needed. 
 Take turns being the blower and the catcher. 
 Work toward having two children play together, with adults assisting as 
needed. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  Get in a circle and blow the feather from one person to the next. 
     2.   Have each child blow a feather up and catch it with his own hands.  
  3.  Use a balloon instead of a feather. Or blow up the balloon, then let it go, 
and have the child try to catch it as it ﬂ ies around the room. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning to modulate their breath, which controls volume. 
They need to know how to control their breath so they can learn to use their 
 “ inside voices. ”  Controlled respiration also helps create longer sentences.  
  Controlled breathing also helps create calmness. 
   They are practicing focusing because they have to keep their eyes on 
the feather in order to catch it. And they have to get their hands in 
position to catch the falling feather. Thus, they are learning eye - hand 
 coordination. 
   If the children have to move in order to get in the best position to catch 
the feather, they are challenging their sense of balance and thereby 
increasing it. 
  They are also learning the pleasures of back - and - forth play. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For the child who gets distracted more easily and won ’ t keep his eye on 
the feather, make the distance between you very small and reward him 

134  Early Intervention Games
for each catch. The reward can be whatever he likes, such as a 
hug, high ﬁ ve, treat, favorite toy, or verbal praise.  
    For children who need more work on breath 
control, which is an underlying factor in the abil-
ity to speak longer sentences, hold the feather in 
your hand and have them practice blowing softly 
and then blowing strongly. Comment on the 
 difference. 
    For children who need a lot of visual stimulation in 
order to stay attentive, use the balloon variation.  
 Listening Game 
 Hearing a sound they can ’ t identify can be scary for 
children, and there are so many sounds in our world. 
This game helps make them familiar. 
 G O A L S  
 Listening 
 Identifying 
 Auditory stimulation 
 Group participation 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Recording of common sounds 
 S E T U P 
 Make a recording of common sounds, such as a car starting, water run-
ning, a vacuum cleaner running, a dog barking, a door closing, and a toilet 
 ﬂ ushing.  

 Social Fine Motor Games  135
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Have the children sit and tell them you are going to ask them to listen to 
some sounds. When they are quiet, start the recording. Stop the recording 
after each sound and ask,  “ What made that sound? ”  If needed, give them 
choices,  “ Was that a toilet ﬂ ushing or a dog barking? ”  Make the choices as 
obvious or subtle as needed by your group.  
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  Let one of the players start and stop the recorder. 
  2.  Have children try to imitate the sounds they hear. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning to identify by sound the things that are in their 
lives. This will help them not be alarmed when a sound comes on sud-
denly. They begin to see that many things make a sound and these 
sounds can be identiﬁ ed.  
  They are also being part of a group and hearing others ’ interpretations. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For the child who alarms easily, let him control the stopping and start-
ing of the recorder, or play the sounds at a low volume. 
   For the child who needs visuals to understand, have photos or pictures 
of the objects to accompany the sounds.      
 Lost in Rice 
 This is a classic game, and there is a reason for that. Everyone enjoys digging 
for treasures. 

136  Early Intervention Games
 G O A L S  
 Playing with others 
 Tactile stimulation 
 Decreasing tactile sensitivity 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Rice or any small, dry material, such as beans, birdseed, corn kernels, 
and so on 
 Medium - size container or bucket 
 Small toys or objects, such as toy cars, ﬁ gures, wrapped treats, combs, 
Ping - Pong balls, and so on 
 S E T U P 
 Fill a container with the rice or other material. Use a basin, box, or any 
container that allows children the freedom to dig without the rice spilling 
over the sides. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Either bury the items in the rice yourself, or have another child bury the 
items to ﬁ nd. You can do this with or without the child watching. 
  “ Tanya buried something in the rice. Can you ﬁ nd it? A car! You found 
a car! ” 
 Let the child play with the car for a while before saying,  “ Now it ’ s your 
turn to bury the car for Tanya to ﬁ nd. ” 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   For a small number of children, bury quite a few toys in the rice and 
have each child take a turn to ﬁ nd an object. 
     2.   Name one of the objects hidden and encourage children to ﬁ nd the 
object without looking and using just their hands. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   If children watch the toy being buried, they learn that objects that are 
no longer seen still exist (object permanence). If they have tactile issues, 

 Social Fine Motor Games  137
they can learn to increase their tolerance. If they tend to put things in 
their mouths to identify texture, they learn to use their ﬁ nger pads for 
identiﬁ cation instead.  
   Feeling the pressure of the rice or other material on their hands as they 
search for the toys can also be very calming. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For the child who is tactilely sensitive and reluctant to let his hands touch 
unfamiliar things, allow him to watch the desired toy being buried so that 
he ’ ll be willing to go get it. As he becomes more familiar and comfortable 
with the game, try using other materials, such as sand or damp oatmeal, 
to get him to tolerate more textures. Keep a bucket of water nearby so he 
can rinse as needed. Then, later, keep the bucket of water further away so 
he learns to tolerate the feeling for longer  periods.  
 Penny Flick 
 This is a quickly organized social and ﬁ ne motor game with an easy - to - ﬁ nd 
material, pennies. 
 G O A L S  
 Playing with others 
 Visual focusing 
 Eye - hand coordination 
 Fine motor control 
 M A T E R I A L S  
  Pennies (or poker chips, quarters, bottle caps)     
 S E T U P 
 Partner two children across from each other or have children sitting around 
a circular table.  

138  Early Intervention Games
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Give the children each a penny and show how to move the pennies along 
the table by ﬂ icking their index ﬁ nger with their thumb or by pushing with 
just their index ﬁ nger or the side of their thumb. They can use whatever 
ﬁ nger method works best for them (the method doesn ’ t matter). 
 If you do the partner game, have the players sitting across from each 
other ﬂ ick their pennies toward each other, trying to get them to touch. 
 If you use the group game, have all the players ﬂ ick their pennies into 
the center of the table and try to get the pennies to bump into each other. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Set up two objects, such as two cups or just two other pennies, a short 
distance away from the ﬂ ickers to serve as  “ goal posts. ”  The players have 
to ﬂ ick their pennies between the two objects. Keep making the  “ goal 
posts ” closer together to increase the challenge. 
     2.   Use straws, spoon handles, tongue depressors, or popsicle or craft sticks 
as hockey sticks, call the penny a  “ puck, ” and bat the puck back and 
forth between the players.  
  3.  Make a line of pennies and have the player try and hit each penny and 
knock it out of line. 
     4.   Make a line of pennies with at least an inch of space between them and 
have the player try to ﬂ ick his penny through each of the spaces. Make the 
ﬁ rst space the largest and each following space progressively smaller.  
     5.   Show children how to place a penny on its edge, give it a little push, and 
watch it roll. See how far it can go without falling over. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are engaged in back - and - forth play in which they are either 
taking turns or playing simultaneously.  
   The small muscles of the hand are getting a workout in this game, and 
children are learning how to grade the energy output of those muscles 
to produce the desired results.     

 Social Fine Motor Games  139
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   Children who have dif-
ficulty controlling their 
fingers would do better 
if they used the second 
variation of a  “ hockey 
stick. ”  
   If the child might put 
small objects in his 
mouth, use objects too 
big to swallow, such as 
poker chips, quarters, or 
large bottle caps. 
 Point to the Cup 
 Learning to point and, even more important, learning to understand what 
pointing means, can be a tricky skill for young children with ASD. 
 G O A L S  
 Pointing as communication 
 Visual stimulation 
 Naming objects 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Three plastic or paper cups 
 Small objects — little plastic ﬁ gures or other common objects, such as 
coins, rings, bells, and so on 
 S E T U P 
 Place the three cups upside down on the table. 

140  Early Intervention Games
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 In view of the child, put an object, such as an animal figure, under one 
of the cups. Ask,  “ Where is the bear? Is it here? ”  (Model pointing to 
one cup.)  “ Or here? ”  (Point to another cup.)  “ Or here? ”  (Point to the third 
cup.) Encourage the child to point to the correct cup using hand - over - hand 
prompting if needed. 
 Keep the cups out of reach to discourage grabbing for the object. The 
second the child points or attempts to point at the correct cup, immediately 
reward her by giving her the object. 
 If the child reaches, rather than points, for the correct cup, pretend 
ignorance and lift the wrong cup, asking again for a pointing response.  
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  Use more than three cups to enlarge choices or only one to reduce 
choice. 
     2.   Instead of cups, hide an object or objects around the room and ask the 
child to point to where the bear is hiding, for example.     
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning to communicate their wants. For nonverbal chil-
dren, it ’ s frustrating to want something and not be able to communicate 
that need. Pointing is a ﬁ rst step.  
   Pointing is one of the first communication skills and can be easier 
to learn than following an eye gaze. The basic idea for these games is to 
make pointing interesting and useful. You also want the child to under-
stand that pointing is used in different ways and in combination with 
different words. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   To help children learn to point, ﬁ rst place objects on the table and have 
children touch each object with their index ﬁ nger as they are named. 

 Social Fine Motor Games  141
This helps children understand that a pointed ﬁ nger directs attention 
across a distance. 
   To keep a child interested in the game, put one of his favorite objects 
that he wants under the cup. 
  To help children be very clear about their pointing, place the cups at 
a distance from each other so that pointing to the left is very different 
from pointing to the right. 
 Pudding Party 
 Messy fun is a good way to help children see the joy in getting dirty. 
 G O A L S  
 Decreasing tactile defensiveness 
 Increasing tactile awareness 
 Fine motor control 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Pudding, yogurt, or any ready - made whipped topping 
 Plastic sheet 
 Aprons (or garbage bags with holes for head and arms to be used as 
aprons) 
 Optional: food coloring 
 S E T U P 
 Cover a table with a plastic sheet and cover the children with aprons or 
modiﬁ ed garbage bags. If you want, add food coloring to the pudding or 
other food to make it different colors. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Help children spoon a blob of pudding in front of them and use their hands 
to spread the goop. 
 Demonstrate how to write or make marks in the pudding. For example, 
draw circles of the ﬁ rst letter of their names. 

142  Early Intervention Games
 Use ﬁ ngers, cotton swabs, toothpicks, paintbrushes, or combs to get dif-
ferent effects .
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Use dry materials, such as cornmeal, birdseed, sand, or talcum pow-
der, depending on the likelihood that children will put the substance in 
their mouths. 
  2.  Use wet sand or shaving cream if the children are not likely to put it in 
their mouths. 
  3.   Place a mirror under the substance so children can see their reﬂ ections 
when they swish the material around.  
     4.   Let children put their feet in shaving cream by placing it on a tray or 
cookie sheet on the ﬂ oor. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
  Children are learning to tolerate touching goopy material. They are also 
getting an opportunity to isolate their pointer ﬁ ngers, increasing their 
dexterity, and to practice making purposeful marks. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For children who ﬁ nd it too difﬁ cult to touch these materials, give them 
thick plastic gloves or thicker kitchen gloves to wear, or use dry sub-
stances, such as powder or cornstarch.  
   Let children use a paintbrush or stick for exploring until they are ready 
to try using their hands. 
 Secret Message 
 Watching something appear from nothing feeds a child ’ s delight in magic. 
 G O A L S  
 Increasing ﬁ ne motor skills 
 Focusing 

 Social Fine Motor Games  143
  Increasing attention span  
 Visual and proprioceptive stimulation 
 Increasing language skills 
 M A T E R I A L S  
  Heavy white paper, such as index cards  
 Candle 
 Paints and brushes or paint bottles with sponge tops 
 S E T U P 
 Using the candle, draw simple shapes or pictures on white index cards  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Give each child one of the index cards. Encourage children to paint over the 
paper and see the shape or ﬁ gure that appears on the card. Ask them to say 
the name of the shape or ﬁ gure they see.  
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Write letters instead of drawing shapes or ﬁ gures. Do a card for each 
letter of the child ’ s name and then encourage him to put them in the 
right order to spell his name. 
     2.   Have the children draw pictures and shapes on the cards and give them 
to each other. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children learn to do an action and anticipate a result. When they paint 
on the card, something will appear. 
   If the variation is used in which the children give each other cards, they 
practice a social give - and - take. 

144  Early Intervention Games
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
    For children who need more 
input on drawing the shapes 
themselves, use colored crayons 
instead of candles so they can 
see what they have drawn. The 
paint, put on by another player, 
will make the shape stand out 
more.  
    For children who do not have the 
ﬁ ne motor control to use a paint-
brush, use bottled paint that has 
a sponge applicator that will 
cover large areas more easily. 
 Sink the Boat 
 This game has an element of suspense. Will your pebble be the one that sinks 
the boat? Watch and see. 
 G O A L S  
  Working with others to achieve a common goal  
 Eye - hand coordination 
 Visual and proprioceptive stimulation 
 Understanding of cause and effect 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Plastic basin (like the kind used for dishwashing) 
 Pebbles 
 Small plastic container (such as a margarine container) or Styrofoam 
meat tray 

 Social Fine Motor Games  145
 S E T U P 
 Place a basin in the middle of the table, ﬁ lled with water .
 Float a small plastic container (or tray) on the water .
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Tell the players that they are going to see how many pebbles it takes to sink 
the boat. Go around the table giving each child in turn a pebble and have 
them put their pebble in the small container. 
 Comment on the progress. After one child puts his pebble in, say,  “ Still 
ﬂ oating. Next turn, ”  “ Still ﬂ oating, ” and so on until,  “ It sank! ” 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  Have several containers ﬂ oating on the water to be sunk, one at a time .
  2.  Play the  “ Will it sink or ﬂ oat? ”  game instead. Take turns placing various 
objects, such a feather, cork, rock, penny, and so forth, on the water to 
see if they will sink or ﬂ oat. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Because all of the children are contributing, the success of the boat sink-
ing has the potential of making a child feel a part of the whole group, 
an often unusual but welcome experience for the child who wants to 
interact with others but is unsure how to do so.  
   If children toss the pebble into the container rather than just placing it 
in, there is the possibility of increasing their eye - hand coordination. 
  If you do the variation of several boats, you can use this activity to prac-
tice counting. How many boats sank?     
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
  Practice ahead of time, on your own, to see how many pebbles it takes 
to sink the boat. Vary the size of the pebbles or the size of the boat to 
ﬁ t the attention span of your group. If they would get too impatient or 

146  Early Intervention Games
distracted and lose the connection between their actions and the conse-
quence, use a smaller container or larger pebbles. 
   If you ’ re worried that some kids will throw their pebbles while waiting 
their turns, give each child a pebble at the moment it ’ s her turn, rather 
than handing out the pebbles ahead of time.  
   If your child is likely to put pebbles in his mouth, use larger objects, 
such as small rocks that are too big to be swallowed. The boat will just 
sink a little faster. 
 Smelling Game 
 This game is a good way to ﬁ nd out what smells kids avoid and which they 
prefer, and it also stimulates their olfactory sense. 
 G O A L S  
 Olfactory stimulation 
 Turn taking 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Clean, empty plastic pill containers 
 Cotton balls 
 Variety of substances to smell, such as peanut butter, maple syrup, 
roses, coffee, lemon, vanilla, peppermint, garlic, onions, pepper 
 S E T U P 
 Put a small amount of each substance in a medicine bottle. Put a hole in the 
lid of each container. If the substance is liquid, ﬁ rst put a dab on a cotton 
ball and put the cotton ball in the container. 
 Have the children sit in a circle or at a table. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Demonstrate how to strongly inhale over the hole of the lid. Pass the con-
tainer around, and have the children guess the smell and say if they like it 

 Social Fine Motor Games  147
or not. Assign one child to pass the container from child to child. Give each 
child a chance to be that person. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Give children three or more containers at a time and ask them to ﬁ nd a 
speciﬁ c aroma.  
  2.  Have children make their own containers with different substances. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning to identify smells. They are becoming aware that 
smells have particular sources so that they can more clearly identify 
their preferences or dislikes. 
   Roses and vanilla are generally considered calming, whereas pepper-
mint and lemon are invigorating. If your child discovers an aroma that 
is calming, he learns to seek it out when needing calmness. 
   The child who gets to pass the containers around experiences being the 
important leader and being aware of each child ’ s reaction. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   Start with easy, pleasant odors for the child who is defensive, and then 
work toward stronger ones. For example, start with the roses and work 
your way up to the onions. If a child has an aversion to smelling the con-
tainers, let her be the one who hands the containers to others instead, if 
she ’ s willing. 
   Rather than have them identify the name of the smell, talk about when 
or where they smelled that before. For example, a coffee smell might 
remind them of mornings and vanilla might remind them of cookies. 
 Sound Makers 
 Along with learning to imitate and make sounds, it ’ s good to know that 
everything can make music. Kids have a great time with this game inspired 

148  Early Intervention Games
by the Broadway show  “ Stomp, ”  which features music and dance with  trash -
 can lids. 
 G O A L S  
 Listening 
 Rhythm 
  Group play  
  Understanding of cause and effect  
 Auditory stimulation 
 M A T E R I A L S  
  Household items that make sounds, such as an eggbeater, wooden 
spoons, pot lid and spoon, chopsticks, timers with ringers, alarm 
clock, bell, keys on a ring, grater and spoon     
 S E T U P 
 Put a variety of the above materials in one container. Have the children sit 
in a circle or in a small group.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Pass the objects out to the children or let them choose their own. Let chil-
dren experiment with making sounds with their  “ instruments. ”  The instru-
ments can be played all at the same time, or each one can be passed around 
the circle so that all of the children have experience with that instrument. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Add spontaneous vocal sounds and a rhythmic beat to the playing. 
Encourage children to imitate the sounds and rhythms.  
  2.  Sing a familiar song, such as  “ Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star, ” and encour-
age the children to bang on their instruments in a similar rhythm. 
  3.  Make homemade sound shakers by ﬁ lling yogurt cups or plastic water 
bottles with different household objects, such as rice, beans, salt, sand, 
birdseed, coins, beads, pebbles, and so on. 

 Social Fine Motor Games  149
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning to do activities with others and to be aware of 
being part of a group activity. 
   When adding vocals to the sound, they are being introduced to the idea 
of making music out of whatever is around, and are starting to get the 
sense of rhythm and keeping a beat. 
   There is also a feeling of joy that can come from banging pot lids together 
and making other simple sounds.  
  Children who ﬁ gure out how to make 
an alarm clock or timer ring are also 
gaining an understanding of cause and 
effect and how to make things work.  
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For children who are hypersen-
sitive to sounds, work with them 
individually on playing softly and 
experimenting with increasingly louder 
sounds. 
   For children who have difﬁ culty with sensory modu-
lation, help them experience the difference between banging lids with 
full intensity and tapping them softly. The repetition and variation of this 
activity helps them to explore and modify their responses.  
 Straw Sucking 
 Speech requires the ability to control the muscles of the lips, tongue, and throat, 
which are all developed in the act of sucking on something. In this game chil-
dren get an unusual way to practice the art of sucking. 

150  Early Intervention Games
 G O A L S  
 Oral control 
 Following direction 
 Modulation 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Stickers 
 One straw per child 
 Piece of paper 
 S E T U P 
 Lay the stickers out on a table.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Demonstrate how to suck on a straw to get the sticker to adhere to the bot-
tom of the straw. Then release the sticker by stopping sucking in the air. 
 Ask a child to practice picking up the sticker with the straw and drop-
ping it into your hand. In this way you can have your hand in the right place 
until his control is better. 
 Next lay out a series of stickers and ask the child to move a particular 
one to a separate piece of paper. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Once all the stickers are moved, have the child peel off the backs and 
stick the stickers onto the paper. 
  2.  Instead of stickers, use heavier objects, such as pictures on construction 
paper. This requires increased breath control. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning oral and breath control and how to modulate this 
control so that the sticker stays connected to the straw or is purposely 
released. 

 Social Fine Motor Games  151
   They are experiencing listening to and following directions and, if they 
use the variation of peeling off the stickers, they are getting some ﬁ ne 
motor experience as well. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For children who are having a hard time understanding sucking, have 
them start with blowing through the straw at objects that move easily 
when blown, such as cotton balls. Using sound, exaggerate the differ-
ence between blowing out and sucking in, and encourage the child to 
suck in and get the cotton ball to adhere to the straw.      
 Styrofoam Hammering 
 Styrofoam blocks provide just the right amount of resistance to hold a golf tee 
upright but respond immediately to any hammer blows, so the beginner only 
has to hammer lightly to see results. 
 G O A L S  
 Playing with others 
 Eye - hand coordination 
 Proprioceptive stimulation 
 Tactile stimulation 
 Increasing strength 
 M A T E R I A L S  
  Styrofoam block, such as from packing material 
 Small hammer or rock 
 Golf tees 
 S E T U P 
 Take a block of Styrofoam and press in the tips of golf tees so that the head of the 
tee and most of its length protrudes. Place the tees two to three inches apart.  

152  Early Intervention Games
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Give a child a small toy wooden hammer, or a tack hammer, or any hammer 
you feel comfortable with him using. Or, if you don ’ t have an appropriate 
hammer, you can use a rock. 
 Show him how to hammer the tee into the block. 
 Show him how he can pull the hammered tees back out of the Styrofoam, 
place them in another unused area of the block, and hammer again. 
 Once the process is learned, have the children take turns or have one 
child hand the tees to the other to pound. Or have the children take turns 
being the one who hammers and the one who pulls the tees out. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  Use screws and a screwdriver. 
     2.   Don ’ t use a hammer, but have children press the tee in with their 
ﬁ ngers.  
  3.  Use ﬂ at - top rooﬁ ng nails instead of golf tees. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   There ’ s nothing like hammering to hammer home the concept of eye - hand 
coordination. To be effective, you have to watch what you are doing!  
   Children get the experience of being part of another ’ s project by hand-
ing them the next tee.     
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   Children who have difficulty sharing and taking turns might need 
to start this game by playing alone until they have had a satisfactory 
amount of turns. Once the novelty wears off, they might be more will-
ing to take turns.  
   Using the variation of pushing the tees in with their hands will work 
better for children who do not yet have the eye - hand coordination to 

 Social Fine Motor Games  153
aim the hammer. If you use this method, place the tee in an already 
made hole so that it slips down more easily.      
 Tile Painting 
 Painting on a tile instead of on paper means you ’ ll never run out of a painting sur-
face. A tissue immediately wipes away the last drawing and makes it ready for the 
next. Also, the smoothness of the tile ’ s surface provides ease in drawing. 
 G O A L S  
 Encouraging creativity 
 Increasing ﬁ ne motor control 
 Awareness of others 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Plain white or lightly colored tiles, any size 
 Colored felt - tip pens or paints 
 Damp paper towel, sponge, or tissue 
 S E T U P 
 Give each person a piece of tile and place a variety of colored markers in the 
center of the table for everyone to choose from. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Let the children draw whatever they want on the tile and have them watch you do 
the same. When the pictures are done, make a point of holding up each person ’ s tile 
so everyone can see the work. Make appropriate praising comments, even if they 
are very simple, such as  “ Reggie ’ s tile has lots of red in it. Red is a fun color. ”  
 Show children how to use a tissue, sponge, or paper towel to wipe off 
the design when ﬁ nished.  

154  Early Intervention Games
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Draw lines and have children copy your designs. For beginners, start 
with horizontal and vertical lines and circles. Work toward crosses, x ’ s, 
squares, and rectangles. 
     2.   Let the child lead and copy whatever marks he makes.  “ I ’ m going to 
make a squiggle like yours. ” Take turns leading and following. 
     3.   Turn simple lines into drawings, such as making a circle and a vertical 
line into a balloon with a string.     
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are experimenting with making art on a new type of surface, 
as well as learning how to erase and redo. 
   They are noticing what others are doing and seeing variations using the 
same materials.  
  Mainly, they are experiencing the joy of creating. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   If you have a child who tends to throw things as a way of showing she 
is ﬁ nished with the project, you may want to use linoleum tiles instead 
of ceramic.  
    For the child who needs things to be organized in order not to get dis-
tracted, use a small tray and put the tile and one or 
two pens on the tray so that his materials 
are all in one place.  
    If your children are more advanced 
and would like to work on perfecting 
the drawing, use the corner of a paper 
towel or cotton swab to wipe away 
any part that they wish to redo.  
    If they do want to save their artwork, make a color pho-
tocopy, or cover the tile with clear cellophane tape or 
clear contact paper. 

 Social Fine Motor Games  155
 Toothpick Treats 
 Here ’ s a game that encourages focusing and ﬁ ne motor development, and you 
get to eat a treat! 
 G O A L S  
 Increasing ﬁ ne motor skills 
 Focusing 
 Eye - hand coordination 
 Visual stimulation 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Toothpicks 
 Raisins 
 S E T U P 
 Each child gets a toothpick. For the child who can work independently, 
place a little pile of raisins in front of him. For the child who needs assis-
tance, have an adult or classmate hand him one raisin at a time.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Demonstrate how to poke the toothpick through the raisins until the tooth-
pick is full. Then the child can eat the raisins. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Make abstract sculptures or models of animals, people, buildings, or 
shapes. 
  2.  Use cereal to place on toothpicks. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   The children are getting a chance to practice coordinating the small 
muscles of their hands and focusing their attention on a task. There is 

156  Early Intervention Games
a clear end to the project (when the toothpick is full) and the reward of 
eating the raisins. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For the child who wants to eat each raisin, encourage him to alternate: 
one raisin for his mouth, one to go on the toothpick. 
   If raisins have too much sugar for a hyperactive child, use lightly cooked 
dried peas instead.  
   For children who crave oral input and need more chewing than raisins 
will provide, have a small dish of pretzels nearby for munching while 
spearing the raisins. 
 What ’ s in the Sock? 
 Identifying objects with their eyes or ﬁ ngers is a practical exercise in being 
aware of what ’ s in one ’ s environment. 
 G O A L S  
 Increasing tactile awareness 
 Environmental awareness 
 Building vocabulary 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 One clean sock 
 Variety of small common household objects, such as a pencil, coins, 
orange, comb, hairbrush, glue bottle, spoon, fork, and carrot 
 S E T U P 
 Place at least three objects in the sock without the children seeing. 

 Social Fine Motor Games  157
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Put the objects inside a sock and have a child reach in and pull one out. Ask 
her to say the name of the object. If nonverbal, ask yes - no questions, such 
as  “ Is this a comb? ”  or questions that require saying a word, such as  “ Is this 
a comb or a spoon? ” 
 If the child is more advanced, name an object that she needs to feel for 
and take out  “ Put your hand inside and ﬁ nd the coin. ” 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Place only one object in the sock and ask your player to identify what 
is in the sock by just feeling the outside of the sock and not looking 
inside. 
  2.  Allow children to gather objects from around the area and place them 
in the sock. Then the adult or another child can be the guesser. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   On one level, children are developing their vocabulary as they learn the 
names of things in their surroundings.  
   When feeling and guessing, the child is focusing on the informa-
tion that her ﬁ ngertips are sending, which her brain is receiving and 
 identifying.  
   When the child is the gatherer of objects, his attention is more open as 
he scans the environment for something that is just the right size and 
texture. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For the child who is echolalic and would just repeat the last word if 
given a choice of two words, only say the name of the object to repeat.  
  For the tactilely defensive child who is reluctant to put her hands into 
the unknown, put the objects in an open box and ask her to give you the 
objects named. 

158  Early Intervention Games
 Yes - No Game 
 Teaching children to say  “ Yes ”  or  “ No ”  or to shake or nod their heads provides 
an important beginning communication skill. Because it is common for children 
with ASD to enjoy sorting objects according to color or size, we use this knowledge 
to teach them by incorporating a sense of humor and doing it purposely wrong! 
 G O A L S  
 Improving communication 
  Developing sense of humor 
 Head control 
 Visual and auditory stimulation 
 M A T E R I A L S  
  Sorting toy, such as a shape box, color sorter, or pole with colored rings  
 S E T U P 
 Place the sorting toy on the table. Place the objects to be sorted next to it.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Pick up one of the objects and purposely put it in the wrong place. Then say, 
 “ No! ”  which is probably what the child is thinking, and put it in the correct 
place, saying,  “ Yes! ”  Each time, combine the words with the physical action 
of shaking your head for  “ No ” and nodding it for  “ Yes. ” 
 Continue with the other objects, each time doing an exaggerated  “ No ”  when 
you put it in the wrong place. If the child is already good at sorting, let her cor-
rect you and put it in the correct place while you say an afﬁ rming,  “ Yes! ”  
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  Use puzzles instead of sorting toys .
     2.   Make some mistakes even more ridiculous, such as putting socks on the 
child ’ s ﬁ ngers. 

 Social Fine Motor Games  159
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   You are teaching the meaning of  “ No ”  and  “ Yes, ”  both the verbal and the 
physical expression. 
   If you do the silly variations, children can experience a fun interchange 
with each other. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
  Very concrete thinkers may just think you ’ re not very smart. Aim for 
being comical so children will learn that you are purposely being silly 
and will see the humor in the game.  


161
   Water Games   
 A
lthough the games in this chapter involve water, most of them can be 
played with just a water table, other water container, or a shallow kid-
die pool. And many of the big pool games can be varied to play on land 
instead. If you want to play in a pool, but don ’ t have a community, school, 
or backyard pool available, you might approach a hotel. Many allow outside 
guests pool privileges for a small fee. 
 Being surrounded by water instead of air provides a very special sen-
sory experience. Water has a distinctive feel on the skin, and the even, 
hydrostatic pressure enveloping the body can be soothing and calming. 
Generally, warm water relaxes the body, while cooler water invigorates and 
activates it. Buoyancy creates a sense of weightless and freer motion while 
moving against the resistance of water proves wonderful sensory input. 
Best of all, water - based activity can be a fun, motivating way to improve 
sensory comfort, sensorimotor skills, and overall physical ﬁ tness.  
 — Lindsey Biel, MA, OTR/L and Nancy Peske,  Raising a 
Sensory Smart Child (p. 47) 
 In the pleasing environment of gently lapping water, it is easier for children 
to respond socially because they are more relaxed. Aquatic therapy also has a 
practical result. Having children be comfortable and capable in the water is a 
smart skill, whether in a large body of water or in a kiddie pool. Kids need to 
be water friendly. 
C H A P T E R  5

162  Early Intervention Games
 When playing around any water, you should always assign one adult to 
each child. If your program doesn ’ t have enough adults on staff, encourage 
parents or interested adults to join the group. Always make sure children have 
adequate safety equipment. Things like inner tubes, rafts, and noodles are fun, 
but they can ’ t take the place of life jackets. And never leave children unsuper-
vised around any type of water. Children can drown in as little as a few inches 
of water. When ﬁ rst getting into the pool, start with a little  “ free time ”  before 
introducing the games. In this way, children get used to the temperature and 
novelty of being in the water. If there are several children and adults in a 
group, it ’ s a good time to meet and greet and have simple interactions.  
 Blow Bubbles and Hum 
 Learning to put one ’ s face in the water can be scary. Blowing bubbles and hum-
ming help distract from the fear. 
 G O A L S  
 Oral control 
 Focusing 
  Tolerating having one ’ s face in the water  
 Sensory discrimination input 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Shallow end of a pool, kiddie pool, or bathtub 
 Life jackets 
 S E T U P 
 Have children and adults sit in the shallow water with their chins in the 
water. 

Water Games  163
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 While your and the child ’ s chins are in the water, exaggerate closing your 
mouth by ﬁ rst opening your mouth and then closing it. When you close 
your mouth, start to hum and slowly lower your mouth into the water while 
continuing to hum. Have the child copy what you are doing. 
 Next, open and close your mouth but, instead of humming, blow on the 
surface of the water and continue blowing as you lower your mouth into 
the water making bubbles. Again have the child copy what you do. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Once children are comfortable with putting their faces under the water, 
have them hum a specific tune while underwater, such as  “ Twinkle, 
Twinkle, Little Star. ” 
     2.   Pretend to be motorboats and blow bubbles underwater while moving 
about. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning to be more accepting of having their faces under-
water, a necessary prerequisite for swimming. 
  They are learning to consciously control the muscles of their lips and 
jaws and noticing the difference between pursing their lips and keeping 
them closed, which are good oral motor skills for speech. They are also 
learning to control respiration and regulate their breathing.     
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For children who are just learning to blow, have them start by blow-
ing the water with a straw. Make a hole near the top of the straw so 
the water doesn ’ t go in their mouths. If they can ’ t do this, they can 
even start by blowing Ping - Pong balls on top of the surface of the 
water.  

164  Early Intervention Games
 Boogie Board Ride 
 Boogie boards are too much fun to just use riding waves. Instead of waves, kids 
can ride in the pool. 
 G O A L S  
 Alertness 
 Vestibular stimulation 
  Accepting a new experience     
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Boogie board 
 Pool 
 Life jackets 
 S E T U P 
 One or two adults hold the boogie board steady so that a child can be placed 
in a sitting position on top. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 When the child is sitting comfortably on the board, give him a ride around 
the pool, encouraging him to keep his balance. Adults can adjust the board 
so that the child does not fall in, or you can allow the child to experience the 
effectiveness of his own physical adjustments.  
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  Have the child kneel or lie down instead of sitting. 
  2.  Two or more children can sit together. 
     3.   One child can hold onto the leash of the board and take another child 
for a ride, with an adult supervising and pointing out what is happen-
ing  “ Look, you are giving Chris a ride! ” 

Water Games  165
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning to maintain their balance on a moving surface. 
If successful at adjusting their balance with the movement, they are 
rewarded with a ride. If not, they get instant feedback and fall in the 
water. Some kids who love jumping into water will especially enjoy this 
part. They are experiencing doing something they probably have never 
done before, and that can be big fun.  
   Children who pull the leash and give another a ride experience being 
responsible for another ’ s fun.     
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   A child who has difﬁ culty with balance or who has gravitational inse-
curity may do better lying on the board with an adult’s arm securely 
holding him across his back, or with a hand on his back. This will 
make him feel safer and more willing to experiment with a moving 
surface.  
 Bury the Body 
 If you happen to be at the beach for your water games, this is always a good 
activity. Getting buried in the sand is not only fun for kids but also can be great 
therapy. 
 G O A L S  
 Body awareness 
 Tactile stimulation 
 Achieving goals 
 Proprioceptive stimulation 
  Enlarging tactile tolerance     

166  Early Intervention Games
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Sandy beach 
 S E T U P 
 The child is sitting on the sand. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Have an adult or adults put increasing amounts of sand on a child ’ s arms 
and legs while explaining what is being done,  “ I ’ m going to cover up your 
foot. Now your leg, ”  and so on. Continue to cover as much of the body as 
the child seems to enjoy. Encourage other children to help. 
 After the child is covered and is ready to end the game, you could play-
fully ask,  “ Where are your feet? I lost your feet! Oh, there they are! ”  Continue 
until the whole body reemerges. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  Use wet sand instead of dry to increase the weight of the sand. 
  2.  Make a hole for the child to sit in to increase the tactile input. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
  Being covered in the sand stimulates the body ’ s tactile system and 
can increase alertness or, depending on the child ’ s sensory system, can 
calm and settle the child, in the way that a heavy blanket can produce 
a calming feeling.  
  The physical feedback from the weight of the sand increases aware-
ness of body parts, especially if the body part is named while being 
covered.  
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
  The adult saying,  “ I lost your foot, ”  may alarm children who are con-
crete thinkers! The reappearance of the foot and the lightness of your 
tone might help him learn about less literal forms of thinking. 

Water Games  167
   Children who have tactile defensiveness and are reluctant or scared to 
allow their body parts to be covered may do better if they are the ones 
covering up someone else, rather than being covered themselves. Or 
start with a small, gentle version of this activity, such as only covering 
the toes or ﬁ ngers, and have a pail of water nearby or sit near the ocean ’ s 
edge so the child can rinse off whenever she wants. This will increase the 
sense of being in control. 
   Do this game each time the child is at the beach. The consistency will 
increase familiarity and this predictability will make this tactile game 
more acceptable and enjoyable. 
 Catch a Fish 
 The novelty of this game makes it easy for children to attend, and the challenge 
is not too hard and not too easy. 
 G O A L S  
 Focused attention 
 Joint attention 
 Imagination 
 Task completion 
 Eye - hand coordination 
  Motor planning     
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Ping - Pong balls (paint eyes on them for added interest) 
 Small bowl or container (such as a large, empty plastic yogurt con-
tainer) 
  Large bowl or bucket or water table  
 Small strainers or ﬁ shing nets 

168  Early Intervention Games
 S E T U P 
 Put the Ping - Pong ball  “ ﬁ shes ”  in a small bowl or container. Put water in the 
larger bowl or bucket. Have players sit in a circle around the bucket either 
independently or on an adult ’ s lap. Give each player a strainer or ﬁ shing net.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Show the children the container of Ping - Pong ball  “ ﬁ shes ”  and then dump 
them into the water saying,  “ Uh - oh, the ﬁ sh got away. Help me catch them 
and put them back in the bowl. ”  Demonstrate how to catch the ﬁ sh with 
a strainer or ﬁ shing net and put it into the bowl. Encourage the children 
to catch ﬁ sh with their strainers and empty them into the bowl. Continue 
doing this until all the ﬁ shes are back in the bowl. 
 Show the children that the bowl is ﬁ lled again. Then pretend the ﬁ sh got 
away again by turning the bowl over ( “ Oh no — they got away again! ” ) and 
asking the group to gather them back up. 
 Sing a song that would go with the game, such as this one to the tune of 
 “ Catch a Falling Star ” : 
 Catch a little ﬁ sh and put it in the bowl and never let it get away 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  Use other things that ﬂ oat, such as packing peanuts, rubber miniature 
dolls, or corks.  
  2.  Use tongs to pick up the ﬁ sh instead of strainers. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children get an opportunity to be involved in a group project of gath-
ering all the ﬁ shes, giving them the feeling of being part of the whole. 
Their ability to imagine is strengthened by adding the pretend element 
of catching the ﬁ sh. When the ﬁ sh are being gathered, point out or look 
for any that aren ’ t caught ( “ Look, there ’ s one! See any more? ” ). This 
enhances their focusing ability and also contributes to the feeling that 
they are helping to accomplish a larger task than just catching one.  

Water Games  169
  Children ’ s eye - hand coordination and 
motor planning skills are also reinforced 
as they try to capture the ball with their 
strainers. Balls move differently in water 
than on land, and the children need to 
anticipate the movement to get the 
strainer in just the right position.     
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   If you have children who are still 
concrete learners and unable to 
play pretend, use materials, such 
as corks, that don ’ t need to be 
 “ caught. ” 
  To enhance communication and 
joint attention for more advanced children, ask them to point out 
to the less advanced children the  “ ﬁ sh ”  that need to be caught ( “ Show 
Leanna where to ﬁ nd a ﬁ sh ” ). 
   For children with dyspraxia (poor motor planning skills), use a 
 hand - over - hand approach or gently guide their elbows to eliminate 
 frustration. 
 Choo - Choo Train 
 Making a choo - choo train is a fun group game anywhere, but it can be espe-
cially fun in the water. 
 G O A L S  
 Awareness of others 
 Shared attention 

170  Early Intervention Games
 Holding on 
 Focusing 
 Pretending 
 Imitation 
 Vestibular, proprioceptive, and auditory stimulation 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Inner tubes 
 Pool 
 Life jackets 
 S E T U P 
 An adult places each child in a tube. The tubes are then lined up, with each 
child holding on to the tube in front of her and the child in the very front 
holding on to an adult. Other adults should be either part of the train or 
supervising the children in the tubes.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 The adult in front acts as the  “ engineer ”  and begins to pull the rest of 
the train quickly through the water. The other adults are on the sides 
of the train helping the children to continually hold on to the tubes in 
front of them as well as helping the  “ engineer ”  move the train through 
the water. 
 Everyone makes trains sounds like  “ chugga chugga, ”  “ choo choo, ” or 
 “ whooo whooo. ” 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   The  “ engineer ”  can make quick turns or sudden stops and starts to 
increase the sensation of movements. 
     2.   The  “ engineer ”  can alternate between fast and slow and stop and go, 
with another adult calling out the commands, such as  “ Go fast ”  or 
 “ Stop! ”  You might also use a visual to emphasize the command (for 
example, a stop sign or green and red colored materials, a bell, and 
so on).  

Water Games  171
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are sharing the awareness of doing something with others. 
Their ability to hold on without being reminded or prompted can indi-
cate the level of their awareness of being part of a group.  
   When they make train sounds, they are engaging in the idea of pretend-
ing as well as imitating others. 
   When the variations are used, the children ’ s awareness of the meaning 
of the words  “ Stop, ”  “ Go, ”  “ Slow, ” and  “ Fast ” 
is increased. The change in movement 
also keeps the children in the present.  
   The sensation of moving through the 
resistance of water provides deep 
pressure, and the sudden changes in 
movement alert the nervous system. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   Children who cannot tolerate this 
level of unpredictable movement 
or closeness may need to stand 
back and watch. The adult can 
describe what the others are doing 
to keep the child involved in the experience. 
   A child who is hypersensitive to touch and wants to avoid bumping into 
the others might prefer riding on the back of an adult when being part 
of the train. 
 Fill the Bucket 
 This is a popular game because the action is easy to understand: ﬁ lling a cup 
with water and then pouring it into the bucket. The added spice is what hap-
pens after the bucket is full. 

172  Early Intervention Games
 G O A L S  
 Following directions 
 Auditory processing 
 Task completion 
 Sequencing 
 Shared attention 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 One large bucket with a small hole on the side, near the bottom of the 
bucket 
 One small paper or plastic cup for each child 
 Water source 
 S E T U P 
 Have children sit in a circle and give each one a cup. The bucket is in the 
middle of the circle. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Demonstrate ﬁ lling the cup with water and pouring it into the bucket and 
encourage everyone to do the same, all at the same time, while a song is 
being sung. 
 (Sung to the tune of  “ Skip to My Lou ” ) 
 Fill your cup and ﬁ ll the bucket 
 Fill your cup and ﬁ ll the bucket, 
 Fill your cup and ﬁ ll the bucket, 
 All the way to the top 
 When the bucket is full, point this out to the children,  “ Look, the bucket 
is full, all the way to the top, ”  or ask one of the children to look and decide 
if the bucket is full. 
 Then, lift the bucket over everyone ’ s head and slowly turn in a circle 
while the water runs out of the hole near the bottom of the bucket. 

Water Games  173
 Encourage the children to put their empty cups under the stream of 
water to reﬁ ll them. 
 Sing an appropriate song about water, such as: 
 It ’ s raining, it ’ s pouring, 
 The old man is snoring 
 He went to bed and bonked his head 
 And didn ’ t get up in the morning. 
 Repeat the game at least three times so children can learn to follow 
directions and anticipate what will happen next. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   If you don ’ t want to make a hole in the bucket, gently pour the water on 
everyone ’ s heads or body parts, including the adults! 
  2.  Toss the water up in the air so that it falls down on everyone. Announce the 
move by saying  “ Waterfall! ” so children anticipate the subsequent action.  
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning to follow the directions in the song. They will need 
to reﬁ ll their cups many times and pour them into the bucket before the 
bucket is full. 
   They are discovering the sequence to the game. First the cup is ﬁ lled and 
emptied into the bucket, and then the bucket is ﬁ lled and emptied.  
   They are experiencing being part of a group project with a common 
goal of ﬁ lling the bucket. 
   In order to reﬁ ll their cups from the stream of water coming out of the 
bucket hole, they need to notice how to place their cups in a strategic 
position. 
   They are learning the words to a simple song and the appropriate time 
to sing. 

174  Early Intervention Games
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
  At ﬁ rst, some children may need hand - over - hand help to ﬁ ll and pour 
their cups.  
   If children lose interest before the bucket is full, use a smaller 
bucket.  
  For some children, the variations 
of pouring water on their heads or 
making a waterfall may be too much 
stimulation. For them, the water can 
be poured on their legs or other body 
parts, or not poured on them at all. 
    To make it very clear when the bucket 
is full, draw a line in a contrasting 
color near the top. When the water 
hits the line, the bucket is full.  
    If the players are more advanced, 
mark a line halfway or three - 
quarters of the way and modify 
the goal to only filling the bucket 
partway.  
 Floating on Your Back 
 Learning to relax is just as important as learning to move. 
 G O A L S  
 Relaxation 
 Tolerating change 
 Trust 
 Vestibular stimulation 

Water Games  175
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Pool 
 Life jackets 
 S E T U P 
 None 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Tell the child she ’ s going to ﬂ oat on her back and relax. Turn the child on 
her back and rest her head on your shoulder so it 
is out of the water. 
 Sing or hum a quiet tune to increase the 
feeling of calmness. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  Place the child on her back on a boogie 
board or inﬂ ated raft.  
  2.  Let the child ﬂ oat on his back inde-
pendently with hips and head held 
aﬂ oat, but ears underwater. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G 
L E A R N E D  
   The child is learning to trust that 
she will be safe with that adult 
and can not only learn to tolerate a new situ-
ation but also ﬁ nd that it is fun. 
  She is also learning a way to relax her body. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   A child who ﬁ nds it alarming to be on his back when held by an adult 
might be more comfortable on a raft. 

176  Early Intervention Games
 Gecko Walking 
 Some animals, including geckos, walk alternating the left and right pairs of 
legs. In this imitation game, you can choose the name of the animal that ﬁ ts 
your area. You can also easily transfer this game to land. 
 G O A L S  
 Imitating an animal 
 Playing pretend 
 Following directions 
 Maneuvering the body through water 
 Alternating movement from one side of the body to the other 
  Strengthening the neck and back muscles  
 Proprioceptive stimulation 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Pool 
 Life jackets 
 S E T U P 
 Have the child stand on all fours in shallow water or on a submerged ledge 
of a pool. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Encourage the child to move forward in the water by alternating his left and 
right sides like a gecko or salamander. 
 Accompany the movement with a song, such as the following, sung to 
the tune of  “ Fr è re Jacques ” : 
 Gecko walking, 
 Gecko walking 
 To the end 

Water Games  177
 To the end 
 You are gecko walking 
 You are gecko walking 
 To the end 
 To the end. 
 Make sure the child keeps her head above water at all times as she is 
moving forward. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Change the animal being imitated to a turtle. The movement would 
then be to advance forward with the arms and pull the legs after. 
     2.   Have the children make believe they are porpoises and roll over in the 
water or jump up for pretend treats. 
     3.   Transfer this skill and use this same idea on land, having children imi-
tate a bear or kangaroo.     
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Movement through the water alerts and organizes the child ’ s body and 
helps him pay attention to the moment. 
   This is an opportunity to expand on the children ’ s awareness of animals 
via movement.  
   Children are also learning how to arrange their bodies so that their heads 
stay up and out of the water while they are moving through the water.     
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
  For children who beneﬁ t from visual cues, have a picture of a gecko or 
lizard to show. Or, if doing variations, show pictures of a turtle crawling 
or a porpoise jumping. Other children might need to feel the desired 
movement by ﬁ rst experiencing it while riding on an adult ’ s back. Have 
the adult lying prone and place the child on his back. The adult moves 
forward, exaggerating the side - to - side movement. 

178  Early Intervention Games
 In and Out and Crash 
 Kids seem to relish crashing into each other. Many adults do too. Think bumper 
cars or football. This game has all the fun and none of the risk. Sensory seeking 
kids especially love to bump! 
 G O A L S  
 Awareness of others 
 Proprioceptive stimulation 
 M A T E R I A L S  
  One child - sized inner tube for each child  
 Pool 
 Life jackets 
 S E T U P 
 Have all the children inside inner tubes and ﬂ oating in a circle with adults 
standing behind them. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 The adults chant these words: 
 In  . . .  and . . .  out . . .  and 
 In . . .  and . . .  out. 
 In . . .  and out . . .  
 And in . . .  and . . .  
 Crash! 
 During the word  “ In, ” adults ﬂ oat the children into the center of the 
circle. On  “ Out, ”  they float them back out to the edge of the circle. On 
the word  “ Crash, ”  they bump the inner tubes into each other.  

Water Games  179
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Vary the gentleness or the roughness of the crash depending on the 
children ’ s reaction. 
  2.  Vary the speed and distance on the in and out portion. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   This sense of connecting to others in a fun but slightly jolting way that 
cannot be ignored is the essence of this game.  
   Children are also experiencing the movements associated with the words 
 “ In ”  and  “ Out ”  and  “ Crash. ”   
  After a few times of playing the game, they are learning to anticipate 
what comes next. 
   They are also increasing their awareness of others by visually seeing them 
come closer, go farther away, and then physically bump into them. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   If one child has difﬁ culty with the crashing aspect, let him still expe-
rience the in and out portion of the game, but hold his tube slightly 
away when others bump. Or encourage the child to say,  “ Stop ”  or put his 
hands up if he has had enough and wants to stop. 
 Into the Hole 
 This game is good for when the attention starts to get scattered and you want 
to bring it back. Place an inner tube for a target next to a child, hand him the 
ball to throw, and gather others up to have the next turn. 
 G O A L S  
 Awareness of others 
 Turn taking 

180  Early Intervention Games
 Shared attention 
 Handling attention 
 Eye - hand coordination 
 Proprioceptive stimulation 
 Modulation 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 One inner tube 
 One ball — use a beach or larger ball if the inner tube is large 
and a small ball, such as a tennis ball, if the inner tube 
is smaller  
 Pool 
 Life jackets 
 S E T U P 
 Have children make a circle in the pool, either being held or beside an 
adult. 
 Have an inner tube ﬂ oating in the center of the circle. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Hand a ball to a child and ask her to toss it into the hole in the center of the 
tube while the rest of the class chants her name: 
 “ Do ra , Do ra , Do ra , Do ra , Do ra , Do ra ”  (the emphasis is on the last 
 syllable)    .
 When the ball is thrown into the tube, everyone cheers,  “ Yea! ”  the ball is 
handed to the next child, and the sequence is repeated using the new child ’ s 
name. 
 If the child misses, say something like  “ Almost got it! ” or  “ Try again ” and 
let the child have another turn until she is successful. If needed, the tube can 
also be brought closer to the child, or the child can be physically helped, to 
increase success. 

Water Games  181
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  Place a ﬂ oating object, such as a sponge, in the middle of the pool and 
have everyone take turns throwing hula hoops or other large rings 
around that object. 
  2.  Place a ﬂ oating toy in the middle of the pool that children try to dunk 
by hitting it with the ball. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
  Children are experiencing having the whole group ’ s attention focused 
on them and having to perform. But as this moment only lasts a few 
seconds, it ’ s easier to tolerate, and from this they can begin to expand 
their ability to handle attention for longer periods. 
   Hearing the sound of one ’ s own name said many times can add to a 
child ’ s sense of being someone who is noticed and valued.  
   Children are also learning that other children have names and having 
the opportunity to say those names. 
   Children are also practicing their ability to coordinate the move-
ment of their hands with the direction from their eyes and practic-
ing modifying the amount of energy needed to put the ball through 
the hole.  
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For children who may need the game to be more challenging, have them 
stand further away from the target. Physically weaker or less coordi-
nated children may need to be moved closer.  
  Some children who may not understand the expectation will need phys-
ical prompting to help with throwing. Using a hand - over - hand tech-
nique encourages muscle memory by giving the child ’ s body input on 
what the correct movement should feel like. 

182  Early Intervention Games
 The Kids in the Water Go 
Splashy Clap 
 Here is a fun way to adapt the song  “ The Wheels on the Bus ”  to water. 
 G O A L S  
 Playing with others 
 Imitating movement 
 Following directions 
 Auditory processing 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Kiddie pool, shallow end of a regular pool, or water table 
 Life jackets (if in a regular pool) 
 S E T U P 
 Have the children sit in a circle in the pool or stand around the water table 
so that they can see each other. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Sing this song as you do the actions described (sung to the tune of  “ The 
Wheels on the Bus ” ): 
 The kids in the water go splashy clap 
 (Clapping hands in a small amount of water so that they splash when 
clapped.) 
 Splashy clap 
 Splashy clap 
 The kids in the water go splashy clap 
 All day long.  

Water Games  183
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Add a variety of movements and ask kids and other adults to come up 
with others. For example, 
 The kids in the water: 
 Go up and down 
 Go in and out 
 Go side to side 
 Splash each other 
 Kick their legs 
 Flap their arms 
 Wiggle their ﬁ ngers 
 Wag their heads 
 Pat the water 
 Swoosh the water, and so on. 
     2.   Use a different song, such as  “ If You ’ re Happy and You Know It ”  and 
make up different original ways to show your joy. 
     3.   Do noises instead of movements.  “ The kids in the water say (cough, 
achoo, la la la, beadle beadle bum, and so forth). ” 
 4.  If you do the  “ in and out ” movement variation, when children go into 
the center of the water, you can arrange for them to bump into each 
other. This will give them some physical feedback that there are others 
there. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning to follow simple instructions. Because the instruc-
tions are given in song, it is easier for some children with ASD to hear 
them.  
   It is also a way to give children the sense of enjoyment that can come 
from following the directions of others. When everyone is doing the 

184  Early Intervention Games
same movements, it can help children feel connected to others and part 
of the group.  
   So much is learned through imitation. Because this game encourages 
watching and copying, it sets the tone for other learning situations.  
  While imitating, children need to ﬁ gure out which muscles are being 
used to accomplish the task presented. What muscles are needed, for 
example, to swoosh the water? On an unconscious level, by watching 
and doing, they are learning to isolate just the right muscle group. 
   When children are making movements underwater, they are expe-
riencing working against the resistance of water, which can be very 
 calming.     
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
  Some children might need to be fully prompted physically to do the 
movements. If the child is sitting on the adult ’ s lap, the adult is in a good 
position to help the child move from side to side or in and out, and to 
prompt the child to kick legs, and so on. 
   After you give an instruction, wait a beat to see if the child is going 
to respond on his own. It might take a few seconds for 
him to process the direction. If there is no response, 
prompt or move the child ’ s body parts accordingly.  
    Some children will be uncomfortable if water gets 
splashed in their eyes. The idea is to make the activ-
ity enjoyable for this child as well as to stretch the 
number of things she can tolerate. At ﬁ rst, have this 
child clap with her hands above the water and just 
experience the splashing of others on her sides. As 
the game gets more familiar, experiment with more 
water in her clapping. 

Water Games  185
 The Little Dutch Boy 
 It ’ s empowering to know that you can make something happen, or not happen, 
just by using your thumb. 
 G O A L S  
 Understanding of cause and effect  
  Working with others  
 Differentiating stop and go  
 Fine motor control 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Plastic water bottle 
 S E T U P 
 Poke a small hole or holes in the lower sides of a plastic water bottle so that 
when the bottle is full, water pours out of the hole. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Fill the bottle with water and show one or two children how the water pours out 
and how you can stop the water from ﬂ owing by putting a thumb over the hole. 
 Encourage the children to take turns stopping the water, or make two 
holes in the bottle so that each child can cover one of the holes with a ﬁ nger. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Practice the concept of  “ stop and go ”  by having the child release the 
hole on a verbal cue. 
  2.  Poke many holes in the bottle and let the water ﬂ ow out. Hold the bottle 
above the child ’ s head or other parts of her body so that she feels the ﬂ ow. 
Sing a song, such as  “ It ’ s Raining, It ’ s Pouring ” to accompany the game.  
     3.   Make several well - placed holes so the child needs to use ﬁ ngers  and 
thumb to stop the water ﬂ ow. 

186  Early Intervention Games
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   By stopping the water ﬂ ow, children are learning that they have the abil-
ity to control an event. 
   If they are doing the game with another, they experience working 
together to accomplish a goal. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   To make the hole and where to place the ﬁ nger more obvious, use per-
manent marker to draw a ring around the hole.  
   Make the hole larger or smaller depending on the size of the child ’ s hand.      
 Little Jumps, Big Jumps 
 Jumping the waves comes naturally to a child at the beach. In this game, we 
just make the height of the jump a purposeful and conscious decision. 
 G O A L S  
 Awareness of environment 
  Differences in energy output  
 Imitation of movement 
 Sharing activity 
 Anticipating action 
 Vestibular, visual, and proprioceptive stimulation 
 M A T E R I A L S  
  Ocean or large lake with little waves  
 Life jackets 
 S E T U P 
 Make sure that there are just little waves, gently lapping the shore.  

Water Games  187
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Standing at the water ’ s edge or in shallow water, encourage the child or 
children to make little jumps over the small waves and bigger jumps over 
the bigger waves. 
 Help them anticipate the size of the jump by encouraging awareness 
of the wave that is coming next,  “ Here comes a big wave, get ready to 
jump high! ”     “ Ahhhh, here is just a little wave, a ripple, let ’ s just jump a 
little bit. ”  
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Have an adult and a child or two children face each other, hold both 
hands, and jump together. 
     2.   Have a line of children and adults face the water, hold hands, and jump 
together. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning to anticipate and motor plan. They are noticing 
the differences in the size of the waves and are consciously using differ-
ent levels of energy depending on the wave ’ s size.  
   They are noticing that they are imitating others and participating 
in a similar goal. When the action includes getting splashed or top-
pling over in the water ’ s foam, they are also experiencing the fun of 
the sea.  
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For children who are fearful at ﬁ rst, pick them up and hold them in 
your arms so they can concentrate on noticing the size of the waves and 
experience the sensation of your jumps.  
   For children who are fearless or lack safety awareness, attach a small, 
soft rope to their life jackets so that they have the freedom to jump inde-
pendently and you have the control over how far out they go! 

188  Early Intervention Games
 London Bridge 
 This is an old game with a new twist. Instead of being made from arms, the 
bridge is made from foam  “ noodles ”  that lower to form the place where they 
 “ lock them up. ”  This activity can also be done on land. 
 G O A L S  
 Turn taking 
 Sequencing 
 Tolerating change 
 Anticipating predictable action 
 Vestibular stimulation 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Two foam  “ noodles ” 
 Pool (optional) 
 Life jackets (if using the pool) 
 S E T U P 
 Have two adults hold either end of the two noodles and form a bridge in the 
shallow end of the pool. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Sing the traditional London Bridge song: 
 London Bridge is falling down 
 Falling down 
 Falling down 
 London Bridge is falling down 
 My fair children (instead of  “ My fair ladies ” ) 
 Take the key and lock them up 

Water Games  189
 Lock them up 
 Lock them up 
 Take the key and lock them up 
 My fair children 
 Children take turns going under the noodle bridge by moving in a cir-
cular pattern. First they go under the bridge, then around the adult holding 
one end, and ﬁ nally back under the bridge. On the verse that starts with 
 “ Take the key, ”  a child is caught between the two noodles and moved back 
and forth until the end of the verse. 
 The song is repeated until everyone has had a chance to get  “ locked up. ”   
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Catch more than one child at a time. Sometimes catch all the children 
at the same time!  
     2.   Lower the noodles so that the children have to at least get their chins wet 
if not their whole heads while going under. Change the words slightly, 
singing: 
 London Bridge is 
 Way way down 
 Way way down 
 Way way down 
 (and so on) 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning to be part of a larger experience with others and 
taking turns.  
   They are experiencing the sequencing of moving in a circular pattern 
and going under the bridge. 
   They are learning to anticipate predictable action by seeing others get-
ting caught and by experiencing it themselves. 

190  Early Intervention Games
  Children are also learning how to tolerate the direct attention of being 
caught and sung to. 
   When caught, the child is held between the two noodles and swung 
from side to side, increasing vestibular awareness. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   Many children will need physical help from an adult to steer them in 
the right direction. As the game becomes increasingly familiar, reduce 
the amount of physical guidance. Start with holding 
the child and taking him under the 
bridge and progress to just giving 
standby assistance. 
    Vary the amount of motion 
provided to the caught child. 
Increase it for children who 
need or want more stimulation. 
Decrease it for those who can ’ t 
tolerate much. 
 Make a Pond 
 This game provides endless excuses to ﬁ ll one ’ s bucket with water as children 
try to make a pond that never ﬁ lls up. 
 G O A L S  
 Imitation of others 
 Group goal 
 Tactile stimulation 
  Proprioceptive and vestibular stimulation  
 Sequencing 

Water Games  191
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Sandy beach 
 Small buckets 
  Life jackets  
 Optional: beach shovels 
 S E T U P 
 Children and adults sit around a central ﬂ at spot in the sand near the water. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Have everyone work together to dig a large hole in the sand using shovels 
or just hands. 
 Once the hole is dug, give the children buckets to ﬁ ll up with ocean or 
lake water to dump into the hole. Give them the image that they are ﬁ lling 
up the hole to make a pond or pool. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Place a bucket in the hole and make the surrounding sand ﬂ ush with 
the top of the bucket. Because water quickly leaks through the sand, the 
ﬁ lled bucket makes a more clear - cut ending to the goal. 
     2.   Have a child sit in the hole and pour the water around and on the child 
in the  “ pond. ” 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   This game encourages working toward a joint goal so that children 
experience being part of a group process. 
   Carrying the water to dump in the hole requires the awareness of 
sequences. First the child must scoop the water from the ocean, then 
walk over to the hole, then dump the water.  
   Carrying the bucket increases muscle strength and alerts the proprio-
ceptive system with heavy work, which can also be calming.  
   Walking on the uneven surfaces of the sand is challenging and increases 
children ’ s sense of balance by stimulating their vestibular systems. 

192  Early Intervention Games
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
  Children who have difficulty with sequencing and staying focused 
will need a lot of physical prompts to follow the directions along with 
the verbal cues,  “ Now we go get the water, ”  “ Now we are scooping up the 
ocean water, ”  and so on. They may need an adult or more experienced 
child to stay with them to keep them on task. 
 Monkey Walking 
  “ Monkey walking ”  helps a child begin to be independent in the water by allow-
ing him to hold on to the pool ’ s rim while moving. 
 G O A L S  
 Synchronized movement with others 
  Motor planning through body awareness  
  Establishing independence in the pool  
 Increasing conﬁ dence and autonomy 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Pool 
 Life jackets 
 S E T U P 
 Have children hold on to the side of the pool with their feet either hanging 
down or on the pool wall. 
 An adult should be beside each child or, if needed, behind the child and 
also holding on to the sides of the pool.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Have children move sideways along the edge of the pool by alternating 
the positioning of the hands and feet. Either go along the entire length of the 
pool this way, or from one designated spot to another. 

Water Games  193
 Chant these words as the children move along: 
 Monkey walking 
 Monkey walk 
 Monkey walking 
 Monkey walk 
 Monkey walking 
 Monkey walk 
 All the way to the end 
 When you get to the end, reverse direction and return to the starting 
point. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   This can be done in shallow water so that children can walk sideways 
against the resistance of water .
  2.  This can be done just using the arms to move sideways and letting the 
feet dangle.  
     3.   Two children or an adult and a child can do this together when one 
person is behind the other. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children feel more in control while in a pool knowing that they have the 
ability to move along the edge.  
   They are learning to coordinate the movements of their arms or their 
legs and arms together to accomplish a goal.  
   Because they are moving in concert with one another, their awareness 
of being part of a group is enhanced. When they reverse directions, they 
need to move together to avoid collisions. 

194  Early Intervention Games
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   Almost all children seem to learn this movement fairly easily because it 
includes the security of holding on to the side of the pool.  
   Some children might have difficulty with the correct movement of 
hands and would beneﬁ t from having an adult behind them. The adult 
places his hands on the child ’ s and moves the child ’ s hands in unison 
with his own. 
 One, Two, Three — Change 
 Getting comfortable with a variety of people is a challenge for many of us, and 
especially for kids with ASD. Here ’ s a lighthearted way to experiment with 
changes. 
 G O A L S  
 Dealing with change 
 Greeting strangers 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 One inner tube per child 
Pool
 Life jackets 
 S E T U P 
 Put each child in an inner tube and have the adults form an open circle in 
the pool with a child in front of them. The water should be shallow enough 
so that the adults can stand. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Adults begin to chant,  “ One, two, three — change ” , and on the word  “ Change, ” 
everyone gently pushes their child ’ s inner tube to their left and to the next 

Water Games  195
person in the circle. The waiting adult encourages the child to paddle toward 
him and greets her by name. Again, the  “ One, two, three — change ”  call is 
said and the children continue on to the next person in the circle until back 
with the person they started with. In this step - by - step way, each child has 
contact with each adult. 
 According to the needs of the group, adjust the pace of the game and 
how quickly the changes are made. Start the game slowly and, as children 
get used to what is happening, slightly speed it up. 
 As the game gets more familiar, add rowdier variations so that the nov-
elty of the added movements enhances the children ’ s alertness. 
 In the beginning, do at least one round with everyone having a chance to 
be with everyone else. Later, continue the game for three or four rounds.  
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Add a new greeting. When the child arrives at the next adult, have them 
exchange a high ﬁ ve or a handshake. 
     2.   Add a twirling movement. When the child arrives at the next adult, his 
inner tube is twirled by rotating it around in a circle or, holding hands, 
adult and child twirl in a circle together.  
     3.   Add lifts. The child is picked up, in the inner tube, and thrown lightly 
in the air, before being placed back in the water. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
  This game addresses the difﬁ culty that some children have with being 
with new people and with making changes. In this game, change hap-
pens quickly but consistently. There is the letting go of the familiar and 
the pleasant sensation of going through water, leading to a brief moment 
of relating to someone new.  
   The continual pleasure of being surrounded by water in a friendly set-
ting makes this usually troublesome adjustment easier to handle. It 
helps children to see that meeting a new person can be a safe and pleas-
ant experience. 

196  Early Intervention Games
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For the child who ﬁ nds change too frightening at this point, have her 
make the changes in the arms of a familiar adult. The adult and the child 
together go from adult to adult. Later, when the other adults become more 
familiar and the game predictable, have the child do it on her own.  
  Or, at ﬁ rst, keep the circle small so that the child who is uncomfortable 
with leaving his familiar adult returns quickly to that person. 
   As the game becomes more familiar and predictable, keep enlarging the 
circle so the children are able to travel longer distances between adults 
before returning to the familiar adult. 
    Purposely make eye contact with the 
children during the greeting part to 
give those for whom eye contact 
may be difficult a chance to try it 
brieﬂ y in an activity in which there 
are no prolonged expectations.  
    Some children who crave vestibu-
lar and proprioceptive input love 
to get thrown rather than floated 
from person to person. These 
are the children who are already 
comfortable with going under the 
water and know how to close their 
mouths to keep the water out.  
    Know which children have potential respiratory problems so that care is 
taken not to get water in their mouths. 
 Parallel Swim 
 Having someone call to children encouragingly can help them learn a new skill, 
in this case, swimming on their own. 

Water Games  197
 G O A L S  
 Following directions 
 Anticipating a goal 
 Motor planning (conscious use of muscles to achieve a goal) 
 Awareness of others 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Pool 
 Inner tube 
 Life jackets 
 S E T U P 
 Have two adults stand a short distance apart in the pool with one adult 
holding the child in an inner tube or life jacket facing the other adult.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Give the instruction,  “ Swim to Jerry, ”  or whatever name identiﬁ es the other 
adult. Give as much or as little help as needed to propel the child in the right 
direction. 
 Add verbal cues, such as  “ Kick your legs ” or  “ Use your arms, ” and give 
some physical prompts, when appropriate. 
 When the child reaches the goal of arriving at the other person, make a 
big deal out of saying,  “ You did it! ” 
 Have the child swim back and forth between the adults for a while.  
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Two children can play this at the same time, each one going to the other 
adult. 
  2.  In subsequent sessions, enlarge the distance between the adults. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
  The child is having the experience of achieving a goal. If the child was 
initially fearful about being in the water independently, the ability to be 
on her own, however brieﬂ y, will increase her sense of autonomy.  

198  Early Intervention Games
   She is learning to coordinate the movements of her upper and lower 
halves to propel herself forward. This ability to move the halves of the 
body separately but in concert is needed for other motor activities, such 
as jumping and running. 
   The social awareness of pleasing others and the pleasure of receiving 
praise is also present. 
   The pressure of moving through the water both alerts and calms 
the child. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
  Some children are fearful of not being held while in the water. Provide 
enough tactile pressure to calm the child so that she feels safe, or make 
the distance between adults very small. With time, decrease touch and 
replace it with encouraging words, such as  “ You ’ re OK, ”  “ You ’ re doing 
it, ” or  “ I ’ m right here. ” 
 Ping - Pong Play 
 Ping - Pong balls are always fun to play with. They are just the right size for 
little hands, they move slowly enough in the water to hit easily, and they move 
erratically enough to add a challenge. 
 G O A L S  
 Focusing 
 Eye - hand coordination 
 Proprioceptive feedback 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Ping - Pong paddle for each child 
 One Ping - Pong ball with a happy face painted on it 

Water Games  199
 Kiddie pool, shallow end of a regular pool, or water table 
 Life jackets 
 S E T U P 
 Have the children and adults sit in a small pool or stand in a circle in shal-
low water.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Give each player a Ping - Pong paddle and have them push the Ping - Pong 
ball in the water from player to player. All the children are encouraged to 
watch the ball and see where it goes. 
 When the ball comes into a child's space, he pushes it away with his paddle.  
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Use hands rather than paddles to bat the balls.  
     2.   Use a larger ball, such as a tennis ball, or an even larger ball, such as a 
beach ball, to make the game even more obvious.     
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Being able to focus on an object without getting distracted is a necessary 
skill for learning, and one that can be difﬁ cult for children. This game 
gives them an opportunity to try and stay aware of what is happening, 
because at any moment they will get the chance to bat at the ball.  
   Because moving a paddle through the resistance of water is  “ heavy 
work, ”  they are getting the feedback from their joints and nerves that 
can help alert and calm them.  
  They are also getting an opportunity to practice eye - hand coordination.     
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   If some kids have trouble understanding the game, start with only two play-
ers so that the idea of the game is understood and each child gets many turns. 
Once the game is familiar, do it with more children in a circle formation.  

200  Early Intervention Games
   Some children may need the adult to help them hit the ball at the right 
moment.  
   Help some children to stay attentive to the action by pointing out who 
hit the ball,  “ Look, Sarah hit the ball to Kyle. ”       
 Ready? Set. Jump! 
 Jumping on cue takes preparation, waiting, anticipating, and then action. But 
kids just know that jumping is fun! 
 G O A L S  
 Responding to verbal cues 
 Timing 
  Overcoming fear  
  Motor planning  
 Tolerating change 
 Proprioceptive, vestibular, and auditory stimulation 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Pool 
 Life jackets 
 S E T U P 
 Have the child stand by the edge of the pool while an adult waits in the 
water in front of him. If the pool has an inside ledge, begin this activity at 
this lower level. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 The adult should hold her arms out to the child and say,  “ Ready  . . .  set . . . 
 jump! ” encouraging the child to jump on the ﬁ nal word. 

Water Games  201
 If the child is reluctant to jump, the adult should initially hold her 
under her armpits and lift her into the air before gently placing her in the 
water. 
 At the next level of competence, the adult should place her hands on the 
child ’ s trunk to guide her when to jump. 
 At the next level, the child should be able to propel herself and the adult 
should catch her and control how deeply she goes into the water. 
 At the ﬁ nal level, the child can jump in herself and go under the water 
before coming up.  
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Two children hold hands and jump together or just jump at the same time.  
 2.  While saying,  “ One, two, three, jump, ” have the children imitate 
 holding up the right amount of ﬁ ngers to show each number before 
jumping.  
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning to overcome the fear of transitions by experiencing 
the sudden changing from one medium to another (air into water). 
   They are learning to listen to cues to jump with the correct timing. 
Timing takes an internal awareness of what their bodies are doing as 
they motorically plan to bend before pushing off at the word  “ Jump. ” 
   They are practicing their ability to trust others as they launch them-
selves into waiting arms or drop into the water, knowing that they will 
come up and be OK.     
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   Some children will step off into the water rather than jumping. Show 
them how to bend their knees ﬁ rst and then push off.  
  Some children get distracted or anxious and run off in another direc-
tion. For those children, use two adults for this activity. Have one adult 
stand behind the child, gently squeezing her shoulders and arms or 

202  Early Intervention Games
 compressing the shoulder joints to help calm her. The adult in the water 
lifts or guides the child into the pool after saying the cue words. 
   Children who are hyporesponsive to movement will need the additional 
exhilarating and alerting sensation of being lifted high in the air before 
being splashed in the water. You ’ re likely to ﬁ nd that they want this game 
repeated many times! 
 Riding the Horse Noodles 
 Riding a  “ noodle ” is like riding a horse, but much easier. 
 G O A L S  
 Playing pretend 
 Awareness of others 
 Balance 
 Muscle isolation 
 Vestibular stimulation 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Two foam  “ noodles ” 
 Pool 
 Life jackets 
 S E T U P 
 Have an adult show the child how to put the noodle between his legs so that he 
is sitting in the middle of the noodle and holding on to the top half with both 
hands. When the child is on the noodle, the adult also gets on the noodle.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 The adult should tell the child that they are pretending the noodles are 
horses and they are going to make them go using your legs. Show her by 

Water Games  203
example or with physical prompts how to paddle her feet so that she moves 
forward in the water. 
 Pretend to be racing each other with appropriate vocals, such as 
 “ Giddyap horsey ” and  “ Yippee! ” 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
  1.  Have several children do it together and have a race. 
 2.  Have two children ride one noodle horse together. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are developing imagination by pretending the noo-
dle is a horse. 
   They are enhancing their sense of balance by sitting upright 
on the noodle horse. 
   They are also learning how to isolate and move their lower 
extremities to accomplish the goal of moving forward in 
the water.  
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For the child who is unable to accomplish this by 
himself due to poor trunk balance or fearfulness, 
place him on the same noodle as the adult, sitting in 
front. Or have a child with more advanced skill ride 
with the child who is less skilled. 
 Ring - Around - a - Rosy 
 Most people know this game. It ’ s a wonderful way for a group of kids to play in 
a circle together. The fun of doing it in the water is the change in the ending. 
Instead of falling down, kids jump into the water. 

204  Early Intervention Games
 G O A L S  
 Timing 
 Listening 
 Shared attention 
 Motor planning (praxia) 
 Vestibular stimulation 
 Auditory stimulation 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Kiddie pool 
 S E T U P 
 Alternate children and adults in a circle around the kiddie pool.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Sing the traditional  “ Ring - Around - a - Rosy ” tune with a slight variation in 
the words, as you walk in a circle around the pool. 
 Ring around a rosy 
 A pocket full of posies 
 Bend your knees 
 And  . . .   
 Jump in! 
 When the phrase  “ Bend your knees ”  is sung, adults model by bending 
their knees as in preparation for a jump. On the words  “ And jump in, ”  the 
adults on either side of a child help her jump into the pool. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Once children have learned the game very well, experiment with having 
the children form their own circle without help from the adults.  
     2.   While going around in the circle, instead of just walking, lift legs as if 
marching. 

Water Games  205
  3.  Try different endings, such as  “ All kick the water, ”  “ All jump up, ” or  “ All 
run into the middle. ”  The variety encourages following directions and 
imitating movements and brings in novelty. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
  Children are learning to match their movements with words. 
   They are learning to anticipate what is coming next.  
   They are learning the words to a song and experiencing singing it with 
others. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
  Some children have difﬁ culty with timing, motor planning, or following 
verbal cues. They might jump too soon or too late. Hold the word  “ And ”  
for a beat or two and then really emphasize the words  “ Jump in!!! ”  to 
help them see the connection. Or use a visual cue, such as throwing a 
ball into the pool on the word  “ Jump ” or waving a red bandanna. 
  Fade the visual cues as they learn to attend to the verbal ones. 
   When introducing the game, start slowly so that children have time to 
notice and imitate the  “ Bend your knees ”  portion. Bending their knees ﬁ rst 
helps children who are new to jumping to get into correct  positioning.      
 Save Your Life 
 It can be fun to pretend your life is in danger and that you are able to save your-
self. It ’ s also good practice to know you could save yourself if you needed to. 
 G O A L S  
 Sense of independence 
 Awareness of safety 
 Pretending 

206  Early Intervention Games
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Pool 
 Life jackets 
 S E T U P 
 An adult places the child in the water a short distance from the edge of the 
pool. This game is for the child who is already comfortable in the water and 
has the cognition to understand the game.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 An adult asks a child,  “ Can you swim to the edge of the pool by yourself? Do 
you want to try now? ”  If the answer is yes for both questions, say,  “ Are you 
ready? When I count to three, I ’ m going to let go and you are going to swim 
by yourself. Ready — one, two, three — save your life! ” 
 When the child reaches the edge, give lots of praise,  “ You did it! You did 
it! ”  Some little ones enjoy being physically rewarded by being tossed up in 
the air and caught, along with the verbal praise. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Over time, keep increasing the distance that the child swims.  
     2.   Have two or more children do the game at the same time. Or have one 
child who would be a role model for the other go ﬁ rst. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
  Children are learning the correct direction to go for safety. If, at another 
time, they ﬁ nd themselves alone, they already will have had practice in 
saving themselves and will be less likely to panic. 
   They are learning that they can be independent in the pool when wear-
ing a life jacket and they are also developing a sense of competence in 
their abilities.  
   They are also getting an opportunity to practice pretending to be in 
danger and overcoming it. 

Water Games  207
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   This activity is for children who have already shown that they have a 
sense of humor and playfulness and not for the child who is more con-
crete in her thinking and would take the game seriously. To develop the 
same skills in these children, do the same activity, but instead of telling 
them to save themselves, just encourage them to  “ Swim to the edge. ” 
 Shark Attack 
 Pretending to be afraid of some kind of monster is always fun. Change the 
name, if you want, to the creature of your choice. 
 G O A L S  
 Joint attention 
 Sequencing 
 Pretending 
  Overcoming fear  
 Vestibular stimulation 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Pool 
 Life jackets 
 Optional: a pretend shark ﬁ n hat (or other kind of hat) to help bridge 
the difference between the concrete and pretend     
 S E T U P 
 One adult should hold a child in the pool. Another pretends to be a shark by 
holding up a ﬂ at palm at his forehead or wearing a shark hat. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Have the shark say to child,  “ I ’ m going to get you. You ’ d better run. ”  
The adult holding the child should pretend to be afraid and start running 

208  Early Intervention Games
in the water carrying the child away from the shark. They keep running, 
looking back at the shark, until the shark catches them and tickles the child 
or pretends to eat them. 
 Next, switch roles so that the adult and child pretend to be the shark and 
the former shark turns and runs away. 
 It ’ s more fun and clearer to the children if the person running away exag-
gerates his fear by throwing his arms in the air and saying,  “ Help! Help! ” 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Keep prolonging the length of the chase and increase the amount of 
time the child is in the present moment. 
     2.   Involve other people in the game. They can be hiding behind someone 
else, asking for help, running away, or helping the   shark.       
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Like an amusement park ride that seems dangerous but really isn ’ t, this 
shark attack gives children an opportunity to overcome fear. It gives 
them a moment to allow unpredictability and loss of control, which 
turns out to be OK and even fun.  
   Being afraid also stimulates awareness of the present moment by 
increasing the adrenaline. Yet the children can feel that excitement and 
still know they are safe in their adult ’ s arms. 
   Because no one runs very fast in the water, it all takes place in a kind of 
slow motion that gives the child a chance to understand what is happen-
ing and the rules of the game: to chase and be chased. 
   Children also are learning the sequence of being the chaser and the one 
who is chased. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   If a child is genuinely afraid, start small so that the children learn quickly 
that getting attacked means getting tickled or hugged or whatever 
action each particular child enjoys. Children who are hyporesponsive 

Water Games  209
to  vestibular input may prefer something more energetic than tickling, 
such as roughhousing. For the child who has tactile hypersensitivities, 
tickling might be replaced with a gentle squeeze.  
   For children who have difﬁ culty with pretending, a photo of a shark 
could be used to help the child understand what he is supposed to be. 
Later, phase out the props of the hat and the photo. 
   If sharks are too scary, use a milder creature like a  “ tickle monster. ”  The 
tickle monster can be in the center of a circle of kids and pretend to go 
after them one by one Kids can take turns being the tickle monster. 
 The Sponge Pass 
 Waiting for one ’ s turn can be hard for anyone, even for adults in a supermarket 
line. In this game, kids ﬁ nd that it ’ s worth waiting for something fun. 
 G O A L S  
 Turn taking 
 Shared attention 
 Understanding of cause and effect  
 Following directions 
 Rhythm practice 
 Modulation 
 Tactile stimulation 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Large sponge 
 Kiddie pool or water table 
 S E T U P 
 Have children sit in a circle in the water or stand around the water table. 
They should have already played a few group games everyone could play at 

210  Early Intervention Games
once, such as Fill the Bucket. And if they have already had a chance to be 
active, they will be better able to handle waiting for a turn. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 First demonstrate the actions to the words below. Chant the words or add 
a tune to the words. For example, this song is sung to the tune of  “ Skip to 
My Lou ” : 
 Dip the sponge and squeeze it hard 
 Dip the sponge and squeeze it hard 
 Dip the sponge and squeeze it hard 
 Pass it to your friend 
 Exaggerate the action so the movement is very obvious to the children. 
Dip the sponge deeply into the water on the word  “ Dip ”  and, when squeez-
ing the sponge on the word  “ Squeeze, ”  make a grunting face as your ﬁ ngers 
wring the sponge. 
 Each child has the whole length of the lyric to play with getting the 
sponge soaking wet and squeezing it before they have to pass it to the next 
person. Children are encouraged to make eye contact when passing and put 
their hands out when receiving. 
 The plan is that children will do the movements to match the words of 
the song, but you may have to slow the words to match the child ’ s move-
ments.  “ Dip the sponge annnnnnnnnnnnnnnnd squeeze it tight. ” 
 While the sponge is making its way around the circle, the adults can 
encourage shared attention by pointing out where the sponge is now.  “ Justin 
has the sponge and soon he will give it to Jimmy and soon it will be your 
turn. ” 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Use different objects on different days to expand the experience. For exam-
ple, use watering cans, squirt guns, turkey basters, or any plastic instrument 

Water Games  211
that can be ﬁ lled with water and emptied. Other kinds of objects that are 
unusual to use, such as rotary mixers and funnels, capture children ’ s atten-
tion and are worth waiting for. Change the words to the song to match the 
action: for example, when using a turkey baster, sing: 
 Fill the tube, then squeeze it out 
 Squeeze it out 
 Squeeze it out 
 Fill the tube, then squeeze it out 
 Pass it to your friend 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning to watch when it is someone else ’ s turn and to 
wait for their own turns. The rhythm of the song lets them know how 
long each turn will take and gives them hope that their turn is coming 
soon. 
   They are getting a chance to explore items and learn how to make them 
work. Objects that are novel to children increase the interest level. 
   They are having the opportunity to hear directions and imitate match-
ing their movements to the words, as well as to grade 
their movements to be the appropri-
ate  intensity. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   It can take a while for some children 
to be agreeable to the  “ Pass it to your 
friend ”  part, and they may need reas-
surance that they will get another turn.  
   If they have a hard time waiting, 
use two similar objects, such as two 
sponges of different colors, and 

212  Early Intervention Games
have them both going around the circle in different directions so kids 
don ’ t have to wait as long for their turns. 
   Children can also play the  “ my turn, your turn ”  game with an adult 
beforehand. In these practice sessions, the adult takes a very short turn 
before giving the item back to the child.        
 The Squirting Game 
 There is something about snowball ﬁ ghts and squirting games that always 
raises the level of excitement. 
 G O A L S  
 Joint attention 
 Experiencing back - and - forth play 
  Understanding of cause and effect  
 Enlarging tactile tolerance 
 Tactile and visual stimulation 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Squirt toys (instead of or in addition to guns you can buy little crea-
tures, such as frogs and ﬁ shes, that squirt) 
 S E T U P 
 Fill the squirt toys with water and put them in a bag or bucket.  
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Bring out a bag of squirt toys and say,  “ Who wants a toy? ”  Children need to 
respond at whatever level they can, from saying,  “ Me, please ”  to making a 
palms - up hand gesture or sound. 
 Begin squirting while saying,  “ I ’ m going to squirt you ”  in a fun voice. 
Start by squirting the children who are most likely to respond. When they 

Water Games  213
squirt back, exaggerate your response by falling over or making a grand 
 “ I ’ m hit ” gesture. It ’ s delightful to see children get the humor of it and laugh 
heartily at an adult ’ s response. 
 Keep the back - and - forth play going for as long as the interest lasts. To 
announce the end of the game, bring out the bag the toys were in and sing 
a familiar  “ Clean Up ” song. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Use a cup instead of a squirt toy and pour water on each other ’ s heads 
or other body parts. 
 2.  When you ’ re in a pool, splash each other. 
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
  Children are learning the give - and - take of playing. They are learning 
how to play pretend and read another ’ s response through their gestures 
and body language. Mostly they are seeing that this kind of give - and -
 take can be silly and satisfying fun.     
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   For the concrete thinker who ﬁ nds this game too threatening or the 
child who ﬁ nds the action overstimulating, have her just watch while 
sitting snugly on your lap as you describe the action.  “ Jimmy is squirt-
ing Jerry, and Jerry is laughing and pretending to fall over. ”   
   If you use the variation of pouring water and the child doesn ’ t like it, try 
pouring water on a part of the body that is less sensitive, such as the legs 
or feet, to help desensitize her reaction. Or encourage her to pour water 
on you or have another adult help her to do that, and you exaggerate 
being surprised,  “ What — you poured water on me! ”   
   If a child does not respond, try to elicit a response by being direct.  “ I ’ m 
going to squirt your arm. Are you ready? Tell me yes or no. Yes? OK. 
One, two, three — squirt! ” 

214  Early Intervention Games
 Tug the Tube 
 If you ’ ve known the fun of playing Tug - of - War with a rope, you ’ ll see why kids 
like Tug the Tube. 
 G O A L S  
 Shared attention 
 Focusing 
 Muscle strengthening 
  Pretend play  
  Proprioceptive stimulation     
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Pool 
 Life jackets 
 Child - sized inner tube 
 S E T U P 
 Adults and children should sit in a circle in very shallow water. Each child 
is sitting beside an adult or on an adult ’ s lap. An inner tube is placed in the 
center of the circle. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 The children are encouraged to hold on to the tube. A hand - over - hand 
method is used, if needed, to encourage children to hold on. 
 Half the group pulls the tube toward themselves while the other half 
pulls the tube in the opposite direction. A playful  “ tug - of - war ” ensues. 
Adults model such words as  “ It ’ s ours! ” and  “ No, it ’ s ours! ” 
 The game continues until one side pulls the inner tube away from the 
others. 
 Grown - ups on the losing side can exaggerate their falling forward. The 
winning team makes triumphant sounds. 

Water Games  215
 V A R I A T I O N S  
    1.   Do the game in deeper water with the adults standing and holding their 
children or with their children in other inner tubes of their own.  
     2.   Make this a back - and - forth game between only two children.     
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Proprioceptive input can have a powerful calming and organizing effect 
on the nervous system. Pulling stimulates the proprioceptive system, 
giving the nervous system more feedback. For children with autism and 
SPD, this feedback alerts the child that there is something going on and 
encourages her to check out what is happening externally, increasing 
her awareness of others. Because the atmosphere is playful, children get 
a chance to practice pretending to be in a mock battle. 
   Children also have the opportunity to develop the sense that they are 
part of a larger team and are working together to accomplish a goal.  
   For the child who has physical weakness or undeveloped musculature, 
this activity of pulling against resistance increases muscle strength.  
   For the hyperactive child who craves more movement, this tugging allows 
this need yet also contains it to a focused area. If playing in deep water, 
children are free to move their legs against the resistance of water, which 
also satisﬁ es their need for more movement, but in an appropriate way.     
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S  
   Modify the aggressiveness of the tugging and the noise level for children with 
low tolerance for sound and movement. Try increasing children ’ s tolerance 
by holding them securely during the game to increase their sense of safety.  
 Wa - Wa - Wa - Water! 
 Sometimes the anticipation of a fun experience is just as exciting as the experi-
ence itself. 

216  Early Intervention Games
 G O A L S  
 Anticipation 
 Imitation 
 Sequencing 
  Working in concert with others  
 Vestibular and proprioceptive stimulation 
 M A T E R I A L S  
 Kiddie pool, shallow end of a regular pool, or water table 
 Life jackets 
 S E T U P 
 Have the children sit in a circle in shallow water or stand around the water 
table so that they can see each other and the leader. 
 D I R E C T I O N S 
 Say the word: 
 “ Wa 
 Wa 
 Wa 
 Wa — ter ” 
 As you say the word, swirl the water around enticingly for the  “ Wa Wa ’ s, ”  
with palms up, and then lift up handfuls of water in the palms of your 
hands and let it trickle out on the ﬁ nal  “ Wa — ter. ” 
 Encourage children to copy the action. 
 V A R I A T I O N S  
     1.   Instead of lifting up water on the last word, pat the water to make it 
splash. How vigorously you pat the water depends on the mood and 
needs of the children. 
     2.   Use a similar anticipatory sound when doing other movements, such as 
 “ K - K - K - Kick! ” 

Water Games  217
 W H A T  I S  B E I N G  L E A R N E D  
   Children are learning to anticipate a fun experience. They are experienc-
ing rhythm and timing by learning how long they make the beginning 
sound before they get to splash the water. They are being part of a group 
doing the same thing, so they are getting to see the fun in togetherness.  
   The predictability of the activity is also satisfying and helps them to 
expand their repertoire of familiar experiences. 
 M O D I F I C A T I O N S 
   It can be fun for children to splash the water or it can be irritating. If a 
child does not like the splashing element, modify the game by using just 
the ﬁ ngers for swirling. Or play a different variation, such as the “K - K - K 
Kick” idea.  
 Some children may need verbal or physical prompts to imitate the 
movements.


 Index of Games 
by Sensory 
System or Skill 
Stimulated   
 Although each game encourages many aspects of development, the games 
below are divided according to the system or skill most stimulated. 
 Proprioceptive  
 A Kid Sandwich 
 Are You My Mummy? 
 Blanket Ride 
 Going Through the Tunnel of Legs 
 Make a Pond 
  Name Game  
 Ping - Pong Play 
 A P P E N D I X  I
219

220  Appendix I
 Rolling Children 
 Sausage Roll 
 Scarf Toss 
 Sink the Boat 
 Styrofoam Hammering 
 Tug - of - War 
 Tug the Tube 
 Visual  
 Bingo Game 
 Bubble Blowing 
 Catch a Fish 
  Cereal Box Puzzles  
 Cereal Necklace 
 Drawing Faces 
 Feather Blowing 
  “I ’ m Here  !”
 Penny Flick 
 Point to the Cup 
 Scarf Toss 
 Secret Message  
 Sink the Boat 
 Stack the Cans 
  Target Games  
 The Little Dutch Boy 
 Toothpick Treats 
 What ’ s in the Sock? 
 Who Is This? 
 Wiggling Snake 
 Yes - No Game 

Appendix I  221
 Vestibular  
 Are You My Mummy? 
 Balloon Baseball 
 Blanket Ride 
 Boat Ride 
 Boogie Board Ride 
 Feather Blowing 
 Gecko Walking  
 Hammock Swing 
 Jump to Colors 
 Leap the Shoes 
 Make a Pond 
 Monkey Walking 
 Obstacle Course 
 Ready? Set. Jump! 
 Riding the Horse Noodles 
 Sausage Roll 
 Tug - of - War 
 We Are Rocking 
 Wiggling Snake 
 Tactile  
 Are You My Mummy? 
 Bury the Body 
 Dump and Fill 

222  Appendix I
 Eyedropper Squirts 
 Lost in Rice  
 Pudding Party 
 Sausage Roll 
 Styrofoam Hammering 
 The Little Dutch Boy 
 Wa - Wa - Wa - Water! 
 What ’ s in the Sock? 
 Auditory  
 Fill the Bucket 
 “I ’ m Here!” 
 Listening Game 
 Little Jumps, Big Jumps 
 Ring - Around - a - Rosy 
 Sound Makers 
 Who ’ s in the Box? 
 Yes - No Game 
 Motoric  
  Into the Hole  
 Balloon Baseball 
 Bingo Game 
 Catch a Fish 
 Cereal Necklace 

Appendix I  223
 Colored Slots 
 Dump and Fill 
 Eyedropper Squirts 
 Jump to Colors 
 Little Jumps, Big Jumps 
 Parallel Swim 
 Penny Flick 
 Ping - Pong Play 
 Races 
 Ready? Set. Jump! 
 Save Your Life 
 Scarf Toss 
 Sink the Boat 
 Stack the Cans 
 Stop and Go 
  Styrofoam Hammering  
 Target Games 
  Throw the Balls into the Box 
 Throwing Through the Tube 
 Toothpick Treats 
 Walk with Rhythm 
 Wiggling Snake 
 Oral Motor and Communication  
 Blow Bubbles and Hum  
 Bubble Blowing 
 Feather Blowing 
 “I ’ m Here! ” 
 Point to the Cup 

224  Appendix I
 RurRurRurRurRUN! 
 Straw Sucking 
 Wa - Wa - Wa - Water 
 Who ’ s in the Box? 
 Yes - No Game 
 Social  
 A Kid Sandwich 
 Blanket Ride 
 Box Ride 
 Bury the Body 
 Choo - Choo Train 
 Colored Slots 
 Dump and Fill 
 In and Out and Crash 
  Name Game  
 One, Two, Three — Change 
 Parallel Swim 
 Penny Flick 
 Ring - Around - a - Rosy 
 Rolling Children 
 Sausage Roll 
 Shark Attack 
  The Squirting Game  
 Stack the Cans 
 The Kids in the Water Go Splashy Clap 
 Tug - of - War 
 Who ’ s in the Box? 

Appendix I  225
 Turn Taking  
 Balloon Baseball 
 Box Ride 
 Colored Slots 
 Dump and Fill 
  London Bridge  
 Ping - Pong Play 
 Smelling Game 
 The Sponge Pass 
 Calming  
 Are You My Mummy? 
 Boat Ride 
 Box Ride 
 Cereal Necklace 
 Feather Blowing 
 Hammock Swing 
 Massaging 
 Pudding Party 
 Sausage Roll 


    Additional Resources 
 Information and Organizations  
  Alert Program (Mary Sue William and Sherry Shellenberger):  
www.alertprogram.com 
 AOTA Special Interest Sensory Integration and Early Intervention: 
 www.aota.org ;  www.aota.org/search.aspx?SearchPhrase=sensory 1 
integration 
 Autism and Asperger ’ s Digest:  www.autismdigest.com/ 
 Autism Network for Dietary Intervention (ANDI):  www.autismndi.com 
 Autism Society of America:  www.autism - society.org/site/PageServer 
 Carol Kranowitz:  www.out - of - sync - child.com/ 
DAN! (Defeat Autism Now):  www.defeatautismnow.com 
 Daniel Hawthorne:  www.tbns.net/danielrh/ 
 Developmental Delay Resources:  www.devdelay.org/ 
 Feingold Diet:  www.feingold.org 
 Greenspan, Stanley DIR * /Floortime: Developmental, Individual differ-
ences and Relationship components:  www.ﬂ oortime.org 
 Integrations Catalog:  www.integrationscatalog.com 
A P P E N D I X  I I
227

Jene Aviram’s Natural Learning Concepts (autism and special needs 
tools): www.nlconcepts.com
 Lucy Jane Miller ’ s Sensory Processing Disorder Foundation:  www.
SPDFoundation.net 
 Picture Exchange Communication (PECS):  www.spectronicsinoz.com 
 Pivotal Response Training:  www.dbpeds.org/articles/detail.
cfm?TextID=229 
 Play Project - Training Program:  www.playproject.org 
Pocket Full of Therapy (pediatric and school - based products): 
www.pfot.com
Right Start (eco - friendly equipment for young children): 
www.rightstart.com 
 Sensory Resources:  www.SensoryResources.com  
  SPD Canada Foundation:  www.spdcanada.org   
 Star Program:  www.starprogram.org/ 
SticKids (software and activities for sensory processing differences) 
www.SticKids.com
 TACA (Talk About Curing Autism):  www.talkaboutcuringautism
.org/index.htm 
 The Gray Center — Carol Gray ’ s Social Stories Web Site:  
www.thegraycenter.com   
 Vision Therapy:  www.vision - therapy.com 
 Zosia Zaks:  www.autismability.com 
 Therapy and Play Ideas  
Abilitation Integration (therapy equipment): www.abilitation.com
 Barbara Sher ’ s games:  www.gameslady.com 
 Carol Kranowitz ’ s Out - of - Sync Child:  www.out - of - sync - child.com 
 Henry OT Services and Diana Henry:  www.ateachabout.com 
 OT Exchange:  www.otexchange.com 
228  Appendix II

Appendis II  229
 Right Brain Learning:  www.DianneCraft.com 
Therapy Bookshop (Australia; books on autism): 
www.therapybookshop.com
Therapy Products: www.theraproducts.com
Therapy Shoppe (for fun ﬁ ne motor tools and more): 
www.therapyshoppe.com
 Parent Listservs (Parent Support)  
 Ida Zelaya ’ s Sensory Street:  www.sensorystreet.com 
 Parent Forum:  www.parent - forum.com 
 Tips for parents of children with SPD:  www.spdconnection
.com/parenttips.htm 


   The Author  
 Barbara Sher is a mother, grandmother, and an occupational therapist who 
has worked for over thirty - ﬁ ve years with children who have special needs. 
Her unique style is to go into the classrooms and play a fun, active, learning 
game with all the children, including  “ her ”  special child, so that everyone 
can enjoy playing and learning together. She also uses small groups, such as 
 “ Social Club ” and  “ aquatherapy ,” for therapeutic intervention. 
 She has given workshops on playing games and making homemade 
educational toys in many countries, including Cambodia, Honduras, Hong 
Kong, and New Zealand. Her books have been translated into a large variety 
of languages, including Chinese, Swedish, Hebrew, Arabic, and Estonian. 
Her games reach across cultures and touch the spirit of all children. 
 She spends the school year working in the Northern Mariana Islands 
and the summers in Northern California, near her daughters and grand-
children. 
 She is the author of  Attention Games: 101 Fun Easy Games That 
Help Kids Learn to Focus (Wiley);  Smart Play: 101 Fun Easy Games 
That Enhance Intelligence (Wiley);  Self - Esteem Games: 300 Fun Activities 
That Make Children Feel Good About Themselves (Wiley);  Spirit Games: 300 
Fun Activities That Bring Children Comfort and Joy (Wiley);  Extraordinary 
Play with Ordinary Things: Motor Games with Everyday Stuff  (Bright Baby 
Books);  Playful Moments: Spontaneous Games to Play with Your Young 
(Bright Baby Books); and  Homegrown Babies: Gentle Ways of Enriching 
Babies Development (Bright Baby Books). 
For more details, see www.gameslady.com
231


   Bibliography  
 Angermeir, Patricia, Joan Krzyzanowski, and Kristina Moiir.  Learning in Motion . Las 
Vegas, NV: Sensory Resources, 1998. 
 Aquilla, Paula, Ellen Yack, and Shirley Sutton, OT.  Building Bridges Through Sensory 
Integration . 2nd ed. Las Vegas, NV: Sensory Resources, 2009. 
 Armstrong, Thomas.  The Myth of the ADD Child . New York: Plume, 1997. 
 Ayres, Jean,  Sensory Integration and the Child . Los Angeles: Western Psychological Service, 
2005.  
 Biel, Linsey, and Nancy Peske.  Raising a Sensory Smart Child . New York: Penguin, 2005. 
 Bos, Bev.  Together We ’ re Better . Roseville, CA: Turn the Page Press, 1990. 
 — — — .  Infants and Mothers: Differences in Development . New York: Dell, 1983.  
 Brazelton, Berry, and J. Sparrow.  Touchpoints 3 – 6 . Minneapolis, MN: Da Capo, 2002.  
  Brown, Stuart, and Christopher Vaughan.  Play . Knoxville, TN: Avery, 2009.  
 Church, Ellen Booth.  50 Fun and Easy Brain - Based Activities for Young Learners . New 
York: Scholastic Press, 2008. 
  Coleman, Mary, and Laura Krueger.  Play and Learn . Roseville, MN: AbleNet, 1999. 
    Dennison, Paul, Ph.D. and Gail E. Dennison.  Brain Gym . Binghamton, NY: Edu -
 Kinesthetics, 1992. 
 Fraiberg, Selma.  The Magic Years . New York: Scribner, 1996. 
  Frick, Sheila, Ron Frick, Patricia Oetter, and Eileen Richter.  Out of the Mouths of Babes . 
Grapevine, TX: Southpaw Enterprises, 1998.  
 Frith, Uta.  Autism: Explaining the Enigma . New York: Blackwell, 1989. 
 Gardner, Howard.  Multiple Intelligences: The Theory in Practice . New York: Basic Books, 
1991.  
 Goldman, Daniel.  Emotional Intelligence . New York: Bantam, 1995. 
 — — — .  Thinking in Pictures . New York: Vintage, 2006.
 Grandin, Temple.  The Way I See It . Arlington, TX: Future Horizon, 2008. 
 Grandin, Temple, and Margaret Scariano.  Emergence: Labeled Autistic . New York: Warner 
Books, 1996. 
 Hartmann, Thom.  Attention Deﬁ cit Disorder: A Different Perception . Lancaster, PA: 
Underwood - Miller, 1993. 
 — — — .  Tool Chest . Glendale, AZ: Henry OT Services, 2005.
233

 Gray, Carol.  The New Social Story Book . Arlington, TX: Future Horizons, 2000.  
 Greenspan, Stanley, and Nancy Thorndike Greenspan . First Feelings . New York: Penguin, 
1989.  
 Greenspan, Stanley, and Nancy Lewis.  The Growth of the Mind . Cambridge, MA: Da 
Capo, 1998.  
 — — — .  Building Healthy Minds . Cambridge, MA: Da Capo, 2000.  
 Greenspan, Stanley, and Jacqueline Salmon.  The Challenging Child . Cambridge, MA: Da 
Capo, 1998.  
 Greenspan, Stanley, and Robin Simons.  The Child with Special Needs . Cambridge, MA: Da 
Capo, 1998.  
 Greenspan, Stanley, and S. Wieder.  Infancy and Early Childhood Mental Health . New York: 
American Psychiatric Association, 2005.  
 — — — .  Engaging Autism . Cambridge, MA: Da Capo Lifelong Book, 2006.  
 Heller, Sharon.  Too Loud, Too Bright, Too Fast . New York: Harper, 2003. 
 Henry, Diana.  Tools for Tots . Glendale, AZ: Henry OT Services, 2006.  
 Hickman, Lois, and Rebecca Hutchins.  Seeing Clearly . Las Vegas, NV: Sensory Resources, 
2002.  
 Hicks, Ester, and Jerry Hicks.  Ask and It Is Given . Carlsbad, CA: Hay House, 1997. 
 Kranowitz, Carol.  The Out - Of - Sync Child Has Fun . New York: Perigee Trade, 2003.  
 Kranowitz, Carol, and Lucy Miller.  The Out - of - Sync Child . New York: Perigee Trade, 1998. 
 Kranowitz, Carol, and Joyce Newman.  The Out - of - Sync Child: Recognizing and Coping 
with Sensory Integration Dysfunction . New York: Perigee Trade, 2009.  
 Levine, Mel.  A Mind at a Time . New York: Simon  & Schuster, 2002. 
 Miller, Lucy, and Doris Fuller.  Sensational Kids: Hope and Help for Children with Sensory 
Processing Disorde r. New York: Perigee, 2007. 
 Montagu, Ashley.  Touching: The Human Signiﬁ cance of the Skin . New York: Free Press, 
1993. 
Montessori, Maria.  The Absorbent Mind . Oxford, UK: Clio Press, 1994.  
 Piaget, Jean.  Origins of Intelligence . New York: Norton, 1963. 
 Sher, Barbara.  Extraordinary Play with Ordinary Things . Whitethorn, CA: Bright Baby 
Books, 1992.  
 — — — .  Self-Esteem Games . New York: Wiley, 1997. 
 — — — .  Spirit Games . New York: Wiley, 2002. 
 — — — .  Smart Play . New York: Wiley, 2004. 
 — — — .  Attention Games . New York: Wiley, 2006. 
 — — — .  Playful Moments . Whitethorn, CA: Bright Baby Books, 2009.  
 — — — .  Homegrown Babies . Whitethorn, CA: Bright Baby Books, 2009.  
234  Bibliography

 Stillman, William.  The Soul of Autism . Franklin Lakes, NJ: New Page Books, 2008. 
 Taylor, Jill.  Stroke of Insight . New York: Plume, 2009. 
 Trott, Maryann Colby, Marci K. Laurel, and Susan L. Windeck.  SenseAbilities: 
Understanding Sensory Integration . San Antonio, TX: Therapy Skill Builders, 1993.  
 Williams, Donna.  Nobody, Nowhere . New York: Avon, 1994. 
 — — — .  “ How Does Your Engine Run? ” in  A Leader ’ s Guide to the Alert Program for Self -
 Regulation . Albuquerque, NM: Therapy Works, 1994. 
Williams, Mary Sue, and Sherry Shellenberger.  Take Five! Staying Alert at Home and 
School . Albuquerque, NM: Therapy Works, 2001. 
Bibliography  235
Download more eBooks here: http://avaxhome.ws/blogs/ChrisRedfield

Early Intervention Games
Children identiﬁ ed with Autism Spectrum or Sensory Processing Disorders are often perceived as needing to 
be “ﬁ xed.”  However, recent research suggests that what we need to do instead is play with them and help them 
ﬁ nd the joy in interacting with others. In Early Intervention Games, expert occupational therapist Barbara Sher 
provides a wide selection of fun and novel games to do at home or in the classroom, including a variety of games 
to play in water. This indispensable resource can help these unique children enhance and increase their social, 
motor, and sensory skills. Each game explains the lessons playfully learned and ways of modifying the games so 
that everyone, regardless of skill level and sensibility, can play along.
Neuroscientists now know that playing is a profound biological process that shapes and enlarges the brain; but 
from the children’s view, it just feels good to have fun. Enjoy the positive interaction with the children in your life 
that you’ll discover in Early Intervention Games.
Praise for Early Intervention Games
“ Early Intervention Games brims with sparkling ideas to help children learn the pleasures of engaging in back 
and forth play. Barbara’s warm advice and cool activities invite us to dive right in!”
—Carol Kranowitz, author of The Out-of-Sync Child
“ Barbara Sher is gifted in her ability to weave therapy into play while deeply respecting the strengths and unique-
ness of each child. In this book, she artfully explains how everyone can support challenged children through 
brilliantly creative yet practical, low-budget games. Her gentle, welcoming ways pull out the best in children as 
she shows us how to playfully play.”
—Mary Sue Williams, co-author of How Does Your Engine Run?® Alert Program® for Self-Regulation 
“ Early Intervention Games takes a unique approach with its emphasis on playful activities. Barbara Sher’s games 
and ideas are simple, fun, and wonderful tools for therapists working with children who have Sensory Processing 
or Autism Spectrum Disorders.”
— Dr. Lucy Jane Miller Ph.D., OTR, executive director, Sensory Processing Disorder Foundation and author of 
Sensational Kids
Barbara Sher, M.A., O.T.R., has more than 30 years experience as a teacher and occupational therapist, specializ-
ing in pediatrics. She conducts workshops for parents, teachers, therapists, and children around the world, and is 
the author of nine books, including Attention Games, Self-Esteem Games, and Extraordinary Play with Ordinary 
Things, which have been translated into eight languages.
U.S. $16.95 | CAN $19.95
www.josseybass.com
EDUCATION

