History Telling 
The Rise and Fall of Psychohistory 
 

For Roger, Kate & Christopher 
 
 

Contents 
 
Acknowledgments 
Index of Main Characters 
List of Illustrations 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Section 1 
The Legend of a Movement’s Childhood 
 
2. Canon Fodder 
 
3. What do you make of Adolf Hitler? 
 
Section 2 
The Psychohistorians 
 
4. Wellfleet 
 
5. The Clio Complex 
 
6. Decline of a Signifier 
 
7. Conclusion 
 
Appendix 
Bibliography 
Index

List of Figures 
 
Fig. 1. Queen Tyi 
Fig. 2. The Growth of Psychoanalytic Literature 
Fig. 3. Bruce Mazlish 
Fig. 4. Robert J. Lifton 
Fig. 5. Napoleon Bisexual Emperor 
 
 

Acknowledgments 
 
First of all, I would like to thank Sonu Shamdasani. Without his support and understanding this 
book could not have been written. He is an inspiring scholar and human being. Second, my 
thanks go to Renée Danziger. Her influence was more indirect; it was no less needed. 
One of the great pleasures of working on this project has been the opportunity to meet 
and discuss psychohistory with some of the main protagonists of this study. Among the 
scholars who granted me conversations and correspondences were Bruce Mazlish, Robert J. 
Lifton, Lynn Hunt, Brett Kahr, George Makari, Eric Olsen, Daniel Pick, Ernst Falzeder, Wim 
van Binsbergen, Fuhito Endo, Max Hernandez, Jorge Kantor, Mac Runyan, Chuck Strozier 
and Paul Elovitz. I cannot thank them enough for their generosity and wisdom, as a significant 
part of this work rests on their thoughts and recollections. 
Roger and Kate Eaton made this project possible. They read through drafts and gave 
me specific suggestions and general wisdom. Christopher Eaton was a great support. I have 
learned a lot from his perseverance in the face of setback. Sarah Marks was amazing. She read 
parts of the manuscript, gave helpful suggestions and for a long time provided a roof over my 
head; I think back very fondly on that time. With Matei Iagher I had many late-night 
conversations about psychoanalysis, psychohistory and other mind-altering phenomena. Annie 
Hardy was always there when I needed her. Our many conversations had a profound influence 
on this work. Merlijn Olnon and Esther Wils gave me the opportunity to support myself while 
working on the project, as did Hans Boot.  
My work has been profoundly shaped by discussions with my family, friends and 
colleagues. I would like to thank, especially – Hella Godee, Camille Verhaak, Sjors de Haan, 
Thomas Lamers, Hannah van Binsbergen, Pieter Wolter, Peter van Munster, Frans van 
Munster, Anna Granzarolo, Jeanne van Munster, Ivo Jansen, Tiers Bakker, Fuensanta Mendez-
LeComte, Charis Kontou, Lewis Kerfane Brown, Gaia Domenici, Andreas Sommer, Martin 
Liebscher, Dee McQuillan, Josh Torabi and Alex Woodcock. My great friend Daniel Kantor 
kindly invited me to come to speak about psychohistory in Lima, Peru. Jos van Mosel listened 
patiently to my thoughts about psychohistory. Helmer Stoel is the best possible friend and 
sparring partner, kind and clever. His wit and wisdom resonate in all of my work. Simon Haslett 
and Sam Burchell welcomed me into their home, I am very grateful for that. And I am forever 
in debt to Maya Burchell-Haslett – my love, my partner. 
 
AE 
 

Index of Main Characters 
 
Chapter Two: 
 
William M. Runyan (1947 –) Professor in the School of Social Welfare and research 
psychologist at the institute of Personality and Social Research of the University of California, 
Berkeley: ‘Psychohistory isn’t dead. It just needs reimagining.’ 
 
John E. Mack (1929 – 2004) Professor at Harvard Medical School: ‘[I am interested in] what 
general applicability this intersystemic model [psychohistory] has to psychoanalysis as a 
general psychology, including work with individual patients.’ 
 
Frank E. Manuel (1910 – 2003) Professor of History at New York University and Brandeis: 
‘[Psychology and history] have become mammoth academic enterprises, whose cohabitation, 
some might say, is doomed to sterility from the outset, like the improbable mating of a whale 
and an elephant.’ 
 
Chapter Three: 
 
Erik H. Erikson (1902 – 1994) Developmental psychologist and psychoanalyst: ‘We may 
have to risk that bit of impurity which is inherent in the hyphen of the psycho-historical as well 
as of all other hyphenated approaches. They are the compost heap of today’s interdisciplinary 
efforts, which may help to fertilize new fields, and to produce future flowers of new 
methodological clarity.’ 
 
Walter C. Langer (1899 – 1981) Psychoanalyst and author of The Mind of Adolf Hitler: ‘I like 
to believe that if such a study of Hitler had been made years earlier, under less tension, and 
with more opportunity to gather first-hand information, there might not have been a Munich; a 
similar study of Stalin might have produced a different Yalta; one of Castro might have 
prevented the Cuban situation; and one of President Diem might have avoided our deep 
involvement in Vietnam.’ 
 
William L. Langer (1886 – 1959) Chairman of the History Department at Harvard University 
and President of the American Historical Association: ‘We may, for all we know, be on the 
threshold of a new era when the historian will have to think in even larger, perhaps even in 
cosmic, terms.’ 
 
Chapter Four: 
 
Bruce Mazlish (1923 –) Professor in the Department of History at Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology: ‘Psychohistory is not merely the application of psychoanalysis to history but a 
true fusion of the two, creating a new vision.’  
 
Robert J. Lifton (1926 –) Psychiatrist. Founder of the Wellfleet Psychohistory Group: ‘The 
Faustian intellectual temptation is to dismiss the paradox and make things simple. We do better, 
I am certain, to embrace the paradox. For it can be energizing.’ 
 
Chapter Five: 
 

Lloyd deMause (1931 –) Founder of the History of Childhood Quarterly, the Institute for 
Psychohistory and the International Psychohistorical Association: ‘Sooner or later [it will be] 
necessary for psychohistory to split off from history and form its own department within the 
academy.’ 
 
Peter Loewenberg (1933 –) Professor Emeritus of History at UCLA and psychoanalyst: ‘The 
tool of cognition is the self – the emotional insight and sensibility of the researcher.’ 
 
Charles B. Strozier (1944 –) Professor of History and founding Director of the Center on 
Terrorism, John Jay College, City University of New York, Former Editor of The 
Psychohistory Review: ‘We were young, low-key and under the radar, this worked in our 
advantage at the time. We had absolutely nothing to lose.’ 
 
Chapter Six: 
 
Peter Gay (1923 – 2015) Professor of History at Yale University: ‘There is little point in 
launching a critique of psychohistorical writings since the mid-1950s; they add up to very 
varied performances and are, in sum, by no means wholly depressing. To advert, even 
glancingly, to the fiascos of psychohistory is not to yield the ground but to clear it.’ 
 
David Stannard (1941 –) Professor of American Studies at University of Hawaii. Critic of 
psychohistory: ‘The quality of this work ranges from the elegant and sensitive writings of Erik 
H. Erikson, to the tawdry and crackpot disquisitions of too many to name without fear of 
overlooking others equally deserving of mention.’ 
 
Dominick LaCapra (1939 –) Professor of Humanistic Studies at Cornell University: ‘The 
typical procedure of psychohistorians has been to make more or less selective use of 
psychoanalytic concepts as they proceed to put individuals or groups from the past “on the 
couch”.’ 
 
 

Fools, visionaries, sufferers from delusions, neurotics and lunatics have played great roles at 
all times in the history of mankind and not merely when the accident of birth had bequeathed 
them sovereignty. Sigmund Freud 
 
In short, we have an already shattered Humpty Dumpty who cannot be put back together again 
by any number of hyphenated or compound words: psycho-physical, psycho-somatic, psycho-
biological, psycho-pathological, psycho-social, etc., etc. R. D. Laing 
 
 

Chapter 1 
Introduction 
 
After we finished our interview, 89-year old psychohistorian Bruce Mazlish stood up from his 
living-room sofa and said: ‘There’s never been a history of psychohistory written.’ The 
Professor Emeritus of Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) gave me a fatherly pat on 
the shoulder and added: ‘But now you’re here.’1  
I felt those words were designed – perhaps not consciously – to make an impression on 
a young historian. At times they served as a motivation to remain focused on the work ahead; 
at others they felt like a crippling burden. This book will argue that a wide array of ideas and 
projects became attached to the signifier ‘psychohistory’ over the course of time. Yet one idea 
runs through the history of psychohistory consistently: the idea that a researcher’s subjective 
responses to his or her object of study, responses conceived of by the Freudian psychohistorians 
as remnants of childhood experience, may have a significant impact on the process of writing 
history – the transference towards one’s object of study. The variety of responses that 
Mazlish’s remark sparked in me during the process of writing this book served me as a clear 
illustration of this idea. 
This is not a psychohistory of psychohistory. The aim of this work is to trace the history 
of the signifier ‘psychohistory’ by critically examining the various projects that have become 
associated with the term over time. Historians and psychoanalysts associated with the 
movement have often generally defined psychohistory as the application of psychoanalytic 
thought to historiography. For example in The Houses of History (1999), one of a small number 
of university textbooks on historiography to devote an entire chapter to the field, the authors 
define psychohistory as ‘the use of psychoanalysis to aid our understanding of historical 
personalities, groups or trends.’2 Similarly, in Routledge’s The Freud Encyclopedia (2002), 
psychohistory is defined as ‘the application of psychoanalysis to the study of history.’3 But as 
we shall see, a wide variety of ideas developed about what psychohistory was, or should 
become – including the idea that there could or should be such a thing even as non-
psychoanalytic psychohistory. In fact, the cross-fertilisation of psychoanalytic and 
historiographical narratives produced a wide variety of texts and projects that cannot simply 
be categorised as either history or applied psychoanalysis. We will see that, roughly, three main 
‘strands’ of psychohistory emerged: projects are best described as psychoanalytic biographies, 
or ‘psychobiographies’; studies that focus on the interaction between leaders and their 
followers; and projects that look at the history of child-rearing practices, and how their 
changing nature shaped the subjectivity of successive generations. This study has been written 
in the firm belief that psychohistory should be examined on its own terms.  
From this perspective, I will argue that psychohistory emerged primarily as a subgenre 
of psychoanalytic literature, constructed out of the union between two disciplines – 
psychoanalysis and (academic) historiography – with their own presuppositions, narrative 
strategies and particular histories, in the United States in the wake of World War II. It is the 
story of how two discourses collided and in the hands of different authors produced a variety 
of projects. Although I have refrained as much as possible from applying pre-existing 
categories and concepts to the study, I have found psychohistorian Charles ‘Chuck’ Strozier’s 
understanding of psychohistory as an ‘interdiscipline’ particularly useful, as it implies that the 
 
1 Personal communication with Mazlish, January 15, 2014. 
2 Green, Anna, and Kathleen Troup. The Houses of History: A Critical Reader in Twentieth-century History and 
Theory. New York: New York University Press, 1999. 59. 
3 Erwin, Edward. The Freud Encyclopedia: Theory, Therapy, and Culture. New York: Routledge, 2002. 456. 

field was functionally dependent on its two ‘parent’ disciplines.4 Although I will judge 
psychohistory on its own terms, the reader will find that it never fully emancipated itself from 
its parent disciplines, despite sustained efforts to do so by its practitioners. What I aim to show 
in this book is the construction of the ‘interdiscipline’ psychohistory. 
In light of this, I would like to think about the history of psychohistory as a history of 
debates over the content of a signifier. A concomitant focus on breadth of coverage necessarily 
means that I have been less able to offer rounded treatments of the biographies of individuals. 
At any rate, and in contrast to the work of the psychohistorians themselves, the origins of 
particular modes of thought are not sought in the biographies of main characters. I have tried 
to show how and why intellectual positions varied among psychohistorians; why and how they 
were born out of particular intellectual communities and backgrounds; and how they changed 
shape in the hands of different authors. A guiding metaphor was the children’s game of 
‘Chinese whispers’, also known as ‘Russian scandal’, in which a group of people whispers a 
word to each other in a circle and, when everyone has passed the word on at least once, one of 
them reveals how the word has changed as it was transmitted from person to person. As in the 
game, I was interested primarily in the points where communication between individuals 
breaks down – the lapses, miscommunications and misconstruings, both deliberate and 
coincidental, that led ideas, texts and relationships to change. Among other things, this 
approach helped me to explain why psychohistory was a failure in the eyes of many of its early 
practitioners.  
As historian Lynn Hunt described in an unpublished essay: ‘Despite the cultural 
prestige of Sigmund Freud, psychological history or psychohistory failed to establish a 
comparable disciplinary beachhead.’5 Although many of the concepts that were developed and 
propagated by the psychohistorians are still succesfully used inside and outside of academia, 
the history of psychohistory is the story of the failure of an intellectual movement.  
 
Terminology 
 
As Mazlish pointed out, psychohistory has seen very little sustained scrutiny outside of the 
movement itself.6 Attempts to describe the history of psychohistory have always been carried 
out with strong ideological agendas in the background – it has been propagated, vilified, 
resurrected, but never given a chance to speak for itself and as a movement. By focusing on the 
word, or signifier, ‘psychohistory’ and the various projects that became attached to that word 
over time, what seemed initially to be a trench war of incommensurable positions held by a 
myriad of scholars (psychoanalysts, historians, academic psychologists, political scientists) 
gradually became an understandable, coherent phenomenon with a history of its own. The 
edited volume, Psychology and History: Interdisciplinary Explorations (2014), by Cristian 
Tileagă and Jovan Byford, is a valuable reference for contemporary thought on the intersections 
between psychology and history – it contains a useful chapter by psychohistorian Paul Elovitz 
on the history of the psychohistorical movement. Petteri Pietikainen and Juhani Ihanus’ article 
‘On the origins of psychoanalytic psychohistory’ (2003), based in part on interviews with 
Bruce Mazlish and Robert J. Lifton, formed a starting point for this research. 
In reviewing the literature on psychohistory, one thing that jumps out immediately is 
the confusion about what exactly constitutes psychohistory, in other words: what makes a work 
psychohistorical and its author a psychohistorian? Jacques Szaluta’s book Psychohistory: 
 
4 See Elovitz, Paul. ‘A Conversation with Charles B Strozier’, Clio’s Psyche, Volume 3, No. 4, November 22, 
1996. 
5 Hunt, Lynn. ‘Psychoanalysis and History’. Presented at the Radcliffe Institute, Harvard University, February 
22, Cambridge, MA.  
6 Personal communication with Mazlish, January 15, 2014. 

Theory and Practice (1999), for instance, provides background information on the lives of 
people that Szaluta, himself a practising psychohistorian, considers psychohistorians – such as 
Sigmund Freud, Erik Erikson and Jacques Lacan. There is a case to be made that Erikson was 
a psychohistorian, although he himself at times would have denied it, but Sigmund Freud never 
called himself a psychohistorian, and Jacques Lacan certainly did not. Unfortunately, this trend 
is endemic of the field. The main criterion that we will use to determine if a work was 
psychohistory or not is simply whether the author identified it as such. I will refer to 
psychohistory as designating either the movement – a group of scholars who identified as 
psychohistorians; individual works produced by those scholars; the practice of applying 
psychohistorical knowledge; the signifier ‘psychohistory’; or the field at large – a common 
metaphor, which I use loosely to indicate all of the above. In this, I simply mirror the use of 
the word by the psychohistorians themselves. Although Erikson, who was crucial in the 
construction of the movement, while remaining radically ambivalent towards it, hyphenated 
the word (‘psycho-history’) and was adamant that the hyphen was important to show the 
provisional unity of the two disciplines, most of its users, more interested in the unifying 
potential of the word psychohistory for their movement, were quick to drop the hyphen. I use 
the unhyphenated word throughout this work for clarity and consistency. 
One of the problems the psychohistorians faced in their attempts to anchor a stable 
meaning to the signifier ‘psychohistory’ was defining what type of historical work exactly 
counted as psychohistory and what did not. As we shall see, roughly three ‘strands’ of 
psychohistorical work emerged – so-called psychobiographical studies, carried out with 
psychoanalytic concepts more or less in the forefront; group analyses, usually constructed 
around the theme of the dynamics between leaders and followers; and the history of child-
rearing practices and their influence on successive generations’ subjectivity and behaviour. 
Importantly, in this study I make a distinction between psychohistory and psychobiography. 
This is somewhat artificial, as I will show that a number of practitioners of both disciplines 
considered the two very similar or even identical. At points, their meanings blend into one. 
And although an important part of the various works labelled psychohistory was, essentially, 
psychobiography – and these works will be discussed, it is crucial to make a distinction 
between the two terms. After all, some psychohistory was not psychobiography – that is, dealt 
with more than individuals in history – and some psychobiographers did not consider their 
work psychohistory. I have chosen to follow psychobiographer Alan C. Elms in holding that 
psychohistory and psychobiography are separate projects; he considers them ‘sibling 
disciplines’.7 In contrast to Elms, I would argue that psychobiography, which, in contrast to 
psychohistory, reached the peak of its popularity in the 1980s and as a term is currently used 
more frequently than psychohistory, was a product of the emergence psychohistory. As such, 
psychohistory will be discussed in so far as it was a part of the history of psychohistory, but in 
the knowledge that a full history of psychobiography would require a book onto itself. 
 Generally speaking, and in relation to psychohistory, one might conclude that 
psychobiographies were closer to applied psychoanalysis as it was practiced by psychoanalysts 
before psychohistory. Carroll Smith-Rosenberg, a well-known feminist historian who started 
her career as a psychohistorian and a frequent contributor to psychohistorical journals, wrote: 
‘[Psychobiographies] are conceived within the shadow of the couch and the analytic session. 
Their goal seems less to understand the society in which the individual lived, than to 
demonstrate that historians, through the refracting glass of centuries, can duplicate a diagnostic 
process which contemporary analysts practice with difficulty.’8 There is some truth to this 
 
7 Elms, Alan C. Uncovering Lives: The Uneasy Alliance of Biography and Psychology. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1994. 4. 
8 Smith-Rosenberg, Carol. ‘The New Woman and The Psycho-Historian: A Modest Proposal.’ GUPH 
Newsletter, December, 1975, Volume IV, No. 3. 4. 

statement, however, our history will show that such generalisations do not do justice to the 
complexity of the various uses of both terms.  
In the first chapter, ‘Canon Fodder’, I will argue that psychohistorians appropriated 
non-psychohistorical works into what I call a psychohistorical canon, in order to unify their 
widely varying projects through establishing a common heritage. In the second chapter, ‘What 
do you make of Adolf Hitler?’, I discuss two events that have come to signal the beginning of 
the movement in the telling and re-telling of the story of psychohistory by the psychohistorians 
themselves. Here I use the term ‘legend’ loosely to describe this telling and re-telling of the 
story of psychohistory, and I have found inspiration in the description of the ‘legend of 
psychoanalysis’ by Sonu Shamdasani and Mikkel-Borch Jacobsen in their book The Freud 
Files (2012). The authors use the term legend to denote a hypothetical ‘story’ of psychoanalysis 
(a mix of history, theory and myth) that, through repetition, takes on a certain more or less 
fixed form, and yet remains open (that is, malleable) enough to be welded onto other stories in 
different contexts: such as, for example, the ‘stories’ of phenomenology, Marxism, structural 
linguistics, and, more recently, neuroscience. Particular ‘elements’ of the legend can be 
dropped or included to fit the story it is being included in. We shall see that it was a particular 
‘legend’ of psychoanalysis that was used in the construction of psychohistory as an 
interdiscipline, and that psychohistory itself also became a legend, albeit a less successful one 
than psychoanalysis.  
When it suited their needs, the psychohistorians identified work by scholars who had 
not self-identified as psychohistorians as psychohistory; at other times, they distinguished their 
work from earlier applications of psychological thought to history. For the most part, they were 
uninterested in seeking out the origins of the term psychohistory itself. As a result, many of 
them claimed that Erik Erikson coined the term, which he may have believed himself; 
psychohistorian Robert J. Lifton corrected them and claimed in his edited volume Explorations 
in Psychohistory (1975) that Isaac Asimov was the first to use the term in his series of science 
fiction novels, Foundation (1942).9 In Asimov’s fictional stories, psychohistorians were 
essentially computer analysts who, because of their use of enormous amounts of data, were 
very nearly able to predict the future of their worlds.10 As Lifton has consistently argued that 
real-life psychohistory was more akin to literature than science, it is not hard to see why he 
was wont to believe that the term psychohistory – an imagined science – had its origins in a 
fictional story entitled Foundation. But as psychohistorian Paul H. Elovitz has shown, both 
claims are false. L. Pierce Clark, an American psychiatrist and psychoanalyst, used the term 
psychohistory with and without a hypen, as well as psychobiography, as early as the 1920s to 
denote his applications of psychoanalytic thought to historical figures. It is unknown if Erik 
Erikson, whose early ‘psycho-historical’ work Young Man Luther became a blueprint for good 
psychohistory within the movement, was aware of this work. He might well have been, as he 
was actively engaged with the work of Clark’s contemporary – psychobiographer Preserved 
Smith. As Elovitz has shown, Clark was editor of the journal Archives of Psychoanalysis 
created in 1926, in which he published work by Sigmund Freud, Anna Freud, Georg Groddeck, 
Wilhelm Reich, and his own work, such as: ‘A Psychohistorical Study of Akhnaten, First 
Idealist and Originator of a Monotheistic Religion.’ The journal was discontinued in 1927.11 
But even further back, in his book Psychology, General and Applied (1915), Hugo 
Münsterberg entitled a chapter: ‘The Psychohistorical Sciences’. He wrote: ‘We can apply the 
results of a theoretical science in order to be helped in our practical endeavours, but we can 
 
9 Lifton, Robert J., and Eric Olson. Explorations in Psychohistory; the Wellfleet Papers. New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1975. 17. 
10 Asimov, Isaac. Foundation (1951). London: HarperCollins, 1995.  
11 Elovitz, Paul. ‘Two of the Earliest American Psychobiographers: Preserved Smith and L. Pierce Clark’, in 
Altaalla, Norderstedt, Saksa: Books on Demand, 2014. 

also apply it in order to solve other theoretical problems.’12 And further: ‘No doubt we can also 
in this sense apply psychology, both individual and social, in the service of many other 
theoretical sciences. Wherever we have the products of man’s activity in his prehistoric or 
historic life, in language and religion, in state and legal institutions, in literature and art, in 
customs and folk lore, we can make use of psychology in the study of the given facts.’13 Francis 
Hackett, in his biography of Henry VIII, published in 1929, wrote that: ‘To be then-minded, to 
use imagination and intuition, to suggest life – this is the task of the psychohistorian.’14 The 
book is an imaginative reconstruction of the life of Henry VIII, without reference to any 
psychological theory and without the use of any psychological jargon. The first use of the term 
to denote a form of historiography was apparently used in 1905, in a translation of Karl 
Lamprecht’s What is History? By E.A. Andrews.15 The original German was: psychologischen 
Geschichtschreibung.16 
 
Psychohistory: An American Affair 
 
Although some of its ideas were succesfully transported out of the United States, psychohistory 
as an intellectual movement was a markedly American phenomenon. As T.G. Ashplant 
observed, the application of psychoanalysis in history did not become popular in Great Britain 
until the 1980s, and the term psychohistory was never popular there.17 Besides authors such as 
Cypriot-born psychoanalyst Vamik Volkan and Indian psychoanalyst Sudhir Kakhar, who both 
identified as psychohistorians, psychohistory as a term was not greatly popular with 
practitioners of either psychoanalysis or history, or a combination of the two, outside of the 
United States. We will limit our study to the dominant, American psychohistorical movement.  
Psychohistory emerged in the 1960s and 1970s. One of the structural conditions for the 
emergence of psychohistory was the reimagining of American academia after World War II. 
The great expansion that took place in the United States helped redefine and promote the social 
sciences and led to a new demarcation of traditional boundaries between disciplines. As 
anthropologist Clifford Geertz put it: ‘It was, in any case, social science in full cry; headier and 
more confident than ever before or since.’18 In its traditional form – unaided by the social 
sciences – academic history was increasingly perceived as having lost relevance in the modern 
world. At the same time, historians were encouraged to tread into the limelight of public 
debates and share their knowledge with a wider public, which led to the popularisation of 
history as a semi-literary genre. Over the course of time, psychohistory was often associated 
with other attempts to marry insights from the social sciences with history, such as quantitative 
history; although the psychohistorians had a hard time planting their seed in academia, a 
surprising number of their works in the field became bestsellers. 
The history of psychohistory is intimately bound up with the history of psychoanalysis. 
In 1938, Franz Alexander, a psychoanalyst who emigrated to the United States from Berlin, 
delivered his Presidential Address – entitled ‘Psychoanalysis Comes of Age’ – to the American 
 
12 Münsterberg, Hugo. Psychology, General and Applied. New York: D. Appleton and Co., 1915. 352.  
13 Ibid. 
14 Foreword to: Hackett, Francis. The Personal History of Henry the Eighth. New York: The Modern Library, 
1929. 
15 ‘As the following will show, the affirmation of the second alternative suffices for the establishment of the 
main facts of a psycho-historical science.’ In: Lamprecht, Karl. What is History? Five Lectures on the Modern 
Science of History. London: Macmillan & Company, Ltd., 1905. 152. 
16 Ibid. 
17 Ashplant, T. G. ‘Psychoanalysis in Historical Writing.’ History Workshop Journal. 26, No. 1, 1988. 103. 
18 Geertz, Clifford. After the Fact: Two Countries, Four Decades, One Anthropologist. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1995. 100. 

Psychoanalytic Association.19 In the paper, Alexander proposed that psychoanalysis should 
become a scientific discipline in his adoptive country. Specifically, he meant that American 
psychoanalysis should strengthen its ties with psychiatry, denounce the more speculative 
elements of Freudian theory, and find for itself a new foundation in observation as opposed to 
philosophical speculation and theory-building. His call did not fall on deaf ears. Alexander 
argued for the operationalisation of the natural scientific aspects of psychoanalytic theory and 
practice; this included a monopolisation of the rituals of psychoanalysis by medical 
practitioners. Until the 1980s, those rituals were, as a rule, only performed by psychiatrists in 
the United States.20 Due in part to American psychoanalysis’s near-total coincidence with 
psychiatry at the time, a medical interpretation of the concept of cure was carried over on to 
psychotherapy, whose desired outcome now – generally speaking – became happiness and 
normality. Historian Eli Zaretksy, who started his career as a frequent contributor to 
psychohistorical journals, has observed that psychoanalysis emerged in Europe after World 
War II as a system of thought pitched against an established patriarchal order, while it emerged 
in the United States as a method of ‘cure and self-improvement’.21 As Nathan Hale has shown, 
psychoanalysis was in fact adapted to indigenous psychological currents in the United States.22 
This ‘curative conception’ of the role of psychoanalysis was not limited to an 
application to the patient and his or her ills. In 1950, the president of the American Institute for 
Psychoanalysis (AIP) declared in a speech: ‘Sick people do sick things, and war is a sign of 
sickness.’23 Psychoanalysis, he thought, held the cure. In the following decade, various 
diagnosticians of society and politics emerged in the United States, all of them convinced that 
psychoanalysis might help to remove its moral and political illnesses. As I will suggest, the 
intended scientisation of psychoanalysis and the monopolisation by medical doctors of its 
rituals produced a space for the expression of seemingly more speculative elements contained 
in psychoanalytic theory, such as its cultural applications. Psychohistory became a vessel for 
those more speculative elements of psychoanalytic thought.  
In his well-known paper ‘Concerning Wild Psycho-analysis’ (1910), Freud introduced 
the concept of wild analysis to describe unsanctioned attempts at practicing psychoanalysis, 
characterised at the time by premature interpretations without adequate regard for resistances 
and transference. ‘In the spring of 1910,’ Freud wrote, ‘we founded an international 
psychoanalytic society, in order to be able to disclaim responsibility for the acts of all who do 
not belong to us and who call their medical practice “psychoanalysis”.’24 Besides laying the 
groundwork for the regulation of the practices and thought of psychoanalysis, Freud’s 
institutionalisation of psychoanalysis created an anti-discipline: wild analysis. When one 
understands wild analysis as the unsanctioned application of Freudian ideas and rituals, 
psychohistory becomes a prime example. 
Although some of its proponents were, or went on to become, practicing 
psychoanalysts, psychohistory was generally treated with apprehension by established 
 
19 Makari, George. ‘Mitteleuropa on the Hudson: On the Struggle for American Psychoanalysis after the 
Anschluss’, in: Burnham, John C. After Freud Left: A Century of Psychoanalysis in America. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2012. 119. 
20 For a detailed account of this history, see Hale, Nathan G. The Rise and Crisis of Psychoanalysis in the 
United States: Freud and the Americans, 1917-1985. New York: Oxford University Press, 1995. 
21 Zaretsky, Eli. Quoted in: Samuel, Lawrence R. Shrink: A Cultural History of Psychoanalysis in America. 
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2013. xii. 
22 Hale, Nathan G. The Rise and Crisis of Psychoanalysis in the United States: Freud and the Americans, 1917-
1985. New York: Oxford University Press, 1995. 
23 Samuel, Lawrence R. Shrink: A Cultural History of Psychoanalysis in America. Lincoln: University of 
Nebraska Press, 2013. 73. 
24 Freud, Sigmund. The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud. (1910). 
London: Vintage, 2001. 226. 

psychoanalysts as well as historians. Psychohistory was seen as transgressive by a great number 
of practitioners within both of its parent disciplines. A history of the movement, then, also 
offers a lens onto the presuppositions and reigning taboos of the discourses that it drew from 
at the time. Testament to its impact is the publication of an official report by the American 
Psychiatric Association entitled The Psychiatrist as Psychohistorian: Report of the Task Force 
on Psychohistory of the American Psychiatric Association (1976) in which the potential threats 
of psychohistory – including the threat to United States national security – were elaborately 
discussed.25  Like his American followers, Freud was more concerned with the potential 
damage to the image of psychoanalysis than wild analysis’ lack of effectiveness. ‘For as a 
matter of fact,’ Freud wrote in 1910, ‘such wild analysts do more harm to the subject 
[psychoanalysis] than to the individual patient. It has often been my experience that such an 
awkward procedure, even if it at first caused an aggravation of the symptoms, has nevertheless 
achieved a cure in the end. Not always, but quite often.’26 The forbidding response of American 
psychoanalysts towards psychohistory was partly to blame for many of the psychohistorians’ 
self-conception as ‘rogue’ and ‘pioneering’. Frankfurt School philosopher Herbert Marcuse put 
it as follows at the time: ‘As psychoanalysis has become socially and scientifically respectable, 
it has freed itself from compromising speculations.’27 Psychohistory, we shall see, came to be 
used for a scala of compromising purposes: as a vehicle for cultural and political critique; 
journalism; slander; a philosophical challenge of the underpinnings of academic history-
writing; poetry; and the emancipation of women, children and persons with dark skin. If, as 
psychohistorian Robert J. Lifton once put it, the union of psychoanalysis and history was 
indeed a ‘logical marriage’, psychohistory was undoubtedly its ‘wild child’.28 
 
Contexts and Concepts 
 
As Georg Iggers described in Historiography in the Twentieth Century (1997): ‘The various 
kinds of social-science oriented history spanned the methodological and ideological spectrum 
from quantitative sociological and economic approaches and the structuralism of the Annales-
school to Marxist class analysis. In different ways all these approaches sought to model 
historical research more closely after the natural sciences.’29 Psychohistory, as we shall see, 
was a part of this movement. However, like postmodern history, which according to Iggers 
rejected ‘the distinction between fact and fiction, history and poetry’, psychohistory was also 
sceptical about the neutrality of the historical observer.30 Like authors such as Roland Barthes, 
Paul de Man and Hayden White, psychohistory problematised and opened up for scrutiny the 
relationship between the author and his text. Psychohistory, as we shall see, occupies a space 
in-between the natural-science model of history and postmodern history. All psychohistorical 
projects shared a belief that the historian should not ignore the subjectivity of historical actors. 
With the advent of Freudian thought in the United States after World War II – undoubtedly in 
part the result of a Cold War-need to formulate an alternative intellectual explanation to ‘the 
means of production’ and ‘the division of labour’ – the scientific study of the internal world of 
persons who lived in the past seemed possible and within reach. Gradually an awareness of the 
 
25 See Chapter Three. 
26 Ibid. 
27 Marcuse, Herbert. Eros and Civilization (1955). London: Sphere Books, 1969. 25. 
28 Lifton, Robert J., and Eric Olson. Explorations in Psychohistory; the Wellfleet Papers. New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1975. 13. 
29 Iggers, Georg G. Historiography in the Twentieth Century: From Scientific Objectivity to the Postmodern 
Challenge. Hanover, NH: Wesleyan University Press, Published by University Press of New England, 1997. 3  
30 Ibid. 10. 

historian’s own subjectivity, through the psychoanalytic concepts of transference and 
countertransference, was added into the equation.  
In the third chapter – ‘Wellfleet’ – we will look at the birth of psychohistory as a 
movement. From its inception onwards, the concepts of transference and countertransference 
would be key for the movement. In his historical work on Mahatma Gandhi, which formed the 
basis of discussions at the earliest Wellfleet psychohistory gatherings, Erik Erikson became 
aware of the ‘countertransference’ he experienced in relation to his object of study.31 He then 
developed the concept of ‘disciplined subjectivity’ as a way of harnessing that form of 
transference – using it productively. Psychohistorian Peter Loewenberg revisited the concept 
of transference towards one’s object of study at length in various works.32  
The concepts of transference and countertransference constitute an entire chapter in the 
history of the dissemination of psychoanalysis. Freud first discussed the concept in Studies on 
Hysteria (1895). In the famous Dora Case, Freud saw his own therapeutic failure as a result of 
his neglect of the transference: ‘I did not succeed in mastering the transference in good time 
[…] I was deaf to its first warning […] So I was surprised by the transference.’33 In 1910, Freud 
wrote: ‘We have become sensitive to the ‘counter-transference’ which arises in the doctor as a 
result of the patient’s influence on his unconscious feelings, and we are close to insisting that 
he shall recognize this counter-transference in himself and master it.’34 By the 1950s, 
countertransference was being used as a productive conceptual tool. American psychoanalyst 
Frieda Fromm-Reichman wrote: ‘The psychiatrist who is trained in the observation and inner 
realization of his reaction to patient’s manifestations can frequently utilize these reactions as a 
helpful instrument in understanding otherwise hidden implications in patient’s 
communications. Thus the therapists’ share in the reciprocal transference reactions of doctor 
and patient in the wider sense of the term may furnish an important guide in conducting the 
psychotherapeutic process.’35 By that time, the concept had been considerably broadened. 
Psychoanalyst Wilhelm Reich wondered: ‘Is not all love transference love?’36 And Freud 
himself noted: ‘It must not be supposed […] that transference is created by analysis and does 
not occur apart from it. Transference is merely uncovered and isolated by analysis. It is a 
universal phenomenon of the human mind, it decides the success of all medical influence, and 
in fact dominates the whole of each person’s relations to his human environment.’37 
Loewenberg understood the concept as follows: ‘I subscribe to, and will use here, the modern 
concept of countertransference which is “to designate all of the feelings produced in the analyst 
by the patient”. Whereas countertransference was formerly viewed as an intrusion in the 
analysis to be guarded against and overcome, it is now welcomed, listened to, analyzed, and 
utilized in treatment and research. Today the countertransference is an appropriate part of any 
case report and should become an accepted element in historical writing.’38  
Depending on their interpretations of psychoanalysis, some psychohistorians saw their 
transference towards their object of study as something that needed to be overcome in order to 
 
31 Erikson, Erik H. Gandhi's Truth: On the Origins of Militant Nonviolence. New York: Norton, 1969. 
32 See Chapter Four. 
33 Freud, Sigmund and James Strachey. Fragments of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria (1905). London, 
Vintage, 2001. 1-122. 
34 Freud, Sigmund and James Strachey. The Future prospects for psycho-analytic therapy (1910). London, 
Vintage, 2001. 139-151. 
35 Quoted in Loewenberg, Peter. Fantasy and Reality in History. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995. 12. 
36 Quoted in Corrington, Robert. Wilhelm Reich: Psychoanalyst and Radical Naturalist. New York: Farrar, 
Straus and Giroux. 103. 
37 Freud, Sigmund, and James Strachey. An Autobiographical Study: Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety; the 
Question of Lay Analysis and Other Works ; (1925-1926). London: Vintage, 2001. 41. 
38 Loewenberg, Peter. ‘Historical Method, the Subjectivity of the Researcher, and Psychohistory’, in: The 
Psychohistory Review, Volume 14, No. 1, Fall 1985. 34. 

be able to write with more critical distance. When I asked what Mazlish thought of the concept, 
he answered: ‘It is an interesting concept. But the analysis [of one’s own transference] should 
remain personal. Something one takes into account before one starts on a project, nothing 
more.’39 At their most radical, however, other psychohistorians interpreted historical texts as 
symptoms: dream-like tableaux, with facts and sources serving as manifest content for the 
historian’s unconscious preoccupations. ‘If the criterion for judgment is almost exclusively 
internal,’ as H. Stuart Hughes put it, a fellow-traveller of the psychohistorical movement, ‘if 
an account is to be accepted or rejected primarily for its artistic and philosophical elegance – 
then it is difficult to see where the writing of history differs from the strictly imaginative 
exercises of the human spirit.’40 Many psychohistorians were keenly aware of the subjective 
component in writing history, and history’s poetical dimension. This aligns them theoretically, 
at least in part, with postmodern authors such as Foucault (who were, not incidentally, also in 
dialogue with psychoanalytic thought), who notoriously wrote: ‘I am well aware that I have 
never written anything but fictions. I do not mean to say, however, that truth is therefore absent. 
It seems to me that the possibility exists for fiction to function in truth. One “fictions” history 
on the basis of a political reality that makes it true, one “fictions” a politics not yet in existence 
on the basis of a historical truth.’41 
There is, no doubt, a strong subjective – or ‘fictional’ – element to the writing of history, 
but the main role of the historian, it seems, can never be entirely fictional, as he invariably 
deals with facts and referents in reality that are not his own and that are somehow external to 
his subjectivity. I agree with the psychohistorians that an important part, perhaps the most 
interesting part, of the subjective component of writing history might take place outside of the 
awareness of the author. This has led me to think about the role of the historian less as that of 
a producer of fictions than a creator of montages – someone who creatively assembles traces 
of the past. This is close to Walter Benjamin’s position on the subject, for whom, as Benjamin-
scholar Philippe Simay says in reference to Benjamin’s historical work, ‘montage is the 
construction in which fragments come into connection in order to form a constellation 
intelligible to the present, because no kind of continuity exists between them and it.’42 The 
historian, who acts as a mediator between past and present, creates the continuity. Benjamin 
interestingly problematises this conception when he speaks about his own use of quotations: 
‘Quotations in my work are like wayside robbers who leap out, armed, and relieve the idle 
stroller of his conviction.’43 This self-reflective attitude towards one’s subjective involvement 
in the process of writing seems to me interesting and productive.  
The reader is welcomed to read this work along these lines, and to analyse any patterns 
and repetitions, omissions and foreclosures – but I myself will abstain from interjecting 
personal narrative into the history. Nevertheless, the history of psychohistory is a story rife 
with intrigue, weird lacunae, shattered hopes and thwarted ambition. I have found it impossible 
to remain unaffected by it. Some theories held by psychohistorians stretch the imagination far 
beyond what scientific credibility, let alone common sense, should allow for. As one-time 
psychohistorian Peter Gay put it: ‘The syllabus of errors rehearsing the offenses of 
psychohistory looks devastating and seems irrefutable: crimes against the English language, 
 
39 Personal communication with Mazlish, January 15, 2014. 
40 Mollenhauer, Bernard, and H. Stuart Hughes. ‘History as Art and as Science’. Books Abroad 38, No. 4, 1964. 
18. 
41 Foucault, M. ‘The History of Sexuality’ (an interview), in: Power/Knowledge Selected Interviews and Other 
Writings, 1972-1977. 193. 
42 Simay, Philippe. ‘Tradition as Injuncton’, in: Benjamin, Andrew E. Walter Benjamin and History. London: 
Continuum, 2005. 147. 
43 Quoted in Salzani, Carlo. Constellations of Reading: Walter Benjamin in Figures of Actuality. Oxford: Peter 
Lang, 2009. 317. 

crimes against scientific procedures, crimes against common sense itself.’44 But I came to the 
topic from a background in philosophy and psychoanalytic studies – both fields that demand a 
high tolerance for what psychohistorian Robert J. Lifton has called ‘disciplined thought’ as 
well as ‘far-out speculation’.45 My background in multiple fields helped me to understand the 
problems that psychohistory faced as an ‘interdiscipline’. The reader will not be surprised to 
find that this academically scruffy group of self-proclaimed pioneers grew on me over time. 
Last of all, this history takes the shape of a ‘rise and fall’ narrative, but it is important 
to emphasise that psychohistory is not dead. Psychohistory may have fallen; I see no reason 
why it could not stand back up again. There are undoubtedly methodological tensions in the 
union of psychoanalysis and history that are problematic – they will be discussed in the course 
of this work – but I can think of no reason why those tensions could not be overcome or set to 
work productively. They have been in the past. And in fact, psychohistory’s contradictions are 
currently being used productively by an array of scholars who work under new umbrella-terms 
such as ‘psychoanalytic studies’ and ‘psychosocial studies’. My work, however, is concerned 
with the term psychohistory and its use among a community of scholars who considered 
themselves a movement. There are currently still a handful of people doing work entitled 
psychohistory, but they are a minority and would probably agree that they are fighting a 
Quixotic battle against the tide of academic vogue. 
Much of the material in this work is based on interviews held with protagonists of this 
study. I have tried to give the psychohistorians a voice, to have them jump out – like Benjamin’s 
wayside robbers – and give their interpretations of the history of psychohistory, always, 
however, against a background of critical reflection. In an article in 2003, Bruce Mazlish 
reiterated the need for a history of psychohistory. The field, he held, had been grossly 
misunderstood and misrepresented. A proper history of psychohistory, he felt, should focus on 
‘why and how psychohistory arose and what contributions, along with errors, it has made to 
our understanding of the past. Only in the light of the history of psychohistory can one fully 
judge its aspirations, achievements and shortcomings.’46 It has been my aim to write such a 
study. 
 
 
 
44 Introduction to Strozier, Charles B., and Daniel Offer. The Leader: Psychohistorical Essays. New York: 
Plenum Press, 1985. ix. 
45 Lifton, Robert J., and Eric Olson. Explorations in Psychohistory; the Wellfleet Papers. New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1975. 14 
46 Mazlish, Bruce. ‘The Past and Future of Psychohistory’, in: The Annual of Psychoanalysis, Volume 31, 
Psychoanalysis and History, 2003. 265. 

Section I 
The Legend of a Movement’s Childhood 
 
 

Chapter 2 
Canon Fodder 
Creating a Prehistory for Psychohistory 
 
From psychohistory’s beginning onwards, its practitioners were obsessed with their 
movement’s past. This is perhaps unsurprising, as the theories of psychoanalysis invite and 
reward retrospection. And like Freud, who attempted to canonise psychoanalysis by placing 
himself and his work in a line of thinkers such as Copernicus and Darwin, the psychohistorians 
felt that their movement was in need of a tradition of thought.47 
They did not make it easy for themselves. From psychoanalysis, they borrowed the 
assumption that the past is implied in the present, and that an experience of the present 
inevitably imposes itself on any understanding of the past. As a result, most of them were aware 
of the strong subjective component in writing history. There were contrasting views of what 
history is and does, and practitioners adhered to a variety of schools of psychoanalytic thought. 
On top of this, practitioners of psychohistory were caught between the evolving demands and 
constraints of two parent disciplines in flux. These are all slippery theoretical positions – 
blurring past and present, fact and interpretation, scientific genres. Besides the obvious 
difficulties of explaining to the outside world what psychohistory was, and why it was 
worthwhile, these positions inevitably led to a confusion of tongues among psychohistorians 
themselves. As a result, much of the work done by psychohistorians was aimed at anchoring a 
stable meaning to the term psychohistory. And as the movement consisted principally of 
historians and psychoanalysts, they adopted a strategy that came naturally to them: turning to 
the past. It seems that by constructing a history for psychohistory, they were hoping to find 
unity in the present. In the telling and re-telling of their history, not only did they create a 
narrative of the birth of their field – they also created a heritage, a prehistory.48 Here we will 
examine this heritage critically, well aware that in the process we are writing a prehistory for 
psychohistory of our own. 
This raises the question: how do we know that we are not simply dealing with historians 
and psychoanalysts investigating neutrally the origins of their new movement? The answer, in 
part, lies in the way the psychohistorians presented their findings. In this chapter we shall 
discuss critically three attempts at constructing such prehistories for psychohistory, by John 
Mack (1970), psychoanalyst; Frank Manuel (1971), historian; and William McKinley (‘Mac’) 
Runyan (1988), academic psychologist. As we shall see, the authors assimilated historical and 
psychoanalytic works and authors – who had not identified as psychohistorians or even used 
the term at all – into a psychohistorical canon. Looking back over the long history of the 
interactions between psychological and historical thought, they retroactively labelled the fruits 
of those interactions ‘psychohistory’ or ‘psychohistorical’. They drew titles and characters 
from both parent fields: history and psychoanalysis, and often actively identified authors of 
such prehistorical works as psychohistorians.49 Instead of presenting and analysing the past, 
the psychohistorians were actively intervening in it, moulding it for their cause. 
This instrumental teleology had several purposes. First, and most broadly, it served to 
justify the marriage of psychoanalysis and history. It did so by showing that there had been 
concern for the historical in psychology and the psychological in history long before Erikson 
and Langer and his ‘Next Assignment’. This gave weight and prestige to psychohistory as a 
 
47 For a detailed account of Freud’s attempt to canonize himself and his movement, see Borch-Jacobsen, 
Mikkel, and Sonu Shamdasani. The Freud Files: An Inquiry into the History of Psychoanalysis. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2012. 
48 See Chapter Two. 
49 For example: ‘Freud was the first psychohistorian’, in: Erwin, Edward. The Freud Encyclopedia: Theory, 
Therapy, and Culture. New York: Routledge, 2002. 

project. In such accounts, the movement appeared as a natural outgrowth of earlier attempts to 
integrate the two disciplines. An example of these accounts can be found as early as 1960, in 
Bruce Mazlish’ Psychoanalysis and History (1960). In the introduction to that collection of 
essays, the author claimed Herbert Marcuse and Norman O. Brown as predecessors to his own 
project.50 At times, however, earlier interactions between psychoanalysis and history were 
explicitly framed as failures in order to justify current theoretical positions, or to emphasise the 
novelty of psychohistory in general. This latter position often involved ridiculing the early 
psychoanalytic applications of theory to historical subjects in Freud’s work and that of his first 
followers. In these cases, the message was clear: psychohistory, albeit concerned with the same 
problems as the pioneers of psychoanalysis, is doing things differently.51 
 
John E. Mack: Psychohistory for Psychoanalysts 
 
Psychohistory had to be sold to both historians and psychoanalysts. By 1980, psychiatrist and 
psychoanalyst John E. Mack (who would later become notorious for his clinical work with 
alien abductees) wrote: ‘The fruitful applications of psychoanalytic concepts to biographical 
and historical subjects grow in range and depth, despite disclaimers among the practitioners – 
including myself – that we are not doing anything so crude or simple as ‘psychobiography’ or 
‘psychohistory’.’52 Nine years earlier, however, Mack still unabashedly identified as a 
psychohistorian.  
Mack was involved in the Group for Applied Psychoanalysis (GAP) with historian 
Bruce Mazlish, and published a long article entitled ‘Psychoanalysis and Historical Biography’ 
in the Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association in 1971. In the article, Mack 
discussed the methodological problems inherent in psychoanalytic biography; he looked at the 
biographical study of public figures, and gave a detailed overview of the history of 
psychoanalytic approaches to biography. In psychohistory he found particularly important 
‘what general applicability this intersystemic model has to psychoanalysis as a general 
psychology, including work with individual patients.’53 What had been insufficiently 
developed in psychoanalytic theory was, Mack held, ‘an understanding of the place of the 
individual patient and his associative “material” in a dynamic context or matrix which takes 
into account […] other psychological elements and reality systems which the psychologist-
historian has come to look upon as an essential part of his study.’54 By showing how 
psychohistory emerged out of earlier interactions between psychoanalysis and history, Mack 
hoped to show that psychohistory was able to instruct psychoanalysis on how to include 
sociological, anthropological and historical materials in its clinical work. Mack was writing for 
a psychoanalytic audience.55 
In a message tailored for his readers, Mack showed how the use of anthropological and 
sociological material, as well as the biographical study of ‘great men’, went as far back as 
Freud and the Wednesday Psychological Society’s meetings in Vienna. He wrote: ‘It was in 
these years (1906-1910) that the early interest in psychoanalytic biography, or ‘pathography’, 
as it was frequently referred to at that time, began to take hold.’56 The group used these 
 
50 Mazlish, Bruce. Psychoanalysis and History. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1963. 
51 For other psychohistorical prehistories, see: Africa, 1979; Gedo, 1972; Hoffman, 1982, 1984; Mazlish, 1977; 
Strozier and Offer, 1985. 
52 Mack, John E. ‘Psychoanalysis and Biography: Aspects of a Developing Affinity.’ Journal of the American 
Psychoanalytic Association 28, 1980. 544. 
53 Mack, John E. ‘Psychoanalysis and Historical Biography’. Journal of the American Psychoanalytic 
Association 19, No. 1, 1971. 177. 
54 Ibid. 
55 Ibid. 143 – 177. 
56 Ibid. 145. 

pathographies, Mack argued, for evidence of the expression of the sexual component instincts 
in their normal or pathological forms. At this point, any historical analysis that took place was 
still fully in service of furthering psychoanalytic theory. Mack believed that this changed with 
Freud’s own writings on historical figures. Around this time, the period following World War 
I, the public became receptive, ‘as it had been at various times before the nineteenth century, 
to factual and psychological realism in biography.’57 He pointed out that Lytton Strachey’s 
biographical works had been of seminal importance in stimulating a receptivity for 
psychoanalytic works in the English-speaking world. In Eminent Victorians, and in his 
biography of Queen Victoria, Strachey had exposed (often embarrassing) details of his subjects 
in an uncompromising way. In the years following, ‘Strachey’s delight in exposing the virtuous 
and reducing the mighty stimulated a whole “debunking” school of crude imitators for whom 
Freudian concepts of sexuality and psychopathology, misunderstood and misapplied, furnished 
splendid ammunition.’58 In the 1920s and 30s, Mack held, ‘dozens of “Freudian” studies were 
done of people such as Luther, Jefferson, Hamilton, Poe, Lincoln and Melville, with varying 
degrees of insight and understanding of psychoanalytic concepts’.59 Mack included the 
infamous biography of Woodrow Wilson written by Freud and Bullitt in his list.  
Things were different now, Mack believed. With the development of ego psychology – 
in the decades since Freud published ‘The Ego and the Id’ and ‘Inhibitions, Symptoms and 
Anxiety’ – new, more serious, possibilities in the field of psychoanalytic history had opened 
up. Ego psychology accepted ‘the inevitability of certain phase-specific childhood problems in 
psychosexual development and emphasizes the way in which each individual deals with these 
conflicts.’60 But after ego-psychology’s amendments of psychoanalytic theory, Mack held, it 
also became possible to ‘study the product of the creative individual, not simply as revealing 
childhood drives, experiences, traumata, disappointments, and memories; but as complex 
transformations, efforts of the ego to “renegotiate” the settlements of childhood and to 
surmount these early struggles through work.’61 With the development of ego psychology, 
Mack seemed to say, psychoanalysis had grown up. Like many American psychoanalysts, 
Mack was wary of Freud’s drive theories and favoured a more ‘symbolic’ interpretation of 
Freud, based on the founder’s later works. Psychoanalysis, he thought, was now ready for its 
application to other fields. Erik Erikson’s work held special promise. Trained by Anna Freud 
in ego psychology, Erikson was ‘the first psychoanalytic biographer to integrate the 
multiplicity of variables that determine the relationship between the great man's personality, 
his creative work, and his time.’62 It seems that Mack was arguing that, through the 
developments in ego psychology, an application of psychoanalytic theory to history might now 
be able to transcend biographical work – and become something unto itself: psychohistory.63 
In 1976, Mack was one of the consultant psychiatrists for the American Psychiatric 
Association’s (APA) document ‘The Psychiatrist as Psychohistorian’. Those psychiatrists were 
assigned the role of deciding in the APA’s name what was good psychohistory and what was 
not.64 In 1977, he published his highly successful psychobiography of T.E. Lawrence, for 
which he received a Pulitzer Prize. In the following years, Mack grew more and more critical 
of psychohistory as a discipline. He was killed in 2004 by a drunk driver in London, where he 
was attending a conference sponsored by the T.E. Lawrence Society. 
 
57 Ibid. 148. 
58 Ibid. 
59 Ibid.  
60 Ibid. 150. 
61 Ibid. 
62 Ibid. 
63 The theoretical underpinnings of ego psychology are, for that reason, discussed elaborately in Chapter 2. 
64 Hofling, Charles K. The Psychiatrist as Psychohistorian: Report of the Task Force on Psychohistory of the 
American Psychiatric Association. Washington: APA, 1976. 

 
Great Men – the 1920s 
 
As the discussion of John Mack’s paper shows, both proponents and critics (as well as 
proponents-turned-critics) of psychohistory dismissed early psychoanalytic history as crude 
and amateurish. Louise Hoffman, also a psychohistorian, has argued that such views need 
qualification.65 Hoffman was milder on the earlier practitioners of psychoanalytic history, and 
more critical in her use of the term psychohistory. She avoided retroactively applying the term 
psychohistory to earlier interactions between psychoanalysis and history. She made the case 
that early psychobiographers derived many of their methods from established biographical 
traditions, so that neither their virtues nor their vices could be attributed to psychoanalysis 
alone. Early psychobiographies reflected shifting historiographical emphases, and 
psychoanalytic theory provided biographers and historians with a systematic methodology to 
transcend previous approaches to psychological description. 
Hoffman showed that by the 1920s the psychoanalytic approach to biography had 
become quite common in the United States and in Europe. Not only psychoanalysts were 
writing psychoanalytic biographies – historians, physicians and others were undertaking 
psychoanalytic studies too. Their subjects included political leaders, famous writers, and 
spiritual leaders. Traditional disciplines largely remained resistant to the genre, so that articles 
of this kind were mainly published in psychoanalytic or psychological journals. This changed 
after 1930, when the lives of living leaders came under psychoanalytic scrutiny, and 
psychoanalytic interpretations percolated into mass culture in the United States and in Europe. 
The term psychobiography, denoting psychoanalytic biography in particular, Hoffman found 
was introduced by American psychiatrist L. Pierce Clark, who collaborated closely with 
historians Harry Elmer Barnes and James Harvey Robinson.66 
If we accept Hoffman’s analysis, what Mack referred to as pathography could be more 
accurately described as early applied psychoanalysis. These early explorations of 
psychoanalytic history focused on great men, and their main emphasis was on pathological 
characteristics. This was an extension of previous biographical approaches in the style of 
historian and philosopher Thomas Carlyle, who famously proposed a view of history as 
dominated by heroes, and who attempted an intuitive psychological method to analyse them. 
It was he who wrote: ‘The history of the world, I said already, was the biography of Great 
Men.’67 But another important contributing factor to this early ‘great-men approach’ in 
psychoanalytic history was the growth of scientific psychology. This spawned the genre of 
what is more accurately described by ‘pathography’, and whose practitioners described the 
lives of notable individuals known to have been emotionally disturbed, or described as being 
geniuses. As Hoffman pointed out, the connection between non-Freudian pathographies and 
the early Freudian biographies was made by Franklin Fearing, an American psychologist from 
Ohio, as early as 1927. Fearing described a number of these pre-Freudian studies and then 
discussed psychoanalytic concepts, which biographers at the time found useful:  
 
These studies of the genius – in so far as the ‘great’ personages of history are geniuses 
– seem to point to the conclusion that psychopathy or neurotic tendencies are frequent 
 
65 In her paper: Hoffman, Louise E. ‘Early Psychobiography, 1900-1930: Some Reconsiderations’. Biography 7, 
No. 4, 1984. 341-51. 
66 Ibid. 
67 ‘The Hero as Divinity’ in Carlyle, Thomas. Heroes and Hero-worship (1840). London: Collins, 1900. 

components in the personality make-up of the genius. With psychoanalysis, a new 
school of biographical writing and interpretation is coming into being.68 
 
As Mack noted, applied psychoanalysis and scientific pathography allowed the historian to 
analyse the historical subject’s exaggerated characteristics, or pathology, and therefore 
promised a glimpse on the psychological mechanisms of genius. Undoubtedly this was part of 
their attraction for large audiences. But besides the early great-men approach, which resonated 
for a long time in the history of psychohistory, a number of historians emerged who advocated 
an entirely new kind of psychoanalytically inspired history. In Europe, more specifically in 
France, the Annales school advocated a new form of history that included social scientific 
research.69 In the United States, the historians who first used psychoanalysis systematically 
were the historians who promoted the so-called ‘New History’, such as the earlier mentioned 
James Harvey Robinson and Harry Elmer Barnes. Like the Annales historians, they proposed 
a cross-fertilisation of history and the social sciences, and opposed the perceived 
‘departmentalisation’ of academia. Barnes wrote about his predecessors:  
 
History was in a condition not unlike that in which the physicist, chemist, or biologist 
would find himself if supplied with a vast body of notebooks containing the carefully 
set down records of countless experiments, but without any real attempt to interpret the 
significance of this mass of material or to derive from it great scientific laws of general 
applicability.70 
 
To be able to interpret this data correctly, more scientifically, Barnes believed history needed 
assistance from social science, including the relatively new field of psychoanalysis. In a 1921 
article, he discussed how: 
 
Vital biography must deal with those intimate features of private life which reveal the 
deeper complexes in the personality, and cannot content itself with a superficial 
presentation of certain objective achievements nor accept as valid expressions of 
doctrine which may be only elaborate forms of disguise or extended secondary 
rationalization.71 
 
New methods and standards would have to be adopted in interpretative historical biography, 
and psychoanalysis was to provide them. Armed with his new psychological concepts, Barnes 
went on to enthusiastically describe George Washington’s Jehovah complex, the inferiority 
complex of Thomas Jefferson, and the intense sadism of Andrew Jackson. Psychoanalytic 
biographers such as Barnes argued that academic psychology was irrelevant to the tasks of the 
psychiatrist and the biographer.72  
Among these early Freudian historians, the biographer’s own motives went largely 
unexamined; the Oedipus complex was their central concept. Like Freud and his early 
followers, they assumed that the Oedipal situation was a universal pattern independent of 
 
68 Hoffman, Louise E. ‘Early Psychobiography, 1900-1930: Some Reconsiderations’. Biography 7, No. 4, 1984. 
343. 
69 Bizière, Jean Maurice. Psychohistory and Histoire des Mentalités. The Journal of Psychohistory, Volume 11, 
No. 1, 1983. 89. 
70 Barnes, Harry Elmer. ‘Psychology and History: Some Reasons for Predicting Their More Active Cooperation 
in the Future’. The American Journal of Psychology, Volume 30, No. 4, 1919. 337. 
71 Hoffman, Louise E. ‘Early Psychobiography, 1900-1930: Some Reconsiderations’. Biography 7, No. 4, 1984. 
344. 
72 Ibid. 

cultural variations that could be applied regardless of background or context.73 Historian Ralph 
Harlow valued psychoanalysis for its insight into the ‘internal forces’ behind the behaviour of 
historical figures, in addition to the external forces that had been the traditional objects of study. 
Both Harlow and Barnes became interested in the dynamics of leadership, a conceptual point 
where the internal world of the leader and the external needs of a collective intersected. Their 
work would in turn become a model for later psychobiographies, particularly those of Hitler. 
It is not hard to see why, as Harlow wrote of Samuel Adams: 
 
A man of this type can convince a community that it is persecuted when really it is very 
well off. Then, when a large share of the people have become fanatics, the abnormal 
nervous and mental organization of perhaps one man may easily precipitate a needless 
war.74 
 
The Early Freudians 
 
Nearly all psychohistorians called themselves Freudians, all of them positioned their writings 
in relation to Freud’s ideas, and some of them engaged directly with his work. Three of Freud’s 
texts were of particular significance to the movement: Leonardo da Vinci, A Memory of His 
Childhood (1910); Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego (1922); and Moses and 
Monotheism (1939). ‘Psychohistory for the early Freudians was not trivial,’ Strozier and Offer 
wrote in the introduction to their book The Leader: Psychohistorical Essays (1985); in fact, 
they said, ‘everything hung on it.’75 
The paper on DaVinci was influential primarily because it showed that psychoanalytic 
ideas could be creatively applied to historical characters. Freud told a story that was similar to, 
and could be supplemented with, existing forms of biographical narrative. The Leonardo study 
became something of a blueprint for later applications of psychoanalytic thought to biography. 
Before Freud and Bullitt’s study of Woodrow Wilson surfaced in 1967, the editors of the 
Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud described the 
Leonardo piece as ‘not only the first but the last of Freud’s large-scale excursions into the field 
of biography.’76 As psychiatrist Robert Coles put it in the early 1970s: ‘What Freud tried to do 
over a half century ago still is being done, sometimes under the name of psycho-history.’77 
Freud himself was very pleased with the work. In a letter to Lou Andreas Salomé he called it 
‘the only beautiful thing I have ever written’.78 
For psychohistorians, the book achieved at least three important things: 1) It 
reconstructed (episodes from) Leonardo’s childhood and explained his adult behavior on the 
basis of these reconstructions; 2) It emphasised his sexual experience, both in adulthood and – 
in the specifically Freudian sense – in childhood. Freud wrote: ‘If a biographical effort really 
endeavors to penetrate the understanding of the psychic life of its hero it must not, as happens 
in most biographies through discretion or prudery, pass over in silence the sexual activity or 
 
73 Ibid. 
74 Ibid. 348 
75 Strozier, Charles B., and Daniel Offer. The Leader: Psychohistorical Essays. New York: Plenum Press, 1985. 
22. 
76 Freud, Sigmund, James Strachey, Anna Freud, Alix Strachey, and Alan Tyson. The Standard Edition of the 
Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud. London: Hogarth Press, 1957. 60. 
77 Coles, Robert. ‘Shrinking History Part 1’. New York Review of Books, February 22, 1973.  
78 Strozier, Charles B., and Daniel Offer. The Leader: Psychohistorical Essays. New York: Plenum Press, 1985. 
30. 

the sex peculiarity of the one examined.’79; 3) It linked Leonardo’s outstanding behavior and 
achievements with the vicissitudes of his desire, thereby establishing a connection between 
‘pathology’ and ‘genius’, while at the same time problematising both categories. Freud later 
wrote: ‘belief in a stiff frame of normality and a sharp line of demarcation between normal and 
abnormal in the psychic life has long since been abandoned by our science.’80 As we shall see 
in further chapters, many psychohistorians successfully reproduced the first two points. Some, 
however, found it irresistible to measure their subjects to an assumed standard of normality 
derived from present experience, thereby using psychoanalytic theory to pathologise them.  
Freud’s Group Psychology was important because it opened up ways of thinking 
historically and psychoanalytically about the behaviour of groups, and thus transcend 
biography. History in general is concerned not only with individuals but rather with groups, 
large and small. Psychoanalysis as a discipline deals mostly with patients individually, 
sometimes with couples, and in rare cases with families and groups. Group Psychology was 
Freud’s attempt to show that psychoanalytic concepts could be successfully applied to an 
analysis of group behaviour. The Group Psychology book also addressed explicitly the problem 
of leader- and followership. In the book, Freud described his theory of the psychology of mass 
movements. He wrote: ‘The impulses which a group obeys may according to circumstances be 
generous or cruel, heroic or cowardly, but they are always so imperious that no personal 
interest, not even that of self-preservation, can make itself felt.’81 Crucially, Freud argued that 
the group-member’s superego could be replaced by the father-figure leader, so that self-
criticism was virtually annihilated. Although this idea would become highly influential in 
psychohistorical leader-led analyses, especially of the Nazis, it was also limited and limiting. 
Psychohistorians John Demos and Bruce Mazlish concluded that: ‘To put the matter bluntly, 
Freud did not have a credible group psychology to apply to most historical materials.’82 Other 
psychohistorians agreed. To account for the subjectivity experienced in, and the behaviour of, 
groups, psychohistorians were forced to adopt or mint new concepts such as ‘psychic 
repository’, ‘symbolic field’, ‘social unconscious’, and even ‘racial unconscious’.83 
Moses and Monotheism was particularly influential because it showed that the subject-
matter of psychoanalytic thought about the past was not always concrete fact, but could also 
be ‘past subjectivity’, or: myth, legend. Freud had intended his study to be called Moses and 
Monotheism: A Historical Novel, but had, in the end, decided against it.84 The position that 
Freud adopted in the text problematised the historian’s search for an ‘objective’ account of the 
past. This position was highly influential among psychohistorians. Although he generally 
rejected some of Freud’s most fundamental assumptions, psychiatrist Robert J. Lifton would 
claim that Moses and Monotheism was one of psychohistory’s foundational texts.85 Its 
emphasis on psychic reality allegedly inspired him to search for the symbolic expressions of 
 
79 Freud, Sigmund, James Strachey, Anna Freud, Alix Strachey, and Alan Tyson. The Standard Edition of the 
Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud: Early Psycho-analytic Publications. Vol. 11, 1910, Five 
Lectures on Psycho-analysis, Leonardo Da Vinci and Other Works. London: Vintage, 2001. 73. 
80 Freud, Sigmund, and William C. Bullitt. Thomas Woodrow Wilson, Twenty-eighth President of the United 
States; a Psychological Study. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1967. xiv. 
81 Freud, Sigmund, James Strachey, Anna Freud, Alix Strachey, Alan Tyson, Sigmund Freud, and Sigmund 
Freud. The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud: Early Psycho-analytic 
Publications. Vol. 18, 1920-1922, Beyond the Pleasure Principle, Group Psychology and Other Works. London: 
Vintage, 2001. 41. 
82 Mazlish, Bruce, and John Demos. ‘Psychoanalytic Theory and History: Groups and Events’. Annual of 
Psychoanalysis, 1978. 41. 
83 See, for instance, the discussion of Joel Kovel’s work in Chapter Five. 
84 Lifton, Robert J. ‘On Psychohistory’, in Explorations in Psychohistory: the Wellfleet Papers. New York: 
Simon and Schuster, 1975.  
85 Lifton, Robert J. ‘On the Nature of Psychohistorical Evidence’, in Explorations in Psychohistory: the 
Wellfleet Papers. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1975. 

people who had undergone shattering experiences such as thought reform and nuclear 
holocaust. History, for Lifton, had less to do with an accumulation of facts, and more with a 
critical examination of the changing symbolic structures and events that produced particular 
personalities and experiences at a given point in time. Lifton was not so much in search of 
facts, as of the symbolic expressions of the interpretation of facts. Similarly, historian Bruce 
Mazlish, although more conservative in his ideas about what history could be and do, 
acknowledged that Freud in Moses and Monotheism considerably extended the historian’s 
toolkit, as he took the book to show that ‘psychic facts’ were also facts that a historian could 
lay bare.86 
Undoubtedly the most direct and lasting influence that Freud and his earliest followers’ 
works had on psychohistory was through their take on biography. But not only Freud’s own 
texts served as examples. Psychohistorians such as Strozier and Offer found inspiration in the 
largely forgotten work of Freud’s earliest followers. ‘Nevertheless,’ they reminded their 
readers, ‘it is worth remembering that Freud was the one with original ideas in the group.’87 
 
The Case of Young Amenhotep 
 
Karl Abraham (1877-1925) was an important early follower of Freud. His theories about 
mother-infant interactions became highly influential in the development of post-Freudian 
psychoanalysis, especially in object-relations theory. In his lifetime, he was known as a staunch 
defender of Freud’s work, especially of the libido theory and the theory of psychosexual 
development. Freud called him his ‘Rocher de Bronze’.88 Abraham became best known for his 
work on character formation, his extension of Freud’s psychosexual phases, and his theories 
on the aetiology of depression. He also played an important part in bringing psychoanalysis to 
prewar Berlin, and helped promote and standardise psychoanalytic training.89 In 1912, Freud’s 
‘best pupil’ published a detailed study of pharaoh Amenhotep IV in the first edition of Imago 
- Zeitschrift für anwendung der Psychoanalyse auf die Geisteswissenschaften (later known as: 
Natur- und Geisteswissenschaften). Freud was very pleased with Abraham’s work, and called 
the essay ‘a new orientation’ for psychoanalysis. Years later, psychohistorians Strozier and 
Offer called it the gem of early psychohistory.90 
Freud created Imago as the third official psychoanalytic periodical under his name. The 
other two journals were the successful Jahrbuch für Psychoanalyse and the Zentralblatt für 
Psychoanalyse. Hanns Sachs and Otto Rank were appointed as editors of the new publication. 
The two earlier journals were specifically oriented towards clinical applications and 
developments, while Imago served solely as a forum for dialogue with neighbouring fields. In 
a letter to Férenczi in 1911, Freud wrote that Imago was to be ‘totally removed from medicine 
and dedicated to the literary, mythological, and philosophical applications of ΨA.’91 In the first 
decade of the journal’s existence, only five out of 138 articles dealt directly with the application 
of psychoanalysis to history.92 Some of Imago’s most notable early publications were Isidor 
 
86 See Chapter Four for a discussion of the similarities and differences between Lifton and Mazlish’s 
interpretation of Freud’s Moses and Monotheism. 
87 Strozier, Charles B., and Daniel Offer. The Leader: Psychohistorical Essays. New York: Plenum Press, 1985. 
24. 
88 Bentinck, Anna. ‘Karl Abraham, een vergeten analyticus’, Tijdschrift voor Psychoanalyse, No. 1, 2004.  
89 Makari, George. Revolution in Mind: The Creation of Psychoanalysis. New York: HarperCollins, 2008. 
90 Strozier, Charles B., and Daniel Offer. The Leader: Psychohistorical Essays. New York: Plenum Press, 1985. 
30. 
91 Letter from Sigmund Freud to Sándor Ferenczi, May 28, 1911. The Correspondence of Sigmund Freud and 
Sándor Ferenczi Volume 1, 1908-1914. 285-287. 
92 Strozier, Charles B., and Daniel Offer. The Leader: Psychohistorical Essays. New York: Plenum Press, 1985. 

Sadger’s biographical portraits of poets, Ernest Jones’ two-part article on the psychology of 
salt and Lou Andreas-Salomé’s analysis of the ‘female type’. 
In his article, Abraham examined the short life of Egyptian king Amenhotep IV, who 
ascended the throne when he was only ten years old; proceeded to change entirely the face of 
Egyptian art, religion and culture; adopted the name Ikhnaton (after his new deity sun god 
Aton), and died at the age of twenty-eight.93 Abraham based his analysis on two main sources: 
the ‘Amarna-tablets’, discovered in the Egyptian village of el-Amarna in 1880, and 
hieroglyphic texts, as well as on secondary literature. ‘The works of Breasted and Weigall,’ 
Abraham wrote, ‘deserve particular mention in this connection.’ 94 Abraham followed 
Weigall’s arguments closely. Abraham reassured his readers that he was well aware of the 
difficulties involved in analysing a character so far removed from his and his readers’ contexts. 
Yet he wrote with the firm conviction that ‘a man living even so remote a cultural past was 
ruled by the same complexes, the same psychological mechanisms, as those which Freud and 
his school have discovered in contemporary men and women.’95 Was Abraham writing a 
pathography? He wrote his article with a keen awareness of the political situation in Egypt at 
the time (around 1300 B.C.), and detailed knowledge of the function and role of art, of religion 
and of myth. Obviously, he was writing as a psychoanalyst, for psychoanalysts, with the 
conviction that psychoanalytic theory could, to some degree, be successfully carried over onto 
the study of history in order to provide new insight. In a letter to Freud, Abraham wrote:  
 
I know that its theme will interest you: it is about Amenhotep IV and the Aton cult. 
The subject has a particular attraction for me—to analyse all the manifestations 
of repression and substitutive formation in a person who lived 3,300 years ago. 
The Oedipus 
complex, sublimation, 
reaction 
formations—all 
exactly 
as 
in 
a neurotic today.96 
 
It would seem that Abraham was looking for confirmation of Freud’s theories in young 
Amenhotep, ‘the first individual in history’ as historian James Breasted referred to him. But 
Abraham’s portrait did not provide a simple diagnosis, nor did he carelessly apply diagnostic 
labels. His Amenhotep, or Ikhnaton, emerged as a troubled young king who was married at the 
age of nine, who worshiped his beautiful mother, and who hated his brutal father, Amenhotep 
III. Abraham postulated that the young pharaoh must have had a particularly strong attachment 
to his mother, who served as regent-queen after the death of his father. The portrait-bust of 
queen Tiy in the Berlin Museum was so beautiful to him (see Fig. 1), ‘so strikingly alive’, that 
it led Abraham to the following conclusion: ‘It must seem very plausible that the high-strung, 
sensitive son should have had a fixation on just this mother’.97 
 
 
93 Many facts about Amenhotep’s life are contested. Here we will follow the account given by Karl Abraham in 
1912. 
94 Abraham, Karl. ‘Amenhotep IV (Ikhnaton)’. Psychoanalytic Quarterly, Volume IV, October 1935. 537. 
95 Ibid. 538. 
96 Abraham Karl, and Sigmund Freud., ed. Ernst Falzeder. The Complete Correspondence of Sigmund Freud 
and Karl Abraham 1907-1925. London: Karnac. 146. 
97 Abraham, Karl. ‘Amenhotep IV (Ikhnaton)’. Psychoanalytic Quarterly, Volume IV, October 1935. 543. 

 
 
Fig. 1. Queen Tiy, Berlin Museum 
 
Ikhnaton’s libidinal attachment to his mother, Abraham argued, was neatly shifted onto his 
wife. Contrary to custom, he did not take a harem, and he remained entirely faithful to his wife, 
Nefertiti, who bore him only daughters.98 After Amenhotep III’s death, queen Tiy had begun 
to favour the worship of Aton, the sun god, over the traditional deity Amon. But young 
Amenhotep carried this development further – replacing the gods of his ancestors with the 
single deity Aton, who came to be represented as a sun whose rays ended in hands embracing 
the king. Abraham concluded that the young king had symbolically replaced his father with a 
new, more loving one: the sun. This personal decision had major political consequences. At 
seventeen, Amenhotep moved the capital of Egypt some 450 kilometres north of Thebes. He 
gave the city the name Achetaton – horizon of Aton. In his attempt to break completely with 
previous religious tradition, Amenhotep had a completely new style of art created:  
 
To one who knows Egyptian art certain peculiarities in the pictures of the king are 
conspicuous, distinguishing them at first sight from the works of the preceding period: 
the long drawn skull and neck, the protruding abdomen, and the over-long hips and 
thighs.99 
 
Abraham argued that: ‘In order to accomplish such comprehensive reforms in the life of the 
people, the king required not only great energy, but also a practical sense which would enable 
him to take into account the forces that were certain to oppose him.’100 But Ikhnaton lacked 
this capacity. During his brief reign, ‘the young king remained a passive onlooker while the 
world empire which his predecessors had built up was falling to ruin. His greatness lay in 
 
98 Nefertiti, whose bust was recovered in the year that Abraham published his paper, also became world-famous 
for her extraordinary beauty. The object allegedly sparked an ‘Egyptian craze’ in women’s fashion in the years 
following the discovery.  
99 Ibid. 547. 
100 Ibid. 563. 

another realm—in the realm of ideas.’101 In Ikhnaton’s newly-founded religion, Abraham held, 
‘probably for the first time in the history of the spiritual life of mankind, love is extolled as a 
world-conquering force.’102 
It would appear that Ikhnaton set up a cult of love. The only aggression in his reign, the 
psychoanalyst concluded, was aimed against his father. Priests of Amon were persecuted; his 
father’s name removed from all inscriptions. At the same time, the young king showered his 
wife with epithets such as ‘mistress of his happiness’, and sought to make propaganda for a 
new conception of marriage and the relations between men and women. He laid out gardens 
where he could enjoy the flowers and animals, and took a particular interest in music. But the 
more this allegedly effeminate king ‘effaced, in his idealism, the distance between himself and 
his people,’ Abraham judged, ‘the more he antagonized the priests of the old deity; the more 
radically he sought to execute his reforms, the more he lost his masses.’103 Abraham told the 
story of a king whose neurosis made him lose the sway over his population. In his view, 
Ikhnaton ‘closed his ear to the cries for help from his Asiatic subjects and was blind to the 
horrors that were enacted in his provinces.’104 As such, his paper became the story of how a 
man’s particular character structure made him unsuitable as a leader. Abraham’s interest was 
not only on the psychological mechanisms that Young Amenhotep allegedly displayed, he was 
also interested in showing the dynamics that were at play between a leader and his followers. 
An interest in the specific qualities of a leader and the attraction for his followers would 
become crucial in the psychohistorians’ legendary history of psychohistory. In the 
psychohistorians’ accounts, Erik Erikson’s work would be distinguished from earlier 
applications of psychoanalytic thought to historical subjects, in particular in biographies, 
precisely for its strong emphasis on the role of a leader’s pathology and its resonance, or rather 
the lack thereof, with his or her followers.105 This emphasis supposedly set Erikson’s work 
apart from the ‘applied psychoanalysis’ produced by the early Freudians; it justified the use of 
a new term for psychoanalytic history-writing: psychohistory. But in Abraham’s forays into 
Egyptology we see very similar concerns, problematising the sharp distinctions made by 
psychohistorians between psychohistory, pathography and (psycho-)biography. 
 
A Disastrously Bad Book 
 
While the psychohistorians may have ridiculed the early Freudians’ historical works for 
strategic purposes, Freud himself was more often than not exempted from criticism. ‘In the 
name of “applied psychoanalysis”,’ Robert Coles put it, ‘the lives of an assortment of political 
leaders, generals, artists and writers have been examined, and as one goes through those 
attempts, one keeps coming back to [Freud’s] Leonardo study – and to Freud’s superior 
qualities as a thinker and writer.’106 But as we have seen, not all of the work done by Freud’s 
early followers amounted to uncritical applications of Freud’s ideas, and neither was all of 
Freud’s work brilliantly innovative. In the latter case, there was one notable exception that even 
the psychohistorians could not overlook: Thomas Woodrow Wilson: Twenty-eighth President 
of the United States - A Psychological Study. Freud co-authored the book with William Bullit, 
a diplomat and his former analysand. It was published posthumously in the United States in 
1967, to devastating reviews. William C. Bullitt worked as an American diplomat and foreign 
 
101 Ibid. 538. 
102 Ibid. 558. 
103 Ibid. 563. 
104 Ibid. 564. 
105 See for example: Pomper, Philip. The Structure of Mind in History: Five Major Figures in Psychohistory. 
New York: Columbia University Press, 1985. 
106 Coles, Robert. ‘Shrinking History Part 1’. The New York Review of Books, February 22, 1973. 

correspondent in Europe under President Woodrow Wilson. He was also a novelist, known for 
his scathing lampoonings of the American elite. In 1926, The New York Times wrote about 
Bullitt’s novel, It’s Not Done: ‘It is a volley, a propaganda novel, directed against a single 
institution, the American aristocratic ideal, and whose defect is that the smoke does not quite 
clear away so that one can accurately count the corpses.’107 Bullitt was analysed by Freud in 
the 1920s. After the analysis, Freud and Bullitt agreed to write a psychoanalytic study of 
President Wilson together – Bullitt was to provide the data on Wilson’s life, and Freud and 
Bullitt would together write an analysis of his personality.  
The response to Woodrow Wilson amounted to no less than widespread disavowal, 
bordering on pandemonium. On its publication, the American Psychoanalytic Association 
discussed denying Freud’s authorship of the book as a possible PR strategy.108 Erik Erikson 
suggested in The New York Review of Books that Freud could have only agreed to such a 
‘disastrously bad’ publication because Bullitt helped him and his family flee the Nazis.109 Anna 
Freud reportedly ‘disliked the book’ as soon as she read it. She ‘had hopes that it could be 
changed to a large extent. This proved impossible.’110 In a review, historian A.J.P. Taylor 
wondered: ‘How did anyone ever manage to take Freud seriously?’111 
Publishers marketed the book as ‘Freud’s only study of a politician of his own time.’112 
Psychohistorians, aware of the importance of this document for their budding movement, were 
keen to show that Freud could not have been the author of certain passages. John Voss, the 
executive officer of the American Association of Arts and Sciences, who had just procured a 
large grant for the upcoming two Wellfleet psychohistory gatherings, wrote in a letter to 
Erikson: ‘I suggested to Bruce [Mazlish] that it might be interesting to do a computer-word 
analysis of the text to find out how much of it was Freud and how much of it was Bullitt. My 
guess would be that the actual author of 90% of the volume would be the latter.’ In his 
introduction to the book, Freud clearly stated: ‘For the analytic part we are both equally 
responsible; it has been written by us working together.’ It is significant that the Bullitt-Freud 
book appeared in 1967. The first Wellfleet psychohistory gathering was held in 1966, and 
interest in the application of psychoanalytic thought to history was growing steadily around 
that time.113 Psychohistorians were afraid that the publication of the book would endanger their 
movement. Woodrow Wilson became an example of how psychohistory should not be written. 
Stylistically speaking, the book is weak: the tone is hostile and at points contrived. In content, 
however, it does not essentially differ much from Freud’s earlier work. Much as in Freud’s 
Leonardo piece, Bullitt and Freud reconstructed Wilson’s childhood, and from there analysed 
his behaviour as President. It seems likely that Freud did in fact have something to do with the 
analysis, and that the book was later re-written by Bullitt. The authors focused specifically on 
Wilson’s relationship with his father: 
 
The outlets employed by Wilson's Ego for his passivity to his father were all outlets 
approved by his Super-Ego. His chief outlet was through direct submission to the will 
of his father. He did what his father wanted him to do and did not do what his father 
 
107 Review: It’s Not Done. The New York Times, April 11, 1926. 
108 ‘Annual Meetings—May, 1967’. Bulletin of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 23. 887-906. 
Review of William Bullitt and Sigmund Freud, Thomas Woodrow Wilson: A Psychological Study (1967), in 
The New Statesman and Nation, May 12, 1967, 653-54. 
109 Erikson, Erik H. ‘The Strange Case of Freud, Bullitt, and Woodrow Wilson: I’. The New York Review of 
Books, February 9, 1967.  
110 Letter from Anna Freud to Paul Roazen, dated March 15, 1967. Quoted in Dufresne, Todd. Freud Under 
Analysis: History, Theory, Practice: Essays in Honor of Paul Roazen, London: Jaron Aronson Inc., 1997. 282. 
111 Quoted in Gay, Peter. Freud for Historians. Oxford: Oxford University Press., 1985. 93. 
112 Psyche. Zeitschrift für Psychoanalyse, 62. 2008. 61. 
113 For a more detailed discussion, see Chapters Three and Four. 

did not want him to do. He accepted his father's thoughts without question and his 
father's leadership with adoration.114 
 
As Erikson remarked in his review of the book, it is unlike Freud to speak about the ego in 
hydraulic terms such as ‘outlets’, and yet the theory applied is solidly Freudian. The book is 
centred around Wilson’s compromise of the Fourteen Points and his acceptance of the 
Versailles Treaty: 
 
His (Wilson's) mental life from April to September 1919, when he collapsed completely 
and permanently, was a wild flight from fact. The mental disintegration is an additional 
indication that in the second week of April 1919 he could not face his femininity and 
fear but merely embraced with finality the rationalizations which enabled him to avoid 
looking at the truth. At the crisis of his life he was in fact overwhelmed once more by 
his passivity to his father and by fear. He seems never to have let his knowledge of this 
fact rise into his consciousness. It seems clear that when he decided to allow the 
Fourteen Points to be transformed into the Treaty of Versailles he was conscious of 
only the most noble motives. He betrayed the trust of the world as a matter of 
principle.115 
 
In an extensive review of the book in the New York Review of Books, Erikson grudgingly agreed 
with Freud and Bullitt’s interpretation. ‘For one does find in the lives of a number of men and 
women of messianic bent and historic performance a comparable relation of parent and child, 
which makes it incumbent on the child to fulfill the parent’s ideal image and to redeem his own 
shortcomings.’116 Some of these more primitive dynamics, Erikson held, were correctly 
suggested in the book. ‘Yet the decisive factors in any historical study are not only how the 
parent could coerce the child, and the child convince the parent,’ he thought, ‘but how the child 
became a man who could make his contemporaries believe that he was filling a place in history, 
that he was a principle force in history.’117 In Freud and Bullitt’s book, Erikson recognised the 
biographical truth, but missed the sociological and historical context to Wilson’s life. It was 
only through the achievements of ego psychology, and Erikson’s own identity concept, that he 
felt that these fields were successfully married to a psychoanalytic viewpoint. By properly 
embedding the psychoanalytic actor in his or her historical context, Erikson sought to find out 
why a person became attractive as a leader to his or her followers.118 
 
Hitler’s Doctors – the 1930s 
 
Erikson was by no means the first to be interested in such problems. Psychoanalytic 
investigations into the dynamics between messianic leaders and followers took flight in the 
1930s. The first significant wave of applications of psychoanalytic thought to historical events 
undoubtedly came with the rise of Nazism. Historian Daniel Pick has recently shown how 
psychoanalysis engaged with Nazism extensively in the years leading up to, during, and 
directly after the war.119 He showed that psychoanalytic studies received widespread attention 
 
114 Freud, Sigmund, and William C. Bullitt. Woodrow Wilson: A Psychological Study (1966). New Brunswick: 
Transaction Publishers, 1999. 65. 
115 Ibid. 264. 
116 Erikson, Erik H. ‘The Strange Case of Freud, Bullitt, and Woodrow Wilson: I’, The New York Review of 
Books, February 9, 1967. 
117 Ibid. 
118 See Chapter Two. 
119 See Pick, Daniel. The Pursuit of the Nazi Mind: Hitler, Hess, and the Analysts. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2012. 

for the first time in this period, and occasionally even government funding. Similarly, the 
psychohistorians put a lot of weight on this period in their reconstructions and prehistories. In 
their view, it seems that Nazism and World War II prepared the world for psychohistory. 
Psychohistorian Peter Loewenberg judged that it was ‘The first systematic large-scale 
application of the social and behavioral sciences to a current historical problem.’120 Louise 
Hoffman even claimed that ‘psychobiography – in the sense of a sustained, systematic, and 
intensive scrutiny of an individual life – may be said to have emerged out of psychoanalytic 
investigations of Adolf Hitler and his contemporaries.’121 When asked what spurred the sudden 
increase in interest about the application of psychoanalysis in the 1950s, Bruce Mazlish 
answered simply: ‘the war.’122 
Freud did not offer a specific analysis of Nazism at the time. Although it has been 
argued that Moses and Monotheism was a covert attempt at evaluating the tradition of Jewish 
thought on the eve of World War II, by this time Freud was too old and sick to concern himself 
with political affairs directly.123 As a prominent Jew his concerns about the rise of fascism were 
practical, not theoretical. But his immediate followers were quick to respond to the fascist 
threat by making use of psychoanalytic thought. Hitler and his movement appeared so 
outrageous - and so dangerous - that the unconscious became a helpful, if not necessary, 
category to explain them. Franz Alexander said of fascism that it could not ‘be understood in 
terms of common sense or indeed of consciousness at all’.124 At times these psychoanalytic 
critiques of Nazism were coupled with an explicit political stance. The psychoanalytic rebel 
Wilhelm Reich published his book The Mass Psychology of Fascism in 1933, in which he 
argued that the repression of childhood sexual impulses led to a susceptibility to authoritarian 
thinking. ‘At first,’ he wrote, ‘the child has to submit to the structure of the authoritarian 
miniature state, the family; this makes it capable of later subordination to the general 
authoritarian system.’125 For his communist sympathies, Reich was banned from the 
International Psychoanalytic Association; for his criticism of Stalin he was ousted from the 
German Communist Party.126 What Reich’s case shows is that psychoanalytic theory could be 
successfully adopted to serve various political positions, including those on the far left.  
Concern about Hitler’s mental stability was expressed in the American media at the 
time, and is evidence of the fact that there was a demand for psychological explanations of 
Nazism. As early as 1922, Cyril Brown of the New York Times credited Hitler with 
‘extraordinary powers of swaying crowds to his will’.127 A review of a non-psychoanalytic 
biography of Hitler quoted the author as diagnosing its subject with a ‘split-personality’ in 
1936.128 In 1938, The New Republic published an article entitled ‘Is Hitler Crazy?’ And a well-
 
120 Quoted in: Hoffman, Louise E. ‘Psychoanalytic Interpretations of Adolph Hitler and Nazism, 1933-1945: A 
Prelude to Psychohistory’. The Psychohistory Review, Volume 11, No. 1, Fall 1982. 68. 
121 Hoffman, Louise E. ‘Psychoanalytic Interpretations of Adolph Hitler and Nazism, 1933-1945: A Prelude to 
Psychohistory. The Psychohistory Review, Volume 11, No. 1, Fall 1982. 70. 
122 Personal communication with Mazlish, January 15, 2014. 
123 Zaretsky, Eli. Political Freud: A History. New York: Columbia University Press, 2015. 108. 
124 Quoted in: Hoffman, Louise E. ‘Psychoanalytic Interpretations of Adolph Hitler and Nazism, 1933-1945: A 
Prelude to Psychohistory. The Psychohistory Review, Volume 11, No. 1, Fall 1982. 69. 
125 Reich, Wilhelm. The Mass Psychology of Fascism. New York: Orgone Institute Press, 1946. 28. 
126 See Makari, George. Revolution in Mind: The Creation of Psychoanalysis. New York: HarperCollins, 2008. 
127 Brown, Cyril. ‘New Popular Idol Rises in Bavaria: Hitler Credited With Extraordinary Powers of Swaying 
Crowds To His Will’. The New York Times, November 21, 1922.  
128 M’Cormick, Anne O’Hare. ‘Two Brilliantly Revealing Accounts of Hitler's Life; The Books of Heiden and 
Olden Should Be Read for the Light They Cast on Contemporary Germany’. The New York Times, May 24, 
1936.  

known book at the time was Inside Hitler, by Kurt Krüger; later editions of that book were 
published under the title I was Hitler’s Doctor.129 
The theories of psychoanalysis – especially Freud’s reformulations of his theory in the 
1920s – slotted into the confusion and cultural malaise of the times. His concepts of id, ego 
and superego, proposed in The Ego and the Id in 1923, provided a schema that was easily 
applicable (and just as easily misapplied) to contemporary persons and situations. As Daniel 
Pick put it: ‘Under-achievers, over-achievers, criminals, religious devotees, obsessive hand-
washers, manic party-goers or depressed recluses, tyrants, gang-leaders, “slavishly” 
acquiescent fascist followers, and any number of other people could be thought about in 
relation to the strength, weakness, and particular timbre of the superego.’130 Similarly, the 
irrational anger and perverse pleasure inherent in the National Socialist doctrine could be 
explained by the unruly drives contained in the id. Generally speaking, however, 
psychoanalyses of National Socialism and Hitler at the time were hasty generalisations based 
upon scant material. But psychoanalysts argued that in applying their methods to current events 
and personalities, the benefits outweighed the theoretical problems. Nazism was an evil that 
needed uprooting, and psychoanalysis was one way of showing just how ‘sick’ the ideology 
and its followers were. British psychoanalyst Edward Glover called these works ‘tracts for the 
times’, and acknowledged that they were far from objective.131 Many of the authors were 
political refugees themselves, personally threatened by the Nazis and politically active. Some 
of the early cases of applied psychoanalysis were in fact political statements cloaked in 
psychoanalytic terminology. 
An early example of how the psychoanalytic theory was put to work in service of 
political ideas was the book Subconscious Europe. It was published in 1931 by an author named 
Fedor Vergin. Very little is known about both the author and work. In the book, Vergin gave a 
typology of the unconsciouses of different nations. He applied psychoanalytic theory to wide 
range of phenomena: political figures such as Hitler and Wilhelm II, nations such as Britain, 
Austria and Hungary, and political ideologies such as socialism and fascism.132 
The author argued that every European citizen inherited psychological inhibitions 
distinctive of his or her nation, and was raised to believe in specific semi-religious conceptions. 
On top of this, he believed in a primitive magic that – all taken together – Vergin thought 
produced particular complexes, mass-illusions, and collective hallucinations. As these illusions 
differed for every European nation, they also differed for every national group. ‘The British,’ 
Vergin wrote, ‘do not aspire to be different. They comply happily, and with a sense of humour, 
always poking fun at themselves, but never giving up on their mental ideals. In this they are 
like no other nation on earth.’133 Only a few heroic (‘rational’) political leaders were able to 
transcend their national pathologies in order to strive for health: a unified Europe. Vergin was 
probably the first psychoanalytic author to pathologise Hitler. He judged that Hitler’s ideology 
was based on two pathological female images – the pure mother and the loose woman. Hitler’s 
representation of Germany oscillated between a ‘pure motherland’ and a submissive mass that 
would bend to any strong man’s will.134 
 
129 Hoffman, Louise E. ‘Psychoanalytic Interpretations of Adolph Hitler and Nazism, 1933-1945: A Prelude to 
Psychohistory. The Psychohistory Review, Volume 11, No. 1, Fall 1982. 83. 
130 Pick, Daniel. The Pursuit of the Nazi Mind: Hitler, Hess, and the Analysts. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2012. 19. 
131 Ibid. 
132 Vergin, Fedor. Das Unbewusste Europa. Psychoanalyse der europäischen Politik. Wien-Leipzig: J. 
Hess&Co. Verlag, 1931. 
133 Ibid. 212. 
134 Stam, A. ‘De Medische en Psychologische beoordeling van Hitler, Een bibliografische verkenning met 
historische kanttekeningen’. Tijdschrift voor Psychiatrie, No. 10, 1979. 516. 

Vergin was concerned with the political developments in Europe, and his book was an 
appeal for a unified continent, clothed in psychoanalytic jargon. He drew on Carl Jung’s 
concept of the collective unconscious and William McDougall’s concept of the group mind. 
‘A political idea like that of the United States of Europe,’ he wrote, ‘suffers from the lack of 
essential psychological conditions and propaganda on its behalf. It is rendered useless by 
ignorance of psychoanalysis.’135 He outlined the catastrophes which would result if his 
psychoanalytic utopia was not brought about: Europe would soon find itself rushing into a 
‘fresh nationalist war with the same fresh, and to many, quite inexplicable transports of joy, 
which it displayed in 1914.’136 Subconscious Europe ended with ‘a testamentary greeting to 
future explorers in the European desert’. The Europeans, Vergin prophesied, would have gone 
to their foolish graves as they resisted understanding their own contradictions.137 In further 
chapters we will see that this pathologising function of psychohistory was used in a similar 
way in the 1960s and 70s by authors with different political agendas. The idea that nations have 
an unconscious would be revisited by the controversial psychohistorian Lloyd deMause in his 
last book, The Emotional Life of Nations (2002). 
 
Frank Manuel: Psychohistory for Historians 
 
Frank Manuel was Professor of History at New York University and Brandeis. He was part of 
the early Wellfleet psychohistory gatherings, and became known as a scholar of utopian 
thought. In 1971, the same year that Mack published his article advocating psychohistory for 
psychoanalysts, Manuel published an article entitled ‘The Use and Abuse of Psychology in 
History’. It focused on the last hundred years of the intersection between psychology and 
history, no less: ‘when both disciplines have become mammoth academic enterprises, whose 
cohabitation, some might say, is doomed to sterility from the outset, like the improbable mating 
of a whale and an elephant.’138 He hoped that ‘perhaps at the end I may find a place for myself, 
and, who knows, others might be willing to join me even if it means standing midstream in 
rather shallow waters.’139 
Confusing metaphors aside, Manuel’s paper was a crucial contribution to 
psychohistory’s legendary beginnings. It was aimed at historians, not psychoanalysts. In his 
sweeping account, he summarised the more prominent interactions between psychology and 
history from a historical perspective. ‘More and more,’ he began, ‘I see Giambattista Vico, that 
lone Italian who lived in Naples from 1668 to 1744, as the bold conceptualizer of this new 
historical consciousness.’140 By this new consciousness Manuel meant, ‘a specific attunement 
in history to psychological problems’.141 An attunement that Manuel was undoubtedly hoping 
to reawaken in his colleagues. He went on to trace the intersections of history and psychology 
from Vico to Herder, to Hegel, whose contribution to the development of a psychological 
history lay less in his characterisation of the stages in the development of spirit; more in his 
description of the master-slave dialectic, and his use of the term Entfremdung - alienation, 
which had a profound influence on both Kierkegaard and Marx, and which had been ‘inflated 
as the central psychological distinction of modern consciousness’.142 
 
135 Vergin, Fedor, tr. Raglan Somerset. Subconscious Europe. London: J. Cape, 1932. 
136 Quoted in Passerini, Luisa. Europe in Love, Love in Europe: Imagination and Politics between the Wars. 
Washington Square, NY: New York University Press, 1999. 90. 
137 Ibid.  
138 Manuel, Frank. ‘The Use and Abuse of Psychology in History’. Reprinted in: Daedalus, Volume 117. No. 3, 
1988. 199. 
139 Ibid. 
140 Ibid. 201. 
141 Ibid. 
142 Ibid. 203. 

In Manuel’s mind, the nineteenth century had meant a breakthrough for psychological 
history. At the time, he felt, psychology ‘began to achieve a measure of recognition as an 
autonomous science in the German academic world’.143 And with this recognition came an 
interest in what the budding field had to offer to scholars of other stripes. In time, Manuel 
stressed, historians Wilhelm Dilthey and Lucien Febvre, unaware of each other’s works, both 
became committed to a fusion of psychology and history (although, Manuel notes, they meant 
something very different when they spoke about psychology) and both were more influential 
for the movements they inspired than their own work in psychological history ever was (In 
Dilthey’s case: Troeltsch, Meinecke and Heidegger; for Febvre the Annales-school). And while 
the Germans tended to be ‘impressionistic’ in their use of psychology, the French had insisted 
on positivistic rigor. ‘Both, of course, were totally untouched by such outrageous novelties as 
the doctrines of their contemporary, Sigmund Freud. As for the historical forays of Freud 
himself and his immediate disciples, they rarely came within the purview of the academic 
historians of any country at this period’.144 Febvre had touched upon Freud and Luther: ‘Let us 
frankly abandon the effort to reconstruct Luther’s early surroundings […] A Freudian Luther 
is so easy to imagine that one feels not the least curiosity or wish to prosecute the acquaintance 
when an investigator undertakes to delineate him.’145 And so Manuel’s paper neatly ended with 
Erik Erikson, his successful application of psychoanalytic thought to Martin Luther in Young 
Man Luther, and the promise of psychohistory. By ‘joining forces with Freudian ego 
psychologists,’ Erikson had ‘struck off in a truly new direction of psychological history and in 
the sixties popularized the term psychohistory.’146 And with Erikson, Manuel felt ‘the analytic 
method applied to history has received its most subtle exemplification.’147 But there was work 
to be done. ‘The austere and rigorous criteria for ‘psychohistorical evidence’ that Erikson had 
proposed, ‘are not always observed in practice.’148 
 
Interdisciplinary Boundaries 
 
In both Mack’s and Manuel’s accounts, Erikson’s work was perceived as the beginning of 
something new. And in both accounts, ego psychology was packaged as a novel and somehow 
more acceptable form of psychoanalysis than Freud’s original drive theories. Yet, Manuel 
constructed his account in such a way that Erikson’s work was viewed as the outgrowth of 
historical authors concerned with psychological problems, while Mack situated him in relation 
to the tradition begun with what he thought of as psychoanalytic ‘pathography’. In truth, 
Erikson used conventional historical techniques and appropriated parts of accepted 
psychoanalytic theory for his books on Gandhi and Luther; in the process he created a new 
genre of psychoanalytic literature. 
Because he worked rigorously within both traditions, psychohistorians coming from 
both backgrounds were able to claim Erikson as an ancestor. But this also posed 
methodological problems for his followers: were they historians primarily, or psychologists? 
Manuel was concerned about the state of psychohistory after Erikson. Too many examples of 
psychohistory were irresponsible applications of psychological thought to historical characters 
and situations. Manuel’s text was clearly an attempt to mine the historiographical past for better 
examples. By showing that even the great names in history had taken up positions vis-à-vis 
psychological problems in their field, he was hoping to find acceptance among his 
 
143 Ibid. 
144 Ibid. 203-204. 
145 Quoted in Ibid. 206. 
146 Ibid. 209. 
147 Ibid. 
148 Ibid.  

contemporary colleagues for the psychohistorical project, and to promote a more historically 
oriented psychohistory. But because Manuel painted in such broad strokes, it is hard to 
distinguish what earlier interactions were of actual importance to the development of 
psychohistory, and what were simply cases of historical authors thinking along vaguely 
psychological lines. What his account did make clear was that there was a long-standing 
tradition of engagement with psychological questions in history. And because of this, in his 
own way, Manuel was – like his predecessors of the New History movement – arguing against 
the departmentalisation of American history. He showed that historians had always engaged 
with problems on the intersections of different fields – in this case of history and psychology.  
He was not preaching to deaf ears. In fact, American historiography at the time was 
becoming increasingly interdisciplinary. Horn and Ritter (1980) have shown that the growing 
interest in the use of behavioural and social sciences in the field of history in the USA was 
spurred in part by a series of reports prepared by social-scientifically oriented historians for the 
Social Science Research Council in 1946, 1954, and 1963. The interest in communication with 
other disciplines that the documents spurred, in turn helped feed the growth of so-called ‘area 
studies’ in the 1950s and 60s, in which scholars from different backgrounds came together to 
study particular regions of the world. The development of this trend was sponsored by the 
American government, who heavily promoted cross-disciplinary teamwork at the time. 
Although the original practitioners of psychohistory were inspired more by developments in 
psychoanalysis than in contemporary historiography – as we shall see in further chapters – the 
initial warm response to the psychohistorians’ cross-fertilisation of psychology and history can 
be traced to a wide-spread belief in the scientific validity of psychoanalytic theories, and a 
general curiosity about the possibilities of interdisciplinary history. And as we shall see, an 
important strand of psychohistory was influenced by similar interdisciplinary, government-led 
investigations during World War II. 
This interdisciplinary emphasis coincided with a general shift of focus in the humanities 
at large during the 1960s and 70s. As Francois Cusset has argued, universities in the United 
States started adopting a more open stance towards ‘counter-cultural’ theory in order to 
neutralise student protests.149 French theory and post-Marxist thought appeared in para-
academic journals in the USA around this time, while post-political interpretations of Derrida 
and Deleuze were gradually incorporated in university curricula as a politically neutral 
alternative to Marxism. Journals of the intellectual Left such as the Partisan Review and Telos 
presented authors such as Baudrillard as heirs to the Frankfurt School. Sanitised versions of 
European critical thought were becoming increasingly popular in the United States. The 
receptivity to European thought and the emphasis on interdisciplinarity coincided in the 
American scholarly engagement with the Annales school. From the 1960s onwards, a large 
number of American scholars became enthralled by the interdisciplinarity of the Annales 
historians as they posed a challenge to the ‘great man’ paradigm in history, and confronted the 
positivism latent in American historiography. In 1966, Mazlish wrote of the Annales: ‘Annales, 
that wonderful periodical, is aware of the interconnectedness of psychological history with 
studies in demography, social history, and economic history.’150 A number of questions and 
concerns raised by the work of the Annales historians were mirrored in the works of the 
psychohistorians, and they were frequently mentioned in the same breath. For example: on the 
3rd of July 1971, The New York Times reported on a new development in historiography: 
‘Armed with computers, statistics, psychoanalysis, sampling techniques, economic models and 
other tools of modern social science, younger historians have established a wide beachhead in 
 
149 Cusset, François. French Theory: How Foucault, Derrida, Deleuze, & Co. Transformed the Intellectual Life 
of the United States. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2008. 
150 Mazlish, Bruce. ‘Inside the Whales’. Times Literary Supplement, July 28, 1966. 667. 

the discipline.’ 151 The author, Robert Reinhold, traced this interdisciplinary tendency in history 
back to Marc Bloch and the Annales school.  
There were striking similarities in approach between the psychohistorians and the 
Annales historians. The Annales school used concepts of ‘mentalities’, which the founder Marc 
Bloch defined as ‘both a cognitive and an emotional structure, a system of representations but 
also a receptacle for unconscious images that overwhelm the social actor more than they inform 
him’.152 This concept would resonate in the psychohistorians’ use of terms such as ‘social 
unconscious’, ‘racial unconscious’ and ‘symbolic structures’. Another important similarity was 
the emphasis on the problems and possibilities of historical presentism. As André Burguière 
who was a prominent member of the Annales school himself has argued, for the Annales 
historians, ‘the historian is taken into account not because of the psychological peculiarities of 
his personality and his sense of individuality but because he belongs to the present. It is that 
place within the present, through the culture and the preoccupations of his era, that guides the 
historian in apprehending and questioning the past.’153  
But some psychohistorians went even further. For many of them, it was exactly the 
acceptance of the role of the historian’s unconscious and his ‘transference’ to the subject – 
playing a role in the seeking out, presentation, and interpretation of the subject – which served 
as liberating ideas. These ideas led the psychohistorians towards an analysis of the personality 
of the historian, and also of his or her upbringing and context. Paradoxically, for many of the 
psychohistorians, this meant including a form of self-reflection in the process of writing up 
history in order to achieve a degree of objectivity. Erikson developed these ideas with his 
suggestions of cultivating a ‘disciplined subjectivity’ towards the historical subject and 
process, and Peter Loewenberg made them explicit in his papers on historical transference. In 
this they were closer to E.H. Carr, who said: ‘When we take up a work of history, our first 
concern should be not with the facts which it contains but with the historian who wrote it. […] 
Study the historian before you begin to study the facts.’154 By bringing up the inevitable 
subjectification of the past by the present, the psychohistorians entered a discussion that went 
back as far as the late nineteenth century, from Dilthey to R.G. Collingwood and Benedetto 
Croce, who wrote: ‘The practical requirements which underlie every historical judgment give 
to all history the character of “contemporary history”, because, however remote in time events 
there recounted may seem to be, the history in reality refers to present needs and present 
situations wherein those events vibrate.’155 
These psychohistorians contributed to the debate in historiography on the problem of 
objectivity. Most psychohistorians were not philosophers, however, and many of their 
assumptions about writing history were simply handed down from their particular education 
and traditions. Like most academic historians, the majority of the psychohistorians had no 
philosophical training, and were only indirectly interested in questions about objectivity and 
truth. This meant that they did not rigorously hold to the principles that they themselves 
advocated.  
A discussion of the psychohistorians’ attitude towards the problem of objectivity is 
important because the anti-realist consequences of psychoanalytic thought made psychohistory 
unappealing to professional historians. Ranke’s age-old injunction that historiography involves 
 
151 Reinholds, Robert. ‘Historians Find Fresh Answers with Tools of Social Science; Historians Finding Fresh 
Answers with New Tools’. The New York Times, July 3. 1971. 
152 Burguière, André. The Annales School: An Intellectual History. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2009. 210. 
153 Ibid. 23. 
154 Carr, Edward H. What Is History? The George Macaulay Trevelyan Lectures Delivered in the University of 
Cambridge January-March 1961. London: Macmillan, 1977. 23. 
155 Quoted in Turner, Bryan S. The New Blackwell Companion to Social Theory. West Sussex: Wiley Blackwell, 
2009. 406. 

finding out about the past ‘as it was’ had led to a paradigm in American historiography that 
held that objectivity was an essential characteristic of historiography. Some presuppositions of 
psychoanalysis – that the observer is always in some way (consciously or not) involved in his 
or her subject – problematised this position, which was prevalent throughout American 
historiography throughout the twentieth century.156 Some psychohistorians believed that by 
using the ‘scientific’ theories of psychoanalysis to understand one’s own unconscious relation 
to the subject and the psychology of the historical actor, one could achieve a greater degree of 
objectivity. Others believed that the anti-realist consequences of psychoanalytic history 
justified taking up a moral position.157 Some psychohistorians, such as Peter Gay, proposed 
that psychohistorians should themselves undergo psychoanalysis.158 Others proposed that only 
a full psychoanalytic training could prepare one to write decent psychohistory. Others again 
believed that psychoanalytic training would stand in the way of a proper historical perspective. 
For others still, the transference towards one’s subject problematised the notion of objectivity 
in history-writing altogether. From this perspective, a historical study was at best a form of 
imaginative literature; at worst a symptom, with historical facts serving as manifest content in 
a dream-like expression of the author’s unconscious. This brought some of the 
psychohistorians’ concepts of truth close to what historian Hayden White called ‘poetic 
truth’.159  
 
The Optative Mood – the 1960s and 1970s 
 
The concept Entfremdung, whose origins Manuel located in Kierkegaard and Marx, was also 
to play an important role in the history of psychohistory. Along with shifting conceptions of 
health and illness in the 1960s and 70s came a growing emphasis on the influence of societal 
demands on the formation of neuroses; psychohistory increasingly became a vehicle for 
emancipatory movements that ‘diagnosed’ society as sick or alienated, and were at pains to 
remedy it.  
This trend was an outgrowth of the influence and the growing popularity of the 
Frankfurt School, especially its best-known American representatives (Adorno and 
Horkheimer, Fromm, and Marcuse). Peter Loewenberg was inspired by Adorno, and attended 
a lecture by him on the future of psychoanalysis in Berlin as a student.160 His The Authoritarian 
Personality (1950), co-authored with Else Frenkel-Brunswik, Daniel Levinson, and Nevitt 
Sanford, was an influential study that broke new ground in the general application of 
psychology to political questions. In the introduction to his pioneering volume Psychoanalysis 
and History (1963), Bruce Mazlish approvingly quoted Herbert Marcuse, and hailed him as 
one of ‘a number of writers on Freud who have sought recently to go beyond the master himself 
and to hold out the hope of mankind freeing itself from the curse of repression.’161 Although 
his own interpretation and use of Freud was far more conventional than Marcuse’s, Mazlish 
was keen to include him in the pantheon of writers who had paved the way for psychohistory. 
Psychohistorian Robert Lifton, several years later, was not so inclined:  
 
 
156 Novick, Peter. That Noble Dream: The "objectivity Question" and the American Historical Profession. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988. 
157 See Chapter Three. 
158 See Chapter Five. 
159 Muchowski, Jakub. ‘I am not interested in truth. I am interested in Reality. A conversation with Hayden 
White’. Historyka. Studia Metologiczne, Special Issue, 2012. 
160 See Chapter Four. 
161 Mazlish, Bruce. Psychoanalysis and History. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1963. 11. 

To me, Marcuse has always been kind of an enigma in his psychological perspective, 
because he maintains a more or less instinctual, Freudian position in his large projection 
of society and his notion of repression and surplus repression. Then, in One 
Dimensional Man, he reverts to an almost nonpsychological method in order to make a 
very strong psychological statement. That is, a society of such rigidly fixed and 
functional institutions in advanced capitalism, our present society, creates men and 
women who are mirror images of their institutions. My impression of the way things 
are happening in this country is rather the reverse, in which not only is man much more 
Protean, but even those who are constricted, and who come closest to Marcuse’s 
definition, are in a kind of despair and conflict.162 
 
This quote was taken from the minutes of an early Wellfleet meeting, where Norman Birnbaum 
led a discussion about the relationship between critical theory and psychohistory. For 
Birnbaum, a well-known sociologist, psychohistory represented the natural outgrowth of 
critical theory. To him, psychohistory was a form of Marxism without its prophetic aspect: 
stripped of its implicit view of an immaculate human nature corrupted by the division of labour. 
Psychohistory was not only a mode for the understanding of history, but a modern 
interpretation of the task of critical theory. He mused that psychoanalysis had ‘an Old 
Testament-like, awful, moral lesson: that all humans must suffer, that life is hard and 
unremitting, and that health consists in the ability to comprehend and understand that these 
blows are inevitable.’163 Stanley Edgar Hyman, a literary critic for the Partisan Review, 
expressed a similar view several years before: ‘Insofar as [psychoanalysis] is a philosophic 
view of man and body that can be turned on any area of culture (that is what Freud called 
‘applied psychoanalysis’), it is gloomy, stoic, and essentially tragic.’164 With all attempts at the 
concretisation of Marxist utopia defeated, Birnbaum wrote: ‘The failure of Marxist prophecy, 
the verification of the Freudian one, are the elements of a dreadful secular eschatology. We are 
parts of a humanity caught in an unending cycle of exploitation, domination, repression and 
pain.’165 Under this banner, psychoanalysis promised a more intricate, yet pessimistic, 
psychology that could be applied to other fields such as the social sciences and history. But 
Birnbaum also found that Freud’s hopes for psychoanalysis contained ‘an idea of liberating 
therapy – not just for individual patients, but for a reeducated humanity.’ Similarly, Hyman 
wrote: 
 
If Freud produced a climate of opinion in which tragedy could again flourish, an 
important group of followers in this country, the ‘neo-Freudians’ or ‘revisionists’, have 
done their best to dispel it as quickly as possible. In half a century of existence, 
psychoanalysis has raced through the whole religious cycle from revolutionary 
prophetic truth to smug Sunday sermon, and almost as soon as Freud’s philosophy 
began to have an effect on our culture it was hushed up and denied in his name. The 
revisionists, principally the late Karen Horney, Erich Fromm, and the late Harry Stack 
Sullivan, along with a number of others of similar views, have put Freudian 
psychoanalysis into what Emerson called the ‘optative mood’.166 
 
 
162 Lifton, Robert J. Explorations in Psychohistory: The Wellfleet Papers. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1974. 
203. 
163 Ibid. 183. 
164 Hyman, Stanley E. ‘Freud and the Climate of Tragedy’. Partisan Review, Spring 1956. 201. 
165 Lifton, Robert J. Explorations in Psychohistory: The Wellfleet Papers. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1974. 
194. 
166 Hyman, Stanley E. ‘Freud and the Climate of Tragedy’. Partisan Review, Spring 1956. 203. 

And indeed, this paradox was visible in much of the work produced under the label 
psychohistory – especially the work that emerged in the late 1960s and early 1970s; this shows 
the plasticity of the theories of psychoanalysis and psychohistory. Birnbaum and Hyman were 
not impressed with the New Left and popular political engagement. Birnbaum wrote: ‘It seems 
to me that the theory of the counterculture is a curious parody of a fused and undigested Freudo-
Marxism.’167 Instead, he explained the rise of psychohistory out of the failure of Marxism’s 
view of man. Undeterred by Birnbaum’s pessimism, psychohistory developed into a vehicle 
for the emancipation of excluded peoples in the 1970s. At the same time, the best-known 
representative of Freudo-Marxism in the United States, Erich Fromm, bitterly claimed that he 
was in fact the true founder of psychohistory.168 Historians of psychohistory Pietikainen and 
Ihanus have suggested that Erikson was inspired to write his analysis of Hitler on the basis of 
Fromm’s Escape from Freedom (1941), which included a chapter on Hitler’s character. Erikson 
had certainly read the book, and admitted that he had learned much from it, but he nowhere 
commented on this connection, nor did he acknowledge any influence. Erikson had visited 
Fromm several times with his wife Joan during the period when he was working on Young Man 
Luther, but from all accounts it seems that there was little discussion of ideas.169 When Fromm 
received a copy of the Wellfleet Papers, a collection of essays presented at the early Wellfleet 
Psychohistory Gatherings in 1975, he wrote to his friend David Riesman:  
 
I was surprised to find that in Lifton’s presentation the impression is given that he and 
Erikson discovered psycho-history in the 50s or 60s, I forget at the moment when, and 
that the fact is not mentioned that I started psycho-historical research back in the early 
thirties with ‘The Dogma of Christ’, and continued it in Escape from Freedom, in both 
instances trying to use psychoanalytic viewpoints to understand a historical process. 
They must know my work and it is difficult for me to imagine that they should be so 
possessed by the ambition to appear as the originators of a thought, that they would 
consciously and intentionally refuse to mention my work for such personal purposes.170 
 
In his reply, Riesman speculated that Lifton was ‘closer to Marcuse than to you in his politics, 
and this might also be an element in his seeking a patent on the term and concept of 
psychohistory vis-à-vis yourself.’171 The Dogma of Christ appeared in German in Imago in 
1930, and was not the first attempt at applying psychoanalytic knowledge to history, and it was 
published in English in 1963, some years preceding the formation of the Wellfleet 
Psychohistory Group. In the piece, Fromm developed a psychoanalytic social psychology: he 
traced the historical evolution of the dogma of Christ from Christianity’s early days up to the 
fourth century, and gave a social-psychoanalytic interpretation of the development and the 
functions of religion. In the article, Fromm did not use the term psychohistory.172 
 
William M. Runyan: A Final Synthesis 
 
 
167 Lifton, Robert J. Explorations in Psychohistory: The Wellfleet Papers. New York: Simon and Schuster, 
1974. 197. 
168 See Pietikainen, Petteri, and Juhani Ihanus. ‘On the Origins of Psychoanalytic Psychohistory.’ History of 
Psychology, Volume 6, No. 2, 2003. 171-94. 
169 Friedman, Lawrence J. Identity’s Architect: A Biography of Erik H. Erikson. London: Free Association 
Books, 1999. 274-275. 
170 Quoted in Pietikainen, Petteri, and Juhani Ihanus. ‘On the Origins of Psychoanalytic Psychohistory.’ History 
of Psychology, Volume 6, No. 2, 2003. 171-94. 
171 Ibid. 
172 Fromm, Erich. The Dogma of Christ, and Other Essays on Religion, Psychology, and Culture. Greenwich, 
CT: Fawcet, 1973. 

Psychohistorian David R. Beisel described the 1970s as the ‘Golden Age for psychological 
history’.173 Mack and Manuel’s prehistories, written in the early years of that decade, clearly 
served to inspire fellow psychoanalysts, psychologists and historians; to entice them to see the 
possibilities – even the necessity – of psychohistory as an interdiscipline. For the purpose of 
disseminating psychohistorical ways of thinking and working, at this point, psychohistory had 
to be sold to a variety of audiences. 
By the late 1980s, the situation was very different. The field of psychohistory was now 
being heavily criticised from within and without.174 It is useful, in fact necessary, to recognise 
a fundamental distinction between practitioners of psychohistory who were academics and 
those who were not. Especially the group of practitioners who gathered around psychohistorian 
Lloyd deMause, who was himself not affiliated to any academic institution (in fact outwardly 
critical of academic history), were heavily criticised by academic historians, psychologists and 
psychoanalysts. Historian David Stannard wrote: ‘Clearly, Mr. de Mause [sic] works well 
beyond the fringe of even the most generous definition of scholarship.’175 Even Bruce Mazlish 
called deMause ‘a jig man,’ and ‘a good businessman, not much else.’176 It is safe to say that 
deMause’s wild interpretation of psychohistory was pushing the boundaries of legitimate 
scholarship. His insistence to anchor a stable meaning to the term, to make hyperbolic and 
provocative statements, and his attempt to institutionalise psychohistory’s practice in an 
Institute of Psychohistory, made him extremely unpopular with more moderate users of the 
term. 
DeMause’s imaginative – but wildly speculative – theories made psychohistory 
vulnerable to criticism from academics.177 From the academic psychohistorians’ point of view, 
then, the field had to be saved from a host of critics, as well as from the more speculative 
internal elements. William McKinley (‘Mac’) Runyan, a sociologist and psychologist at 
Berkeley, attempted to formulate a new prehistory of psychohistory against this background. 
His contribution to the field was the book Life Histories and Psychobiography: Explorations 
in Theory and Method (1982). A reviewer in psychohistorical journal The Psychohistory 
Review judged it the best study of lives ‘since Erik Erikson’s Young Man Luther.’178 In the 
book, Runyan responded to criticisms of psychobiography and psychohistory, and suggested 
rigorous criteria for evaluating studies of individual lives.179 Several years later, he edited a 
volume of essays: Psychology and Historical Interpretation (1988). The introduction to that 
volume was an overview of the field of psychohistory: ‘A Historical and Conceptual 
Background to Psychohistory’.180 
Runyan received his PhD in clinical psychology and public practice from Harvard 
University in 1975, and has been a professor at the University of California, Berkeley since 
1979. Throughout his career, his main interests have been the methodological and theoretical 
issues concerning the study of lives. He was influenced most by his teachers Henry Murray 
and Robert W. White. ‘At first,’ he said, ‘I did not have a sympathetic exposure to 
psychodynamic theory. In graduate school I got more exposure to humanistic psychology, 
through those influenced by Carl Rogers, and also to behavioral critiques of psychoanalytic 
 
173 Beisel, David. ‘The Nazi Youth Cohort’. Clio’s Psyche, Volume 19, No. 1, June 2012. 108.  
174 See Chapter Five. 
175 Stannard, David. Shrinking History: On Freud and the Failure of Psychohistory. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1980. xii. 
176 Personal communication with Mazlish, January 15, 2014.  
177 See Chapter Four. 
178 Runyan, William McKinley. Life Histories and Psychobiography: Explorations in Theory and Method. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1982. 
179 Ibid. 
180 Runyan, William McKinley. Psychology and Historical Interpretation. New York: Oxford University Press, 
1988. 

theory.’181 Although he was formally retired, Murray became Runyan’s mentor at Harvard: ‘I 
think Henry Murray was important in advocating personality psychology and ‘personology’ or 
the study of lives starting in the 1930s,’ Runyan has said, ‘with his publication of Explorations 
in Personality (1938). As director of the Harvard Psychological Clinic from 1928, he also 
inspired many workers in the field, including the distinguished co-authors of Explorations in 
Personality, such as Robert W. White, Erik Erikson, Jerome Frank, Donald MacKinnon, Nevitt 
Sanford, and others.’182 
From Murray, Runyan inherited a deep conviction that the study of individual lives 
could be useful to a variety of academic disciplines. In psychohistory, he found a conceptual 
home to express this conviction. To this day, he is an advocate of psychologically informed 
history and historically informed psychology. He has been critical of psychology and 
philosophy’s tendencies for hasty abstraction and generalisation. He has found that life 
histories and biography have the capacity to serve as an antidote to such tendencies, in so far 
as they show how lives and personalities are far more complex – far more ‘overdetermined’ – 
than many theoretical approaches would account for. Although he has grown wary of the term 
psychohistory over the years, he is still committed to the many possibilities of psychobiography 
– a word he has always preferred to psychohistory – and the historical study of individual lives 
within the wider field of psychology. He has defined psychobiography as ‘the explicit use of 
formal psychological theory or research in the interpretation of individual lives.’183 But in 
contrast to psychobiography, he feels psychohistory has become a problematic term. He 
believes that this is because there has been a lot of irresponsible work published under that 
name. ‘Poisoned would be a good metaphor,’ he has said, to describe what happened to the 
field. But according to Runyan, psychohistory never died. It simply needs reimagining.184 
In 1988, when Runyan published his ‘A Historical and Conceptual Background to 
Psychohistory’, psychohistory was also in need of some imaginative reconstruction. Like many 
psychohistorians, Runyan freely applied the term psychohistory to work that was published 
long before Erikson started using the term. He wrote: ‘The history of psychohistory is 
traditionally defined as beginning with Freud’s study ‘Leonardo DaVinci and a Memory of his 
Childhood’.’ And Runyan traced psychohistory even further back:  
 
Perhaps the most detailed discussion of pre-Freudian psychohistory is that of Harry 
Elmer Barnes in Psychology and History (1925); he reviews the contributions of a 
number of workers who left no direct legacy and are little cited now, such as Wilhelm 
Wundt’s folk psychology (which has been overshadowed by his pioneering work in 
experimental psychology) and that of his colleague at Leipzig, the historian Karl 
Lamprecht, who argued that history should define itself as collective psychology and 
who provided a schematic and controversial conception of stages in the 
sociopsychological evolution of Western civilization.185  
 
Unsurprisingly, Runyan’s definition of psychohistory was broad. He basically considered all 
psychologically informed history psychohistory. Like many psychohistorians, he considered 
the publication of Young Man Luther by Erik Erikson and William Langer’s ‘Next Assignment’ 
address – both in 1958 – a significant turning point for the psychohistorical movement. 
 
181 Schultz, William T. ‘Psychobiography and the Study of Lives: William McKinley Runyan’, Clio’s Psyche, 
Volume 8, No. 3, December 2001. 107.  
182 Ibid. 
183 Ibid. 106 
184 Personal communication with Runyan, July 11, 2016. 
185 Runyan, William McKinley. Psychology and Historical Interpretation. New York: Oxford University Press, 
1988. 13. 

Crucially, he argued that the field of psychohistory did not develop within one unified and 
coherent stream, but evolved from several partially independent traditions and lines of 
influence.  
In his overview Runyan drew upon the work of William Gilmore, who wrote a 
Psychohistorical Inquiry: A Comprehensive Research Bibliography (1984). This document, 
containing more than 4,000 items, was intended to give a comprehensive list of English-
language publications in psychohistory through 1981, as well as a selection of studies written 
in foreign languages. The bibliography included a section on ‘The Life Cycle’, and included 
works that bear on childhood, adulthood, old age, and death. Gilmore’s sources included earlier 
bibliographies in psychohistory; items he encountered as co-editor of The Psychohistory 
Review; a systematic search of citations in Psychological Abstracts, Sociological Abstracts, 
Abstracts in Anthropology, Dissertation Abstracts, America: History and Life, and Historical 
Abstracts; and a search of the History of Childhood Quarterly, The Journal of Psychohistory, 
The Psychohistory Review, the I.P.A. Bulletin, the GUPH Newsletter, and the Journal of 
Interdisciplinary History. As in most other reflections on psychohistorical publications carried 
out from within the psychohistorical movement, works by authors who would not have labelled 
their own work as psychohistory are included. Runyan, analysing a self-selected portion of the 
materials included in the bibliography, came up with the following graph (Fig.2):  
 
 
Fig. 2. Runyan’s ‘The growth of literature in psychohistory’. 
 
By showing how the number of dissertations, books and articles on psychohistory had grown, 
Runyan conveyed a sense of urgency; by carving up psychohistory into various strands, ‘semi-
autonomous subtraditions’ as he referred to them, Runyan acknowledged that the field had 
grown problematically complex. His paper can be read as an attempt at organising the field. 
He wrote: ‘Current work in psychohistory is dispersed across a diverse range of disciplines, 
and the structure of the field may be better represented as a set of partially autonomous streams 

of work rather than as a single tightly organized tradition.’186 Concerned that the variety of 
different projects might be confused with one particular stream of work, he identified five main 
strands of psychohistory and its practitioners, sorted in accordance with the academic tradition 
that they grew out of. These subtraditions consisted of: 1) psychoanalysts, organised loosely 
around Erik Erikson, Robert Lifton and the Wellfleet Psychohistory Group, 2) political 
scientists, based predominantly at Yale, 3) academic psychologists, among whom Runyan 
ranked himself; with roots in the Harvard Psychology Department and the tradition of 
personality psychology, or ‘personology’, begun by Henry Murray, 4) academic historians, 
interested in supplementing history with knowledge from the social sciences, such as the 
Annales historians and their American counterparts, 5) the deMause group.187 Later he would 
add two extra subtraditions: journalists, such as Nancy Gager Clinch, and philosophers, such 
as Ray Monk.188 
In an attempt to make clear that many of psychohistory’s practitioners had roots in a 
variety of academic disciplines, Runyan was reclaiming the term psychohistory for an 
academic audience. He showed that it had firm roots in academia, where he believed the 
movement belonged. About the deMause group, Runyan wrote: ‘While many academics are 
extremely critical of the logic and reasoning of at least some of the work done by this group, it 
has received a good deal of public attention and is, to the regret of many other psychohistorians, 
often seen as representative of the field as a whole.’189 By his identification of the semi-
autonomous subtraditions within the field, he hoped psychohistorians could determine what 
branch of psychohistory they identified with. Runyan’s paper was designed as a compass to 
help reorientate the confused academic practitioner. ‘The deMause group was not happy with 
the book,’ Runyan later stated.190 But his efforts came too late. As we shall see, by 1988 the 
term psychohistory had been discarded by many of its most authoritative practitioners and 
interest in psychohistory was on the wane.  
Runyan tried to disassociate the term psychohistory from particular strands of the 
movement. In further chapters, we shall see that the history of psychohistory can be read as a 
game of tug-of-war between practitioners who were set to anchor a fixed meaning to the term, 
and those for whom psychohistory was better left undefined – so as to remain malleable and 
open to interpretation. But all of them came to the topic with particular ideological agendas, 
and their reconstructions of the past served political needs in the present. John Mack, in an 
attempt to win over psychoanalysts, sought to convince his readers that psychohistory could 
have significance in clinical practice; Frank Manuel showed the wide-ranging interactions 
between psychology and history that preceded, even led up to, psychohistory, in order to make 
it acceptable to academic historians; Mac Runyan tried to save psychohistory from its critics 
and the wild speculations of the deMause group, by showing its roots in a variety of academic 
traditions.  
By writing histories and prehistories of their movement, the psychohistorians were 
intervening in the past to promote their personal interpretations of psychohistory in the present. 
And in the process, they appropriated certain pre-psychohistorical works and authors, and 
distanced themselves from others, which in that way became fodder for their ideological 
canons. In the next chapter we shall see that the prehistories of psychohistory can be viewed as 
part of an over-arching narrative, an open-ended story, told and retold by practitioners about 
the history of their movement – a legend of psychohistory. 
 
186 Ibid. 14. 
187 Ibid. 
188 Personal communication with Runyan, July 11, 2016. 
189 Runyan, William McKinley. Psychology and Historical Interpretation. New York: Oxford University Press, 
1988. 17. 
190 Personal Communication with Runyan, July 11, 2016. 

 
 

Chapter 3 
What Do You Make of Adolf Hitler? 
 
On the 29th of December 1957, William L. Langer delivered his presidential address at the 
annual dinner of the American Historical Association in the Statler Hilton Hotel on 7th Avenue, 
New York City. Bruce Mazlish, a 34-year old historian of Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology (MIT), was present that evening and later recalled that ‘many eminent historians’ 
left that night ‘muttering that “old Bill Langer has gone off his rocker”.191 The diplomatic 
historian and professor at Harvard had apparently baffled his audience by giving a talk entitled 
‘The Next Assignment’, in which he urged strongly for a ‘deepening of historical 
understanding through exploitation of the concepts and findings of modern psychology’. 192 He 
meant specifically: Freudian psychoanalysis.193 
William Langer was chairman of the history department at Harvard and an expert on 
nineteenth century diplomacy. He earned his reputation as a scholar of European and Middle 
Eastern history and was known as an expert on military intelligence.194 During World War II 
he was on leave from his post at Harvard to serve as head of the Research and Analysis Branch 
of the Office of Strategic Services (OSS). In 1945, President Truman awarded him the Medal 
for Merit for his work in the service during the war. Over his thirty-seven years on the history 
faculty at Harvard, he published papers on a wide variety of imaginative topics, including a 
comparative essay on Nuclear War and the Black Death, and a paper on the role of the potato 
in the eighteenth century population explosion in Europe. Mazlish called him ‘a historian’s 
historian, so to speak.’195 He later recalled: ‘Nobody saw his psychoanalytic turn coming.’196 
In the telling and re-telling of the legend of psychohistory, by both its friends and foes, 
Langer’s speech has become one of the two events that mark the beginning of the movement.197 
William McKinley Runyan, who worked on several overviews of the field, has mentioned it as 
such.198 Peter Gay referred to it as such in his book Freud for Historians, in which, as we shall 
see, he increasingly distanced himself from the psychohistorical project.199 David E. Stannard 
in his collection of rabidly anti-psychohistorical essays Shrinking History also mentions 
Langer’s speech.200 But even authors with far more critical distance, reflected in space and 
time, towards the project of psychohistory such as Pietikainen and Ihanus (2003), have pointed 
to William Langer’s ‘Next Assignment’ as a starting point of psychohistory.201 Langer’s 
address very nearly coincided with the other formative event: the publication of Young Man 
 
191 Quoted in Pietikainen, Petteri, and Juhani Ihanus. ‘On the Origins of Psychoanalytic Psychohistory’. History 
of Psychology, Volume 6, No. 2, 2003. 171-94. 
192 ‘Presidential address delivered at the annual dinner of the American Historical Association the Statler Hotel, 
New York City, December 29, 1957’. American Historical Review 63, No. 2, January 1958. 283-304. 
Redproduced on: https://www.historians.org/about-aha-and-membership/aha-history-and-archives/presidential-
addresses/william-l-langer 
193 Ibid. 
194 Kann, Peter R. ‘Historian Langer Enters Retirement After 37 Years on Harvard Faculty’. The Harvard 
Crimson, June 9, 1964. 
195 Mazlish, Bruce. ‘Inside the Whales’. Times Literary Supplement, July 28, 1966. 667. 
196 Personal communication with Mazlish, January 15, 2014. 
197 I use the term ‘legend’ loosely, but have found inspiration in the description of the ‘legend of 
psychoanalysis’ by Sonu Shamdasani and Mikkel-Borch Jacobsen in their book The Freud Files (2012). See 
Introduction. 
198 Runyan, William McKinley. Life Histories and Psychobiography: Explorations in Theory and Method. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1982. 
199 Gay, Peter. Freud for Historians. New York: Oxford University Press, 1985. 
200 Stannard, David E. Shrinking History: On Freud and the Failure of Psychohistory. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1980. 
201 Pietikainen, Petteri, and Juhani Ihanus. ‘On the Origins of Psychoanalytic Psychohistory’. History of 
Psychology, Volume 6, No. 2, 2003. 171-94. 

Luther by Erik Erikson in 1958. In constructing a beginning for psychohistory, scholars in and 
of the field have, without any notable exception, mentioned these two events in one breath.  
In the previous chapter we discussed how the psychohistorians had conflicting ideas 
about the roots of psychohistory. Here we will look at what they could all agree on: two seminal 
events that came to signal the starting point of the psychohistorical movement. The 
psychohistorians had differing ideas about the roots of psychohistory, but they all looked back 
over these two events. The contradictions inherent in the standpoints of the canonisers were 
somehow embedded in these two events – William Langer, a historian propagating the use of 
psychoanalysis; Erik Erikson, a psychoanalyst doing historical work. If the last chapter was 
about the psychohistorians trying to establish a canon of psychohistorical works, this chapter 
is about the story that they told themselves about their own origins. It is our aim to look 
critically at those two seminal events and seek out the empirical and theoretical links between 
them. 
 
The Next Assignment 
 
Langer ended his speech on a rather grand note. ‘We may, for all we know, be on the threshold 
of a new era when the historian will have to think in even larger, perhaps even in cosmic, 
terms.’202 Langer envisioned an integrative task for historians, who, he thought, like ‘the 
scientists’, should entertain high hopes of ‘enlarging through cooperation their understanding 
as well as their knowledge of the universe.’203 Langer was hoping that American historians 
would integrate the findings of other disciplines into their historiographical method. By 
contrast, his own proposed expansion of the historian’s explanatory scope was strikingly un-
cosmic in its scale. In fact, Langer suggested that historians turn their attention inwards: he 
reminded his listeners that ‘for many years young scholars in anthropology, sociology, religion, 
literature, education and other fields have gone to psychoanalytic institutes for special 
training’.204 Now the veteran of World War I and former OSS-officer suggested ‘that some of 
our own younger men might do the same’.205 
Langer felt that for a movement that ‘strikes so close to the heart of our own discipline’, 
Freudian psychology had for too long been unjustly ignored by professional historians.206 He 
gave several reasons. After Freud, the application of psychoanalysis to historical subjects had 
been limited to what he regarded as ‘ill-informed, sensational, scandalizing […] pseudo-
psychoanalytical biographical writing in the 1920s’, which had made it unattractive for serious 
scholars to work with psychoanalytic ideas. 207 Only recently had there, in his view, emerged a 
truly ‘systematic personality and character study on a psychoanalytic basis’.208 The 
‘scientisation’ of psychoanalysis, led by psychoanalyst Franz Alexander some twenty years 
earlier, had produced a particular version of psychoanalysis that could serve as a credible, 
authoritative partner to other disciplines.209  
‘The field of medicine is feeling its impact not only in the area of psychosomatic 
illness,’ Langer stated, ‘but in the understanding of the doctor-patient relationship. Our whole 
 
202 ‘Presidential address delivered at the annual dinner of the American Historical Association the Statler Hotel’, 
New York City, December 29, 1957. American Historical Review 63, No. 2 (January 1958): 283-304. 
https://www.historians.org/about-aha-and-membership/aha-history-and-archives/presidential-addresses/william-
l-langer 
203 Ibid. 
204 Ibid. 
205 Ibid. 
206 Ibid. 
207 Ibid. 
208 Ibid. 
209 Alexander, Franz. ‘Psychoanalysis Comes of Age’. Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 7, 1938. 299-306. 

educational system and the methods of child-training have been modified in the light of its 
findings. […] Its influence has been felt in penology, in political science, and even in 
economics, while in the arts almost every major figure of the past generation has been in some 
measure affected by it.’210 It is interesting to note that Langer also mentioned the revisionist 
‘neo-Freudians’, a term associated with Erich Fromm and Karen Horney, as an example of a 
strand of psychoanalysis attempting such a systematic study. Langer found that historians had 
rejected findings of psychoanalysis precisely because they had ‘thought of themselves as 
psychologists in their own right’, and had perceived psychoanalysis as threatening to their own 
approach, which, he held, restricted historians to ‘recorded fact and to strictly rational 
motivation’.211 Psychoanalysis, Langer thought, allowed the historian to expand his scope so 
as to include speculation on scientific grounds about what went on in the minds of individuals 
and collectives, thereby surpassing a strictly rational view of man. What history needed was a 
‘penetration in depth’ of ‘modern psychology’.212 
It is important to note that Langer’s particular interest in psychoanalysis lay less with 
the application of psychoanalysis in biography and life histories, and more with its possible use 
to explain the behaviour of crowds. In contrast to the later canonisers of psychohistory, William 
Langer was proposing a fresh beginning – allowing psychology to invade and take over history. 
He cited Everett D. Martin, a crowd psychologist of the 1920s, who conceived of the crowd as 
‘a device for indulging ourselves in a kind of temporary insanity by all going crazy together’, 
and he mentioned how Carl Jung had characterized political mass movements as ‘psychic 
epidemics, i.e. mass psychoses.’213 It appears that Langer was broadly interested in the 
irrational forces in the individual and collectives and the interactions between the two. In Moses 
and Monotheism, Langer said, Freud had ‘tried to determine the effect of group experience on 
the formation of a collective group mind.’ More specifically, Langer wanted to know the ‘long-
range psychological repercussions’ of collective traumatic experiences, such as disease or 
famine. He expressed the hope that psychoanalysis might help elucidate ‘the underlying 
psychological forces’ of such experiences.214 
One example stood out. ‘Most striking,’ Langer judged, was ‘the case of the greatest of 
the reformers, Martin Luther.’ In Langer’s opinion, the Church Reformer illustrated the 
response to such traumatic collective experience best. The experience in this case was the 
Bubonic plague. From the immense number of papers and table talks produced by Luther, 
Langer got the impression of an ‘unusually self-analytical and self-critical personality’, who 
was also ‘tortured by the temptations of the flesh’, and in conflict with personalised demons. 
Luther, Langer held, had been profoundly shaped by his times, and identified with symbols of 
death and decay. Langer cited a psychoanalytic interpretation of Luther by Professor Preserved 
Smith, from 1913. Smith considered Luther ‘highly neurotic’ – driven to the monastery by the 
hope of finding a refuge from temptation and an escape from damnation. Smith’s study was 
important because it influenced Dr Paul J. Reiter, who later published ‘a huge and greatly 
detailed study of Luther’s personality’.215 Reiter reached the conclusion that Luther had 
suffered from ‘manic-depressive psychosis’, which was, Langer held, ‘frequently associated 
with genius’. ‘The point of mentioning all this,’ Langer reminded himself and his listeners, ‘is 
 
210 ‘Presidential address delivered at the annual dinner of the American Historical Association the Statler Hotel’, 
New York City, December 29, 1957. American Historical Review 63, No. 2 (January 1958): 283-304. 
Redproduced on: https://www.historians.org/about-aha-and-membership/aha-history-and-archives/presidential-
addresses/william-l-langer 
211 Ibid. 
212 Ibid. 
213 Ibid. 
214 Ibid. 
215 Ibid. 

to suggest that Luther’s trials were typical of his time’.216 Langer saw Luther’s struggles as the 
result of a collective preoccupation with death and sickness, and he interpreted Luther’s 
vocation as an attempt to deal with this traumatic climate. He concluded: ‘It is inconceivable 
that he should have evoked so great a popular response unless he had succeeded in expressing 
the underlying, unconscious sentiments of large numbers of people’.217  
In his ‘Next Assignment’, Langer assumed a far more unified psychoanalytic corpus 
than actually existed at the time.218 Alexander’s scientisation of psychoanalysis may have 
created the outward semblance of a unified, scientific field; in fact, psychoanalysis in the 
United States, as elsewhere, consisted of a myriad of schools, doctrines and idiosyncratic 
theoreticians and their followers. One such idiosyncratic character, not a scientist originally 
but an artist-turned-psychoanalyst, was Erik Erikson, whose next assignment at the time was 
finishing his psychoanalytic study of Martin Luther. 
 
The Luther-Book 
 
‘You remember,’ Erik Erikson wrote in 1957, in a letter to his friend and colleague David 
Rapaport, ‘how you used to think that my historical-ideological references were the weakest 
parts of my work? This is certainly so for psychoanalysis in general.’219 Less than a year later, 
Erikson published Young Man Luther (1958). It is considered one of his finest and most 
influential books, and consists of a historical-ideological study of the early life and developing 
thought of the Church Reformer. By 1958, Erikson was one of the most renowned 
psychoanalysts in the United States.220 He had gained notoriety for his popular book Childhood 
and Society (1950), in which he linked psychoanalytic thought about childhood with other 
disciplines such as anthropology. Erikson was of Danish origin, was trained by Anna Freud in 
Vienna, married an American dancer, and fled Europe from the Nazis with his family in 
1938.221 In Young Man Luther, he pursued his multidisciplinary approach to psychoanalysis, 
showing how he thought psychoanalytic concepts might be usefully applied in, and informed 
by, historical analysis.222 For the history of psychohistory it is an exceptionally important work, 
because in it Erikson transcended the standard application of psychoanalytic theory to a 
historical character.   
It is tempting to read some sort of significance into the coincidence of Langer and 
Erikson both choosing Martin Luther as an example of their bold, new vision for the 
intersections of psychoanalysis and history. Following Langer’s own logic, one might suggest 
that the American ‘collective mind’ was looking for an explanation of Hitler’s rise to power 
and, too traumatised to deal with Hitler directly, found in Luther a benevolent substitute to 
explain the mechanisms of ideological attraction and the leader-led dynamic. Biographer 
Robert G. L. Waite summarised a widely-held sentiment when he claimed that: ‘[Hitler] was 
Nazism. Since he was the sole source of final authority, he alone could legitimize Party 
decisions and determine public policy. […] Seldom in the history of Western civilization since 
 
216 Ibid. 
217 Ibid. 
218 This is one of the points of criticism launched at the psychohistorical movement by historian David Stannard 
in his book Shrinking History (1980), see Chapter Five.  
219 Letter from Erik H. Erikson to David A. Rapaport, ca. 1957, Container 467, Erik H. and Joan M. Erikson 
papers, 1925-1985, Houghton Library, Harvard College Library, Harvard University. 
220 Wallerstein, Robert S., and Leo Goldberger. ‘Ideas and Identities: The Life Work of Erik 
Erikson’. Psychoanalytic Psychology, Volume 17, No. 2, 2000. 437-42.  
221 For an overview of Erikson’s life and his fleeing of Europe, see: Friedman, Lawrence J. Identity's Architect: 
A Biography of Erik H. Erikson. New York: Scribner, 1999. 
222 Erikson, Erik H. Young Man Luther: A Study in Psychoanalysis and History. New York: W.W. Norton, 
1962. 

Jesus has so much depended on one man’s personality.’223 But the paths by which Erikson and 
Langer came to choose Martin Luther as their prime illustration of new ideas about 
psychoanalytic historiography are more complex and warrant closer investigation. In fact, it 
seems more likely that the coincidence of Erikson and Langer’s interest in Luther has 
retroactively contributed to the two events becoming associated and considered formative in 
the legendary ‘beginning’ of psychohistory. It is more than likely that Langer did not know 
Erikson was working on a book about Luther when he gave his speech in December 1957. On 
the 4th of September of the following year, he wrote a thank-you note to Erikson for the proofs 
of his new book. He judged it to be ‘full of interesting insights and shrewd observations which 
should prove stimulating to all historical students’.224 ‘Really,’ Langer wrote, ‘my only 
criticism is that at times you embark upon lengthy psychological or clinical discussions which 
from the very nature of things are difficult for the layman to follow and the exact relevance of 
which is not always obvious.’225 
The general public disagreed. Erikson’s Luther-book, as he himself referred to it, was 
not an immediate bestseller, but it would go on to become one. By 1964, the paperback edition 
had sold 9,900 copies, as opposed to 28,000 for Childhood and Society.226 In a review of the 
book, Harold G. McGurdy, professor of psychology at the University of North Carolina, found 
that Erikson ‘gently, sweetly, suavely’ cut out Luther’s guts. ‘Despite its medical aspects,’ 
McGurdy wrote, ‘Erikson’s book is more of a tract than a case history’. McGurdy’s main 
criticism lay in his view that Erikson supposedly translated Luther’s religious experience into 
formulaic psychoanalytic jargon: the historical Luther, he held, was reduced to a patient.227 
Clyde Kluckhohn, professor of Anthropology at Harvard University and a colleague of 
Erikson’s, thought otherwise and noted: ‘[Erikson] studied Kierkegaard in Danish and covered 
much other pertinent philosophy and theology. The result is a remarkable historical study that 
has a constant background in clinical experience.’ The ‘patient’ Luther, Kluckhohn found, was 
successfully situated in a historical context.228 
These two reviews, taken both from Erikson’s own scrapbook collection, reflect two 
general attitudes found in the literature on Young Man Luther. The first takes the work to be a 
psychoanalytic study of Luther in the tradition that Freud began with his books on Leonardo 
DaVinci and Dostoevsky – psychoanalytical texts on historical figures; the second takes it to 
be in essence a historical work, albeit informed by Erikson’s experience as a psychoanalyst. 
Similar attitudes can be found in more recent literature. Lyndal Roper, in her survey of 
psychoanalytic and historical approaches to Luther, stated that the work ‘exemplifies the vogue 
for psychobiography in the 1950s. In studies of this kind,’ she wrote, ‘Freudian ideas relating 
to instincts – the sexual instincts in particular – were applied to historical characters’.229 But 
psychiatrist and psychohistorian Robert J. Lifton called it ‘[Erikson’s] greatest book’, exactly 
because it was more than just an application of psychoanalytic thought to a historical figure: 
‘Erikson evoked Luther as himself a creation of the history of his time, who could in turn alter 
that history by means of his own extraordinary impact.’230 The author himself saw no need for 
 
223 Langer, Walter C. The Mind of Adolf Hitler; the Secret Wartime Report. New York: Basic Books, 1972. 220.  
224 Letter from William L. Langer to Erik H. Erikson, Container 329, Erik H. and Joan M. Erikson papers, 1925-
1985, Houghton Library, Harvard College Library, Harvard University. 
225 Ibid. 
226 Friedman, Lawrence J. Identity's Architect: A Biography of Erik H. Erikson. New York: Scribner, 1999. 325. 
227 McGurdy, Harold Grier. ‘Luther: Psychoanalyst’. PsycCRITIQUES, Volume 4, No. 7, July 1959. 201-202. 
228 Review by Kluckhohn, in Clippings and Reviews of Young Man Luther, ca. 1959. Container 1488, Erik H. 
and Joan M. Erikson Papers, 1925-1985, Houghton Library, Harvard College Library, Harvard University. 
229 Roper, Lyndal. ‘The Seven-Headed Monster: Luther and Psychology’. History and Psyche: Culture, 
Psychoanalysis, and the past. London: Palgrave and Macmillan, 2012. 
230 Lifton, Robert J. ‘Entering History: Erik Erikson’s New Psychological Landscape’, in: Ideas and Identities: 
The Life and Work of Erik Erikson. Madison: International Universities Press. 105. 

the book to be either one or the other, as is clear from the book’s subtitle: ‘A Study in 
Psychoanalysis and History’. 
In the first chapter, Erikson confided to his readers that such a study ‘will re-evaluate a 
segment of history (here the youth of a great reformer) by using psychoanalysis as a historical 
tool; but it will also, here and there, throw light on psychoanalysis as a tool of history.’231 To 
describe this curious blend of two disciplines, Erikson invented the adjective ‘psycho-
historical’.232 The hyphen was of particular importance to him, as it showed that psychohistory 
was still a work in progress: thrown on a ‘compost heap of today’s interdisciplinary efforts, 
which may help to fertilize new fields, and to produce future flowers of new methodological 
clarity’.233 Later, Erikson would characterise the psychohistorical marriage of psychoanalysis 
and history as ‘an in-between field’: ‘an area in which nobody as yet is methodologically quite 
at home, but which someday will be settled and incorporated without a trace of border disputes 
and double names.’234 Lifton has claimed that the noun-form ‘psycho-history’ was first applied 
to his own book Thought Reform and the Psychology of Totalism (1961) by a Yale 
undergraduate, Daniel Yergin.235 As Pietikainen and Ihanus have shown, both the noun psycho-
history and psycho-historical appeared in art historian Walter Abell’s book The Collective 
Dream in Art. Abell’s work, in which he proposed to merge insights from the arts, 
psychoanalysis and history into a new ‘psycho-historical theory of culture’ was published by 
Harvard University Press and may well have been known to Erikson. He did not, however, 
refer to the work when he used the hyphenated adjective in Young Man Luther for the first 
time.236  
Young Man Luther’s explanatory framework was present-centred, and the ease with 
which Erikson navigated between historical facts, interpretations and analogies was made 
possible exactly by the fact that he labelled his work a study in both ‘psychoanalysis and 
history’. By creating a hitherto non-existing ‘in-between’ field – an interdiscipline – out of two 
existing disciplines, Erikson relieved himself of the responsibility of conforming to the 
conventions of either genre. 
Erikson sets the stage for his discussion of Luther by introducing his readers to four 
earlier interpreters of the young reformer’s life: A Protestant professor of theology (Erikson 
calls him ‘the professor’), a Catholic priest (‘the priest’), a Danish psychiatrist (‘the 
psychiatrist’), and even a psychoanalyst of sorts (‘professor Smith’, the same one that Langer 
referred to in his speech). The book opens with a crucial event: ‘the fit in the choir’. During his 
early twenties, Luther was reported to have had a breakdown, suddenly falling to the floor in 
his monastery in Erfurt, calling out: ‘Ich bin’s nicht! Ich bin’s nicht!’ or ‘Non sum! Non 
sum!’237 One by one, Erikson calls upon the earlier interpreters to give their views of the event 
(in short: ‘meaningful’, ‘Satanic’, ‘diseased’, and ‘hysterical’, respectively). Erikson then 
shows their limitations, and proposes his own view. Rendering the event in his own terms, 
Erikson interprets the experience as an ‘epileptoid paroxysm of ego-loss, the rage of denial of 
 
231 Erikson, Erik H. Young Man Luther: A Study in Psychoanalysis and History. New York: W.W. Norton, 
1962. 16. 
232 As we have seen in the introduction, Erikson was not the first to use the word ‘psychohistory’ and 
‘psychohistorical’ when referring to psychoanalytic history, but it is very well possible that he did not know of 
these earlier uses. 
233 Ibid. 
234 Lifton, Robert J. On the Nature of Psychohistorical Evidence, In: Explorations in Psychohistory; the 
Wellfleet Papers. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1975. 43. 
235 Personal communication with Lifton, May 22, 2015. 
236 Pietikainen, Petteri, and Juhani Ihanus. ‘On the Origins of Psychoanalytic Psychohistory’. History of 
Psychology, Volume 6, No. 2, 2003. 
237 Erikson, Erik H. Young Man Luther: A Study in Psychoanalysis and History. New York: W.W. Norton, 
1962. 23. 

identity which was to be discarded’.238 The other interpreters and their views re-appeared 
throughout the book, mostly used to contrast, sometimes to complement, Erikson’s own 
interpretations. Especially ‘professor Smith’, who, as Erikson saw it, used Freudian ideas rather 
reductively, suffers the fate of the straw man repeatedly. 
Throughout the work, Erikson adopted the voice of a benevolent therapist: friendly, 
sometimes tongue-in-cheek, insistently non-dogmatic. Interpretations were presented as 
possible and partial explanations of Luther’s behaviour, never as definitive or strictly causal. 
On a formal level the Luther-book resembled a collage. Within a single paragraph, Erikson 
allows himself to narrate historical facts, freely associate to the materials (it is often unclear 
exactly what the status of these associations is, if they are supposed to have occurred to Luther, 
or if they are Erikson’s own, intended merely to illustrate), and to draw comparisons between 
Luther’s situation and contemporaneous situations, topics and people. As we have seen, an 
important chapter was dedicated to showing the similarities between Luther and Hitler’s 
upbringing and youth. But other known characters from Erikson’s earlier writings re-appear as 
analogous cases: George Bernard Shaw, Charles Darwin, and Sigmund Freud.239 
Erikson’s loyalty to Freud’s theories goes unquestioned throughout the work. But it is 
a particularly open-ended interpretation of Freud’s theories that Erikson committed to. There 
is a general emphasis on Luther’s relationship to his mother and father, and Erikson showed 
how certain features of his Oedipal situation: his father’s harshness and his mother’s 
superstition permeated Luther’s later beliefs. The innovative aspect of the book, however, is 
Erikson’s suggestion that Luther’s particular upbringing, characterised by his father’s strictness 
and his mother’s submissiveness, reflected a broader trend in parenting, and that this accounted 
in part for his later appeal as an ideological leader. Erikson proposed that Luther’s childhood 
situation could be seen as a reflection of changing property relations, due to the increasing 
relevance of Roman concepts of law, so that fatherhood took on the connotation of an 
ownership of wife and children. Luther’s struggle with the Catholic Church, in part a 
displacement of the struggle with his father, questioning the property and ownership of the 
Church, resonated with as many followers as it did, exactly because of this shared background. 
It was a book about the dialectic between leaders and followers.240 At the same time, it served 
Erikson as an illustration of his ideas about adolescence and identity and their role in 
psychoanalysis. 
 
The Veterans at Mt. Zion 
 
During the mid-1940s, Erikson worked as a consultant psychologist at the Mt. Zion Veterans 
Rehabilitation Clinic in San Francisco. The clinic, run by psychoanalysts Jascha Kasanin and 
Emanuel Windholz, provided short-term treatment for young men suffering from ‘nervous 
instability’, ‘psychoneurosis’241 and ‘readjustment problems’242.  
World War II had challenged the widely-held belief among psychiatrists in the United 
States that the origin of psychopathology was organic and based on hereditary predisposition. 
The influx of traumatised soldiers seemed to show that ‘environmental stress’ was a much more 
significant factor than predisposition in the cause of mental disorder.243 Erikson did not contest 
 
238 Ibid. 42. 
239 Ibid.  
240 Erikson, Erik H. Young Man Luther: A Study in Psychoanalysis and History. New York: W.W. Norton, 
1962. 
241 Friedman, Lawrence J. Identity's Architect: A Biography of Erik H. Erikson. New York: Scribner, 1999. 160. 
242 Kasanin, J. S., Charl Rhode, and Ernestine Wertheimer. ‘Observations from a Veterans' Clinic on Childhood 
Factors in Military Adjustment’. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry. 640-59. 
243 Hale, Nathan G. The Rise and Crisis of Psychoanalysis in the United States: Freud and the Americans, 1917-
1985. New York: Oxford University Press, 1995. 187. 

this. Yet he disagreed with most of the diagnoses given to these men by his more orthodox 
Freudian colleagues. He believed that the veterans were not ‘shell-shocked’ or 
‘psychoneurotic’, but that they were simply normal young men who, at a crucial stage in their 
psychic development, had been subjected to dramatic, historical changes. ‘Conditions of 
modern warfare,’ he wrote in 1945, ‘cause a considerable number of soldiers (...) to develop 
more or less transient symptoms of nervous instability of varying degrees.’244  
According to Erikson these men were damaged, but they were not ill. They had simply 
been lifted out of their particular contexts, separated from their families and loved ones, and 
subjected to military discipline and the atrocities of war. In Erikson’s words, they had ‘been 
impaired in that central control over themselves for which, in the psychoanalytic scheme, only 
the inner agency of the ego could be held responsible’.245 Erikson believed the young men were 
going through what he called an ‘identity crisis’. 
In ‘A Combat Crisis in a Marine’, a clinical vignette published in Childhood and 
Society, Erikson described the case of a medical officer who developed acute symptoms 
(paralysis; incapacitating headaches – they continued into the period following service) after 
having been handed a gun in the heat of battle. The marine had joined the medical corps 
specially to avoid having to carry a weapon. As a child, this man had left his home after his 
mother had pointed a gun at him during a drunken rage. After having secured the help of a 
school principle, he had sworn never to drink, swear, indulge himself sexually, and – 
importantly – never to carry a gun for the rest of his life. Now he could no longer keep the 
promise made to this internalised father-figure. He needed the weapon to save himself and his 
comrades. Erikson speculated that this was why the man broke down.246 
This example shows the importance of symbols in Erikson’s theory of identity crisis. 
For the marine, the gun was a personal symbol of moral decline and the breach of intimate 
trust; a symbol that in a very different context of war, gained a completely different meaning. 
In this particular context, a gun meant protection for the young marine himself and for others. 
The young men treated by Erikson at the Mt. Zion Clinic, men such as the marine, were 
no longer able to rely on what he called ‘ego synthesis’, by which he meant – the capacity to 
sift through and organise stimuli into meaningful patterns of symbols. By being lifted from one 
context into a completely different one, the veterans’ lives ‘no longer hung together’ and lacked 
‘continuity and sameness’.247 The marine’s story is an example of how Erikson saw that a 
symbol (the gun) can exist on a personal (the story of the mother) level, as well as on the level 
of collective experience (in wartime, as a necessary defence), and how the two attached 
meanings can come to conflict with one another. The problem of identity, Erikson later wrote, 
is a problem located in ‘the core of the individual’ as well as in ‘the core of his communal 
culture’.248 
Erikson regretted the amount of publicity given to neurotic instability in returning 
veterans.249 Because he did not judge these returning soldiers to be particularly ill, his 
suggestion of treatment was straightforward and involved encouraging the men to re-establish 
careers and families after the war. As circumstances changed, Erikson speculated, the synthetic 
capacities of the ego would be restored. He also urged that other clinicians drop diagnostic 
terms like ‘psychoneurotic’ altogether in such cases, to avoid reinforcing feelings of self-doubt 
 
244 Erikson, Erik H., and Stephen Schlein. A Way of Looking at Things: Selected Papers from 1930 to 1980. 
New York: W.W. Norton, 1987. 
245 Erikson, Erik H. Identity, Youth, and Crisis. New York: W.W. Norton, 1968. 17. 
246 Erikson, Erik H. Childhood and Society. 2d ed. New York: W.W. Norton, 1964. 32 – 36. 
247 Ibid. 36. 
248 Erikson, Erik H. Identity, Youth, and Crisis. New York: W.W. Norton, 1968. 22. 
249 Erikson, Erik H., and Stephen Schlein. A Way of Looking at Things: Selected Papers from 1930 to 1980. 
New York: W.W. Norton, 1987. 

and inferiority in the men.250 His colleagues at Mt. Zion agreed with this, presumably because 
of the great numbers of requests for mental help.251 
 
‘I’ for Identity 
 
Before his untimely death in 1960, David Rapaport took it upon himself to ‘translate’ many of 
Erikson’s intuitive notions into a more formal ego-psychological framework and jargon. He 
wrote introductions to his works to that end, and read and extensively commented on his 
friend’s drafts. But in 1979, when Erikson revised a version of his book Identity and the Life 
Cycle (which was originally published as a theoretical companion volume to Young Man 
Luther in 1959) he no longer added the original introduction by Rapaport. It appears that 
Erikson no longer felt he needed to justify himself to a psychoanalytic audience. He wrote: the 
‘psychosocial orientation [...] has become part of a historical one, which would force us 
eventually to view the ego’s functioning (as well as our attempts to grasp the nature of what 
we have been calling the “ego”) as processes underlying a historical relativity.’252 Erikson was 
re-branding his work for (psycho-)historically minded readers.  
Despite the early efforts made by Erikson and others to streamline his work to the then-
current ego-psychological metapsychology, his books became increasingly marginalised in the 
psychoanalytic world.253 It was not until recently that his legacy underwent a positive re-
evaluation within psychoanalytic circles in the United States. In his own time, Erikson was 
consigned to what psychoanalyst Robert Wallerstein has called ‘a persisting psychoanalytic 
limbo’.254 
By 1968, Erikson’s concepts of ‘identity’ and ‘identity crisis’ had fallen into common 
usage. In the introduction to a collection of essays, he wrote that they had become ‘terms which 
alternately describe something so large and seemingly self-evident that to demand a definition 
would almost seem petty’, while at other times ‘they designate something so narrow for 
purposes of measurement that the over-all meaning is lost.’255 He gave some examples: 
newspapers at the time ran headlines such as ‘The Identity Crisis of Africa’; the outgoing 
president of the American Psychoanalytic Association titled his farewell address ‘The Identity 
Crisis of Psychoanalysis’, and students at Harvard University held what they called an ‘Identity 
Crisis’ on a Thursday night at eight o’clock sharp.256 Rather mischievously, he added: 
‘Everybody has heard of ‘identity crisis’, and it arouses a mixture of curiosity, mirth and 
discomfort which yet promises [...] not to turn out to be something quite as fatal as it sounds.’257  
Fatal or not, the definition of ‘identity’ changed throughout Erikson’s career. In fact, it 
was important to him that his central concept remained elusive and malleable: in the same 
introduction, he described his concept as ‘a suggestive term’ that had just ‘begun to lend itself 
to ritualized usage.’258 By this time, Erikson was writing and thinking more as a historian and 
less as a psychoanalyst and had started scrutinising psychoanalytic concepts through a 
historical lens. It was exactly his place in ‘psychoanalytic limbo’ – working at once inside and 
outside the psychoanalytic field – that allowed him to do so. Erikson’s work is still hard to 
categorise because it is located on the intersection of, or the space between, many fields and 
 
250 Ibid. 
251 Friedman, Lawrence J. Identity's Architect: A Biography of Erik H. Erikson. New York: Scribner, 1999. 162. 
252 Erikson, Erik H. Identity and the Life Cycle (1959). New York: W.W. Norton, 1980. 12.  
253 Wallerstein, R. S. ‘The Growth and Transformation of American Ego Psychology’. Journal of the American 
Psychoanalytic Association. 135-68. 
254 Ibid. 230. 
255 Erikson, Erik H. Identity, Youth, and Crisis. New York: W.W. Norton, 1968. 15. 
256 Ibid. 
257 Ibid. 
258 Ibid.  

genres – psychoanalysis, history, anthropology and sociology. He cultivated this position by 
leaving some of his central concepts open or undefined, so that scholars working in different 
fields could appropriate them. Still there are some guiding themes derived from his background 
in ego psychology that must be pointed out here, as they contributed to Erikson’s view that 
even central concepts are sometimes best left undefined. 
In 1946, Erikson published an important paper entitled ‘Ego Development and 
Historical Change’. The paper foreshadowed parts of his famous book Childhood and Society, 
and it linked his thoughts at the time with his ego-psychology background. In the paper, 
Erikson argued that the ego draws much of its strength from culture. In contrast to Freud, who 
had stressed how society issues its demands on a person through internalised superego 
injunctions, Erikson showed how society gives purpose and meaning to a person’s life, and 
how it ‘seduces him to its particular lifestyle’, or, in some cases, doesn’t. This was already a 
controversial position to take in psychoanalytic circles, but to add to the controversy, Erikson 
announced in the paper that he was in favour of exploring how family patterns were socially 
determined - thereby opening up questions about the ‘Oedipus trinity as an irreducible schema 
for man’s irrational conducts’.259 
Erikson’s psychoanalytic thought was heavily influenced by his analysis and training 
with Anna Freud. In his controversial paper, he approvingly quoted from her book The Ego 
and the Mechanisms of Defence (1936). At a glance, it is obvious that he agreed with her 
reconceptualisation of psychoanalysis – regarding the ego, the ‘Ich’, as at once instrument (as 
the ‘seat of observation’) and object of psychoanalytic inquiry. Like his analyst and mentor, 
Erikson’s psychoanalytic model of the mind is clearly the structural model, proposed by 
Sigmund Freud in ‘The Ego and the Id’ in 1923. Like her father, Anna Freud effectively 
rendered the content of the unconscious a ‘noumenon’. She held that psychoanalysis should 
focus its attention on the derivatives of unconscious processes in consciousness, if it was to 
remain an empirical science. Her interest, however, was still very much concentrated upon 
describing the various ‘defence mechanisms’ that the ego employs in its confrontation with id-
impulses and the demands issued by the outside world. In his paper, Erikson implicitly 
challenged Anna Freud’s problematic status of the ‘outside world’ as something issuing 
demands to be reckoned with, and set out to fill ‘the methodological gap’ that ‘has perpetuated 
in psychoanalytic thought an artificial differentiation between the individual within his family 
(or seemingly surrounded by projections of his family constellation on the ‘outer world’)’ and 
‘social organization’.260 The outside world, Erikson contended, had a lot to offer to the 
developing individual. 
The most significant things on offer were a ‘vitalizing sense of reality’, ‘cultural 
meaning’, ‘functional pleasure’ and ‘social recognition’: all in service of a sense of ‘realistic 
self-esteem’.261 Erikson was responding here to another major figure from the ego-psychology 
establishment, Heinz Hartmann, who would formulate the reality principle a year later as the 
‘tendency to take into account in an adaptive way [...] whatever we consider the real features 
of an object or situation’.262  
In a tribute to Hartmann, Anna Freud once wrote that ‘I came into [the field of ego-
psychology] more conventionally, from the side of the ego’s defensive activities against the 
 
259 Erikson, Erik H. ‘Ego development and historical change’, in Identity and the Life Cycle (1959). New York: 
W.W. Norton, 1980. 19. 
260 Ibid. 18. 
261 Ibid. 
262 Hartmann, Heinz. ‘On Rational and Irrational Actions’. In: Psychoanalysis and the Social Sciences, 1947. 
33. 

drives; Hartmann, in a more revolutionary manner, from the new angle of ego autonomy.’263 
From the concepts of autonomy and adaptation, Hartmann developed the fundamental 
structures of ego psychology, most notably: an emphasis on mechanisms of control, and ‘ego 
strength’. Hartmann developed his concept of a ‘conflict-free’ sphere of ego development, 
which was geared towards adaptation of reality, instead of organising defences against internal 
drives. At this point, the goal of psychoanalytic therapy became to help achieve ‘a better 
functioning synthesis and relation to the environment’.264 This involved a change in 
conceptualisation of what the ego was and how it developed. Contrary to Freud’s model, the 
ego did not develop from the id, but rather emerged from an undifferentiated phase determined 
by inborn givens. Inspired in part by the works of figures such as Jean Piaget, Hartmann argued 
that defences, as described by Sigmund and Anna Freud, could serve as ways of successfully 
mastering the environment.265  
Erikson criticised Hartmann’s conceptualisation of the ego and its relation to the 
environment, as it remained caught within what he called the ‘Cartesian straight-jacket that we 
have imposed on our model of man’.266 If Anna Freud remained interested most in the ego’s 
intra-psychic activity, Hartmann focused on the ego’s autonomous functioning, while Erikson 
tried to show the ego’s dependence on social, symbolic structures. But Erikson did follow 
Hartmann in saying that a distinction should be made between ego, ‘I’ and Self. In contrast to 
Sigmund Freud, whose German ‘Ich’ was translated into ‘ego’ by James Strachey, Hartmann 
and Erikson reserved a role for the ‘I’ as consciousness – seeing and contemplating ‘the body, 
the personality, and the roles to which it is attached for life.’267 These roles were then thought 
to be made up out of multiple selves that together form a cohesive Self. The ego, on the other 
hand, was understood as a central and partially unconscious organising agency. Ego identity 
tests, selects and integrates self-images ‘on one of the ego’s frontiers, namely that of 
‘environment’ which is social reality.’268 In identity diffusion or crisis ‘a split of self-images is 
suggested, a loss of center and dispersion.’269  
In a paper from 1961, Erikson separated from the concept of reality one of its 
implications, actuality, by which he meant: ‘the world verified in immediate immersion and 
interaction.’270 Here he made a distinction between phenomenal reality, the ‘outer world’ that 
has to be dealt with, responded to by an inner agency, with a ‘minimum of distortion and with 
a maximum of customary validation agreed upon in a given state of technology and culture’271, 
and actuality: which is the space where ‘outer’ conditions and ‘inner’ states meet. Erikson 
proposed that one can speak of actuality as co-determined by an individual’s stage of 
development, his personal circumstances and by historical and political processes.  
Already in 1946, Erikson was less interested in the psychoanalytic interpretation of 
reality as something to be adapted to, phenomenal reality, than reality as actuality, meaning: 
an embeddedness in a symbolic, ‘historical’ context. Personal identity, according to Erikson, 
is based on two simultaneous observations. First, a perception of one’s self-sameness and 
 
263 Quoted in: Wallerstein, Robert S. ‘The Growth and Transformation of American Ego Psychology’. Journal 
of American Psychoanalytic Association, Volume 50, 2002. 137. 
264 Hartmann, Heinz, and David Rapaport. Ego psychology and the problem of adaptation. Madison, CT: 
International Universities Press, 1958. 81. 
265 Wallerstein, Robert S. ‘The Growth and Transformation of American Ego Psychology’. Journal of American 
Psychoanalytic Association, Volume 50, 2002. 
266 Erikson, Erik H. Insight and Responsibility. New York: W.W. Norton, 1964. 163. 
267 Erikson, Erik H. Identity: Youth and Crisis. New York: W.W. Norton, 1968. 217 
268 Ibid. 218. 
269 Ibid. 212. 
270 Erikson, Erik H. ‘Psychological Reality and Historical Actuality’. Insight and Responsibility; Lectures on the 
Ethical Implications of Psychoanalytic Insight. New York: W.W. Norton, 1964. 164. 
271 Ibid. 165. 

continuity in time, and second, the perception that others recognise this continuity. 272 What is 
assumed here is that the two – the internal world and the outer world, are somehow shared in 
a symbolic space. If, at any point, one of these two elements is called into question, or when 
the two start to conflict with one another, one may speak of an identity crisis. Erikson called 
the inner sense of being collectively integrated ‘ego identity’, and it was exactly this sense of 
symbolic integration, he held, that was lost for the veterans at Mt. Zion, when they made the 
transition from high school, college and the work-place to the battlefields of Normandy and 
Guam.  
 
The Medusa Dream 
 
Erikson started work on a book that he provisionally entitled Varieties of Identity Diffusion in 
the early 1950s. He had recently moved to Massachusetts and began working at the Austen 
Riggs Centre: a small psychiatric hospital in Stockbridge. There were no closed wards, patients 
were encouraged to engage in community affairs, and they were free to roam around town.273 
Erikson attended three staff meetings a week, conducted training analyses, and saw a small 
number of patients. The book was planned as a discussion of five of his Riggs patients, all 
young men and women who had been admitted because of severe emotional disturbances. As 
he had done in Childhood and Society, Erikson planned to complement the clinical cases with 
illustrative historical examples.274  
One of the five cases stood out. A young seminarian – the man was in his early twenties 
– had been admitted to the hospital in the early 1950s. The man was part of a small group of 
patients at the Riggs that came from theological seminaries. He had developed his symptoms 
whilst attending a Protestant seminary, where he had been training for missionary work in Asia. 
As a rule, patients admitted to the Austen Riggs Centre were subjected to a preliminary 
screening, a set of interviews that served to provide the therapist with a picture, painted in 
broad strokes, of the person’s over-all character and ‘expectable mental states’. In the case of 
the young seminarian, these tests had indicated that the patient displayed so-called border-line 
psychotic features.275 Remarking on this procedure, as well as this particular preliminary 
diagnosis, Erikson later said that ‘even the best preparation cannot predict what depths and 
heights may be reached once the therapeutic process gets underway.’276  
In a lecture given at MIT in 1957, Erikson used this young man’s case as an example 
of how dreams might serve as clinical evidence in psychotherapeutic treatment. He reports how 
the patient’s father was a successful physician, but a distant character, and that it was his mother 
and her father, the patient’s grandfather, to whom the young man felt closest. The grandfather 
was a benevolent man, a country doctor, and the mother was a domineering presence in the 
patient’s life. Halfway through the first year of his treatment, the young seminarian reported a 
dream of ‘a big face sitting in a buggy of the horse-and-buggy days. The face was completely 
empty, and there was horrible, slimy, snaky hair all around it.’ He added: ‘I am not sure it 
wasn’t my mother.’277 
Erikson referred to this dream as the ‘Medusa Dream’. The dream became central to 
the seminarian’s treatment, and in his lecture, Erikson went to great lengths to show the 
 
272 Erikson, Erik H. ‘Ego development and historical change’. Identity and the Life Cycle, New York: W.W. 
Norton, 1980. 22. 
273 Friedman, Lawrence J. Identity's Architect: A Biography of Erik H. Erikson. New York: Scribner, 1999. 160. 
274 Ibid. 
275 Erikson, Erik H. Insight and Responsibility; Lectures on the Ethical Implications of Psychoanalytic Insight. 
New York: W.W. Norton, 1964. 60. 
276 Ibid. 
277 Ibid. 57. 

multiple layers of meaning that the dream contained. He reminded his audience that Freud had 
held that Medusa, with her angry face and snakes for hair, symbolised male fear of femininity 
and castration. But Erikson was less concerned with the underlying sexual themes, which he 
took for granted, and more with the manifest particulars of the dream, especially the theme of 
‘facelessness’, which he interpreted as pointing to a lack of identity. The emptiness of the face 
represented the ‘diffusion’ of the seminarian’s identity, and Erikson speculated that the patient 
was trying, unsuccesfully, to differentiate his own face from his mother’s. The facelessness 
also pointed to the patient’s religious scruples that coincided with the appearance of psychiatric 
symptoms.278  
The man’s case served as an illustration of Erikson’s syndrome called ‘identity 
diffusion’ - a term which described the inability of young people to establish a ‘station and 
vocation’ in life, and ‘the tendency of some to develop apparently malignant symptoms of 
regression.’ Again, Erikson translated a then-standard clinical diagnosis (‘border-line 
psychotic features’ and ‘obsessive compulsive character’) into the development-related, more 
benign, term – ‘identity diffusion’. By this time, Erikson was convinced that identity ‘crises’ 
in particular, and identity ‘diffusion’ more generally, were universal phenomena (aggravations 
or undue prolongations of, or regressions to normative crises belonging to stages of 
development, rather than common dynamic patterns of groups of severe disturbances).  
There are certain stages in life, Erikson wrote, when even ‘seemingly malignant 
disturbances are more profitably treated as aggravated life crises rather than as diseases subject 
to routine psychiatric diagnoses’, and further, that ‘the therapeutic need in one patient is 
identical with the need of young people anywhere for ideological affirmations’.279 Out of this 
insight grew Young Man Luther – a reconstruction of the life of another young seminarian. 
Erikson’s discussion of Martin Luther was supposed to serve as the illustration to the clinical 
material of the young seminarian. Instead, Luther became the main focus of an entirely new 
project. In a letter to Rapaport, Erikson confided that the ‘Luther business really has got me 
chained to the kind of material and the kind of writing procedure which, once you have started 
it, you have to finish it, even though there are many moments when you really don’t know 
whether you should have chosen the subject.’280 Yet it was worth it, he concludes, because: 
‘Here I come across a man who fits my specifications for a first class identity crisis within a 
first class ideological crisis’. 281  Erikson was not consciously encouraging the invasion of 
history by psychology. In fact, he was using history to test out new ideas that were drawn from 
clinical experience. Unbound by the restrictions involved in writing up clinical case material, 
Erikson found in Luther an illustration of his ideas.282 
 
Young Man Hitler 
 
Luther was more than just a convenient stand-in for Erikson’s young patient. In the early 1940s, 
Erikson was one of many academics approached by the US government to assess the situation 
in Europe. Besides the applied knowledge used for code-breaking and the development of 
weapons such as nuclear bomb technology, scholars in the humanities and social sciences were 
employed by the government to further understanding of phenomena such as the cultural and 
psychological impact of Nazism. The organisation that issued the request was the Office of 
Strategic Services (OSS), a special United States Intelligence Agency founded in 1941. 
 
278 Ibid. 57-58. 
279 Ibid. 65. 
280 Letter from Erik H. Erikson to David A. Rapaport, ca. 1957, Container 467, Erik H. and Joan M. Erikson 
papers, 1925-1985, Houghton Library, Harvard College Library, Harvard University. 
281 Ibid. 
282 Ibid. 

Psychohistorian Louise Hoffman has documented Erikson’s involvement with the OSS in her 
papers ‘American Psychologists and Wartime Research on Germany, 1941-1945’ and ‘Erikson 
on Hitler: The Origins of “Hitler’s Imagery and German Youth”’. 
The Service was set up to do several things: coordinate espionage activities, collect 
intelligence, employ propaganda, plan post-war activities, and conduct what it called 
‘psychological warfare’.283 On July 1941, William ‘Wild Bill’ Donovan was appointed Co-
ordinator of Information (COI) for the OSS. Like its succesor, the Central Intelligence Agency 
(CIA), set up in 1947, the OSS made use of the knowledge of university professors and other 
experts in their respective fields. These scholars were employed by the so-called Research and 
Analysis branch of the service, led by historian William Langer. This branch assembled 
roughly 900 scholars of various disciplines: historians, economists, political scientists, 
geographers, psychologists, anthropologists, and diplomats were especially favoured. Erik 
Erikson was among those consulted, as were Arthur M. Schlesinger, H. Stuart Hughes, and 
Herbert Marcuse, to name a few. One of the OSS’ tasks was to decipher the states of mind of 
foreign leaders, and to estimate the morale of foreign peoples.284 
As early as 1939, a so-called Committee for National Morale was set up, uniting 
academics dedicated to investigating the psychological dimensions of warfare and propaganda 
within the United States in anticipation of war. This group included prominent scholars such 
as Margaret Mead, her husband Gregory Bateson, Ruth Benedict, Kurt Lewin and Harvard 
psychologist Henry Murray.285 These were all people closely associated with Erikson. Later, 
the Psychological Division of the OSS, led by psychologist Robert Tryon, sought to enhance 
understanding of American and foreign national characters, and also aided with the selection 
of American intelligence agents in the first psychological assessment centre set up in the United 
States.286 Erikson was part of this team. In early 1941, higher officials within the OSS pressed 
for psychological research on Germany. A report to ‘Wild Bill’ on 18 February requested a 
‘comprehensive critique of psychological factors which were found to be of defining 
importance in modern wars’.287 Some months later, Donovan was asked to set up a 
‘psychological offense directed against Hitler, based on an analysis of his personality disorder 
to “adversely affect Hitler’s already precarious emotional stability”.’288  
One of the tasks set for the psychologists associated with the OSS was to evaluate and 
try to explain the rise of Hitler. Before psychoanalysts became actively engaged with the 
Intelligence Agencies, there had been sporadic earlier psychoanalytic studies of Hitler’s rise to 
power. Most of these works stressed the father-role that Hitler had played to his followers – in 
this they followed Freud’s analysis of the attraction of leaders in Group Psychology and the 
Analysis of the Ego.289 Some other psychoanalysts, more inclined to study social factors after 
a Marxist fashion, such as Erich Fromm, included analyses of socio-economic factors.290 
Three of Erikson’s contributions to the OSS survive: a 31-page paper entitled ‘On Nazi 
Mentality’ submitted in April 1942; a 28-page typescript entitled ‘Hitler’s Imagery and German 
Youth: A Contribution to the Study of German Character Structure’ submitted in the summer 
 
283 Banks, Louie M. The Office of Strategic Services Psychological Selection Program, PhD-thesis, Fort 
Leavenworth, Kansas, 1995. 
284 Pick, Daniel. The Pursuit of the Nazi Mind: Hitler, Hess, and the Analysts. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2012. 152. 
285 Friedman, Lawrence J. Identity's Architect: A Biography of Erik H. Erikson. New York: Scribner, 1999. 164. 
286 Banks, Louie M. The Office of Strategic Services Psychological Selection Program, PhD-thesis, Fort 
Leavenworth, Kansas, 1995. 
287 Friedman, Lawrence J. Identity's Architect: A Biography of Erik H. Erikson. New York: Scribner, 1999. 167. 
288 Ibid. 
289 Pick, Daniel. The Pursuit of the Nazi Mind: Hitler, Hess, and the Analysts. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2012. 274. 
290 Ibid. 196. 

of 1942; and the published version of ‘Hitler’s Imagery’. As Hoffman has shown, together they 
form an important chapter in Erikson’s first book, Childhood and Society (1950): ‘The Legend 
of Hitler’s Childhood’.291 
In that chapter, Erikson set out to explain Hitler’s appeal to his German following. He 
was particularly impressed by Hitler’s myth-making capacities. He wrote: ‘I shall not now 
review the psychiatric literature which has described Hitler as a “psychopathic paranoid”, an 
“amoral sadistic infant”, an “overcompensatory sissy”, or a “neurotic laboring under the 
compulsion to murder”.’292 Hitler, according to Erikson, ‘was first of all an adventurer, on a 
grandiose scale.’293 This approach, which did not focus on Hitler’s pathology and its origins in 
his childhood but rather on his capacities to convince his followers, set Erikson’s analysis of 
Hitler apart from other psychoanalysts’ work. It went beyond an analysis of Hitler’s pathology, 
and it also went beyond stating mere facts, such as economic determinants. Erikson was 
interested in the fabric of Hitler’s appeal, the ‘psychic facts’ – the stories and mythology that 
he created, and how they linked up with Germany’s collective fantasies, fears and ideals. ‘The 
personality of the adventurer is akin to that of an actor,’ Erikson wrote, ‘because he must 
always be ready to personify, as if he had chosen them, the changing roles suggested by the 
whim of fate. Hitler shares with many an actor the fact that he is said to have been queer and 
unbearable behind the scenes, to say nothing of in his bedroom. He undoubtedly had hazardous 
borderline traits. But he knew how to approach the borderline, to appear as if he were going 
too far, and then to turn back on his breathless audience.’294 Again, Erikson was interested in 
the dialectic between leaders and followers. 
Whether or not Erikson’s approach was of much use to the OSS officials remains 
unknown. Louise Hoffman reported that for Erikson himself the work was more expensive than 
it was rewarding. His consultant fees and expenses made for the OSS remained unpaid for more 
than two years; in the meantime, he sold his car to make ends meet.295 But the work on Hitler 
undoubtedly prepared him theoretically for his book on Luther. Erikson himself made the 
comparison in Young Man Luther, when he wrote that centuries after Luther ‘there appeared 
in Germany another young man who radically underbid Martin in his choice of temporary 
nothingness; a young man who likewise re-emerged from his moratorium as a leader of the 
German nation, matching Luther little in constructiveness, and outdoing him in systematic 
political destructiveness. This man, of course, was Adolf Hitler.’296 In the Luther-book, Erikson 
returned to the question what psychological trends in Hitler prepared the nation for the 
acceptance of the ‘Brown Piper’s most persuasive tune,’ to show how similar processes had 
been at work in the choice of Martin Luther as a spiritual leader, centuries before.297 Erikson’s 
study of Hitler for the OSS indirectly paved the way for his ‘psycho-historical’ study of Luther. 
 
William and Walter 
 
William Langer, author of ‘The Next Assignment’, suffered from crippling attacks of 
stagefright. ‘Lecturing,’ he wrote, ‘became a chronic ordeal, and I found myself becoming 
 
291 Hoffman, Louise E. ‘Erikson on Hitler: The Origins of “Hitler’s Imagery and German Youth”’. The 
Psychohistory Review, Volume 22, No. 1, Fall 1993. 70. 
292 Erikson, Erik H. Childhood and Society. New York: W.W. Norton, 1950. 287. 
293 Ibid. 
294 Ibid. 288 
295 Hoffman, Louise E. ‘Erikson on Hitler: The Origins of “Hitler’s Imagery and German Youth”’. The 
Psychohistory Review, Volume 22, No. 1, Fall 1993. 82. 
296 Erikson, Erik H. Young Man Luther: A Study in Psychoanalysis and History. New York: W.W. Norton, 
1962. 105. 
297 Erikson, Erik H. Childhood and Society. New York: W.W. Norton, 1950. 288. 

panicky even before entering the classroom.’298 For this reason, he went to see the 
psychoanalyst Hanns Sachs, the first training analyst at the Berlin Institute, who later moved 
to Boston. Langer later entered into analysis with Dr. Jenny Waelder. About his analysis, 
Langer later wrote that it was ‘highly instructive’, but that his affliction proved ‘absolutely 
recalcitrant.’299 Nonetheless, Langer became convinced that psychoanalysis was an important 
tool for assessing personalities.300 By 1942, William Langer was head of the OSS Research 
and Analysis branch. In that capacity he wrote to ‘Wild Bill’ Donovan, head of the OSS, that 
he was ‘personally convinced that psychological warfare operations can be strengthened by 
bringing in people in the psychoanalytic field.’301 Erikson’s reports were commissioned as a 
result.302 But in the spring of 1943, Donovan commissioned a full-scale analysis of Hitler’s 
personality. The person he turned to for a ‘psychoanalysis’ of Hitler was psychoanalyst Walter 
C. Langer, William’s younger brother. 
In a letter from 1975 to Sanford Gifford, chief librarian of the Boston Psychoanalytic 
Institute, Walter Langer described how he entered analysis with Martin Peck in 1923, and after 
graduating Langer moved to New Mexico, where he set up a school for ‘neurotic adolescent 
boys’, which was later moved to Massachusetts.303 After the school burned down, Langer 
decided to go back to Harvard to work on a PhD. There he befriended Erik Erikson in 1934, 
‘who had just come from Europe where he had been analyzed by Anna Freud and trained at 
the Vienna Psychoanalytic Instute.’304 Inspired by his meeting with Erikson, Langer wrote to 
Anna Freud in 1935 and was accepted as a candidate by the Vienna Institute. Langer arrived 
in Vienna in the summer of 1936. 
Langer recalled that whilst training in Vienna and being in analysis with Anna Freud, 
‘the political clouds were gathering and becoming more ominous’.305 In the letter, Langer 
described how Anna Freud was called in for questioning by the Gestapo during one of his 
sessions, and ‘after a time she did appear as unruffled as ever and the “analysis” continued.’306 
Little is said in the long autobiographical letter about the actual analysis that Langer had with 
Anna Freud, but he openly discussed the political circumstances in Vienna at the time. Langer 
was involved in smuggling Jewish refugees across the border, and made a visit to Berlin ‘to 
see what life was like under the Hitler regime.’307 It was these travels, which led him past the 
Nuremberg Rallies, that would make him particularly appealing to the United States authorities 
as an expert on the situation in Germany and, in his own words, ‘the person best qualified to 
write a psychological analysis of Hitler and his relationship to the German people for the OSS 
during the war’.308 
 
298 Quoted in: Loewenberg, Peter. Decoding the Past, The Psychohistorical Approach. New Brunswick: 
Transaction Publishers, 2002. 241. 88-89. 
299 Ibid. 
300 In a psychobiographical portrait of William Langer, psychohistorian Peter Loewenberg offered his own 
explanation of Langer’s interest in psychoanalysis. See: Loewenberg, Peter. Decoding the Past, The 
Psychohistorical Approach. New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers, 2002. 241. 88-89. 
301 Quoted in Pick, Daniel. The Pursuit of the Nazi Mind: Hitler, Hess, and the Analysts. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2012. 112. 
302 Hoffman, Louise E. ‘Erikson on Hitler: The Origins of “Hitler’s Imagery and German Youth”’. The 
Psychohistory Review, Volume 22, No. 1, Fall 1993. 
303 Walter C. Langer to Sandford Gifford, 11 November, 1975. Box 2f.11. Boston Psychoanalytic Society and 
Institute Archive. 3. 
304 Ibid. 5. 
305 Walter C. Langer to Sanford Gifford, 29 June, 1975. Box 2f.11. Boston Psychoanalytic Society and Institute 
Archive. 2. 
306 Ibid. 3. 
307 Ibid. 
308 Ibid. 7. 

 Langer was involved in arranging the Freud family’s move to London, and continued 
his analysis with Anna Freud in Britain. In 1938, he moved back to New York City, where the 
New York Psychoanalytical Institute declined him membership because he was not a medical 
doctor. After a few unsatisfying years of working on various projects, Langer returned to 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, where he was allowed to attend the meetings of the Boston 
Psychoanalytical Society in 1940.  
While recuperating from back problems in hospital in August 1941, Langer contacted 
Wild Bill Donovan, informing him of the possibilities of the use of psychoanalysis for the OSS. 
After returning home, he received a call from Washington informing him that ‘Colonel 
Donovan was very much interested’ in his views and invited him ‘to have breakfast with him 
a week hence.’309 Over breakfast, Donovan made known his worries about a growing anti-war 
sentiment mostly among ‘college students’, and asked Langer: ‘What light could 
psychoanalysis shed on these pressing problems?’310 Langer had noticed such attitudes among 
his patients, and proposed that he would set up study groups around the country that could pool 
their clinical experience, discuss implications and try to arrive at ‘a common denominator 
concerning the psychological factors underlying these attitudes. […] The findings could then 
be compared to each other in order to determine the degree of agreement across the country.’311 
After the attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941, however, ‘the response of young men 
across the country was such that there was little room for doubt concerning their probable 
reaction to a draft’, and the project lost its immediate relevance.312 
Spurred on by William Langer, Donovan remained interested in the various uses that 
psychoanalysis might have for the OSS. He requested that Langer set up a psychoanalytic ‘field 
unit’ in Cambridge that would draw on ‘the talents of many experienced psychoanalysts’ 
working in the area. 313 This plan was thwarted because the Bureau of Budget was not willing 
to finance an independent psychological unit. Langer stayed on as a freelance psychoanalytic 
consultant. ‘It was sometime in the spring of 1943,’ Langer wrote, that General Donovan – 
promoted in the meantime – had ‘seemingly out of nowhere’, asked him: ‘What do you make 
of Hitler?’314 This question led to a report of more than a thousand pages consisting of notes, 
interviews, and analyses of the personality of Adolf Hitler. Langer’s account of what Donovan 
precisely asked of him is worth quoting in its entirety: 
 
What we need is a realistic appraisal of the German situation. If Hitler is running the 
show, what kind of a person is he? What are his ambitions? How does he appear to the 
German people? What is he like with his associates? What is his background? And most 
of all, we want to know as much as possible about his psychological make-up – the 
things that make him tick. In addition, we ought to know what he might do if things 
begin to go against him.315 
 
Langer was aware of the difficulties involved in ‘psychoanalysing’ Hitler. In the introduction 
to the published version of the report, he explained that as a psychoanalyst he was accustomed 
to dealing with first-hand information; in a proper psychoanalysis, he wrote, ‘the information 
may be fragmented and incomprehensible at any given time, but at least [the psychoanalyst] 
can be sure it is reliable and pertinent to the problem since it originated in the mind of his 
 
309 Langer, Walter C. The Mind of Adolf Hitler; the Secret Wartime Report. New York: Basic Books, 1972. 5. 
310 Ibid. 
311 Ibid. 6. 
312 Ibid. 7. 
313 Ibid. 8. 
314 Ibid. 9. 
315 Ibid. 10. 

patient.’316 The obstacles at the outset seemed so great that Langer questioned if such a 
psychoanalysis-by-proxy was even possible. He pointed out to Donovan that ‘neither 
psychological nor psychoanalytic techniques were designed or readily adoptable to such an 
enterprise.’ Wild Bill was undeterred. He replied: ‘Give it a try and see what you can come up 
with. Hire whatever help you need and get it done as soon as possible. Keep it brief and make 
it readable to the layman.’317  
In the opening sentences of the document delivered to Donovan in 1943: ‘A 
Psychological Analysis of Adolf Hitler: his Life and Legend’, Langer stated clearly that the 
file ‘represents an attempt to screen the wealth of contradictory, conflicting and unreliable 
material concerning Hitler into strata which will be helpful to the policy-makers and those who 
wish to frame counter-propaganda.’318 He warned that ‘the material available for such an 
analysis is extremely scant and spotty’. 319 The materials consisted of literature and press 
holdings that Langer and his associates collected at the New York Public Library, as well as 
interviews with captured informants and refugees conducted by Langer himself. ‘I scoured the 
United States and Canada in search of persons who had had more than a passing contact with 
Hitler at some period of his life.’ Among the people Langer interviewed were: Hermann 
Rauschning, a German conservative politician who wrote a book Gespräche mit Hitler (which 
Langer also quoted from); Friedelinde Wagner, daughter of composer Siegfried Wagner; Ernst 
Haefstaengl, a businessman and former friend of Hitler’s; Princess Stephanie von Hohenlohe, 
a former Nazi-spy. To minimise the informant’s personal prejudice, Langer invented an 
interview technique whereby he urged the individuals to recall specific incidents rather than 
letting them dwell on generalities and personal conclusions. When incidents were recalled that 
held special promise, he would urge the informants to supply additional details. Langer and his 
team produced more than a thousand pages of material that became known as the The Hitler 
Source-Book.  
Langer produced a picture of Hitler’s personality based on these interviews that served 
him as a map to guide him towards his own conclusions about Hitler’s personality structure. 
He wrote: ‘A survey of the raw material, in conjunction with our knowledge of Hitler’s actions 
as reported in the news, was sufficient to convince us that he was, in all probability, a neurotic 
psychopath.’ These conclusions were an attempt to ‘understand Hitler as a person and the 
motivations underlying his actions.’320 On the basis of these conclusions, Langer and his team 
wrote up several scenarios about the end of the war, and Hitler’s possible reactions to them. 
‘Psychoanalysing’ Hitler was not only done to find out ‘what makes him tick’, but also ‘what 
he might do if things begin to go against him’. In the legend constructed around the wartime 
report, this is often the most focused upon because in it Langer accurately predicted that Hitler 
would commit suicide when faced with defeat.321   
In his letters, Langer more than once refers to himself as a part of a group of ‘dyed-in-
the-wool disciples of Freud’ and one of ‘the more orthodox Freudians’322. In the discussion of 
Hitler’s childhood in the report, young Adolf emerges from the ‘scant and spotty evidence’ as 
a little Oedipus. The picture painted is a grim one – of an abusive father and an overly protective 
mother who improperly sexualised the relationship with her son. Langer conceded that ‘there 
 
316 Ibid. 
317 Ibid. 
318 Murray, Henry. Analysis of the Personality of Adolph Hitler. Accessed through: archive.org. 1. 
319 Ibid. 
320 Murray, Henry. Analysis of the Personality of Adolph Hitler. Accessed through: archive.org. 1 
321 A notable instance of such a ‘legendary’ approach to the document is the documentary film made about 
the wartime report for the BBC: Inside the Mind of Adolf Hitler.   
322 Walter C. Langer to Sandford Gifford, 11 November, 1975. Box 2f.11. Boston Psychoanalytic Society and 
Institute Archive. 3. 

is nothing abnormal in this’323 – at least not enough to account for any of Hitler’s future actions. 
But in contrast to Erikson, Langer made much of Hitler’s early childhood. What was 
exceptional in Hitler’s case was ‘the intensity of the emotions involved.’324 Like Freud in his 
study of Leonardo DaVinci, Langer used his reconstruction of Hitler’s childhood to explain 
how the Führer had acted as an adult. Central to Langer’s argument was the hypothesis that as 
a child, young Adolf must have witnessed his parents having sex. In later life, he argued, there 
must have been ‘a symbolic reliving’ of this primal scene ‘that played an important part in 
shaping his future destinies’. Langer posited that ‘unconsciously, all the emotions he had once 
felt for his mother became transferred to Germany’ and ‘just as Germany was ideally suited to 
symbolise his mother, so Austria was ideally suited to symbolize his father.’325 Langer held 
that the alliance of Austria and Germany served to symbolize the marriage of Hitler’s father 
and mother. Similar to Fedor Vergin, Langer concluded that Hitler was ‘not dealing with 
nations composed of millions of individuals but is trying to solve his personal conflicts and 
rectify the injustices of childhood.’326 In the original report he added: ‘his microcosm had been 
inflated into a macrocosm.’327 
According to Langer, Hitler’s ‘intensity of emotions’ was strengthened by ‘the fact that 
as a child he must have discovered his parents having sex. An examination of the data makes 
this conclusion almost inescapable and from our knowledge of his father’s character and past 
history it is not at all improbable.’328 The passage from Mein Kampf that served as the principle 
piece of evidence on which this hypothesis rested is ambiguous, to say the least.329 In the 
passage, Hitler gave a description of a child’s life in a lower-class family. Langer assumed that 
in the passage Hitler is, at least in part, describing his own childhood:330  
 
Among the five children there is a boy, let us say, of three [...] When the parents fight 
almost daily their brutality leaves nothing to the imagination; then the results of such 
visual education must slowly but inevitably become apparent to the little one. Those 
who are not familiar with such conditions can hardly imagine the results, especially 
when the mutual differences express themselves in the form of brutal attacks on the part 
of the father toward the mother or to assaults due to drunkenness.331 
 
Henry Murray, who was listed as a co-author of the original report (but who, like the two other 
psychoanalysts that worked on the file, Bertram D. Lewin and Ernst Kris, was omitted from 
the title page in the 1972 edition), and who wrote a second, ‘shadow’ report on Hitler, came to 
surprisingly similar conclusions. Murray was a highly influential academic psychologist at 
Harvard, who trained as a psychoanalyst in 1933, and had been in a brief analysis with Carl 
Jung in Zürich. His standardised tests, questionnaires, ability gauges, ethical standard indices 
and thematic apperception tests became well-known and widely used in academic psychology. 
His narrative approach to individual lives and the study of personality – which he called 
 
323 Langer, Walter C. The Mind of Adolf Hitler; the Secret Wartime Report. New York: Basic Books, 1972. 151. 
324 Ibid. 
325 Ibid. 154. 
326 Ibid. 155. 
327 Murray, Henry. Analysis of the Personality of Adolph Hitler. Accessed through: archive.org. 161. 
328 Langer, Walter C. The Mind of Adolf Hitler; the Secret Wartime Report. New York: Basic Books, 1972. 151. 
329 Gatzke points out that the keywords that led Langer to interpret this passage as expressing Hitler’s 
witnessing a primal scene in the German original text do not support Langer’s hypothesis. 
330 A book on Hitler’s childhood that paints a very different, much less oblique picture of Hitler’s early years is 
by Smith, Bradley F. Adolf Hitler; His Family, Childhood, and Youth. Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution on War, 
Revolution, and Peace, 1967. 
331 Langer, Walter C. The Mind of Adolf Hitler; the Secret Wartime Report. New York: Basic Books, 1972. 143. 

‘personology’ – influenced a generation of psychologists interested in psychobiography and 
psychohistory. Walter Langer had been Murray’s junior colleague at Harvard.  
When they started working together, Langer was under the impression that Murray was 
part of the team he was coordinating. In truth, Murray was writing his own account under 
separate instruction. As historian Daniel Pick has shown, Murray dropped out of meetings and 
failed to send Langer his promised contributions to the project. Years later, Langer was 
dismayed to find that Murray had written his own analysis of Hitler, presumably based on the 
materials that Langer had collected. In the introduction to The Mind of Adolf Hitler, Langer 
wrote: ‘After reading the raw material, one of the collaborators discovered that he was too 
pressed for time to make the trips to New York to participate in our evaluative meetings. He 
promised, however, to write down his views and conclusions and submit them for our 
consideration. Unfortunately, not a word was ever received from him.’332 Murray later denied 
having used Langer’s OSS material in his own report. Langer and Murray came to a very 
similar conclusion on the basis of the same material in the shadow report. It is unclear if Murray 
and Langer independently arrived at the idea of Hitler’s witnessing a primal scene, or if he 
based his interpretation on Langer’s, or vice versa. 
Both Murray and Langer employed elementary Freudian terminology and concepts; 
they focused on Hitler’s childhood and how his environment may have led to the intensification 
of pre-existing tendencies towards destruction. They were also both concerned with the status 
of Hitler as leader of the German people, and up to a certain extent with the problems in trying 
to explain Hitler’s appeal to a large number of people. After all, if Hitler was a ‘hysteric’ and 
displayed symptoms of ‘paranoid schizophrenia’, why then was he so popular to such a large 
part of the German population? Murray’s answer to this question was rather bold: ‘[Hitler] and 
his ideology have exactly met the needs, longings and sentiments of the majority of 
Germans.’333 Langer’s answer to the question was more complex: ‘Those who are delegated to 
conduct the war against Germany’, Langer wrote, ‘cannot content themselves with simply 
regarding Hitler as a personal devil and condemning him to an Eternal Hell in order that the 
remainder of the world may live in peace and quiet.’334 He continued: 
 
They will realize that these are not wholly the actions of a single individual but that a 
reciprocal relationship exists between the Fuehrer and the people and that the madness 
of the one stimulates and flows into the other and vice versa. [...] From a scientific point 
of view, therefore, we are forced to consider Hitler, the Fuehrer, not as a personal devil, 
wicked as his actions and philosophy may be, but as the expression of a state of mind 
existing in millions of people.335 
 
Further on, Langer wrote: ‘if the individual being studied happens to be the leader of a group, 
we can expect to find the pertinent factors in an exaggerated form that would tend to make 
them stand out in sharper relief than would be the case if we studied an average member of the 
group.’336 Langer thought that Hitler’s popularity lay in the fact that he was able to appeal 
directly to repressed parts of his audience’s psyches. By invoking a language rooted in a 
‘repressed feminine-masochist’ part of the personalities of his followers, he confronted his 
audience with this repressed side of their personalities, which, according to Langer, led them 
to an extreme form of guilt, and allowed Hitler to move his male audience to commit brutal 
and ruthless crimes. This form of denial had served Hitler in the overcoming of his own 
 
332 Langer, Walter C. The Mind of Adolf Hitler; the Secret Wartime Report. New York: Basic Books, 1972. 18. 
333 Murray, Henry. Analysis of the Personality of Adolph Hitler. Accessed through: archive.org. 1. 
334Langer, Walter C. The Mind of Adolf Hitler; the Secret Wartime Report. New York: Basic Books, 1972. 138. 
335 Ibid. 138. 
336 Ibid. 

conflicts, and now, by first making his audiences aware of their feminine-masochist 
personalities, he was offering them his own solution. ‘It is as though,’ Langer mused, ‘Hitler 
had paralyzed the critical functions of the individual Germans and had assumed the role for 
himself.’337  
 
The Mind of Adolf Hitler 
 
Although it is unknown if the OSS actually used the study, Langer was very proud of his work 
and believed deeply in its significance. In the introduction to the published version of the report, 
he stated: ‘I have also been asked: “Do you honestly believe that analyses of this kind are worth 
making?” My answer is a definite yes. The world has become more and more complex with 
our ever-advancing technology, and revolutions and dictators are becoming numerous and 
more dangerous.’338 The report remained classified until 1968. It was published in 1972, with 
an introduction by Langer and an afterword by historian Robert G. L. Waite. Bruce Mazlish 
was involved in getting the manuscript published at Basic Books. At the height of interest in 
psychohistory, Langer’s study, now entitled The Mind of Adolf Hitler became a bestseller 
nearly thirty years after the manuscript was completed. In the introduction to the published 
version, Langer wrote: ‘I like to believe that if such a study of Hitler had been made years 
earlier, under less tension, and with more opportunity to gather first-hand information, there 
might not have been a Munich; a similar study of Stalin might have produced a different Yalta; 
one of Castro might have prevented the Cuban situation; and one of President Diem might have 
avoided our deep involvement in Vietnam.’339 The report circulated among the higher echelons 
of the OSS, but it is not clear if President Roosevelt read the report.  
Reception of the publication was mixed. A. James Gregor, a political scientist at 
University of California, Berkeley found the book was ‘incredibly silly’.340 He felt Langer’s 
extensive interviews amounted to a collection of ‘hearsay from the most peccable sources – 
third-party recitations, political opponents, refugees from Hitler’s many disgruntled relatives, 
venal informers and self-seeking opportunists among others.’341 He also felt that Langer was 
‘so wedded to Freudian simplicities that this book can only, and most charitably, be 
characterized as bizarre.’342 Boston University historian Dietrich Orlow, in the Journal for 
Interdisciplinary History, was slightly more charitable, and saw that The Mind of Adolf Hitler 
illustrated ‘with particular clarity both the many advantages and some possible pitfalls of the 
psychohistorical approach.’343 He was critical about Langer and the psychohistorians’ 
ahistorical methodology, but welcomed psychoanalysts’ abilities to ‘ask new questions and 
thereby unleash, as it were, hitherto undiscovered facts and information in the available 
data.’344 In 1972, psychohistorian Robert Lifton wrote a review of Langer’s book for the New 
York Times. He called the study ‘adventurous, intelligent and risky.’345 But he was not 
uncritical. ‘Given what Hitler represented,’ Lifton reasoned, ‘Langer’s ethical position as a 
psychohistorian had an enviable clarity. But I wish his retrospective introduction had supplied 
 
337 Ibid. 139. 
338 Langer, Walter C. The Mind of Adolf Hitler; the Secret Wartime Report. New York: Basic Books, 1972. 22. 
339 Quoted in Waggoner, Walter H. ‘Walter Langer is Dead at 82; Wrote Secret Study of Hitler’. The New York 
Times, July 10, 1981. 
340 James Gregor, A. Review: The Mind of Adolf Hitler. The American Political Science Review, Volume 68, 
No.1, March 1974. 317.  
341 Ibid. 
342 Ibid. 
343 Orlow, Dietrich. Review: The Mind of Adolf Hitler. The Journal of Interdisciplinary History, Volume 5, 
No.1, Summer 1974. 132. 
344 Ibid. 133. 
345 Lifton, Robert J. ‘The Man Who Wanted to Live Forever’. The New York Times, December 31, 1972.  

us with more information about his personal motivation in taking what was, prior to Pearl 
Harbor, an unusual step.’346 Lifton was concerned that the ‘location and advocacy of the 
investigator have great bearing on the “diciplined subjectivity” of psychohistorical work.’347 
He wrote: ‘I do not know whether Walter Langer has ever thought of himself as a 
psychohistorian, but he is one nonetheless.’348 
In ‘The Next Assignment’, William Langer tried to show that Luther must have been 
unconsciously influenced by the trauma of the Black Death in a way that rang true with, and 
was appealing for, his large following. Erikson had tried to show that both Hitler and Luther, 
by being products of their specific time and place, were able to resolve conflict that extended 
beyond their own personal situation, and in doing so became attractive as leaders to groups of 
followers suffering from similar pathologies. Both projects shared a concern for the interaction 
between group and leader.  
William allegedly had no part in the preparation of his brother’s report on Hitler. When 
he did read it, he was ‘particularly intrigued’ by his brother’s approach, and as a result he ‘more 
and more came to realize that we historians often indulged in very superficial estimates of men 
and their motives’.349 It is unknown exactly when and under what circumstances William 
Langer read Walter’s analysis of Hitler. It is probable that in his function as head of the OSS 
Research and Analysis Unit and prime instigator of a psychoanalytic approach in the OSS, 
William had access to the report. In any case, Walter received generous acknowledgement in 
the first note of William’s ‘The Next Assignment.’ In an introduction to the 1972 publication 
of the report in book-form, William Langer stated that the report ‘reflected many discussions I 
had had with [Walter], especially those after his return from Vienna in 1938.’350 Those 
discussions had led William to become ‘a veritable apostle of the doctrine [of psychoanalysis]’, 
and ‘completely converted to the notion that historians should explore and exploit the findings 
of modern psychology’351, which would ultimately bring him, in 1957, to the conclusions set 
forth in his Next Assignment. In looking back over the prehistory of their movement, and in 
their attempt to shape a narrative about it, the psychohistorians put special weight on William 
Langer’s address, and the publication of Young Man Luther.  
We have seen how Langer, a well-known and respected historian, lent credence to the 
idea of the fusion of psychoanalysis and history, in the process inspiring a generation of 
younger historians. We have looked at how Erik Erikson’s particular interpretation of ego 
psychology made a highly specific marriage of psychoanalysis and history possible. Those two 
‘events’ – Langer’s address and the publication of Young Man Luther – paved the way for the 
psychohistorians’ movement. They are the ‘legendary’ starting points of psychohistory. In the 
next chapter we will look at the actual beginnings of the psychohistorical movement. The 
moment when, for the first time, historians and psychologists convened under the banner of 
‘psychohistory’, and called themselves psychohistorians. This happened in a rather remarkable 
place: a little town on the East Coast of the United States – Wellfleet, Massachusetts.  
 
 
 
346 Ibid.  
347 Ibid. 
348 Ibid.  
349 Langer, Walter C. The Mind of Adolf Hitler; the Secret Wartime Report. New York: Basic Books, 1972. vi. 
350 Ibid. 
351 Ibid. 

Section II 
The Psychohistorians 
 
 

Chapter 4 
Wellfleet 
 
The town of Wellfleet, Massachusetts is located on the outer rim of Cape Cod, some forty-five 
miles out into the Atlantic Ocean. It has an upland area of approximately 13,100 acres, 8,000 
acres of which lie within seashore boundaries. Over the summer, between Memorial Day and 
Labor Day, the small population waxes into roughly 17,000. The area is known for its fresh 
water ponds, beaches and ‘Wellfleet oysters’.352 Henry David Thoreau called it ‘a kind of 
Promised Land.’353 
In the 1940s, psychoanalyst Clara Thompson (co-founder of the neo-Freudian William 
Alanson White Foundation) first brought her pupils to Wellfleet for the holidays. Ever since, a 
remarkable number of people working in the mental health professions have been gathering in 
Wellfleet every year. At present, there are two rival psychotherapy training centres in town; 
since the 1980s, the Boston Graduate School of Psychoanalysis has been holding its annual 
summer conference there.354 But it was during the late 1950s when psychiatrist Robert J. Lifton 
was struck by what he called the ‘oceanic feeling’ of the place: ‘Freud (quoting the writer 
Romain Rolland) used the metaphor ‘oceanic feeling’ to describe much-desired psychic states 
(such as those involving transcendence); in Wellfleet we have the real thing’.355 
In psychoanalytic circles, Wellfleet is chiefly known for the group established there by 
Lifton: the Wellfleet Psychohistory Group. That group has become known as the birthplace of 
psychohistory as both a discipline and a movement.356 At the time of writing, Lifton still 
considers himself a psychohistorian, but has in recent years increasingly distanced himself 
from the term ‘psychohistory’ as he feels it has gained ‘nasty’ connotations.357 A group of 
scholars still meets every year in Lifton’s ‘renovated hut’ to discuss the various intersections 
between psychology and history. For as long as it has existed, it has consisted of intellectuals 
of a variety of backgrounds: historians, psychologists, sociologists and philosophers. The list 
of core members – known by Lifton as ‘Wellfleetians’ – and fellow travellers has, however, 
changed considerably over time.358 Prominent attendants over the years have included 
psychoanalyst Erik Erikson, who attended every meeting until his deteriorating health 
prohibited him from coming in the mid-1980s, historian Bruce Mazlish, political scientist Doris 
Kearns Goodwin, psychiatrist Robert Coles, sociologist Kai Erikson, philosopher Stuart 
Hampshire, historian H. Stuart Hughes – who referred to Wellfleet as ‘la plage des 
intellectuels’ – and writer and critic Norman Mailer.359 
In Lifton’s recollection the group was established principally around himself and 
Erikson, and specifically around their evolving approach to each other’s work. ‘Erikson and I,’ 
he wrote, ‘were seeking ways to further a relationship between a mentor [...] and a close student 
struggling to break sufficiently free of mentorship’.360 In his version of the story, the Group 
provided the two men with an ‘informal’ yet ‘institutional’ structure for their developing 
 
352 ‘Experienced tasters know that they are plump and clean with a distinctively good balance of creamy 
sweetness and brine,’ claims the Wellfleet Oysterfest website. 
353 Thoreau, Henry David, Horace Elisha Scudder, H. G. O. Blake, Ralph Waldo Emerson, and F. B. Sanborn. 
The Writings of Henry David Thoreau. Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin and, 1894. 62. 
354 Swidey, Neil. ‘Why do shrinks flock to Cape Cod’s Wellfleet?’ The Boston Globe, July 23, 2014. 
355 Lifton, Robert J. Witness to an Extreme Century: A Memoir. New York: Free Press, 2011. 337. 
356 Pietikainen and Ihanus have dealt with this topic in their paper: ‘On the Origins of Psychoanalytic 
Psychohistory’. History of Psychology 6, No. 2 (2003): 171-94. 
357 Personal communication with Lifton, May 22, 2015.   
358 Lifton, Robert J. Witness to an Extreme Century: A Memoir. New York: Free Press, 2011. 
359 Lustig, Jessica. ‘The Wellfleet Ten’. The New York Times, 13 May, 2011. 
360 Lifton, Robert J. Witness to an Extreme Century: A Memoir. New York: Free Press, 2011. 337. 

intellectual exchange.361 Historian Bruce Mazlish, who procured funding for the earliest 
Wellfleet meetings, remembers the beginning of Wellfleet very differently. The initial aim of 
the group according to Mazlish was to formally ‘conceptualize the basis of psychohistory’.362 
In fact, when the Group first met in late August 1966, it was still named the ‘Group for the 
Study of Psychohistorical Process’, a name proposed by Lifton.363 At that time it received large 
grants from the American Society of Arts and Sciences. In return, the Academy expected the 
Group to compile a volume of papers, publish in their journal Daedalus and set up a training 
programme in psychohistory.364 The idea that psychohistory might some day be an independent 
discipline was conceived at Wellfleet. It was also buried there, as we shall see, only to be 
revived by others later. In this chapter we will examine the hopes and aims of the founding 
Wellfleetians and show why they failed at reaching those aims. 
 
Living History 
 
As several authors have shown, most notably among them Nathan Hale and Lawrence Samuel, 
the growing interest in applying psychoanalytic theory to history and the social sciences in the 
1950s and 60s corresponded with a broad cultural acceptance of psychoanalytic ideas by an 
educated public in the United States. As early as 1920, the American magazine Current 
Opinion judged that: ‘One can hardly pick up a newspaper or magazine without finding 
psychoanalytic terms.’365 As late as 1988, historian Peter Gay found: ‘Freud’s ideas pervade 
our culture to such an extent that we often use Freudian language – narcissism, sibling rivalry, 
ambivalence, neurosis – without even realizing it.’366 In the decades in between, the language 
of psychoanalysis percolated into the discussion of American politics. To understand the rise 
of psychohistory, it is worth looking more closely at what has been called the 
‘transnationalisation’ or ‘Americanisation’ of Freud.367 
In the United States, membership in the American Psychological Association grew 
from 2,739 in 1940, to 30,839 in 1970, while membership in the American Psychiatric 
Association rose from 2,423 to 18,407 between 1940 and 1970.368 While psychoanalysis took 
hold in psychiatry after World War II, it came to be portrayed more and more favorably in 
journalism - from sympathetic (sometimes deliberately caricatured) portrayals in mass 
magazines such as Life, Time and The New Yorker, to more rigorous exegeses in Scientific 
American.369 Titles of magazine articles such as ‘What’s it Like to Be Psychoanalyzed?’ and 
‘Psychoanalysis Broke up my Marriage’ point towards the discipline’s broad appeal at the time 
– it was as ‘hip’ as it was ‘square’ – and were to be found in a wide range of publications, from 
 
361 Lifton, Robert J., and Eric Olson. Explorations in Psychohistory; the Wellfleet Papers. New York: Simon 
and Schuster, 1975. 12.  
362 Pawelec, Tomasz. ‘Bruce Mazlish: Pioneer Psychohistorian’. Clio’s Psyche, December, 1996, Volume 3, No. 
3. 77. 
363 Lifton, Robert J., and Eric Olson. Explorations in Psychohistory; the Wellfleet Papers. New York: Simon 
and Schuster, 1975. 13. 
364 See Mazlish, Bruce. Records of the Academy (Academy of Arts and Sciences), No. 1966/1967 (1966-1967). 
31-32. 
365Samuel, Lawrence R. Shrink: A Cultural History of Psychoanalysis in America. Lincoln: University of 
Nebraska Press, 2013. 7. 
366 Levin, Eric. ‘Putting Freud on the Couch, Historian Peter Gay Finds a Genius Whose Stature Time Cannot 
Shrink’, People Magazine, June 6, 1988. 
367 Matthews, F. H. ‘The Americanization of Sigmund Freud: Adaptations of Psychoanalysis before 1917’. 
Journal of American Studies, Volume 1, Issue 1, April 1967. 39-62. 
368 Eghigian, Greg. From Madness to Mental Health: Psychiatric Disorder and Its Treatment in Western 
Civilization. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2010. 369. 
369 For an in-depth discussion, see Hale, Nathan G. The Rise and Crisis of Psychoanalysis in the United States: 
Freud and the Americans, 1917-1985. New York: Oxford University Press, 1995. 

the Washington Post to Cosmopolitan.370 Economic prosperity delivered access to 
psychoanalysis to an increasing number of Americans, including journalists. As a result, 
psychoanalysis indirectly contributed to a shift in journalistic perspective, influencing authors 
associated with the New Journalism movement (such as Norman Mailer, Gay Talese, Joan 
Didion, Tom Wolfe). The movement became known for re-inserting ‘the first-person singular 
point of view into journalism’ and apply narrative techniques associated with fiction to non-
fiction.371  
Under the influence of books such as Freud: The Mind of a Moralist by Philip Rieff 
(another one-time Wellfleetian), critics had for a long time viewed psychoanalysis as a 
principally conservative discipline, and portrayed Freud as a thinker who urged mankind to 
make the best of an inevitably unhappy fate.372 In the latter part of the twentieth century, this 
view was gradually challenged, especially by the growing influence and public visibility of 
thinkers associated with the Frankfurt School. Erich Fromm used a blend of early-Marxist 
theory and psychoanalysis to locate the origin of neuroses in a historically determined warping 
of a presumed essential nature of man.373 He discussed ‘the problems of survival and freedom 
in America’ on national television; Herbert Marcuse rallied students with his message that 
mankind was sick with the burdens of sexual repression in his book Eros and Civilization 
(1955); Norman O. Brown, in his book Life Against Death (1959), used Freud’s notion of the 
death drive to argue that ‘man’s cultural situation’, which he perceived as dire, was an 
expression of his own desires: ‘hostile to life and unconsciously bent on self-destruction’.374 
By the late 1960s, psychoanalytic terminology had permeated American culture to such an 
extent that there was now a large potential readership for books that ‘psychoanalysed’ political 
situations and figures. After World War II, with a heightened awareness of the possible 
destructiveness of a single individual such as Hitler, historians were susceptible to the argument 
that where a man occupied a position that allowed him to shape history in a certain direction, 
an understanding of his life-history could be of great significance.375  
As psychoanalytic terminology and thought permeated American culture at large, they 
entered into the country’s political debate. Shortly before the 1964 presidential election 
(Johnson vs. Goldwater), newly founded Fact Magazine polled members of the American 
Psychiatric Association (APA), asking them whether conservative candidate Barry Goldwater 
was mentally stable enough to become president of the country. The cover of the November-
December issue gave the answer: ‘1,189 psychiatrists say Goldwater is psychologically unfit 
to be president!’ 376  The issue’s title in full was: ‘The Unconscious of a Conservative: A Special 
Issue on the Mind of Barry Goldwater’. The thrust of the two main articles was that Goldwater 
had ‘a severely paranoid personality and was psychologically unfit’ to become president.’377 
According to the official jury report, the articles tried to support the thesis that Senator 
Goldwater was mentally unstable ‘by citing allegedly factual incidents from his public and 
 
370 Samuel, Lawrence R. Shrink: A Cultural History of Psychoanalysis in America. Lincoln: University of 
Nebraska Press, 2013. 
371 For a discussion of this, see Terence E. Holt’s essay, Holt, Terence E. ‘Narrative Medicine and Negative 
Capability.’ Literature and Medicine 23, No. 2, 2004. 318-33. 
372 Rieff, Philip. Freud, the Mind of the Moralist. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1979. 
373 See for example Fromm, Erich. Marx's Concept of Man. New York: F. Ungar, 1966. 
374 Brown, Norman O. Life Against Death: The Psychoanalytical Meaning of History (1959). London: Sphere 
Books, 1960. 1. 
375 Mazlish, Bruce. ‘What is Psycho-History?’ Transactions of the Royal Historical Society Conference (22 
September 1970). Volume 21, 1971. 79-99. 
376 ‘The Unconscious of a Conservative: A Special Issue on the Mind of Barry Goldwater’. Fact Magazine, 5, 
Sep-Oct. 1964. 
377 Ibid. 

private life and by reporting the results of a “poll” of 12,356 psychiatrists’, together with a 
sampling of comments ‘by the 2,417 psychiatrists who responded to the poll questionnaire.’378 
It was not the first instance of the pathologising of political preference in the US media. 
Around the same time, Harper’s published a piece entitled ‘The Paranoid Style in American 
Politics’, written by Columbia historian Richard Hofstadter. 379 He argued that conservatism 
could and should be regarded as a mental illness.380 A court-case followed the publication of 
the article in Fact Magazine: ‘Goldwater vs Ginzburg’ (Ralph Ginzburg was editor-in-chief 
and publisher of the magazine). A federal jury awarded Barry Goldwater $1 in compensatory 
damages; $25,000 in punitive damages were claimed from Ginzburg.381 Fact ceased to exist, 
and the incident led to an amendment of the APA’s ethics principles several years later. The 
amendment became known as ‘section 7.3’, or: the ‘Goldwater rule’, and stated that it was 
forbidden for members of the APA to comment on the mental states of individuals without 
having examined them personally.382 No such rule, however, was put in place for historians. 
 
Great Promise 
 
The development of a Freudian ‘climate of opinion’ in the United States, to borrow W.H. 
Auden’s well-worn phrase, prepared the ground for psychohistory. Despite the small number 
of classically trained psychoanalysts among the first attendants of the Wellfleet Psychohistory 
Group, the initial approach to the use of psychoanalysis in history adopted by most of the early 
psychohistorians was closer to the classical Freudian tradition of the application of 
psychoanalytic thought to historical subjects than to any approach of affiliates of the so-called 
Frankfurt School. Lifton was influenced by his personal analysis with Beata Rank and his 
interactions with Erikson. Mazlish was influenced by William Langer, whose interpretation of 
psychoanalysis was heavily influenced by his brother, psychoanalyst Walter Langer.383 
In April 1966, Bruce Mazlish and Robert Lifton co-authored and sent out an invitation 
to thirteen scholars for the first Wellfeet meeting. They wrote: ‘Approaches from 
psychoanalysis have all too often focused so one-sidedly upon individual psychopathology […] 
and those from history have either neglected or dealt inadequately with the individual 
psychological dimension. Recently, however, a number of scholars from various disciplines 
have been converging on the general area of psychohistorical inquiry in a way that, we believe, 
holds great promise.’384 
The first attendants of the Wellfleet gatherings were an academically diverse group of 
well-educated white males, all with some organic connection to one another, and all with strong 
feelings and opinions about the relationship between psychology and history. Among them 
were: Frank Manuel, historian at New York University; Frederick Wyatt of the University of 
Michigan’s Psychological Clinic; William B. Willcox of Michigan University’s History 
 
378 http://www.supremecourtopinions.wustl.edu/files/opinion_pdfs/1969/69-687.pdf (Accessed on September 
13, 2016). 
379 Hofstadter, Richard. ‘The Paranoid Style in American Politics’. Harper’s Magazine, November 1964. 
380 Ibid. 
381 http://www.supremecourtopinions.wustl.edu/files/opinion_pdfs/1969/69-687.pdf (Accessed on September 
13, 2016). 
382 Questions surrounding this issue have come under scrutiny again at the time of writing, see Carey, Benedict. 
‘The Psychiatric Question: Is It Fair to Analyze Donald Trump From Afar?’ The New York Times, 15 August, 
2016. 
383 Interestingly, both Walter Langer and Erikson were analyzed by Anna Freud, whose antipathy towards 
psychobiography has been well-documented. 
384 Invitation letter Group for the Study of Psychohistorical Process, April 9, 1966. Container 11, Erik H. and 
Joan M. Erikson papers, 1925-1985, Houghton Library, Harvard College Library, Harvard University. 

Department; and Erik Erikson, who was to be the ‘unofficial guest of honor’.385 Under the 
influence of Mazlish, the aim of the Group at this point was ‘a systematic exploration of 
problems and methods in studying psychohistorical process’.386 Papers and manuscript drafts 
were circulated beforehand and the proceedings recorded stenographically. ‘We envision this 
seminar as part of a continuing program, and we would welcome an association with the 
Academy [of Arts and Sciences] both in relation to future intellectual exchanges and to 
resulting publications.’387 The Academy of Arts and Sciences released a bulletin that 
summarised the first Wellfleet meeting.  
Later, John Voss (representative of the Academy of Arts and Sciences) and Mazlish 
would agree that the first meeting had been underfunded. For the following two meetings 
(1967, 1968) the Group received 13,400 dollars from the Academy. ‘If the group generates 
plans in the next two years for a formal program,’ Voss promised, ‘the scale of activities and 
expenses will increase, particularly in the area of supporting services, such as editing, 
reproduction, etc.’388 
Psychohistory held great promise for many of Wellfleet’s first attendants. Lifton was 
inspired foremost by the work and personality of Erikson. As we have seen, he was hoping to 
use his Wellfleet gatherings – and perhaps psychohistory – as a vehicle to transcend the mentor-
pupil dynamic that he perceived was operative between them. But he was not the only one who 
was impressed by Erikson’s work, and interested in building on it further. Keniston came to 
Erikson’s theories of identity and life-stages from the perspective of a sociologist, and his 
concerns with adolescent behaviour, i.e. student rebellion, in the 1960s. Robert Coles was 
inspired by Erikson’s unconventional interpretation of psychoanalysis and his life-histories, 
that linked cultural symbols and individual personality (he would later write a short intellectual 
biography of Erikson).389 
Mazlish, on the other hand, also held Erikson in high regard but had been primarily 
influenced by William Langer and his own study of Freud as a philosopher – or ‘great 
speculator’ – of history.390 In an extensive article in the Times Literary Supplement of 28 July 
1966, Mazlish set the stakes high. He wrote: ‘while as a therapy [psychoanalysis] might allow 
historians to diagnose the pathological behavior of a few past individuals or groups, as a 
comprehensive theory of the development of human personality it presumes to offer historians 
a key to all human behavior.’391 Mazlish was in contact with Langer at the time; he had served 
under him in the OSS during World War II, and would later be involved in publishing the OSS 
Hitler-document written by Langer’s brother, psychoanalyst Walter Langer.392  
The Wellfleet invitation stated: ‘William Langer [...] claimed [...] “the next assignment” 
for historians working on the edge of their profession would be to investigate the possible use 
 
385 Personal communication with Mazlish, January 15, 2014. 
386 Invitation letter Group for the Study of Psychohistorical Process, April 9, 1966. Container 11, Erik H. and 
Joan M. Erikson papers, 1925-1985, Houghton Library, Harvard College Library, Harvard University. 
387 Ibid. 
388 Letter from John Voss to Erik Erikson, February 3, 1967. Container 11, Erik H. and Joan M. Erikson papers, 
1925-1985, Houghton Library, Harvard College Library, Harvard University. 
389 Coles, Robert. Erik H. Erikson; the Growth of His Work. Boston: Little, Brown, 1970. 
390 Mazlish, Bruce. The Riddle of History; the Great Speculators from Vico to Freud. New York: Harper & 
Row, 1966. 
391 Mazlish, Bruce. ‘Inside the Whales’. Times Literary Supplement, July 28, 1966. 667. 
392 Personal communication with Mazlish, January 15, 2014. On December 29, 1970, William Langer and Bruce 
Mazlish co-signed a letter asking Erik Erikson if he wanted to be part of a study group in psychohistory, 
organised by the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. The letter stated that ‘the American Academy has 
for some time been interested in psychohistorical studies. […] The group’s long-range purpose will be to 
explore the possibilities of institutionalizing training in this field.’ It is unknown whether or not Erikson replied 
to the letter and what became of the study group. The letter can be found in Container 11, Erik H. and Joan M. 
Erikson papers, 1925-1985, Houghton Library, Harvard College Library, Harvard University. 

of psychological approaches to history. It is only now, eight years later, that a serious attempt 
to map the boundary conditions of this new area of history is being completed.’393 The 
differences between Mazlish’s and Lifton’s hopes and aims for psychohistory at Wellfleet can 
be traced to their differences in intellectual background. 
 
Mazlish 
 
The Wellfleetian most heavily invested in the idea of psychohistory as a semi-independent 
discipline was Bruce Mazlish. Mazlish received his doctoral degree in intellectual history from 
Columbia University in 1955. At the time, he worked under Professors Shepherd Clough and 
Jacques Barzun, and for a few years taught at Columbia and the University of Maine, before 
settling at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) where he remained until the autumn 
of 2003 when he assumed emeritus status. At MIT he served as the chairman of the History 
Section (1965-1970) and as head of the Humanities Department (1974-1979).  
Throughout his career, the nature of Mazlish’s work has been consistently 
interdisciplinary. His first book, The Western intellectual Tradition: from Leonardo to Hegel 
was co-authored by Jacob Bronowski. It was ‘an intellectual history in the largest sense’, 
covering ‘an interplay of ideas from different fields’ during the four centuries in which the 
world was ‘transformed from medieval into modern’.394 It was also a bestseller and paid for 
the house that Mazlish still lives in at the time of writing.395 In recent years, Mazlish has stated 
that psychoanalysis was merely one among other ‘lenses’ that he has used to approach history 
with.396 And it is true that he has worked in and on the intersections of various fields: his current 
interests lie in global history, and the changing interactions between humans and technology. 
But in the 1960s psychohistory still held out special promise to him: ‘psychohistory is not 
merely the application of psychoanalysis to history,’ he wrote, ‘but a true fusion of the two, 
creating a new vision.’397 
This particular vision was influenced by historian William Langer. During World War 
II, Mazlish had worked under Langer in the OSS, and he was one of the young historians 
inspired by Langer’s presidential ‘Next Assignment’ address in 1958.398 In the early 1970s, 
Mazlish was involved in publishing Walter C. Langer’s Hitler-report. He was a consultant at 
publishing house Basic Books and played tennis with Langer’s stepson, Duncan Nelson. 
Mazlish recalls having been inspired by Langer’s words in his speech: ‘[I]f I were a young 
man, starting all over again, I would have worked on the frontiers between psychology and 
history.’399 In line with his theorising, Mazlish also identified an important personal reason for 
his interest in psychohistory: he had entered into therapy shortly after the breakup of his first 
marriage.400  
In 1958, Mazlish read Young Man Luther. He contacted Erikson, who invited him to 
come to Harvard for a talk. Mazlish became ‘exposed to [Erikson’s] extraordinary clinical 
 
393 Invitation letter Group for the Study of Psychohistorical Process, April 9, 1966. Container 11, Erik H. and 
Joan M. Erikson papers, 1925-1985, Houghton Library, Harvard College Library, Harvard University. 
394 Bronowski, Jacob, and Bruce Mazlish. The Western Intellectual Tradition, from Leonardo to Hegel. New 
York: Harper, 1960. 
395 Personal communication with Mazlish, January 15, 2014. 
396 Mazlish, Bruce. ‘The Past and Future of Psychohistory’, in: The Annual of Psychoanalysis, Volume 31, 
Psychoanalysis and History. 256. 
397 Mazlish, Bruce. In Search of Nixon: A Psychohistorical Inquiry (1972). Baltimore, Maryland: Penguin 
Books, 1974. 152. 
398 Personal correspondence with Mazlish, January 15, 2014. 
399 Pawelec, Tomasz. ‘Bruce Mazlish: Pioneer Psychohistorian’. Clio’s Psyche, Volume 3, No. 3, December, 
1996. 
400 Personal correspondence with Mazlish, January 15, 2014. 

sense’, ‘fell under his spell’ and then proceeded to help him evaluate the historical work of 
some of his students.401 Coincidentally, Mazlish was asked to write a book about the 
intersections between psychoanalysis and history. He felt unequipped to write an entire book 
about the topic himself, but agreed to compile an anthology: half of which consisted of essays 
on the philosophy of history, and half on the actual application of psychoanalysis to history. 
The book, entitled Psychoanalysis and History, was published in 1963. It appeared at a ‘lucky 
moment when the field was beginning to form’.402 With its publication, Mazlish became a 
pioneer at one bound. ‘Pioneers,’ he jokingly recalled, ‘have to keep ahead of the wagons in 
back of them.’403 So he decided to teach a course on the application of psychoanalysis to history 
at MIT. It was the first such course taught by a historian, as he recalled, ‘probably in the 
world’.404 Erikson, a psychoanalyst, was teaching a similar course at Harvard.  
In 1965, Mazlish co-founded the Group for Applied Psychoanalysis (GAP) in the 
Boston area, together with Norman Holland, professor of English literature, and Joseph 
Michaels, a psychiatrist. Similar GAPs were founded later, most notably in New York City. 
The group in Boston met once a month for fifteen years. This group, in which a paper was 
discussed every session, taught him how ‘clinicians approach materials’.405 According to 
Mazlish, these groups brought together ‘analysts, psychiatrists, small-group psychologists, 
clinical workers, literary critics, sociologists and historians.’406 But it was the ‘Wellfleet 
project’ – ‘I was the historian among the founding members’ – where Mazlish says he learned 
psychohistory’s ‘trade and its principles’.407 Mazlish underwent psychoanalysis after the break-
up of his first marriage, but he never formally trained as a psychoanalyst. With psychoanalytic 
training, he said, ‘there is a danger along with the gain: you may stop thinking like a historian 
and start thinking like an analyst’.408 
In 1966, the year of the first Wellfleet meeting, Mazlish published his book The Riddle 
of History. In it he discussed the work of ten philosophers of history – ‘great speculators’, he 
called them – that influenced him and his own studies. The book, in a sense, is pre-
psychohistorical, but it gives an impression of how Mazlish envisioned an interdisciplinary 
approach to history. ‘Philosophy of history,’ Mazlish wrote in the introduction, ‘assumes a 
willingness to use epistemological and metaphysical assumptions of philosophy in an attempt 
to understand and give meaning to the empirical data of history. On occasion, history [is 
presumed to] reveal the correct nature of philosophy.’409  
Freud was discussed in the last chapter. In The Riddle of History, Mazlish told his 
readers what he thought was Freud’s major contribution to historiography. He quoted Freud 
from Studies in Hysteria: ‘[T]he case histories I describe read like short stories and lack, so to 
 
401 Mazlish, Bruce. James and John Stuart Mill: Father and Son in the Nineteenth Century. New York: Basic 
Books, 1975. xix. 
402 Mazlish, Bruce. James and John Stuart Mill: Father and Son in the Nineteenth Century. New York: Basic 
Books, 1975. xix. 
403 Pawelec, Tomasz. ‘Bruce Mazlish: Pioneer Psychohistorian’. Clio’s Psyche, Volume 3, No. 3, December, 
1996. 77. 
404 Ibid. 
405 Ibid. 
406 Mazlish, Bruce. ‘Inside the Whales’. Times Literary Supplement, July 28, 1966. 667. 
407 Mazlish, Bruce. James and John Stuart Mill: Father and Son in the Nineteenth Century. New York: Basic 
Books, 1975. xix. 
408 Pawelec, Tomasz. ‘Bruce Mazlish: Pioneer Psychohistorian’. Clio’s Psyche, Volume 3, No. 3, December, 
1996. 77. 
409 Mazlish, Bruce. The Riddle of History; the Great Speculators from Vico to Freud. New York: Harper & 
Row, 1966. 

speak, the serious imprint of science.’410 And further on: ‘it is obviously the nature of the 
material itself that is responsible for this [the short story aspect] rather than my own choice.’411 
In his historical-anthropological texts, such as Totem and Taboo and Moses and Monotheism, 
Freud was, according to Mazlish, finding psychological meaning in events of the past.412 And 
it was exactly the nature of the material that caught Mazlish’s attention. Freud found meaning 
not only in actual events, but also in psychical ones - unconscious fantasies that he attributed 
to groups (or ‘hordes’) in the past - based on a mix of observed (reported) behaviour and 
hypotheses derived from his individual case studies. Mazlish saw that in his historical-
anthropological speculations Freud had extended the field of scientific observation; not only 
for the clinician, but also for the historian. 
Freud’s contribution to history, in Mazlish’s view, was that he had shown that psychical 
facts could have actual historical implications, for both groups and individuals. Wie es gewesen 
war, was no longer enough: wie es gedacht und erfahren war now became crucial. Mazlish 
would later claim that he could not imagine ‘looking at or listening to texts and arguments 
without [psychoanalysis’] insights,’ because that would be like ‘going back to mono after 
hearing music on stereo.’413 If psychical facts are facts, Mazlish argued, then why should a 
historian not attempt to uncover, and explain, them too? To an extent, he argued, historians had 
in the past also dealt with psychical realities. After all, any historian or biographer speculates 
about the motivation of his or her subject or subjects. Before psychohistory, Mazlish argued in 
the Wellfleet invitation, historians had borrowed explanatory frameworks from other social 
sciences; often basing their interpretations on general rules such as: ‘men follow their economic 
self-interest’, or: ‘men are determined by economic modes of production’, or simply basing 
their interpretations of behaviour on their own ‘seat-of-the-pants’ psychological 
understanding.414 
Mazlish looked upon psychoanalysis as a science that dealt with these specific kinds of 
facts. In his view psychoanalysis attempted to show how actual events were translated into 
psychical material, and vice versa. He immediately saw the value of Freud’s contribution, but 
only came to see the practical use of psychoanalysis for his own work when he was working 
on his study of John Stuart Mill. As he was studying Mill’s account of his formation at the 
beginning of his Autobiography, Mazlish noticed that Mill nowhere made any mention of his 
mother. Further research showed that, in an early draft, Mill had devoted a few, highly critical, 
pages to her, and had then discarded them. ‘What did this signify, if anything, for Mill’s views 
on women?’ Mazlish now wondered. 415 By attempting to formulate an answer to that question, 
Mazlish felt he had become ‘a real psychohistorian’.416 In Mazlish’s hands, William Langer’s 
‘Next Assignment’ gained a clear objective: substituting, or more realistically supplementing, 
the historian’s intuition with theory: Freudian theory. 
 
 
410 Breuer, Josef, Sigmund Freud, James Strachey, Anna Freud, Alix Strachey, and Alan Tyson. The Standard 
Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud: Studies on Hysteria. Volume 2, 1893-1895. 
London: Vintage, 2001. 160-161. 
411 Ibid. 
412 Mazlish, Bruce. The Riddle of History; the Great Speculators from Vico to Freud. New York: Harper & 
Row, 1966. 
413 Mazlish, Bruce. James and John Stuart Mill: Father and Son in the Nineteenth Century. New York: Basic 
Books, 1975. xix. 
414 Invitation letter Group for the Study of Psychohistorical Process, April 9, 1966. Container 11, Erik H. and 
Joan M. Erikson papers, 1925-1985, Houghton Library, Harvard College Library, Harvard University. 
415 Mazlish, Bruce. James and John Stuart Mill: Father and Son in the Nineteenth Century. New York: Basic 
Books, 1975. xix. 
416 Ibid. 

 
Fig. 3. Bruce Mazlish 
 
‘I was a prophet!’ 
 
Mazlish went ‘in search of Nixon’ in 1968. In fact, he didn’t so much start off in search of 
Nixon, as he did in pursuit of what he thought were the predictive qualities of psychohistory. 
Through his connection with William Langer, Mazlish was aware of the OSS Hitler-study 
written by Walter Langer during the war.417 He had been impressed by the fact that Langer and 
his team had predicted Hitler’s suicide, and was now bent on proving (or disproving) that 
psychohistory, in his understanding of the term, had limited predictive qualities.418 
At this point, in 1968, Mazlish co-ordinated a secret group of academics with the aim 
of analysing thoroughly the personality of the presidential candidate for the next election: 
Richard Nixon or Hubert Humphrey. For the project, Mazlish sounded out ‘five or six 
outstanding scholars – other historians, political scientists, and psychoanalysts’ on their 
willingness to participate in a team inquiry into the psychodynamics of the prospective 
president. 419 Each of the members, using his or her own set of theories, was asked to write an 
analysis of the candidate; afterwards, a group portrait would be assembled. In addition, 
alternative ‘scenarios’ of the ‘major problems and events that might confront the President’ 
would have been written up, and predictions about his behavior in such stressful situations 
added. 420 In order to prevent possible misuse of their work, Mazlish decided that the document 
would not be published until after the president’s term of office. By that time the analyses and 
predictions would be compared with how ‘things had turned out’, thereby shedding light on 
the success or failure of psychohistory. 421 The estimated funding for the project was 15,000 to 
 
417 Personal communication with Mazlish, January 15, 2014. 
418 Mazlish, Bruce. In Search of Nixon: A Psychohistorical Inquiry. Baltimore, Maryland: Penguin Books. vi. 
419 Ibid. 
420 Ibid. 
421 Ibid. 

20,000 dollars. Mazlish started on his own research, approached a number of organisations, 
but none agreed to participate. For lack of finance the project was finally aborted.422 
The preliminary studies did not go to waste. On 19 January 1970, Mazlish presented a 
paper on Nixon to the Boston GAP, based on the initial research he had done for the aborted 
Nixon project.423 The paper was later published in slightly altered form by The Journal for 
Interdisciplinary History at MIT. The published paper, in turn, formed the basis of the book: 
In Search of Nixon: A Psychohistorical Inquiry, which was published in early 1972, before the 
Watergate scandal was properly uncovered. In a revised edition of the book in 1973, written 
while many of the facts about Nixon’s involvement in the scandal were still unknown or yet to 
be verified, Mazlish cautiously remarked that ‘[Nixon’s] predilection for denial, as we have 
described it, has been greatly in evidence throughout the unfolding of Watergate. […] These 
and other characteristics that we have tried to analyze reappear compulsively.’424 In an 
interview, several decades later, Mazlish put it more directly: ‘I was a prophet!’425 
In truth, Mazlish did not predict anything even close to the Watergate scandal, and in 
fact he never claimed to have. The book was a portrait of Nixon based upon all available 
sources, including the ones about his childhood. Without access to any first-hand accounts of 
the President’s personality, Mazlish had to make do with speeches, autobiographical writings 
and second-hand accounts of Nixon’s life and behaviour. Mazlish was aware of the limitations 
of this approach, but throughout the book stressed that he believed an analysis of the available 
materials might still be fruitful.  
He tried to answer the question what, in his view, makes a psychohistorical approach 
more, or less, than an application of psychoanalytic theory to a historical figure. ‘For example,’ 
he wrote, ‘psychohistory allows us, indeed forces us, to take seriously Nixon’s role as 
president. Many of his decisions will emerge from the demands or constraints of his role rather 
than his personality […] Psychohistory tries to take that fact seriously.’426 Psychohistory, he 
went on to argue, also directs attention to the way in which the subject’s personality has been 
shaped by the values and institutions of the society in which he grew up, and to the way in 
which he reflects, influences and confirms those values and institutions. It is this last emphasis 
that aligned Mazlish’s approach with that of Erikson, and it was also exactly this part that was 
missing from the Nixon-book. In the preface he wrote: ‘In fact, what I am offering is primarily 
a brief psychological sketch of Richard Nixon, informed by an awareness of psychohistorical 
theory and practice – and a good deal of humility.’427 
The portrait of Nixon that Mazlish painted was of a man haunted by his mother’s dislike 
of warfare and his father’s competitiveness: a split and extremely ambivalent President who 
dealt with his ambivalence by projection of aggression onto others. ‘He is a man,’ Mazlish 
wrote, ‘haunted by his father’s failure and driven to avoid that failure for himself and to redeem 
it for his parent. He compensates for lack of native abilities, where this is the case, by enormous 
hard work and persistence. […] He has had a serious problem with death wishes and anxiety 
in relation to his brothers, Eisenhower and himself.’428 Up to a certain extent, Mazlish argued, 
these character traits correspond to those of Americans in general. ‘For [Nixon] and for us […] 
dedication to peace has a corresponding element in powerful aggressive impulses and a 
tremendous competitive drive to win, and avoid any semblance of ‘defeat’. The compassion 
 
422 Ibid. vii. 
423 Ibid. vii.  
424 Ibid. xii. 
425 Pawelec, Tomasz. ‘Bruce Mazlish: Pioneer Psychohistorian’. Clio’s Psyche, Volume 3, No. 3, December, 
1996. 
426 Mazlish, Bruce. In Search of Nixon: A Psychohistorical Inquiry. Baltimore, Maryland: Penguin Books. 11. 
427 Ibid. vii. 
428 Ibid. 142. 

for the needy finds a companion in the desperate need to always to feel strong and to reject 
feelings of passivity and dependency.’429 The book received reasonably good reviews: James 
T. Patterson, a historian at Brown, found the book ‘agreeable’. But he did wonder: ‘Does one 
learn much about Nixon’s presidency by being advised that his relationship with his father 
enabled him to deal with Eisenhower many years later?’430 Arnold A. Rogow, a political 
scientist, regretted to say that In Search of Nixon came ‘close to qualifying as ‘wild’ 
psychoanalysis in the political field.’431 It is safe to say the book fared better outside academic 
circles. David Broder, a reviewer for New York Magazine, thought the book interesting, and 
persuasively argued.432 
In Search of Nixon revealed an underlying belief that psychoanalysis was a scientific 
discipline, as well as a strong conviction that a psychohistorian could, given enough data, come 
to verifiable conclusions about a subject’s personality. Earlier he had posed the question: ‘Is 
psychoanalysis a science, or is the historian who uses it resting on a weak reed? The question 
is far too complicated and philosophical to be more than noted by the historian. His job is to 
see whether theories and techniques of depth psychology can illuminate his materials, point his 
attention to new data, and offer him useful hypotheses in explaining human action in the 
past.’433 From In Search of Nixon it would seem that Mazlish believed that psychoanalysis – 
even the psychoanalysis of a historical actor conducted at a distance in space and time – could 
produce a form of (relatively) certain knowledge. He did not shy away from applying 
psychoanalytic thought to living subjects, either. In the first chapter, ‘The Nixon Problem’, he 
wrote that ‘the American President is so powerful that “analysis” of his “personality” is both 
necessary and justified.’434 With the belief that the President should be subjected to therapeutic 
analysis, what many scholars refer to as the ‘psychologisation of America’ reached a high point 
in the late 1960s.435 Nixon emerged from Mazlish’s book as a botched American hero: 
incapable of dealing with his own weakness and therefore prone to falseness and trickery. It 
was not exactly a prediction of the Watergate scandal, but it was an evaluation of the 
President’s character that would not be contradicted by the unfolding of events. 
 
Lifton 
 
Historian Philip Pomper judged that Robert Lifton was to psychohistory ‘what the first 
anthropologists who went into the field were to their armchair colleagues.’436 He received his 
medical training at Cornell University and New York Medical College. He graduated in 1948 
and was sent to Japan during the Korean War as an Air Force psychiatrist. During the 1950s 
and 60s he spent several years in Japan, Korea and Hong Kong. There he studied the victims, 
both Western and non-Western, of Chinese thought reform (or ‘brainwashing’); rebellious 
Japanese university students during the early sixties; and Hiroshima survivors of the atomic 
bomb. In the process, Lifton devised a psychoanalytic interview technique that focused on 
‘themes, forms, and images that are in significant ways showed, rather than upon the life of a 
 
429 Mazlish, Bruce. In Search of Nixon: A Psychohistorical Inquiry. Baltimore, Maryland: Penguin Books. 142. 
430 Patterson, James T. Reviews in American History, Volume 1, No. 1, March 1973. 60. 
431 Rogow, Arnold A. Review: In Search of Nixon. Political Science Quarterly, Volume 87, No. 4, December, 
1972. 675. 
432 Broder, David. ‘The President’s Analysts’. New York Magazine, August 28, 1972. 54. 
433 Mazlish, Bruce. ‘Inside the Whales’. Times Literary Supplement, July 28, 1966. 667. 
434 Mazlish, Bruce. In Search of Nixon: A Psychohistorical Inquiry. Baltimore, Maryland: Penguin Books. 3. 
435 Burnham, John C. After Freud Left: A Century of Psychoanalysis in America. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 2012. 8. 
436 Pomper, Philip. The Structure of Mind in History: Five Major Figures in Psychohistory. New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1985. 144. 

single person as such’.437 The method, he recalled, ‘remains probing, encouraging the widest 
range of associations, and includes detailed life histories and explorations of dreams. But it 
focuses upon the specific situation responsible for bringing us [Lifton and his subject] 
together’.438 As it was mostly Lifton himself who sought out his subjects, there was no real 
concept of therapeutic cure involved in the technique – the outcome of the conversation was 
simply a mutual exploration of a theme or subject.  
After returning from Japan in 1962, Lifton broke off the psychoanalytic training he had 
started before he left. ‘In a way,’ Lifton mused in an interview, ‘psychoanalysis had oversold 
itself in American society. It had emerged from World War II with considerable brilliance, 
because there weren’t many, or any, other psychologies that did much for soldiers when they 
had combat difficulties. There was a wave of psychoanalytic triumph and triumphalism which 
certainly influenced young people like myself.’439 
At the time, Lifton considered himself a ‘particular kind of research psychiatrist who 
had no great need to become a psychoanalyst’.440 His approach was broadly psychoanalytic, 
and yet he found himself gradually moving away from the ‘classic’ Freudian model of the mind 
– renouncing the idea of instincts or drives and a quantitative concept of energy. He replaced 
them with a theory of images, forms and symbols, in part derived from Erikson’s 
psychoanalytic emphasis on identity. He had been introduced to Erikson’s work by reading the 
‘The Problem of Ego Identity’ in the Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association.441 
As Lifton reinvented psychohistory, he moved away from classical psychoanalysis. Yet 
through his interest in the historical present and the interviewing method he devised as a result 
of this interest, Lifton re-established psychohistory’s link with therapeutic practice. And more 
specifically, he re-established psychohistory’s connection with its early origins in the 
observation and treatment of traumatised soldiers. 
Lifton himself was analysed by Beata Rank, Otto Rank’s first wife. In his work, he 
drew inspiration from psychodynamic theorists (Freud, Jung, Rank) but also from 
phenomenology and existentialism, particularly the works of Albert Camus. Lifton shifted the 
focus of psychoanalysis away from sexuality and on to traumas, anxiety and guilt arising from 
an awareness of the polarities of life and death. Similar to Camus, there is an implicit mistrust 
of ‘totalising’ theories and concepts that can be observed throughout Lifton’s work, as well as 
an articulated ideological mistrust of totalitarianism (or, as he calls the convergence of the two: 
‘ideological totalism’).442 Simultaneously, Lifton seems to favour the rebellious individual, and 
he emphasises history’s concern with particularities, not with patterns and structures. At the 
same time, Lifton uses his individual case studies to gain access to a presumed, large symbolic 
repository. In Lifton’s hands, the Freudian psyche ‘becomes a fluid self, and the self can no 
longer be identified with a substructure of the psyche charged with assessing reality – the 
rational ego – or with something quite as stable as Erikson’s ego identity.’443 As Pomper has 
correctly observed, this places Lifton in a group of thinkers who ‘have committed themselves 
 
437 Lifton, Robert J. ‘On Psychohistory’, in Explorations in Psychohistory: The Wellfleet Papers. New York: 
Simon and Schuster, 1974. 31. 
438 Ibid. 
439 ‘History and Psychoanalysis During the Postwar Period’. Conversation between Daniel Pick and Robert J. 
Lifton. Heyman Center/Society of Fellows. Vimeo. Published 2014. https://vimeo.com/92536012. (Accessed on 
September 13, 2016) 
440 Ibid. 
441 For a discussion of the importance of this article in Erikson’s development of psychohistory see Chapter 
Three. 
442 Lifton, Robert J. Thought Reform and the Psychology of Totalism; a Study of "brainwashing" in China. New 
York: Norton, 1961. 
443 Pomper, Philip. The Structure of Mind in History: Five Major Figures in Psychohistory. New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1985. 145. 

unreservedly to the neo-Kantian view that the human species is best known as homo 
symbolicus.’444 Lifton’s radical reconceptualisation of the Freudian self eventually culminated 
in his book: The Protean Self, published in 1994. That book was an expanded version of a 
paper ‘Protean Man’ published in the Partisan Review in 1968.  
 
 
Fig. 4. Robert J. Lifton 
 
Protean Man 
 
Ego psychology – and especially Erikson’s interpretation of it – had made possible a new 
emphasis in psychoanalysis on symbols and symbolisation; the metabolisation of the subject’s 
environment. Ego psychologists moved away from analysis of internal processes such as 
condensation and displacement, and replaced them with an emphasis on symbolising processes: 
the ego’s adaptive function and its capacity to make cognitive and emotional use of the 
environment. Erikson pointed out that Freud had in no satisfying way taken into account his 
subjects’ historical contexts, and therefore had not come close enough to the richness or the 
texture of their experience – their phenomenology. And as his emphasis shifted, so did his 
conceptions on the aetiology of psychopathology. Erikson asserted that psychopathology could 
arise from a conflict between the subject’s personal symbolic vocabulary and his or her context. 
His concept of identity, which served as the bridge between the subject’s internal symbolic 
vocabulary and his surrounding symbolic context, was crucial. 
Robert Lifton continued and expanded Erikson’s line of thought in his essay ‘Protean 
Man’ (1968). The essay was not only a diagnosis of contemporary American culture and 
subjectivity; it was also an ideological programme. Because of his roots in classical 
psychoanalysis, with its heavy psychobiological emphasis, Erikson had prioritised the person’s 
symbol of his own organism. In ‘Protean Man’, Lifton set out to ‘examine a set of 
psychological patterns characteristic of contemporary life, which are creating a new kind of 
man – a “protean man”.’445 In so doing, he was moving away from Erikson. Lifton interpreted 
Erikson’s concept of identity as ‘an effort to get away from [the] principle of fixity; and I have 
 
444 Ibid. 
445 Lifton, Robert J. ‘Protean Man’. Partisan Review, Volume 1, Winter 1968. 13. 

been using the term self-process to convey still more specifically the idea of flow.’446 Lifton 
was shifting away from Freudian remnants in Erikson’s thought; implying that the life cycle 
and the psychosexual stages were obsolete. Lifton’s concept of self-process referred to his idea 
that the Self continuously recreated itself. Because of Lifton’s hesitance to fully distance 
himself from his mentor, the exact status of the Protean Man as Lifton describes him in the 
essay remains unclear. Was it a timeless and essential structure of the mind that had only 
recently been fully actualised? Was it a historically specific pathological structure? Was it a 
preferable ideology? There is evidence in the essay to support any of those positions. ‘I do not 
mean to suggest that everybody is becoming the same, or that a totally new “world-self” is 
taking shape,’ he wrote.447 ‘But I am convinced that a new style of self-process is emerging 
everywhere.’448 The times, Lifton held, were changing. 
Like much of his early work, Lifton’s ideas about the new Protean Man were primarily 
based on his observations and interviews in Asia. His work with Chinese subjects was done in 
Hong Kong, in connection with his study of the processes of ‘thought reform’ (or: 
brainwashing) as conducted on the mainland. He found that ‘Chinese intellectuals of varying 
ages, whatever their experience with thought reform itself, had gone through an extraordinary 
set of what I at the time called identity fragments – each of which they could readily abandon 
in favor of another.’449 Even more dramatic, he found, were the shifts in self-process of a young 
Japanese man that he interviewed in Tokyo and Kyoto in the early 1960s. Confused by his 
beliefs after Japan’s surrender during World War II, this young person had apparently adopted 
many subsequent identities. He went from being a ‘fiery young patriot’, to an exponent of 
democracy, to a committed Marxist, to being ‘an aimless dissipater, as he drifted into a pattern 
of heavy drinking, marathon mah-jongg games and affairs with bargirls.’450  
This was a universal pattern. Lifton identified two historical developments that had 
importance for creating his Protean Man. The first was ‘the world-wide sense of what I have 
called historical (or psychohistorical) dislocation, the break in the sense of connection which 
men have long felt with the vital and nourishing symbols in their cultural tradition – symbols 
revolving around family, idea systems, religions, and the life cycle in general.’451 The second 
was ‘the flooding of imagery produced by the extraordinary flow of post-modern cultural 
influences over mass communication networks.’452 From Greek mythology, Lifton held, we 
know that Proteus easily shifted shape – ‘from wild boar to lion to dragon to fire to flood’.453 
What Proteus found difficult was committing to one, single form, so as to carry out his 
prophecy. Lifton recognised that a lot of young people’s psychopathology originated in this 
sense of dislocation. But Lifton reassured his readers: ‘we must keep in mind his possibilities 
as well as his difficulties.’454  
The Protean style of self-process allegedly extended to all areas of human experience – 
‘to political as well as sexual behavior.’455 Lifton gave rich illustrations of Protean structure 
from various forms of literature and art. ‘In contemporary American literature, Saul Bellow is 
notable for the protean men he has created.’456 In philosophy, Lifton found that a ‘distinguished 
French literary spokesman for the protean style – in his life and work – is, of course, Jean Paul 
 
446 Ibid. 
447 Ibid.  
448 Ibid.  
449 Ibid. 14. 
450 Ibid. 15. 
451 Ibid. 16. 
452 Ibid. 
453 Ibid. 
454 Ibid. 17. 
455 Ibid. 
456 Ibid. 18. 

Sartre.’457 Further, he found Protean elements ‘in the constant internal and external motion of 
‘beat generation’ writings, such as Jack Kerouac’s On the Road; in the novels of a gifted 
successor to that generation, J. P. Donleavy, particularly The Ginger Man; and of course in the 
work of European novelists such as Günter Grass’.458 Even film stars could be Protean: 
‘[Marcello] Mastroianni accepts his destiny as protean man.’459 Lifton described his 
contemporary subjectivity as fleeting, collage-like, non-committal and fluid. He connected 
these tendencies to what he called ‘the end of ideology’, a phrase he borrowed from Daniel 
Bell, and he approvingly concluded that what Protean Man found most acceptable was ‘images 
of a more fragmentary nature than those of the ideologies of the past.’460 It is tempting to read 
Lifton’s own preoccupations and struggles into his description of the Protean Man.  
History and psychology, Lifton later argued, ‘each has something of an impulse to 
eliminate the other.’461 In classical psychoanalysis, he said, there is ‘an implicit assumption 
that the larger historical universe is nothing but a manifestation of the projections or emanations 
of the individual psyche’.462 Historical writing, on the other hand, seems to ‘replace a 
psychological perspective with common-sense assumptions about human motivation, or else 
to drown psychological man – that is, the inner life of individual man – in a sea of collectivity. 
[…] The Faustian intellectual temptation is to dismiss the paradox and make things simple. We 
do better, I am certain, to embrace the paradox. For it can be energizing.’463 
Lifton was a supporter of the student rebellions of the 1960s, and found resonance with 
the student movement’s broad, liberal aims. While at Yale he joined the ‘Concerned Yale 
Faculty’ that was made up of people sympathetic to the student uprisings. The Sixties, he 
recalled, ‘confronted me with a tandem of rebelliousness and totalism. I was hardly free from 
confusion, but tried to keep my bearings by embracing much of the rebellion while taking a 
critical stance towards the totalism.’464 Lifton saw psychohistory as closer to a literary 
enterprise than a scientific one. In his article entitled ‘On Psychohistory’ Lifton drew attention 
to the fact that Freud had initially chosen as a subtitle for his work Moses and Monotheism, ‘A 
Historical Novel’, and pointed out that this subtitle had found a recent echo – ‘History as a 
Novel, The Novel as History,’ chosen by what Lifton judged to be ‘a promising young 
existentialist psychohistorian named Norman Mailer for his much awarded book Armies of the 
Night’.465 He explained: ‘The self-irony in juxtaposing history and fiction does not necessarily 
suggest that either Freud or Mailer lacked belief in his own views, but rather that each felt he 
was dealing with a kind of truth that took him beyond conventional historical description.’466 
As mentioned earlier, Mazlish had come to a similar conclusion in The Riddle of History, but 
for him it was no reason to start branding his work as anything other than scientific. 
In Lifton’s hands, psychohistory became a critical instrument; a tool for radical critique, 
albeit from a radically individual perspective. Lifton’s psychohistory was ‘impelled by a sense 
of urgency about our present historical predicament, and by a strong desire to evolve 
psychohistorical theory adequate to the dangerous times in which we live’.467 He believed that 
 
457 Ibid. 19. 
458 Ibid. 
459 Ibid. 20. 
460 Ibid. 21. 
461 Lifton, Robert J. ‘On Psychohistory’, in Explorations in Psychohistory: The Wellfleet Papers. New York: 
Simon and Schuster, 1974. 23. 
462 Ibid. 
463 Ibid. 24. 
464 Lifton, Robert J. Witness to an Extreme Century: A Memoir. New York: Free Press, 2011. 192. 
465 Ibid. 27. 
466 Ibid. 28. 
467 Lifton, Robert J. ‘The Sense of Immortality: On Death and the Continuity of Life’. The American Journal of 
Psychoanalysis, Volume 33, 1973. 4. 

psychohistorians, aware of their own (unconscious) involvement with their subject, were 
compelled to articulate their own ideological positions and shape their theories around them. 
Not only were they allowed, but even obliged, to express their sentiments and ethical and 
political values in their work. Where Erikson had shown that the subject of a historical analysis, 
such as young Luther, was both product and transformer of his historical, symbolic context; 
now Lifton held that this was just as much the case for the observer. In Lifton’s view, 
articulated self-knowledge of the historical and moral particularity of the observer opened up 
the possibility for psychohistorical critique. 
 
Disciplined Thought vs. Far-Out Speculation 
 
The difference between Lifton’s and Mazlish’s hopes for psychohistory can be traced to their 
differing interpretations of its two parent fields: psychoanalysis and history. Both of them 
believed that psychoanalysis could supplement history with an emphasis on the importance of 
‘psychic truth’. Lifton took this position to an extreme: inspired by Erikson, he conceived of 
history as an analysis of the interplay between symbolic structures, ideologies and individuals’ 
symbolic interpretations and life histories. This position is at risk of losing a concept of factual 
truth to the more slippery notion of psychological truth. One of his key tools was his interview-
method, which was loosely based on psychoanalytic practice. Trained as an academic historian, 
Mazlish was far more conservative in his interpretation of what history was and could do: he 
believed that psychoanalysis’ emphasis on ‘psychic truth’ could supplement the historian’s 
conventional search and presentation of facts. In turn, they stressed different aspects of 
psychoanalytic theory and practice. Lifton was openly critical of Freudian theory, Mazlish was 
not. Whereas Lifton stressed the particularity of historical actors’ subjectivities, and the 
capacity to problematise the author-text relationship through the psychoanalytic concept of 
transference to one’s subject, Mazlish was more interested in psychoanalysis as an authority-
bearing discourse, a science. His aim was to substitute the historian’s ‘seat-of-the-pants’ 
implicit psychological frameworks with coherent Freudian theory. Lifton stressed the ‘protean’ 
qualities of psychohistory – its capacity to analyse and lay bare the particularity of a given 
historical actor’s beliefs and experience; Mazlish believed in the predictive qualities of 
psychohistory. 
In 1967, Mazlish became the youngest member of the Academy of Arts and Sciences. 
Through his connections with John Voss, a representative of the Academy, he was able to 
procure the generous funding for the first Wellfleet meetings.468 Early on, Mazlish expressed 
a hope that psychohistory might become a semi-independent discipline with deep roots in 
academia: ‘Will the time come,’ he wondered in 1966, ‘when history departments will list 
courses on “The Psychological History of Modern Europe” (to take one example) as a normal 
thing, in the same way they now have courses on “The Political History of Modern Europe” or 
“The Economic History of Modern Europe”?’469 
About the earliest Wellfleet meetings, Lifton later recalled: ‘Very roughly, they can be 
divided into two phases – a first period of about four years that could be called The Grand 
Illusion of Unity, and a subsequent phase of Work, Play and Struggle.’470 There appear to have 
been conflicting ideas on what the aim of the group should be from the outset. In a report of 
the first Wellfleet meeting for the record of the Academy, Mazlish wrote: ‘In the following 
year, we should like to engage in discussion of the best way to institutionalize our work. Should 
 
468 Letter from John Voss to Erik Erikson, February 3, 1967. Container 11, Erik H. and Joan M. Erikson papers, 
1925-1985, Houghton Library, Harvard College Library, Harvard University. 
469 Mazlish, Bruce. ‘Inside the Whales’. Times Literary Supplement, July 28, 1966. 668. 
470 Lifton, Robert J., and Eric Olson. Explorations in Psychohistory; the Wellfleet Papers. New York: Simon 
and Schuster, 1975. 13. 

we, for example, look forward to setting up a permanent institute? If so, what type of institute 
should it be? We believe that we are founding, or helping to found, a new discipline – 
psychohistorical inquiry.’471 Mazlish sought to ‘lay down the foundations of psychohistory’ 
and found a new academic discipline. Lifton, on the other hand, was skeptical about unification. 
He sought a more informal combination of what he called ‘disciplined thought and far-out 
speculation’.472 In the Academy’s bulletin of October 1966, a short summary of the first 
Wellfleet meeting was given:  
 
All the participants at Wellfleet agreed that the week had provided an unusually 
rewarding opportunity for free inquiry and intellectual exchange. The combination of 
presentations based on previously circulated papers and informal conversations before 
and after the formal meetings contributed to an atmosphere in which unusually direct 
discussion, controversy, and candor were possible. The Conference plans to meet again 
in a year, at which time working papers on more specific theoretical approaches will be 
presented.473 
 
Looking back on the earliest Wellfleet meetings, Lifton mentioned that besides ‘direct 
discussion and controversy’ the group had to endure its share of ‘non-communication, 
posturing and soliloquy.’474 This tension was the result of the two conflicting tendencies within 
the group: first, to create a psychohistorical baseline by finding areas of conceptual agreement, 
roughly Mazlish’s position, and second, an individualistic tendency to utilise the group for a 
deepening (or promoting) of one’s own work. ‘Even at the height of our early enthusiasm,’ 
Lifton recalled, ‘none of us fully embraced the ever-present illusion of unification – inevitably 
based on a misleading application of a scientific model – that has long haunted sociological 
and psychological thought.’475 In his view, the sponsorship by the Academy of Arts and 
Sciences: ‘brought to bear on us a certain pressure toward a more organized and integrative 
effort and practical products: using a particular meeting to create an issue of Daedalus, the 
Academy’s journal, and a series of meetings to create an enduring institution that could 
coordinate, and train others in, psychohistorical work.’476 By the time of what Lifton called the 
second phase – of ‘Work, Play and Struggle’ – he and his fellow Wellfleetians ‘had resolved 
the matter in favor of a more limited […] commitment to our own intellectual exploration.’477 
Bruce Mazlish no longer attended the Wellfleet meetings. 
 
The Wellfleet Papers 
 
Simon and Schuster is pleased to present, in a simultaneous cloth and paperback 
edition, this important volume of papers in which the founding practitioners place the 
field of psychohistory in a balanced context by offering various approaches in 
methodology, theory and research. [...] EXPLORATIONS IN PSYCHOHISTORY is 
destined to become a classic reader for the student and scholar searching for an 
understanding of what the intriguing discipline of psychohistory is all about.478 
 
471 See Mazlish, Bruce. Records of the Academy (Academy of Arts and Sciences), No. 1966/1967 (1966-1967). 
31-32. 
472 Ibid. 
473 ‘Conference on Psychohistorical Process’. Bulletin of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Volume 
20, No. 1, October 1966. 7. 
474 Ibid. 
475 Ibid. 
476 Ibid. 
477 Ibid. 
478 Advertisement in The Journal of Modern History, Volume 47, No. 2, June 1975. 

 
Explorations in Psychohistory: The Wellfleet Papers collected thirteen papers delivered at 
Wellfleet meetings during the first eight years of the group’s existence. The essays in 
Explorations were an eclectic mix, and this seems to have been Lifton’s point. In fact, the book 
can be read as the triumph of the Protean style of psychohistory – flexible, amorphous – over 
and above any systematic application of psychology to historical subjects. As per Lifton’s 
wishes, psychohistory remained an elusive, malleable concept; the Wellfleet meetings 
remained informal, without any further goal of institutionalisation. The papers in Explorations 
reflected this informal character of the gatherings, and differed considerably in style and 
content. Fred Weinstein wrote in a review:  
 
A volume such as this must be uneven, including as it does the confiding style of 
Erikson and the brisk, no-nonsense intellectuality of Rieff, the ‘traditional’ language of 
Mazlish and the self-consciously novel language of Lifton, discussions of biography 
and of two different approaches to collective behavior. But the volume is also curiously 
incomplete, in the sense that important problems and issues are inconclusively raised 
without even the slightest editorial hint of what one might do or where one might go to 
pursue these issues, or what the implications are for the future of psychohistorical 
work.479 
 
Some chapters consisted of transcriptions of the paper with the discussions added on. 
Unsurprisingly, Mazlish’s contribution ‘The Mills: Father and Son’ – an early paper on his 
research into the relationship between John Stuart Mill and his father James – was the most 
classic example of psychobiography in the book. Three of the essays stand out in particular. 
They give a good overview of the ‘Erikson-Lifton’ interpretation of psychohistory: Lifton’s 
‘On Psychohistory’; Erikson’s ‘On the Nature of Psychohistorical Evidence: In Search of 
Gandhi’; and Robert Coles’ ‘The Method’. 
‘On Psychohistory’ was Robert Lifton’s anti-manifesto for psychohistory. 
‘Psychohistory,’ he began, ‘is in one sense already old, and in another hardly born. None can 
deny the logic of a marriage between psychology and history. But a certain amount of 
scepticism about logical marriages (and their offspring) is always in order.’480 Lifton identified 
four ‘models’ or ‘paradigms’ of psychohistory. Two of them were strictly Freudian; the other 
two drew upon Freud but moved away from some core psychoanalytic assumptions. First was 
the model that Freud used in Moses and Monotheism and Totem and Taboo. In these texts, a 
supra-historical, or mythical, event (such as the murder of the primal father by the sons) became 
determinative of actual history. Like Mazlish, Lifton recognised that the most powerful 
insights in this paradigm were those centred ‘upon the psychological significance of the 
perceived historical past’ for the present and the future.481 The second Freudian 
psychohistorical model was the most common, and straightforward: the application of 
psychoanalytic theory to biography. These works stood in the tradition of the Freud-Bullitt 
biography of Woodrow Wilson, and were apprehended, Lifton held, by Freud’s treatment of 
men like Leonardo DaVinci and Fyodr Dostoevsky (as artists rather than historical actors). 
Both models, Lifton stressed, were based on what he called an ‘individual-psychological’ 
model. In these models, the return of the repressed became ‘the basis of Freud’s view of history 
as psychological recurrence.’482  
 
479 Book Review Section. GUPH Newsletter, Volume III, No.4, March 1975. 22. 
480 Lifton, Robert J., and Eric Olson. Explorations in Psychohistory; the Wellfleet Papers. New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1975. 21. 
481 Ibid. 
482 Ibid. 25 

For Lifton, these paradigms were frustrating. In his view, they interpreted history 
psychologically but avoided actually doing history itself. The first two models were superseded 
by Erikson’s Young Man Luther, which provided the blueprint of the third model: ‘the great 
man in history’-model. He showed how Erikson had moved away from Freud’s instinctual 
idiom, and had started looking at the intersection of individual and collective histories.483 Here 
he quoted Erikson that Luther, Gandhi and Freud all had one thing in common: ‘a grim 
willingness to do the dirty work of their ages.’484 That dirty work, Lifton remarked, was 
historically specific, although it was involved with psychological universals. It was exactly this 
turn to historical specificity that had drawn Lifton to Erikson’s work.  
The fourth paradigm was Lifton’s own paradigm of ‘shared historical themes’. He 
observed these themes in the lives of men and women exposed to particular forms of collective 
and individual experience. He described how he used his interview-method for work in this 
paradigm, and showed how it was partly empirical (in so far as it was based on interviews); in 
part phenomenological (in that it stressed the individual’s and his own metabolisation of 
symbols, individual and collective); and partly speculative (in its positing of relationships 
between the individual and his history). In this framework, effect became virtually 
indistinguishable from cause. A group, such as the survivors of Hiroshima that Lifton 
interviewed, was at once created by a historical event and simultaneously influenced it, or fed 
back into it. For this reason, Lifton judged, his method dealt more with ‘historical flow’ than 
with historical cause and effect. A social theory that linked the individual processes with group 
processes, he concluded, could be borrowed from Marxism or invented anew. Psychohistory 
could then become a ‘New History’. Concomitant with the development of this New History 
was the emergence of Lifton’s Protean man: ‘postmodern and in some ways post-Freudian’.485    
Another important idea that Lifton put forward was the notion that the psychohistorian 
is implicated in his or her own research. Here Lifton was again indebted to Erikson. In an 
earlier paper, ‘Evidence and Inference’, delivered at a discussion sponsored by the American 
Psychoanalytic Association (APA) in 1957, Erikson had argued that out of all the other 
disciplines represented at the conference, he felt closest to the historian: ‘for he, like the 
clinician, must serve the curious process by which selected portions of the past impose 
themselves on our renewed awareness and claim continued actuality in our contemporary 
commitments.’486 Historians, like clinicians, Erikson said, transform the fragmentations of the 
past and the peculiarities of those who make history into such wholeness of meaning as 
mankind in general, or a patient in particular, seeks. In his contribution to Explorations, Erikson 
went further: In ‘On the Nature of Psychohistorical Evidence: In Search of Gandhi’, Erikson 
picked up this theme again in an attempt to ‘delineate’ an in-between field’: the 
psychohistorical approach. ‘Such a compound name usually designates an area in which 
nobody is methodologically quite at home, but which someday will be settled and incorporated 
without a trace of border disputes and double names.’487 
In the 1957 APA lecture, which was later expanded into an article, Erikson described 
the therapeutic process as he saw it and discussed the concept of countertransference. More 
than any other clinician, Erikson explained, the psychotherapist ‘must include in his field of 
observation a specific self-awareness,’ the core of what he called ‘disciplined subjectivity’.488 
 
483 For a detailed discussion of the exact theoretical underpinnings, see Chapter Three. 
484 Lifton, Robert J., and Eric Olson. Explorations in Psychohistory; the Wellfleet Papers. New York: Simon 
and Schuster, 1975. 28 
485 Ibid. 39.  
486 Erikson, Erik H. ‘On the Nature of Psychohistorical Evidence’. In Lifton, Robert J., and Eric 
Olson. Explorations in Psychohistory; the Wellfleet Papers. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1975. 42. 
487 Ibid. 43. 
488 Erikson, Erik H. Insight and Responsibility. New York: W.W. Norton, 1964. 53 

Scientists, he concluded, ‘may learn about the nature of things by finding out what they can do 
to them, but the clinician can learn of the true nature of man only in the attempt to do something 
for and with him.’489 In the paper, Erikson juxtaposed science and the knowledge produced in 
the therapeutic encounter. In his paper on psychohistory, he continued this line argument. 
Countertransference, he argued, is part of what the clinician must observe in himself. Like the 
patient, he too might transfer unconscious strivings that derive from his infantile past. ‘Relived 
and resolved in each case, they are a necessary part of the evidence; and their elucidation is the 
only way to a cure. But are they also applicable to some aspects of historical research?’490 The 
Academy of Arts and Sciences report on the first Wellfleet meeting suggests that this topic was 
on the Wellfleetians’ agenda from the very beginning. It reads: ‘Particularly important [in the 
discussions] was an awareness of the researcher’s own involvement in his work, an 
involvement that may be illuminated by a comparison with the psychoanalytic principle of 
countertransference, although the two are not identical.’491 
Erikson’s paper for Explorations consisted of a series of reflections on the process of 
writing his book Gandhi’s Truth. He argued that in the process of studying a figure such as 
Gandhi, whilst relying heavily on the subject’s autobiographical writings, it was of utmost 
importance to take into consideration not only the subject’s historical context but also his 
(unconscious) preoccupations. Using his theory of life stages, Erikson examined a part of 
Gandhi’s autobiography and showed that it was significant to wonder what the aim of this piece 
of autobiographical writing had in light of the author’s particular life-circumstances at the time. 
However, according to Erikson, it is similarly just as important to examine the historian’s own 
circumstances in researching a subject. In his autobiography, Erikson tells us, Gandhi describes 
a moment in which he is particularly cruel and petty towards his wife. Erikson paraphrases 
Gandhi: ‘What if all his professions of universal love, all his sacrifices of those closest to him 
by family ties for the sake of those furthest away (the masses, the poor, the Untouchables), 
were a ‘pretense’?’492 Here, Erikson recalled, Gandhi makes the reader of his autobiography 
the externalisation of his own self-doubt. Erikson felt ‘so directly appealed to that I began to 
think of how I might have explained these matters to him in light of our clinical knowledge.’493 
In Gandhi’s Truth, Erikson addressed Gandhi personally, explaining to his subject that, 
‘as a student of another lover of truth, a contemporary of his on the other side of the world, I 
had a more charitable term than ‘pretense’ for the psychological aspect of his dilemma: namely, 
‘ambivalence’.’494 And he continued: ‘Gandhi, I think, would have listened to me, but probably 
would have asked me teasingly why I had taken his outburst so personally. And, indeed, my 
impulsive need to answer him ‘in person’ before I could go on with my book revealed again 
that all manner of countertransference can accompany our attempts to analyze others, great or 
ordinary.’495 Working as a historian on the life of Gandhi, and coming from a psychoanalytic 
background, Erikson now suggested that the historian himself brought with him his own 
unconscious preoccupations in writing the history of his subject. ‘I believe,’ he wrote, ‘that any 
man projects […] on to the men and the times he studies some unlived portions and often the 
unrealized selves of his own life[.]’496 These portions and preoccupations had to be made 
manifest, Erikson would say, in order to write good history.  
 
489 Ibid. 
490 Erikson, Erik H. ‘On the Nature of Psychohistorical Evidence’. In Lifton, Robert J., and Eric 
Olson. Explorations in Psychohistory; the Wellfleet Papers. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1975. 42. 
491 Bulletin of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Volume 20, No. 1, October, 1966. 7. 
492 Erikson, Erik H. ‘On the Nature of Psychohistorical Evidence’. In Lifton, Robert J., and Eric 
Olson. Explorations in Psychohistory; the Wellfleet Papers. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1975. 
493 Ibid. 56. 
494 Ibid. 56. 
495 Ibid. 
496 Ibid. 60. 

‘[A]s we demand that he who makes a profession of “psychoanalyzing” others must 
have learned a certain capacity for self-analysis,’ Erikson wrote, ‘so must we presuppose that 
the psychohistorian will have developed or acquired a certain self-analytic capacity[.]’497 What 
would such self-awareness consist of? According to Erikson, the historian must be aware of 
the following: (1) the stage and the conditions of the historian’s own life; (2) the place of the 
work in the sequence of the historian’s life history; (3) the present state of the historian’s 
communities; (4) the history of the historian’s communities. Under communities, Erikson 
subsumed all the ‘collective processes from which [the historian] derives identity’.498 The 
psychohistorian must, above all, know himself as part of the historical process. In other words, 
he or she has to be aware of his or her (unconscious) symbolic context. 
This position automatically problematised the relationship of the historian with his 
subject, and the author with his text. And it certainly cast doubt on claims that history was a 
rule-based science as opposed to an art. If the choice of subject and materials, and the way one 
wrote up history, was a reflection of unconscious processes and preoccupations, history became 
at best an embodiment of personal vision, at worst a symptom; in any case far removed from 
the ideal of seeking truth in accordance with principles and rules that guarantee scientific 
validity. The particular way in which Erikson inserted psychoanalysis into the historiographical 
equation led to what can be considered an idiographic historiography, as opposed to the 
nomothetic position that William Langer and Bruce Mazlish adhered to at the time.499 
The idiographic position was most fervently defended by Robert Coles, who also 
contributed a chapter to Explorations. In ‘The Method’, Robert Coles’ contribution to 
Explorations in Psychohistory, the child psychiatrist and admirer of Erikson (Coles wrote one 
of the first biographies of Erikson) described how he went about studying the lives of ‘migrants, 
sharecroppers and mountaineers’ and their children. In fact, the paper was the introduction to 
the second volume of Coles’ panoramic, five-volume social study of the lives of the American 
poor: Children of Crisis. It was an outright attack on method, at least in any strictly 
psychoanalytic or historical sense, and in it, Coles defended a literary approach to the lives of 
the subjects he studied. In his work, Coles used techniques of participant observation, such as 
tape recordings and field notes, as well as clinical interpretation and literary narrative. Due in 
part to his particular branch of history – writing the life-histories of people with whom he 
would spend a considerable amount of time – in his view an observer could not be disentangled 
from the observed at all. 
‘Lives as opposed to problems,’ Coles wrote, ‘may puzzle the fixed notions of the 
theorist, while at the same time adding confirmation to what has been revealed by such keenly 
sensitive (if “methodologically untrained”) observers as Dostoevsky or Zola, Orwell or Agee, 
who have managed, regardless of time and place, to set down something both comprehensible 
and enduring about human beings.’500 Although Coles was an anti-theorist, in his stance he 
betrayed influences of psychoanalyst Donald Winnicott and Erikson. He acknowledged that in 
the recent past there had been a shift in outlook among psychiatrists and psychoanalysts: under 
the influence of psychohistory, he held, they ‘have learned to look upon people as citizens of a 
nation, as members of a given society, and particular members at that, not merely as members 
of an Oedipal family.’501 For all his antipathy towards theory, Coles recognised at least one 
 
497 Ibid. 56. 
498 Ibid. 57. 
499 The terms idiographic and nomothetic were first used by philosopher Wilhelm Windelbandt, See Oakes, 
Guy. ‘Wilhelm Windelband on History and Natural Science.’ History and Theory, Vol.19, No. 2, February 
1980. 165-168. 
500 Coles, Robert. ‘The Method’. In Lifton, Robert J., and Eric Olson. Explorations in Psychohistory; the 
Wellfleet Papers. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1975. 165. 
501 Ibid. 167. 

major contribution of psychoanalysis to his own work as a psychohistorian: ‘Long ago Freud 
urged all of us who would know how others think and feel to look at our own reactions and 
responses and styles of thought or feeling.’502 
 
Repression 
 
When Explorations was published in 1974, the term psychohistory had started to penetrate the 
American consciousness at large.503 It appeared regularly in the columns of the New York 
Times, which published reviews of books by all the major psychohistorians; works labeled 
‘psychohistory’ appeared on the bookshelves of major bookstores in the United States. But the 
reception of psychohistorical works, by both professionals and the mainstream media, was 
mixed. Two New Yorker cartoons published in the 1970s are worth mentioning in this context. 
The first depicted an author at a cocktailparty, bragging: ‘I’ve done some soft-core, some as-
told-to’s, and a few gothics. Now I’m into psychohistory’.504 The second cartoon pictured the 
bolted door of a psychiatric ward, with a small sign reading ‘psychohistorian’ nailed above a 
peephole.505 
Besides such tongue-in-cheek criticisms there was also outright hostility towards the 
new discipline, coming, for example, from more traditional historians. Under the influence of 
the Annales school in France, a new generation of historians in the United States was calling 
for a more interdisciplinary form of history, with a focus on social class, mobility, geography, 
disease and economic determinants of human behaviour. The Journal for Interdisciplinary 
History reflected this movement. Psychohistory was often (sometimes by psychohistorians 
themselves) considered a part of this movement; and psychoanalysis, by extension, considered 
a scientific practice on par with the statistics and computer analyses used and performed by 
other interdisciplinary historians. Jacques Barzun, once the supervisor of Mazlish’s PhD-thesis, 
was now one of this new interdisciplinary history’s fiercest critics, and a staunch defender of 
narrative history.506 
Barzun did not mention his former student’s name once in his highly critical book on 
psychohistory: Clio and the Doctors (1974). He did, at times, refer to and paraphrase from, ‘a 
psycho-historical study of President Nixon’ – Mazlish’s study. In Barzun’s book the author 
tackled ‘the doctors’: Erikson, Lifton and Coles; Bruce Mazlish is hauntingly absent from 
Barzun’s discussion of ‘Psycho-History, Quanto-History and History’. The short book was the 
result of an invitation to speak at City University, New York, in 1971, at a conference on 
interdisciplinary history, organised by leading historian Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr.; Mazlish 
also attended that conference. The gathering was covered extensively by The New York Times, 
and a quote from the conference served as The Times’ ‘Quotation of the Day’.  
 
Armed with computers, statistics, psychoanalysis, sampling techniques, economic 
models and other tools of modern social science, younger historians have established a 
wide beachhead in the discipline that Prof. C. Vann Woodward of Yale, former head of 
the American Historical Association calls a ‘living fossil from the pre-scientific age’.507 
 
 
502 Ibid. 168. 
503 For a detailed account of the growth of psychohistory in the 1970s, see Chapter Four. 
504 The New Yorker, December 17, 1973. 
505 Strozier, Charles B., and Daniel Offer. The Leader: Psychohistorical Essays. New York: Plenum Press, 
1985. 60. 
506 Mit.edu. https://history.mit.edu/people/bruce-mazlish (Accessed on September 13, 2016) 
507 Reinhold, Robert. ‘Historians Find Fresh Answers With Tools of Social Science’. New York Times, July 3, 
1971 

‘My chief aim,’ Barzun wrote in the Preface to his critical essay, ‘has been to lay the issues 
before the younger generation of students now ‘taking’ history. Their tendency, altogether 
understandable, is to embrace the new.’508 Clio and the Doctors was a fierce statement 
defending the old, ‘traditional’ or ‘literary’, history, against the tendency to ‘graft upon history 
such neighboring knowledge as wears the aspect of science’.509 Against psychohistory Barzun 
launched three major points of critique: first, the ‘attempt to rescue Clio from pitiable 
maidenhood by artificial insemination […] is nothing new.’510 Barzun looked upon 
psychohistory as a fad, an intellectual hype that would come and go. Second, psychohistory 
mixed genres: Young Man Luther, which Barzun took as exemplary for the field of 
psychohistory, according to Barzun was not history but biography (without expanding on the 
difference), and also dealt with ‘studies of mental types or social institutions’, therefore making 
it ‘difficult to distinguish from previous sociological, psychiatric, or anthropological reports’. 
Third, ‘how the method-user passes from individual psychology to the ‘mind’ of an age or a 
group is not clear’.511 Another important point of critique was the involvement of the author 
with his subject.  
In a review of Clio and the Doctors in The New York Times, sociologist Richard Sennett 
called it ‘a sad book’ because in his view it represented an ‘aristocratic’ interpretation of 
history, whose proponents at first ‘inclined to snoot at both psycho-history and quanto-history 
as interesting oddities at best’, and now – taking note of the wide interest in interdisciplinary 
variants of history – responded to them patronisingly as menacing threats.512 Presumably 
without any knowledge of Barzun’s background as one of the most prominent 
psychohistorian’s former mentors, Sennett also noted how the author’s position resembled that 
of a father laying down the law for a group of rebellious sons, noting further, however, that 
‘the father’s vice – a certain anti-intellectuality, a certain unreflectiveness in the writing of 
history – has been passed down intact’.513 
But criticism of psychohistory also came from deep within its own ranks. In the 
February and March editions of the New York Review of Books of 1973, in a two-part article 
entitled ‘Shrinking History’, Robert Coles remarked that ‘Even friends get caught in such 
intellectual warfare, where sides are taken and one is considered either a friend or a foe.’514 In 
the essay, Coles gave an extremely critical overview of the field of psychohistory, and was 
especially critical towards ‘the editor of a volume of essays on Psychoanalysis and History’.515 
In a response to the two articles, published in the May edition of the same magazine, Bruce 
Mazlish asked: ‘Why must one be either friend or foe? Cannot different inquirers work in 
different ways, without being enemies?’516 
In the essay, Coles surveyed various works that were labelled psychohistory and held 
them up to Freud’s study of Leonardo, written some fifty years before the term psychohistory 
was first used by Erikson. ‘Words like ‘oral’ or ‘anal’ or ‘phallic’ are not fastened upon 
Leonardo. His ideas about religion are discussed in the context of the fifteenth and sixteenth 
 
508 Barzun, Jacques. Clio and the Doctors: Psycho-history, Quanto-history, & History. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1974. x. 
509 Ibid. 11. 
510 Ibid. 14. 
511 Ibid. 
512 Sennett, Richard. ‘Review: Clio and the Doctors’. The New York Times, October 20, 1974. 
513 Ibid. 
514 Coles, Robert. ‘Shrinking History Part 1’, New York Review of Books, February 22, 1973. 
http://www.nybooks.com/articles/1973/02/22/shrinking-historypart-one/ 
515 Ibid. 
516 ‘An Exchange on Psychohistory’. The New York Review of Books, May 3, 1973. 
http://www.nybooks.com/articles/1973/05/03/an-exchange-on-psychohistory/ 

century in which he lived.’517 In Coles’ opinion, no work labelled psychohistory, with the 
exception of Young Man Luther, held up in comparison to Freud’s study; even though Freud’s 
work, Coles acknowledges, was flawed as well. Coles conceded that there was a need for 
psychoanalytically informed historians and historically minded psychiatrists, but the former 
Wellfleetian did not believe in psychohistory as an independent field. Coles exempted his 
former mentor from his critical gaze: ‘One can look at a sentence [by Erikson] and be grateful 
for the subtlety of its content and expression.’518 In Young Man Luther, he found: ‘the facts are 
assembled to tell a story, to interest and maybe bestir the reader, to allow a writer with, say, 
psychological or philosophical interests […] a medium for self-expression through another’s 
life.’519 Interestingly, Coles did not accept the term psychohistory at all, yet his view on what 
good history is: ‘self-expression through another’s life’, might well serve as a summary of what 
Erikson defined as good psychohistory in ‘On the Nature of Psychohistorical Evidence: In 
Search of Gandhi’. 
‘Shrinking History’ was first and foremost a critique of the use of psychoanalytic 
vocabulary in historical writing: ‘[Few scholars] can give biography the power and drama of a 
novel, while providing the most vivid and searching kind of history.’520 And Coles was 
particularly critical of Mazlish’s book on Nixon. ‘The “search” for Nixon,’ he wrote, ‘ends 
with the discovery of “three traits”, which Mazlish characterizes as “role identification”, 
“ambivalence” and “denial”. We have already been informed that any of us can possess these 
qualities.’521 He continued: ‘One wonders […] why the author has bothered to write this book 
at all, especially since the rest of the book offers nothing else about the President’s “character”, 
only an extensive justification of the value of “psychohistory” as a “science”.’522 
Unsurprisingly, then, Coles was also rather dismissive of Walter Langer’s OSS-report, which 
had been recently published under the title The Mind of Adolf Hitler. Among other things, he 
was unimpressed by Langer’s prediction of Hitler’s suicide: Clearly,’ he wrote, ‘Dr. Langer 
was right in suggesting suicide as “the most plausible outcome”. But then, my ninth-grade 
Latin teacher made a similar prediction – he was more unequivocal – in a class around the same 
year; […] and so did the journalist Dorothy Thompson, who mentioned the very same 
likelihood several times in her syndicated columns during the early 1940s.’523 Coles was 
implicitly criticizing Mazlish’s interpretation of psychohistory, and ridiculing his intention to 
seek out the predictive qualities of the discipline.  
Coles’ article is an important document for two reasons. First, it is the clearest indicator 
of the failure of the initial aims of the Group for the Study of Psychohistorical Process: no 
‘foundations’ of psychohistory were settled upon, and no ‘psychohistorical baseline’ was 
established by this point. The article makes clear that, by 1973, there was quite some interest 
in psychohistory, and there were a fair number of people calling the work they wrote 
psychohistory, but there was hardly any agreement on what these various projects had in 
common. Psychohistory, in other words, remained what Claude Lévi-Strauss would call a 
‘floating signifier’, with no single meaning and no authority appointed to anchor a stable 
meaning to it.524 In a response to Coles’s article, Mazlish wrote: ‘It is therefore doubly 
dismaying to have a “friend” of psychohistory attack it in the same dogmatic, intolerant way—
 
517 Coles, Robert. ‘Shrinking History Part 1’, New York Review of Books, February 22, 1973. 
http://www.nybooks.com/articles/1973/02/22/shrinking-historypart-one/ 
518 Ibid. 
519 Ibid. 
520 Ibid. 
521 Ibid. 
522 Ibid. 
523 Ibid. 
524 Lévi-Strauss, Claude. Introduction to the Work of Marcel Mauss. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1987. 
63. 

legitimate criticism is another matter—as its out-and-out enemies.’525 Second, it shows the 
stark differences between the idiographic and nomothetic interpretations of psychohistory. 
Coles seems to have taken Erikson’s and Lifton’s approach to psychohistory to its extreme 
conclusion, even dropping the term psychohistory altogether. History, he suggested, should be 
judged for its artistic merits, and seen as an expression of the author’s (unconscious) prejudices 
and preoccupations, thereby blurring the lines between fact and fiction. Again, Mazlish 
retorted: ‘Others before Freud, of course, had had intuitive glimpses into the human psyche,’ 
and he went on to quote from his own book:  
 
What Freud added to their insights… was system, and the grounding and regrounding 
of his systematized concepts in clinical evidence, and then the hard work of detailed 
analysis of particular case ‘histories,’ which in turn provided new concepts. If one adds 
that, naturally, such an effort at a ‘new science’ will discard, modify, and enlarge its 
concepts and data, would Coles agree? If not, what does he think psychoanalysis is, and 
how does he see its difference, at least in principle, from, say, literary intuition?526 
 
It was exactly this element of ‘literary intuition’ that Mazlish had attempted to banish from 
historiography and replace with the scientific framework of psychoanalysis, and it was this 
position that aligned him with other interdisciplinary historians such as the ones who published 
in the Journal for Interdisciplinary History. 
Mazlish was not alone in his nomothetic approach to psychohistory. If Coles 
represented a type of critic that did not trust psychohistory’s scientistic claims, there were also 
critics who held a very firm belief in psychohistory as a science. In 1976, the American 
Psychiatric Association published a short document entitled The Psychiatrist as 
Psychohistorian. Spurred by the Goldwater controversy some years earlier, the aim of this 
document was to assess to what extent psychohistorical studies were impinging upon the 
privacy of the persons studied if these persons were still alive; to look critically at the 
discipline’s methodological underpinnings; and to determine if the analysis of persons ‘in a 
significant and sensitive government position – such as a Secretary of State’ (the author here 
is alluding to the psychohistory of Henry Kissinger that Mazlish was preparing at the time) 
might ‘place the subject, and therefore the Nation, at a disadvantage in negotiating with foreign 
powers’.527 The authors of the document were convinced that psychoanalytic profiles compiled 
by intelligence agencies ‘in the service of national interest’ were of value.528 By implication, 
they were now determining if psychohistory could also be deemed a national security threat. 
According to the authors, psychiatrists made for especially dangerous psychohistorians, for 
two reasons, worth quoting in full: 
 
(1) By reason of his special perceptive and deductive skills and his special knowledge 
of depth-psychology, the psychiatrist as psychohistorian is often in a position to discern 
certain things about the subjects mind and behavior that are not discernible to the 
subject himself or to those observers lacking the special training and knowledge. (2) 
By reason of his special status as a physician, a psychiatrist, and a scientist, the author 
is, to a considerable extent, accepted by a large segment of society as having special 
powers, and his report is therefore likely to be taken very seriously, often as having 
 
525 ‘An Exchange on Psychohistory’. The New York Review of Books, May 3, 1973. 
http://www.nybooks.com/articles/1973/05/03/an-exchange-on-psychohistory/ 
526 Ibid. 
527 Hofling, Charles K. The Psychiatrist as Psychohistorian: Report of the Task Force on Psychohistory of the 
American Psychiatric Association. Washington: APA, 1976. 10. 
528 Ibid. 13. 

even greater authority than he claims for it. [...] In a case in which the psychiatrist had 
reasonably ample data – let us say, interviews with the subject, interviews with persons 
on familiar terms with the subject at various periods of his life, access to some of the 
subject’s speeches, writings and behavior in the public domain – his psychohistorical 
analysis of the subject would, at least in theory, be analogous to clinically deductive 
reports of X-ray films of the patient’s body.529 
 
The document betrays some interesting assumptions about psychiatry and psychoanalysis: first, 
that ‘depth-psychology’ was based upon, and produced, a ‘special knowledge’ which was only 
accessible to those who had gone through proper training; second, that it was a science, which, 
if based upon enough data, produced certain knowledge, analogous to the physician’s 
knowledge of a patient’s body. Also, that this knowledge was obtainable through the use of 
documents and interviews with the patient and people surrounding the patient, and was 
therefore not contingent upon the psychoanalytic (or otherwise therapeutic) process itself. 
Finally, the passage above seems to acknowledge that ‘physician’, ‘psychiatrist’ and ‘scientist’ 
were terms that, in the public’s imagination, were invested with a considerable amount of 
authority; an authority that was put at risk by the association of psychiatry and psychohistory, 
and the latter’s use by non-specialists, such as journalists and historians. John Mack, who was 
a member of the task force, explained: ‘Although some of us felt there could be exceptions, we 
were trying to avoid the irresponsible armchair stuff that pretends to be clinical.’530 The 
psychiatrists were fighting a losing battle, as ‘the actual practice of psychoanalysis’ 
increasingly became ‘less important than its cultural impact’.531 
Finally, the task force concluded that there was nothing improper or unethical (even if 
written by a psychiatrist) about a study such as the one written by Walter Langer about Hitler 
for the OSS. If an extreme situation warranted it, psychiatrists and historians were allowed – 
even expected – to serve their country. In fact, in times of peace, the authors could find no fault 
in producing ‘for confidential use of government officials’, psycho-profiles and 
psychobiographies of significant international figures whose personality formation needed to 
be understood ‘to carry out national policy more effectively’.532 The authors held that ‘this type 
of activity blends by almost imperceptible degrees into common practices of educational 
institutions, businesses, charitable organizations, and so on, many of which compile basically 
harmless files or “dossiers” on the tastes, likes and dislikes, biases, and eccentricities of key 
individuals with whom they must deal.’533 Only when a person under scrutiny was currently 
alive and a fellow-citizen or a functioning component of the same nation as the writer, did 
ethical considerations ‘assume considerable weight’. It would only be ethical for a psychiatrist 
to write and publish a psychohistory, psychobiography or psycho-profile of a living person if 
the subject had been informed, and had freely given consent for personal interviews and 
publication. That meant Mazlish’s ‘psychohistorical inquiry’ of Nixon was suspect.  
From the taskforce’s perspective, then, psychohistory not only impinged upon the 
privacy of individuals and possibly formed a threat to national security; in its crudest form, it 
also jeopardized the authoritative position of psychiatry as a profession. In an interview with 
The New York Times in response to the report’s publication, Mazlish dismissed the worries 
 
529 Hofling, Charles K. The Psychiatrist as Psychohistorian: Report of the Task Force on Psychohistory of the 
American Psychiatric Association. Washington: APA, 1976. 9. 
530 Noble, Philip. ‘A Controversial Discipline’. New York Times, October 10, 1976 
531 Quoted in Samuel, Lawrence R. Shrink: A Cultural History of Psychoanalysis in America. Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press, 2013. xiii. 
532 Hofling, Charles K. The Psychiatrist as Psychohistorian: Report of the Task Force on Psychohistory of the 
American Psychiatric Association. Washington: APA, 1976. 12. 
533 Ibid. 13. 

expressed in the document: ‘It staggers me to imagine that the Syrians could read my book and 
say, “Ah, now we know how to deal with Kissinger. That’s a fantasy”.534 To be on the safe 
side, Mazlish decided to drop the term psychohistory from the title of his psychohistory of 
Henry Kissinger. The cover of that book simply read: Kissinger: The European Mind in 
American Politics. A biographical inquiry by Bruce Mazlish.535 
 
 
 
534 Noble, Philip. ‘A Controversial Discipline’. New York Times, October 10, 1976. 
535 Mazlish, Bruce. Kissinger: The European Mind in American Policy. New York: Basic Books, 1976. 

Chapter 5 
The Clio Complex 
 
As the psychohistorical project increasingly suffered attacks from inside and outside the 
movement in the 1970s, it returned elsewhere – not unlike a psychoanalytic symptom – in 
different guises. Psychohistory had crossed the threshold of American intellectual awareness, 
and now appeared in more pronounced conceptual forms, with stronger institutional ties and 
advocated by more zealous proponents. At this point there was, in effect, a race on to determine 
what exactly psychohistory was – to anchor meaning to the word and to establish the standards 
of its practice. Two highly competitive groups of loosely connected scholars competed in this 
race, the Group for the Use of Psychology in History (GUPH) led by historian Charles ‘Chuck’ 
Strozier, and the so-called ‘deMause group’ led by Lloyd deMause. 
Psychohistorical works were now extensively reviewed in publications such as The 
New York Times and New York Magazine. Two professional psychohistory periodicals were 
established: The Journal of Psychohistory (until 1973, the History of Childhood Quarterly) and 
the Newsletter of the Group for the Use of Psychology in History – which became a fully-
fledged journal, The Psychohistory Review, in 1976.536 A Journal for Interdisciplinary History 
was set up in 1969 with the aid of Mazlish; it would publish psychohistorical articles until 
around 1980. Those pieces appeared alongside essays using social science methods on, for 
example, voting patterns in mid-Victorian England. History and Theory, also co-founded by 
Mazlish, published psychohistory articles, and mainstream history journals such as the 
American Historical Review, under editorship of Robert K. Webb (1968-1975) and Otto 
Pflanze (1977-1985), published psychohistorical pieces too. Psychoanalytic journals (such as 
American 
Imago 
and 
The 
Psychoanalytic 
Quarterly) 
increasingly 
published 
psychobiographical studies, and in 1975 Lloyd deMause founded the Institute for 
Psychohistory. In 1978 the first convention of the International Psychohistorical Association 
was held in New York City. In The Psychohistory Review, the conference was announced in 
the Fall 1977- 1978 edition: ‘The IPA’s Committee on Organization welcomes proposals and 
encourages all psychohistorians and friends of psychohistory to attend.’537 
The majority of works published around this time were psychobiographical texts and 
studies on leadership inspired by Erikson’s work. Psychobiographies included subjects such 
as: Frederick Taylor, Andrew Jackson, Theodore Herzl. Studies of women included works on 
Lou Andreas Salomé and Florence Nightingale. Book titles such as Young Man Thoreau (1989) 
and Young Louis Fourteenth: The Early Years of the Sun King (1970) attest to Erikson’s lasting 
influence on the field. Leadership studies occasionally went beyond the political realm to 
include the study of business leaders and tycoons, such as: The First Henry Ford: A Study in 
Personality and Business Leadership (1970). Dana Ward’s Kissinger: A Psychohistory (1975) 
shows that contemporary politicians were still under scrutiny. Titles such as Napoleon: 
Bisexual Emperor (1972) point to the unwavering dominance of Freudian theory in 
psychohistory.538 It is around this time when the first distinctions between psychohistory and 
psychobiography become visible. Psychobiographies, in general, tended to focus more 
internally on the life of the subject studied. And although, similar to psychohistory proper, 
psychoanalytic concepts were used to assist the historian in his explanation, psychobiographies 
did not claim to explain, for example, the dynamics of the interaction between the subject 
 
536 For a detailed discussion of these journals and the increase in popular books labelled psychohistory, see 
Chapter Five. 
537 ‘Communications from the Editor’. The Psychohistory Review, Fall-Winter 1978, Volume VI, No. 2-3.  
538 See Sinovsky, Faye and John J. Fitzpatrick, Louis W. Potts, Lloyd deMause. ‘A Bibliography of 
Psychohistory’. History of Childhood Quarterly: The Journal of Psychohistory, Volume 2, No. 4, Spring 1975. 
517-562. 

studied and his or her historical context. In this sense, psychobiographies were closer to earlier 
applications of psychoanalytic concepts to historical characters within the early psychoanalytic 
movement. However, at this point, psychobiographies were no longer the exclusive domain of 
psychoanalysts: biographers, too, started to apply Freudian concepts freely. Where many 
psychohistorians insisted that they were engaged in a project that could be neither classified as 
psychoanalysis or history, psychobiographers more often than not situated their work in either 
‘parent’ tradition. In this context, the work of Leon Edel on Henry James comes to mind. 
Although psychohistory’s popularity undoubtedly created fertile ground for the positive 
reception of Edel’s impressive, five-volume psychobiographical study of Henry James; he did 
not claim that this work was psychohistory, nor did he believe himself to be a part of a 
psychohistorical ‘movement’. He did, however, reflect on his relationship with his object of 
study from a psychoanalytic perspective, as is evident from his discussion of his ‘transference’ 
to James in an extensive interview with the Paris Review. In 1985, he is quoted:  
 
Biographical transference takes many forms. It can be so powerful that the biographer 
after spending a lifetime gathering materials isn’t able to get the life down on paper. 
Some strong inhibition occurs. I’ve known such would-be biographers—one young 
biographer who followed a living novelist all over Europe, drank with him, developed 
a friendship, they corresponded, the subject was helpful and willing to be questioned . 
. . and then the friendship stood in the way. Nothing the young man could put down 
seemed good enough; or, in the fantasy, there remained a fear that perhaps the subject 
wouldn’t like it. The history of Boswell’s dilemma after Johnson died fits what I’m 
saying. He’d had a long friendship with Johnson and it was one of continual admiration; 
Johnson had also liked Boswell’s own genial candor. Boswell struggled to get the book 
written, but he finally had to get the help of a great scholar, Edmond Malone, who, 
being an outsider, could help give the narrative an objectivity Boswell didn’t always 
have.539 
  
It is fair to say that psychohistory simultaneously produced and was part of an intellectual 
climate that led to the dissemination of psychobiography. Psychobiography was, in that sense, 
a ‘child’ or ‘product’ of psychohistory, and most psychohistorians ranked psychobiographies 
as part of their over-all project. It is only later, with the publication of William McKinley 
Runyan’s Life-History and Psychobiography that psychohistory and psychobiographies 
become clearly separated categories from the perspective of psychobiographers. In Runyan’s 
view, psychohistory was an independent project, with its own aims and ideals, and in practice 
focused more narrowly on the use of psychoanalytic theory, whereas psychobiography held the 
promise of one day being free from psychoanalysis.540 Differences aside, the psychohistorians 
considered psychobiographies as a fundamental part of their project, and people who wrote 
them allies – if not psychohistorians themselves. 
Although psychohistory proper was unequivocally an American phenomenon, ideas 
associated with psychohistory achieved international status in the 1970s. In an overview 
published in the ‘History of Childhood Quarterly: The Journal of Psychohistory’ in 1975, 
deMause and his colleagues noted that in France, the influential historian Alain Besançon had 
published L’Histoire Psychoanalytique (1974); in Germany, Psycho-pathografieen I: 
Schriftsteller und Psychoanalyse (1972) appeared; in Italy, Giangaetano Bartolomei published 
 
539 Edel, Leon. ‘The Art of Biography, Vol.1. Interviewed by Jeanne McCullough’. Paris Review, issue 98, 
winter 1985. 
540 Personal communication with Runyan, July 11, 2016. 

an article ‘Psicoanalisi et storiografia: Prospettive per un dibattito’ (1972)541. As Mazlish put 
it, in the 1970s, ‘psychohistory took on all the outward trappings of a field in rapid 
expansion.’542  
Langer’s ‘Next Assignment’, it seemed, was being fulfilled. In the introduction to an 
edited volume entitled The Psychoanalytic Interpretation of History (1971), he wrote:  
 
[The historian’s] struggle to expand the field of historical research beyond the confines 
of political and military affairs to include economic, intellectual, and social factors has 
been brought to a successful close. Many historians – notably younger scholars – now 
see the need to deepen their understanding of the past by far more rigorous analysis of 
individual and social action. […] If we are to understand the world-shaking and world-
shaping events of either the past or the present, we historians need all the help that other 
disciplines can provide – not only economics, geography, demography, and so on, but 
also and especially psychoanalysis.543 
 
But despite a growing interest in the potential of the field, psychohistory was still a floating 
signifier. There was a remarkable lack of agreement among practitioners as to what methods 
the interdiscipline should employ, and how the validity of psychohistorical explanation should, 
or even could, be measured. As Strozier, one of the founding editors of the GUPH newsletter 
noted at the time: ‘For every good study published, numerous disgraceful works surface,’ and 
further: ‘in many historical circles Barzun flourishes, while all too often psychoanalysts insist 
on locking psychohistory in the institutes’.544 Disgraceful or not, the number of self-proclaimed 
psychohistorians was steadily growing, and there seems to have been a strong sense that 
something important was at stake in debates about the content of the term. 
With the rise of social history and an openness to the inclusion of the findings from the 
social sciences in historical research, academic historians became increasingly interested in the 
idea of psychology as an auxiliary discipline. In her overview of the field, Joan W. Scott argued 
that the 1970s were a period of ‘tumultuous disciplinary and national politics marked by calls 
for the inclusion in the annals of history the histories of neglected groups: workers, peasants, 
women, African-Americans, homosexuals, and others.’ 545 And yet advocates of these histories, 
‘did not turn to psychohistory,’ she held, ‘even though it was a lively and expanding area at the 
time’.546 In this chapter we will strongly take exception to that position. Some of the most 
interesting examples of psychohistorical literature produced at the time served as intellectual 
vehicles for subaltern voices and representatives of emancipatory movements. Feminists 
started using the term, as did Marxists; as well as the deMause group, who were extremely 
concerned about the effects of child-abuse. As Scott would have it, through psychohistory, 
psychoanalytic terminology served to uncover ‘hidden motives, desires, life trajectories’.547 
This is undoubtedly the case. In addition, we will argue that, perhaps even more importantly, 
psychohistory served to address societal issues: to slander, to critique, and to pathologise 
perceived injustices in American society.  
 
541 Bartolomei, Giangaetano. ‘Psicoanalisi et storiografia: Prospettive per un dibattito’. Nuova Rivista Storica 
56, 1972. 192-203. 
542 Mazlish, Bruce. ‘Reflections on the state of Psychohistory’. The Psychohistory Review, Volume 5, No. 4, 
March 1977. 2. 
543 Wolman, Benjamin B. The Psychoanalytic Interpretation of History. New York: Basic Books, 1971. 
544 Strozier, Charles B. ‘A Rationale for Teaching Psychohistory’. GUPH Newsletter, Volume IV, No. 1, June 
1975. 8. 
545 Tileagă, Cristian and Jovan Byford. Psychology and History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014. 
71. 
546 Ibid. 
547 Ibid. 

Whether they were conscious of it or not, the psychohistorians’ work betrayed a sense 
that interpretation is assault – to paraphrase Susan Sontag.548 Because psychohistory itself was 
marginalised by practitioners in both its parent disciplines, it seems it was especially open to 
being used to provide other excluded voices a platform. In the process, psychoanalytic theory 
and its jargon were liberated from their psychiatric and academic confines. As many authors 
have described, American psychoanalysis’ insistence on the ‘scientific’ nature of its theory 
increasingly tended to reconcile the discipline with morality and received social values.549 The 
importance of psychohistory lay, to a large extent, in the fact that it became a vehicle for the 
iconoclastic, rebellious aspects of psychoanalytic theory that had initially appealed to the 
European psychoanalytic intelligentsia of the 1920s. Fueled by a surge of interest – fused with 
intense criticism – in the 1970s, psychohistory came to serve as a shelter for a number of 
institutionally homeless and theoretically wayward psychoanalytic authors in the United States. 
 
 
 
Fig. 5 Napoleon: Bisexual Emperor (1972) 
 
California Dreaming 
 
Much of the resistance towards psychohistory was not based on an evaluation of any actual 
achievements of psychohistorians, but sprang rather from antipathy towards the idea that the 
rituals of psychoanalysis could be performed by anyone other than medical doctors. Since the 
1930s, the American Psychoanalytic Association (ApsA) had limited membership to medical 
specialists, with only a few exceptions granted to well-known analysts such as Erik Erikson 
and David Rapaport. In 1985, when a lawsuit alleging restraint of trade was filed by a group 
 
548 Sontag, Susan. Against Interpretation: And Other Essays. New York: Dell Publishers, 1966. 16. 
549 Hale, Nathan G. The Rise and Crisis of Psychoanalysis in the United States: Freud and the Americans, 1917-
1985. New York: Oxford University Press, 1995. 299. 

of psychologists, the APsA’s official position changed.550 Criticism of psychohistory has to be 
read against the backdrop of these developments.  
The debate over lay analysis in North America caused much controversy from the very 
beginnings of psychoanalysis on that continent, and it has continued to do so.551 As late as 
2007, in a discussion on the state of psychoanalysis in the United States organised by the 
Philoctetes Center in New York City, Robert Michels, a psychoanalyst and professor of 
medicine and psychiatry at Weill Cornell Medical College, argued that two different worlds of 
psychoanalysis should exist. In one world, he explained, psychoanalysis ‘is a treatment for sick 
people. It’s a profession of caretakers, and its sister professions would be surgery and medicine 
and paediatrics’.552 In the other world, psychoanalysis is an area of human knowledge, ‘which 
has a unique and immensely valuable perspective on how to look at and understand all types 
of human activity’.553 In the first area, ‘the greatest error you could make, is to let someone in 
who might be of sub-threshold quality as a person, ethically, responsibly, clinically’.554 In the 
second area of psychoanalysis, he found, the worst mistake would be ‘to keep somebody out 
who, although they are maverick, and different, and odd, and strange, and creative, and 
intelligent, are potentially gifted.’555 As it was practiced by both clinicians and historians, 
psychohistory inevitably inhabited the space in between these areas. It comes as no surprise, 
then, that Michels’s words were aimed at another member of the panel: psychohistorian and 
lay psychoanalyst Peter Loewenberg, whose life-long project has been to give clinically 
informed psychoanalytic thinking a space in academia, and to open up clinical training for non-
medical specialists. 
Loewenberg won a crucial battle for this position in 1977, when the California Research 
Psychoanalyst Law passed – this made it possible for academics in the state to train to become 
licensed practitioners of psychoanalysis and register with the Medical Board of California. 
Loewenberg was one of the first self-proclaimed psychohistorians to be fully trained in history 
as well as in psychoanalysis. At the time of writing, he is Professor Emeritus of history at 
UCLA, where he taught European cultural and intellectual history, political psychology, and 
psychohistory. He is also a Training and Supervising Analyst of the Southern California 
Psychoanalytic Institute. In 1992, he created (with Nancy Chodorow and Robert Nemiroff) the 
University of California Interdisciplinary Psychoanalytic Consortium (UCIPC) – a discussion 
forum for ‘research psychoanalysts’, academics who practice psychoanalysis, which holds 
annual meetings to this day. Loewenberg has published numerous psychohistorical works: 
Decoding the Past: The Psychohistorical Approach (1983), Fantasy and Reality in History 
(1995), 100 Years of the IPA: Centenary of the International Psychoanalytical Association, 
1910-2010 (2011), and Evolution and Change (2011, with Nellie Thompson), and has authored 
articles on psychohistory and psychoanalysis. 
Loewenberg studied history at the Meinecke Institut at the Freie Universität in Berlin, 
at a time when, as he put it, students ‘were still living in the East because the rent was 
cheaper’.556 He was in graduate school when William Langer gave his Next Assignment 
address. ‘I was awed,’ he has said in an interview, ‘and we were hoping for psychoanalysts [to 
 
550 Pear, Robert. ‘M.D.'s Make Room for Others In Ranks of Psychoanalysts’, The New York Times, August 19, 
1992. 
551 Burnham, John C. After Freud Left: A Century of Psychoanalysis in America. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 2012. 
552 ‘Psychoanalysis in the United States’, Youtube video, Published on 27 December 2007. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vPzIc-xQADg 
553 Ibid. 
554 Ibid. 
555 Ibid. 
556 ‘Life is Strange’, Vimeo video, published 2012. https://vimeo.com/41035334 

be hired] in all the major social science departments. But that didn’t happen.’557 In the 
development of Loewenberg’s work we see the three important psychohistorical positions 
reflected – traditional psychobiography and leadership studies, the study of groups, and the 
awareness of the transference towards one’s subject. 
During his time as a student in Berlin, Loewenberg was impressed by attending a guest 
lecture by Theodor Adorno. In that lecture Adorno argued that Germany was in need of 
psychoanalysis, because it lacked self-reflection and introspection. As a result, the young 
Loewenberg developed the conviction that one cannot really understand the twentieth century 
‘without understanding what the twentieth century knew about human behavior’.558 His 
subsequent career has been dedicated to putting that belief into practice. As a Professor at 
UCLA, he has taught psychohistory courses since the early 1970s, and has arranged for many 
of his students to spend time working at psychoanalytic institutes. Loewenberg’s early writings 
are traditional applications of psychoanalytic theory to historical subjects. Two of his best 
known articles ‘The Unsuccessful Adolescence of Heinrich Himmler’ and ‘The 
Psychohistorical Origins of the Nazi Youth Cohort’, both published in the prestigious 
American Historical Review in 1971, constituted a triumph for psychohistory in terms of 
acceptance in mainstream journals. His first collection of essays, Decoding the Past (1983), 
included these and other articles, and was judged ‘a stunning departure from the standard 
examination of events as a series of social/military/economic/political causes and results’ by 
historian Arnold Kammer. 559 Fellow psychohistorian Richard Schoenwald judged the 
collection ‘solid but unexciting’.560 
The piece on Himmler was based on Loewenberg’s close-reading of Himmler’s 
adolescent diaries. He concluded that Himmler was schizoid and obsessive-compulsive. Using 
the adolescent diary as a source, Loewenberg attempted to show how psychoanalytic theory 
and clinical insight could be utilised to demonstrate an emotional coherence and internal 
consistency between the adolescent and adult Himmler. To make his case, Loewenberg drew 
on the work of a variety of analysts and thinkers: Bruno Bettelheim, Peter Blos, Erik Erikson, 
Anna Freud, Harry Guntrip and Theodor Adorno. ‘At the end of Himmler’s adolescence,’ 
Loewenberg concluded, ‘Hitler became a father figure to him. […] As Freud has noted, if 
enough narcissistic support is available from identification with a leader, then the superego 
may be completely disregarded.’561 Loewenberg described Himmler as a character with a weak 
mind, constantly seeking external figures to identify with, and who served to prop up an 
underdeveloped emotional structure. To the question what set Himmler apart from millions of 
other boys of his time and culture, Loewenberg answered:  
 
Could one have predicted from his adolescence that this youth would grow up to be the 
greatest mass murderer of all time? Clearly such prediction is beyond the scope of either 
history or psychoanalysis. The variables are too numerous; as Freud said, psychic life 
is ‘overdetermined’. History, too, seeks multiple explanations for a single phenomenon 
and is not engaged in the tasks of replication or meeting the scientific test of 
predictability.562 
 
 
557 Ibid. 
558 Ibid. 
559 Kammer, Arnold. Louisiana History: The Journal of the Louisiana Historical Association, Volume 25, No. 
1, Winter, 1984. 109. 
560 Schoenwald, Richard. Pacific Historical Review, Volume 53, No. 3, August, 1984. 381. 
561 Loewenberg, Peter. ’The Unsuccessful Adolescence of Heinrich Himmler’. The American Historical Review, 
Volume 76, No. 3, June 1971. 633. 
562 Loewenberg, Peter. Decoding the Past, The Psychohistorical Approach. New Brunswick: Transaction 
Publishers, 2002. 241. 

Although Loewenberg’s Himmler-article can be read as part of a tradition of psychohistorical 
thinking about the origins of Nazism, begun with the analysis of Adolf Hitler commissioned 
by the OSS, Loewenberg differed from psychohistorians such as Mazlish. Loewenberg did not 
consider it the task of a psychohistorian to do ‘profiling’, and he did not believe in the 
predictive qualities of psychohistory. Instead, his work can be better understood as a deepening 
of the tradition of applied psychoanalysis. In the second article, ‘The Psychohistorical Origins 
of the Nazi Youth Cohort’, Loewenberg looked at the postwar experiences of the children and 
young persons born in the wake of World War I, and attempted to show how their experience 
had ‘explicitly conditioned the nature and success of National Socialism.’563 He wrote: ‘It is 
time to lay at rest the idea that psychoanalytical explanations are necessarily unicausal or that 
they are inherently incompatible with quantitative data such as demographic, election, 
consumption, and health statistics,’ and further: ‘psychoanalysis can give these macrodata new 
coherence and meaning, thus adding a vital qualitative dimension to history.’564 As we shall 
see, this aligned him theoretically with work done in the deMause group on the history of child-
rearing practices.  
The Nazi-cohort article was an account of the experience of a large group: a generation. 
As such it was influential in the further history of psychohistory, departing as it did from the 
standard application of psychoanalysis to individuals. Loewenberg was inspired by the work 
of Karl Mannheim, who proposed a conceptual formulation of the generation as a force acting 
within history in his 1927 essay ‘The Sociological Problem of Generations’. Mannheim 
adhered to an idea of the human mind as a layered structure, with earliest experience lying at 
the base of all other experience. ‘Early impressions,’ Mannheim wrote, ‘coalesce into a natural 
view of the world. All later experiences then tend to receive their meaning from this original 
set, whether they appear as that set’s verification and fulfilment or as its negation and 
antithesis…’565 Cloaked in vaguely Hegelian terms was a fundamentally psychoanalytic 
viewpoint that Loewenberg succesfully appropriated. He then used these ideas to show how 
‘the new adults who became politically effective after 1929 and who filled the ranks of the SA 
and other paramilitary party organizations, such as the Hitler-Jugend and the Bund-Deutscher-
Mädel, were the children socialized in World War I.’566 In the essay Loewenberg examined 
‘what happened to the members of this generation in their decisive period of character-
development – particularly in early childhood – and studies their common experiences in 
childhood, in psychosexual development, and in political socialization that led to similar 
fixations and distortions of adult character.’567 In contrast to Erikson’s work on Luther and 
Gandhi, the essay did not focus on a leader, but on followers. Loewenberg argued that this 
generation, disturbed by years of privation and paternal absence, was unable to resolve Oedipal 
complexes and was therefore susceptible to National Socialist ideology. It was not a radically 
new conception of the use of psychoanalysis in history, but it shifted perspective on existing 
approaches.    
Increasingly Loewenberg’s attention moved away from the application of 
psychoanalytic thought to historical subjects towards a psychoanalytic understanding of the 
relationship of the historian with his research. The battle to win psychoanalytic training for 
non-medical students in California undoubtedly influenced Loewenberg’s perspective on the 
possible interactions between history and psychoanalysis.  
 
563 Ibid. 244. 
564 Ibid. 248. 
565 ‘The Problem of Generations’ in From Karl Mannheim. Edited by Kurt H. Wolff. New Brunswick: 
Transaction Publishers, 1993. 373. 
566 Loewenberg, Peter. Decoding the Past, The Psychohistorical Approach. New Brunswick: Transaction 
Publishers, 2002. 244. 
567 Ibid. 245. 

‘One day,’ he recalled, ‘I received a call from a friend on the California Psychology 
Licensing Board, who told me there had been a complaint filed against me for “practicing 
psychology without a license”.’568 As a result, Loewenberg decided to secure what was to be 
called the ‘Research Psychoanalyst Law’, which would allow academics from any field to train 
in and practice psychoanalysis. ‘The most important lobby we had on our side was the 
University of California Student Lobby,’ he noted.569 The lobby represented the 130,000 
students and their extended families and ‘argued with great understanding of the nature of 
academic psychoanalytic training and practice and of what was at stake for students of the 
university.’570 The students’ argument ran as follows: if professors were not allowed to actually 
engage in the practice of psychoanalysis, their instruction would consist entirely of theoretical 
knowledge with no solid foundation in practice. At the time, there were professors teaching 
courses that involved some form of psychoanalytic thought at UCLA in various fields: history, 
law, medicine, political science and the humanities. Legislation was carried in the senate by 
Senator Walter Stiern, Loewenberg’s veterinarian in his hometown of Bakersfield. Stiern 
secured unanimous passage. On 30 September 1977, Governor Edmund G. Brown, Jr., signed 
the first Research Psychoanalyst Law, which was the first time in the history of any jurisdiction 
that psychoanalysis was legitimated by a state. Upon passage of the law, Anna Freud wrote to 
Loewenberg: ‘I think this legal decision is a wonderful thing and will mark an important 
development in the history of psychoanalysis in America.’571  
An article published in The International Review of Psycho-Analysis in 1977, the same 
year as the California bill was passed, outlined clearly Loewenberg’s arguments for why 
academics should be allowed to train to be clinicians and shows how he conceived of a cross-
fertilisation of historical and psychoanalytical thought.572 He opened the piece by quoting 
Freud:  
 
If – which may sound fantastic today – one had to found a college of psychoanalysis, 
[…] analytic instruction would include branches of knowledge which are remote from 
medicine and which the doctor does not come across in his practice: the history of 
civilization, mythology, the psychology of religion and the science of literature. Unless 
he is well at home in these subjects, an analyst can make nothing of a large amount of 
his material.573 
 
Loewenberg argued that there was a lot to be gained for history when it was enriched by 
psychoanalytic insight, but that psychoanalysis too could learn from history by exploring the 
developments of humanistic and social science methodology. He showed, by using clinical 
vignettes, the relevance of filling in the social and cultural context of clinical cases. The 
emphasis on the unique aspects of a clinical case, according to Loewenberg, ‘is a standard 
canon of historical method’, and could feed psychoanalytic thinking, thereby leading it away 
from grand theory-building and towards a focus on the particularities of individual cases.574 
Using Thomas Kuhn’s theory of paradigm shifts and Einstein’s comments on the nature of 
science relying on ‘Einfuehlung’, Loewenberg argued that psychoanalysis could only grow if 
it did away with its nineteenth-century, positivistic assumptions about the growth of 
 
568 Daum, Andreas W., and Hartmut Lehmann, James J. Sheehan. The Second Generation: Émigrés from Nazi 
Germany as Historians. New York: Berghahn Books, 2016. 124. 
569 Ibid. 
570 Ibid. 
571 Ibid. 
572 Loewenberg, Peter. ‘Why Psychoanalysis Needs the Social Scientist and the Historian’., International 
Review of Psycho-Analysis, 4. 305-315.  
573 Ibid. 305. 
574 Ibid. 307. 

knowledge, and adopted a ‘relativistic and pluralistic view’ of its own enterprise. ‘Cultural and 
historical relativism, the modern history and philosophy of science, and conceptual abstraction 
from reality can be used to build bridges between the social sciences, the humanities and 
psychoanalysis,’ he thought.575 But the most important contribution to psychoanalytic thought, 
Loewenberg held, would come from the historian’s ‘procedure of reconstruction of the past by 
inferring the thoughts and feelings of particular men in the past from the historical evidence of 
the present.’576 This process of immersion in problems and identification with their solution, 
Loewenberg drew from R.G. Collingwood’s work, who had himself been inspired by Freud. 
Collingwood’s insights might, he thought, shed new light on the psychoanalytic concept of 
transference and the therapeutic situation. ‘Each discipline can make better sense of its own 
problems if it understands the methods of the other,’ he concluded.577  
Since the passage of the research bill, Loewenberg has consistently argued that clinical 
practice and theoretical understanding of psychoanalysis are inextricably intertwined. ‘The 
critical difference,’ he once stated, ‘between those who use only theory and those who have a 
thorough familiarity with a hands-on clinical situation is that the psychoanalyst uses his 
subjective self empathically to know the ‘other’ in the emotional field they jointly occupy. This 
field may be the chaos of a research project or the inner pain of an analysand.’578 The crucial 
similarity between the interpretive task of the historical scholar and that of the psychoanalyst, 
Loewenberg held, is that both construct narrative explanations. ‘The tool of cognition is the 
self – the emotional insight and sensibility of the researcher.’579 The use of psychoanalysis for 
historians, in Loewenberg’s view, was to acknowledge, analytically pick apart, comprehend 
and then use productively the subjective aspects of historical scholarship. ‘Knowledge, 
understanding, and problem-solving do not lend themselves to narrow scotomized approaches. 
Fields such as history and psychoanalysis must be related to each other by the researcher, not 
statically, but as independent variables, each with its own context and imperatives.’580  
This view aligned him theoretically with Erikson and his ideas about the historian’s 
transference towards his or her object of study.581 Although he did not quote Erikson, 
Loewenberg wrote an article about the use that the psychohistorian should make of his own 
unconscious in 1985. He argued that a researcher is only ever able to write rigorously and 
truthfully about the past if he is aware that there is always a transaction between the historian 
and his or her data: ‘Thus an historian’s communication of his unanalyzed counter-transference 
to his subject can be our most valuable clue that we are upon unconscious conflictual material 
in an historical problem.’582 In the article, Loewenberg quoted four historians’ 
countertransferences as communicated in their writings: Isaac Deutscher on Leon Trotsky; Joel 
Colton on Leon Blum; Eugene Lunn on Gustav Landauer; and Kenneth Stampp on the Civil 
War (Loewenberg posited that these psychodynamic insights need not be limited to biography). 
Linking his findings back to Freud, Loewenberg quoted: 
 
The psychoanalyst researcher, Freud said: ‘should turn his own unconscious like a 
receptive organ toward the transmitting unconscious of the patient. He must tune 
himself to the patient as a telephone receiver is tuned in to the transmitting mouthpiece. 
 
575 Ibid. 311. 
576 Ibid. 313. 
577 Ibid. 315. 
578 Loewenberg, Peter. ‘Dual Training: Professional and Personal Insights’. Clio’s Psyche, Volume 4, No. 2, 
September 1997. http://www.cliospsyche.org/sample_dt.html 
579 Ibid. 
580 Ibid.  
581 See Chapter Two.  
582 Loewenberg, Peter. ‘Historical Method, the Subjectivity of the Researcher, and Psychohistory’, in: The 
Psychohistory Review, Volume 14, No. 1, Fall 1985. 34. 

Just as the receiver converts back into soundwaves the electric oscillations in the 
telephone line which were set up by sound waves, so the doctor’s unconscious is able, 
from the derivatives of the unconscious which are communicated to him, to reconstruct 
that unconscious.583 
 
Loewenberg argued that, similarly, ‘an historian’s unconscious must “tune-in” to the materials 
of his research and listen for its underlying cadences’ that would lead to insights regarding key 
structures and relationships.584 It is likely that Loewenberg was aware of the similarities 
between these notions and Erikson’s idea of ‘disciplined subjectivity’ and the 
countertransference to the historical subject, but he did not acknowledge this in his paper at the 
time. He concluded the article with these words: ‘The integration and fuller conceptualization 
of these conjunctures remains the future task for historians in which psychohistory will play an 
important if not central role.’585 Like many of Loewenberg’s significant contributions to 
psychohistory, the article appeared in a journal entitled The Psychohistory Review – one of the 
most important vessels of knowledge in the scattered psychohistorical field. 
 
The GUPH 
 
The Group for the Use of Psychology in History (GUPH, or ‘goof’, as it was referred to 
affectionately by some of its earliest editors) was established as an affiliate of the American 
Historical Association (AHA) in 1972 by Richard Schoenwald, professor of history at Carnegie 
Mellon University. In 1971, Schoenwald sent out a mimeographed sheet to a list of colleagues, 
asking for support for a psychohistory group that was to meet at AHA congresses annually. He 
also planned to issue a newsletter to enhance communication between people interested in the 
new field of psychohistory. There was quite some response: from H. Stuart Hughes, for 
instance, who became an early supporter of the initiative. Schoenwald set up the group as 
planned, and operated as the head of GUPH; Patrick Dunn was appointed coordinator of the 
Newsletter; Jack Fitzpatrick edited a ‘teaching psychohistory’ section; William Gilmore wrote 
an ongoing bibliography of psychohistorical works; and Charles ‘Chuck’ Strozier, a young 
unemployed historian, handled the ‘research notes’, including brief profiles of people working 
in psychohistory and summaries of their research projects.586 
At the time, Charles Strozier was ‘fresh from a couple of years in Europe and had a 
newly minted Ph.D. from the University of Chicago’.587 Inspired by reading Erikson, he had 
written a psychoanalytic study of the nineteenth-century Polish Revolution. ‘I spent a year-
and-a-half in Warsaw and Krakow,’ he recalled in an interview. ‘This was during the Cold 
War: phones were tapped and there were men in dark suits talking into their wristwatches and 
following me whenever I went to the library.’588 After his return, Strozier started calling 
himself a psychohistorian, but had no job. When he received Schoenwald’s announcement, he 
decided to jump on the bandwagon. For the Newsletter he wrote to psychohistorians throughout 
the country and asked about their works in progress. His work was then to edit and assemble 
their replies. As he recalled, ‘it turned out to be a good way to make contacts in the field’.589 
The early Newsletters appear short and primitive by contemporary standards, but they served 
 
583 Ibid. 
584 Ibid.  
585 Ibid. 
586 Personal communication with Strozier, April 1, 2016. 
587 Elovitz, Paul H., ‘A Conversation with Charles B. Strozier’, Clio’s Psyche, Volume 3, No. 4, November 22, 
1996. 
588 Ibid. 
589 Strozier, Charles B. ‘Autobiographical Reflections on The Psychohistory Review’. The Psychohistory 
Review, Volume 15, No. 1, Fall 1986. 2. 

their purpose at the time. According to Strozier, ‘those associated with it were eager to know 
what was happening where and who was doing what in psychohistory’.590 In those days, he 
recalled, ‘psychohistory courses were being taught everywhere’, and people shared a lot of 
excitement about the new field: ‘There was something in the air.’591 
Yet things started to unravel in the GUPH soon. Within a year Schoenwald decided that 
he did not want the responsibility of leading the group. At an AHA convention in New Orleans, 
he stepped down, and was replaced by historian James H. McRandle. During the following 
year no meetings were planned and the Newsletter slowed down: ‘Those of us working on the 
Newsletter and interested in GUPH felt a mounting sense of frustration.’592 In May 1973, 
subscription renewals had not reached the goal of 100, which the editor considered 
‘psychologically and financially necessary to continue’.593 By the end of the year, over 
breakfast at a conference in San Francisco, Strozier, Gilmore and Fitzpatrick decided that they 
had had enough. They planned ‘something, it was not a coup’594. Strozier now felt more secure, 
as he had been hired at Sangamon State University (SSU), a small, progressive university in 
Illinois set up in 1969. Through Peter Loewenberg, SSU had contacted Strozier: ‘it was 
definitely the first and probably the last such position ever opening up.’595 He applied and got 
the job. Now, ‘in one bold stroke of genius, arrogance, youth, or whatever,’ Strozier, Gilmore 
and Fitzpatrick decided that ‘our vinyl-covered table, now filled with eggs and ham, was the 
site of a reconstituted GUPH.’ Strozier took over the Newsletter and agreed to coordinate 
activities within the group, but the three men ‘shared responsibilities as a kind of 
triumvirate’.596 
As Strozier remembers it, the reason for the initial collapse of GUPH and the Newsletter 
was ‘the stormy entrance into psychohistory of Lloyd deMause, who had money, flair, and the 
apparent support of all the top names in the field.’597 This left members of the GUPH 
disheartened, as the Newsletter had none of those things. ‘It turned out later,’ Strozier recalled, 
‘when records were transferred [from Dunn to Strozier], that our worst fears were justified: the 
GUPH Newsletter had six paid subscribers and $70 in the kitty.’598 However, it soon became 
clear that Lloyd deMause’s journal, The History of Childhood Quarterly (HCQ), was, in an 
attempt to be pluralistic and open-minded, publishing material that did not conform to the 
academic standards of the time. This quickly led authors who had been initially interested in 
the journal, such as Robert Lifton and Peter Loewenberg, away from deMause and his journal. 
Strozier and his colleagues saw an opening. With a touch of bravado, he recalled: ‘we were 
young, low-key and under the radar – this worked in our advantage at the time. We had 
absolutely nothing to lose.’599  
The newly-formed triumvirate consciously constructed the Newsletter in opposition to 
the History of Childhood Quarterly. As Strozier put it later: ‘I thought deMause was froth from 
the start. I found his imperious style impossible and his understanding of psychoanalysis and 
psychohistory off-beat, if not bizarre.’600 In contrast to the HCQ, which had a glossy cover and 
 
590 Ibid.  
591 Personal communication with Strozier, April 1, 2016. 
592 Ibid. 2-3. 
593 From the Editor. GUPH Newsletter, Volume II, No. 1, May, 1973. 1. 
594 Personal communication with Strozier, April, 1, 2016. 
595 Ibid. 
596 Strozier, Charles B. ‘Autobiographical Reflections on The Psychohistory Review’. The Psychohistory 
Review, Volume 15, No. 1, Fall 1986. 4. 
597 Ibid. 3. 
598 Ibid. 
599 Personal communication with Strozier, April 1, 2016. 
600 Strozier, Charles B. ‘Autobiographical Reflections on The Psychohistory Review’. The Psychohistory 
Review, Volume 15, No. 1, Fall 1986. 3. 

was attractively designed, the Newsletter’s goal was to be ‘avowedly all book and no cover, to 
be highly professional in the editorial control of what we published but simple in 
appearance.’601 In this way, the group sought to make the contrast with the competition 
complete. Money remained an issue. ‘Sometime around this period after the change (or the 
takeover, depending on your point of view), I remember David Musto of Yale sent the 
Newsletter an unsolicited gift of $25,’ Strozier remembered, ‘it represented a quarter of our 
operating budget’.602 
By 1976, Strozier had metamorphosed the Newsletter into a peer-reviewed journal: The 
Psychohistory Review. ‘In those days Jack, Bill, Fred, and I all read the submitted papers,’ he 
recalled, ‘then I usually got one, two, or three outside readings. It was thus not uncommon for 
an article submitted to the Review to be read by six people.’603 In the fall of 1978, an impressive 
editorial board was established, consisting of Fred Weinstein, as Chairman; Rudolph Binion, 
at Brandeis; John Demos, also at Brandeis; Howard Feinstein, at Cornell; Arnold Goldberg, of 
Michael Reese Hospital; Joel Kovel, of the Albert Einstein College of Medicine; George M. 
Kren, at Kansas State University; Robert Jay Lifton, at Yale; Peter Loewenberg, at UCLA; 
Steven Marcus, at Columbia; Bruce Mazlish, at MIT; David F. Musto, at Yale; Gerald M. Platt, 
at University of Massachusetts; George Pollock, of The Institute of Psychoanalysis in Chicago; 
Lucian W. Pye, at MIT; Paul Roazen, at York University, Ontario; Suzanne Rudolph, at the 
University of Chicago; Richard L. Schoenwald, at Carnegie Mellon University; Miles F. Shore, 
at Harvard Medical School; Cushing Trout, at Cornell; and Eli Zaretsky, at the University of 
California, Berkeley. Only Frederick Crews, who ‘no longer believed in psychoanalysis’, and 
Erik Erikson kindly refused Strozier’s request to be members of the board. The purpose of the 
board was ‘to review, read, help, counsel – and, of course, to provide some window-
dressing.’604 
Until 1978, Strozier found there was a seemingly chronic shortage of publishable 
articles: ‘I would have in hand loyal Fred Weinstein’s sixth article in two years, a couple of 
short communications, Bill Gilmore’s bibliography and a few book reviews. Such a collection 
does not a journal issue make.’605 Over the decade, the Review published a score of articles on 
psychohistorical methodology, such as: ‘On Methodological Strategies of Political Biography: 
a Précis, by Barbara Kellerman, 1976; ‘History as Mythology: The Punjab Style in British 
India, by Lewis Wurgaft, Spring 1978; ‘Is Psychohistory really history?’ by Peter C. Hoffer, 
Winter 1979; ‘Evaluating Psychohistorical Explanations’, by Faye Crosby, Spring 1979. These 
reflections on psychohistorical methodology were crucial, as more and more work groups, 
university courses and even training programmes in psychohistory emerged, which the 
Newsletter and the Review dutifully recorded. In an early Newsletter, Richard Schoenwald 
recounted an attempt to set up a psychohistorical reading group with both historians and 
psychiatrists in an article entitled ‘Setting Up Sitting Up with Psychiatrists’:  
 
We usually met on the same day each month, mainly for the convenience of the 
analysts. We started at 8, later 8.15 p.m., and stopped promptly at 10. Beer and pretzel-
type snacks were the only refreshments, at fifty cents a head, regardless of how much 
anyone consumed. […] On balance, I think our shambling, stumbled-into eclecticism 
met our needs, and that is why we stuck to it as long as we did.606 
 
601 Ibid.  
602 Ibid. 4. 
603 Ibid. 7. 
604 Ibid. 7. 
605 Ibid. 8. 
606 Schoenwald, Richard L. ‘Setting Up Sitting Up with Psychiatrists’. GUPH Newsletter, Volume II, No. 1, 
May 1973. 5. 

 
A lot changed in the next few years. Besides the annual meetings at the AHA gatherings, and 
meetings at the Convention of the Organization of American Historians in 1974, the Newsletter 
announced the birth of Chicago’s Center for Psychosocial Studies, led by self-proclaimed 
psychohistorian John Demos, who would later publish the highly influential psychohistorical 
work Entertaining Satan (1980), on the history of witchcraft in New England.607 By 1977, 
George M. Kren and the Review proudly announced that Kansas State University and the 
Menninger Foundation were setting up a collaborative graduate training programme in 
psychohistory. Another important genre of articles published in the Review were 
psychobiographical pieces, often modeled after Erikson’s work. Examples of such articles 
were: ‘The Unstrung Orpheus: Flaubert’s Youth and the Psycho-Social Origins of Art for Art’s 
Sake’, by Arthur Mitzman, who won the ‘Langer-Award’, a $500 award set up by the GUPH 
to encourage psychohistorical work; ‘1866: Bismarck’s Gamble’, by Charlotte Sempell; ‘Why 
America Loved Theodore Roosevelt: or Charisma is in the Eyes of the Beholders’, by Kathleen 
Dalton. New methodologies were sought after. David Luck, at the Russian Institute at 
Columbia University was using interdisciplinary methods to conduct a comparative 
psychobiographical study that, the Review judged, ‘could have important methodological 
implications for psychohistory generally’:  
 
A content analysis of the available articulations of Hitler, Stalin, and Mao was 
undertaken and the results so far are encouraging. One of the coding categories is 
‘primary’ oral imagery, involving projections of food and mouth images onto political 
objects (e.g., ‘The Jew would devour us’), while another is ‘primary’ anal imagery, 
involving peculiarly violent verbals and dirty-clean adjectives (e.g., ‘We must smash 
that filthy theory’); of Hitler’s imagery which can be coded into one or the other primary 
category (about 20 per cent of total imagery N, so far, of 10,000), the distribution is 
skewed orally by roughly 65-35 per cent; of Stalin’s (15 per cent of an N of about 
60,000), the distribution is skewed anally by about 80-20 per cent; Mao’s primary 
distribution (10 per cent of an N of 20,000) is clearly more balanced, with a 60-40 anal 
skew.608 
 
Although this approach may have seemed promising at the time, the majority of articles 
published in The Psychohistory Review were either applications of psychoanalytic theory, or 
reflections on the history, method and future of the movement. By the late 1970s and early 
1980s, major figureheads in the psychohistorical movement were publishing in the Review. 
Robert Lifton published an article in 1980, ‘On the Consciousness of the Holocaust’, which 
was widely re-published and translated, and Bruce Mazlish published two pieces in the early 
1980s: The Next ‘Next Assignment’: Leader, Led, Individual and Group’, in which he 
addressed psychohistory’s incapacity to formulate a coherent theory of groups, in 1981; and 
‘American Narcissism’, in 1982. Fitzpatrick, who could not find an academic position so 
retrained as a psychoanalyst, and William Gilmore stayed on as editors until the fall of 1982. 
Strozier stepped down as editor in 1986, when Robert Lifton invited him to come and teach at 
John Jay College of Criminal Justic at City University in New York. At the time of writing, he 
is still there.609 
 
Women’s Psychohistory 
 
 
607 GUPH Newsletter, Volume 3, No. 1, June 1974. 4-5. 
608 Research Notes. GUPH Newsletter, Volume II, No. 1, May, 1973. 3. 
609 Personal communication with Strozier, April 1, 2016. 

Post-war America produced a number of visible female figureheads of psychoanalysis (such 
as Frieda Fromm-Reichmann, Karen Horney, and Clara Thompson). And yet, the 
psychoanalytic profession was dominated by men until the 1980s, when non-medical analysts 
were gradually allowed to train. In the preceding decades, publications such as Psychoanalysis 
and Female Sexuality (1966) and Psychoanalysis and Women (1973) gave a voice to female 
and, increasingly, feminist perspectives in and of the field. With the advent of women’s history 
and feminist movements in the 1960s and 70s, a number of female authors interested in the use 
of psychoanalytic concepts took refuge in the field of psychohistory. In the first ten years of 
The Psychohistory Review’s existence (from 1976 onwards), roughly 20% of the articles were 
written by women; for the History of Childhood Quarterly: The Journal of Psychohistory, this 
was only 13%. Although such figures seem to lend credence to Joan Scott’s assertion that 
‘psychohistory was primarily the province of intellectual history, a largely (white) male field,’ 
a number of female historians began exploring the interface between women’s history, 
feminism, and psychohistory.610 
The result, as seen in the work of Carroll Smith-Rosenberg, was a new history that 
focused on the events, patterns, and psychodynamics of private places. She wrote: ‘I became a 
psycho-historian because I had first become a historian of women,’ 611 Smith-Rosenberg wrote 
in an article in the GUPH Newsletter. ‘My route was neither idiosyncratic nor fortuitous. 
Inherent parallels exist between these two innovative forms of contemporary social history.’612 
A shared focus on the private world of sex and domestic relations produced a convergence in 
concerns between women’s history and psychohistory. Historians of women had been 
primarily concerned with women’s roles in social processes and institutions, and with women’s 
location and status within society; but now, with the aid of psychoanalytic theory, light was 
cast onto women’s experiences, and the question how their particular standpoint fed back into 
the abstract formative structures and procedures that determined their subjugation.613 
‘Childrearing practices, sexuality and family dynamics cannot be understood if the reality of 
the women involved in these processes are ignored,’ Smith-Rosenberg forcefully argued. 614 
Her aim was to examine ‘the internal structure and dynamics of institutions and processes, as 
well as the existential or emotional quality of life lived within them.’615 Psychohistory provided 
a model that did not sever particular experience from an investigation of the determining 
symbolic structures and institutions of a given society, but rather emphasised their connection 
and interdependence.  
Smith-Rosenberg did, however, urge her fellow psychohistorians to move away from 
the speculative areas of psychoanalysis and psychohistory, such as the reconstruction of 
childhood experience. She emphasised that there were avenues of psychohistorical research 
now open that were far less contentious, yet still rewarding. Following Hartmann and Anna 
Freud, Smith-Rosenberg’s interest lay primarily in the ego’s structure and its function: the ways 
in which it mediates between the needs of the individual and his or her society; the defences it 
develops in this interaction; and the various ways in which culture shapes character formation. 
‘I would urge historians,’ she said, 
 
 
610 Tileagă, Cristian and Jovan Byford. Psychology and History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014. 
71. 
611 Smith-Rosenberg, Carroll. ‘The New Woman and The Psycho-Historian: A Modest Proposal.’ GUPH 
Newsletter, December, 1975, Volume IV, No. 3. 4. 
612 Ibid. 
613 Ibid. 
614 Ibid. 
615 Ibid. 

to focus on the ways in which ego development and levels of ego maturation seem to 
be affected by social institutions and cultural values: by gender role socialization, by 
punishment patterns, by the presence or absence of a broad range of legitimate 
behavioral options for the maturing individual, by cultural structuring of mother-
daughter, mother-son, father-daughter, father-son relations, and by the existence of role 
discontinuity at various points during the life cycle.616 
 
By studying discrete groups within a culture and relating the findings of those studies to the 
experiences of individuals, Smith-Rosenberg felt that the relationships between ‘social 
structure and gender roles, social change, psychic stress and the development of defence 
mechanism against such stress’ could be fruitfully examined.617 There are, she held, ‘quite 
concrete ways in which a culture influences personality development’, and these ways were 
open to be explored by psychohistorians.618 In fact, in her view, these ways were possibly far 
more accessible to the psychohistorian than to the psychoanalyst, who had a far narrower, 
clinical focus. This insight, she thought, might eventually lead to a contribution of 
psychohistory to the edifice of psychoanalysis: the conceptual framework of ego-psychology 
made possible an investigation of culture and its influence on individuals’ experiences in the 
past that was radically new and promising. Smith-Rosenberg put her ideas into practice in her 
article: ‘The Female World of Love and Ritual: Relations between Women in Nineteenth-
Century America’, published in the same year as her ‘The New Woman and the Psycho-
Historian: A Modest Proposal’. She explored the largely ignored experience of intimate 
friendships among women, and showed how women in eighteenth and nineteenth-century 
North America ‘routinely formed emotional ties with other women’, as the rigid gender-role 
differentiation within the family and society led to a physical and emotional segregation of 
women and men.619 Although her perspective here was psychohistorical, she analysed female 
friendships within a cultural and social setting, as opposed to what she called the ‘exclusively 
individual psychosexual perspective’.620 
For some female authors, however, such an analysis of the experience of women’s 
predicament in a patriarchal society was not nearly radical enough. Nancy Gager Clinch (née 
Nancy Land Gager) was an outspoken feminist author and editor, and founding president of 
the Washington chapter of the National Organization for Women (NOW). She was a 
mountaineer, a member of the American Historical Association, and served as a civilian 
intelligence analyst in Korea for the United States army. Clinch spent time in Nepal, and 
worked as part of the staff of National Geographic. She also wrote for the Women’s Right 
Almanac. One of her most successful projects was the creation of the script for ‘How We Got 
the Vote’, an Emmy Award-winning documentary narrated by Jean Stapleton. The film 
highlighted, among other things, how feminists were once labeled by psychologists as mentally 
disturbed. She earned her BA in political science from Wellesley College and studied literature 
at Oxford University. In 1980, at the age of 48, she died of leukemia.621 
Clinch’s best known work, The Kennedy Neurosis (1973), was a self-proclaimed 
exercise in psychohistory, and more specifically, in what she termed ‘psychohumanism’.622 
From her perspective as a feminist, she found in Freud too ‘gloomy and pessimistic’ a thinker, 
 
616 Ibid. 6. 
617 Ibid. 7. 
618 Ibid. 
619 Smith-Rosenberg, Carroll. ‘The Female World of Love and Ritual: Relations between Women in Nineteenth-
Century America.’ Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society Volume 1, No. 1, 1975. 1. 
620 Ibid. 
621‘Nancy Gager, Author and Editor, Dies’, Washington Post, February 4, 1980 
622 Clinch, Nancy Gager. The Kennedy Neurosis. New York: Grosset and Dunlap, 1973. 7. 

who was not only sexist, but who also conceived of human nature as ‘essentially hostile and 
self-destructive’.623 Erik Erikson’s work, in turn, ‘provided much stimulation’, but she found 
his theories less convincing than his insights: ‘I do not subscribe to his psychoanalytic basis’, 
she admitted.624 As such, Clinch’s work is a rare example of explicitly non-Freudian 
psychohistory. Instead, Clinch drew heavily on authors such as Karen Horney, Erich Fromm 
and Harry Stack Sullivan (also psychoanalysts, albeit more wayward ones, and arguably less 
sexist), as well as humanistic psychologists such as Gordon Allport, Rollo May and Abraham 
Maslow. On its release, the book was deemed controversial: author Jim F. Heath called it 
‘overly astringent and methodologically questionable,’625 but a writer for New York Magazine 
judged that ‘if one accepts psychohistory at all, this is a pretty persuasive, sympathetic and 
even tragic contribution to it.’626 Bruce Mazlish wrote the introduction to the work. ‘In spite of 
certain flaws,’ he prophesied: ‘there is a very good chance that it will end up as a landmark in 
political biography.’627 
Clinch opened her book with a short story, told as if it were a fairy tale: ‘Once upon a 
time there was a country in which white men were often able to work very hard and acquire 
great personal fortunes, depending upon their individual circumstances and energies…’628 
What followed was the life history of a dynasty. Instead of focusing on one particular member 
of the Kennedy family, Clinch reconstructed how the history of the family had produced in its 
members a particular type of shared ‘neurosis’. The Kennedy family, she argued, had indeed 
acquired great personal fortune, but had at the same time also suffered from always being cast 
as ‘outsiders’. This split between material wealth and social acceptance had led to a particular 
harsh upbringing of the three Kennedy sons, and their neurosis, which she defined as: ‘a human 
sickness which prevents the victim from achieving his own humanity and thus from fulfilling 
his capacity for ethical living’.629 Any authority the Kennedy family possessed rested on the 
irrational fears and desires of much of the voting public, and came to rest more and more on 
the creation of illusions and the assertion of magical qualities rather than on actual 
performance.   
The Kennedys, in Clinch’s eyes, were charlatans, unable to achieve any full sense of 
humanity. Central to her story (and her conception of neurosis), was the idea that one becomes 
ill when one is somehow unable to fulfil one’s promises or potential. Here she drew heavily on 
Erich Fromm, who made a distinction between ‘rational authority’, based on competence, and 
‘irrational authority’, based on intimidation and an admiration of so-called ‘magic’ qualities. 
The source of such irrational authority, Clinch decided, was power over people. But Clinch 
was worried that it was not only the Kennedy family who were cursed. The Kennedy neurosis, 
Clinch held, was also very much ‘an American neurosis’. In her book, she was attempting to 
undo the spell that the Kennedys had cast over the voting public.  
With all their wealth and power, Clinch’s argument ran, the Kennedys had had the 
chance to achieve in their time and place what Erik Erikson had termed ‘psychohistorical 
actuality’ – ‘an encounter between a great leader (such as Martin Luther or Gandhi) and his 
people that actualizes or releases fruitful new potentialities in both.’630 They had possessed the 
necessary intelligence, energy, and single-minded concentration to fulfil this task. What had 
 
623 Ibid. x. 
624 Ibid. 18. 
625 Heath, Jim F. Decade of Disillusionment: The Kennedy-Johnson Years. Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1976. 305 
626 New York Magazine, 11 September 1972. 61. 
627 Clinch, Nancy Gager. The Kennedy Neurosis. New York: Grosset and Dunlap, 1973. ix 
628 Ibid. 2. 
629 Ibid. 8.  
630 Ibid. 17. 

been missing, however, was ‘the crucial moral vision – the essence of courage’.631 Not only 
their background, also their ultimate goal: self-gratification, rather than a genuine self-
fulfilment, had kept them emotionally separated from the people who they had professed to 
lead. It had also, it seems, brought misfortune on them: 
 
Of four Kennedy sons, three are dead: one by wartime disaster and two by assassination. 
The fourth son was nearly killed in a plane crash; and half a decade later, he disgraced 
himself in the eyes of millions by contributing to the death of a young woman under 
ambiguous circumstances, severely, if not irreparably, damaging his presidential 
ambitions. One daughter was killed in a plane crash. Another daughter has been 
confined since young adulthood in a home for the mentally retarded. Thus, of the nine 
heirs, only four have survived as functioning adults: one son and three daughters.632 
 
The Kennedy Neurosis was a moral tale, and the Kennedys’ ‘neurosis’ was something akin to 
a modern curse. The Kennedys were the victims of their parents, their social ethos, and their 
inexplicable appeal and mystique. In other words, they had been cursed by their background 
and upbringing. ‘Science and technology,’ Clinch wrote, ‘have precipitated a situation where 
the risks of executive compulsions and illusions become potentially more dangerous every 
year. In short, it is imperative that we search out within ourselves and within our leaders the 
neurotic conflicts that could mean the difference between national survival and national 
extinction.’633 Not only had their curse led to the Kennedy family’s downfall; it was 
increasingly a threat to the American public that needed to be tackled. The book reads like a 
political statement and a moral indictment, more akin to the Woodrow Wilson book by Freud 
and Bullitt than to any work by Erikson, Mazlish or Lifton. In The Kennedy Neurosis, the 
language of psychoanalysis was used in the guise of psychohistory to pathologise a powerful 
family and everything it stood for. And indeed, this was exactly Clinch’s intention: ‘If my 
emphasis seems generally negative, it is largely because the lavish praise of the Kennedys has 
been so irrational and untrue that a revisionist must inevitably feel the weight of writing against 
an enormous tide of published opinion.’634 Despite its hostile tone, Mazlish judged that the 
book was written in ‘a clear and compelling style’ and ‘pleasure joins importance in urging us 
on to its reading.’635 
Clinch’s use of this conception of neurosis-as-curse points to a growing confusion 
inside and outside of psychoanalytic circles about what was exactly meant by the word 
neurosis. By distancing herself from Freud, and associating with thinkers such as Horney and 
Fromm, Clinch accepted a particular view on neuroses and their aetiology: a view that located 
their origin less in intrapsychic mechanisms such as repression, and more in a skewed 
confrontation of the individual with his particular society and its demands. Society, according 
to Clinch, was making its subjects, including its leaders, ill. Such a view places her book in a 
tradition of authors who based their work on the Frankfurt School, and makes it a precursor to 
works such as Christopher Lasch’s: The Culture of Narcissism (1979). In this tradition, the 
analyst (or historian’s) view of his particular society was crucial; his or her own value-system 
intruded much more openly on the studied material than in traditional psychoanalytic literature, 
where moral values were mostly implicit. The emptiness of the signifier ‘psychohistory’ meant 
that it could be appropriated easily, and, combined with the loosening of the definition and 
aetiology of neuroses by the neo-Freudians. This facilitated a position where the language of 
 
631 Ibid.  
632 Ibid. 11-12. 
633 Ibid. 19.  
634 Ibid. 11. 
635 Ibid. x.  

psychoanalysis was used as a vehicle for moral indictment and cultural critique. As Mazlish 
observed in his introduction to The Kennedy Neurosis: ‘The counterculture seeks to change the 
values the Kennedys represented. Manliness in an atomic age is seen as a form of madness; 
and boys wear long hair like girls to symbolize the acceptance of community,’ and he 
continued: ‘without passing judgment on these attempted value changes, it should be clear that 
Ms. Clinch’s book must be seen as a part of this movement.’636 Clinch not only wished ‘to 
analyze the Kennedys,’ Mazlish judged, ‘but to offer treatment to the American “psyche”.’637 
 
Psychohistory and Racism 
 
The use of psychoanalysis as a tool in studies of racism in the United States goes as far back 
as the 1920s. African-American authors such as W.E.B. Du Bois and Zora Neale Hurston used 
Freudian concepts to gain a deeper understanding of the ‘double consciousness’ they 
experienced being black Americans: ‘two souls, two thoughts, two unreconciled strivings; two 
warring ideals in one dark body, whose dogged strength alone keeps it from being torn 
asunder’.638 The concomitant idea of a so-called ‘racial unconscious’ was further explored by 
literary authors such as Richard Wright and Ralph Ellison. Eli Zaretsky has convincingly 
shown how psychoanalysis provided African-American intellectuals with a conceptual 
framework to explore and explain the conflicts inherent in racial self-awareness.639 Authors 
such as Horace Clayton, an African-American sociologist who underwent psychoanalysis and 
wrote on psychoanalytic topics, used Freud’s theories to understand white Americans’ “guilt-
hate-fear-complex”, as he called it.640 As early as 1943, William V. Silverberg had argued that 
there was a connection between race-prejudice and social immaturity.641 In 1972, historian Earl 
Thorpe published a book entitled The Old South: A Psychohistory (1972), in which he explored 
Southern black consciousness in the antebellum era. But the first comprehensive 
psychoanalytic study of racism written by a white American was entitled White Racism: A 
Psychohistory (1970), by psychiatrist and psychoanalyst Joel Kovel. 
Kovel, the son of Jewish immigrants, graduated from Yale in 1957. He received his 
M.D. from the Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons in 1961, and in 1977 
graduated from the Psychoanalytic Institute, Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York. 
As such, he was one of the few self-proclaimed psychohistorians who was a psychiatrist and 
had completed a full psychoanalytic training. In the 1980s, Kovel made a drastic intellectual 
turn: he abandoned the mental health profession altogether and became a full-time Marxist 
social theorist. He ran as a candidate for the Green Party for the United States Senate in 1998. 
Together with radical anthropologist Michael Löwy he released an Ecosocialist Manifesto in 
2001, in which he set out to define the ideology of ecosocialism, which seeks ‘the emancipation 
of people from capital’, as well as ‘the emancipation of the earth from the cancer of 
capitalism’.642 He is also advisory editor of the British periodical, Socialist Resistance. The 
roots of his activism, as well as the roots of his only book labeled psychohistory, White Racism, 
can be traced back to his work in the Public Health Service during the Vietnam War, which he 
 
636 Ibid. xiii. 
637 Ibid. 
638 Du Bois, William E.B. The Souls of Black Folk, New York, Dover, 1994. 10-11. 
639 Zaretsky, Eli. Political Freud: A History. New York: Columbia University Press, 2015. 
640 Ibid. 58. 
641 Silverberg, William V. ‘Race-Prejudice-social immaturity’. Current History 5, 1943. 25-29. 
642 Kovel, Joel and Michael Lowy. ‘An Eco-Socialist Manifesto’. Paris, 2001. 
http://members.optushome.com.au/spainter/Ecosocialist.html. (Accessed on September 13, 2016). 

has described as: ‘a two-year agony to discharge my military obligation to Uncle Sam, which 
succeeded in radicalizing me politically.’643 
Written in the late 1960s, according to its author White Racism bore ‘the imprint of that 
stormy decade’.644 In any case, the book was key in Kovel’s personal transformation from a 
Freudian psychoanalyst to a radical social theorist. Two years after its publication, a review 
appeared in a small philosophy journal, Telos. The reviewer, Chip Sills, praised the book, but 
asked why the author had not considered Marx among the intellectual sources of the work. Sills 
recognised in Kovel ‘an intuitive Marxist’ who, for his lack of historical materialist theory, 
remained limited, subjectivistic, in his approach. Kovel would later recall that the review 
changed his life: ‘Sills made me aware of a lack I scarcely knew existed; in so doing, he kindled 
in me a passion.’645 Writing White Racism, then, did two things: it confirmed Kovel in his 
vocation as an author, and after its publication it also altered his intellectual trajectory. About 
this, he wrote:  
 
For a while, I saw the change in terms of the notion with which I had subtitled White 
Racism – that it was to be a ‘psychohistory’, a kind of melding of two disciplines, 
psychology and history each informing and enriching each other. Fine, I would be a 
psychohistorian. Other scholars had begun using the term at the same time, and 
assembling new journals and associations devoted to the new field, and I would join 
them. I found this intriguing, but also unsatisfying. As practiced, psychohistory was 
about the skilful weaving together of scholarly discourses. But I was fast coming to 
recognize, through the legacy of the radical urges that had prompted the writing of 
White Racism, a different kind of desire altogether – not to weave together but to 
transform.646 
 
But White Racism did more than just awkwardly hold together psychoanalytic theory and 
history. The New York Times praised the book, but called it ‘profoundly pessimistic’.647 In a 
review in The New York Review of Books, once again adopting his comfortable role of the 
internal critic of the psychohistorical endeavour, Robert Coles compared Kovel’s book to 
Herbert Marcuse’s One Dimensional Man, and complained that the psychoanalytic component 
in both works suffered from a lack of interviews and clinical materials.648 Kovel would later 
admit that his book was less about the psychology of individual cases of racism, and more 
about the ‘social unconscious’ of white men and women.649 In it, he described what he called 
the ‘Varieties of Racist Experience’. And as he recalled: ‘It was plainly insufficient to make 
racism identical to the set of racist behaviors, if only because it had a history. More deeply, I 
was unhappy about the ability of the psychological canon to adequately express the sense of 
evil entailed in racism.’650 The main premise of the book was classically Freudian, and 
deceptively simple: dark-skinned people in the United States had been, and were still being, 
treated like shit. 
Kovel put it as follows: ‘Thus the root symbol between the idea of dirt and the blackness 
of certain people is that highly colored, strongly odored, dispensable and despised substance 
 
643 Kovel, Joel. ‘Reflections on White Racism’. Psychoanalytic Dialogues, Volume 10, 2000. 581. 
644 Ibid. 579. 
645 Ibid. 586. 
646 Ibid. 585. 
647 Lehmann-Haupt, Christopher. ‘Black, Black, Black is the Color of the White Man’s Dirt’. The New York 
Times, March 30, 1970. 
648 Coles, Robert. ‘Understanding White Racists’. The New York Review of Books, December 30, 1971.  
649 Kovel, Joel. ‘Reflections on White Racism’. Psychoanalytic Dialogues, Volume 10, 2000. 583. 
650 Ibid. 581. 

which the human body produces so regularly.’651 The idea came to him early in his career. 
During his residency, Kovel had presented to his supervisor a patient’s dream in which black 
people had figured as characters: ‘Oh don’t you know about that?’ the supervisor had 
pronounced airily, ‘She means her shit. That’s what black people always mean in the 
unconscious. It’s the color, you know.’652  
The years leading up to the publication of White Racism were spent trying to figure out 
how to commit ‘such an awful proposition to paper’.653 Kovel asked himself: ‘How could I 
write something that consigned millions of souls, with their history and culture and unique 
individualities, to the level of the most commonplace, undifferentiated, and despised substance 
common to human existence?’654 The answer was, through psychohistory. He wrote: 
 
I loved the audacity of the old Freudian observation, further developed by Ferenczi, 
that feces stands for possession, and especially money, in the unconscious. […] Could 
it be that the special association of blacks with feces in the racist unconscious is 
grounded in the historical reality of their enslavement – that they had in fact been 
considered property within an emergent capitalism, held as degraded things within a 
grasping yet idealistic society?655 
 
By describing the meaning of racism in what he later went on to call the ‘social unconscious’, 
Kovel followed the vicissitudes of the symbol ‘darkness’ in its American context, showing, 
among other things, how it had for a long time served a social, unifying function for white-
skinned people when it was applied to dark-skinned people. Through this scapegoating 
mechanism, differences within one group were projected onto another easily identifiable group. 
Following Freud and Ferenczi, Kovel held that feces stood for possession, especially money, 
in the unconscious: 
 
The American slaver went one step further in cultural development: he first reduced the 
human self of his black slave to a body and then reduced the body to a thing; he 
dehumanized his slave, made him quantifiable, and thereby absorbed him into a rising 
world market of productive exchange. In the creation of this world market, the 
Westerner was changing his entire view of reality – and changing reality in view of his 
new conception of it.656 
 
In tracking the social function of the symbol of ‘darkness’ and how it was applied to African 
American people, Kovel reconstructed the story of how a symbol (and a cluster of fantasies 
attached to that symbol) shaped, and in turn was shaped by, the course of American political 
history. He wrote, for example: ‘The wilderness that stimulated Americans into their expansion 
was also an ambivalent symbol of darkness – a darkness which combined with the color of 
enslaved skin to stimulate the particular American response to blackness.’657 More specifically, 
he showed that what had begun as a symbol that served to justify a form of concrete domination 
and discrimination was in time overlaid and then replaced by a symbol that cradled a widely-
held internal aversion, leading to pernicious resentment and frustration. With the triumph of 
the Northern way of life over the Southern, racism in the United States became de-
 
651 Kovel, Joel. White Racism, a Psychohistory. New York: Pantheon Books, 1970. 87. 
652 Kovel, Joel. ‘Reflections on White Racism’. Psychoanalytic Dialogues, Volume 10, 2000. 582. 
653 Ibid. 
654 Ibid. 583. 
655 Ibid. 584. 
656 Ibid. 18. 
657 Ibid. 185. 

institutionalised, yet, at the same time, internalised in a new guise by a large segment of the 
population, now fused with resentment.658  
Although he was aware of the limited predictive qualities of any psychological theory, 
Kovel’s conclusion was that this new form of racism was at the very heart of American culture, 
and that the future, even after the re-appropriation of the symbol of darkness by African-
Americans, was bleak. He predicted: ‘First, there is the possibility that the black rebellion, 
feeding upon its frustrations, will turn into guerrilla warfare and frank revolution, and bring on 
in turn the fascist regression that already looms so large.’659 Another, more likely option, was 
that ‘the malaise which Freud postulated as the conscious derivative of the repressed guilt […] 
is bound to increase with the growth of civilization [and] the result, while bland and smooth, 
may reach the same end-point as that attained by fascist regression: the creation, perhaps indeed 
by 1984, of a totalitarian State.’660 The legacy of racism and slavery could simply not be 
overcome, according to Kovel, because it had been on this contaminated soil that the whole 
edifice of American culture had been erected. Kovel could find no cure, not within the 
vocabulary of psychoanalysis, for what ailed the American psyche. For that, as we have seen, 
he would have to turn to an entirely different, more actively revolutionary, discourse: 
 
Here we have the nuclear creation: the radical dehumanization – the ‘thingification,’ 
with all the excremental implications it involves – of black people. By making property 
of men, Americans raised the mystique of property – and with it the whole matrix of 
anality – to untold powers in their culture; from then on it was to become engrained 
indelibly and increasingly in American history.661 
 
The History of Childhood 
 
Lloyd deMause has, without any doubt, been the most controversial character in the history of 
psychohistory. He attended a General Motors Institute in Flint, Michigan, where he trained as 
an accountant. As a young man, deMause joined the army in order to obtain the GI Bill to 
attend Columbia in order to redo his undergraduate studies. He was shipped to Korea, where 
he was strongly impressed by the atrocities of war. ‘After I came back,’ he said in an interview 
in 1996, ‘I was very much interested in why those little Korean kids were living underneath 
those bridges, and starving to death at the end of the war I had joined over there.’662 He majored 
in political science, started psychoanalytic treatment and training (as a lay analyst, at the New 
York Center for Psychoanalytic Training), and decided to try to apply his findings in a study 
of Hitler. At Columbia, deMause was impressed by the work and teaching of C. Wright Mills, 
a sociologist who influenced the New Left movement, and he studied with Jacques Barzun. 
But, as he recalled: ‘Columbia threw me out while I was doing my doctorate, saying there’s no 
combining political science and mental health.’663 
DeMause rose to prominence within the psychohistorical movement as the publisher 
and editor of a journal: History of Childhood Quarterly: The Journal of Psychohistory (later 
simply: The Journal of Psychohistory). The journal originally grew out of a collective book 
project: ‘Feeling that the failure of applied psychoanalysis to become a real science was due to 
its failure to become truly historical,’ deMause wrote in the first edition of the journal, a group 
 
658 Ibid. 191. 
659 Ibid. 228. 
660 Ibid. 229. 
661 Ibid. 185. 
662 Lentz, Bob. ‘Interview: Lloyd deMause, Editor The Journal of Psychohistory’. Clio’s Psyche, Volume 3, No. 
1, June, 1996. 8. 
663 Ibid. 

of likeminded historians and psychologists, began what he described as ‘a long-term project to 
examine primary source material back to antiquity in order to begin constructing an empirically 
accurate history of childhood.’664 The result was The History of Childhood, self-published by 
deMause’s company: The Souvenir Press. It was a collection of essays on child-rearing 
practices throughout time, written by different authors, with a theoretical introduction by 
deMause. ‘Its history begins five years ago’, he wrote, ‘with a group of twenty historians and 
psychoanalysts working with me on a research project under the sponsorship of the Association 
for Applied Psychoanalysis. Feeling that the failure of applied psychoanalysis to become a real 
science was due to its failure to become truly historical, we began a long-term project to 
examine primary source material back to antiquity in order to begin constructing an empirically 
accurate history of childhood.’665  
‘What we found,’ deMause wrote, ‘was so startling, so important to the understanding 
of historical change, and so generative of further research, that we began this Journal [The 
HCQ] in order to have a place to publish our continuing findings.’666 The book became very 
influential, especially among psychoanalysts and workers in the field of child mental health. 
William Langer summarised its importance in the foreword: ‘It seems clear that the history of 
childhood must be of major importance to any study of human society, for if, as it is said, the 
child is father to the man, it should be possible, with an understanding of any individual’s 
group’s past, to form a more intelligent judgment of their performance as adults.’667 Reuben 
Fine, director of the New York Centre for Psychoanalytic Training, wrote in a review: ‘Neither 
history nor psychiatry can ever be the same again. It is not impossible that this book will at 
some future time be considered a turning point in the integration of the social sciences’.668 
Erich Fromm found it was ‘just magnificent – an extremely important contribution to the 
knowledge of man’.669 Several years before, Mazlish had already pointed out the importance 
of family history for psychohistory in a lecture given for the Royal Historical Society in 1970, 
entitled: ‘What is Psycho-History?’ He wrote:  
 
The family is, additionally, of crucial importance in working towards group history 
because it establishes the nuclear social and psychological relations from which all 
others spring. Loving and hating, giving and receiving, obeying and commanding, 
controlling and being controlled all take their origin here. By transference, they become 
the basic patterns on which are erected such abstract political problems as Authority, 
Liberty, Equality, and so forth. How the transferences take place, and in what ways they 
are shaped by social, political and economic forces, for example, is an empirical 
question. Until now, the key approaches to these problems have been in terms of child-
rearing practices and socialization processes; and it is these that psycho-historians, 
along with social anthropologists and social psychologists, have attempted to study.670 
 
For his book, deMause pursued this line of inquiry and co-ordinated research into hitherto 
neglected sources on childhood. Subsequently, he constructed a speculative evolutionary 
theory out of his findings. Using Freudian theory loosely, he asserted that there have been 
 
664 DeMause, Lloyd. ‘The History of Childhood: The Basis for Psychohistory’. History of Childhood Quarterly: 
The Journal of Psychohistory, Summer 1973, Volume 1, No. 1. 1. 
665 Ibid. 
666 Ibid. 
667 DeMause, Lloyd., ed. The History of Childhood (1974). Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 
2006. 6. 
668 Ibid. 
669 Ibid. 
670 Mazlish, Bruce. ‘What is Psycho-History?’ Transactions of the Royal Historical Society Conference, 
September 22 1970, Volume 21, 1971. 79-99. 

basically three attitudes parents adopt with their children: 1) they use their child as a vehicle 
for the projection of the contents of their own unconscious; 2) they use the child as a substitute 
for an important figure in their own childhood; or 3) they empathise with the child's needs and 
attempt to satisfy them. DeMause periodised the history and development of parent-child 
relations and carved it up into six modes: Infanticidal (Antiquity to fourth century A.D.), 
Abandonment (fourth to thirteenth), Ambivalent (fourteenth to seventeenth), Intrusive 
(eighteenth), Socialisation (nineteenth to mid-twentieth), and Helping (mid-twentieth and on). 
Projective and reversal reactions, he held, dominated until the eighteenth century, after which 
empathic reactions increasingly became the norm.671  
He argued that the importance of parent-child interactions for social change had been 
known long before Freud: ‘St. Augustine’s cry, “Give me other mothers and I will give you 
another world,” has been echoed by major thinkers for fifteen centuries without affecting 
historical writing.’672 Since Freud, deMause argued, man’s ‘view of childhood has acquired a 
new dimension, and in the past half century the study of childhood has become routine for the 
psychologist, the sociologist and the anthropologist. It is only beginning for the historian.’673 
And yet, in deMause’s view, even Freud had focused on the wrong elements of childhood 
experience: ‘the fact that most of the children, most of [Freud’s] patients, were quite obviously 
swaddled, sexually-abused, and beaten to a pulp – of this Freud and all the psychoanalysts 
around him said all this had absolutely no effect. Beating and raping of children, which I think 
was the reason they came to him, the reason they were sick, he said had no influence.’674 In 
deMause’s opinion, Freud’s biggest mistake had been to give up his seduction theory. 
DeMause’s study of childhood posited that actual, lived trauma was at the root of mental 
illness, not the fantasies underlying the Oedipus complex. He wrote: ‘The history of childhood 
is a nightmare from which we have only recently begun to awaken.’675 But there was hope. 
With every new generation of less traumatised children, deMause speculated, the world would 
grow more peaceful and less prone to wars and poverty.  
The History of Childhood dealt with issues that were pertinent at the time. The 1960s 
had witnessed an increase of interest in the prevention and identification of child abuse in the 
United States. Before the 1960s, medical schools provided little training on the subject. This 
changed with the publication of the article ‘The Battered Child Syndrome’ (1962) by 
paediatrician Henry Kempe, which brought nation-wide attention to the subject.676 Feminists 
had also increasingly taken an interest in the topics of motherhood, childhood and child-rearing 
practices, and the history of childhood had become an important object of scholarly study with 
the publication of Philippe Aries’s Centuries of Childhood: A Social History of Family Life, 
which appeared in English in 1962. Whereas Aries had argued that childhood was a social 
construct, deMause and his team focused on the impact of abuse and its effects on generations 
of traumatised adults.   
But deMause’s theory raised questions: ‘I found that most psychoanalysts, other 
psychotherapists, and historians did not follow me,’ deMause recalled. 677 ‘Even the family 
 
671 DeMause, Lloyd., ed. The History of Childhood (1974). Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 
2006. 11-83. 
672 Ibid. 12. 
673 Ibid. 
674 Lentz, Bob. ‘Interview: Lloyd deMause, Editor The Journal of Psychohistory’. Clio’s Psyche, Volume 3, No. 
1, June, 1996. 9. 
675 DeMause, Lloyd., ed. The History of Childhood (1974). Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 
2006. 11. 
676 Meyers, John E.B. ‘A Short History of Child Protection in America’. Family Law Quarterly, Volume 42, No. 
3. 449-463. 
677 Lentz, Bob. ‘Interview: Lloyd deMause, Editor The Journal of Psychohistory’. Clio’s Psyche, Volume 3, No. 
1, June, 1996. 8. 

historians I got to write The History of Childhood [with] finally nearly threw me out of the 
book even though I was editor.’678 His colleagues found deMause’s evolutionary theory – 
which he called ‘the psychogenic theory of history’ – too positivistic, teleological and 
reductionistic, while deMause himself accused his fellow authors of whitewashing their 
materials and turning a blind eye towards the inhumanity of child-rearing practices of the past. 
He recalled: ‘They were cutting out all the material that was emotionally important. So I wrote 
my own article at the beginning with my own research and all of the people had a revolution 
and wanted to throw me out of the book, saying that they wouldn’t appear in a book with me, 
that they didn’t agree with it at all.’679 
Other psychohistorians were also sceptical of deMause and his theories, but not so 
much as to prevent them from publishing material in his newly-founded, well-advertised 
journal. When asked what he thought of deMause’s evolutionary theory at the time, Strozier 
answered: ‘It’s a good theory. Good for one book, perhaps, or a set of articles, but not an entire 
oeuvre.’680 Mazlish judged more harshly at the time: ‘History is reduced to psychology, as 
when deMause claims that ‘the central force for change in history is neither technology nor 
economics, but the ‘psychogenic’ changes in personality occurring because of successive 
generations of parent-child interactions.’681 Despite his reservations, Mazlish’s name appeared 
on the HCQ’s initial board of contributing editors. The HCQ’s early emphasis was 
unequivocally on the study of the history of child-rearing practices, but deMause led a broad 
church. In the early years, contributing editors were listed as: John F. Benton, Rudolph Binion, 
Glenn Davis, John Demos, Patrick Dunn, Henry Ebel, Barbara Finkelstein, Gerald J. Gargiulo, 
Arthur E. Hippler, Joseph Illick, George M. Kren, William L. Langer, Bogna Lorence, Peter 
Loewenberg, Richard Lyman, Elizabeth Wirth Marwick, Bruce Mazlish, Herbert Moller, Leon 
Rappoport, Stanley Renshon, William Saffady, Edward Saveth, Edward Shorter, Helm Stierlin, 
Michael Stone, Charles Strickland, Melvin Tucker, John Walzer, and John Waters.682 
In choosing material for his journal, deMause purposely did not discriminate among 
theoretical positions. He published the work of Freudians, Jungians, and, preferably, 
deMauseans. The journal had no referee system and published on both the history of child-
rearing practices and psychohistory. ‘Most articles for The Journal are submissions by people 
who are uniquely qualified in their areas, who have no peers,’ deMause said in an interview.683 
‘I myself as editor check out each article at the library for accuracy of references, simply 
because I learn so much doing so.’684 Despite the controversies, deMause’s theories were 
popular especially among psychotherapists, and even inspired playful literary works that were 
published in the journal. A poem by William Batstein (a pseudonym), ‘From the First Part of 
the Revelation of Moses the Son of Jehoshar’ (1974) is worth quoting. An excerpt: 
 
Vaginanuswomb. 
Down there is where we drop our shit. 
Down there is where we drop our corpseshit. 
But suppose our shit came back to haunt us?  
 
Dr. Nudnick Archaeologist finds a prehistoric grave. 
 
678 Ibid. 
679 Ibid. 9. 
680 Personal communication with Strozier, April 22, 2016.  
681 Mazlish, Bruce. ‘Reflections on the State of Psychohistory’, The Psychohistory Review, Volume V, No. 4, 
March 1977. 8.  
682 History of Childhood Quarterly: The Journal of Psychohistory, Volume 3, No. 3, Winter 1976.  
683 Lentz, Bob. ‘Interview: Lloyd deMause, Editor The Journal of Psychohistory’. Clio’s Psyche, Volume 3, No. 
1, June, 1996. 8. 
684 Ibid. 

It contains an infant skeleton, and other objects. 
‘How curious,’ says Dr. Nudnick, ‘that they would bury such fancy 
offerings with a baby.’  
SCHMUCK! THE BABY IS AN OFFERING!685 
 
As his journal’s influence rapidly grew, deMause’s theories became increasingly radical, and 
his over-all tone more confident. In ‘The Independence of Psychohistory’, he announced that 
psychohistory was an independent scientific field, not part of history, nor, for that matter, of 
psychology. ‘Sooner or later [it will be] necessary for psychohistory to split off from history 
and form its own department within the academy in much the same way that sociology broke 
off from economics and psychology from philosophy in the late 19th century,’ he wrote.686 In 
his view, psychohistory should be concerned with establishing eternal laws, and discovering 
definite causes: ‘the relationship between history and psychohistory is parallel to the 
relationship between astrology and astronomy,’ deMause held.687 ‘Psychohistory, as the 
science of historical motivation, may concentrate on the same historical events that written 
history covers, but its purpose is never to tell what happened one day after another.’688 
DeMause argued that the accusation that psychohistory reduced everything to psychology was 
philosophically meaningless. All it studied, in his view, was historical motivation, which was 
by definition psychological. Increasingly, the words ‘psychohistory’ and ‘Lloyd deMause’ 
became conflated in deMause’s own writings. To one of the many criticisms that were aimed 
at deMause and his theories, he retorted: ‘This matter of psychohistory ‘ignoring’ other fields 
when it specialized is a matter of some importance, since it is so often repeated by historians 
when criticizing psychohistorical works.’689 And he explained: 
 
I have been accused of being ignorant of economics (although I am the founder and 
Chairman of a company which publishes seven professional economic newsletters), of 
being ignorant of sociology (although I am trained in sociology and was C. Wright 
Mills’s research assistant at Columbia), of being unable to use statistics (although I 
earned my living as a professional statistician for five years) and of ignoring political 
factors (although all my graduate training was in political science). What seems not to 
have occurred to the critics of psychohistory is that we might choose to focus on the 
historical evolution of the psyche because only thereby can we reach the unresolved 
problems of precisely these same fields of politics, economics and sociology, fields 
which are shot through with unproven psychological assumptions and which have 
failed to become reliable sciences precisely because of the unresolved psychohistorical 
problems within them.690 
 
DeMause’s approach drew criticism from psychohistorians who did not subscribe to his 
theories. ‘At any meeting we organised,’ Strozier remembered, ‘Lloyd and some of his acolytes 
would turn up and cause a ruckus.’691 DeMause’s wild speculations played into the hands of 
critics of psychohistory, who eagerly reproduced his more radical statements. At the journal’s 
peak, deMause claimed that it had 10,000 subscribers, but Paul Elovitz – a close associate of 
 
685 Batstein, William. ‘From the First Part of the Revelation of Moses the Son of Jehoshar.’ History of 
Childhood Quarterly: The Journal of Psychohistory, Volume 1, No. 3, Winter, 1974. 427. 
686 DeMause, Lloyd. ‘The Independence of Psychohistory’. History of Childhood Quarterly: The Journal of 
Psychohistory, Fall 1975, Volume 3, No. 2. 167. 
687 Ibid. 164. 
688 Ibid. 
689 Ibid. 165. 
690 Ibid. 
691 Personal communication with Strozier, April 22, 2016.   

deMause – thinks the real number was closer to 8,000.692 The History of Childhood Quarterly: 
The Journal of Psychohistory did two things, at least: it provided a platform for more 
speculative texts in psychohistory, and it encouraged the historicisation of child-rearing 
practices. DeMause’s wild theoretical speculations were inspiring to child mental healthcare 
workers, as his gruesome portrayal of ancient child-rearing practices and his hopeful 
conception of helping mode parenting brought attention to changing attitudes towards 
parenting in the 1960s and 1970s and to the detrimental effects of child abuse.693 
Psychoanalysts were critical of deMause’s approach, as his interpretation of psychoanalysis 
returned to a model that resembled Freud’s conception of the aetiology of neuroses that 
preceded him giving up his seduction theory.694 His historicisation of child-rearing practices 
challenged the universality and timelessness of the Oedipus complex, while it took other 
psychological mechanisms for granted.  
Historian Clifford Griffin wrote a review of the first three years of the HCQ entitled 
‘Oedipus Hex’ in Reviews in American History: ‘[The HCQ] is a kingdom divided against 
itself.’695 And he continued: ‘The title of the journal expresses its divided nature. In the western 
part of the kingdom – the better part, left of the colon – lies the history of childhood (including 
adolescence and even young childhood), which is a most important subject long ignored by 
professional historians. But in the east dwells that strange thing its practitioners call 
psychohistory, and here is where the kingdom is being brought to desolation.’696 The main 
problem, Griffin found, was ‘that in the ten issues published before I wrote this essay, no writer 
in the journal – including conspicuously deMause himself – has provided an intellectually 
adequate explanation of what psychohistory is, and no one seems to know with any clarity what 
it is.’697 
Besides problems concerning the definition of psychohistory, the deMause group also 
had trouble living up to the expectations of institutionalisation. In 1975, Lloyd deMause 
decided to try to capture the unruly spirit of psychohistory in an institutional framework.698 
The International Psychohistorical Association (IPA) was founded by deMause, Paul Elovitz, 
David Beisel, Henry Lawton and others. The Psychohistory Press and the Association for 
Psychohistory followed soon after. The basic goal of these institutions was to further the study 
and teaching of psychohistory. They were the product of deMause’s longing to anchor a stable 
meaning to the term psychohistory, and they were meant to give psychohistory the semblance 
of unity and authority. ‘I think Lloyd at times saw himself as the Freud of psychohistory,’ Paul 
Elovitz recalled.699 DeMause was ‘incredible at getting people together’, according to Elovitz, 
but he seems to have been equally skilled at driving them apart.700 Although it is arguable that 
deMause’s attempts were succesful at creating some unity within the movement for a short 
period of time, the institutions were not invested with a significant amount of authority by 
leading psychohistorians to generate the vitality needed to sustain a movement. They served 
primarily as a vehicle to develop and propagate deMause’s own speculative theories. 
 
692 Personal communication with Elovitz, August 11, 2016. 
693 Personal communication with Kahr, October 30, 2015. 
694 Ibid. 
695 Griffin, Clifford S. ‘Oedipus Hex’, Reviews in American History, Volume 4, No. 3, September, 1976. 305. 
696 Ibid. 
697 Ibid. 
698 DeMause’s attempts have been well documented by Joseph F. Campbell in his article ‘Psychohistory, 
Creating a New Discipline’. The Journal of Psychohistory, Volume 37, No. 1, Summer 2009. 2. 
699 ‘IPA 2015: Dr. Paul Elovitz on Leadership in Freudianism and Psychohistory’. Youtube Video. Published on 
22nd July 2015. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vOK04p4RfiM 
700 Ibid. 

‘Occasionally [the institutions] meant something,’ Paul Elovitz recalled, ‘most of them just 
existed on paper, although some of it became real.’701  
As Elovitz would recall, deMause was ‘torn between being very practical and loving 
very extreme ideas.’702 In 1978, deMause published a controversial paper in the HCQ by 
Howard Stein of the University of Oklahoma. In the paper, entitled: ‘Judaism and The Group-
Fantasy of Martyrdom: The Psychodynamic Paradox of Survival Through Persecution’ (1978), 
Stein wrote that the ‘subject of […] history is fantasy rather than reality – or, rather, group-
fantasy that generates cultural ethos which, in turn, generates myth which, in turn, generates 
polity that sculpts reality to conform to fantasy and thereby confirms externally the fantasy of 
history.’703 His thesis was bold: ‘I suggest that it is the specific nature of the Jewish conscience 
that has made of Jews a persecuted and martyred people not merely at the hands of Christians, 
but long antedating the Judeo-Christian split – in fact tracing in Semitic history to the covenant 
between Abraham and Isaac.’704 And further: ‘Victimology or martyrdom is the dominant 
group-fantasy of the Jewish people, a fantasy in which ego-alien and ethos-alien cultural groups 
come to be delegated and assume the role of persecutor. The Chosen people are self-chosen to 
be sacrificial people.’705 It was controversial papers such as this one that drove away a number 
of scholars, including Peter Loewenberg, who deemed this particular piece of work anti-
Semitic. In 1983, a part of the IPA broke away – Elovitz set up the Psychohistory Forum, a 
work-group with far less lofty ambitions than deMause’s.706 
Psychohistory emerged in the 1970s as a genre of psychoanalytic and historical 
literature that encompassed many different perspectives. It produced interesting biographical 
narratives and became an important vehicle for political critique and the voices of 
emancipatory movements. Psychohistory occupied the space between institutionalised 
psychoanalysis and wider culture. However, competition between different ‘factions’ within 
psychohistory – most notably centred around the two competing journals – led to disunity and 
hostility among practitioners. Differences between theoretical approaches were magnified by 
differences in style, and a division appeared between practitioners who considered 
psychohistory an independent discipline and those who thought of it as a subdiscipline or 
interdiscipline subordinate to the discourses it was born out of. Most psychohistorians came to 
psychohistory from one or other parent discipline – history or psychoanalysis – and carried 
over onto the subject presuppositions about its practice drawn from their parent discipline. This 
made communication between practitioners difficult. Unburdened by the constraints of an 
academic affiliation and supported by sufficient financial means, Lloyd deMause constructed 
imaginative and wildly speculative theories about historical motivation that he propagated in 
his successful journal. His attempts to institutionalise psychohistory’s practice in an Institute 
for Psychohistory and an International Psychohistorical Association were disheartening to 
other psychohistorians who took advantage of the term’s openness and malleability. At the 
same time, this openness led to a multitude of perspectives incapable of dialogue. By the end 
of the decade, the once promising field had produced trench warfare between practitioners 
defending incommensurable theoretical positions; no credible authority had been capable of 
unifying the movement or anchoring a stable meaning to the term. Psychohistory entered the 
1980s in disarray. 
 
 
 
701 Personal communication with Elovitz, August 11, 2016. 
702 Ibid.  
703 Stein, Howard F. ‘Judaism and the Group-Fantasy of Martyrdom: The Psychodynamic Paradox of Survival 
Through Persecution’. The Journal of Psychohistory, Fall 1978. 152. 
704 Ibid. 153. 
705 Ibid. 154. 
706 Personal communication with Elovitz, August 11, 2016. 

Chapter 6 
Decline of a Signifier 
 
The surprising fact, C, is observed;  
But if A were true, C would be a matter of course. 
Hence, there is reason to suspect that A is true. 
 
C.S. Peirce, Collected Papers, Vol.V707 
 
In 2006, the American Historical Association decided to remove ‘Psycho-History’ from its 
taxonomic list of research specialisations. This caused a mild stir. Peter Loewenberg, always 
ready to defend the cause, wrote an angry letter to the editor of the AHA’s Newsmagazine, 
saying: ‘I am dismayed to learn that the AHA Council approved the deletion of psychohistory 
as a specialty choice for members. […] The tent of ‘history’ should be ecumenical, embracing, 
and offer many options.’708 Judith M. Hughes, of the University of California at San Diego, 
wrote a letter as well, offering her own reason for wanting to keep psychohistory on the list: 
‘If I take the subjects that interest my younger colleagues as any indication of where the 
discipline is headed, it would seem that psychology is making a comeback – albeit pursued 
differently from how it was pursued a generation ago.’ 709 But she suggested: ‘Perhaps the 
subspecialty should be renamed psychological history.’710 In an issue of the Newsletter 
published later that year, the president of the AHA at the time, Linda Kerber, responded 
apologetically: ‘The decision to omit psychohistory from the list of fields of specialization 
printed in the membership renewal form did not indicate a new disciplinary stance minimizing 
the significance of the field.’ 711 She rationalised as follows:  
 
The decision was dictated purely by practical considerations – how to make space 
available in the printed form for new fields that scholars were declaring as their fields 
of interest. The only way to do this (without reducing the type size beyond legibility or 
increasing the size of the form) was, it seemed, to de-list the fields with the fewest 
adherents. Psychohistory, which was a field selected by only four – out of 14,000 
people who can each make up to three choices – thus appeared to be an ideal candidate 
for exclusion from the printed form. However, it now turns out that thanks to the 
technical wizardry of our designers, psychohistory can – and will – remain on the 
printed forms.712 
 
The decline of psychohistory set in during the 1980s. By this point, Erikson himself had on 
several occasions expressed the wish that psychohistory as a label would disappear. To him it 
was purely a transitional word, and he made clear that he regretted that a movement had ever 
 
707 Peirce, Charles Sanders, Charles Hartshorne, and Paul Weiss. Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, 
Volume V. Cambridge (Mass.): Belknap of Harvard UP, 1934. 189. 
708 Loewenberg, Peter. ‘Categorical Imperatives?’, January 2007 (https://www.historians.org/publications-and-
directories/perspectives-on-history/january-2007/letter-to-the-editor-categorical-imperatives) 
709 Hughes, Judith M. ‘What's in a Subspecialty's Name?’, January 2007 
(https://www.historians.org/publications-and-directories/perspectives-on-history/january-2007/letter-to-the-
editor-whats-in-a-subspecialtys-name) 
710 Ibid. 
711 Linda Kerber's Response to ‘Categorical Imperatives?’ and ‘What's in a Subspecialty's Name?’ Linda 
Kerber, January 2007 (https://www.historians.org/publications-and-directories/perspectives-on-history/january-
2007/letter-to-the-editor-linda-kerbers-response). 
712 Ibid. 

been constructed around it.713 Even with its most staunch defenders, the term did not sit well – 
like Erikson, Lifton was increasingly hesitant to use the term; Mazlish at times claimed that he 
had a personal preference for the term ‘Psycho-social History’. In The Meaning of Karl Marx 
(1984), an acclaimed analysis of the messianic themes in Marx’s youthful writings and poetry, 
Mazlish wrote: ‘I might add that my attention to Marx’s individuality is not in terms of a 
psychohistorical study. Such a study, unlike this one, aims at a systematic application of 
psychological concepts and theories to its subject. I must also add that I cannot imagine any 
historical treatment, mine included, that is not informed by a particular sort of psychological 
understanding.’714 Several years before, it had been Mazlish’s aim to rid history from 
unsystematic applications of psychology. But by 1984, Mazlish’s ‘particular sort of 
psychological understanding’ was under fierce attack inside and outside of academia.  
 
The Field Entrenched 
 
By the 1980s, psychoanalysis in the United States was changing. The introduction in American 
academia of what Bruno Latour later referred to jokingly as ‘Lacanium’ – an exotic drug that 
he felt was as addictive as crack – was threatening the hegemony of American, more clinically-
oriented interpretations of Freud in academia. 715 The publication of Jacques Lacan’s Écrits 
(1966) had nearly coincided with the earliest Wellfleet gatherings. By the 1980s, the French 
thinker’s structuralist reinterpretation of Freud was gaining momentum in the United States. 
Lacan’s version of Freud was cryptic, malleable, and couched in a structuralist ontology that 
made it easily adaptable to theories current in literature and philosophy departments. The 
psychohistorians’ 
overwhelmingly 
Freudian, 
more 
biologistic 
interpretations 
of 
psychoanalysis were losing appeal fast.716 
But psychoanalysis in general was also increasingly challenged in the 1980s. Scholars 
coming from different fields were launching harsh critiques of Freud and his followers, 
including his historian-followers. Adolf Grünbaum, philosopher of science, wrote a 
philosophical critique of psychoanalysis’ natural scientific underpinnings in his The 
Foundations of Psychoanalysis (1984); Frank Sulloway looked critically at how a Freud-myth 
had been constructed in Freud: Biologist of the Mind (1979); Hans Eysenck looked critically 
at Freud’s scientific assumptions in and The Decline and Fall of the Freudian Empire (1985); 
Elizabeth Thornton, a medical historian, argued that Freud’s theories were fueled by an 
addiction to cocaine in The Freudian Fallacy (1983); Paul Roazen, a political scientist, had 
portrayed Freud’s treatment of his patients and acolytes critically in Freud and his Followers 
(1975). 
Texts such as Henri Ellenberger’s The Discovery of the Unconscious (1970) and 
Lancelot Law Whyte’s The Unconscious Before Freud (1960) had paved the way for the 
historical critiques of the foundations of psychoanalysis that followed in the 1980s. In his 
article ‘Dispatches from the Freud Wars’, historian of psychoanalysis John Forrester judged 
that most of these critics were ideologues, who operated with the ‘heartfelt wish that Freud 
might never have been born or, failing to achieve that end, that all his works and influence be 
made as nothing.’717 But that did not explain their sudden rise to prominence. The controversies 
 
713 For example: ‘The Jefferson Lecture’, Washington D.C., May 1, 1973. Quoted in Friedman, Lawrence J. 
Identity’s Architect: A Biography of Erik H. Erikson. London: Free Association Books, 1999. 
714Mazlish, Bruce. The Meaning of Karl Marx. New York: Oxford University Press, 1984. 5. 
715 Quoted in: Cusset, Francois. French Theory. How Foucault, Derrida, Deleuze, & Co. Transformed the 
Intellectual Life of the United States. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2008. 
716 For a detailed exposition of the dissemination of Lacan in the United States, see: Ibid. 
717 Forrester, John. ‘Dispatches from the Freud Wars: Psychoanalysis and Its Passions’. Psychoanalytic 
Psychology, Volume 16, No. 1, 1999. 

concerning psychoanalysis that arose around this time have been documented best by authors 
such as Nathan Hale and Eli Zaretsky718. Shamdasani and Borch-Jacobsen’s The Freud Files 
(2012) is partly based on interviews with key participants of the ‘Freud Wars’.719 Remarkably, 
some of the critiques were philosophical, others came from psychology, but most of them were, 
at least in part, historical in nature – in almost all cases some form of historical method was 
used to demythologise the origins of psychoanalysis. In an unpublished paper delivered at the 
Radcliffe Institute, historian Lynn Hunt argued that as social and cultural history became 
dominant in the 1970s, history over-all became more anti-psychological.720 In the 1980s, we 
might add, history was turned against psychoanalysis.721 As a consequence, the two disciplines 
no longer appeared as natural allies; pressure mounted on historians who were keen to 
incorporate psychoanalytic insight into their methodology. One of psychohistory’s parent 
disciplines had been set against the other.  
Outside of academia, Freud and the Freudians were not receiving good press either. On 
the brink of the decade, Time magazine reported that: ‘Freud’s struggles, as recounted by Freud 
and the Freudian historians, is heavily laced with legend and much of it is false.’722 This was 
remarkable criticism coming from a periodical that had generally been amenable to Freudian 
ideas, and had featured Freud on the cover three times in the first half of the century. However, 
it would reflect the tone of the debate inside and outside of academia for the coming years. 
Psychoanalysis’ cultural and academic hegemony was being challenged from different 
quarters, and no part of its legacy was spared, including its wild child – psychohistory. By 
1981, Marcus Cunliffe, a British professor of American Studies, noted that even the 
psychohistorians themselves were beginning to concede that the Oedipus complex was largely 
dated, the reputation of Erikson was on the wane, and prominent one-time believers were 
publicly turning apostate.723 The problem was, they had no theories to substitute them with. In 
the same year, Newsweek judged that ‘The figure [of Freud] that steps from recent biographies 
is no longer the majestic prophet of the legend, but more like one of the neurotic egoists who 
might have frequented his own couch.’724 The issue featured Freud on the cover, opened up 
like a Russian doll to reveal a more sinister version of himself. It read: ‘The Hidden Freud, his 
secret life, his theories under attack’.725  
Emboldened by this shift in perspective, academic critiques of psychohistory by 
traditional historians mounted. Donna Artzt, although generally sympathetic to psychohistory, 
criticised the psychohistorians notion of transference towards the object of study, as she feared 
that the application of this idea might compromise the historian’s concern with the coherence 
 
718 Zaretsky, Eli. Political Freud. New York: Columbia University Press, 2015. & Hale, Nathan G. The Rise and 
Crisis of Psychoanalysis in the United States: Freud and the Americans, 1917-1985. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1995. 
719 See, for example: ‘The Decline of Psychoanalysis’ in: Hale, Nathan G. The Rise and Crisis of 
Psychoanalysis in the United States: Freud and the Americans, 1917-1985. New York: Oxford University Press, 
1995. 
720 Hunt, Lynn. ‘Psychoanalysis and History’, Presented at the Radcliffe Institute, Harvard University, February 
22, Cambridge, MA. 
721 Hunt, Lynn. ‘Psychoanalysis and History’, Presented at the Radcliffe Institute, Harvard University, February 
22, Cambridge, MA. Hunt’s argument is convincing, but only as a partial explanation. After all, authors such as 
Swales and Masson used arguments derived from psychoanalysis to demythologize its origins. I believe the 
cannibalization of psychoanalysis and psychohistory in the 1980s cannot be explained by shifting 
historiographical emphases alone. She acknowledges this in the paper. Also, psychohistory – to an extent – 
identified as part of the social science movement within historiography.  
722 Leo, John. ‘Did Freud Build His Own Legend?’ Time Magazine, July 30, 1979. 
723 Gay, Peter. Freud for Historians. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1985. 15. 
724 ‘The Hidden Freud’. Newsweek, November 30, 1981. 12. 
725 Ibid. 

of history – ‘the consistency of his theory,’ she wrote, ‘can only be of secondary importance.’726 
Historian Gertrude Himmelfarb wrote that she perceived psychohistory as fallacious and 
undisciplined. She regretted that psychohistory drew its criteria of validity from psychoanalysis 
and not from history. She cited Erikson in Young Man Luther, who claimed that laying bare 
facts was less important than identifying psychological trends.727 David Stannard, author of 
Shrinking History: On Freud and the Failure of Psychohistory, was one of a number of scholars 
who had, after first having being advocates of psychoanalysis, defected from the discipline. 
Frederick Crews, a literary critic who had at one point been psychoanalytically oriented, 
belonged to this group as well. He argued that the empirical credentials of psychoanalysis were 
drastically weak, and the success rate of psychoanalytic therapy questionable.728 On this basis, 
he discarded its theory and practice completely. In his well-known article ‘Analysis 
Terminable’ (1979), he wrote: ‘Partisans of psychoanalysis can take comfort, furthermore, 
from an unabated outpouring of ‘applied psychoanalysis’ in the form of psycholiterary, 
psychobiographical, and psychohistorical studies which, if not always a credit to the tradition, 
attest to the continuing seductiveness of Freud’s ideas.’ 729 But, Crews continued, ‘given the 
diminished standing of psychoanalysis as a psychiatric modality and a theory of mind, it is 
questionable how much longer the Freudian vogue can last.’730 
In this chapter we will look at how psychohistory was taught in universities, and how 
this reflects some core difficulties of psychohistory, and discuss two books that appeared in the 
1980s – Shrinking History, by David Stannard and Freud for Historians by Peter Gay and show 
how they both, in their own distinct ways, contributed to the decline of psychohistory as a 
signifier. It is no coincidence that David Stannard chose to attack psychohistory through an 
attack on psychoanalysis. Psychohistory was particularly vulnerable to criticisms of 
psychoanalysis because it lacked the means to prove or disprove claims about the therapeutic 
efficacy or philosophical legitimacy of its parent discipline. Although there were immanent 
reasons for the decline of psychohistory, the movement became collateral damage in the wars 
waged against psychoanalysis. When Peter Gay, an authoritative figure within the 
psychohistorical movement, decided to continue the tradition of psychoanalytic history-writing 
under the new guise of psychoanalytic history, psychohistory was left in a state of confusion – 
an empty shell of a word. 
 
Dreams in a Classroom 
 
Psychohistory proved exceptionally hard to teach. And in the difficulties to establish 
psychohistory as an academic subject we see reflected the diversity, complexity and general 
aimlessness of the field. As we have seen, there was a significant growth of interest in 
psychohistory in academia during the 1970s. George M. Kren, a professor of psychology at 
Kansas State University, remarked in an interview that ‘academic interest in psychohistory 
peaked during the 1970s.’731 In 1966, Mazlish and Erikson were the only academics teaching 
courses on psychohistory at MIT and Harvard respectively. By 1977, Kren reported that there 
were ‘more than 200 courses in psychohistory with varying titles being offered around the 
country in colleges, universities and psychoanalytic institutes.’732 A similar estimate was given 
 
726 Artzt, Donna. ‘Psychohistory and its Discontents’. Biography, Volume 1, No. 3, Summer 1978. 27. 
727 Ibid. 
728 Crews, Frederick C. ‘The American literary critic Frederick Crews explains why he has rejected Freud’, 
London Review of Books, Volume 2, No. 23, December 4, 1980. 3-6 
729 Crews, Frederick. ‘Analysis Terminable.’ Commentary, July 1, 1980. 
https://www.commentarymagazine.com/articles/analysis-terminable/. (Accessed on September 13, 2016).  
730 Ibid. 
731 Kren, George. ‘Pioneering Psychohistory in Kansas’. Clio’s Psyche, Volume 5, No. 4, March 1998. 136. 
732 Kren, George M. ‘Psychohistory in the University’, The Journal of Psychohistory; Winter 1977. 339 

by Mazlish around the same time.733 ‘Not unexpectedly,’ he wrote, ‘in the light of such a figure, 
some universities have even been hiring psychohistorians as specialists, comparable, for 
example, to an economic or intellectual historian.’734 But that was wishful thinking. Although 
the field of psychohistory mushroomed in the 1970s, academic psychohistorians were unable 
to transform the growth in literature into a comprehensive body of knowledge that could be 
taught to students and young practitioners; only two full academic graduate programmes grew 
out of the field’s growth in popularity. 
This was not for lack of interest in teaching on the part of the psychohistorians. The 
very first Newsletter of the Group for the Use of Psychology in History, published in 1972, had 
a ‘Teaching Section’, which, in its later guise The Psychohistory Review, became the ‘Teaching 
Forum’.735 In the column, an academic psychohistorian would discuss his or her approach and 
present a syllabus for their course in psychohistory.736 The first Newsletter stated: ‘Since many 
of us teach, or plan to teach, history courses that explicitly utilize psychological theory, it is 
my hope that this section of the Newsletter can draw upon this common interest and serve as a 
vehicle for the transmission of information about the teaching of psycho-history. I think we 
have much to learn about this relatively new endeavour.’737 And further: ‘As a regular feature 
of this column I would also like to publish a list of psycho-history courses in the planning stage. 
Many undergraduate and graduate students will be reading the Newsletter and information 
about the new course and programs (like the one planned at UCLA) will be useful to them as 
they assess which graduate school to attend.’738  
The following years would prove that transmitting psychohistorical knowledge was 
easier said than done. In 1977, only a limited number of psychoanalytic institutes offered 
courses for graduate credit in psychohistory; the Southern California Institute of 
Psychoanalysis, the Topeka Institute for Psychoanalysis, and the New York Center for 
Psychoanalytic Training all offered a form of training for historians and social scientists. 
Mazlish reported that: ‘the Boston [Psychoanalytic Society] offers basic courses in ‘Clinical 
Concepts for the Social Scientist’, in cooperation with social scientists from the surrounding 
universities, to give specialized instruction for non-training candidates interested in 
psychohistory.’739 But the aim of psychoanalytic institutes was to train therapists, and they had 
little interest in applying psychoanalytic ideas to history. ‘An examination of the 1974/5 
catalogue of the Menninger Foundation and the 1976/7 catalogue of the New York Center for 
Psychoanalytic training indicates, except for one course on psychoanalysis and the social 
sciences, a common absence of any course work dealing with psychohistorical problems,’ Kren 
found.740 The medical background of most candidates tended to work against consideration of 
psychohistorical questions and approaches. 
On the other hand, there were problems facing academic approaches to psychohistory. 
Kren reported on the basis of informal inquiries ‘that enrollment in psychohistory courses 
ranges from half a dozen to about forty.’741 He explained that universities often decided if 
 
733 Mazlish, Bruce. ‘Reflections on the State of Psychohistory’, The Psychohistory Review, Volume V, No. 4, 
March 1977. 1. 
734 It is unclear to what ‘some universities’ Mazlish is referring here; possibly Charles Strozier’s appointment at 
Sangamon State University. 
735 GUPH Newsletter, Volume I, No. 1, March 1972.  
736 For the first psychohistory syllabus submitted to the GUPH Newsletter by Richard Schoenwald, see 
appendix 1. 
737 Teaching Methods and Materials. GUPH Newsletter, Volume 1, No. 1, March 1972. 3. 
738 Ibid. 
739 Mazlish, Bruce. ‘Reflections on the State of Psychohistory’, The Psychohistory Review, Volume V, No. 4, 
March 1977. 3. 
740 Kren, George M. ‘Psychohistory in the University Kren’, The Journal of Psychohistory, Winter 1977. 342. 
741 Ibid. 341. 

courses would be continued to be taught not on the basis of theoretical merit but – ‘in a truly 
capitalistic fashion’ – on the bases of adequate demand on the part of the students.742 Concern 
with ‘bread and butter’ subjects in academia militated against history generally, and against 
psychohistory in particular. A similar complaint had been made by Jacques Barzun some years 
before.743 In addition, psychology programmes seemed to be overwhelmingly anti-Freudian: 
‘Psychology departments seek frequently to identify their work as ‘hard’ science, and 
methodologically are close to nineteenth century positivism’.744 Students were not sufficiently 
acquainted with Freudian thought to become interested in applying Freudian ideas to history. 
According to Kren, ‘The inability of students to find an introduction to psychoanalytic material 
in psychology departments constitutes one of the biggest difficulties for psychohistory at the 
university and the college.’745 Because of the lack of Freudian approaches taught at 
universities, he reported that ‘students appear to have difficulties dealing with material that is 
conceptual rather than narrative. They find Freud difficult, the vocabulary of psychoanalysis 
strange, and are not really convinced of the whole approach.’746 
According to Strozier, psychohistorians had ‘trouble rationalizing the place of 
psychohistory in the university. There are many reasons for this state of affairs, but one of the 
more important I think is our tendency to confuse the training of psychohistorians with the 
teaching of psychohistory.’747 He held that ‘the difference parallels that between a graduate 
seminar and a freshman introductory course; between the New York Yankees and a sandlot 
baseball; or between a musical apprenticeship to a master craftsman and fumbling through the 
scales.’748 The question was: how, if at all, were the psychohistorians to teach psychohistory 
in universities? And to whom? Was psychohistory a subject that could be taught to 
undergraduates? Strozier felt that ‘psychohistory should not be hidden away as an advanced 
graduate specialty, but I am not arguing it should supplant other disciplines or even other 
interdisciplines.’749 He advocated a cautious, gradual approach to integrating psychohistorical 
ideas in university curricula: ‘the ground is only freshly broken in psychohistory and we must 
move with caution or run hopelessly amuck.’750 Here, again, we see a stark difference between 
the GUPH approach and deMause’s, who argued for ‘the eventual establishment of 
independent psychohistory departments in the university separate from history departments.’751 
After all, Strozier conceived of psychohistory as an interdiscipline born out of history and 
psychoanalysis; for deMause it was an independent, scientific enterprise. 
What the varieties of psychohistory had in common was an underlying belief shared by 
their advocates that traditional history’s answers and explanations were, in some way, 
inadequate. But with divergent notions of the status of psychohistory came very different ideas 
about the actual nature of the material that should be taught in psychohistory courses. A survey 
of the ‘Teaching Section’ and ‘Teaching Forum’ in the Newsletter and The Psychohistory 
 
742 Ibid. 
743 He wrote: ‘In any event, the combination of the dominant social sciences (‘social studies’ in the lower 
schools), the cult of the new in art, commerce, technology, and natural science, and the numerous anxieties 
expressing themselves in ‘futurism’ (planning, forecasting, ‘educating for the year 2000,’ and other forms of 
astrology) has created the impression that History can no longer speak in an important way to the contemporary 
world.’ (Clio and the Doctors, p.3)  
744 Ibid. 
745 Ibid. 341-342. 
746 Ibid. 
747 Strozier, Charles B. ‘A Rationale for Teaching Psychohistory’. GUPH Newsletter, Volume IV, No. 1, June 
1975. 8.  
748 Ibid.  
749 Ibid. 10 
750 Ibid. 
751 DeMause, Lloyd. ‘The Independence of Psychohistory’. History of Childhood Quarterly: The Journal of 
Psychohistory, Fall 1975, Volume 3, No. 2. 167. 

Review suggests that most approaches focused on psychobiography. In his paper, Kren gave a 
summary of varying approaches:  
 
Without even attempting a comprehensive listing, the following are cited as an example 
of the wide range of psychohistorical inquiries – not always taught within history 
departments – that deal with special subjects. Paul Elovitz teaches a course on the 
psychology of political leaders, which discusses Kennedy, Nixon, Robespierre, Mao, 
Lenin, Stalin and Hitler. Stanley Allen Renshon’s course at Herbert Lehman College 
C.U.N.Y., on psychology and politics emphasizes the socialization process of politics 
and examines the psychological dimensions of political belief. Neil Smelser, a 
sociologist at the University of California, examines the application of psychoanalysis 
to such areas as social work, criminology, the study of personality and culture, and the 
interpretation of literature. Charles Strozier at Sangamon State University – an 
institution that appears especially hospitable to psychohistory – teaches a course which 
deals with ego psychology and includes readings not only of Sigmund Freud but also 
of Anna Freud, Hartman, Lederer and Robert White, which attempts to provide a 
theoretical examination of this part of analytic theory.752 
 
A survey of the syllabuses collected in The Psychohistory Review similarly shows that some 
programmes focused on biography; some on the history of childhood; some on leadership; 
some on the theoretical underpinnings of psychohistory. As transference to the historical 
subject was a central notion for many psychohistorians, the students’ own motivations were 
often scrutinized in class. Paul H. Elovitz wrote that students came to his courses ‘seeking 
knowledge that will give them insight and improve their lives.’753 To harness students’ 
motivations, sometimes unorthodox and haphazard therapeutic interventions were used in the 
classroom. This reveals the psychohistorians’ ongoing struggle over how far to incorporate not 
only the theoretical components of psychoanalysis, but also the rituals of its practice, into their 
own psychohistorical practice.  
This insight led to creative teaching interventions. In his article ‘Springfield Über 
Alles’, Strozier describes how he encouraged his students to assume the characters of Nazi 
figureheads in roleplay, so as to teach them to understand their historical subjects’ motivations 
and behaviour. Strozier highlighted the strong emotional responses that his method evoked: 
‘The majority of the students did not regret their choices. Interestingly enough, however, the 
only two students who acted Jewish roles – the actress and the shopkeeper – regretted their 
choices and were unable to articulate clearly why. The actress was almost incoherent: “If I 
were to do it again I would not be Jewish as that fact got in the way of finding out what I was 
interested in knowing.”754 Richard Schoenwald, founder of the GUPH, reported that the 
direction of his class on psychohistory consistently revealed that ‘most of students wanted 
some kind of real or semi-real therapeutic experience.’755 To accommodate the interest, he 
encouraged students to ‘bring personal experiences, dreams, and other relevant material to the 
class discussions. The student previously may have analyzed the material, either in whole or 
part, or the class could participate in the analysis.’756 Richard Lyman, a historian associated 
with the deMause group, reported that he had ‘excellent results when we asked students to 
develop some aspect of their own life context into a paper. We got long papers, often illustrated, 
based on heavy extensive and imaginative research. Entire new lines of communications were 
 
752 Kren, George M. ‘Psychohistory in the University’, The Journal of Psychohistory, Winter 1977. 347. 
753 Ibid. 342. 
754 Strozier, Charles B. ‘Springfield über Alles’. GUPH Newsletter, Volume IV, No. 2, September, 1975. 14. 
755 Teaching Materials. GUPH Newsletter, Abstract of Volume I, No. 1-2, March and May, 1972. 7. 
756 Ibid. 8. 

opened up, they reported, with members of their own families as a direct by-product of the 
paper.’757  
But not all psychohistorians were convinced that an exploration of students’ 
motivations was particularly useful, or the task of the psychohistorian. Patrick Dunn, a historian 
of Russia based at Worcester Polytechnic Institute, reported that ‘Students ought to be 
encouraged to express emotions in class, but unless the instructor is a trained analyst he/she 
ought not to try to work with those emotions.’758 Kren agreed: ‘One element in the 
understanding of the motivations and feelings of historical figures is recognizing one’s own. 
Yet the primary object of a psychohistory course is the comprehension of a historical figure in 
the past and not that of the student – although the two questions are related.’759 
In the 1977-1978 academic year, Kren and Leon Rappoport, authors of Varieties of 
Psychohistory (1976), set up a graduate training program in psychohistory. Around the same 
time, Loewenberg announced that the State of California passed a bill that established the 
profession of Research Psychoanalysis. For the course in Kansas, Kren and Rappoport received 
financial support from the National Endowment for the Humanities. ‘We applied and received 
a grant for starting a degree in psychohistory. […] Students would fulfill the normal 
requirements for a PhD in history or psychology, but their dissertation would be on a 
psychohistorical subject. In addition to the regular courses at the Menninger Foundation in 
Topeka, where they would do some supervised clinical work.’760 The grant allowed them to 
bring in well-known psychohistorians for a series of lectures: Peter Loewenberg, Rudolph 
Binion, Lloyd de Mause, John Demos and Bruce Mazlish all spoke. ‘The lectures,’ Kren later 
recounted, ‘resulted in sensitizing the history department in particular to psychohistory.’761 But 
the programme over-all did not succeed. The grant provided money to pay for the lectures, but 
not enough money was left over to support students. ‘After a few years,’ Kren reported, 
‘interest on the part of undergraduates in psychohistory also dropped and in the 1980s we gave 
up teaching courses in psychohistory and the history of childhood.’762 Peter Loewenberg’s 
programme in psychohistory at UCLA was succesful and ran until Loewenberg retired, but 
graduates failed to find teaching positions. It was impossible to make a living out of 
psychohistory. Some of Loewenberg’s students made use of the legacy of the Research 
Psychoanalysis bill and became clinicians instead.763 
 
The Freudian Vogue 
 
A psychohistorian might well, at one point, have considered David E. Stannard a colleague. In 
his book, The Puritan Way of Death (1977) – a historical attempt to understand the role of the 
concept of death for the Puritans of New England – Stannard not only drew on philosophy, 
literary criticism and anthropology; he also found it useful to draw upon Freud’s work, and 
psychoanalysis in general, to understand what the concept of death could have meant to the 
early Americans.764 A historian and professor of American Studies at Hawaii University, 
Stannard became well-known in the early 1990s for his popular book American Holocaust: 
The Conquest of the New World (1992), in which he applied the terms ‘racism’, ‘genocide’ and 
 
757 Kren, George M. ‘Psychohistory in the University’, The Journal of Psychohistory, Winter 1977. 343. 
758 Kren, George M. ‘Psychohistory in the University Kren’, The Journal of Psychohistory, Winter 1977. 343. 
759 Ibid. 
760 Kren, George M. ‘Pioneering Psychohistory in Kansas’. Clio’s Psyche, Volume 5, No. 4, March 1999. 136. 
761 Ibid. 
762 Ibid. 
763 Daum, Andreas W., and Hartmut Lehmann, James J. Sheehan. The Second Generation: Émigrés from Nazi 
Germany as Historians. New York: Berghahn Books, 2016. 121-122.  
764 Freud is referred to positively on the first page of Stannard, David E. The Puritan Way of Death: A Study in 
Religion, Culture, and Social Change. New York: Oxford University Press, 1977. 

‘holocaust’ – with their twentieth-century connotations – to mass slaughterings of Native 
Americans by European settlers in the fifteenth and sixteenth century.765 By then, Stannard was 
already notorious among psychohistorians and psychoanalysts for his small book, Shrinking 
History: On Freud & the Failure of Psychohistory (1980). In that book he attempted to show 
that, as he put it, ‘little, if any, psychohistory is good history’.766  
It is no coincidence that Stannard chose to attack psychoanalysis instead of 
psychohistory. Psychohistory, a young and amorphous discipline, was much harder to pin 
down. In the book, Stannard judged that the quality of psychohistorical writing ranged ‘from 
the elegant and sensitive writings of Erik H. Erikson, to the tawdry and crackpot disquisitions 
of too many to name without fear of overlooking others equally deserving of mention.’767 One 
psychohistorian stood out particularly: ‘Clearly,’ Stannard wrote, ‘Mr. de Mause works well 
beyond the fringe of even the most generous definition of the world of scholarship’.768 
Stannard borrowed the title for his book from another important piece of criticism of 
psychohistory, Robert Coles’ series of articles in the New York Review of Books, in which he 
criticised Bruce Mazlish’s book In Search of Nixon – also entitled ‘Shrinking History’.769 
Stannard’s book was principally a response to the idea expressed by Bruce Mazlish that the 
idiosyncratic, common-sense psychological element involved in history-writing might be 
better substituted by the coherent theory of psychoanalysis. ‘In the abstract,’ Stannard wrote, 
‘this argument appears to have merit. But first such a theory must be shown to exist and be 
logically and empirically credible. Otherwise we are merely adding to the confusion by 
substituting an unverified and logically reductionist explanation that stands a very good chance 
of being dead wrong for the sensibly diverse, modest, cautious, common sense, experientially 
derived wisdom of the traditional historian.’770 Stannard was not satisfied with debunking 
psychohistory alone. Psychoanalysis in its entirety was suspect. If Freud’s theories had 
provided him with a perspective on the meaning of death in the unconscious of Puritans in 
1977, three years later he was arguing that there was no such thing as an unconscious at all. 
Psychoanalysis, he held, suffered ‘from problems with illogic, experimental nonconfirmation, 
and cultural parochialism.’771 Reviewer Michael Franz Basch, a psychoanalyst based in 
Chicago, concluded: ‘This is a very angry book.’772 
In his book, Stannard drew on critics of psychoanalysis such as Adolf Grünbaum and 
Hans Eysenck. ‘It is worth emphasizing,’ Stannard wrote about Sophocles’ Oedipus myth, ‘that 
the entire sequence of events began with the oracle’s prediction to the troubled young man. 
The same pattern holds with Freud’s analysis of Little Hans (and with psychoanalysis in 
general). […] Freud referred to Little Hans as a ‘little Oedipus’ after, under much parental 
prodding, the child grudgingly seems to have accepted his father’s observation that he wanted 
his father out of the way in order to be alone with his mother.’773 If psychoanalysis worked at 
all, Stannard suggested, it operated by the power of suggestion. He did not review a single 
 
765 Stannard, David. ‘American Holocaust’, reply by J.H. Elliott. The New York Review of Books, October 21, 
1993. 
766 Stannard, David. ‘Shrinking History: Freud and the Failure of Psychohistory’. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1980. Xiii. 
767 Ibid. xi 
768 Ibid. xii 
769 Coles, Robert. ‘Shrinking History Part 1’, New York Review of Books, February 22, 1973. 
770 Stannard, David. ‘Shrinking History: Freud and the Failure of Psychohistory’. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1980. 82. 
771 Ibid. 30. 
772 Basch, Michael Franz. ‘Comment on David E. Stannard’s Shrinking History.’ The Psychohistory Review, 
Volume 9, No. 2, Winter 1980. 136. 
773 Stannard, David. Shrinking History: Freud and the Failure of Psychohistory. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1980. 86. 

psychohistorical study in depth, and decided to instead argue that psychoanalysis was a weak 
foundation for historical work to rest upon. Stannard based his argument on existing critiques 
of psychoanalysis. The book was a patchwork of behavioural and philosophical arguments 
against psychoanalysis. One of Stannard’s main points, based on Eysenck’s research, was that 
studies suggested that other forms of therapy were as successful as, if not more successful than, 
psychoanalysis in curing neuroses; and, moreover, that neuroses often spontaneously went into 
remission without any form of therapy. Stannard held that in the face of these criticisms, 
psychoanalysis had been unable ‘to provide acceptable evidence to indicate that it is more 
successful as a therapeutic device than any other form of recognized therapy.’774 Stannard 
discarded the psychoanalysts’ argument that psychoanalysis works with other evaluative 
criteria for cure, and then turned quickly to philosophical critiques of the natural scientific 
underpinnings of psychoanalysis. He reviewed some of the standard philosophical critiques of 
the concept of the unconscious such as Popper’s arguments that, like astrologers, 
psychoanalysts were able to ‘explain away anything that might have been a refutation of the 
theory had the theory and the prophesies been more precise,’ by making their interpretations 
and prophesies sufficiently vague.775 He then attempted to show that there were severe flaws 
in the logic employed by psychohistorians. One substantive point of criticism was the 
circularity of the psychoanalysts and psychohistorians’ arguments concerning the foundations 
of adult behavior in childhood experience:  
 
Post hoc, ergo propter hoc describes the error built on the assumption that if event B 
followed event A, then B must have happened because of A. This is a common enough 
mistake in all historical writing, but since Freud it has been given a dizzying new twist: 
it is now apparently no longer necessary to historically establish the existence of A. So 
long as B is found to exist, it is assumed that A must have happened since B is a 
psychoanalytically posited consequence of A. Once having ascertained, then (by means 
of conjecture), the alleged existence of A, the cause of B's existence is made clear: it 
exists because of A—even though there may be not a shred of real evidence that A ever 
existed!776 
 
Another important point of criticism that Stannard raised was that psychohistorians used 
theoretical models and cognitive assumptions derived from present experience which they 
subsequently imposed on the past. In doing so, psychohistorians assumed ‘that in most 
fundamental ways all people, at all places, at all times, have viewed themselves and the world 
about them in substantially the same fashion.’777 This seemed unlikely to Stannard: ‘While not 
always addressing directly the then still exotic vogue of psychoanalysis,’ he explained, ‘such 
great early twentieth-century historians as Huizinga and Febvre (who were by no means always 
in agreement with one another) both implicitly and explicitly suggested that the historical past 
was in fundamental ways a very different world from that of the present.’778 In Stannard’s 
hands, the question of whether or not to use psychoanalysis in history became a question 
concerning one’s willingness to accept the idea of a fundamental, timeless human experience.  
To substantiate his claim that it was unlikely for people in the past to have experienced 
themselves in terms close to ‘a trinity of mystical forces’ of id, ego, and superego, Stannard 
drew on the work of social psychologists such as Hans H. Toch and Richard Schulte, who had 
 
774 Stannard, David. Shrinking History: Freud and the Failure of Psychohistory. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1980. 148. 
775 Ibid. 67. 
776 Ibid. 24. 
777 Ibid. 122. 
778 Ibid. 122. 

performed controlled experiments suggesting a strong influence of a person’s particular 
experience on perception.779 ‘Abstract and at first glance seemingly removed from the 
problems of psychohistory, the implications of these experiments for the psychohistorian are 
in fact acute,’ he explained: ‘for if an individual in the past did not even perceive a person, 
event, or other seemingly ‘objective’ phenomenon in the same way as does the modern 
historian, it would clearly be a mistake to apply retrospectively contemporary psychoanalytic 
or any other highly structured explanatory concepts of motivation to the historical figure’s 
behavior.’780  
In a kaleidoscopic manoeuvre, Stannard had criticiced psychoanalysis and 
psychoanalytic history using classically psychohistorical argumentation, based upon the notion 
that the psychological aspect of history-writing (attributing motives and explaining behavior 
in the past) was best carried out using up-to-date, coherent and scientifically sanctioned 
psychological theory. Ironically, but not coincidentally, the psychological theory that Stannard 
chose to base his argument on supported an idiosyncratic and common-sense approach to 
explaining motivation in the past. As reviewer Dominick Cavallo put it in the journal of Social 
Science History: ‘In assuming the role of critic as executioner, Stannard forces himself into an 
untenable intellectual corner. In his ardor to prove that psychohistory ‘cannot work,’ Stannard 
makes statements whose lack of subtlety, ahistoricity, logical perversity, and lack of 
verification rival the worst psychohistory.’781 Shrinking History can be read as psychohistory 
turning upon itself; and what the book illustrated more than anything was the general 
ideological shift away from psychoanalytic theory that took place in academia during the 
1980s. The ‘vogue of psychoanalysis’, as Stannard and Crews had both called it, was coming 
to an end. 
For obvious reasons, psychohistorians were troubled by Stannard’s work. His 
arguments pointed to substantial weaknesses in their justifications for using Freudian theory in 
history. It also pointed to the disarray that psychohistory as a movement found itself in. The 
Psychohistory Review published a series of clumsy responses by psychohistorians, followed 
by a response from Stannard. Fred Weinstein, an important contributor to the Review, had 
nothing good to say about Stannard’s work. The book was ‘so bad’ that he did ‘not care to say 
much about it.’782 Michael Franz Basch was interested particularly, ‘over and above the content 
of his essay,’ in ‘the ongoing struggle in these pages between Stannard the scholar and Stannard 
the polemicist. The ridicule, sarcasm and sophistry employed by the author in his attempt to 
make those who would take a different position from his feel foolish and/or intellectually 
dishonest does his cause no service.’783 The most telling review came from Travis L. Crosby, 
a psychobiographer, who judged that: ‘Part of Stannard’s difficulty in evaluating psychohistory 
dispassionately lies in the lack of an effective definition of the term.’784 It was simply 
impossible to systematically criticise psychohistory, Crosby argued, because – despite efforts 
by people such as Lloyd deMause to institutionalise its practice and anchor a stable meaning 
to the term – there existed such a wide-ranging variety of works that called themselves 
psychohistory that a comprehensive critique of psychohistory was nearly impossible. He wrote: 
‘Very few psychohistorians have thought seriously about the problems of definition, and have 
 
779 Ibid. 141. 
780 Ibid. 133. 
781 Cavallo, Dominick. ‘Review of Shrinking History’. Social Science History, Volume 5, No. 4, Autumn, 1981. 
492-495. 
782 Weinstein, Fred. ‘Comment on David Stannard’s Shrinking History’. The Psychohistory Review, Volume 9, 
No. 2, Winter, 1980. 145. 
783 Basch, Michael F. ‘Comment on David Stannard’s Shrinking History’. The Psychohistory Review, Volume 9, 
No. 2, Winter, 1980. 136. 
784 Crosby, Travis L. ‘Comment on David Stannard’s Shrinking History’. The Psychohistory Review, Volume 9, 
No. 2, Winter, 1980. 149. 

glided too readily into a reliance on psychoanalysis.’785 As we have seen, a number of authors 
did try to define psychohistory, but it remained an elusive concept that changed guise in the 
hands of different practitioners. The second half of Crosby’s remark points to a growing 
awareness among psychohistorians that the ‘vogue’ of Freudian theory was passing; one of 
psychohistory’s parent disciplines – arguably the principle one – was increasingly under fire, 
and practitioners had to take up position in response to these criticisms. Crosby’s position was 
clear:  
 
There are two possible avenues that could lead to an acceptable redefinition of 
psychohistory, and thereby avoid present day views that psychohistory must be married 
to a psychoanalytic technique. The first is to jettison those aspects of psychoanalysis 
that are least suitable to a study of the past. For example, psychohistory would be well 
advised to relinquish any attempt at drawing causal relationships between childhood 
experiences and adult behavior.786 
 
Crosby was willing to give up one of psychohistory’s core principles – an emphasis on the 
importance of the reconstruction of childhood experience. And he continued: ‘A second avenue 
toward a redefinition of psychohistory, lies in the application of non-psychoanalytic 
psychology to the study of the past.’787 This was not a new idea, and had been advocated by 
members of the Wellfleet group almost from psychohistory’s conception onwards. Later, 
William McKinley Runyan had been interested in exploring the possibilities of a non-
psychoanalytic psychohistory and psychobiography. When he wrote to B.F. Skinner to ask his 
opinion of psychobiography, he received a short reply, worth quoting in full:  
 
Dear Dr. Runyan: I have no strong confidence in the psychobiography of my colleague 
Erik Erikson nor am I well read in related fields. I am afraid I can give you no help. 
Yours Sincerely, B. F. Skinner788 
 
After World War II, with a burgeoning psychiatric field in the United States, most 
psychohistorians had clung to psychoanalysis in the hope that they had found a unified and 
unifying psychological theory to work with. Psychohistory had relied on psychoanalysis as one 
of its parent disciplines – it had been conceived that way by Erikson and Langer. Because 
psychoanalysis was the most dominant psychological discourse, with sufficient scientific 
authority, psychohistorians had been able to rely on it relatively uncritically over the past 
decades. That was now changing.  
Stannard did not spare his critics. ‘First,’ he wrote in his reply to the comments, ‘I wish 
to congratulate Charles Strozier for selecting three reviewers whose comments represent a 
broad range of perspectives: one of them appears to think my argument substantially correct 
(with reservations); one of them thinks my argument is largely incorrect or at least incomplete 
(again, with reservations), and one of them doesn’t think.’789 As for the book’s style, Stannard 
explained he was following ‘the wise counsel of J.H. Hexter to the effect that ‘violent 
destruction is not necessarily of itself worthless or futile. Even though it leaves doubts about 
 
785 Ibid. 
786 Ibid. 
787 Ibid. 
788 Letter from B.F. Skinner to William McKinley Runyan, April 19, 1982. Quoted in: Runyan, William M. 
‘From the study of lives and psychohistory to historicizing psychology: A conceptual journey’. Annual of 
psychoanalysis, special issue on psychoanalysis and history. Hillsdale, N.J.: Analytic Press, 2003. 125. 
789 Stannard, David. ‘Reply to comments on David Stannard’s Shrinking History’. The Psychohistory Review, 
Volume 9, No. 2, Winter, 1980. 150. 

the right road for London, it helps if someone rips up, however violently, a ‘To London’ sign 
on the Dover cliffs pointing south.’790 
 
Freud for Historians 
 
Peter Gay (1923-2015) was Professor of History at Yale University. He was a historian of 
European thought and an important advocate of the psychoanalytic approach to history. The 
New York Times called him America’s pre-eminent cultural historian in 2007. Some of his best-
known works include: Weimar Culture: The Outsider as Insider (1968); The Bourgeois 
Experience: Victoria to Freud (1984-1998); Freud: A Life for Our Time (1988) and Freud for 
Historians (1985) – a defense of the use of psychoanalysis in history-writing. He received the 
Heineken-prize from the Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1990; the University 
of Munich’s Geschwister Scholl prize and a lifetime distinction award from the American 
Historical Association in 2004. Gay’s obituary in The Guardian stated that his ‘Freudianism 
was often applied with a light touch, however, as in The Bourgeois Experience, and his many 
essays and shorter books on Freud and aspects of his life and thought were not uncritical in 
their approach to the master.’791 He was one of the most well-respected historians to have 
engaged with psychohistory.   
In the early 1950s, Gay met left-wing political scientist Franz Neumann at Columbia 
University. Neumann was a Marxist scholar with ties to the Frankfurt School. He invited Gay 
to attend a reading group that he and his wife had set up with their friend Herbert Marcuse.792 
Through his interactions with Neumann and Marcuse, Gay became increasingly enamoured 
with the Frankfurt School’s reading of Freud – in particular with Erich Fromm’s revisionist 
interpretation of psychoanalysis. Yet it wasn’t until the mid-1970s that Gay underwent training 
in psychoanalysis. His application of Freudian thought to historical materials was very 
cautious, but committed. He was an advocate of having graduate students in history undergo 
psychoanalysis. ‘Intellectually,’ he wrote, ‘it is on a par with the reasonable demand that the 
historian inform himself of his terrain, as Samuel Eliot Morison, the great student of 
Columbus’s voyages reenacted Columbus’s bold ventures. The principle objection […] is 
financial.’793  
In an interview in 1997, Gay acknowledged that he did not much like the term 
psychohistory: ‘I haven’t used that word for myself because, although it’s very convenient, on 
the whole I’ve always thought that psychohistory has been excessively reductionist, giving too 
much weight, or causal importance, to certain inner experiences of whatever sort.’794 Instead, 
he chose to identify himself as a historian who was ‘oriented towards’ or ‘influenced by’ 
psychoanalysis. He advised his graduate students who were interested in psychohistory not to 
‘come out of the closet’ until they had tenure.795 His ambivalence towards psychohistory was 
apparent in Freud for Historians (1985) – his important manifesto for the use of psychology in 
history. Gay’s alliance to psychoanalysis went unquestioned in the book: ‘It seems to me fairly 
obvious that the psychoanalytic view of the human animal is the most fruitful psychology 
 
790 Ibid. 
791 Evans, Richard J. ‘Peter Gay Obituary.’ Guardian, May 24, 2015. 
792 Elovitz, Paul H., and David Felix, and Bob Lentz. ‘The Psychoanalytically-Informed Historian: Peter Gay’. 
Clio’s Psyche, September, 1997. http://www.cliospsyche.org/psychoint_pg.html (Accessed on September 13, 
2016). 
793 Gay, Peter. The Bourgeois Experience: Victoria to Freud. New York: Oxford University Press, 1984. 465-
466. 
794 Elovitz, Paul H., and David Felix, and Bob Lentz. ‘The Psychoanalytically-Informed Historian: Peter Gay’. 
Clio’s Psyche, September, 1997. http://www.cliospsyche.org/psychoint_pg.html (Accessed on September 13, 
2016). 
795 Ibid. 

we’ve got. To have psychoanalysis as one of your instruments to search with or as one of your 
fundamental orientations towards individuals and collective experiences makes dual training 
very valuable.’796 Freud for Historians was a defence of psychoanalysis and simultaneously a 
critique of psychohistory. His ambivalence, even hostility, towards the term psychohistory was 
apparent: ‘Some pungent and irritated responses to psychohistory have been only too 
deserved,’ he wrote.797 It seems that Gay set out to save psychoanalysis from psychohistory. 
Gay’s book was, in effect, a response to the responses of non-Freudian, ‘ordinary’ 
historians to psychohistory. ‘I intend to take these aggressive defences against psychoanalysis 
seriously,’ he wrote. ‘I am visualising the historian’s defensive manoeuvers as six concentric 
rings of intellectual fortification mobilized against the Freudian assault.’798 On Stannard, he 
wrote: ‘In the rapidly growing contentious literature about Freud, the man and his work, David 
E. Stannard, Shrinking History: On Freud and the Failure of Psychohistory (1980) deserves 
particular attention, since it has shaped the way many historians think, and talk, about 
psychoanalysis as a possible discipline. Well-served by economy of expression, fluency of 
style, and a scrupulous abstention from personal vilification, this effort to devastate Freud’s 
creation is, however, compromised by tendentiousness.’799 Apparently, Stannard’s 
characterisation of Lloyd deMause as tawdry and crackpot did not count as personal vilification 
to Gay. About Paul Roazen, the other sceptical historian, Gay said: ‘Nothing is more ludicrous 
than the picture of the historian growing skeptical about psychohistory because psychoanalysis 
is in trouble. He knows nothing about psychoanalysis, and cares less.’800 
Freud for Historians was an attempt to reconfigure the debates about the use of 
psychoanalysis in history. Couched in the language of war, Gay’s essay sought to muster 
whatever fighting power was left in the ranks of psychohistory and redirect it towards critics 
under a new banner: ‘the sheer defensiveness that angry historians have displayed in attempting 
to stifle psychohistory is a tribute less to their acuity than to the dents that psychoanalytically 
oriented historians have made in their armor. The literature of responsible psychoanalytic 
history may be small, but it is growing.’801 Gay called for a new kind of psychohistory – ‘a 
kind that has not yet been explored, let alone practiced’.802 As such, his book was not a direct 
attack upon the achievements of psychohistory, but a plea to reform the field to such an extent, 
and to discard so much of its achievements, that it was unclear what exactly remained of the 
enterprise after its purge. In content, his arguments for a new ‘psychoanalytic history’ were not 
much different from the psychohistorians’s. Like Mazlish, he argued that ‘the professional 
historian has always been a psychologist – an amateur psychologist.’803 Like most 
psychohistorians, Gay wrote from the strong conviction that ‘psychoanalysis should inform 
other auxiliary sciences, other techniques; it should enrich, without disturbing, paleography, 
diplomatics, statistics, family reconstruction. Nor need it be reductionist.’804 The name Lloyd 
deMause is hauntingly absent from Gay’s essay, but it was clear that he sought to rebrand 
psychohistory and give it back its academic respectability. Psychohistory had been marred by 
its irresponsible uses: ‘The syllabus of errors rehearsing its offenses – including the familiar 
charges of reductionism and crimes against good sense, scientific procedure, the rules of 
 
796 Ibid. 
797 Gay, Peter. ‘Psychoanalysis in History,’ in: Psychology and Historical Interpretation, ed. William McKinley 
Runyan, Oxford, 1988. 113.  
798 Gay, Peter. Freud for Historians. New York: Oxford University Press, 1985. 4. 
799 Ibid. 11. 
800 Gay, Peter. ‘Reply to comments on Peter Gay’s Freud for Historians’, The Psychohistory Review, Volume 
15, No. 1, 1986. 98. 
801 Gay, Peter. The Bourgeois Experience: Victoria to Freud. New York: Oxford University Press, 1984. 464. 
802 Gay, Peter. Freud for Historians. New York: Oxford University Press, 1985. xi. 
803 Ibid. 6. 
804 Ibid. 210. 

evidence, and the English language – is not wholly unfounded.’805 Psychohistory was not only 
under attack from outside, Gay held, there was as much danger coming from within its own 
ranks.  
Historians interested generally in the use of psychology in history were quite amenable 
towards Gay’s book. Robert G. L. Waite called Freud for Historians a ‘graceful, wise, and 
witty essay’, although he felt that the author confined himself by endorsing only Freudian 
analysis, and ignoring developments in psychoanalysis since Freud.806 Unsurprisingly, David 
Stannard was not impressed. In a lengthy review, he wrote: ‘the book that would examine and 
answer, “one by one,” the major objections to psychohistory had not yet come close to having 
been written. Gay seems to have made only a halfhearted try, it should not be surprising if 
unshrunk historians begin to conclude that such a book has not been written because it cannot 
be written.’807 The psychohistorians, not even the one’s associated with the academically 
oriented GUPH, did not welcome Gay’s assistance in their battle for psychohistory. As they 
had done for David Stannard’s book, The Psychohistory Review’s editors published a 
symposium on the work.808 Responses to Freud for Historians were furious. Richard 
Schoenwald felt that psychoanalysis was ‘touted as a subservient helper for the historian who 
is intent, as ever, on carrying out the commandments into which he was inducted in graduate 
school: get facts, data, documents, and write up the stuff readably. Use a little psychology or 
literary criticism or sociology or anthropology to supply piquant perspective, but above all, get 
those facts!’809 Eli Zaretsky claimed that Gay had done Freud a grave injustice by reducing 
him to a theorist of personality, unconcerned with sociology and groups. He accused Gay of 
being a conformist who tried to make Freud palatable ‘bit by bit’.810  
The psychohistorians felt that the achievements of their field had been overlooked – if 
not played down – in Gay’s book. Gay defended himself by saying that he had put the book 
together as ‘a coherent defence of the psychohistorical enterprise.’811 He explained: ‘The point 
of my book, then, which I deliberately kept fairly short, was to take up arms against prominent 
historians who have neglected or ignorantly misused Freud, and to demonstrate that they are 
depriving themselves of an invaluable intellectual instrument.’812 At any rate, he did not seem 
too bothered by the psychohistorians’ qualms with his text. ‘I have had well over a hundred 
reviews, many of them prominent and most of them favorable,’ he wrote.813 
 
An Eccentric Legacy 
 
The publication of Peter Gay’s Freud for Historians signalled a turning point in the history of 
psychohistory. In essence, Gay presented an alternative model for psychoanalytic history, not 
weighed down with the responsibilities of constructing or maintaining a movement. He 
distanced himself from the more speculative elements in psychohistory and just stopped short 
of giving up the term altogether. Although he savoured many of the ideas propagated by the 
psychohistorians, his book was a ‘return to Freud’ – a plea for a more modest application of 
 
805 Strozier, Charles B., and Daniel Offer. The Leader: Psychohistorical Essays. New York: Plenum Press, 
1985. ix. 
806 Waite, Robert G.L. Review Freud for Historians, The American Historical Review, Volume 92, No. 3, June 
1987. 633-634. 
807 Stannard, David. ‘Review of Freud for Historians’. Reviews in American History, Volume 14, No. 2, June, 
1986. 298-308. 
808 ‘Comments on Peter Gay’s Freud for Historians’. The Psychohistory Review, Volume 15, No. 1, Fall, 1986. 
809 Ibid. 88. 
810 Ibid. 91. 
811 Ibid. 96. 
812 Ibid. 
813 Ibid. 

psychoanalytic ideas and a humbler use of psychoanalytic models of the mind in history-
writing. Gay was undoubtedly an heir to the psychohistorical movement, but his call to arms 
was far removed from William Langer’s dreams of a cosmic shift in the perspective of the 
historian. Those days had passed.  
With psychoanalysis under fire, psychohistory had to change its tune and its aspirations. 
As Lynn Hunt has argued in her unpublished lecture, Langer’s ‘Next Assignment’ had not 
come to fruition.814 T.G. Ashplant, in an essay on psychohistory’s reception in Great Britain 
published in The History Workshop Journal, referred to psychohistory as a ‘not-wholly 
successful attempt to establish a new sub-sector within the discipline of history.’815 This 
sentiment was shared by many of the earliest psychohistorians. By the 1980s, psychohistory 
had lost nearly all of its impetus as a movement. It had not produced a coherent body of 
knowledge that could be succesfully taught to a younger generation of scholars; parts of the 
field were deemed too speculative and reductionist to be taken seriously academically; its 
loosely defined foundations were no longer an advantage now that one of its parent disciplines 
was under attack from various quarters; psychohistory had not developed a secure enough 
foundation of literature to withstand the critiques leveled at psychoanalysis; it could not make 
up its mind if it was art or science; and, importantly, practitioners could not make a living out 
of work done in the field. 
Publication of The Psychohistory Review was terminated in 1999. Although he was by 
this time no longer its main editor, Strozier gave as a reason that he was simply ‘tired of it,’ 
because ‘psychohistory was never going to be recognized within the discipline of history as 
more than ephemeral with very few people having appointments in the field.’816 A year before, 
in June 1998, a new British journal appeared: Psychoanalysis and History, edited by 
psychoanalyst Andrea Sabbadini. In their first issue, Sabbadini stated: ‘While we are clear that 
the name of our journal is neither The Psychoanalysis of History nor The History of 
Psychoanalysis we hope to encompass both projects.’817 In an interview, Sabbadini declared 
that he was not hostile to psychohistory, ‘but I would feel uncomfortable about myself and our 
journal being described as having a psychohistorical approach. I think we don't.’818 When asked 
if he considered psychohistory a natural extension of applied psychoanalysis, he answered:  
 
An extension (how ‘natural’ I don't know!) of applied psychoanalysis, but one about 
which I have reservations, on the grounds of what too often seem to be rather wild 
speculations about past individuals and events -- especially when mechanisms about 
interpersonal relationships are applied to macrosocial/political phenomena of the kind: 
the Koreans suffer from an inferiority complex in relation to the Japanese and react to 
the ensuing castration complex by projecting their envy. Or when the only effort to 
understand, say, the Nazi period boils down to deciding whether Hitler was a 
psychopath or a paranoid schizophrenic, given what we know of his early relationships 
with his parents. Of course, these are caricatures, but based on papers submitted to our 
journal by authors calling themselves psychohistorians.819  
 
 
 
814 Hunt, Lynn. ‘Psychoanalysis and History’, Presented at the Radcliffe Institute, Harvard University, February 
22, Cambridge, MA. 
815 Ashplant, T. G. ‘Psychoanalysis in Historical Writing’. History Workshop Journal, Volume 26, No. 1, 1988. 
102. 
816 Personal communication with Strozier, April 22, 2016. 
817 Sabbadini, Andrea. Editorial. Psychoanalysis and History, Volume 1, No. 1, 1998. 1.  
818 Schneidmann, J. Lee. ‘Psychoanalysis and History: Andrea Sabbadini’, in: Clio’s Psyche, March 2001. 212. 
819 Ibid. 

It is telling for a journal that listed as one of its main goals to publish works in the area of ‘the 
psychoanalysis of history’ that it looked so unfavourably upon psychohistory. The term 
psychohistory had been contaminated.  
In an article published in 2013, Mazlish looked back on the history of the movement 
and ahead to its possible future. He argued that although psychohistory as a movement had 
failed many of its ideas had permeated historiography and the cultural field at large. He wrote: 
‘It is important to note that psychohistorical understanding has entered the general awareness, 
even though psychohistory itself has fallen into somewhat extended disrepute. In this sense, 
the field has been a success.’820 Paul Elovitz expressed a similar idea when he stated in a lecture 
in 2015 that nowadays, ‘all sorts of historians, when they get to particular problems, will go 
ahead and do psychohistory, but just not call it that.’821 Psychohistorian David Beisel made the 
claim concrete at the 2015 International Psychohistorical Association convention:  
 
Sir Ian Kershaw is a good example. His two-volume Hitler biography has been widely 
praised. It is superb history. It is also openly anti-psychological. Early on, Kershaw 
denounces psychohistory as too speculative. […] No sooner does Kershaw inform the 
readers that he wouldn’t be doing any psychology, when he says of Hitler: “It takes 
little to imagine that his later patronizing contempt for the submissiveness of women, 
the thirst for dominance and the imagery of the leader as a stern, authoritarian father-
figure, the inability to form deep personal relationships, his corresponding cold 
brutality toward humankind and, not least, the capacity for hatred so profound that it 
must have reflected an immeasurable undercurrent of self-hatred, concealed in the 
extreme narcissism that was its counterpart, must surely have had its roots in the 
subliminal influences in the young Adolf’s family circumstances.” Sounds like 
psychohistory to me.’822  
 
As Mazlish has argued, some of the ideas associated with psychohistory have been internalised 
in historiography and biography, and this can count as something of a triumph, but it remains 
unclear how far these assumptions are the legacy of the psychohistorical field or movement as 
such, or simply a by-product of the psychoanalytic ‘climate of opinion’ still dominating 
academia and common vernacular. ‘No biographer can fail to hint at the unconscious motives 
of his or her protagonist and hope to escape criticism (which, nevertheless, hardly stops many 
biographers from writing superficial accounts, oblivious to the depths of their subjects),’ 
Mazlish wrote. 823 ‘Whatever battles are lost in the dismissive treatment of individual works of 
psychohistory or psychobiography (and the two are often treated as if they were the same), the 
war itself has been largely if silently won.’824 Psychoanalysis and psychohistory, he argued, 
had become vital, if unacknowledged contexts for present-day historiography. ‘They have done 
what the editors of the French Encyclopedia did in the eighteenth century: changed the way of 
thinking. […] Consciously or otherwise, we live in a psychoanalytic cum psychohistorical 
world.’825 
Another argument for psychohistory’s failure, Mazlish held, was that the works it 
produced are eccentric – that is, they fall ‘outside the circle of common scholarship and 
 
820 Mazlish, Bruce. ‘The Past and Future of Psychohistory’, in: The Annual of Psychoanalysis, V. 31, 
Psychoanalysis and History. 267 
821 ‘IPA 2015 Panel on Psychohistory at the Crossroads - part 1’ Youtube video, Published 21 July 2015, 
01:04:28, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aa_tlwoLRFo 
822 Ibid. 
823 Mazlish, Bruce. ‘The Past and Future of Psychohistory’, in: The Annual of Psychoanalysis, V. 31, 
Psychoanalysis and History. 268. 
824 Ibid. 
825 Ibid. 265. 

between the proverbial two stools.’ 826 Those two stools, in the case of psychohistory, were its 
two parent disciplines. And this brought with it another problem: the legitimacy of 
psychohistory, in so far as it identifies with psychoanalysis, stands or falls with the legitimacy 
of psychoanalysis. As we saw, when psychoanalysis went out of fashion, psychohistory 
suffered. And although a non-psychoanalytic psychohistory had been presented as a possibility 
from the beginning of the movement, no concrete steps in that direction had been taken, and 
no viable non-psychoanalytic psychohistory had been developed.827 
An illustration of the psychohistorians’ notion that ideas associated with psychohistory 
were adopted in non-psychohistorical academic historiography can be found in the work of 
postmodern historian Dominick LaCapra. LaCapra is Professor Emeritus of Humanistic 
Studies at Cornell University. Although he was heavily influenced by psychoanalytic thought, 
and even engaged directly with some of the psychohistorians’ ideas, LaCapra distanced himself 
from his psychohistorical heritage and rejected the term psychohistory as early as 1987, two 
years after Peter Gay published Freud for Historians. LaCapra was one of the academics who 
was more strongly influenced by Lacanian psychoanalysis than by American interpretations of 
Freud. He has argued for a thoroughgoing investigation of the psychological processes that are 
elicited in historical research. Historians, he has held, have tendencies towards identification, 
negative identification, even denial. In an interview, LaCapra explained:  
 
So for me, transference means a form of repetition, both in relations among researchers 
(for example, graduate students/instructors), and perhaps more interestingly – because 
less developed – in the relationship to the object of study. When you study something, 
at some level you always have a tendency to repeat the problems you were studying. 
This is related to your implication in the research. Something like transference (or one’s 
implication in the material and tendency to repeat) always recurs.828 
 
Although his work was concerned with exactly the same problems as the early Wellfleetians – 
the consequences of the idea of transference towards one’s historical object of study and the 
ways in which there could be a mutually beneficial exchange between historical and 
psychoanalytic narratives – and he largely gave the same answers, it was no longer 
intellectually remunerative to work under the label ‘psychohistory’. In an article published in 
1987, LaCapra wrote: 
 
“Psychohistory” has won its way as a subdiscipline in the historical profession, 
although it is still able to raise the hackles of some traditionalists. Yet the typical 
procedure of psychohistorians has been to make more or less selective use of 
psychoanalytic concepts as they proceed to put individuals or groups from the past ‘on 
the couch’. […] History as applied psychoanalysis does not confront the broader 
problem of how psychoanalysis can lead to a basic reconceptualization of historical 
self-understanding and practice or even to a mutual rearticulation of both history and 
psychoanalysis as implicated in a reciprocally provocative exchange.829 
 
 
826 Ibid. 265. 
827 For an example, see: Berkhofer, Robert. A behavioral Approach to Historical Analysis. New York: Free 
Press, 1971. 
828 LaCapra, Dominick. ‘An Interview with Professor Dominick LaCapra’. Yad Vashem, Shoah Resource 
Center. Yadvashem.org 
829 LaCapra, Dominick. ‘History and Psychoanalysis’, in: Critical Inquiry, Volume 13, No. 2, The Trial(s) of 
Psychoanalysis, 1987. 224. 

In more recent years, psychohistory has been forced to go underground. Its various elements 
appear in splintered forms in scattered places. For example, the tradition of pathologising 
political leaders has been carried on successfully in popular culture. Justin A. Frank, a Kleinian 
psychoanalyst based in Washington, D.C., gained notoriety for publishing Bush on the Couch 
(2004), and more recently, Obama on the Couch (2011). His work was featured prominently 
in Rolling Stone magazine.830 Fidel Castro, in his annual speech in 2004, quoted at length from 
the former work.831 More serious questions about the psychological origins of violence and 
warfare have been examined by Robert J. Lifton and Charles Strozier and their study groups at 
The Center for Violence and Human Survival at CUNY (now called the Center on Terrorism). 
The use of biography in psychology and its emphasis on the particularity of life-histories has 
been advocated by psychobiographers such as William McKinley Runyan, Alan C. Elms and, 
more recently, William Todd Schultz. DeMause’s The Journal of Psychohistory is still being 
published intermittently, now by psychoanalyst David Lotto. Recent editions have featured 
articles such as Incoherence in the Iraq War Narrative and the Concept of Collective 
Attachment, A Psychological Profile of Osama Bin Laden, and The Dream-Life of Hilary 
Clinton.832 DeMause’s IPA still holds annual meetings. Clio’s Psyche, a journal published by 
historian Paul Elovitz, and The Psychohistory Forum brings together what is left of the 
psychohistorical movement. In an interview, Elovitz confided that ‘on good days I am 
pessimistic about the field.’833 
Like the ‘grand narratives’ that psychohistory was born out of and responded to, it lives 
on in the postmodern era as an optional ontology – a ‘lens’ as Mazlish would put it; a niche, 
stripped of its authority and reduced to a voice amongst voices in the desert of historiography. 
Like psychoanalysis, psychohistory is still pursued and propagated by a small group of fervent 
disciples, but as a static endeavour – with little sense of progress to impel theoretical 
innovation. Psychohistory as a signifier now leads a spectral, undead existence. However, 
psychoanalysis still exists, and so does history. Both have their dynamic, unstable and 
controversial elements. As we have seen, the disciplines are not natural allies, nor are they 
inherently competitors. If psychoanalysis is evolving and history is evolving, then their 
relationship will also inevitably evolve. As for psychohistory – its future depends on its 
capacity to reimagine itself, as Mac Runyan would have it.  
At a panel entitled ‘Psychohistory at the Crossroads’, held at the 2015 International 
Psychohistorical Association convention, psychohistorian David Beisel complained that: ‘The 
self-appointed guardians of history’s sacred precincts are after nothing less than 
psychohistory’s complete annihilation […]’834 It remains to be seen if adopting such a 
persecutory fantasy will be the most productive way forward for the movement. But the 
evidence does not contradict Beisel’s pessimistic view. He continued: ‘One subfield is not 
recognized by the AHA [American Historical Association] – psychohistory. After spending 
many years on the list, it was dropped from the AHA’s taxonomy several years ago. I lobbied 
the AHA president for its restoration, citing thousands of books, flourishing journals, scholarly 
organizations and large college class enrolments. She insured me psychohistory would be 
reinstated; four years later it has not happened, and it is not likely to happen.’835 Such motivated 
 
830 Frank, Justin A. ‘Obama on the Couch’. Rolling Stone, November 11, 2011. 
831 Arrington, Vanessa. ‘Castro-Bush feud turns personal’. The Miami Herald, July 28, 2004. 
832 Ross, Colin A. ‘A Psychological Profile of Osama Bin Laden’. The Journal of Psychohistory, Volume 42, 
No. 4, Spring 2015.; Sochos, Antigonos. ‘Incoherence in the Iraq War Narrative and the Concept of Collective 
Attachment’. The Journal of Psychohistory, Volume 42, No. 4, Spring 2015.’ Dervin, Dan. ‘The Dream-Life of 
Hilary Clinton’. The Journal of Psychohistory, Volume 36, No. 2, Fall 2008.  
833 Personal communication with Elovitz, August 11, 2016. 
834 ‘IPA 2015 Panel on Psychohistory at the Crossroads - part 1’, Youtube video, Published 21 July 2015, 
01:04:28, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aa_tlwoLRFo 
835 Ibid. 

forgetting on the side of one its parent disciplines does not bode well for the signifier 
psychohistory. As for its signified, perhaps the last of psychohistory’s practitioners can find 
solace in Freud, who wrote: ‘we have been inclined to take the […] view that in mental life 
nothing which has once been formed can perish – that everything is somehow preserved and 
that in suitable circumstances it can once more be brought to light.’836 
 
 
836 Freud, Sigmund. Civilization and Its Discontents. New York: W.W. Norton, 1962. 

Chapter 7 
Conclusion 
 
On August 15th 2016, The New York Times asked: ‘Is it Fair to Analyze Donald Trump from 
Afar?’837 In the article, the author noted that ‘Psychiatrists and psychologists have publicly 
flouted the Goldwater Rule, tagging Mr. Trump with an assortment of personality problems, 
including grandiosity, a lack of empathy, and “malignant narcissism”.’838 Vanity Fair asked: 
‘Could Donald Trump pass a sanity test?’839 The Atlantic published an exposé on ‘The mind 
of Donald Trump’.840 The Huffington Post published a blog on ‘The Psychopathology of 
Donald Trump’.841 And Jill Stein, a Harvard-trained physician and the Candidate for the Green 
Party, declared that the Republican Candidate had, what she called, a ‘memory problem’.842 
None of the authors mentioned psychohistory in their analyses – and their analyses of the 
analyses – of the presidential candidate. And yet their preoccupations, the questions that they 
asked and raised, were, in a sense, psychohistorical. What the APA Taskforce objected to in 
their report The Psychiatrist as Psychohistorian in 1976 – the application of psychological 
labels to living political figures – is still being done, forty years later. One cannot fully 
appreciate the preoccupation with the psychological analysis of a presidential candidate 
without an understanding of the history of psychohistory.  
The history of psychohistory is the history of a failed movement. It is the story of how 
two discourses were soldered together in a way that produced interesting individual works, but 
failed to become institutionalised and widely recognised as a (semi-)independent discipline. 
Erik Erikson was right to emphasise the awkwardness of the union between psychoanalysis 
and history by his hyphenation of the term ‘psycho-history’. And as his follower Robert Lifton 
wrote: ‘Generally speaking, I would say that not only do the two traditions often work at cross-
purposes; worse, each has something of an impulse to eliminate the other.’843 I would add that, 
arguably, the works that were most successful and had sustained public reception were those 
where the author clearly located his or her work in one of psychohistory’s two parent 
disciplines. For example, Erikson’s work is powerful and inspiring because it remains 
psychoanalytic literature, enriched by the insights of history. Similarly, Peter Gay’s work has 
a broad appeal because it is decidedly historical, but uses insights from psychoanalysis to 
support its arguments. Generally speaking, applied psychoanalysis aims to show that people of 
all ages had similar psychological constitutions; historical writing tends to emphasise the 
differences between the experience of people in different times and places. A marriage of the 
two is lopsided at best; unconvincing and contrived at worst.   
I was surprised to find that the history of psychohistory was, and still is, very 
emotionally laden. It happened more than once that someone I interviewed cried when he spoke 
about the project. For its earliest practitioners, the marriage of psychoanalysis and history 
obviously held a lot of promise. Erikson’s work, well-written and clever, provided a blueprint 
for attempts to bring together the two disciplines. When William Langer, an authoritative voice 
 
837 Carey, Benedict. ‘The psychiatric question: Is it fair to analyze Trump from afar?’, The New York Times. 
August 15, 2016.  
838 Ibid. 
839 Alford, Henry. ‘Is Donald Trump Actually a Narcissist? Therapists Weigh in!’, Vanity Fair. November 11, 
2015.  
840 McAdams, Dan P. ‘The Mind of Donald Trump’, The Atlantic. June 2016. 
841 Blum, Bill. ‘The Psychopathology of Donald Trump’. The Huffington Post, August 3, 2016. 
(http://www.huffingtonpost.com/bill-blum/the-psychopathology-of-do_1_b_11286500.html) 
842 Thrush, Glenn. ‘Jill Stein: Trump may have “memory problem”’. Politico, September 19, 2016. 
(http://www.politico.com/story/2016/09/jill-stein-trump-may-have-memory-problem-228346) 
843 Lifton, Robert J., and Eric Olsen. Explorations in Psychohistory: The Wellfleet Papers, New York: Simon 
and Schuster, 1974. 23. 

among professional historians, sanctioned the use of psychoanalysis within history, this gave 
historians the green light for the construction of a movement. At its zenith, psychohistory 
presented itself as an important emancipatory project which defended the standpoints of a 
variety of subaltern groups, while it was religiously propagated and debated by its adherents. 
Psychohistory’s opponents responded to the movement with an intensity that invited the use of 
some form of psychological terminology. Today, the remnants of the movement are being 
watched over hawkishly by a host of intellectuals who consider themselves heirs to an 
important and unjustly embattled tradition. For people involved in the project there was a lot 
at stake; the failure to find resonance inside and outside academia was a genuine 
disappointment. For people looking from the outside in, psychohistory appeared like a ‘fad’ or 
a ‘hype’ – a freakish extension of the infiltration of culture at large by psychoanalytic 
terminology and practice.  
But psychohistory was more than just a passing fad. It raised serious and important 
questions about the disciplines it was born out of. Within psychoanalysis, it questioned the 
universality of the discipline’s central concepts by historicising them. It showed how an 
individual derives a sense of self from the symbols that are handed to him in and through 
history. Within historiography, psychohistory emphasised the importance of the subjective 
experience of historical actors as it showed that psychical facts could have actual implications. 
It also problematised the objectivity of the historian, by showing that he or she too brings his 
or her subjective experience to the writing of history. It showed that in any explanation of the 
behaviour of persons in the past there are ‘implicit psychologies’ at work, and it forced the 
historian to become aware of these implicit psychological frameworks. Psychohistory appears 
to have been transgressive for both psychoanalysts and historians, because it confronted them 
with the limitations and taboos of their own practices. Although it is questionable to what extent 
the issues that psychohistory raised are recognised by modern-day historians and 
psychoanalysts as legitimate issues, a history of psychohistory provides a unique window onto 
these two disciplines and it seeks to bring these issues back to attention. On the one hand, it 
forms a contribution to the history of psychoanalysis; on the other hand, it is a contribution to 
the history of writing history and biography. And in an age of interdisciplinarity, it highlights 
the pitfalls and difficulties facing hybrid combinations of disciplines. Any historian, biographer 
or psychoanalyst who takes his craft seriously should at least have reflected upon them. The 
legacy of psychohistory is a plea for introspection, and provides a series of questions to guide 
it, if not a promise that those questions might, some day, be answered. 
 
 

Appendix 1. 
 
Richard Schoenwald’s Teaching Syllabus 
GUPH Newsletter, March-May 1972 
 
Section 1: 
Reading: Freud, A General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis, pp. 19-142. 
 
Assignment: Select an entry not longer than 1,000 words in either the Dictionary of American 
Biography or Dictionary of National Biography and analyze it psychoanalytically. 
 
Section 2: 
Reading: Freud, General Introduction, pp. 143-471. 
 
 
 
Assignment: Analyze an entry about a woman in the DAB or DWB. 
 
Section 3: 
Reading: Freud, New Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis, pp. 5-182. 
 
Assignment: Take something written by an historian about the status of women as a group and 
analyze it using Freudian theory.  
 
Section 4: 
Reading: Otto Rank, The Myth of the Birth of the Hero, pp. 65-96, 184-210. 
Carl 
Jung, 
Man 
and 
His 
Symbols, 
pp. 
3-94, 
97-156, 
325-374. 
 
Assignment: Select something written about a woman in a contemporary newspaper or 
magazine 
and 
then 
analyze 
the 
material 
using 
both 
Rank 
and 
Jung. 
 
Section 5: 
Reading: Heinz Hartmann, et. al., Papers on Psychoanalytic Psychology, pp. 7-
116, and 144-181. 
 
Assignment: Read a biography about a woman who died before 1900; write an analytic essay 
about the same woman. 
 
Section 6: 
Reading: Erikson, ‘Womanhood and Inner Space,’ and ‘Reflections on the 
Dissent 
of 
Contemporary 
Youth,’ 
Insight 
and 
Responsibility. 
 
Assignment: In the final paper students were asked to select a topic which would lend itself to 
psychological explication: women, child-rearing patterns, biography, etc. They were asked to 
use a variety of analytic approaches, demonstrating what they had understood from the prior 
readings. In addition, they were asked to avoid an intra-psychic analysis – more emphasis 
needed to be placed on showing how human beings operate within a social setting, how they 
learn about the world in which they live, and how they adapt to it.  
 
 
 

Bibliography 
 
 
Books 
 
 
Asimov, Isaac. Foundation (1951). London: HarperCollins, 1995. 
 
Banks, Louie M. The Office of Strategic Services Psychological Selection Program, PhD-
thesis, Fort Leavenworth, Kansas, 1995. 
 
Barzun, Jacques. Clio and the Doctors: Psycho-history, Quanto-history, & History. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1974. 
 
Benjamin, Andrew E. Walter Benjamin and History. London: Continuum, 2005. 
 
Berkhofer, Robert. A behavioral Approach to Historical Analysis. New York: Free Press, 1971. 
 
Binion, Rudolph. Soundings: Psychohistorical and Psycholiterary. New York: Psychohistory 
Press. 
 
Borch-Jacobsen, Mikkel, and Sonu Shamdasani. The Freud Files: An Inquiry into the History 
of Psychoanalysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012. 
 
Brabant, Eva, Ernst Falzeder, and Patrizia Giamperi-Deutsch (eds.). The Correspondence of 
Sigmund Freud and Sándor Ferenczi Volume 1, 1908-1914. 285-287. 
 
Breuer, Josef, Sigmund Freud, James Strachey, Anna Freud, Alix Strachey, and Alan 
Tyson. The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud: Studies 
on Hysteria. Volume 2, 1893-1895. London: Vintage, 2001. 
 
Brown, Norman O. Life Against Death: The Psychoanalytical Meaning of History (1959). 
London: Sphere Books, 1960. 
 
Buchler, Justus. Charles Peirce's Empiricism, Volume 1. New York: Octagon Books, 1966. 
 
Burguière, André. The Annales School: An Intellectual History. Ithaca: Cornell University 
Press, 2009. 
 
Burnham, John C. After Freud Left: A Century of Psychoanalysis in America. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2012. 
 
Bronowski, Jacob, and Bruce Mazlish. The Western Intellectual Tradition, from Leonardo to 
Hegel. New York: Harper, 1960. 
 
Carlyle, Thomas. Heroes and Hero-worship (1840). London: Collins, 1900. 
 
Carr, Edward H. What Is History? The George Macaulay Trevelyan Lectures Delivered in the 
University of Cambridge January-March 1961. London: Macmillan, 1977. 
 

Clinch, Nancy Gager. The Kennedy Neurosis. New York: Grosset and Dunlap, 1973. 
 
Coles, Robert. Erik H. Erikson; the Growth of His Work. Boston: Little, Brown, 1970. 
 
Corrington, Robert. Wilhelm Reich: Psychoanalyst and Radical Naturalist. New York: Farrar, 
Straus and Giroux. 
 
Cusset, François. French Theory: How Foucault, Derrida, Deleuze, & Co. Transformed the 
Intellectual Life of the United States. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2008. 
 
Daum, Andreas W., and Hartmut Lehmann, James J. Sheehan. The Second Generation: 
Émigrés from Nazi Germany as Historians. New York: Berghahn Books, 2016. 
 
DeMause, Lloyd., ed. The History of Childhood (1974). Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield 
Publishers, Inc., 2006. 
 
Du Bois, William E.B. The Souls of Black Folk, New York, Dover, 1994. 
 
Dufresne, Todd. Freud Under Analysis: History, Theory, Practice: Essays in Honor of Paul 
Roazen, London: Jaron Aronson Inc., 1997. 
 
Eghigian, Greg. From Madness to Mental Health: Psychiatric Disorder and Its Treatment in 
Western Civilization. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2010. 369. 
 
Elms, Alan C. Uncovering Lives: The Uneasy Alliance of Biography and Psychology. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1994. 
 
Erikson, Erik H. Childhood and Society. 2d ed. New York: W.W. Norton, 1964. 
 
Erikson, Erik H. Gandhi's Truth: On the Origins of Militant Nonviolence. New York: Norton, 
1969. 
 
Erikson, Erik H. Identity, Youth, and Crisis. New York: W.W. Norton, 1968. 
 
Erikson, Erik H. Insight and Responsibility. New York: W.W. Norton, 1964. 
 
Erikson, Erik H. Young Man Luther: A Study in Psychoanalysis and History. New York: W.W. 
Norton, 1962. 
 
Erikson, Erik H., and Stephen Schlein. A Way of Looking at Things: Selected Papers from 1930 
to 1980. New York: W.W. Norton, 1987. 
 
Erwin, Edward. The Freud Encyclopedia: Theory, Therapy, and Culture. New York: 
Routledge, 2002. 
 
Falzeder, Ernst (ed.). The Complete Correspondence of Sigmund Freud and Karl Abraham 
1907-1925. London: Karnac. 
 
Freud, Sigmund. Civilization and Its Discontents. New York: W.W. Norton, 1962. 
 

Freud, Sigmund, and James Strachey. An Autobiographical Study: Inhibitions, Symptoms and 
Anxiety; the Question of Lay Analysis and Other Works ; (1925-1926). London: Vintage, 2001. 
 
Freud, Sigmund, James Strachey, Anna Freud, Alix Strachey, and Alan Tyson. The Standard 
Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud: Early Psycho-analytic 
Publications. Vol. 11, 1910, Five Lectures on Psycho-analysis, Leonardo Da Vinci and Other 
Works. London: Vintage, 2001. 
 
Freud, Sigmund and James Strachey. The Future prospects for psycho-analytic therapy (1910). 
London, Vintage, 2001. 139-151. 
 
Freud, Sigmund and James Strachey. Fragments of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria (1905). 
London, Vintage, 2001. 
 
Freud, Sigmund, and William C. Bullitt. Thomas Woodrow Wilson, Twenty-eighth President 
of the United States; a Psychological Study. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1967. 
 
Friedman, Lawrence J. Identity’s Architect: A Biography of Erik H. Erikson. London: Free 
Association Books, 1999. 
 
Fromm, Erich. Marx's Concept of Man. New York: F. Ungar, 1966. 
 
Fromm, Erich. The Dogma of Christ, and Other Essays on Religion, Psychology, and Culture. 
Greenwich, CT: Fawcet, 1973. 
 
Gay, Peter. Freud for Historians. Oxford: Oxford University Press., 1985. 
 
Gay, Peter. The Bourgeois Experience: Victoria to Freud. New York: Oxford University Press, 
1984. 
 
Geertz, Clifford. After the Fact: Two Countries, Four Decades, One Anthropologist. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1995. 
 
Green, Anna, and Kathleen Troup. The Houses of History: A Critical Reader in Twentieth-
century History and Theory. New York: New York University Press, 1999. 
 
Hale, Nathan G. The Rise and Crisis of Psychoanalysis in the United States: Freud and the 
Americans, 1917-1985. New York: Oxford University Press, 1995. 
 
Heath, Jim F. Decade of Disillusionment: The Kennedy-Johnson Years. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1976. 
 
Hofling, Charles K. The Psychiatrist as Psychohistorian: Report of the Task Force on 
Psychohistory of the American Psychiatric Association. Washington: APA, 1976. 
 
Iggers, Georg G. Historiography in the Twentieth Century: From Scientific Objectivity to the 
Postmodern Challenge. Hanover, NH: Wesleyan University Press, Published by University 
Press of New England, 1997. 
 
Kovel, Joel. White Racism, a Psychohistory. New York: Pantheon Books, 1970. 

 
Langer, Walter C. The Mind of Adolf Hitler; the Secret Wartime Report. New York: Basic 
Books, 1972. 
 
Lifton, Robert J. Thought Reform and the Psychology of Totalism; a Study of "brainwashing" 
in China. New York: Norton, 1961. 
 
Lifton, Robert J. Witness to an Extreme Century: A Memoir. New York: Free Press, 2011. 
 
Lifton, Robert J., and Eric Olson. Explorations in Psychohistory; the Wellfleet Papers. New 
York: Simon and Schuster, 1975. 
 
Loewenberg, Peter. Decoding the Past, The Psychohistorical Approach. New Brunswick: 
Transaction Publishers, 2002. 
 
Loewenberg, Peter. Fantasy and Reality in History. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995. 
 
Marcuse, Herbert. Eros and Civilization (1955). London: Sphere Books, 1969. 
 
Makari, George. Revolution in Mind: The Creation of Psychoanalysis. New York: 
HarperCollins, 2008. 
 
Mazlish, Bruce. In Search of Nixon: A Psychohistorical Inquiry (1972). Baltimore, Maryland: 
Penguin Books, 1974. 
 
Mazlish, Bruce. James and John Stuart Mill: Father and Son in the Nineteenth Century. New 
York: Basic Books, 1975. 
 
Mazlish, Bruce. Kissinger: The European Mind in American Policy. New York: Basic Books, 
1976. 
 
Mazlish, Bruce. Psychoanalysis and History. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1963. 
 
Mazlish, Bruce. The Meaning of Karl Marx. New York: Oxford University Press, 1984. 
 
Mazlish, Bruce. The Riddle of History; the Great Speculators from Vico to Freud. New York: 
Harper & Row, 1966. 
 
Murray, Henry. Analysis of the Personality of Adolph Hitler. Accessed through: archive.org. 
 
Novick, Peter. That Noble Dream: The "objectivity Question" and the American Historical 
Profession. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988. 
 
Passerini, Luisa. Europe in Love, Love in Europe: Imagination and Politics between the Wars. 
Washington Square, NY: New York University Press, 1999. 
 
Peirce, Charles Sanders, Charles Hartshorne, and Paul Weiss. Collected Papers of Charles 
Sanders Peirce, Volume V. Cambridge (Mass.): Belknap of Harvard UP, 1934.  
 

Pick, Daniel. The Pursuit of the Nazi Mind: Hitler, Hess, and the Analysts. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2012. 
 
Pomper, Philip. The Structure of Mind in History: Five Major Figures in Psychohistory. New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1985. 
 
Reich, Wilhelm. The Mass Psychology of Fascism. New York: Orgone Institute Press, 1946. 
 
Reinholds, Robert. ‘Historians Find Fresh Answers with Tools of Social Science; Historians 
Finding Fresh Answers with New Tools’. The New York Times, July 3. 1971. 
 
Rieff, Philip. Freud, the Mind of the Moralist. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1979. 
 
Runyan, William McKinley. Life Histories and Psychobiography: Explorations in Theory and 
Method. New York: Oxford University Press, 1982. 
 
Runyan, William McKinley. Psychology and Historical Interpretation. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1988. 
 
Salzani, Carlo. Constellations of Reading: Walter Benjamin in Figures of Actuality. Oxford: 
Peter Lang, 2009. 
 
Samuel, Lawrence R. Shrink: A Cultural History of Psychoanalysis in America. Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press, 2013. 
 
Sontag, Susan. Against Interpretation: And Other Essays. New York: Dell Publishers, 1966. 
 
Stannard, David. Shrinking History: On Freud and the Failure of Psychohistory. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1980. 
 
Strozier, Charles B., and Daniel Offer. The Leader: Psychohistorical Essays. New York: 
Plenum Press, 1985. 
 
Thoreau, Henry David, Horace Elisha Scudder, H. G. O. Blake, Ralph Waldo Emerson, and F. 
B. Sanborn. The Writings of Henry David Thoreau. Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin 
and, 1894. 
 
Turner, Bryan S. The New Blackwell Companion to Social Theory. West Sussex: Wiley 
Blackwell, 2009. 
 
Vergin, Fedor. Das Unbewusste Europa. Psychoanalyse der europäischen Politik. Wien-
Leipzig: J. Hess&Co. Verlag, 1931. 
 
Vergin, Fedor, tr. Raglan Somerset. Subconscious Europe. London: J. Cape, 1932. 
 
Wolman, Benjamin B. The Psychoanalytic Interpretation of History. New York: Basic Books, 
1971. 
 
Zaretsky, Eli. Political Freud: A History. New York: Columbia University Press, 2015 
 

 
Articles 
 
 
Abraham, Karl. ‘Amenhotep IV (Ikhnaton)’. Psychoanalytic Quarterly, Volume IV, October 
1935. 
 
Africa, T.W. ‘Psychohistory, ancient history, and Freud: The descent into Avernus. Arethusa 
12, No. 1, 1979. 
 
Alford, Henry. ‘Is Donald Trump Actually a Narcissist? Therapists Weigh in!’, Vanity Fair. 
November 11, 2015. 
 
Alexander, Franz. ‘Psychoanalysis Comes of Age’. Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 7, 1938 
 
Anderson, Terry H. ‘Becoming Sane with Psychohistory’. The Historian, Volume 41, No. 1, 
November 1978.  
 
 
 
Arrington, Vanessa. ‘Castro-Bush feud turns personal’. The Miami Herald, July 28, 2004. 
 
Artzt, Donna. ‘Psychohistory and its Discontents’. Biography, Volume 1, No. 3, Summer 1978 
 
Ashplant, T. G. ‘Psychoanalysis in Historical Writing.’ History Workshop Journal. 26, No. 1, 
1988. 
 
Barnes, Harry Elmer. ‘Psychology and History: Some Reasons for Predicting Their More 
Active Cooperation in the Future’. The American Journal of Psychology, Volume 30, No. 4, 
1919. 
 
Bartolomei, Giangaetano. ‘Psicoanalisi et storiografia: Prospettive per un dibattito’. Nuova 
Rivista Storica 56, 1972. 
 
Batstein, William. ‘From the First Part of the Revelation of Moses the Son of Jehoshar.’ History 
of Childhood Quarterly: The Journal of Psychohistory, Volume 1, No. 3, Winter, 1974. 
 
Basch, Michael Franz. ‘Comment on David E. Stannard’s Shrinking History.’ The 
Psychohistory Review, Volume 9, No. 2, Winter 1980. 
 
Bentinck, Anna. ‘Karl Abraham, een vergeten analyticus’, Tijdschrift voor Psychoanalyse, 
No.1, 2004. 
 
Bizière, Jean Maurice. Psychohistory and Histoire des Mentalités. The Journal of 
Psychohistory, Volume 11, No. 1, 1983. 
 
Blum, Bill. ‘The Psychopathology of Donald Trump’. The Huffington Post, August 3, 2016. 
 
Broder, David. ‘The President’s Analysts’. New York Magazine, August 28, 1972. 54. 
 

Brown, Cyril. ‘New Popular Idol Rises in Bavaria: Hitler Credited With Extraordinary Powers 
of Swaying Crowds To His Will’. The New York Times, November 21, 1922. 
 
Campbell, Joseph F. ‘Psychohistory: Creating a Discipline’. The Journal of Psychohistory, 
Volume 37, No. 1, Summer 2003. 
 
Carey, Benedict. ‘The Psychiatric Question: Is It Fair to Analyze Donald Trump From Afar?’ 
The New York Times, 15 August, 2016. 
 
Cavallo, Dominick. ‘Review of Shrinking History’. Social Science History, Volume 5, No. 4, 
Autumn, 1981 
 
Coles, Robert. ‘Shrinking History Part 1’. New York Review of Books, February 22, 1973. 
 
Coles, Robert. ‘Understanding White Racists’. The New York Review of Books, December 30, 
1971. 
 
Crews, 
Frederick. 
‘Analysis 
Terminable.’ 
Commentary, 
July 
1, 
1980. 
https://www.commentarymagazine.com/articles/analysis-terminable/.  
 
Crews, Frederick C. ‘The American literary critic Frederick Crews explains why he has 
rejected Freud’, London Review of Books, Volume 2, No. 23, December 4, 1980. 
 
Crosby, Travis L. ‘Comment on David Stannard’s Shrinking History’. The Psychohistory 
Review, Volume 9, No. 2, Winter, 1980. 
 
DeMause, Lloyd. ‘The History of Childhood: The Basis for Psychohistory’. History of 
Childhood Quarterly: The Journal of Psychohistory, Summer 1973, Volume 1, No. 1. 
 
DeMause, Lloyd. ‘The Independence of Psychohistory’. History of Childhood Quarterly: The 
Journal of Psychohistory, Fall 1975, Volume 3, No. 2. 
 
Dervin, Dan. ‘The Dream-Life of Hilary Clinton’. The Journal of Psychohistory, Volume 36, 
No. 2, Fall 2008. 
 
Dietrich, Donald J. ‘Psychohistory: Clio on the Couch – or off?’ Historical Methods, Volume 
15, No. 2, Spring 1982. 
 
Edel, Leon. ‘The Art of Biography, Vol.1. Interviewed by Jeanne McCullough’. Paris Review, 
issue 98, winter 1985. 
 
Elovitz, Paul H., ‘A Conversation with Charles B. Strozier’, Clio’s Psyche, Volume 3, No. 4, 
November 22, 1996. 
 
Elovitz, Paul H. ‘Friedman’s Psychobiographical Comparison of Fromm and Erikson’. Clio’s 
Psyche, Volume 2, No. 1, June, 2013. 
 
Elovitz, Paul H. ‘The Partial Success and Bright Prospects of Psychohistory’. Clio’s Psyche, 
Volume 6, No. 4, March, 2000 
 

Elovitz, Paul. ‘Two of the Earliest American Psychobiographers: Preserved Smith and L. 
Pierce Clark’, in Altaalla, Norderstedt, Saksa: Books on Demand, 2014. 
 
Elovitz, Paul H., and David Felix, and Bob Lentz. ‘The Psychoanalytically-Informed Historian: 
Peter Gay’. Clio’s Psyche, September, 1997. 
 
Evans, Richard J. ‘Peter Gay Obituary.’ Guardian, May 24, 2015. 
 
Erikson, Erik H. ‘The Strange Case of Freud, Bullitt, and Woodrow Wilson: I’. The New York 
Review of Books, February 9, 1967. 
 
Forrester, John. ‘Dispatches from the Freud Wars: Psychoanalysis and Its Passions’. 
Psychoanalytic Psychology, Volume 16, No. 1, 1999. 
 
Frank, Justin A. ‘Obama on the Couch’. Rolling Stone, November 11, 2011. 
 
Gay, Peter. ‘Psychoanalysis in History,’ in: Psychology and Historical Interpretation, ed. 
William McKinley Runyan, Oxford, 1988. 
 
Gay, Peter. ‘Reply to comments on Peter Gay’s Freud for Historians’, The Psychohistory 
Review, Volume 15, No. 1, 1986. 
 
Gedo, J. ‘On the methodology of psychoanalytic biography’. Journal of the American 
Psychoanalytic Association, Volume 20, 1972. 
 
Griffin, Clifford S. ‘Oedipus Hex’, Reviews in American History, Volume 4, No. 3, September, 
1976. 
 
Lentz, Bob. ‘Interview: Lloyd deMause, Editor The Journal of Psychohistory’. Clio’s Psyche, 
Volume 3, No. 1, June, 1996. 
 
Leo, John. ‘Did Freud Build His Own Legend?’ Time Magazine, July 30, 1979. 
 
Hartmann, Heinz. ‘On Rational and Irrational Actions’. In: Psychoanalysis and the Social 
Sciences, 1947 
 
Hartmann, Heinz, and David Rapaport. Ego psychology and the problem of adaptation. 
Madison, CT: International Universities Press, 1958. 
 
Hoffman, Louise E. ‘Early Psychobiography, 1900-1930: Some Reconsiderations’. 
Biography 7, No. 4, 1984. 
 
Hoffman, Louise E. ‘Erikson on Hitler: The Origins of “Hitler’s Imagery and German Youth”’. 
The Psychohistory Review, Volume 22, No. 1, Fall 1993. 
 
Hoffman, Louise E. ‘Psychoanalytic Interpretations of Adolph Hitler and Nazism, 1933-1945: 
A Prelude to Psychohistory’. The Psychohistory Review, Volume 11, No. 1, Fall 1982. 
 
Hofling, Charles K. The Psychiatrist as Psychohistorian: Report of the Task Force on 
Psychohistory of the American Psychiatric Association. Washington: APA, 1976. 

 
Hofstadter, Richard. ‘The Paranoid Style in American Politics’. Harper’s Magazine, 
November 1964. 
 
Holt, Terence E. ‘Narrative Medicine and Negative Capability.’ Literature and Medicine 23, 
No. 2, 2004. 
 
Hunt, Lynn. ‘Psychoanalysis and History’. Presented at the Radcliffe Institute, Harvard 
University, February 22, Cambridge, MA. 
 
Hyman, Stanley E. ‘Freud and the Climate of Tragedy’. Partisan Review, Spring 1956. 201. 
 
Ihanus, Juhani. ‘Erik Erikson as a Pioneer of Psychohistory’. Clio’s Psyche, Volume 10, No. 
1, June 2003. 15. 
 
Kammer, Arnold. Louisiana History: The Journal of the Louisiana Historical Association, 
Volume 25, No. 1, Winter, 1984. 109. 
 
Kann, Peter R. ‘Historian Langer Enters Retirement After 37 Years on Harvard Faculty’. The 
Harvard Crimson, June 9, 1964. 
 
Kasanin, J. S., Charl Rhode, and Ernestine Wertheimer. ‘Observations from a Veterans' Clinic 
on Childhood Factors in Military Adjustment’. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry. 
 
Kovel, 
Joel 
and 
Michael 
Lowy. 
‘An 
Eco-Socialist 
Manifesto’. 
Paris, 
2001. 
http://members.optushome.com.au/spainter/Ecosocialist.html. (Accessed on September 13, 
2016). 
 
Kovel, Joel. ‘Reflections on White Racism’. Psychoanalytic Dialogues, Volume 10, 2000. 
 
Kren, George. ‘Pioneering Psychohistory in Kansas’. Clio’s Psyche, Volume 5, No. 4, March 
1998. 
 
Kren, George M. ‘Psychohistory in the University’, The Journal of Psychohistory; Winter 
1977. 
 
LaCapra, Dominick. ‘An Interview with Professor Dominick LaCapra’. Yad Vashem, Shoah 
Resource Center. Yadvashem.org 
 
LaCapra, Dominick. ‘History and Psychoanalysis’, in: Critical Inquiry, Volume 13, No. 2, The 
Trial(s) of Psychoanalysis, 1987. 
 
Lehmann-Haupt, Christopher. ‘Black, Black, Black is the Color of the White Man’s Dirt’. The 
New York Times, March 30, 1970. 
 
Lentz, Bob. ‘Interview: Lloyd deMause, Editor The Journal of Psychohistory’. Clio’s Psyche, 
Volume 3, No. 1, June, 1996. 
 
Levin, Eric. ‘Putting Freud on the Couch, Historian Peter Gay Finds a Genius Whose Stature 
Time Cannot Shrink’, People Magazine, June 6, 1988. 

 
Lévi-Strauss, Claude. Introduction to the Work of Marcel Mauss. London: Routledge & Kegan 
Paul, 1987. 
 
Lifton, Robert J. ‘Entering History: Erik Erikson’s New Psychological Landscape’, in: Ideas 
and Identities: The Life and Work of Erik Erikson. Madison: International Universities Press. 
 
Lifton, Robert J. ‘The Man Who Wanted to Live Forever’. The New York Times, December 
31, 1972. 
 
Lifton, Robert J. ‘The Sense of Immortality: On Death and the Continuity of Life’. The 
American Journal of Psychoanalysis, Volume 33, 1973. 
 
Loewenberg, Peter. ‘Dual Training: Professional and Personal Insights’. Clio’s Psyche, 
Volume 4, No. 2, September 1997. 
 
Loewenberg, Peter. ‘Historical Method, the Subjectivity of the Researcher, and Psychohistory’, 
in: The Psychohistory Review, Volume 14, No. 1, Fall 1985. 
 
Loewenberg, Peter. ’The Unsuccessful Adolescence of Heinrich Himmler’. The American 
Historical Review, Volume 76, No. 3, June 1971. 
 
Loewenberg, Peter. ‘Why Psychoanalysis Needs the Social Scientist and the Historian’., 
International Review of Psycho-Analysis, 4. 
 
Lustig, Jessica. ‘The Wellfleet Ten’. The New York Times, 13 May, 2011. 
 
Mack, John E. ‘Psychoanalysis and Biography: Aspects of a Developing Affinity.’ Journal of 
the American Psychoanalytic Association 28, 1980. 
 
Mack, John E. ‘Psychoanalysis and Historical Biography’. Journal of the American 
Psychoanalytic Association 19, No. 1, 1971. 
 
Makari, George. ‘Mitteleuropa on the Hudson: On the Struggle for American Psychoanalysis 
after the Anschluss’, in: Burnham, John C. After Freud Left: A Century of Psychoanalysis in 
America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012. 
 
Manuel, Frank. ‘The Use and Abuse of Psychology in History’. Reprinted in: Daedalus, 
Volume 117. No. 3, 1988. 
 
Matthews, F. H. ‘The Americanization of Sigmund Freud: Adaptations of Psychoanalysis 
before 1917’. Journal of American Studies, Volume 1, Issue 1, April 1967. 39-62. 
 
Mazlish, Bruce. ‘Inside the Whales’. Times Literary Supplement, July 28, 1966. 
 
Mazlish, Bruce. ‘The Past and Future of Psychohistory’, in: The Annual of Psychoanalysis, 
Volume 31, Psychoanalysis and History, 2003. 
 
Mazlish, Bruce. Records of the Academy (Academy of Arts and Sciences), No. 1966/1967 
(1966-1967). 31-32. 

 
Mazlish, Bruce. ‘Reflections on the state of Psychohistory’. The Psychohistory Review, 
Volume 5, No. 4, March 1977. 
 
Mazlish, Bruce. ‘The Past and Future of Psychohistory’, in: The Annual of Psychoanalysis, V. 
31, Psychoanalysis and History. 
 
Mazlish, Bruce. ‘What is Psycho-History?’ Transactions of the Royal Historical Society 
Conference (22 September 1970). Volume 21, 1971. 
 
Mazlish, Bruce, and John Demos. ‘Psychoanalytic Theory and History: Groups and Events’. 
Annual of Psychoanalysis, 1978. 
 
McAdams, Dan P. ‘The Mind of Donald Trump’, The Atlantic. June 2016. 
 
McGurdy, Harold Grier. ‘Luther: Psychoanalyst’. PsycCRITIQUES, Volume 4, No. 7, July 
1959. 
 
Meyers, John E.B. ‘A Short History of Child Protection in America’. Family Law Quarterly, 
Volume 42, No. 3. 
 
M’Cormick, Anne O’Hare. ‘Two Brilliantly Revealing Accounts of Hitler's Life; The Books 
of Heiden and Olden Should Be Read for the Light They Cast on Contemporary Germany’. 
The New York Times, May 24, 1936. 
 
Mollenhauer, Bernard, and H. Stuart Hughes. ‘History as Art and as Science’. Books Abroad 
38, No. 4, 1964. 
 
Muchowski, Jakub. ‘I am not interested in truth. I am interested in Reality. A conversation with 
Hayden White’. Historyka. Studia Metologiczne, Special Issue, 2012. 
 
Noble, Philip. ‘A Controversial Discipline’. New York Times, October 10, 1976 
 
Noland, Richard W. ‘Psychohistory, Theory and Practice’. The Massachusetts Review, 
Volume 18, No. 2, Summer 1977.  
 
Oakes, Guy. ‘Wilhelm Windelband on History and Natural Science.’ History and Theory, 
Vol.19, No. 2, February 1980. 
 
Orlow, Dietrich. Review: The Mind of Adolf Hitler. The Journal of Interdisciplinary History, 
Volume 5, No.1, Summer 1974. 
 
Pawelec, Tomasz. ‘Bruce Mazlish: Pioneer Psychohistorian’. Clio’s Psyche, December, 1996, 
Volume 3, No. 3. 77. 
 
Pear, Robert. ‘M.D.'s Make Room for Others In Ranks of Psychoanalysts’, The New York 
Times, August 19, 1992. 
 
Pietikainen, 
Petteri, 
and 
Juhani 
Ihanus. 
‘On 
the 
Origins 
of 
Psychoanalytic 
Psychohistory.’ History of Psychology, Volume 6, No. 2, 2003. 

 
Reinhold, Robert. ‘Historians Find Fresh Answers With Tools of Social Science’. New York 
Times, July 3, 1971 
 
Roper, Lyndal. ‘The Seven-Headed Monster: Luther and Psychology’. History and Psyche: 
Culture, Psychoanalysis, and the past. London: Palgrave and Macmillan, 2012. 
 
Ross, Colin A. ‘A Psychological Profile of Osama Bin Laden’. The Journal of Psychohistory, 
Volume 42, No. 4, Spring 2015 
 
Saffady, William. ‘Manuscripts and Psychohistory’. The American Archivist, Volume 37, No. 
4, October 1974. 
 
Sennett, Richard. ‘Review: Clio and the Doctors’. The New York Times, October 20, 1974. 
 
Schneidmann, J. Lee. ‘Psychoanalysis and History: Andrea Sabbadini’, in: Clio’s Psyche, 
March 2001. 
 
Schoenwald, Richard L. ‘Setting Up Sitting Up with Psychiatrists’. GUPH Newsletter, Volume 
II, No. 1, May 1973. 
 
Schultz, William T. ‘Psychobiography and the Study of Lives: William McKinley Runyan’, 
Clio’s Psyche, Volume 8, No. 3, December 2001. 
 
Silverberg, William V. ‘Race-Prejudice-social immaturity’. Current History 5, 1943. 
 
Sinovsky, Faye and John J. Fitzpatrick, Louis W. Potts, Lloyd deMause. ‘A Bibliography of 
Psychohistory’. History of Childhood Quarterly: The Journal of Psychohistory, Volume 2, No. 
4, Spring 1975. 
 
Smith, Bradley F. Adolf Hitler; His Family, Childhood, and Youth. Stanford, CA: Hoover 
Institution on War, Revolution, and Peace, 1967. 
 
Smith-Rosenberg, Carroll. ‘The Female World of Love and Ritual: Relations between Women 
in Nineteenth-Century America.’ Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society Volume 1, 
No. 1, 1975. 
 
Smith-Rosenberg, Carol. ‘The New Woman and The Psycho-Historian: A Modest Proposal.’ 
GUPH Newsletter, December, 1975, Volume IV, No. 3. 
 
Sochos, Antigonos. ‘Incoherence in the Iraq War Narrative and the Concept of Collective 
Attachment’. The Journal of Psychohistory, Volume 42, No. 4, Spring 2015. 
 
Stam, A. ‘De Medische en Psychologische beoordeling van Hitler, Een bibliografische 
verkenning met historische kanttekeningen’. Tijdschrift voor Psychiatrie, No. 10, 1979. 
 
Stannard, David. ‘Reply to comments on David Stannard’s Shrinking History’. The 
Psychohistory Review, Volume 9, No. 2, Winter, 1980. 
 

Stannard, David. ‘Review of Freud for Historians’. Reviews in American History, Volume 14, 
No. 2, June, 1986. 
 
Stein, Howard F. ‘Judaism and the Group-Fantasy of Martyrdom: The Psychodynamic Paradox 
of Survival Through Persecution’. The Journal of Psychohistory, Fall 1978. 
 
Strozier, Charles B. ‘A Rationale for Teaching Psychohistory’. GUPH Newsletter, Volume IV, 
No. 1, June 1975. 
 
Strozier, Charles B. ‘Autobiographical Reflections on The Psychohistory Review’. The 
Psychohistory Review, Volume 15, No. 1, Fall 1986. 
 
Strozier, Charles B. ‘Springfield über Alles’. GUPH Newsletter, Volume IV, No. 2, September, 
1975. 
 
Swidey, Neil. ‘Why do shrinks flock to Cape Cod’s Wellfleet?’ The Boston Globe, July 23, 
2014. 
 
Thrush, Glenn. ‘Jill Stein: Trump may have “memory problem”’. Politico, September 19, 2016. 
 
Tileagă, Cristian and Jovan Byford. Psychology and History. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2014. 
 
Unknown. Review: It’s Not Done. The New York Times, April 11, 1926. 
 
Waggoner, Walter H. ‘Walter Langer is Dead at 82; Wrote Secret Study of Hitler’. The New 
York Times, July 10, 1981. 
 
Waite, Robert G.L. Review Freud for Historians, The American Historical Review, Volume 
92, No. 3, June 1987. 
 
Wallerstein, R. S. ‘The Growth and Transformation of American Ego Psychology’. Journal of 
the American Psychoanalytic Association. 
 
Wallerstein, Robert S., and Leo Goldberger. ‘Ideas and Identities: The Life Work of Erik 
Erikson’. Psychoanalytic Psychology, Volume 17, No. 2, 2000. 
 
Weinstein, Fred. ‘Comment on David Stannard’s Shrinking History’. The Psychohistory 
Review, Volume 9, No. 2, Winter, 1980. 
 
Weinstein, Fred., and Gerald M. Platt. ‘The Coming Crisis in Psychohistory’. The Journal of 
Modern History, Volume 47, No. 2, June 1975.  
 
 
Other 
 
 
Foucault, M. ‘The History of Sexuality’ (an interview), in: Power/Knowledge Selected 
Interviews and Other Writings, 1972-1977. 
 

Langer, William L. Presidential address delivered at the annual dinner of the American 
Historical Association the Statler Hotel, New York City, December 29, 1957’. American 
Historical Review 63, No. 2, January 1958. 283-304. https://www.historians.org/about-aha-
and-membership/aha-history-and-archives/presidential-addresses/william-l-langer 
 
‘History and Psychoanalysis During the Postwar Period’. Conversation between Daniel Pick 
and Robert J. Lifton. Heyman Center/Society of Fellows. Vimeo. Published 2014. 
https://vimeo.com/92536012. (Accessed on September 13, 2016) 
 
‘IPA 2015: Dr. Paul Elovitz on Leadership in Freudianism and Psychohistory’. Youtube Video. 
Published on 22nd July 2015. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vOK04p4RfiM 
 
‘Life is Strange’, Vimeo video, published 2012. https://vimeo.com/41035334 
 
‘Psychoanalysis in the United States’, Youtube video, Published on 27 December 2007. 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vPzIc-xQADg 

