BD 096 770
AUTHOR
TITLE
INSTITUTION
SPONS AGENCY
PUB DATE
NOTE
?DRS PRICE
DESCRIPTORS
DOCUMENT RESUME
EA 006 449
Erickson, Donald A.
Super-Parent: An Analysis of State Educational
Controls.
Illinois Advisory Committee on Nonpublic Schools,
Lansing.
Continental Illinois National Bank and Trust Co.,
Chicago.
Oct 73
225p.
HP-$0.75 HC-$10.20 PLUS POSTAGE
*Accreditation (Institutions); Court Cases;
Educational Legislation; Educational Objectives;
*Legal Problems; Private Schools; Public Schools;
*State Agencies; *state Legislation; State Licensing
Boards; State Programs; State School District
Relationship; *State Standards; State Supervisors;
Teacher Certification
ABSTRACT
This study represents an attempt to discern what
responsibility the State should assume for regulating the education
of the youngr and what is the most defensible approach to fulfilling
that responsibility. Analyses of this type could be timely,
especially in the light of the spreading "alternative schools"
movement; growing recognition among scholars that most
educational
experimentation remains discouragingly close to conventional
practices despite dramatic differences in the educational needs of
children; concern that cultural pluralism is declining in a society
bombarded by electronic mass media; new attacks on compulsory school
attendance laws and other time-honored mechanisms of educational
regulation; and at least inchoate recognition that the
nation's
courts have not yet adequately balanced the interests of the State
against the liberties that students, parents, and teachers seek to
exercise in educational settings. These considerations are discussed
and documented. The most pervasive and liberty-endangering regulatory
approach used by State governments is the programmatic approach--the
method of prescribing the programs, methods, or procedures
by which
children must be reared during the extensive periods when school
attendance is compulsory. Little attention has been given to other
ways of fulfilling government's regulatory responsibility in
education. (Author/JF)

5, DI PAW Toot her OF otEALTH
O '(4tONa *ILLP ARE
air10%41 to.stitutt. OP
LOU(.4% pN
t
.1 t% .1
.1:'
.
..
t
rt v.'
SUPER - PARENT
AN ANALYSTS OF STATE EDUCATTONAI. CONTROLS
by
Donald A. Erickson
Professor of Education
University of
Chicago
with a chapter by John El son and the assistance
of James G. Ci.bulka and Bruce S. noopor
Illinois Advisory Committee on Nonpublic Schools
(2261 Indiana Avenue, Lansing, Illinois 60438)
Chicago, Illinois
October, 1973

ACYNOWLETTI"mwm(1
The author is grateful to the Illinois Aftisory Com-
mittee on Nonpublic Schools, whose sponsorship made this
investigation possible; to the Continental Illinois Nations)
Bank, which provided the bulk of the funding; to John Elson,
for producing the excellent legal analysis appearing in
chapter 4; to James Cibulka and Bruce Cooper for additional
professional assistance; and to many individuals who responded
to our requests for information.
Thanks are due as well to
Irene Anderson and Shirley Heap for typing the manuscript so
capably.
None of these groups or individuals should be
assumed, however, to vouch for the report ar a whole.
Except
for passages written or cowritten by others; the author
assumes full responsibility for the study h4 an expression
of his efforts as a scholar.

BEST COPY AVAILAbLi
CONTENTS
iteknowledements
Chepter 1,
The Nature and Context of Existing Controls
Chapter 2:
The Case for Prot!rammatic Controls
Chapter lt
Unstated Reasons for Programmatic Controls.
Chapter 41
Leal Dimensiora of the State Ra?:ulation
of Nonnublic Srhools
Chapter 5:
Summary and Implications
Appendix Al Notes on keereditation

CHAPTER 1
THE NATURE AND CONTEXT OF EXISTING CONTROLS
The present study is an attempt to discern what responsi-
bility the state should assume for regulating the education of
the young, and what is the most defensible approach to fulfil-
ling that responsibility.
Analyses of th:.
`ype may be timely,
especially in the light of the spreading "C*ernative schools"
movement (which frequently runs afoul of goJrnment); growing
recognition among scholars that most educetfonal experimenta-
tion remains discouragingly close to conventional practices
(partly because of legal constraints), despite dramatic dif-
ferences in the educational needs of children; concern that
cultural pluralism (which a more heterogeneous amalgam of
schools might help maintain) is declining in a society bombarded
by electronic mass media; new attacks upon compulsory school
attendance laws and other time-honored mechanisms of educational
regulation; and at least inchoate recognition that the nation's
courts have not yet adequately balanced the interests of the
state against the liberties students, parents, and teachers seek
to exercise in educational settings.
These eonsiderations are
discussed and documented in the pages that follow.
The work reported here was funded by the Continental
Illinois National Bank Foundation and sponsored by the Illinois Advisory
Committee on Nonpublic Schools.
One major impetus for the study
was the Illinois Advisory Committee's concern over new regula-
tory policies for nonpublic schools, reportedly under considera-
tion in Illinois.
In numerous respects, however, we have found
it analytically useful to examine, not only state
controls for
nonpublic schools, but the state's responsibility to impose
guidelinez, .7tandards, safeguards, and other prescriptions in

1/2
pullic and nonpulic educational sectors.
Our research has been
in .no 'significant sense empirical.
Rather, the author has at-
tempted to draw together, analyze, and .build upon, numerous
strand:3 of relevant thought from efforts under .iay elsewhere,
from recently completed investigations, and from literature
spanning many decades.
Early in the study, John Elson of the
Mandel Legal Aid Clinic of the University of Chicago agreed to
provide the legal analysis found in chapter 4.
Further assis-
tance was obtained from Bruce Cooper of the faculty of the
University of Pennsylvania and James S. Cibulka of the faculty
of the University of Wisconsin at Milwaukee.
In the remainder of the present chapter, distinctions
essential to the study are articulated, an effort is made to
characterize in analytically useful terms the prevailing approach
to educational regulation in the United States, and concepts are
examined that raise serious questions about thit approach.
Special attention is paid to the fact that state controls seem
primarily designed to dictate child-rearing practices, in con-
trast to controls that attempt to perform essential protective
functions while leaving the processes of education unspecified.
Widepead control;:: of this process-spe..ifying type persist,
mon:over, despite the availability of alternative methods.
In
chapter
wt: attempt to identify the rational basis for the pre-
vailinc ("programmatic") approach to regulating schools.
We
analyz.f? the mont powerful arguments we have been able to identi-
fy in that regard.
Since we find these rationales, these stated
purpo:;es of regulation, far from adequate, we proceed in chapter
"f- to examine what may be the most plausible unstated reasons
for current otate controls in education.
Elson's legal analysis,
as we have already noted, appears in chapter 4.
Finally, our
7t,nclu.:ion:: and recommendations, along with a summary of the
earlier chapter:1, appear in chapter 5.

1 /3
14:, must Login :pith a central distinction:
Programmatic
,untroisl as defined in the present study, are controls whicri
prescribe how children must be reared.
For instance:
when a
,,tate demands that all y3ungsters attend schools, regardless of
whether they or their parents prefer learning experiences in
other settings, it is imposing programmatic controls.
Thus,
numerous courts have held that home instruction, no matter what
its quality may be, is not acceptable in lieu of school attend-
ance,' and until the recent Supreme Court decision in their
favour,2 the Amish were harassed,
arrested, fined, jailed, and
deprived of their property through sheriffs' sales for substi-
tuting their impressively effective post-elementary system of
learning -by- apprenticeship -to - parents for conventional high
schools.3
Obviously, the states in which these occurrences have
taken place are not content to demand certain essential understand-
ings and skills, but have insisted upon prescribing the institu-
tional context in ;:hich these competencies must be developed.
In effect, furthermore, since schools must fulfill certain
requirements to be recognized for compulsory attendance purposes,
these states have dictated the means by which the understandings
and skills must be acquired.
Laws which spell out teacher quali-
fications, methods of pupil management, and curricula are ob-
viously programmatic.
Their effect is to dictate processes of
child-rearing, at least during the extended periods when atten-
dance is mar.datory.
In addition, our system of educational
governance permits local majorities (acting in behalf of the
state) to impose a particular style of life in all public schools
in a given area.
Our financing arrangements penalize faMilies
for opting out of the public system.4
Our society is gradually
tightening programmatic controls for the nonpublic schools that
oLltensibly exist as alternatives to government-operated schools.
(There is a marked and -...rowing tendency for .,chool codes to

demand that nonpublic school
be patterned after the public
fundamental particulars.5)
The state is raying to
future citizens and their parents, by implication, that they
:annot be trusted to determine what preparation for adulthood is
essential in the modern world.
Otherwise, why the compulsion?
Strangely enough, these limits on the discretion of all
parents are confined to al
s generally regarded as "education."
Except in cases of stark wrong-doing, parents are free to decide,
outside the hours of compulsory school attendance, what will be
provided to their children by way of clothing, shelter, food,
medical care, recreation, discipline, companionship, and neigh-
borhood characteristics.
This deep bias against family decision-making in educa-
tion persists, moreover, in the face of frequent contentions
that it is inefficient.?
Children vary markedly as to the con-
ditions of learning to which they respond.
Some youngsters
require expensive equipment and remedial instruction to overcome
their handicaps.
Others need only minimal attention from a
teacher, find classrooms oppressive, and learn many subjects
best at home, curled up with a book, or tinkering with a ham set.
Still other.: have talents and interest that are furthered most
effectively through private lessons, observation of skilled
performers, or experience on the job.
The burgeoning, but still
numerically insignificant "alternative schools" movement is one
apparent result of i spreading awareness that youngsters require
a wide variety of learning opportunities.8
Under our current system, however, a single expenditure
level normally is determined through political mechanisms for
each school district, though logic dictates spending more money
on .schooling for some children than for others.
Furthermore, a
striking similarity is reflected in the programs on which the
money is spent.9
Giving parents more freedom to determine what

1 /5
types of schooling will be utilized, and what other learning
experiences will be substituted for schooling,
could produce a
more efficient allocation of available funds, and in some respects
(by producing better results among children who do not respond
well to orthodox programs) greater equality of educational
oppor-
tunity.
In his presidential address to the American Educational
Research Association in 1972, Robert Glaser sought to explain
why, though individualization of instruction had been emphasized
repeatedly since at least 1911, "time goes by with still only
a
recognition of the problem, and as yet, no directions toward
solution realized."1°
We seemed to be caught in a "selective
mode of education," Glaser observed, "characterized by minimal
variation in the conditions under which individuals are expected
to learn."11
The methodology of American schools is so homo-
geneous that opportunities to study the effects of unconventional
approaches with adequate samples are generally nonexistent.
Hanushek and Kain, in critiquing the landmark Coleman study,
point out that Coleman examined only an "exceedingly limited"
range of educational practice, not because he was myopic, but
because his national sample of schools exhibited an extremely
narrow range of practice.12
What does not Hxist can hardly be
examined empirically!
We cannot expect much progress in edu-
cational research, Hanushek and Kain assert, until many schools
engage in "truly radical" experiments--experiments that "involve
a wide variety of educational practices and explore ranges of
input variation in both novel and traditional educational tech-
niques not presently found in the public schools."13
But if
conventional approaches are made legal requirements, how can we
expect radical experiments to occur more than spasmodically?
Given iota* general ignorance concerning the efficacy of
various child r,?arinr practices, it could tmc,ily turn ,..uts in

1 / 6
fact, that programmatic controls make
schools worse than they
would Aherwise have been.
To support this possibility, we
need not agree with Chrisi;opher Jencks,. author of one cdf the
most ompreherLive analyses of school effects produced thus far,
that professional educators know virtually nothing about how to
make schools more powerful instructional experiments.14
If the
basic canions of scholarship are observed, even the most opti-
mistic interpretation indicates that surprisingly little can be
asserted confidently, in the light of the empirical evidence,
about what differentiates the bad schools from the good."
In
circumstances like these, the onus seems to be on the proponents
of programmatic controls.
To justify their apparently arbitrary
stipulations, surely they are obligated to provide some parti-
cularly compelling rationale.
Our search for that compelling
rationale is reflected in chapter 2.
It should be obvious, however, that the possibility of
casting ineffective practices into legal concrete is not as
ominous in a democracy as the threats to individual liberty that
programmatic controls may pose.
In the latter connection, we
mu t dra: a di:Itinction that Elson expresses in somewhat different
in chapter 4:
In most areas of life, state legislatures
and administrative agencies must be granted wide discretion, so
lonz: as th ?ir actions are not demonstrably malicious or arbitrary.
If government were permitted to take only those actions that
were manifestly essential and manifestly wise, our complex
society could not function.
We have developed numerous mechan-
isms, however, in an effort to give special protection to rights
so vital to a democratic society that they may be infringed
upon only for the most urgent reasons.
Among these fragile yet
,!ru.71.al
lii,ertie2, according to the Bill of Rights and :.cores
of supreme Court decisions, are freedom of speech, freedom of
the pre::;, and rreodom
assembly.
It is a fundamental

1/7
assumption A our political and legal im.titutions that th:., best
way to prevent totalitarianism is to keep the marketplace of
ideas as open and unlimited as possible.
Should schools be regarded as particularly vital forums
for exposing people to ideas, orthodox and unorthodox?
In
chapter 4, El :ion voices the hope that the Supreme Court may soon
move toward that position, though he characterizes the Court's
examination of the relevant issues thus far as incomplete.
At least for those many citizens who appear to stop
reading and exploring new ideas as soon as they leave school,
one could argue that state control of education is more dangerous
to liberty than state control of the press.
But strangely, many
people who profess passionate attachment to freedom of the press
and free speech see no problem in permitting the state to deter-
mine what may and may not be examined and pursued in schools.
Little attention is given in our society to the fact that
the state, when it prescribes child-rearing practices in areas
of wides.pread, deeply felt disa6reemont, is in effect attempting
to impose some selected view of the good life on everyone.
If
programcuttic controls are not based on some concept of the life
worth living and the competencies such a life requires, are not
those controls arbitrary and irrational?
But an Old Order
Amishman's view of happy, responsible adulthood is far different
from the concept of most middle-class suburbanites, and it implies
a radically different educational approach.
Who is sufficiently
omniscient to decide 4hich way of life is better for everyone?
The life style that the national mainstream exhibits is anathema
to many American Indians, Blacks, Hutterites, intellectuals, and
proponents of radi(!al countercultures.
Some segments of our
.:ociety still place high value on future orientation, achievement
drive, acqui:itiveness, individualism, and competition.
To other
people, these tendencies are loathesome, the root of most unhap-

/8
piness.
What values should the schools promote through the cur-
riculum, the social system, or the modus operandi?
Even among
people who espouse the same general ideals, there is dissension:
some, hoping for gradual, comparatively painless reform, want
children socialized primarily in term
of our imperfect social
order (so these childr-n will not
b.,-
trlhapry misfits), while
others want the young prepared to be forceful agents of change,
even at the risk of personal malaise.
Forms of schooling that
some cultures find congenial are utterly disruptive to others;
to transplant Scarsdale's purportedly superior schools to the
Pine Ridge Sioux reservation, for example, would promote, not
educational equality but the destruction of the Indian's social
structure.I8
As the Supreme Court itself has recognized, to
force Old Arder Amish adolescents into conventional high schools
is virtually to ensure the dismantling of the Old Order.''
It
seems, then, that when state officials enforce programmatic
controls upon dissenting groups is an ostensible effort to
guarantee "a higher standard of education," the basic issue is
being obscured by bureaucratic rhetoric.
The basic issue is:
Who has the right to determine what ideals will be expressed in
the relevant child-rearing programs?
It may be useful at this point to consider four instances
that illustrate important characteristics f)f existing educational
controls in our society:
Example 1:
The Persecution of LeRoy Garber.' e- -LeRoy
1;arLer's daughter 2haron, who lived with her Old Order Amish
parents on a small farm southwest of Hutchinson, Kansas, gradu-
ated .;ith virtually perfect
rrades from a small rural elementary
.,111-.2o1
in 1964.
:Maxon loved learning, but felt it wrong, as
most member.; ';f the tAd Order do, to attend a public high
With her father's encouragement, she registered for a high
rurr(sp,,ndence course from the American Schcol in Chicago,

perhaps the most reputable of the nation's correspondence inrrl-
tutions.
While working part-time in a greenhouse, she completed
the four-year curriculum in thirty months with an average per-
centage grade of 95.69.
Ervin Stutzman, the greenhou:e
described Sharon as "the best help
,ce've had yet."
She dreamed
of a greenhouse of her own some day and devoured books on Yorti-
culture in an effort to master the trade.
He never had to
explain anything twice to Sharon, said Stutzman.
She learned to
type so she could handle his correspondence.
When the adding
machine was unavailable, she would calculate transactions mental-
ly, using various short-cut methods she had mastered.
She was
the first employee Stutzman ever trusted with the critical task
of planting.
Ir. addition, Sharon attended classes
once a week in an
Amish "vcational high school" described elsewhere.19
Many
informants described her as a superb cook, skillful
seamstress,
unfailing green thumb. Interviews with people who knew her
elicited no complaints concerning her character or competence.
At one point she published an account of the ordeal the family
went through when her father was hounded to court and fined for
failing to send her to a conventional high school.
It would he
encouraging if the majority of high school graduates could
write as /ell.
From on
standp3int, at least, it was ludicrous to
prosecute
LeRoy Garber for allegedly depriving Sharon of a decent
preparation for adulthood.
She was literate, employed, sociable,
happy, law-abiding, intelligent, and well-read.
There was evi-
dence in Kansas, furthermore, that Old Order Amish children who
later decided to go to college obtained mostly above-average
grades despite their lack of any high school attendance.2°
What
more could be required by a state whose schools were failing to
produce comparable mr:ults with thousands of city children?

1/10
Put a particular view of the prerequisites of the good life
apparently -.vas reflected in Kansas
laws.
The district judge
declared, with later concurrence from the state's supreme
court:
"The defendant has not complied with Kansas compulsory
school attendance laws.
.
.
.
To comply .
.
.
such child must
attend a private or parochial school having a school month con-
sic.ting of four weeks of five days each of six hours per day
during which pupils are under direct supervision of its teacher
while they are engaged together in educational activities."21
The decision implied, obviously, that certain essential capa-
bilities could be developed only through prolonged exposure to
the standardized institutions that the state recognized as
"regular schools."
Example 2:
The Busting of the "Cooperative School".-- 22
The Cooperative School (as we will identify it.pseudonymously)
was a small experimental school
in a large Midwestern city.
Coop's program deliberately departed from conventionality in
numerous respects.
Its sponsors attempted to obliterate bounda-
ries between school and community; to create unusually enduring
relationships between pupils and teachers; to utilize a very
large ratio of adults to children; to feature multi-age grouping
extensively; to minimize distinctions between teachers, helpers,
parents, and other adults; to depend primarily on "open class-
room" techniques; to encourage expressions of affection; to re-
place competition with cooperation; to encourage relationships
between people as people rather than as role incumbents; and to
rely on rules as minimally as possible.
The school had been
observed rather extensively by students and professors from the
city's universities.
Most observers seemed favorably impressed.
There was no evidence that the pupils were failing to master the
state-prescribed subjects of study.
.7anuary
1070, the state's attorney's police suddenly

entered, closed, and padlocked the Cooperative School.
Students,
staff members, and parents were arrested, taken to the local
police station, booked, and released on bail.
The school re-
mained padlocked for six weeks before a judge could be persuaded
to nullify the police action.
"The Bust," as the incident came
to be called, was memorialized by a staff member who switched
on a tape recorder as the officers arrived.
Some verbatim
excerpts from the transcription follow:
[The police entered the building under the allegation that one
of the thirteen-year-old girls, who had grimaced and waved her
hand at a squad car parked in front of the school, was "sol-
iciting" them.
As they came through the front door, a staff
member confronted the officers.]
Staff Member:
What are you doing here?
What do you want?
This is private property, a school.
Officer:
Prove you're a school and you're a teacher.
Staff Member:
Do you have a search warrant to come onto
private property?
Officer:
Do you have a lease to prove this is your proper-
ty?
For all we know, you may be trespassing.
[At this point, a student begins to play a guitar.
The music
continues as background to the entire affair.]
Officer:
You could all be burglars, for all we know.
Is
the school private or public?
Staff Member:
Get out of here; you have no right to be
here.
Officer:
I have as much right as you.
Are you a school?
I don't see no sign.
Oh, that's a homemade sign.
I don't
see a real sign.
rAt this point a student begins reading an original poem to
prove he is attending a school.
A mother, having seen the squad
car, bursts in frantically.]
Parent:
You're not supposed to be here!
You need a
warrant.

1/12
Officer:
A young lady did something our front.
And you
don't have separate washrooms for "boys" and "girls."
It's
a violation of city codes.
Officer:
We had better take these people down to the sta-
tion where specialized people will handle them.
The paddy
wagons are outside.
Black Parent:
Remarkable.
When I called the youth divi-
sion because a street gang had beaten up my boy, they
never came.
But a whole squad came to arrest
10 kids.
Officer:
What's the tape-recorder on for? We have our own
equipment.
If we want anything recorded, we'll do it.
Example 3:
The Let-Down of Several "Free SchJols."23
New Mexico exempts members of the rather elitist Independent
Schools Association of the Southwest
(ISAS) from the state's
own approval mechanisms.
A number of "free schools" in New
Mexico, unable because of their unconventionality and other
factors to secure admission to ISAS, asked that a state-wide
association of free schools be granted the same exemption.
New
Mexico officials refused, asserting that local and state-wide
groups were too susceptible to the extremes that were likely to
"balance out" in regional and national
associations.
Example 4:
Eyebrow Reising at the "Country School". 24
The "Country School': located in a bucolic setting in an agri-
cultural state, is a Que.ker boarding school that places heavy
emphasis on equality, cooperation, manual labor, and learning-by-
doing, in keeping with well-known Society of Friends traditions.
All students, male and female, are required to take turns at
various tasks around the farm-like campus for many hours each
week.
The students cook; sew; wash dishes; sweep floors; make
beds; construct buildings;
tend gardens, orchards and fields;

1/13
and take care of animals.
Put at one point, officials from the
state's Department of Education threatened to rescind the
school's state approval for lack of the prescribed number of
Carnegie units of classroom instruction in "the practical arts."
To exhibit competency by doing the "practical arts" was apparent-
ly no fit substitute for sitting in classrooms and talking about
them.
Or perhaps the real, but unspoken issue concerned hidden
(rather than stated) curriculum requirements (a matter dis-
cussed later).
We do not assert that these examples are representative,
but merely that they illustrate (even if in unusually stark
detail) the consequences of existing state approaches to the
regulation of schools.
Some of these incidents emphasize
rather dramatically the threats to individual freom that are
involved in programmatic controls.
In an earlier passage, it was suggested that the courts
have not yet given adequate attention to these dangers.
Per-
haps educational compulsion has become so familiar in the United
States that few people think of subjecting it to careful analysis.
As Elson observes in chapter 4,
the
Supreme Court of the United States provides no clear guidelines
on the topic.
Our analysis of relevant Supreme Court cases,
though proceeding along somewhat different lines, leads to the
same conclusion:
In 1920, a teacher named Meyer in a Lutheran school in
Nebraska was prosecuted for using German as the language of
instruction in a reading course, in defiance of a state law
demanding that all subjects be taught in English.25
When the
case reached the Supreme Court, the attorney for the
state

insisted that "the object of the legislation .
.
.
was to create
an enlightened American citizenship in sympathy with the prin-
ciples and ideals of this country, and to prevent children from
being trained and educated in foreign languages before they have
had an opportunity to learn the English language and observe
American ideals."29
The Court indicated its sympathy with
efforts to promote good citizenship:
"That the state may do
much, go very far, indeed, in order to improve the quality of
its citizens, physically, mentally, and morally is clear.
.
The desire of the legislature to foster a homogeneous people
with American ideals prepared readily to understand current dis-
cussion of civic matters is easy to appreciate."27
But, said
the Court, no emergency had arisen "which renders knowledge by
a child of some language other than English so clearly harmful
as to justify its inhibition with the consequent infringement of
rights long freely enjoyed. ft2a
"Evidently," the Court observed,
"the legislature has attempted materially to interfere with the
calling of modern foreign language teachers, with the oppor-
tunities of pupils to acquire knowledge, and with the power of
parents to control the education of their own."29
Referring to
Plato's suggestion that the state should have complete control
of the upbringing of children, the Court commented:
"It hardly
will be affirmed that any legislature could impose such restric-
tions
.
.
. without doing violence to both the letter and spirit
of the Constitution."3°
The logic behind the state's prohibi-
tion of foreign languages in classrooms was not strong enough in
the Court's eyes to justify interfering in this blatant way
with the liberties of teachers, pupils, and parents.
The Nebraska law involved in the above-discussed case
was associated with "anti-foreign" fears that arose in connec-
tion with heavy immigration during the decades bracketing the
turn of the century, and especially with the xenophobia of

1/15
World Wur I.
During and after the war, the Ku Klux Klan, the
American Protective Association, and other nativist groups
spearheaded numerous attempts to stamp out "foreign enclaves" in
the United States.
The efforts were probably abetted by the
extreme statements of a few scholars.
Ellwood P. Cubberley, for
example, in his influential 1919 book on Public E :ucation in the
United States, described recent immigrants from southern Europe
as "largely illiterate, docile, lacking in initiative, and al-
most wholly without the Anglo-Saxon conceptions of righteousness,
liberty, law, order, public decency, and government," professing
"no allegiance to the land of their adoption."31
Parochial
schools were often depicted as existing to preserve foreign
enclaves and as centers of crime, immorality, Bolshevism,
syndicalism, and anarchy.32
Further action against these suspect "alien" schools was
taken in Oregon by means of a law, passed by referendum, that
required all children of compulsory attendance age to enroll in
public schools exclusively.
(The intent of the law was obviously
programmatic--to stamp out socialization practices that state
officials disliked.
Worse than that, it would countenance no
programs at all in nonpublic schools for compulsory attendance
purposes, no matter how conventional the programs were.) In the
face of the threat to the very existence of their institutions,
the Society of the Sisters of the Holy Names of Jesus and Mary
and the non-sectarian Hill Military Academy sought judicial
protection.
When the case reached the Supreme Court, the state
argued:
At present, the vast majority of the private schools in
the country are conducted by members of some particular
religious belief.
They may be followed, however, by
those organized and controlled by believers in certain
economic doctrines entirely destructive of the funda-
mentals of our government.
Can it be contended that the-re
is no way in which a State can prevent the entire educa-

1/16
tion of a cenlderable portion of its future citizens
being controlled and conducted by bolshevists, syndi-
*calists, and communists?13
Once again, the Court looked favorably upon attempts to promote
good citizenship.
"No question is raised," the Court noted,
"concerning the power of the State reasonably to regulate all
schools, to inspect, supervise, and examine them, their teachers
and pupils; to require that all children of proper age attend
some school, that teachers shall be of good moral character and
patriotic disposition, that certain studies plainly essential
to good citizenship must be taught, and that nothing be taught
which is manifestly inimical to the public welfare."34
However, the Court could see no significant threat to
the general weal in the attendance of many children at non -
public schools.
The law in question, clearly most arbitrary,
was condemned:
Under the doctrine of Meyer v. Fabraska,
.
.
. we think
it entirely plain that the Act or 152
unreasonably
interferes with the liberty of parents and guardians
to direct the upbringing and education of children under
their control.
.
.
.
The child is not the mere creature
of the state; those who nurture him and direct his
destiny have the right, coupled with the high duty, to
recognize and prepare him for additional obligations.35
In a Hawaiian case decided by the Supreme Court in 1927,
the government position, once again, was that the compulsion at
issue was necessary to good citizenship:
"It would be a sad
commentary on our system of government to hold that the Terri-
tory must stand by, impotent, and watch its foreign-born guests
conduct a vast system of schools for American pupils,
teaching
them loyalty to a foreign country and disloyalty to their own
country, and hampering them dUring their tender years in the
learning of the home language in the public
schools.""
But
the Supreme Court once more failed to find any clear danger to
the general welfare.
It struck down the regulations, so extreme-
ly stringent as to jeopardize the existence of the foreign-

1/17
language schools:
.
.
.
the school Act and the measures adopted there-
under go far beyond the mere regulation of privately
supported schools, where children obtain instruction
deemed valuable by their parents and which is not
obviously in conflict with any public interest.
They
give affirmative direction concerning the intimate and
essential details of such schools, intrust their control
to public officers, and deny both owners and patrons
reasonable choice and discretion in respect of teachers,
curriculum and textbooks.
Enforcement of the Act
.
.
.
would deprive parents of fair opportunity to procure
for their children instruction which they think is
important and we cannot say is harmful.3-f
The Court confronted in 1972 the question of whether a
state was justified in condemning a system of informal, on-the-
job instruction which Amish parents had substituted for high
school attendance.
Somewhat as in the cases previously dis-
cussed, the state argued that the requirement under attack was
necessary "to prepare citizens to participate effectively and
intelligently in our open political system" and "to be self-
reliant and self-sufficient particpants in society."38
The
Court found that the Old Order Amish had proved themselves good
citizens despite general lack of a regular high school education:
Insofar as the State's claim rests on the view that a
brief additional period of formal education is impera-
tive to enable the Amish to participate effectively and
intelligently in our democratic process, it must fall.
The Amish alternative to formal secondary school educa-
tion has enabled them to function effectively in their
day-to-day life under self-imposed limitations on rela-
tions with the world, and to survive and prosper in
contemporary society as a separate, sharply identifiable
and highly self-sUfficient community for more than 200
years in this country.
In itself this is strong evi-
dence that they are capable of fulfilling the social and
political responsibilities of citizenship without com-
pelled attendance beyond the eighth grade at the price
of jeopardizing their free exercise of religious belief.
.
.
.
Indeed, the Amish communities singularly parallel
and reflect many of the virtues of Jefferson's ideal. of

1/18
the "sturdy yeoman" who would form the basis of what he
considered as. the ideal of a democratic society.
Even
their idiosyncratic separateness exemplifies the diver-
sity we profess to admire and eucourage.39
Unlike the previous cases, this now-famous Amish school
cane involved freedom of religion as a crucial issue.4°
The
Supreme Court suggested that t-ae right of parents to direct the
upbringing of their children might not have been sufficiently
compelling in and of itself, unbolstered by the issue of reli-
giouo freedom, to warrant dismissing Wisconsin's somewhat plaus-
ible argument for the benefits of compulsory high school atten-
dance.
In the words of the Court:
A way of life, however
virtuous and admirable, may
not be interposed as a barrier to reasonable state
regulation of education if it is based on purely secular
considerations; to have the protection of the Religion
Causes, the claims must be rooted in religious belief.
Thus, if the Amish asserted their claims because
of their subjective evaluation and rejection of the
contemporary secular values accepted by the majority,
much as Thoreau rejected the social values of his time
and isolated himself at Walden Pond, their claim would
not rest on a religious basis.
living no weight to such secular considerations, however,
we see that the record in this case abundantly supports
the claim that the traditional way of life of the Amish
is not merely a matter of personal preference, but one
of deep religious convictions, shared by an organized
group, and intimately related to daily living.
A.
the expert witnesses explained, the Old Order Amish
religion pervades and determines virtually their entire
way of life, regulating it with the detail of the Talmu-
dic diet through the strictly enforced rules of the
church community.41
In sum, the unchallenged testimony of acknowledged
experts in education and religious history, almost 300
years of consistent practice, and strong evidence of a
sustained faith pervading and regulating respondents'
entire mode of life support the claim that enforcement
of the State's requirement of compulsory formal education
after the eighth grade would gravely endanger if not
destroy the free exorcise of respondents' religious

1/19
beliefs.42.
.
.
It cannot be overemphasized that we are
not dealing with a. way of life and mod675YFEENEffir157
a group c a m ng
o
ave recen
y
scovere
some
ro-
gressive" or more enfightened process for rear g cnila-
ren for modern life.'"
The Court further observed that the strong case marshalled
in behalf of the Amish was "one which probably few other religious
groups or sects could make."
Several statements in this case
rather clearly imply that the Wisconsin compulsory attendance
law represented a reasonable exercise of state power as applied
to virtually all citizens and would not have been struck down in
its application to the Amish except for its strident, unambigu-
ous threat to their religio-ethnic way of life.
Other parents
who disagree with the state's view of essential education appa-
rently run a high risk of being overruled by the Court in cases
coming before it.
There is little evidence in the Amish school
case, or in the cases previously discussed, for that matter, to
indicate that the Supreme Court is at all averse to the idea
that the state may enforce what it considers a "progressive or
.
.
. enlightened process for rearing children for modern life,"
so long as obviously unreasonable regulations are not imposed in
the process.
To be sure, in some utterances the Supreme Court dis-
parages the notion of requiring all people to adhere to some
selected child-rearing approach in the face of strident dis-
agreement, but the decisions made in the context of those state-
ments suggest that the disparagement has but little conviction
behind it.
In the first of two famous "flag salute cases," for
instance, the Court asserted:
lreat diversity of psychological and ethical opinion
exists among us concerning the best way to train child-
ren for their place in society.
Because of these dif-
ferences and because of reluctance to permit a single,
iron-cast system of education to be imposed upon a nation
of f:o many rtrainz, we have held that, even though public

1/20
.114,-at Ion
oncuu of our mo
chrihed demcwratic im!ti-
tutIcnr., tho
.711 of Hichto bar a :ltate from compel-
.linc all children to attend the public school;-.
Put it is a very different thing for this Court to
exercise censorship over the conviction of Jeciclatures
that a particular program or exercise will best promote
in the minds of children who attend the common schools
an attachment to the institutions of their country. 44
The Court decided, accordingly, that children from
Jehovah's Witness homes who attended public schools could be
compelled, despite religious convictions .to the contrary, to
participate in a flag salute ceremony.
Within three years,
however, the Court reversed itself, holding that the children in
question could not be compelled to salute the flag in defiance
of their religious beliefs.
The Court commented:
Struggles to coerce uniformity of sentiMentsin support of
some end thought essential to their time ana country
have been waged by many good as well as by evil men.
As governmental pressure toward unity becomes greater, so
strife becomes more bitter as to whose unity it shall be.
Probably no deeper division of our people could proceed
from any provocation than from finding it necessary to
choose what doctrine and whose program public educa-
tional officials shall compel youth to unite in embracing.
The case is made difficult not because the principles of
its decision are obscure but because the flag involved
is our own.
Nevertheless, we apply the limitations of
the Constitution with no fear that freedom to be intel-
lectually and spiritually diverse or even contrary will
disintegrate the social organization.
.
.
.
We can have
intellectual individualism and the rich cultural diver-
sities that we owe to exceptional minds only at the
price of occasional eccentricity and abnormal atti-
tuder;.
.
.
.
If there is any fixed star in our constitutional constel-
lation, it is that no official, high or petty, can pre-
scribe what shall be orthodox in politics, nationalism,
religion, or other matters of opinion or force citizens
to confess by word or act their faith therein.4`'

The second "f.':ag salute cape" implies that in the Su-
preme Court's view no official can coerce uniformity of opinion
and prescribe what shall be orthodox by forcing children to
participate in ceremonies symbolizing particular beliefs or
allegiance.
But the state, while excusing from the flag salute
ceremony children whose religious convictions forbade partici-
pation, was still free to require that the ceremony be held in
the public schools.
The implication of the Court's dicta in the
Amish school case, further, is that officials may
prescribe
what is orthodox in the sense of maintaining a rather compre-
hensive system of educational compulsion (e.g., requiring all
children to attend, until age sixteen or seventeen, the rather
standardized institutions that the state is willing to recog-
nize as "schools")..
It appears that the Court will be moved to
intervene when obviously extreme regulations are imposed (such
as a bar against foreign languages or the requirement that all
children attend public schools exclusively), or when children are
forced to verbalize certain beliefs or attitudes that violate
religious conviction, but that the Court will not be greatly
moved when the state prescribes in considerable detail the sub-
jects and general school regimens to which all children (except
those who belong to such unusual religio-ethnic groups as the
Amish) must be exposed.
There is room to suggest, we think, that the Supreme
Court's attention to the educational implications of constitu-
tionally protected liberties has been superficial.
Even the
power to prescribe ceremonies and curricula for public schools- -
to ignore for the moment other elements of educational compul-
sion--seem to demand less cavalier treatment.
Since school
attendance is required for so many years of the child's life,
and since for many children there is no readily available alter-
native to public schools, to prescribe what must be included and

1/22
imorod in the curricula of these schools is in effect to dic-
tate the materials to which most children must be exposed, as
well as the materials to be withheld.
1n the words of Robert
Hutchins, "are the decisions of the state with regard to the
curriculum final no matter how they may restrict and distort the
education of the young?
When, if ever, does a state violate
the constitution in limiting the freedom of teachers and stu-
dents?"4°
Hutchins complains, in this connection, concerning
"the immaturity of the law, the temper of the justices, and the
inadequacy of the theory of the First Amendment to which they
resort."47
The Court also may have given inadequate scrutiny to
necessary distinctions among schools which the state itself
operates, schools which the state gives major support but does
not operate, and schools which the state neither operates nor
tenders sizeable subvention.
Logically, it would seem that-
schools not operated by the state should have more freedom from
the state's programmatic controls than schools that the state
maintains, and that schools receiving no sizeable state sub-
vention should enjoy more liberty still.
In the Nebraska case
discussed earlier (involving the issue of foreign languages in
the classroom), the Court's dicta distinguished between "the
power of the state to
.
.
.
make reasonable regulations for all
schools" and "the state's power to prescribe
a curriculum for
institutions which it supports."48
Whereas the general tenor of
relevant cases emphasizes the idea that state legislatures have
very extensive power to dictate for public schools, in the
Hawaiian case examined earlier the Court struck down a law that
gave "affirmative direction concerning the irtimate and essen-
tial details" of nonpublic schools, entrusted "their control to
public officers," and denied "both owners and patrons reasonable
choice and discretion in respect of teachers, curriculum,
and

1/23
textbooks."
The law was condemned because "it would deprive
parents of fair opportunity to procure for their children
instruction which they think is important and we cannot say is
harmful."45'
But in more recent cases, the Court seems to have
neglected distinctions between public and nonpublic schools,
and between state-supported and privately supported schools.
In the "free textbook" case of 1968, for example, the Court
envisioned a domain of state control over nonpublic schools,
state-supported or not, that seems scarcely less extensive than
the power to regulate public schools.
Since Pierce, a substantial body of case law has con-
firmed-Mg-Power of the States to insist that attendance
at private schools, if it is to satisfy state compul-
sory-attendance laws, be at institutions which provide
minimum hours of instruction, employ teachers of speci-
fied training, and cov3r prescribed subjects of instruc-
tion.
Indeed, the State's interest in assuring that
these standards are being met has been considered a suf-
ficient reason for refusing to accept instruction at home
as compliance with compulsory education statutes.
These
cases were a sensible corollary of Pierce v. Society of
Sisters; if the State must satisfy its Interest in
secTh= education through the instrument of private
schools, it has a proper interest in the manner in which
those schools perform their secular educational function."
As was noted earlier, Elson elicits evidence in chapter 4
that the Supreme Court may be ready to take a more serious, sys-
tematic look a+ the fundamental rights that programmatic con-
trols often seem to violate in education.
We hope so.
But how
can we explain the Court's apparent willingness, at least up to
the present point, to permit the state to impose some vision of
"progressive" or "enlightened" child-rearing on virtually. every-
one, especially since the Court offers no cogent rationale (or
"First Amendment theory; if you will) in defense of such a
practice?
It is hardly tenable to argue that Supreme Court
,justices are unintelligent, ethically insensitive men.
A

1 / 24
more plausIlle explanation, we think, is that the Court io
reflectanr the l'roader societal tendency to accept familiar
structures of educational control as too obviously good for the
general welfare to warrant serious questioning.
Or perhaps the
Court is inclined, as many people seem to he, to assume that the
only alternative to programmatic controls in education is no
controls at all.
Let us draw the present chapter to completion,
then, by considering the nonprogrammatic controls that seem
readily available.
Iwidentifying nonprogrammatic ways of fulfilling the
state's responsibility to protect individuals and society from
harmful educational practices, we will not attempt in this
chapter to provide a comprehensive analysis of each method
identified.
Elson assesses several of these approaches at
greater length in chapter 4, and we will examine the relevant
issues carefully in the final chapter, where we must reason our
way to a number of policy recommendations.
We will also forego,
for the moment, consideration of controls relating to health,
safety, and the problem of ensuring that public funds will be
used for their legislatively designated purposes.
It should b'? evident in the following discussion that
no discernible mechanism of state control in education--including
the prevailing programmatic approach--is defect-free.
We will
examine in chapter 5 the possibility that some combination of
strategies is essential.
We begin with comparatively gentle departures from cur-
rent policy and become somewhat more radical as we go along:
Alternative 1:
"License" Educational Substitutions.- -
As a modest way of easing its programmatic constraints in edu-
cation, the state could require local school authorities to en-
tertain proposals which parents, students, or schools might make
for substituting unconventional educational experiences in lieu

1 / 25
of the programs that the state normally demands. ='1
The proposals
could be evaluated in terms of clearly stated standards of rea-
sonableness.
One danger in this approach is that public educe..
tional officials might find ways of ensuring that the standards
of reasonableness were written so as to inhibit the unconven-
tional, or might interpret the criteria in a much-too-confining
manner.
There is no reason, obviously, why the licensing of edu-
cational substitutions need be done at the local level.
Regional
or state agencies could be given the discretionary authority.
In addition, steps could be taken to reduce the bias that con-
ventional educational personnel might introduce into the licen-
sing process.
For example:
Whenever an official saw fit to rule
that a proposed substitution was unacceptable, the students,
parents, or school affected by the ruling could be free to appeal
to a special panel appointed by the governor or the state supreme
court.
The panel could be composed of people of acknowledged
breadth and integrity, drawn largely from outside the "education-
al establishment."52
Alternative 2:
Accept an "OK" from a "Reputable" Agency. --
Before 1965, the Oklahoma State Regents for Higher Education
were requiring graduates of two elite private college-preparatory
schools (Casady School in Oklahoma City and Holland Hill School
in Tulsa) to enter Oklahoma institutions of higher education on
probation, because the two schools in question,
willing to
have no truck or trade with the state department of education,
were unaccredited by that agency."
The situation was ludi-
crous, for graduates of Casady and Holland Hall tended to rank at
the very top of their classes in such institutions as the
University of Oklahoma.
During the 19M -65 school year, under some pressure from
influntial eltizc:ni:, the ORlahuma ::;tate Regents established a

1/ 26
!ommit f ec to consider accepting membership in
tho Independent .3chools Association of the Southwest (ISAS) ,
to
which both i.'.asady and Holland Hall belonged, in lieu of state
accreditation.
Subsequently, 1SAS accreditation was so accepted.
One Important factor in the adoption of the new policy concerned
the apparently rigorous evaluation procedures maintained by ISAS.
Mcmi,ers of the special Pacents committee participated in an ISAS
evaluation of the Casady school and reported that it was most
impressive.
Any other association of schools seeking the recogni-
tion now accorded to ISAS would apparently have to undergo the
same z%-niutiny.
Oklahoma interviewees were unanimously enthusiastic
about the self-accreditation arrangement for members of ISAS.
The fundamental rationale for the approach, apparently, was that
nothing would be gained by second-guessing the evaluational
procedures maintained by ISAS.
ISAS has tightened its evalua-
tion mechanisms since being recognized as an accrediting agency
by the Oklahoma Repents.
ISAS officials want to be sure, it
appears, that this highly advantageous arrangement is not Jeo-
pardized in any way.
The arrangement protects ISAS members from
state controls that might threaten the uniqueness of their pro-
grams.
A similar policy was adopted by New Mexico's Department
of Education in 1971, reportedly with the same rationale in mind:
that there was no point in duplicating evaluations done by repu-
table associations of schools."
This acceptance of ISAS mem-
bership in lieu of regulation by state agencies seems to have
worked very smoothly in Oklahoma and New Mexico.
Nevertheless, some
important questions arise:
Does a self-accreditation framework of
this type provide protection to the elitist nonpublic schools that may
need it the least, while leaving the most unorthodox, experimental
schools, which need protection the most, to the mercy of conventional

1 / 27
state regulation?
There is also some danger, perhaps, that a
group gaining the status now enjoyed by ISAS will be reluctant
to wander far from the beaten path, since doing so might jeo-
pardize its special privileges.
Imaginative experimentation
often necessitates a willingness to take risks.
Sometimes a
certain amount of floundering is unavoidable while a school
works out new pedagogical methods.
A few essential ventures may
look bad indeed, in the short run.
Furthermore, what looks
ineffective in terms of conventional objectives may appear quite
different in terms of unconventional, but equally defensible,
goals.
Can orthodox evaluations reckon with these realities?
If not, how can we provide the necessary leeway to experiment?
Alternative 3:
Rely on Consensual Safeguards.--An
accrediting agency may be viewed from another standpoint--not as
the authoritative sourceof a seal of approval, but as a consen-
sual mechanism.
The basic assumption here might be that indi-
vidual parents or parent-pairs, when acting in isolation, are too
susceptible to extreme educational views.
Accordingly, the
state could require that educational programs be based on collec-
tive decision-making at any one of several possible. levels.
Judith Areen suggests, for example, that since a school neces-
sarily reflects some working consensus, it is itself a type of
"private regulation" that rules out the "unacceptable idiosyn-
cracies" of individual tamilies.35
Along this line, we could
require that activities to be substituted for conventional
schooling be sponsored by "alternative schools" or some functional
nonschoolish equivalent.
One major advantage of this approach
is that, to the extent it involves agreement among a schOol's
(or "non-school's") rtrons, no imposition of an alien way of
life is involved (except to the degree that this can occur
inadvertently in any educational program by means of processes
that the people concerned do not recognize or understand.)
If

1 / 28
the
are ratIonale lo extended olif;ht1y,
one may regard the self-
evaluat:*:,
' :fort: or :school a:-sociationo or accrediting agen-
c.ieL; as e7en more likely to "wash out"
the idiosyncracies of
individual families.
But in a pluralistic society,
as larger
and larger collectivities are required to achieve a working
consensus, it is less and less likely that the consensus is
closely fitted to the values and aspirations of each family
involved.
Thus liberty is infringed upon increasingly.
Alternative 4:
Require Professional Input, but with Few
Constraints on the Product.--The viewpoint is frequently expressed
that as a field of practice, education (much like law and medi-
cine) demands highly del.11oped skills and specialized bodies of
knowledge, neither of which laymen can be expected to possess.
Just as we do not permit people without recognized medical
credentials to go into the business of diagnosing illness and
prescribing treatments, it may be asserted that we should not
permit people without recognized credentials as teachers and
school administrators to diagnose learning problems and prescribe
instructional treatments.
In chapter 2, we assess the extent to
which education can claim to be a field of practice with an eso-
teric, validated knowledge base.
But even if we assume that
the competencies of duly credentialed professionals must be
brought to bear upon educational diagnosis and treatment, it
still
does not follow that programmatic controls are just;fied.
If
wishing credentialed professionals to play a prominent role in
the design of all irograms functioning in lieu of publicly
sponsored programs, the state could simply require this
involvement- -much as some communities require people building
homes to file plans drawn by an architect..
When the state is
not content merely to require professional involvement, but takes
the much more sweeping step of imposing programmatic controls,
wh%t we end up with, lobbying realities being what they are, is

1/29
a set of conventionalities promoted for the most part by the
organized teaching profession, conventionalities that reflect,
not only expert ideas of what constitutes good education, but
efforts to promote thc status and security of the occupational
group itself.
If the basic guidelines of educational programs
are designed, not through state legislatures and bureaus, which
professional associations influence to a marked degree, but by
competent individual educators acting in concert with parents,
less professional self-aggrandizement and much more diversity
seems likely to result.
Alternative 5:
Specify Ends, Not Means.--If we want all
children to acquire specified understandings and skills, it seems
unnecessary, as several writers have emphasized, to maintain the
current system of compulsory school attendance and related con-
trols.56
We could, for example, give parents and children
complete freedom to decide how the specified competencies will
be acquired, so long as each child demonstrated periodically
(by responding to national tests, for example) that at least
normal progress was being made.
Alternative 6:
Rely on a Disclosure Law Approach.--To
the extent that parents may be viewed as reasonably rational
decision-makers in education, we may identify a central state
function as one of ensuring that schools provide parents with
adequate decision-making information.
In response to a tendency
by some schools to mislead parents, it is hardly the most logical
strategy to dictate programs and methods.
If accurate informa-
tion is what is lacking, accurate information is what should be re-
quired. The state should require all schools to be informed and informa-
tive concerning the extent to which they are achieving the ends they
avow.
As we will point out in more detail in chapter 5, many categories
of information may be identified as the right of the parent to obtain.
The state could audit the information on a scientific sampling basis

1
/ 30
to help ensure accuracy.
Procedures and penalties could be set
out for the protection of parents and students.
With the neces-
sary intelligence from schools in hand, the state could publish
an annual handbook summarizing, chiefly for the use of parents,
the success
each school is experiencing in meeting the goals
it has named.
It might turn out that parents, thus informed,
would be more rigorous than the state in demanding effectiveness
of schools.
There are also problems with this approach that must
be considered later, such as the tendency of humans to ignore
eviderle in favor of emotion in many decision-making contexts.
In briefly discussing these six alternatives to program-
matic state controls in education, we have not exhausted the list
of possibilities, as later chapters will make clear.
We have
demonstrated, however, that numerous options are available.
The
date need not choose between programmatic controls and no
controls at all.

1/31
notes to Chanter 1
1.
See documentation on this point provided by Elson in
chapter 4,
2.
Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406 U.S. 205, 92 S. Ct. 1526 (1972).
3.
Donald A. Erickson, "The Plain People vs. the Common
Schools," Saturday Review 49 (Nov. 19, 1966),
pp. 85-87, 102-1038
"The 'Plain People" and American Democracy," Commentary 45
(Jan.,
1968), 36-448 "The Persecution of LeRoy Garber," Schwa Bayley 78
(Nov., 1969), 81-90.
4.
When the child attends a public school,
the costs are
taken out of tax revenues, but when the child attends a nonpublic
school, the costs must be provided through private investment
(usually on the part of the parent),
even though the parent must
continue to pay his share of the tax bill for public
education.
5.
See chapters 5 and 7 in Donald A. Erickson, ed., Public,
,trots for Nonpubliq Schools (Chicago:
University of Chicago
Preset 1969)8 and Elson's analysis (chapter 4) in the present report.
6.
Donald A. Erickson, "Freedom's Two Educational Imperatives:
A Proposal," in Erickson, ed., 1221114 Cpntrola,
p. 1648 and E. G.
West, "The Economics of Compulsory Education" (pre-publication
manuscript, 1972).
7.
Milton Friedman. CaMlialigLandErttil2m (Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press,
5 --1078 John
Coons, William H.
Clune III, and Stephen D. Sugarman, private-Wealth and Public Edlica-
=an (Cambridge: Belknap Press of harvard University Press, 1970)4
esp. chapter 68 Charles S. Benson, "Economic Analysis of Institu-
tional Alternatives for Providing Education (Private, Public Sector),"
in Roe L. Johns et at., eds., Economic_Factors Affecting the
financine of gducedign, National Educational Finance Project; Vol. 2
(Gainesville, Fla.. the Project, 1970), pp. 121-172.
8.
Bruce Cooper, Free and Freedom School o (Washington, D.C.:
President's Commission on School Finance, 1971)8 Allen Graubard,
"The Free School Movement," Harvard Educational Review 42 (Aug..
1972), 351-73.
9.
Robert Glaser, "Individuals and Learning:
the New
Aptitudes,"
Researcter 1 (June, 1972). 5131 Eric A.
Hanushek and John F. Kain, "On the Value of Equality git Educational
Onuortunity as a Guide to Public Policy," in Frederick Mosteller
and Daniel P. Moynihan, eds., 9n Equality o
Educational Opportunity
(New York: Random House, 1972), pp. 116-145.
10.
Glaser, "Individuals and Learning," p. 5.
11. =M. P. 6.
12.
Hanushek and Kain, "On the Value," p. 139.
13.
Ibid.

1/32
14.
Christopher Jencks et al.,
Ineauality (New York: Basic
Books, 1972).
15.
E.g., James G. Guthrie, "A Survey of School Effective-
ness Studies"
(pre-publication manuscript, University of California
at Berkeley, 1972).
16,
Rosalie Wax, "The Warrior Dropouts," Transaction, May,
1967, pp. 40-46.
17.
Wisconsin v. igder, supra, note 2.
18.
Erickson, "The Persecution of LeRoy Garber."
To those
who are familiar with the Supreme Court's notable decision in the
Amish school case of 1972 (Wisconsinv. Yoder, goca, note
2),
the ordeal of LeRoy Garber may seem irrelevant, since it is
unlikely to be duplicated again.
As we demonstrate later, however,
the Supreme Court evidenced no inclination to extend similar
liberties to other groups, carefully delimiting its decision to
the unique religio-ethnic circumstances of the Amish people.
19.
Ibid.
20.
aid.
21.
Quoted in ibid., p. 86.
22.
Information concerning this example is drawn from Bruce
S. Cooper, "Organizational Survivals
A Comparative Case Study of
Seven American Free Schools" (Ph.D. dissertation in process.
Department of Education, University of Chicago, 1973).
23.
The information that follows is based upon a lengthy
interview with Donald J. Rea, Director of Nonpublic Schools, State
Department of Education, State of New Mexico, on February 22, 1973.
24.
The description of this case is based upon a visit to
the "Country School" in 1967 and a lengthy interview with the
headmistress.
25.
Meyer v. Ste
of NeWaska, 262 U.S.
390, 43 S. Ct. 625,
67 L. Ed. 1042, ALR 1446
t,
(1923).
26.
At 393-94.
27.
At 401.
28,
At 403.
29.
At 401,
30.
At 402,
31.
Ellwood P. Cubberley, Public Educatiop
th, unit pd
States (Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Company,
1919), pp. 338, 341.

1/33
32.
For useful descriptions of the era, see Sister Raymond
McLaughlin.
a
AG
Washington:
Catholic University of America Press,
Walter
H. Beck,
(St. Louis:
Concordia Publishing House, 1939 4 Leo Pfeffer, Church._ State. apt
Freeslos (rev. ed.; Boston:
Beacon Press, 1967), chapter 13.
33.
Piave yt_Societv of Sisters, 268 U.S. 510, 45 S. Ct.
571 (1925), at 526.
34,
At 573.
35.
At 573.
36.
baciligtuLujajwajggft, 273 U.S. 284, 71 L. Ed. 646,
47 S. Ct. 406,53ALR533(1927), at 285-86.
37.
At 298.
38.
namstmaiLm6lage, supra, note 2, at 221.
39.
At 225-26.
40.
Earler cases involving church - related schools did not
invoke the Establishment of Religion clause of. the First Amendment,
for the Supreme Court did not consider that clause, addressed to
Congress, to be applicable to the states until the 1940 case of
Cantwell v._ Compoticut, 310 U.S. 296.
41.
Wisconsin v. Yoder, ima, note' 2, at 215-16.
42.
At 219.
43.
At 235.
Italics added.
44.
J4inersville v. Gobitis, 310 U.S. 586 (1940), at 598-99.
45.
West 341. State Bd. of We. v.,Dgmette, 319 U.S. 624,
87 L. Ed. 1628, 63 S. Ct. 1178, 147 ALR 674
1943), at 640-42.
46.
Robert M. Hutchins, "The Constitution of Public Educa-
tion," Center MaRaline 2 (July, 1969), S.
47.
Ibid.
48. MIALaAJIAILAIfigboakg, supra, note 25, at 402.
19.
hprinston v. Tokushigq, =Ea, note 36, at 298.
50.
Bd. otAvegtton v. Allyn, 392 U.S. 236, 88 S. Ct. 1923,
20 L. Ed. 2d 1060 (1968), at 245-47,

BEST COPY AVAILABLE
/34
Ki.
nf. wdrar "P. FrielenbPrFt "Autnnnmy and Learning."
Fostri^P and 4nno)A Grns.1, pds,, Raiical Seboo) Reform
few
R;mnfl snd schuater, 1464 0, r,
4P.
"Prebedom's.Two FAucetinnR1 Tmoorat;vee,a
r. 17t.
Rsimal nn lanottIV interviews with key new'snnnel of
the okiehnme StatA RoPrel of RemPnts anz, the Tnelerpndent Srhonla
AmpneliRtinil of thP RouthwPst.
44,
Roped on a lengthy interview with a key member of the
New Maximo nPrartment of Rduration,
cc,
Judith (, groan, "Alternative g^hnmlst
Patter
f:uarA;otre than Ramily nr State?"
Sphrpl Review Pi
19,7?), 174-191.
5A,
Priedonhamr argues:
"Standarditad testi,1* has
deyelnred en massively in the United States, both in quality
anvi in the Rnele of its ortorpria0. that it would be hrth
aimrle and economics] to furlough your, people from sehnol so
1Myl, 2Q they reported to a testing: renter for a ley or two each
year end demonstrated that they were making normal proeress
tmwpwl the rregeribed .fna]n of the eurrimulum."
Edgar 7.
Prielenhart!, "Stages and Role in Fducation,"
The Hupstat )8
(antmbebr-October, 1068) . 16.
h similar auFgestion has been
mad* by Paul nnodvassn in his GLIME9lenrygladdpeptic%n (New Yorkt
wr.ri/nn Protege 14441,

CHAPTER 2
THE CASE FOh PFCCIIAMMATIC CONTROLS
In chapter 1 we suggested that controls in education
which specify child-rearing practices, and consequently may be
described as programmatic, are a serious threat to individual
freedom and an impediment to the improvement of education.
We
demonstrated that a number of nonrrogrammatic strategies were
available for carrying out the state's protective responsibility
in education.
It appears, consequently, that unless we can find
some compelling ratinnale for programmatic controls we will be
unable to justify them at all.
In searching the relevant literature and pondering the
issues, we conclude that the most powerful rationales for pro-
grammatic controls concern the state's responsibility (a) to
ensure that children have a reasonable chance to pursue happi-
ness as autonomous human beings and (b) to preserve the social
fabric upon which virtually everyone's happiness and auto-
nomy depend
.
If the state neglects its responsibility, to an
avoidable extent many individuals may be deprived of self-
fulfillment; society may be burdened by unemployment, indigence,
crime, juvenile delinquency, and mental illness; the absence of
common outlook among citizens may produce unmanageable strife;
and the failure to develop available talent may rob everyone of
important benefits.
a,
The Rights of Children
Though the generally acknowledged rights of children
Are numerous and may be articulated in a variety of ways,
probably the aspect most pertinent to programmatic
controls is
the right of the child to choose freely among available ideologies,
vocations, and life styles, and to develop the decision-making

2/2
capabilities that make choice more than a fiction--at least to
the extent that his or her inherited characteristics
permit.
If
the state must limit the freedom of parents, educators, and even,
in the short run, of children themselves to accomplish this
objective, the interference seemo justified.
The ideal of using schools and colleges to help produce
autonomous human beings lies at the heart of the concept of a
liberal education.
Thus, for example, Booth emphasizes that the
product yielded by a liberal education "is the knowledge or
capacity or power of how to act freely as a man.
That's why we
call liberal education liberal:
it is intended to liberate from
whatever it is that makes animals act like animals and machines
act like machines."'
Similarly, F:edfield insists that our funda-
mental quest must be for the education that contributes to the
achievement of autonomy, "the necessary condition of happiness."2
To satisfy this liberal criterion, educational systems
must promote the rationality of children and must function as
forums in which a wide range of options can be examined freely.
This approach is utterly at odds with attempts by state officials
to mold children to some selected vision of the good society.
It also conflicts with attempts by parents to stamp particular
ideologies and life styles into the young by curtailing the
opportunity to decide.
The goal of education must be a human
being who "has learned to think his own thoughts, experience
beauty fir himself, and choose his own actions."
If after
considering available alternatives, the individual rejects the
national mainstream and becomes an Amishman, hippy, or radical
intellectual, the state has no ground to complain.
It is
assumed that in an unmanipulated marketplace of ideas, the best
values and ideologies will gain majority support in the long run.
Positions that lose supporters in sivh a situation presumably
have demonstrated a lack of logic.
nimilarly, if the child of an

2/3
Old Order Anishman decides, after viewing the options
in a truly
neutral school, that he prefers to work for Standard Oil and
live in a two-car suburban split-level, in an important sense
his parents cannot justly accuse the school of alienating their
child from them.
The purpose of the education was not to dis-
parage one way of life and exalt another, but to make self-
determination possible.
When a child who grew up in an Amish
home decides that another life style is preferable, the choice
is his, not the school's, and not the state's.
Why should he
be denied the right to choose?
In keeping with this position, Mr. Justice Douglas
registered a strong partial dissent in the Supreme Court's
Amish school case.
The Court, he insisted, had failed to con-
front the issue of student rights:
On this important and vital matter of education, I
think the children should be entitlF:d to be heard.
While the parents, absent dissent, normally speak for
the entire family, the education of the child is a matter
on which the child will often have decided views.
He
may want to be a pianist or an astronaut or an ocean
geographer.
To do so he will have to break from the
Amish tradition.
.
.
.
If a parent keeps his child out
of school beyond the grade school, then the child will
be forever barred from entry into the new and amazing
world of diversity that we have today.
The child may
decide that that is tht preferred course, or he may
rebel.
It is the student's judgment, not his parent's,
that is essential if we are to give full meaning
to
what we have said about the Bill of Rights and of the
right of students to be masters of their own destiny.
If he is harnessed to the Amish way of life by those in
authority over 11:1m and if his education is truncated
his entire life may be stunted and deformed.4
Let us assume we are in favor of having the state do
what it can to promote individual autonomy.
What then can the
state do?
What educational processes or outcomes are essential,
or at least simificantly conducivc,, t^ the achievement
of
autonomy?
In what respects can these processes or outcomes be

2/4
guaranteed, or at least made significantly more likely to occur,
through state educational controls?
To begin with the simplest aspect of these questions:
Certain elementary understandings and skills, virtually everyone
seem likely to agree, are probably essential to responsible,
autonomous adulthood, at least for the vast majority of people.
Though questions can be raised about the cruciality twenty years
hence of the Three R's (for most communicating and calculating
soon may be done electronically),r it seems unjust to burden a
child with the risk of growing up without these competencies,
especially since further educational opportunities may be
curtailed as a result.
It is tenuous to assert, similarly, that
there is no justification for familarizing all youngsters with
the fundamental workings of our society's institutions (political,
legal, economic, etc.), so long as the familiarization involves
no attempt to promote a particular point of view.
(Even people
dedicated to revolutionizing society need to know how these
systems work.)
Without such understandings and skills, most
individuals will probably fall far short of the decision-making
capacities they might otherwise develop, and they will find many
options utterly unavailable.
Without the ability to read, for
example, they will find many vocations unattainable, will find
it difficult to secure access to important ideas, and will be
unduly vulnerable to those who attempt to take advantage of
them in the affairs of everyday life.
In fact, it seems likely
that consensus can be reached concerning the reasonableness
(if
not the clear essentiality) of requiring all children to acquire
a basic understanding of a substantial list of areas of study
commonly offered in elementary (if not
secondary) schools.
To
acquaint a child with an area of knowledge is something different,
obviously, from attempting to promote a life style or ideology,
though the two functions 1.re often difficult to separate in

2/5
practice.
Here we have an argument, then, for demanding that every
child be granted at least the essentials of a common elementary
school education.
Considering the Old Order Amish as an example,
the range of options that a simple elementary school education
makes available is surprising indeed, even when the education is
provided in primitive rural schools.
ln Kansas, members of the
Old Order who decided to leave the Amish fold and enter college
experienced remarkable success, regardless of the fact that they
had never attended high schoo1.6
(Usually, they prepared for
college independently or through the medium of correspondence
courses.)
Individuals from the Old Order, almost universally
kept from attending high school, can be found successfully pur-
suing a surprising variety of vocations.'
Several, for instance,
are known to be college professors.
Consequently, Mr, Justice
Douglas may have exaggerated the necessity of high school atten-
dance.
"If a parent keeps a child out of school beyond the grade
school," it is not necessarily true that "the child will be for-
ever barred from entry into the new and amazing world of diversity
that we have today."
Much depends on what forms of out-of-school
education are available to the child.
There is evidence from
history to suggest that success in school instruction is more a
consequence than a cause of the access minorities to secure to
middle-class vocations.a
Even if we agree that few people can achieve a reasonable
amount of autonomy without the essentials of an elementary school
education, however, we have not provided an adequate justifica-
tion for programmatic educational controls.
If we want all
children to develop specified understandings and skills, it seems
unnecessary to maintain the current system of compulsory school
attendance and related regulations.
We could give parents and
children complete freedom to decide how the specified competen-

cies will be acquired, so long as each child demonstrates period-
ically (by responding to national tests, for instance) that at
least normal progress is being made.9
Or if reluctant to allow
that much latitutde, we could at least
"license" proposals from
parents and students who wish to substitute other educational
experiences for in-school instruction, so long as the proposals
meet certain criteria of reasonableness,
and so long as students
show from time to time that they are learning what the state
demands.'`'
We should emphasize in passing one major advantage of
limiting state educational prescriptions to those understandings
and skills which virtually everyone considers essential to auto-
nomous, happy adulthood:
To establish educational policies on
the basis of agreement among the parties affected is not to
impose a hated way of life on anyone's
child, for the state is
merely doing what the parent wants.
It is no accident that
Hutterites have no objection to letting the colony's nursery
begin training and indoctrinating their young from an extremely
early age, or that many Israeli parents
have relinquished virtual-
ly total control of their children's upbringing to Kibbutzim.21
When parents and school are working in concert, nobody has much to
lose.
In complex societies all over the world, however, state-
controlled education arouses parental resistance.22
The reason
is that child-rearing practices
ponsored or required by the
state in pluralistic societies are at odds with many parental
views of the good life and how to prepare for it.
Even in phi-
ralistic societies, however, incursions upon individual liberty
will be minimized if the state confines
its directives to areas
of almost universal agreement.
Of course, one can ask whether
there is any need for state controls when the state is simply
demanding what all citizens consider essential.
We will examine
that question in chapter 3.

2/7
Can we stop with the agreed-upon essentials of an
elementary school education?
Is anything beyond that level
critical to the development of individual autonomy? A further
prerequisite of autonomy, perhaps,
is an introduction during
adolescence and early adulthood to options that are too complex
for adequate consideration in the pre-adolescent years.
The
freedom to choose means little if the individual is unaware
of alternatives--unacquainted with ideologies, life styles,
and vocations not characteristic of his immediate community.
It seems plausible to assert,
furthermore, that decision-making
skills need more honing than occurs in the elementary grades if
one hopes to make rational choices Ir the complex modern world.
A familarity with the modes of inquiry of several disciples
might help.
More problems should be manageable, more occupations
accessible, and more leisure activities available after an inten-
sive study of mathematics, belles-lettres, and rhetoric.
An
involvement in group discussion of historical and contemporary
issues seems advisable.
Exposure to various sports, fine arts,
practical arts, and crafts is a good way to open up vocational
and avocational worlds.
Great ideas from religion, philosophy,
and jurisprudence help illuminate the fundamental dilemmas
that all humans must learn somehow to manage.
Well planned
studies of ethnic and religious groups, of various parts of the
globe, and of alternative approaches to ethical issues can be
argued for quite cogently.
But educational desiderata of this type can be listed
almost indefinitely, far beyond the bounds of student time in
the high school and even the undergraduate
college.
We are
forced, then, to confront questions pondered for generations by
proponents of liberal education: What knowledge is of most worth?
What knowledge is utterly essential?
At this point, we encoun-
ter many enigmas.
To master any area of human endeavor to the

2/8
extent some scholars think essential, we must neglect areas
that
other scholars think essential.
Available, potentially vital
knowledge has become an infinite ocean.
If thinkers in the
tradition of Herbert Spencer had their way, for instance, all
students capable of benefitting therefrom would be given exten-
sive tutelage in science.13
But if overdone, this approach
might produce a good many technically competent barbarians,
insensitive to,beauty and morality.
Many Bernsteins, Hemingways,
and Calders might never uncover and develop their talents.
Similarly., if we grant all children sufficient training in music,
art, crafts, creative writing, and various
sports to ensure that
potential virtuosi in those areas will be discovered, we may end
up with many people essentially naive in several other crucial
sectors of knowledge and skill.
As a further complication, we
must remember that if schools and colleges monopolize too much
time, many individuals may be robbed of the capabilities they
should develop outside classroom walls.
And to add to these
conundrums, in planning today's education we must cope with the
demands of tomorrow's unknown world in an era of precipitous
change.
State officials who at as if they know what areas of
knowledge are essential for everyone must possess insights as
yet undiscovered by leading scholars,
must be unaware of their
own ignorance, or must be guilty of collosal pretension, for
there is little agreement or certitude among thinkers who have
pondered these dilemmas most deeply.
As Booth observes:
Whether from the baffling confusion reigning in higher
education today we can extract forms of learning
demonstrably more worthy of pursuit than others is not
a settled question.
.
.
Some questions are not faced cheerfully by most of us
in this empirical generation.
It is true, of course,
that we regularly make choices that are based on implied
standards of what is worth knowing.
We set degree

2/9
requirements, we organize courses, we give examinations,
and we would scarcely want to say that what we do is
entirely arbitrary.
. And yet we seem to be radically
unwilling to discuss the ground for our choices; it is
almost as if we expected that a close look would reveal
a scandal at the heart of our academic endeavor.
The
journals are full, true enough, of breast-beating and
soul-searching, especially since 'Berkeley:
But you will
look a long while before you find any discussion of what
is worth knowing.
You will look even longer before you
find anything written in the past ten years worthy of
being entered into the great debate on liberal education.
There is something irrational in our contemporary neglect
of systematic thought about educational goals.
When C. P. Snow and F. R. P:avis exchanged blows on
whether knowledge of Shakespeare is more important than
knowledge of the second law of thermodynamics, they were
both, it seemed to me, much too ready to assume as in-
dispensible what a great many wise and good men have
quite obviously got along without.14
No wonder Refield observed:
"If we, like the Homeric
gods, were immortal, we could learn all possibly useful methods
and undertake all the activities for which they prepared us;
over an infinite period of time we could perhaps come to happi-
ness.
As it is we must, in education as in everything else,
make our best guess airl launch ourselves into the void."15
The question of what is most worth learning, neglected in
higher education, seems scandalously ignored at precollegiate
levels.
But if we cannot identify what everyone must master, by
what warrant do we specify what everyone must undergo? Little
candidly acknowledged uncertainty is reflected in the relevant
school codes, department of education regulations, and local
school board resolutions.
It is understandable, then, that
Robert Hutchins, a leading proponent of liberal education, finds
the logic behind conventional school programs "incomprehensible."18
It is difficult to improve on the observation of Franklin Littell

2/10
concerning officials who seem to require no justification for
their actions:
"One is moved to exclain, in the words of Oliver
Cromwell to a zealot of his own day, a zealot whose rage was
destructive of the public dialog:
'In the bowels of Christ,
man!
Did it never occur to you that you might be mistaken?'"17
But perhaps we have gone too far in applying to the high
school ideas on liberal education generated mostly in the context
of `college -level concerns.
Two considerations must be examined
in this regard:
First, we may be able to identify at the high
school level, if not at the college level, areas of study probably
essential to anyone's autonomy.
Second, since precollegiate
students are more easily influenced than their post-secondary
confreres, special steps may be needed to prevent indoctrination
and other infringements on their autonomy.
As for the first of these two considerations:
If some
areas of study at the high school level are indispensible, in
virtually everyone's eyes, to the achievement of individual
autonomy, we need not identify them at the present moment.
The point to make here is the one made in considering earlier
the essentials of an elementary school education:
If state
officials cannot identify the vital outcomes of schooling, they
have no firm basis for programmatic regulation.
If officials
can identify indispensible understandings and skills, they
have not thereby created a justification for programmatic
controls.
In such a case, why should the state not let parents
and children develop the specified competencies through whatever
means they prefer?
Why should state intervention not be limited
to the cases in which it is shown (through a testing program,
for example) that children are not making satisfactory progress
toward the acquisition of those competencies?
It is difficult
to see why not.

2/11
In reaching this conclusion, we must recognize a hypo-
thetical exception," however, in that there may be only one way
to develop some essential understandings and skills.
If no
alternative can produce the outcomes the state is entitled to
demand, the state is obviously justified in requiring a single,
standard approach.
We have been able to identify no area of the
school curriculum that can be pursued successfully only in
standard schools, and for some areas, these schools seem an
obviously inferior place for the desired learning to occur.
But
the "hidden curriculum" (the set of values and behavior patterns
that formal and informal organizational procedures seem designed
to promote) may represent a special case.
Since Robert Dreeben's publications on the hidden or
unstudied curriculum are in some respects
the most succinct
available, we will use his approach to summarize the most
pertinent ideas, though not all reputable writers view the topic
in precisely the same way.
Dreeben suggests that schooling may
be an essential mechanism for developing the "sentiments and
capacities" that are imperative for all people who wish "to
participate as adults in an industrial nation whose dominant
political and economic institutions have not experienced funda-
mental structural change over the past century."19
In schools
children learn, not so much from their studies as from the pat-
terns of behavior that the organizational structure generates,
to relate to others in ways basically different from those learned
earlier in the family.
In the family, there is a tendency to
treat everyone as a unique human being.
In the bureaucratic
spheres that pervade the larger society, the individual must be
capable of working with universalistic norms (which treat all
people in a given category the same, disregarding differences
among them); of interacting with other people in a limited,
specific way (as, for example, when a surgeon deals with the

2/12
morely ar a patient of a particular type, or when a school
principal recognizes that he is not responsible for the miscon-
dut of children during the hours when they are away from school);
of differentiating of the attributes of an organizational
position from the characteristics of the individual occupying the
position (as when a worker calmly obeys a foreman he dislikes);
and of forming and tolerating the transient, shallow social
relationships that are so common in organizational
life.
Dreeben
thinks "formal schooling .
.
. may provide psychological capa-
cities that individuals 'require' in their daily activities as
the clients (customers, patients,
renters, litigants, depositors,
passengers) of others in their occupational pursuits."°
While
agreeing with Dreeben in many respects, Gintis emphasizes the
other side of the coin, viewing patterns of daily life in schools
as .designed primarily to make people effective producers (not
consumers or clients) in a bureaucratic society. 21
For instance,
Gintis thinks people learn in schocis to tolerate long periods of
boredom, to master tasks that have no meaning to them, to follow
schedules dependably, to compete, to subordinate current interests
for the sake of future pay-offs, etc., because these are the be-
havior patterns valued by most employers.
On the basis of these analyses, we may attempt to justi-
fy compulsory attendance at conventional schools by asserting
that this policy is designed to provide children, by means of
the "hidden curriculum," with competencies entirely essential
to the autonomy that is possible in the modern age.
Adopting
this viewpint, we can easily explain why no state in the union
is content to prescribe certain skills and understandings,
leaving parents and children free to determine whether mastery
will be required in conventional ways or not; why LeRoy Garber
was fined in Kansas even though his daughter had mastered all
the subjects required by law (see the description of his case in

2/13
chapter 1); and why schools whose structures depart radically
from conventionality are harassed even when their students make
good academic-progress.
Similarly, we are prepared for the
disclosure that many employers use school and college diplomas
as screening devices, not because these' diplomas certify the
possession of specific job skills, but because people who have
endured many years of schooling without being branded as failures
are probably capable of fitting well in most organizational set-
tings.22
But is Dreeben on target when he suggests that people
who have not learned from the unstudied curriculum of conventional
schools how to function in a bureaucracy-dominated world will
have great difficulty doing so in later life?
In this connection,
again, the example of the Old Order Amish people is illuminating,
for though the simple elementary schools they usually attend
exhibit few of the norms of which Dreeben speaks, and though
the Plain People almost never attend high schools, they seem
typically viewed by employers as superb producers and by bankers
and other business men as superb clients.23
There are still
many examples, furthermore, of non-Amish individuals who,
despite extremely limited formal schooling, have achieved extra-
ordinary success in our bureaucratic world.
It seems obvious,
then, that some people can acquire the competencies of which
Dreeben and Gintis write without being conditioned for many years
by the hidden curriculum of the conventional school.
For all we
know, most people can.
Even without examining the desirability
or essentiality of preparing children to be good cogs in organi-
zational machinery, then, we conclude that we have not yet found
a good reason, based on evidence, why a state should impose the
structure of the conventional school on everyone.
We must consider now the impressionability of children
and adolescents.
On the negative side, we are concerned with

2/114
protecting the young from indoctrination.
On the positive side,
we want to provide a forum (a cafeteria of alternatives) in which
youngrtcro will confront a wide range of options and develop the
caparity to make wire, autonomous choices.
rirectly pertinent here is a fundamental theme of the
literature on liberal education:
to liberate, a school or
collet;0 must free the student from the biasing impact of all
paroehiall=s, be they ethnic, religious, national. or ideo-
loci:73.1.
The autonomous human being, in this view, makes his
choices
an individual, unburdened by prior commitments to
any group position.
To quote Leonard Fein, "liberal intellec-
tuals have cast their lot
against tradition, ritual, and
--community
.
.
.
.
The traditional liberal perspective maintains
its utopian commitment to a world .
.
.
in which the private
community would be obsolete. "24
How can we promote this indi-
vidualistic freedom, this difficult independence, if education
is governed by private communities, by special interest
groups?
The Supreme Court has struck down several efforts to
outlaw"cpecial interest" schools, but since, as we noted earlier,
it har done little to inhibit the forcible conventionalization of
these schools, the educational diversity now judicially guaranteed
is more limited than appearances suggest.
The vast majority
of children are required to spend many years of their lives in
conventional schools.
Furthermore, leading proponents of liberal
dilTarakr,e oven our existing tolerance of private schools
ac, indefensibly conaucive to parochialism.2'
And our society
exacts a financial penalty from parents who elect to send their
children to schools outside the state-operated system.2°
-urt car..es concerned with the justice of this financial
penalty
reveal that the judiciary generally regards the publicly
operated schools as superior to other schools in one important
respect:
the public schools, unlike the others, are considered

2/15
neutra1.27
Viewed from the American bench, the public schools
are the unbiased forum we seek.
They are a cafeteria in which
the young confront a wide range of options and presumably have
opportunity to develop the capacity to make informed, independent
decisions.
The question of whether the state has the capacity to
guarantee the neutrality of the schools most children will of
necessity attend is both crucial to our analysis and generally
neglected.
If the state cannot ensure that an educational forum
is unbiased, it obviously cannot invoke the ideal of individual
autonomy as a justification for requiring all children to spend
many years within that forum.
Logically it may be forced, as the
most workable approach to neutrality, to encourage a great
diversity of educational approaches, none of them neutral, but
all tending to balance each other off in the national dialog to
which they contribute.
Let us consider, then, the factors
involved in making a school neutral.
Official school observances seem at first glance to be
the easiest segment of school activity to neutralize.
There is
nothing subtle or hidden about them.
One can readily determine
whether they exist.
But evidence on the
ineffectiveness of legal
directives in education is sufficient to give anyone serious
pause.
Whatever one may think of Supreme Court rulings on
prayer and Bible reading in public schools,
the record is clear:
the rulings have been widely flouted, and apparently no one can
do much about the flouting. 28
In the words of one study,
.
.
there is no necessary and direct relationship be-
tween a Supreme'Court decision (or, perhaps, other na-
tional enactments as well) and actual local practice.
The tangible consequences of national efforts at change,
we have seen, are the product of an extended process in-
volving many forces and people.
The process only starts
with enunciation of a new national policy; groups, cor-
porations, individuals, and public officials then inter-
act as their priorities and power permit, shaping the

2/16
eventual outcome as nearly as possible to their pre-
ferred image.:23
Many scholars insist, in fact, that it is unrealistic
to expect schools to maintain an unbiased stance.
In the public
schools, at least, neuvrality can hardly be achieved unless of-
ficials disregard demands for privileged treatment from the same
social order that granted their power and privilege.
After
examining several societies, especially our own,
the late
sociologist-anthropologist Jules Henry asked, half-despairingly,
"Is education possible?"3°
He concluded, his pessimism un-
diminished, that education (which he defined in the autonomy-
promoting sense under consideration here) was not possible in
schools maintained by any society or cultural group.
The logic
of his analysis is straightforward:
No social system can be
expected to take deliberate self-destructive steps.
Since every
social system Henry had examined or read about, including our
own, seemed based upon obviously illogical assumptions, every
one of these social systems depended for its survival upon the
inculcation of "socially necessary ignorance."
Most citizens,
he stated, must believe that their form of political economy is
the best, !Ir the system will not work.
In societies like ours,
the schools must not counteract compulsive spending--by encoura-
ging such groups as the Amish, for example.
Nothing of conse-
quence must be done to interfere with the readiness of citizens
to march off and kill on command.
Henry listed numerous other
components of the stupidity that "pays off in the social and
politicml areas over the short run."31
There is room to suggest that some of Henry's specific
charges are extreme.
For instance, what the leaders of a society
think essential to its survival often turns out to be dispensible..
So far as we can determine, however, no respected body of opinion
in the social sciences regards the schools of any society as

2/17
neutral with respect to the ideologies and life styles they pre-
sent for the consideration of the young.
At least one major
historical treatise has as its central theme the remarkable
correspondence of schools with the social orders that have spon-
sored them."
Part of the explanation for biased schools is the myopia
that comes naturally with socialization to any life view.
When
most people in a given locality find a school congenial, they
usually consider complaints about discrimination to be unreason-
able.
Thus, for example, one encounters few mainstream
Americans around Amish communities who display any understanding
of why the Amish think public high schools are hostile."
(The
high schools do not appear hostile to Methodist!,
Jews, and
agnostics.)
Among numerous striking examples that he cites along
this line, Himmelfarb points out the following:
The society many liberal Christians have seen as secular,
either gladly or sadly, is less secular and more Chris-
tian from a Jewish perspective.
Even those who call
themselves secularist rather than Christian tend to havc
different standards from Jews for judging a culture's
secularism and religious neutrality.
Two tests of this
proposition are the place of Christmas in American life
and the question of religious influences in the public
schools.
For a Jew, no matter how secular,
Christmas
must be more problematic than it is for a Christian
(or ex-Christian) of equal secularity.
Despite all the
efforts, frequently by Jews, to show that Christmas
is no longer Christian (or never was), even Jews removed
from Jewish tradition find themselves obliged to engage in
casuistries:
a tree in the parlor but no wreath on the
door or windows, "Seasons' Greetings" rather than "Merry
Christmas"--the list is long and wryly comical.34
But if easily detected observances are a problem, the
curriculum is much more difficult to neutralize.
Here again,
what one person views as neutrality is outright antagonism to
another.
For instance, some citizens view an education denuded
of theism as neutral.
Others disagree stridently.
In the light
of this dilemma, Counelis offers the intriguing suggestion that

2/18
the public school curriculum be restructured to present "several
theistic and non-theistic outlooks."35
Though deserving attention,
the idea is fraught with difficulties.
The idea of confronting
R child with competing world views is repugnant to some groups.
Some subcultures, moreover, are opposed to the essentially in-
dividualistic critical-analytic approach to truth-seeking that
so dominates American educational philosophy.
Their dialog is
more predominantly with the group experiences of the past.
They
are more preoccupied with wholeness and continuity, with "the
thoughts that wound from behind."
Often persecuted for genera-
tions, they distrust the artificer, the inventor, the intellec-
tual, "those who built vast mountains of information and wrote
the code books and pointed mankind toward ends of which they
were profoundly suspicious."36
And today, now that much of the
worlds treasure has been misused and destroyed by cunning
men who experience no inwardly wounding thoughts from behind,
these groups are gaining allies.
As for the way curricular materials are presented, wide-
spread efforts have been made in recent years to render instruc-
tional approaches more conducive to independent inquiry.
Teachers
have been urged repeatedly, in many ways, not to present the
sciences dogmatically, as bodies of facts to be assimilated, but
to familarize students with the modes of investigation scientists
use to seek knowledge.
The latter approach is liberating.
But
hew can the state make certain that every child will be given this
type of educational experience, especially since the number of
teachers is so large that we cannot possibly have exceptionally
qualified people in most classrooms?
There is research to sug-
gest; that despite more than a decade of extensive efforts,
funded by millions of federal and foundation dollars, to pro-
duce inquiry- oriented instruction in the physical and biological
sciences, teachers as a whole--including those who have parti-

2/19
cipated extensively :In special institutes--merely adapt the new
materials to the old methods."
In connection with the presentation of controversial
topics in schools, furthermore, a major complication inheres
in the fact that children are profoundly influence
by those
comparatively few adults with whom they identify strongly.38
How then can we keep individual teachers and administrators
from stamping out, through the influence they exert over the
young, minority ideologies and life styles?
As one approach,
we could forbid discussion of all value-related topics, since
few individuals seem capable of presenting positions with which
they disagree as cogently as they present positions with which they
agree.
But since virtually every aspect of life is fundamentally
significant to someone, this policy would place a taboo on almost
everything, and make the widely documented boredom of the class-
room more deadly than ever.
And even if we could prevent teachers
from presenting unbalanced discussions of value-related topics,
we would have to reckon with such nonverbal influences as an
attractive or repugnant personality.
When admiring and begin-
ning Lo identify with a teacher, a youngster is likely to acquire
some of the teacher's attitudes and values.
We could forbid all
teachers to reveal their positions concerning issues on which
minorities differ fundamentally from the local majority.
Then
what if the teacher's position becomes known to students, in
spite of efforts to conceal it?
Should the teacher be required
to resign, or failing that, to desist at once from impressing
students favorably, lest they begin to identify with him or her and
in the process to view his or her position in an increasingly
positive light?
We could try not to hire any charismatic teachers,
since they all have attitudes they may transmit powerfully to the
young.
At the same time, we should screen out all cantankerous
instructors, lest students develop antipathy towards the positions

2/20
these teachers embody.
We could require a variety of ideologies
and cultures to be represented proportionately among the attrac-
tive and repellent members of a faculty, so as to cancel each
other out.
Each child could be instructed, during a given
school year, by at least half a dozen charismatic teachers, each
representing a different position, to avoid uni-dlrectional
influences.
But all of these approaches are ridiculous!
There
apparently is no feasible way of neutralizing the tendency of
teachers to influence children one way or another on important
questions.
Furthermore, we cannot expect teachers even to
attempt to hide those biases of which they are totally unaware.
(One need not study much anthropology to discover that every
culture is shot through with unexamined assumptions that members
of other cultures find totally unacceptable and repugnant.)
But the aspect of the school that is probably most po-
tent, yet most difficult to neutralize, is the student sub-
culture, particularly during the pre-adolescent and adolescent
years.
Educators as yet know little about it, to say nothing
of learning how to control it.
As James Coleman's study sug-
gests, conformity to the norms of student peer groups is apparent-
ly induced by the "rating and dating system," which mercilessly
dispenses popularity, respect, acceptance into the crowd, praise,
awe, support, aid, isolation, ridicule,
exclusion, disdain, dis-
couragement, and disrespect.39
The system's blunt estimation
of the student's worth has a profound effect.
As Bernard Rosen's
work with orthodox Jewish adolescents suggests, most young
people may capitulate.
In his study, 83 per cent of adolescents
observed Orthodox dietary laws if their parents
and peers both
were observant.
When both parents and peers were non-observant
88 per cent of adolescents were non-observant.
When parents
and peers disagreed, 74 per cent of the adolescents complied with
their peers rather than their parents.4°

2/21
It seems patently ridiculous to proclaim educational
neutrality when a child from a pacifist minority attends a
public school in wartime, when a few Jehovah's Witness children
are required to rub shouldersvith many peers who consider
"Russellite" doctrines inane, when a few Navaho children, reared
to practice mutual assistance, are placed in a school where most
students compete ruthlessly, and in a hundred other settings
where mercilous social sanctions are exercised against children
who behave in accordance with minority ideologies, values, and
life styles.
It is a travesty to view these situations as
liberating, conducive to individual autonomy.
Capitulating to these pressures.or maintaining his or
her integrity, the individual may acquire permanent scars.
When
Morris Rosenberg compared Catholics, Protestants, and Jews who
had been reared in communities where their religious group was
dominant with those reared in communities where they were in the
minority, he discovered a uniform tendency for the minority-
reared to exhibit more anxiety, as reflected in psycho-somatic
symptoms, many years later in adulthood.41
On the basis of
hundreds of relevant studies, Bloom concludes:
Where the home and the school are mutually reinforcing
environments, the child's educational and social devel-
opment are likely to take place at higher and higher
levels.
Where the home and the school are contradictory
environments, it is likely (though our evidence is not
very systematic on this point) that the child's develop-
ment will be slower, more erratic, and, perhaps, with a
good deal of emotional disturbance for the child.42

2 /22
As if these impediments to school neutrality and indi-
vidual autonomy were not enough to cause despair, we must add
the contention considered earlier--that the organizational struc-
ture of a school, in its formal and informal aspects, far from
being a mere container into which ideas of many sorts can be
poured, is itself a potent instrument (a "hidden curriculum ")
for socializing children to a particular life
style.
In this
light, since it seems difficult to conceive of continuing, pur-
posive social activity bereft of structure,
the notion of an un-
biased education seems equally difficult to conceive.
Some
life style must be maintained in any school, but every life
style is odious and threatening from some cultural and ideologi-
cal standpoints.
Several scholars are charging that public schools in the
United States have been seriously biased from their inception,
despite the carefully nurtured myth of neutrality.
(Nonpublic
schools also have been far from neutral.)
Some writers accuse
the public schools of deliberate failure in the education of
disadvantaged minorities.'" Others, seeing formal education as
much less efficacious than most people assume, declare that its
main function is not to promote social mobility: which it alleg-
edly cannot do, but to maintain the fiction that it promotes
social mobility. 44
By happy accident (as this argument goes),
the schools are so organized that most children from disadvan-
taged homes are much less successful academically than are
children from privileged homes.
But if the school is assumed to
be an open avenue to success, people who are kept poor and power-
less will believe they have nothing to blame but their own stu-
pidtty or lack of motivation.
Privileged groups will be safe
from suspicion and attack while they continue to exploit society
and perpetuate their wealth and power from generation to genera-
tion.
Another body of literature asserts that the bulk of

2/ 23
American schools, dedicated to the "melting pot philosophy,
have attempted for any years to destroy ethnic diversity,
with the effects.uct of creating a new way of life, but of
promoting Wasp culture at the expense of other heritages brought
to these shores by immigrants."
Several sociological studies
suggest that the status structure of the surrounding community
is echoed accurately, for the most part, in the school.
Child-
ren whose parents are disadvantaged are discriminated against in
many ways on the playground and in the classrooM.
This is
hardly neutrality.
As one important manifestation of bias, the homogeneous
approach to instruction that programmatic state controls encourage,
as we noted in chapter 1, may deny many children the special pro-
grams their cultural backgrounds demand, and thus may rob these
children of equal opportunity, withholding the very prerequisites
of autonomy that were invoked to justify the controls.
Also,
as we have seen, this treat-everyone-the-same approach. is a threat
to minority cultures themselves.
On the basis of the foregoing analysis, we are forced to
conclude that the ideal of the neutral educational forum, being
unattainable by any means now discernible, can hardly be used to
justify programmatic controls.
There is no neutral school.
If
it could be demonstrated that some schools, even if not neutral,
were much more conducive than other schools to the development
of individual autonomy, we might be able to construct a some-
what plausible case for channelling children into the former
schools rather than the latter, but we can discern no reliable
criteria for making such distinctions among schools.
What
many people consider a close approach to neutrality may turn
out, on closer analysis, to close off important options, and what
many people consider unusually confining approaches to education

2 / 24
may have a surprisingly liberating effect.
Pertinent here is
the previously discussed fact that graduates of Amish schools
seem to move readily into mainstream society when they decide
to do so, whereas the public high school appears to create a
trained incapacity to live as an Old Order Amishman.
The
Black Muslim schools, which send some state legislators into
tirades, teach that white people are devils, but apparently
have the effect, when combined with other aspects of the Black
Muslim social system, of imbuing children with a very traditional
middle-class Protestant ethic.47
The available evidence suggests
that Black Muslim schools, partly by creating ethnic pride and a
sense of self-worth, prepare their students to function well in
many middle-class vocations.48
We are back, consequently, to the implication mentioned
earlier.
If a state wants to approach neutrality in the educa-
tion cf its young, the most viable strategy may be to encourage
a great diversity of child rearing approaches, none of them
neutral, but all tending to balance each other off in the nation-
al dialog to which they contribute.
Of course, the state can
also urge all schools to do.what they can to decrease bias and
to maximize the range of options made available for considera-
tion by the young.
It is probably feasible to reduce the paro-
chialism of most schools.
The question is whether state pro-
grammatic controls facilitate or impede progress to that end.
As another way of minimizing the forcible indoctrination
of children and adolescents, the state could abandon or minimize
compulsory school attendance, particularly during the critical
years of adolescence, pour less of its
largesse into programs
designed as a once-for-all treatment for children, and sponsor
unprecedented development of educational opportunities available
throughout life."
In such a context, an individual who attended
a seriously biased high school or none at all could rectify the

/ 25
problem later.
Deciding as an adolescent or adult to defect
from some dissenting subculture,
one could spend a few months
in the nearest educational way-stexion, acquiring the compe-
tencies needed to pursue one's intersests further.5°
Changes in
occupation and way of life are becoming an accepted, frequently
encountered phenomenon, and the trend seems likely to intensify.
Large numbers of citizens--not just a few people from dissenting
homes--will requite periodic retraining.
The pattern of the
future may be cyclic for many people--a few months of instruction,
a few months without it, a few months with it, a few months with-
out it.
As adult education becomes more important, adolescent
schooling may be less important.
And if the state is not forcing
impressionable youngsters into schools where they will be in-
fluenced toward the views of the local majority, many current
incursions upon individual liberty will be avoided.
It is less
crucial to autonomy that adult education
be strictly neutral.
We have criticized as unrealistic the liberal ideal of
providing all children with neutral schools.
We have maintained
that there is no neutral school.
Now we must assess the possi-
bility that attempts to free the student from the biasing impact
of all parochialisms--ethnic, religious, national, ideological- -
are not only unrealistic but counterproductive.
The individual-
istic critical-analytic method that liberal educators have tried
so long to promote "presupposes a basic disjarment between the
thinker and his ground of being, both toward nature and toward
the social matrix.
That is its grandeur, its creative tension,
and also the source of personal and social despair."51
The quest
for a type of individual autonomy that is unbiased by prior commit-
ment to religion, to ethnicity, to locality,
to nation, "has
admittedly been one of the most toitarous enterprises of modern
culture."52
The quest is antagonistic to the very emphases upon

2/ 26
community, tradition, ritual, and history that may be essential
to psychological health and thus--deep irony!--to autonomy and
rational decision making for most people.
This hostile posture
toward tradition, ritual, and community may conceivably contri-
bute to an often-noted anti-historical neglect of the dialog
with the past, to an unconcern for human wholeness, and thus
to the narrow-minded logic that produces massacres of women and
children in the name of national honor, bombings concealed by
deceit in the federal executive, and the warped morality of
Watergate and the Ellsberg trial.
A leading theme in recent social analysis has been wide-
spread loss of identity in a mass society whose modernization
and bureaucratization intensify at a quickening pace.
Thus
Alter speaks of "a frantic urgency to become in the face of all
the forces that seem subtly or crudely to coerce the self."53
He depicts recent Black Power outbursts, radical protest
activities, and counter-cultural developments as largely "the
violent throes of a collective identity crisis,"
.
.
.
"in
one way or another reactions against the increasingly
'ration-
aliz.d' nature of American society, the growth of bureaucracy,
large-scale if ineffectual social planning, computerization,
corporate commercialism, mindless standardization through the
media."54
Glazer traces the failure of much recent social policy
to the weakening of the social fabric that is essential to human
well leinc7.''
Bronfenbrenner blames drug abuse, delinquency,
rejection of society's central values, and other prominent
symptoms of alienation on the many institutions (especially
schools) that deny children the kind of exposure to others
that they need to develop their humanity.
He laments "the
trend toward the construction and administration of schools az
compounds isolated from the rest of the community."57
Many other examples could be cited from this body of

2 / 27
literature.
But strangely, as Fein noteb, though it is widely
recognized that participation in a relatively small, cohesive
community is essential, for most people. to the development of
a sense of identity and the ability to relate numanely to others,
the implications of that recognition for the old view of a
liberating education have been left largely unexamined.58
Obviously, schools cannot simultaneously foster in the student
a strong identification with his natal group, and dismantle in
the student, on the other hand, the community loyalties and com-
mitments that so many liberals view as impediments to autonomy.
A number of writers--notably Novak--may go too far in
insisting that a full-fledged reemphasis on ethnicity is the
only answer to our societalmalaise.58 While some people may be
unable to function well without the security that comes from
ethnic roots, for others religion, some brand of nationalism,
or a particular ideology may fill the same need; and a certain
percentage of the population may successfully follow the lonely
route of attempting to escape all the subjugations communities
seek to impose.
However, the essential point is that, since the
liberal ideal of freeing the student from all parochialisms is
destructive of community, it may be profoundly counterproductive
for most people.
It may be counterproductive, as we suggested earlier,
not only because it robs individuals of identity, but also
because it robs them of the dialog with the past that close-knit
communities of long standing typically promote through orally
communicated traditions, reenactment of key events, symbolism,
ceremony, and other means; because it robs them of a philosophical
base, implicit or explicit; and because it robs them of a concern
for, and sense of, personal wholeness, centeredness, and integ-
rity.
The possibility must be entertained, contradictory as it
may seem, that our society will make more progress toward ration-

2/28
allty cy encouraging community loyalties than by attempting to
deJtroy them.
Even the most insulated of communities (for
example, the Amish) have exhibited profound adaptations over
time."
In a basic sense, no group can escape involvement in our
national dialog.
The extent to.which individuals can be kept
ignorant of options in a world so permeated by mass media may
be more limited than critics of dissenting groups generally
imagine."
Thus, despite all efforts of their elders to isolate
them, many Amish adolescents have been known to drive their bug-
gies to the homes of friends in nearby towns, change into "Eng-
lish" clothing, sow a few oats, and later journey home in buggy
and Amish garb.
Tourists come.
Mainstream society is encoun-
tered again and again.
We should probably be surprised, not
that youngsters become aware of options outside their small neigh-
borhoods, but that any cultural diversity survives in the age
of the transistor.
Perhaps the most rational
interchange of ideas will occur
when communities are secure from attacks upon their unique values
and when individuals are free from doubts about who they are.
Since we can find no way to dismiss these possibilities, we see
no cogent way to argue that the state has a right to impose pro-
grammatic controls wedded to the liberal ideal of individual
autonomy unbiased by community commitment.
b.
The Survival of Society
A second major rationale requiring analysis here asserts
that programmatic controls are indispensible to the preservation
of society, and thus to virtually everyone's well being.
Not
such autonomy is possible, nor much happiness, without the facili-
tating framework, however imperfect, that society provides.
One pertinent body of thought stresses that future citi-
zens must acquire--if necessary through compulsory means-- a

2/ 29
significant range of common experiences and viewpoints, on the
theory that this commonality will weld society together.
James
Conant clearly had this idea in mind when he stated:
"The
greater the proportion of our youth who attend independent
schools, the greater the threat to our democratic unity.
tte32
Another relevant view emphasizes that schools must, as a
means of preserving society; promote the attitudes and under-
standings citizens need to participate effectively in our
political processes.
Early in the effort to establish a system
of free public schools in this country, such articulate educa-
tors as Horace Mann, Henry Barnard, John Pierce,
Calvin Stowe,
and Caleb Mills, along with such political figures such as Daniel
Webster and Edward Everett,. expressed fear that, unless the
public school system were established, the nation might
fall
under the control of an ignorant, uninformed electorate."
Taking a closely related stance, one may argue that
society cannot function unless citizens possess certain skills
purportedly critical in modern institutions.
Thus a leading
student of comparative education declares:
A complex, closely-textured society requires not only
uniformity of language, of number systems, and of
basic knowledge and beliefs about the operations of
the principal organizations of the society, such as the
post office or the tax system.
Such a society requires
also a broad uniformity of various conduct norms:
punctuality, diligence, future orientation, planfulness
and honesty, not to mention a certain standardization
of etiquette.
For many pupils it is as difficult to
learn these practices and attitudes as to learn a
foreign language or mathematics."
These three variations on the theme that schools must
help preserve society by providing certain common attitudes,
understandings, and skills exhibit one weakness:
No one knows
what attitudes, understandings, and skills are truly essential
to the survival of our social order, and no one knows when a

2/ 30
society has developed too much commonality for its own good.
Furthermore, state officials are probably the last group we
should trust to decide how much commonality is essential to
VI,: general weal.
It is in the interest of these officials to
discourage the dissension and diversity that may jeopardize their
positions, subject them to challenge, and make public institu-
tions more difficult to govern smoothly.
Some efforts to promote
unity, in faQ'', may backfire.
We discussed earlier the likeli-
hood that most people in the United States are unable to identi-
fy more than superficially with mass society.
There is some
evidence to suggest that individuals who have developed the
secure sense of identity found in purportedly disunifying sub-
groups are more capable, not less, of involving themselves in
national affairs.65
If the state requires schools to promote commonality of
viewpoint and experience, some programs must be mandated in
schools and some must be outlawed.
Otherwise, since the ocean
of available materials and styles of learning is so vast, there
may be little commonality among the offerings of different
schools.
Who then should he trusted to decide what all educa-
tional programs must hold in common?
Whose version of national
unity should be enforced upon everyone?
To quote the Supreme
Court)
Struggles to coerce uniformity of sentiment in support
of some end thought essential to their time and country
have been waged by many good as well as by evil men.
As government pressure toward unity becomes greater,
so strife becomes more bitter as to whose unity it shall
be.
.
.
.
[id]e apply the limitations of the Constitution
with no fear that freedom to be intellectually and spiri-
tually diverse or even contrary will disintegrate the
social organization."
A device frequently used to obliterate this issue is the
fiction that the common schools simply emphasize what "all
groups have in common."' We noted earlier that certain outcomes

2/ 31
of education may be considered essential or highly desirable
by virtually all citizens in our society, but that these areas
of agreement are probably very minimal.
Even a cursory look at
educational history reveals, however, that the unity the public
(and often many nonpublic) schools have sought to promote is
neither limited in compass nor composed exclusively of what "all
groups have in common."
So pervasive is the domain of common experiences
and understandings promoted through state programmatic controls
and related policies that some scholars think government has
adopted an official "civil religion" and designated the public
school as an established church.6®
That religion, such scholars
assert, is comprised of the values, beliefs, myths, loyalties,
ceremonies, etc., generally subsumed under the rubric,
"The
American Way of Life."
The nation's civil religion is reflected
in the rhetoric and visual symbols of many public ceremonies
(e.g., Presidential inaugurations, celebrations on Memorial Day
and July 4th).
Civil religion is not a substitute for, or rival
of, Protestantism, Catholicism, Judaism, or any other instrument
of personal piety, but rather a somewhat parallel device that
performs vital civic functions.
At one time, as the argument
goes, the events of the Revolutionary War constituted our civil
religion's Exodus.
"The Declaration of Independence and the
Constitution were the sacred scriptures and Washington the
divinely appointed Moses who led his people out of the hands of
tyranny. "68
Later, the Civil War became the motif of national
redemption, with its overtones of death, sacrifice, and rebirth.
Memorial Day, "a major event for the whole community involving
a rededication to the martyred dead, to the spirit of sacrifice,
and to the American vision," gave ritual expression to these
themes."
The nation's public schools allegedly have played a
central rcle in keeping the civil religion truly national.

2/ 32
Eellah thinks "the public-school system serves," for example,
"az a particularly important context for the cultic celebration
of the civil rituals."71
Michaelson suggests that we have assigned public schetts
a dynamic role "in eliciting and instilling what I have called
public piety."72
Perhaps, in his view, "the public school can
be understood as doing in the United States what the established
church did in medieval Europe."73
In support of this possibility,
he cites a blue-ribbon commission of the National Education
Association as stating in 1951 "that the development in children
of devotion to the moral and spiritual values central to the
American heritage
.
.
.
'is basic to all other educational
objectives.'"74
We will not attempt to demonstrate that this concept of
an established civil religion promoted through the schools is
entirely accurate.
For our purposes, the significant fact is
that the common experiences to which the vast majority of the
nation's youth are compulsorily exposed during most of their
formative years are not at all limited to a few essentials held
in common by all groups.
Rather, the legally mandated area of
commonality is so pervasive that first-rank scholars can seriously
characterize it as a religion and way of life.
If it is a way of
life, as we observed earlier, we may be certain that it is viewed
as hostile and repugnant by numerous cultural groups.
If it is
a religion, or if it performs the essential functions of a reli-
gion, the danger arises that it will be as destructive of the
liberty of dissenters as any religious establishment.
Parents
whose child is alienated from them by far-from-neutral schools
are not likely to be comforted by the contention that what these
schools promote is "not really religion."
The distinction makes
no practical difference.
Apart from definitional problems of "religion" and "not

2 / 33
religion," it suems evident that the unity promoted by state-
controlled schools has never been limited to the ideals all groups
in our society hold in common.
Reactions to the tide of immigra-
tion which hit American shores in the late 1800's and early
1900's made this state of affairs particularly clear.
"Let us
now be rminded," Calvin Ztowe declared, "that unless we educate
our immigrants, they will be our ruin.
.
.
.
It is altogether
essential to our national strength and peace, if not even to
our national existence, that the foreigners who settle on our
soil should cease to be Europeans and become Americans.""
The
or
"Americanization" was soon incorporated into the lexicons
of educators and politicians.
But for such influential educators
as
AWood Cubberley, to Americanize meant "to assimilate and
amalgamate these people
.
.
.
and to implant in their children,
so far as can be done,
.
.
.
the Anglo -Saxon conception of
righteousness, law and order, and popular government."'"
The
intent of Americanization was clear, at least in the minds of
many influentials:
the dominance of Anglo-Saxon culture."
Diversity, ethnic and religious, was characterized as a
"problem" that needed to be obliterated.
Historians began to
praise the American frontier as the "crucible" and the
common
school as the "melting pot" of "spiritual transformation."'"
At times the significant WASPish Americanization thrust
was challenged, but not with much discernible success--at least
until very recently.
To mention just two prominent dissenters:
Early in 1915, there appeared on the pages of The Nation
a sequence of two articles under the title of "Democracy versus
the Melting Pot."
In these articles Horace Kallen wrote:
We are, in fact, at the parting of the ways.
A genuine
social alternative is before us, either of which parts
we may realize if we will
what do we will to make
of the United States-- a unison singing the old Anglo-
Saxon theme "America," the America of the New England
school, or a harmony, in which that theme shall be domi-

2/ 34
nant perhaps, among others, but one among many, not the
only one.8°
Later, Louis Adamic, an immigrant turned prolific writer,
took up the theme of America's multi-cultural heritage and criti-
cized continuous insistence on an Americanization program which
implied, through its educational agents, that Anglo-Saxon culture
was superior.
He blamed feelings of ethnic inferiority and
rootlessness among non-Anglo youth on a condescending climate
in American schools.81
His charges seem particularly appropriate
to Blacks, Indians, Appallachian Whites, Chicanos, Puerto Ricans,
and other groups whose cultures are distinctively different from
the national mainstream.
Within recent years, a reawakening
self-consciousness among ethnic groups has prompted bitter pro-
tests concerning the purportedly neutral unity the schools have
been promoting.82
Adding to the chorus of dissent have been
many people who grew up from birth in.the "good life" that the
officially promoted "unity" represents, only to reject its most
fundamental values:88
And in the wake of Vietnam, unauthorized
bombings in Cambodia, Watergate, the ecology movement, and vari-
ous "counter-cultural" developments, it now seems clear that the
officially defined "commonality" around which all groups in our
society join hands in the schools is largely a facade.
Novak voices the acerbic complaint, in this connection,
that "the 'divisiveness' and free-floating 'rage' so prominent
in America in the 1960's is one result of the shattering impact
of 'forced nationalization' upon personality integration.
The American system
leaves all but a certain human type
profoundly deprived--deprived of initiative and symbolic thick-
ness, unable to function in the unconnected way demanded by the
ethnic symbols of Wasps:
individualism, competition= and merely
rational interest. H84
As Alter points out, Novak may have
blamed Wasp culture for many invasions of human liberty, in

2/35
schools and elsewhere, that are more logically attributable to
other sources.85
Alter does
not deny, however--for logically
he could not--that American schools, whether or not dedicated
primarily to the hegemony of Anglo-Saxon ideals, promote a
type of "commonality" or "unity" that many groups view as hostile.
We have returned, obviously, to a theme discussed earli-
er.
In a previous passage, we documented
the non-neutrality of
schools which the states, under the pretense of developing indi-
vidual autonomy, compel children to attend.
Now we conclude
that the states, while purporting to accentuate only the values
all groups in our society hold in common, use programmatic
controls to promote a distinctly biased version of national
unity.
We have no argument, as earlier passages indicated, with
the contention that the nation's youth must be given a basic
understanding of society's vital institutions (political,
eco-
nomic, legal, etc.), as a prerequisite for responsible partici-
pation in democratic processes.
We have demonstrated, however,
that programmatic controls are not essential to the achievement
of these ends.
As for the more sweeping insistence that child-
ren must be forced by law into institutions that will inculcate
devotion to our political system, the idea deserves rejection,
both because it demands indoctrination in whatever ideals are
officially held as good at a particular time, and because it is
unrealistic.
To repeat a previous argument, to demand a free
press while permitting the state to control another, equally
vital, marketplace of ideas seems inconsistent in the extreme.
For present purposes, it is probably not necessary to analyze
at great length the available research on political socializa-
tion; rather, we quote an assessment by Cohen:
First, there is existing research on childrens' political
socialization.
Although there is a good deal of recent

2/36
work in this field, it seems to be concerned with the
development of childrens' political attitudes, rather
than with the schools' influence on them.
Nowhere,
for example, has any direct evidence been presented on
how much the political attitudes of children vary from
school to school.
If the configuration of political
attitudes in each school turned out to be pretty
typical of the political attitudes found in the entire
(school) population, there would not be much basis for
thinking that schools differ much in their impact on
childrens' political attitudes.
But no studies illu-
minate this point.
Let us suppose schools did differ somewhat in this re-
gard.
We would then want to know whether the differences
were a result of schooling, or other environmental
influences--such as the family, ethnic group membership,
and so on.
Again, however, there is no evidence di-
rectly on this point.
The relative importance of school
and non-school environment in the development of politi-
cal attitudes is unknown.
There is, however, some indirect evidence.
For one
thing, much of the political
socialization research
seems to show relatively little change in childrens'
attitudes over time.
If political attitudes undergo
little change during the school years,
of course, it
would be hard to argue that schools could have much
impact on them.
The only exception to this seems to be
during the primary grades, which may be a period in which
children's political ideas do undergo change.
But this
is an age at which children receive little or no explicit
citizenship instruction, and it also happens to be an
age at which family influences are still extremely strong.
None of this suggests that there are large school
effects on political attitudes.
This is supported by the absence
of convincing evidence
that the schools have much effect in other realms.
Childrens' academic performance and aspirations (which,
after all, is what the schools are about), both seem
not to be differentially influenced by schools.
Aspira-
tions, for example, vary only a little among schools, and
they seem to be quite insensitive to variations in school
resources and policies.
In fact they seem to be affected
only by students' family background, academic ability,
and academic standing.
Roughly the same situation seems

2/37
to hold for achievement.
Most differences in student
achievement lia within, not among schools, and no
combination of school resources and practices
seems to
have any noticeable impact on achievement test scores.
These findings have been confirmed in a variety of stu-
dies, undertaken at different times under different
conditions.
They show that schools have little dif-
ferential effect, even in precisely the areas of their
primary concern.
It is hard to believe, therefore,
that they would have more pronounced influence on
such secondary objectives as citizenship.
In fact,
none of the research I have summarized suggests that
schools vary much in their impact on children' politi-
cal learning.
Indeed, what indirect evidence there is
suggests that these attitudes are pretty much invariant
over the duration of public schooling."
Cohen probably should have added, in connection with
evidence we have considered earlier, 'Oat though schools do not
seem to have much power of indoctrination, at least for the
majority of children,-they do seem to have power, when working
at cross-purposes with home and community, to wreak psychologi-
cal havoc in the child, and consequently, to disrupt cohesive
communities over a period of time.
In some respects, ironically,
it seems that schools have more potential to cause harm than to
work the good that state controls are purported to guarantee.
Let us now consider the assertion that society cannot
survive unless schools inculcate, through the hidden curriculum
or other means, the habits and attitudes without which modern
organizations could not exist.
The problem here is that we can
find merely assertions, but no firm evidence.
Different
scholars, as we have seen, present different definitions of the
capabilities that are allegedly essential.
Furthermore, over a
period of generations, exceedingly complex organizations have
been built and manned by people whose schooling was very minimal
and sometimes most primitive in nature.
As the forces of auto-
mation spread, it cannot logically be assumed teat the character-

2/ 38
istics which make organizational life possible today will do so
tomorrow.
If we grant the state the right to impose programmatic
controls to promote the competencies "needed" in a complex
society, then, we are in effect granting the state the right to
make arbitrary decisions about what are the needed competencies.
To recapitulate very briefly:
In the present chapter we
have analyzed the state's responsibility to promote the
development
of autonomy in the young and to preserve the social framework
that is essential to virtually everyone's autonomy and happi-
ness.
We have been unable to identify any compelling rationale
for programmatic state controls.
But controls as pervasive as
these can hardly be accidental.
We turn in chapter three,
consequently, to what may be some "latent" or "hidden" functions
of programmatic state controls in education.

BEST COPY AVAIIABLL
2/39
Notes to Chapter 2
1%
Wayne C. Booth, "Is There Any Knowledge That a
Man Must Have?" in Wayne C. Booth, ed., The Knowlpda Mcipp
Worth Having (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 196 ?),
p. 21.
Cf. Philip W. Jackson, "After Apple-Picking,"
Harvard Educational Review 43 (February, 196?), 51-601 and
Leonard J. Fein, "The Limits of Liberalism," Saturday Review,
June 20, 1970, pp. 83-96.
2.
James M. Redfield, "Platonic Education," in Booth,
The Knowledge Most Worth Having, pp. 158-59.
3.
Booth, "Is There Any Knowledge That a Man Must
Have?" p. 27.
4.
Wisconsin v. Xoder, 406 U.S. 205, at 244-45,
5.
Booth, "Is There Any Knowledge That a Man Must
Have?" p. 5:
"Indeed, we can survive, in a manner of speaking,
even in the modern world, with little more than the bare
literacy necessary to tell the 'off' buttons from the Nin."
6.
Donald A. Erickson, "The Persecution of LeRoy
Garber," School Review 78 (November,
1969), 81-90.
7.
John A. Hostetler and Gertrude Enders Huntington,
Children
("Cape Stun' em 4" Eftea+imn end
lulture," eds. neormo 0.n" toilige Spindler: Now vork:
Holt,
Dinehart and Winston, In' .,
19.71).
8.
Aprarently when the culture of the group is
adapted to the norms of middle-class society, two consequences
ensue:
members of the group do better economically and do
better in schools.
See, for example:
Christopher Jencks id
al., Ineauality, (New York:
Basic Books, 1972); and Ivar Berg,
Edupation ancl Jobs:
The Great Trainin Robbery (New York:
Praeger Publishing Company, 1970).
9.
Friedenberg argues:
"Standardized testing has
developed so massively in the United States, both in quality
and in the scale of its enterprise, that it would be both
simple and economical to furlough young people from school as
long as they reported to a testing center for a day or two
each year and demonstrated that they were making normal pro-
eress toward the prescribed goals of the curriculum."
Edgar
t. Fri.odenberr,"Status and Rqle in Education," T
Humans t, 28
(September-October, 1968)
16.
A similar suggeson has
been
made by Paul Goodman in his Compulsory Mis-Education (New York:
Horizon Press, 1964),

BEST COPY AVAILABLE
/4o
ln.
Cf. Edgar Z, Friedenherg,
"Autonomy And Learning,"
in Reatriee and Ronald Gross. eds., Radical School Reform (New
York:
Simon And Schuster,
1969), p. 142.
11.
John A. Hnstetler and Gertrude Enders Huntington,
The Hutterites in North America ("Case Studies in Cultural
Anthropology," eds. George and Lnuise Spindler; New York:
Holt,
Rinehart and Winston,
1967); Melford E. Spiro, Phil Aren of the
Kibbutz,
(Cambridge:
Harvard University Press,
1958).
Cf. Francis
Sehrag, "The Right to Education," School Review 79 (May, 1971).
159-378.
12,
C. Arnold Anderson, "State Education and Cultural
Alienation" (pm-publication manuscript, University of Chicago,
1469),
13.
Tn his celebrated essay,
"What Knowledge Is of
Most Worth?" Spencer concluded:
"Thus to the question we set
nut withWhat knowledge is of most worth?--the uniform reply
isScience." Herbert Spencer, gssays on Edu9ation. Etc.
(London:
J. M. Dent & Sons,
td., 1911), p. 42.
14.
Booth, "Ts There Any Knowledge That a Man Must
Have?"
pp. 1-2, 3, 4.
15.
James M. Redfield, "Platonic Education," in Booth,
14123226.40.0.21101ntrth Knowing, p. 154.
16.
Robert M. Hutchins,
"Toward a Learning Society:
the Institutional Illusion," Nat ,oral Elammeptary Pripcilml
51
(Oct., 1971),
Q.
17.
Franklin H. Littell, "Sectarian Protestantism and
the Pursuit of Wiadomt
Must Teehnolorical Objectives Prevail?"
in Donald A. Erickson, ed., hiblisAgntroll for Wingklig_Sshools
(Chiespos
University of Chicago Press,
1969), r. 79.
Another conneivable exception, explored later,
involves the possibility that, whereas few demonstrably essential
imierstendinffp and skills can be
identified, evposinc children
to e wide range of cnmmon experiences (however arbitrarily these
exnerienees have been Relented) is essential to the minimal
unity without which no swiiety can survive.
io.
Robert nreehen, "American sehooling:
Patterns and
Processes of Stability end Chenp.," in Bernard Barber and Alex
Trks10a, eds., Stab
tx and social lbanma (Boston:
Litt70,
Brown, end Co., 197
, r. it Also see Robert Dreeben, Dnatt/
Is Learnoil i
g hoot (Reamnp, Mass.:
Addison-Wesley Publishing
Company, 19
: Philir W. Jackson, Life kr Clajisrooms, (New York:

BEST COPY AVAILABLE
2/41
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1968)1 Norman V. Overly, ed.,
...acluLtAlTijim (Washington, D. C.:
Association
for Supervision and Curriculum Development, 1970)1 Jules Henry,
Culture Apainstlign (New York:
Random House, 1965)1 Bruce R.
Joyce, Alternative Models of Elementary Education (Waltham,
Mass.:
Xerox College Publishint, 1969) 1 Ivan Mich, pggphool-
ine Society (New York:
Harper & Row, 1970), Everett Reimer,
School Is Dead (Garden City, N. Y.:
Doubleday & Company,
1971).
Edgar Friedenberes deacriptinn im w-re
"Thar*
?ire+
r mrxirilm and somet4mea }rota'
intolerance of deep feeling between persons, of emotional
commitment to others.
This permeates school routines; love
and loyalty are violations of its code and are severely
punished.
Affectionate regard and care among peers is
contrary to standard operating procodurek, which prescribes
instead :lolly, antagonistic co-operation and competition.
The school breaks up what it calls peer groups bound together
by strong personal ties as cliques, which it sees as anti-
democratic and potential sourrea of resistance and subversion.
In class, co-operation between friends is cheating."
"Status
and Role in Education," Humanist, (Sept.-Oct., /968), pp. 13-
17, 32.
20.
Dreeben, "American Schooling," p. 101.
21,
Herbert Gintis, "Towards a Political Economy of
Education:
A Radical critique of Ivan Illiches
Society," Harvard Educationa), Review, 42 (February,
.972
7-88.
22.
Erickson, "The Persecution of LeRoy Garber."
23.
Hostetler and Huntington, Children in Amish
Society.
24,
Leonard Fein, "The Limits of Universalism," in
Henry J. Levin, ed., Community Control of Schools (Washingten,
D. C.:
The Brookings Institution, 1970), pp,
%9, 90.
25,
James B. Conant, "Private and Parofhiel Schcnlv,"
Nation's Schools 49 (19g2), 48-49.
26.
When a rihild attends a public school, the costs
are taken out of tax revenues, but when the child attends a
nonpublic school, the coats must be provided through private
investment (usually on the part of the parent), even thoueh the
parent must continue to pay his share of the tax bill for
public education.
27.
See Paul A. Freund, "Public Aid to Parochial
School," Harvard Law Review 82 (June, 19691, 1680-92.

BEST COPY AVAIIABLE
2/42
?.8.
See, for example, Kenneth M. Dolheare and Phillir
"mmond. "he s^hollEMX2XDItiliallal..2=2MC211=LEPli=2.11D
ISV222=101c, Whieeeo:
university of Chicago Press, 197Th
norald R. Reich, "The Supreme Court and Public Policy:
The
Rphomi Prnvor CasP8 " Ebi-DOta KaDDan 48 (September, 1066).
10-?9: Elia Kat'
"Patterns of Comrlianre with the e.chempr
peerieion." amEniiapubus_INE 14 (1064) 1 William G. Howard,
"Florida qehoola Ignore Ban on Bible Reeding," Nation's Schools
al
70 (My, 1067), 1/11 WilliRm K. Muir, Jr., .241x1r...jpIblEMblia
Schools,:
LAW and Utitude Change (Chicago:
nniversity of
Chicago Press, 196?): Arthur Gilbert, "Reactions and Resources,"
in Theodore R. Sizer, ed., Religion and Public Education (Boston:
HouOton Mifflin Company, 196?), pp. 137-83: Donald A. Giannella,
ed., Relieion and the Publie Order. 1964 (Chicago:
nnivernity
of ChieRgo Press, 19651, yr. 243-'52s Theodore Powell, "The
Derwers of liberty," in Sizer, Religion and Public ZOIMatiOn,
p, 14n.
29.
Dolbeare and Hammond, The School Prayer Dectaiona,
p. 133.
ln.
ed., Pyblic
31.
Jules Henry, "Is Education Possible?" in Erickson,
controls, pp. 25-102.
Ibid., P. 87.
32.
Newton Edwards and Herman G. Richey, The School is
th, American Social order, (2d ed.: Boston:
Houghton Mifflin,
1963).
13.
Donald A. Fri ckson, "The 'Plain Peenlee end
American nemorrecy," Pommenter 45 (Jan., 10AR) ,
36-114.
14.
milton
NTpculAr
04 fle:itaw., lopy), Iv.
a
lc,
James Storrs, Couneliat *mho American Curriculum
TINI-ellectupl
Liber47," Orthodox Obsetrvar 10
(mpy, t964), 144-146.
36.
Litton, "Sectarian Protegtantilm," r. AA.
17.
Marshall D. Herron, "The Nature of Scientific
TnepOry," School Review 79 (Feb., 1971),
171-2121 Byron a.
yasielvig, Nancy Freetag Sprague, and Jo Ann Sweeney,
"Trodi-
tinnal Schools, Parlohial Podapopy," School Review 79 (Aug.,
1g71),

ittg Cori ;Mu a)Li.
2/43
38.
See, for example, Urie Rronfenbrenner, "Freudian
Theories of Identification and Their Derivative." Child_Deve)on-
jgatn 31 (March, 1960), 15-40; Wayne Gordon, The Socta; System
of the High Schopl (Glencoe:
The Free Press of Glencoe, 1961)1
neroline M. Tryon, "The Adologeent Peer Culture," in Adolescenpe,
'arty- third Yearbook of the National Society for the S+udy of
Fducation, Part I (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1944),
pp. P17-2391 James S. Coleman, Th, Ado)eggent Society (Glencoe:
The Free Press of Gleneoe, 1961).
39.
Coleman, TJe Adolescent Society.
40.
Bernard C. Rosen, "Conflicting Group Membership:
A Study of Parent-Peer Cross-Pressures," American Sociologisalc
Review 20 (April, 1955), pp. 155-161.
41.
Morris Rosenberg, "The Dissonant Religious Context
and Emotional Disturbance," in Louis Schneider, ed., Religion.
Culture_. and Society:
A Likdir to theSoataXogv gofitligion
(New York:
John Wiley & Sons, 1964), pp. 5,41-519.
42.
Benjamin S. Bloom, "Stability and Change in Human
Characteristics:
Implications for School Reorganization,"
Educational Administration GuarIgrjv, 2 (Winter, 1966), 46.
43.
Annie Stein
"Strategies for Failure," mama
fggratioglagylm 41 (May, 1971), 158-204.
44.
E.g., Gintis, "Towards a Political Economy"'
Michael Bo Kats, Clasp. Bureaucracy and Schqols (New York:
Praeger, 1972)1 Reimer,
ohppl Is Dead, p. 64; Colin Greer,
The Great School Legend (New York:
Basic Books, 1972)1 Illich,
Peschooling Society.
45.
Peter Sehrar
The_Decline of the vast (New York:
Simon and Schuster,
1982i; Michael Novak, Thy Rise of the Un-
meltable Ethnics (New York:
Macmillan, 1972).
46,
Gordon, The Social Suter; Tryon, "The Adolescent
Peer Culture"; Coleman, Thq,Ado;escent Society.
47.
E.g.
Clemmont E. Vontress, "The Black Muslim
Schools," BiliDelia pompon 47 (Oct., 1965), 86-901 Michael
Parenti, "The Black Muslims:
from Revolution to Institution,"
Social Research, 31 (Summer, 1964), 180-83.
48,
Ibid.
49,
Note, for example, the following suggestion in
Robert M. Hutchins, "Toward a Learning Society:
The Institu-
tional Illusion," National Elementary Princrisl 51 (October,

!EST COPY AVAILABLE
9/44
1971) ,
16-40:
"The electronic devices now available can make
every home a learning unit. for all the family.
All the
members of the family mircht be continuously engaged in learning.
Teachers might function as visiting nurses do today--and as
physicians used to do.
The rew electronic devices do not
of
the need for face -to -face instruction or for schools,
but they enable us to shift attention from the wrong question,
which iamow can we er.et everybody in school and keep him there
as long as possible --to the right one, which isHow (ten we give
everybody a chavice to learn all his life?
The new technology
rives us a flexibility that will encourage us to abandon the
old self - imposed limitations:
that education is a matter for
part of life, part of the year, or part of the day, that it is
open in its richness only to those who need it least, and that
it must be conducted formally,
in buildings designed for the
purpose, by people who spend their lives in schools, in accord-
erle., with all !ncomprehenai"a r°6^-"m,
the eMeob
go at
+0
1.!.,e
mis
44 a re. Pt
(r. 3q)
P"
41.
of Wisdom,"
52.
11111.11===211. rp.
174-75.
"Seeterian Protestantism and the Pursuit
ibid./ p
70.
Ibid.
Alter, "4 Fever of Ethnicity," Coomentarv,
41 (June, 1977), 68.
55.
Nathan Glazer, "The Limits of Social Policy,"
Comment ory 41 (Sap+..
1071
.
46,
grip Rronfenbrenner,
"Reunification wi
rhildrpn," 1nemalux.102dmIlIien, No.
12 (July, 1
lulgo^ally the POWe view is presented
in Douglas H.
"Stiviont alienation and School." Ithad_Roview 78
to.
1'7.
th Our
Q72), 10-20.
HeeTh,
auff,, WW1,
47.
Py%nnfenhrenner. "ReunifieRtinn with Our Children,"
A.
rein, "The Limitp of Univereel&em."
5Q.
Nnvak, Tho Riggs.
60.
Hostetler and Hotingtem, aiLimmara_ImInzaailty.

2/45
61.
James S. Coleman, "The Children Have Outgrown the
Schools," Psychology Today, Feb 1972, pp. 72-82.
62.
Conant, "Private and Parochial," 49.
61.
David B. Tyack, ed.t Turning _Points in 4merit=
ucat'o al History (Waltham, Mace.:
Blaisdell Publishing! Co..
197, p. 122.
64.
Anderson, "State Education," p. 243.
65.
For a discussion of relevant studies,
see Donald
A. Erickson, "Contradictory Studies of Parochial Schooling:
An
Essay Review," School Review 75 (Winter, 196719
42g-16.
A6.
West Va. State Bdc of Rduc. v. Barnette. '18 U.S.
624 (1943).
67.
Justice William 0. Douglas, quoted in Robert
Michaelson, Ptetv in the Public School (New York:
The Macmillan
Company, 1970), p. 58.
68.
See, for exampLA
Robert N. Bellah,
Religion in America," Daedalus 96 (Winter,
1967), 1-211 Will
Herberg,
3
-w (rev. ed.:
Garden City, N.Y.:
Anchor Books, 19.0
Michaelsen, Piety in the Public School.
69.Bellah, "Civil Religion in America," p. 9.
70. =a., p.
71.
Ikid.
72.
Michaelson, Piety in the Public Fehool,
p. 46.
"1.
Ibid.
74. ay., quoting nn incompletely described report by
the Educational Policies Commilsion of the National Education
Association, titled Moral and Spiritual Values In the Public
Schools, pp. 6, 54.
75.
Quoted in Tyack, Turning Points,
p. 149.
76.
Quoted in Lawrence A. Cremin, The Transformation of
the School (New York:
Vintage Books, 1961), p. 6R.
Alec+ sea
Tyark, Turning Poir:12, chapter 1.
77.
Charles F. Marden and Gladys Meyer, Minorities
in
American Society (21 ed.1 New York: American Book Company, 104,),
p. 30.

BESt tort AVAILABIF
?./46
78.
Marcus Lee Hansen, "The Third Generation," in
Cseer HAndlin, ed., Chilstren, of the Uprooted (New York:
George
R..R.4i110..., Ire., 196e0, r. 2561 Joshua A. Fishman, "The Histori-
cal And Social Contexts of An Inquiry Into Language Maintenance
Efforts," in Fishman, el., Lan ua a L
It
in the United qtatp.T.
The Hacrue:
Mouton & Company, to
), p. 256.
79.
Frederick Jackson Turner, tha_ruirkier in_Amexi^e27
Nietgry (New York:
Nprry Holt & Competny, 1920), pp. ?'1-.73; tfarq
Kohn, 4.meriean.Naticrlipm (Now
p-,,Ar,
10^,+1e',
1 4A1),
p. 1.
80.
riesA it opear Henning Pd., IBLir"tinn as R
rRetor in American History (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.:
Prent4e04-
Nall, 1991, nn. 141-144.
81.
Ountal.
n. 146.
82.
See, for examnlas
stein, "strategies for Fa:1111-0.1
Victor G. Cicirelli, "Educational Models for the Disadvantaged,"
in Herbert J. Walberg and Andrew T. Kopan,
eds., Rethinking
Urban Education (San Francisco:
Jossay-Bass, 1972), pp. 11-481
Michael B. Katz, Class._ Auraeucracv and Schools;
The Illusion,
of Educational piancre in America (New York:
Bantam Books,
James Herndon, The Way It Spozed to
Re, (New York:
prapper, 197211
1960); Jonathan Kozol, ntath at Pri Early Ace (Boston:
Houghton
Mifflin Company, 19691: Rosalie H. Wax,
"The Warrior Dropoutc."
Transaction (May, 1967) ,
pp. 40-461 Christopher Jencks, "Private
Schools for Blomk Chilaren," New York Timps Marasine,
Nov. 3,
1968: Charles A. valentine, "Deficit, Difference, and Bicultural
Models of Afro - American Behavior," Harvard Educational Review 4t
(May, 1971), 137-.571 niane Mack Drake,
"Anglo American Posehars,
Mexican American Student*, and nissonance in Our Schools,"
Z1222TIM-501221anUM211 71 loAtluarY.
t971). '07-12.
93.
Theodore Roszak, The Making of the Counterculture
(New York:
Anchor Books, 1969): Charles Reich, nig Greening of,
America (New York:
Bantam Rocks, 1970): Michael Rossman,
"How
We Learn Today in America," RAINrap_y_Bovisy, s lag. 11, 1072,
D. /7-7o.
84.
Novak, The Rise, pp. 710-10
qc.
Alter, "A Fever of Ethninity," p.
71.
RA,
David K. Cohan, "Pluralism in the unital
qtAteam?
Section A:
Uncommon Schools and the rommon
Cultlara,11 in Donald
A. Erickson and George F. Malaus,
isspas of Aid to Non ihr
Schools:
Vol. I:
Economic and Social Issues of Educ
Pluralism (Washington, D. C.:
President's Commission on School
Finance, 1971), pp. TV:8:7 - IV :B :9.

CHI.PTFR 3
!INSTATED REASONS FOR PROGRAMMATIC CONTROLS*
We have noted that state legislatures place surprising-
ly extensive reliance upon the most liberty-endangering cont-
rols of all in education--upon "programmatic" fiontrols, which
pres^.4%e the rrocessen by which all mli/d..^11 moat he reared
during the extensive periods when school attendance is
mandatory.
Little apparent attention is given to other ways
of fulfilling the state's regulatory role.
In the analysis
presented in chapter 2, we were unable to find any compelling
justification for these programmatic controls.
The possibility
must be investigated, then, that such controls perform "hidden,"
"latent," or generally unrecognized functions in our society,
or are to some extent historical accidents.
One possible unstated function relates to our earlier
discussion of the "hidden" curriculum.
Numerous writers allege,
often in fairly persuasive terms, that the most fundamental
reason why children are required to attend conventional schoule
is found in the generally implicit demand that all children
must be socialized to viewpoints, attitudes, and patterns of
behavior that will help preserve the current social order.1
By being forcibly subjected to the life style of the conven-
tional school, as this argument goes,
children learn to
observe the norms of our society in virtually automatic,
unquestioning terms.
We are inclined to think, however, that a more promi-
sing central hypothesis for explaining the prevalence of pro-
grammatic controls relates to the efforts of organized educa-
tors, over many decades, to promote the status and security
of their occupational group (by attempting to ensure a steady
demand for their services and simultaneously to control access
to the profession, for example)--efforts that may have been
*Coauthored by James G. Cibulka.

/P
BEST COPY AVAILABLE
sienifiepntly abetted by numerous historical accidents.
Tt seems unfortunate that no historian of note, so fRr
ma we can determine, hag scrutinized systematically the ways
in which self-aggrandizement by educators may have distorted
efforts to make educational opportunities available as
equitably, effectively, and ef.Pietentiv 41R possible.
The
present chapter does not purport to provide such a historical
analysis, but merely to sketch out some major factors needing
examination.
We think the available evidence suprests strongly,
even if not eonclusively, that the "tyranny of the expert" has
been a maim. force in education, as in other spheres of American
life.
Bailyn complains that too much attention has been given
to distorted educational histories,
"the patristic literature
of a powerful academic ecclesia. "2
He alleges that one highly
influential educational historian seemed determined, not to
discover the most logical interprotmtion of past events, but
"to dignify a newly self- conscious
:)rofession, education. "3
Similarly, Cappon asserts that "the history of American educa-
tion
.
. has suffered at the hands of speeialists who, with
the development of public education et heart,
sought historical
evidence to strengthen their 'cause. "4
The most relevant scholarly work, in terms of our
"self-
aggrandizement" hypothesis, has been lone by an economist, E. G.
West, who has reexaminek' historical evidence in England and New
Ynrk qtata, supplemented Pt time
by more limited de to from
other areas.
<
At the heart of Wesi'm Pnalysis is a theory
which states that, since efforts to produce political influence
are costly in terms of money, effort, end time, we shonid expect
these attempts to be made chiefly by the people who will reap
the greatest beTlefits.
Those who earn their paychecks in
schools and other service enterprises run by government
can afford to bring greater than average influence to
bear upon government policy since their incomes will
be particularly responsive to it.
Tn contrast, the

BEST COPY AVAILABLE
3/3
consumers, having interests which are spread over
many products and services, cannot so afford to
buy influence over the supply of only one of them.
In particular, they will not be able to afford the
information necessary to evaluate the full impli-
cations of Fovernment policy such as, for example,
the true incidence of taxation necessary to pay
for "free" services or the eventual erects of a
"free service urem ^^1-sums, fthoices.°
In odlicat4or
ether public service institutions
it is predictable, in terms of West's theory, that organized
professionals will have a powerful and even misleading effect
on public opinion, will exercise a disproportionate influence
on lawmakers, and will frequently promote legislation that
does more for the providers than for the recipients of public
services.
In England and New York, West argues, the state began
developing universally availablettax supported public schools
at a time when there was no evidence that the majority of
parents were unwilling or unable to secure sufficient educa-
tion for their children.
Some parents were too poor to make
a decent education available, and many more were hindered by
geographic factors.
But instead of responding to these
particular needs, the state (influenced to a marked degree by
leading educators) began developing state-supported, state
operated schools in all areas.
For a time these schools,
though subsidized, were free only to the very poor.
Most
parents had to pay fees (then known as "rate bills").
But
problems involved in the collection of these fees often
delayed full payment of teacher salaries by several months.
In response, educators demanded that the schools be made
available to everyone without payment of fees, even though
other reforms might well have eliminated the problems without
financing publicly sponsored education entirely through taxation.
In apparent reaction to the new taxation requirements,many citi-
zens worked to keep school expenditures down.
When taxation

BEST COPY AVAILABLE
3/4
mechanisms did not produce as much money as a combination of
taxes and private investment had once done, many schools
beran operating for only fottr months per year instead of eight,
as previously.
The new laws, intended to increase the supply
of available schooling, had actually reduced it.
However, the employees of public schools were well on
the way toward their objective, from West's viewpoint - -to
ensure, by placing a financial penalty on private school
attendance, that most children by far would go to the public
schools.
By this means, public school teachers and adminis-
trators would be assured a steady demand for their servic's.
(Public school personnel had been seriously concerned for
veers about competition from nonpublic schools.)
As tax sup-
port of public schools increased, the proportion of children
enrolled in nonpublic schools decreased.
In the meantime,
educational leaders made extensive efforts to persuade the
general public that nonpublic schools were
inherently undemo-
cratic, deserving no support or encouragement from government.
As their next step, according to West, professional
educators acted to restrict the freedom of parents to select
favorite public schools in preference to other public schools
within geographic reach, and to withdraw their children from
school at an earlier age in areas where all available schools
seemed inferior.
Strong efforts were launched to make attend-
ance compulsory, though the state superintendent of schools
insisted that the primary cause of poor attendance was bad
teaching, and to require all children to attend whatever
schools fell within specified
'Attendance areas."
Before lore,
"compulsory payment And coripulsory consumption had become
mutually strengthening monopoly bonds and the pattern of
schooling for the next century had been firmly set."7
At no
point, West emphasizes, were the new policies of compulsion
supported by sufficient evidence.

BEST COPY AVAILABI
3/5
Tm an onalvsic by Landes and Solmon. several parts of
Wests thatis are embhasized further. 8
Landes and Solmon
SIWITORt. for elrample that self-aggrandiTement by teachers
and educational compulsion were mutually reinforcing.
As more
and more persons were compelled by the combination of taxation
end compulsory attendance laws to purchase educational
mArvices in the public sector, the pool of public educators
became larger and larger.
And as the pool of people interested
in educational compulsion increased, there was ever more
likelihood that the compulsion would be extended.
Furthermore,
as time went on, most citizens would become accustomed to
state schooling, and the resistance to compulsion would
probably decline.
West also discusses the paradox that universal regula-
tion may be more likely when few parents need to be regulated
than when many parents need to be regulated.
Attempts to make
most people do what they are unwilling or reluctant to do will
be politically unpopular, whereas there will be little resistance
to universal compulsion when nearly everyone is already doing
what the state seeks to compel.
In the case of compulsory
school attendance, for example, the majority will assume that
the controls are intended merely to keep a recalcitrant
minority in line.
West elicits figures to suggest that
education was virtually universal, wherever reasonably available
in England and.the United States, before compulsion waa
intro-
duced.
Along with public financing and operation of tuition-
free schools everywhere, compulsory attendance laws functioned,
according ;:n Welt's interr.atet4^11.
tm e".+0111"44
ronoro"+" .onA41-4ons in educRfiAn that promm+ed the status
and welfare of the teaching profession.
Examining a more recent period in American history,
Cibulka suggests that Progressivism, particularly in the
context of mass immigration and political corruption, may have
facilitated the struggle of teachers and administrators to

maximize their own status and power, and
thus, in effect, to
minimize the discretionary rights of students and parents in
education.Q
The poesibility is directly relevant to our
analysis of state controlR in education, since one
fundamental
rationale for these controls inheres in the idea, discussed
in chapter 2, that educational
decisions should be left up to
the professional.
In addition, we must remember that the
rowers of local public school boards are derived entirely
from the state.
Consequently. arrangements that grant
educational experts at any level extensive power to over-ride
parental preferences are a manifestation of state control; in
essence, the state has designated certain people to act in its
behalf in determining what child-rearing practices are best.
And by means of vague or specific requirements that .nonpublic
schools must be "equivalent" to public schools, even the
private educational sector is affected.
It was probably during the Progressive era that the
elitism of the professional educator was shaped into its
present ideologythe fear of pressure groups, the abhorrence
of controversy and conflict, the conviction that expertise
should dominate the popular will.
Progressivism was essential-
ly a platform to re'ssert political power.
Its supporters
ware primarily Protestant and nativist--an amalgamation of the
old gentry who felt displaced by the growing ethnic political
machines on the one hand, and on the other hand
former Popu-
lists who had lost their political suppert
in the 1890's.
This political alliance restated the old nineteenth-century
conflict between the rights of the people. a theme of the
nolitieal left, avld tt*. responsibilities of expert ciuil
servants, a n1atform pressed until
then by segments of the
political right.
Proftrassives sought to restore faith in the
principle of popular sovereignty by giving experts a greeter
role in raising the level of public discourseand having them
advance communication and understanding among the various

3/7
ethnic groups in our cities."
Experts were to recast the
parochial attitudes of the citizenry and make them compatible
with the requirements of a modern technological nation.
Experts were to convert private wants into a public spirit and
a public interest.
Professionalism would bring a new respect
for rational discussion rather than pressuregroup politics,
a new commitment to public needs rather than personal motives.
It is these ideas, which grew up in response to the excesses
of the Gilded Age, which apparently continue to be the
dominant frame of reference for the educational profession
now presidins to a marked degree--as an agent of, and advisor
to, the state--over our elementary and secondary schools.
The "professionalization" of American educators
apparently was part of the more conservative business and
Mugwump logic within Progressivism.
The public interest was
served best, r.ccording to that logic, by reducing rather than
expanding the scope of public involvement in governmental
decisions.
In the case of public education, local decisions
would be made by a superintendent and professional qtaff
whose specialized knowledge surpassed the partisanship and
ignorance of laymen.
The top educational executive was to be
powerful enough to remain strictly neutral among all the
special interests of society.
He would defend the common
public interest against all self-seeking partisans.
Thus the
will of the expert became confused with the "public interest."
John Dewey, "0 /11!:11%r esvponpn+ -f prew"essive RAllotati^l".
11'' Prpert as p]ayinch; a promin0nt relp in identifying and
promoting community interests.
The professional educator would
use his special knowledge and skill to identify the public
interBst, aggregating competing interests into his superior
/
.
vle)on. 11
Dewey provided no standards (either substative or
procedural) to distinguish
"the public interest " from a
multitude of special interests.
Dewey also seemed oblivious

3/8
to the previously mentioned tendency of the expert to promote
his own interests.
It is not clear to what extent Dewey's ideas influenced
eincational administration or to what extent he merely mirrored
lamer themes in the Progressive movement which found their way
into Administrative doctrines.
Either way, Progressivism
Rpparently provided fertile ground for promoting the concept of
the autonomous expert in edtication.
Cremin notes, however,
that
the publie school reform movement was isolated from the broader
ProeresOvo movement, for in education "professionalism
ultimately divorced the movement from the lay power necessary
to sustain it.
-
.
." 12
Efforts to make the expert autoromons in education
nrobably were significantly aided by reections to massive
immigration.
Many controls for nonpublic schools, including
some that were struck down by the Supreme Court, may be traced
to the fear that the United States we'uld be Balkanized into a
collection of foreign enclaves. 13
During the post-bellum
decades the political right in America,
particularly business,
became concerned over labor unrest then occurring in our cities
and over the rising threats which they felt immigrants posed.
With much support from educators, they asked the newly estab-
lished public scht-:.s to socialize immigrants into American
culture and to give them skills and habits which would make.
them productive workers in the new industrial economy rather
than malcontents and revolutionaries.
William Torrey Harris,
who was superintendent of schools at St.
Louis from 180 to
1906 and profoundly influential nationally, epitomived this
tridencv to use the public schools for Pf,onomic nurposes and,
ultimately, for political suppression, as Merle Curti
has
forcefully observed:
Harris not only defended capitalism against 4ts
critics, but explicitly pointed out how education
might serve more effectively the established order.

BEST COPY AVAILABLE
1/9
Tn m^(3P+inr, the J4t4onto vsinetation AsgociRtior in
18Q4, when the country wtts in the threes of labor
Niignrders." he observPA that the school provided
the pPople with training in those habits of regu-
larity, silPnce, And industry which would "Preserve
Rnd save our civil order."
In the public school,
the center of disciPline, the pupil learned "first
of all to respect the rignts of crrAnizPd industry."
PI the kindergarten the child of the slum. the
weakling of society, learned self-reucpect, moral
ideals, industry, perseverence....
Who can say how far the reluctance of Ameri-
cans to experiment seriously with social control,
to abandon traditional laissez-faire individualism,
in spite of its Patent contradiction by harsh
facts, was related to the skill and plausibility
with which Harris told two generations of Americans
what they already believed, and what they wanted to
believe? Who can estimate the influence of Harris
in standardizing tne school system
and excluding
from its curriculum and its methods everything
that did not confirm the existing economic and
socirl structure?4
Michael Katz also contends that our current public school
systems were shaped by an alliance between edunators and
social conservatives, whose "incipient bureaucracy" triumphed
over rival models of universal education in the mid-nineteenth
century. 15
Further fuel for the "professionalization" of schooling
was provided by the virtual takeover of school systems in many
cities by political machines.
With the rise of these political
machines, city school systems became highly politicalized,
susceptible to logrolling
and grgift.
Progressives proposed
to remove political influences on the schools by constituting
education as a legally independent .function and by instituting
city -wide election
of board members so that these board
members would bP responsive to broader constituencies than
local neighborhoods. 16
But the ideal of separating "education"
from "politics" also served professional interests.
It was
interpreted to require the "neutral" adminstrator to discover
the public irtcre-+ .mPettered
he competimf n' ` ;"s of

3/10
local feifdoms.
It rave him greater latitude to create a
consensus around his conception of the public interest via
communication with the public.
Thus Dewey asks the school
superintendent to make the public understand "the needs
And
possibilities of the creative education of the young."
Public education was essentially the education of the public,
said Dewey.
In fart, Dewey adopts a patronizing, even
suspicious attitude toward the public.
He advises the school
sunerintendent not to weigh
himself down with parental
ccmrlaints.
The srhool administrator must enlighten the
rnblir.. mainly through his influence upon students and
teachers.
some educational leaders of that period went even
further in denigrating the popular will.
Consider Charles
Judd of the University of Chicago, viewed as a reformer
among administrators.
Judd argued for the abolition of school
boards because he believed their members were either uninformed
or sroundrels.
Schooling had become so complicated, he
asserted, that ordinary laymen could no longer decide what
ouFht to be included in the curriculum, let alone what methods
of tParhing were appropriate.
The inclination of board
members' +o interfere with constructive professional policies,
Judd said, served to disguise corruption by political bosses.
The net effect of Judds notion would have been to remove the
nubile-. entirely from particin?tion in educational
decisions.
Judd wanted expertsindividuals lualified by specialized
knowl0dre rati-er than by the virtue or intuition of the people--
to rula ir the PPOrtiPIR interest.
rrhie trend was surreptitious, however, because on
the porminr scene nrofessionalism sometimes appeared to he
in Alliance with populist sentiment.
In rhinago, for elramr1°.
the sove Our schools Commit÷eP, a ritizens reform group,
anpealed to fellow citizens to wrench control of the schools

BSI COPY AVADIAgtf
/11.
from the mayor, conservative businessmen, end those profes-
sionale within the system who raid his machine homage.
This
populist group relied on the princilDle of Popular snvereignty:
they appealed to the moral judgment of the public and hoped to
enlist public ,rir!tPri
're;
PoTwIro nr the Aram? .1
7
Put
at that point in American history, iT was still plausible
identify the autonomy of the expert with the will of the people.
The tension within the reform movement, namely public versus
professional sovereignty, had not yet erupted.
The above-discussed emphasis upon the expert's central
role in the governance of American public schools has created
some ma:ior problems for our society.
In the first place,
several commentators have argue' that it is by no means self-
evident what is the public interest.
These commentators have
even suggested that the concept of a public interest should be
discarded altogether because neither the public nor political
scientists have been able to reach clear consensus on what the
concept actually means. 18
The extent to which our body politic embodies signifi-
cant cleavages over conceptions of the community and over who
shall rule is well documented by political scientists.
At
least nine relit-ice:I ideol ogies :Ire prevalent in the United
States.
For example, Agger, Goldrich, and Swanson cite an
important source of disagreement between public officials of
community eorservntionist persuasion and those who hold liberal
beliefs:
Liberals see racial minorities and even small
businessmen as disadvantaged interests.
Liberals
want public officials to accord the needs of the
disadventaged the highest political
status.
These
needs will be defined by the leaders of the die -
advantaged.
Community conservationists want public
officials to be accorded the highest political status
by all interests, including the disadvantaged.19
Insistence by professional educate -s nn the prin.A.er
their own +^n? e, en 3 na-ticolar style /14"
eieeeeees, and

3/1 2
BEST COPY AVAIIABLE
on a particilap- hnav n4' ^ontent for the schonl curriculwn
hove drastically lessened the pluralism which supposedly
chararterites Aducation in kmeri ca.
Our mytn of local control
notwithstandinr, the ertileational nrocession has imposed A
reinarkable uniformity. n72 we notee earlier.
Whormas in
Europeen countries public schools usually have served the
needs of the nation-state through a formal centralization of
power, a similar effect may be achieved here through quite
opposite means.
America may have nationalized its schools
through controls that enforce the ideas of its
educational
profession rather than through Pxplirit national policies.
Our educational professionals have been vocal guardians, as
well as architects, of a national interest.
While we have
been vigilant in protePt'ng education against the misuses
of political power which have sometimes characterized Euro-
pean public education, we have been less cognizant of the
potential excesses of a professicnal elite.
A further possibility needing investigation by
historians is that, when many child-rearing functions were
transferred from tnP home and immediate community,
apparently
under conditions of unusual stress,
there was little
realization that child-rearinr functions ner RP hart indeed
been transferred.
Even today, the opinion investigated at
length in chapter 2 seems widespread - -.hat schools are simply
neutral containers within which certain essential
understand-
inrs, skills, and attitudes "that we all
hold in common" are
fostPred.
CitizAns posseqsPri of this viewpoint are not likely
to be on guard arainst state dictation of child-rearing pro-
cesses, so long as the
intrusions
are accomplished in places
called "schools."
And the acquiescence of many parents in the
transfer of discretionary power over child-rearing practices
was probably facilitated by the widely promoted ide-als of a
liberal education which, as we have. seen, are generally in-

3/13
tern-etod to tipmand that schools by kept somehow more "neutral"
than homes and local communities can be expected to be.
The growth of programmatic controls may have been
facilitated, further, by the fact that relatively powerless,
often pacifistic groups (such as the Amish) have often been the
only neople to feel the sharp brunt of these controls.
Since
programmatic controls are geared to the life style of the
cultural mainstream, most Americans are unlikely to view them
as hostile.
And if the people sensing hostility had little
disposition or power to make a national commotion, the pro-
,onents of the programmatic controls would have little
significant resistance to overcome.
Roman Catholics have been
a major exception in this regard.
When persecuted, they
responded vocally and powerfully.
But they were preoccupied
with religiov prejudice of a particular kind.
Once the
public schools ceased to be militantly Protestant, most
Catholics apparently assumed that general neutrality had been
achieved.
Finally, since schools have been notoriously inef-
fective instruments of indoctrination thus far (with the
exception of the apparent power, mentioned in chapter 2, to
wreak havoc on minorities not caught up in the cultural main-
stream), the coercive potential of programmatic contro3
has
not yet been widely recognized.
Furthermore, though the
principle is widely accepted that the state may go very far
indeed in dictating the educational experiences to which all
children must be exposed, state legislatures and administrative
agencies have thus far exercised restraint, though blatant
violations of liberty have occurred from time to time (e.g.,
in the case of the Jehovah's Witnesses and the Old Order Amish).
But in the future, If educators learn how to construct more
powerful instructional systems, and if the states intensify
their programmatic grip on schools, liberty may be threatened
much more obviously.

BEST COPY AVAILABLE
1/14
ks we stated at the twinning of this chapter, we
have not attempted to provide a thorough historical analysis,
now badly needed, of reasons for the widespread acceptance
of state propyammatic controls in education.
Rather, we have
sketched nut several plausible hypotheses, some of which are
alrpnriv oqpnni-ted by some evidence.
We find these hypotheses
more tnan mildly plausible, however.
They are ample ground
for assertine that any careful student of American educational
history
an *Rally explain, be means of several appealing
internretations, why we have a system of educational controls
in the Uniteet States that cannot logically be reconciled with
our nuroorted commitment to freedom.

3/15
BEST COPY AVAILABLE
Notes to Chapter_3
1.
SuprA, chapter 2, pp. 2/11 - 2/13, 2/37 - 2/38.
P.
Bernard Bailyn, Education in the Forming of
American Society (Chapel Hill, N. C.
University of North
Carolina Press, 1960), P. P.
1.
Tb4".. p. 7.
4.
rarnm's."Foreword,"ibi4., ;. viii.
r.
'ee, for example, E. G. West, Education and_the
Stape, (London,
The Institute of Economic Affairs, 1965)1
"The Political Economy of American Public School Legislation,"
Journal of law and Economics 10 (Oct., 1967)
101-1281
Economics. Education and the Politician (Hobart Paper 42,
London:
The Institute of Economic Affairs, 1968), "The Uneasy
Case for State Education" (pamphlets Wichita, Kans.:
Center
for Independent Education of Wichita Collegiate School, n.d.);
"The Economics of Compulsory Education" (prepublication manu-
script, 1972).
6.
West, "The Political Economy," p. ilk.
7.
Ib id., P. 127.
8.
W. M. Landes and L. C. Solmon, "Compulsory
Schooling Legislation:
An Economic Analysis of the Law and
Social Change in the Nineteenth Century," journal of Economj
History (March, 1972), Sec. IIT.
9.
James G. Cibulka, "Administrators as Representa-
tives:
the Role of Local Communities in an Urban School
System" (Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Education, Univer-
sity of Chicago, 1973).
10.
Rush Welter, Porular Education and Porular Thoug)it
in kmerica (New York, N.Y.:
Columbia University Press, 1462),
pp. 263-66.
11.
John pewpy, frmL2112+.44LLEJE=hLtaa (New York:
Henry Holt and Cc., 1.927
,
pp. 7
,
1
- 7.
12,
Lawrence A. Cremin, The Transformation of the,
Sc hoof (New York:
Vintage Books, 1961), p. 185.
13.
Supra, chapter 1, pp. 1/14 -
1/16.
14,
Merle Curti, The Social Ideas of Am r* a
ducators
(Totown, N.J.: Littlefield, Adams and Company, 19 7
, p. '49.

14.
Micheal Katz, Class,
Ruroaucrlry, and Srhoolss
The
Change in AmerirA (New Ynrk:
Praoror, 1071).
16.
Georg* Courts was an exception.
Re asked for a
frarkor roeogni tion of interest group ropresentiatinn on Rehnol
boards.
See Goorpe Counts, annaLame Soriet in ChirRro
(Now Ynrk:
Harcourt, Brace, *
rte.
,
197B), p. lc?,
17.
For a suppinet hiqtnry of the ritivarR Srhools
Committee, see "rhicapo Citizens Fight Kelly School rorruptior,"
Better Schpols, (May,
19491, p. 1?.
18.
Glendon Schubert, The Piblic
Tntorost (G1 enc.e0,
T13.:
The Preis Press of Glencoe, 196n), pp. 7 .51-24.
Also Qee
Virrinia Held, The Public Irterost and Individutl
Interests
(New York, N.Y.:
Basic Books, 1070),
1Q.
Robert F.
401745tr. Daniel
Golerieh, Bert F. Swanson,
The Rulers and the Rnled (New York:
John Wiley and Sons,
14A4N,
p. 21.
20.
Bailyn, Ertl:cation in the
rorminer,.

CHAPTER 4
LEGAL DIMENSIONS OF THE STATE REGULATION
OF NONPUBLIC SCHOOLS
by
John Elson
INTRODUCTION
When the state applies legal controls to the nonpublic
school, a potential for conflict is guaranteed by the antithetical
social roles played by the law and the nonpublic school.
The law
requires those who fall under its jurisdiction to conform to
an
established standard: freedom of action is confined within the
limits of that standard.
The nonpublic school requires freedom to
create its own independent identity.
If it cannot innovate and
continually provide alternative programs to those of the ouulir-
schools, it has no significant role in society and little chance
for success.
Nevertheless, when a prosecutor, judge, or other
public official must decide whetner a particular practice violates
a legal standard, he interprets the meaning and application of
the 'statutory language in terms not
f.' potentials, but of pre-
.:edents, of what administrators or courts have allowed in the part.
Arguments of reason and of analogy may often be convincing: even
pleas for trust and patience may occasionally have their effect.

4/2
But it is clear that when novel practices are the sun:feet of legal
attack, the qualities of innovation anl creativity become liabil-
ities in the eyes of those who decide when the law is
violated.
Since nearly every state legislature has felt a need to enact
some checks on the freedom of nonpublic schools,
the conflicts have
been frequent and irreconcilable, with the courts often acting as
the final arbiter.
To avoid having the law's inevitable rigidity and recourse
to precedent stifle the nonpublic school's capacity for innovation,
nonpublic szhnol regulation must oe undertaken with an unaer-
-tanding of both what state interests require protection from
uncontrolled nonpublic schools and what types of regulation will
protect these interests without unnecessarily infringing upon the
nonpublic schools' autonomy.
in addition to the educational
policy considerations set out by Professor Erickson which are
fundamental to such an understanding, consideration should also
be gilen before proposing a regulatory scheme to the following
arear of legal analvcIs, which are the subject of this paper:
(1) the basis in law for state intervention in nonpublic school
affairs ;
(P) the legally recognized state interests in nonpublic
school reTilation:
( ?) the constitutional protections nonpubltc
schools have against state interference; (4) the nature of non-
b:')1
.!hool re-*a tatlon In Illinois and a brief comparison to
other
tates: an i
(') legal dimensIons of '.go alternatives to the
present forms of noriou:,11.: ::drool regulation.

I
LE :AL BASIS FOR STATE INTERVENTION
IN NONPUBLT7 S'71-1001, AFFAIRS
The nonp
tered by the
interference
7chool, pro7iiel it it not fundeq or ^bar-
state, har the samil prote(rtIon wrAinst go.f.-nwiental
as private ourinesser and property owners ha:e in
general. 1
"Under our form of government:" observed the Supreme
Court, "the use of property and the making of contracts
are
normally matters of private and not of public concern.
The
general rule is that both shall be free of governmental Inter-
HP
ference.
This freedom is protected against state action by
the fourteenth amendment's guarantee that "no State shall.
.
deprive any person of life, liberty or property, without due
process of law.
.
.
."
This amendment, however, does "not pro-
hibit governmental regulation for the publiz welfare."3
Rather,
"the guarantee of due process demands only that the law shall
not be unreasonable, arbitrary, or capricious, and that the means
selected shall have a real and substantial relation to the object
sought to be attained.
"
Individual liberty is never infringed
upon by a "regulation which is reasonable in relation to its
subiect and is adopted to the interest of the community.
.
1 tiR Am. Jur., Schools P'?00 (1073).
2 Nebbia v. New York, 791 U.S. r,02,
'-;03
(103"i).
3 Iblu., at X25.
4 Ibid.
West Coast Hotel v. Parish, 300 U.S. 370 (1037).
I
t.

Since the 1930s the United :-,tater Supreme court has
lade it clear that fedftral courts will give state regulatory
le;L:lat.:c)n an almost irresistible presumption of validity.
In
the 10?- ''arolene Products case the ::curt ruled that "f,l/uilcial
inlWrfer, where the legislative .'utig^lcnt is drawn In due:;tion,
must, be restricted to the issue whether any state of facts known
or which could reasonably be azoumed afft.
s support for it. u6
In the 19'12 Day-Brite Lighting case the legislative discretion
was given its widest scope:
"Our recent decisions make it plain
that we do not sit as a superlegislature to weigh the wisdom of
1 eal',7-ti!on
or to de,...ide whether the policy it expresses nffenir
public welfare. "?
State courts differ widely in interpreting the degree of
public benefit that must he shown in order to validate govern-
mental interference with nonpublic schools.
North Carolina strictly
limits private school controls to instances in which "there is a
manifest present need which affects the health, morals, or safety
of the public generally.
.
wc1
But a New York court found the
state's right to regulate nonpublic schools inherent in the func-
tion of education, statin; it to
"an indisputable fact that all
schools, public or private, are afrected with a public intereot
and hence subject to reasonable regulation under the police powers
Un i ted States v. Carolene Produr!ts Co., 304 U.S.
4 ( 1:13P
.
Day-Br ite Lighting, Inc. v. Missouri , 3142 U.3.421,423 (lc.4t,7).
3tate v. Williams, 117 S.E. 2d 4 1:3
(N. C. 1960).

of 4:!,! .4h.te.e'
Under thir more vommon view,
ttate courts will
pre:-u-,! 1 qunmiulio school regulation to be in the public interest
ant will not strike it down unless it is
clearly unreasonable,
regarriless of whether it fulfills a "mainfest present need."
Althoull Illinois appellate courts have not ruled directly on
the constitutionality of nonpublic school
regulations, it is clear
that they would follow the majority view in granting such regulations
a strong presumption of validity.
The Illinois Supreme Court
has recently set forth its standard of review in such cases as
follows:
The inouiry in due process cases has
been
whether the evil existed which affected the
public health, safety, morals or general wel-
fare, and whether the legislative means chosen
to counter that evil were reasonable. If so,
there is a proper exercise of the "elastic
police power," and no want of due process,
despite interference with individual
and contract rights.
Ititationsj iv
The standard for resolving the question of the reasonableness of
the regulatory measure's relationship to the evil to be remedied,
the court went on to note, is "that the legislative discretion
should not be disturbed unless it is clearly erroneous./Citationej n11
It is thus clear that there is little prospect of a
successful constitutional challenge to nonpublic school regulations
on grounds of "substantive due process": that the legislative
9 Packer Collegiate Institute v. Univ. of State of New York,
76 N Y 3 .
7cilf901, ry ' d" on other ground's,
191.1% 7d I.RY-111-.Y. War).
10 Chicago Real Estate Bd.
v. City of Chicago, 36 Ill. ?1
530, 541.542 (911)7).
11 Ibid., at 542-543.

4/6
means is not reasonably related to ft proper publin purrn-7. Tt
is easy to zpeulat.. %6 to clearly tRnr!,!lous nonpublic school
regulations that would violate due process,
such as a rule re-
nuiring the teachinr, of croquet two hours a day.
Realistically,
nowever, it woul;
extremely rare ;:p. a Lv..-L tt
nonpublic school regulation does not serve a purpose
purvied of Vie pub-1'.. jn!crestl "rr, !tr th
NE!:w Yo-.
said
in Packer, "ik711 benools, public or private, tilt 1.1:f
Ah
a public interest, "12 and the scope of that inter':zt
to the operations of nonpublic schools is nearly
112-t-..
4211ssing.
II
THE INTERESTS OF THE STATE
IN NONPUBLIC SCHOOL REGULATION.
A. Programmatic Controls
The greatest controversy in the arguments over ncr.puhlic
school reoNlation har arisen over the ,aliditv of oehtt ?rofessor
Erickson has termed "programmatic controls," or the regulation
of the actual pedagogical practices of nonpublic schools.
However,
there is no nuestion as to the legal alidit:y If the Etate's
intrusion into this area.
Recently the Unites :,talcs Supreme court
in noting what it had recognized ir an earlier decision, Pierce v.
Socle*y of Si:terf_:,-
sta+.ed thsts wne the-
Is no rou.ltervalling
12 Packer, supra, note 9.
13 268 U.S. 510 (1924).

4/7
interest other than the parent's general interest in the nurture
and education of his children, "it is beyond dispute that the
State acts 'reasonably' and constitutionally in requiring educa-
tion to age sixteen in some public or private school meeting the
standards prescribed by the State. 14
Once the court assumes
the validity of compulsory school attendance 'await it will
without hesitation uphold laws requiring that the allowable
alternatives to public schools meet certain minimum standards.15
Without any minimum standards, the purposes of the'compulsory
attendance laws could be frustrated by anyone who could gather
children under a sign saying "school.
The Illinois Supreme Court has also recognized in dicta the
state's right to set minimum standards for nonpublic schools in
a case in which it found that parents who had taught their Child-
dren at home had complied with the compulsory attendance statute.16
This statute exempted from the requirement of public school atten-
dance "[a/ny child attending a private or parochial school where
children are taught the branches of education taught to children
of corresponding age and grade in the public schools.
.
0117
After finding the instruction provided by the parents equal or
superior to that obtainable in the public schools, the court stated:
14 Wisconsin v. Yoder, 92 S.Ct. 1526, 1,-)42 (1Q72): See for
fuller discussion, infra pp. 29-31.
15 In Re Shinn, 16 Cal. Rptr. 165 (1961);
Knox v. O'Brien, 7?
A.2d 389-7737-gaWr., 1950); People v. TUrner,-T73-1372U-ToBr7199).
16 People v. Levisen,404 Ill. 574 (19C0): See for fuller dis-
cussion infri715675=567
17
Ibid.., at 578.

4/8
In concluding that appellants have not
been proved guilty of violating the statute we
do not imply that parents may, under a pretext
of instruction by a private tutor or by the
parents themselves, evade their responsibility
to educate their children.
Those who prefer this
method as a substitute for attendance at the
public school have the burden of showing that
they have in good faith provided an adequate
course of instruction in the prescribed branches
of learning.
This burden is not satisfied if
the evidence fails to show a type of instruction
and discipline having the required quality and
character.
No parent can be said to have a right to
deprive his child of educational advantages at least
commensurate with the standards prescribed for the
public schools, and any failure to provide such
benefits is a matter of great concern to the courts.18
A successful challenge to nonpublic school programmatic
regulations based on grounds of substantive due process
of laws- -
that they are not reasonably related to achieving a valid state
interest--is nearly impossible because the state's Stistitiestleas
for compulsory attendance laws may also be asserted as sufficient
justifications for its setting minimum standards for nonpublic
schools.
The justifications the state may assert for compulsory
attendance are numerous, amorphous, and almost impossible to
controvert.
The United States Supreme Court in Wisconsin v. Yoder
set forth the dual rationale for compulsory attendance of providing
educational opportunities for children and of providing an alter-
native to child labor.19
Because it produces an "educated citi-
zenry" compulsory attendance has also been justified as
being
18 Ibid.
19 Wisconsin v. Yoder, supra, note 14 at 1539.

It/9
necessary to the maintenance of a democratic form of government
and way of life.2°
An equally broad jutification for compulsory
attendance laws is based on the theory that it is the natural duty
of the parent to educate his child and the state, acting as parens
patriae, may enforce that duty.
Dicta of the United States Supreme
Court support this rationale:
Corresponding to the right of control, it is
the natural duty of the parent to give his
children education suitable to their station
in life; and nearly all the States, including
Nebraska, enforce this obligation by compulsory
laws.21
In sum, the state, in response to a constitutional challenge
to its authority to regulate nonpublic school education programs,
may assert that such regulation is related to enforcing the
policies underlying the compulsory attendance law.
Since these
policies include safeguarding the present and the future well-
being of children, of the economy, and of the democratic system
of government, the due process argument will fail unless the
challenged regulations bear virtually no relation to serving any
of these policies.
Other lesser state interests asserted in support of program-
matic nonpublic school regulations are prevention of the teaching
of ideas dangerous to the public order and the promotion of cul-
tural unity among people of diverse ethnic backgrounds.
Examples
of laws intended to serve the former goal are New Hampshire's
20 In Re Shinn
supra, note 15, at 168. Commonwealth v.
Seller, 79 A.
)2a
,-777(Super. Ct. Pa., 1951).
21 Meyer v. Nebraska, 262 U.S. 390, 400 (1922).

4/10
statute prohibiting teachers from advocating "Communism as a
political doctrine or any doctrine including overthrow by force
of the United States or this State" and Nebraska's law prohibiting
"instruction or propaganda.
.
.(in nonpublic schools) subversive
to American institutions and republican form of government or good
citizenship. n22
Professor Erickson has discussed the backgrounds of the three
Supreme Court decisions that struck down state laws attempting to
promote cultural unity through prohibiting the teaching of modern
foreign laguages in Meyer, prohibiting nonpublic school attendance
altogether in Piercesand effectively putting all schools conducted
in a foreign language under public control in Farrington.23
As
shall be discussed later
in more detail, the Court's primary
grounds for striking down these statutes, that they violated
substantive due process of law, would probably not under present
constitutional doctrine support the Court's rulings since the state
could show sufficient reasonable relationship between a valid
state interest and the means enacted to accomplish it.
However,
there can be little doubt that these laws would also be struck
down now under the first amendment's guarantees of freedom of
speech and religion.
Similarly, the laws intended to suppress
advocacy by teachers of ideas dangerous to the public order would,
unless very narrowly drawn and directed to averting a real and
imminent danger, also he subject to attack under the first amendment.24
22 N.H.Rev.Stat. §191.1
Rev.Stat.NebAtu-170') (1(159).
23
Supra, ch. 1, pp. 13-17.
Meyer v. Nebraska, 2(32 U.S. 396,
403 (1923); Pierce v. Society of Sisters,
supra, note 13; Farrington
v. Tokushige, 273 U.S. 284 (1927).
24 Keyishian v. Board of Regents, 385 U.S. 582,1403-4 (1067).

B.
Nonprogrammatic Controls
Less controversial and more prevalent among the states
than programmatic controls are the business, buidling, health,
and zoning code provisions that apply to nonpublic schools.
Ju:t
as private businesses are regulated to pro*:;ect the public from
unfair commercial practices, unsafe building and health conditions,
or undesirable plant locations, nonpublic schools are regulated
by the state and local governments under their police powers to
protect the public from the same or similar dangers.
Thus, the
Illinois legislature has authorized comprehensive regulation of
private business and vocational schools by the Superintendent of
Public Instruction in order to prevent practices that are fraudu-
lent, misleading, or in any way detrimental to the interests of
the public. 25
Chapter 122, section 27-8 of the Illinois Statutes,
1972, requires that physical examinations and immunizations be
given at various stages of schooling.
The City of Chicago Building
Code and the Zoning Ordinance contain lengthy and detailed require-
ments for schools of all types.26
Although questions are often raised about the motiva-
tions of officials for selective enforcement of this type of
business and safety regulation, they are rarely invalidated for
exceeding the state police power.
It is interesting to note,
however, that the government's power to restrict the location of
25 ill. Rev. Stat., Ch. 144, 811136 et !lg.
26 Municipal Code of Chicago, Ch. 48.4.3 and 194A.

4/12
nonpublic schools through zoning ordinances has been success-
fully challenged on constitutional grounds in several states.27
In these jurisdictions the case law on governmental authority to
enact restrictive zoning measures constitutes an exception to
the broad powers courts give state and local governments to
regulate private enterprise for the public welfare.
Generally,
however, the nonprogrammatic business and safety regulations, as
well as the programmatic ones discussed above, enjoy a strong
presumption of validity that is overcome
only by a showing of no
reasonable relationship to a velid public interest.
Another potential state interest in nonprogrammatic controls
of nonpublic schools is to ensure that public funds appropriated
for nonpublic school use are not spent for religious purposes in
violation of the establishment clause of the first amendment. To
this end the Rhode Island and Pennsylvania legislatures in attempt-
ing to aid nonpublic schools sought "to create statutory restrictions
designed to guarantee the separation between secular and religious
educational functions and to ensure that state financial aid
supports only the former:'28
However, to ensure obedience to
these restrictions the Supreme Court found that " a comprehensive,
discriminating, and continuing, state surveillance will inevitably
be reouired" and
"these prophylactic contacts will involve excessive
27 Columbia Trust v. Lincoln Institute, 12q S.W. 113 (Ky.,
1010); Roman Catholic Welfare Cog .
v. City of Piedmont,
2 9 P.2d
a38 (Ca
.,
u
see
anow v.
even Oak Park Inc.
94 A.2d
482 (N.J., 193
State v. Sinor,
23 Lemon v. Kurtzman, 403 U.S.
602, 613 (1970).

4/13
BEV COPY AVAILABLE
and enduring entanglement between state and church," thereby
violating the first amendment.29
Of course, not all restrictions on the use of public funds
by nonpublic schools will cause unconstitutional entanglements,
for, as the Court also pointed out in Lemon v. Kurtzman:
"Judicial caveats against entanglement must recognize that the
line of separation, far from being a 'wall,' is a blurred, in-
distinct, and variable barrier depending on all the circumstances
of a particular relationship."30
In its most recent decision on
the question, the Court, over the vigorous dissent of three Jus-
tices, found no excessive government entanglements in a statute
providing for the issuance of bonds to benefit a Baptist- controlled
college, which would be restricted to using the funds' for secular
purposes and would be subject to government inspeetions to ensure
such secular use. 31
Finally, an interest the public may have in nonpublic
school controls is that of prohibiting such schools,froe abridging
students' civil rights.
In order to invoke the fourteenth amend-
ment's guarantees of due process and equal protection of law, there
must be a judicial finding that the discrimination in question
involves actions of the state and not just actions of-private
29 Ibid., at 619.
30 Ibid., at 614.
31 Hunt v. McNair, 37 L.Ed. 24 923 (1973).

4/14
individuals. 32
Persuasive arguments have been made that educa-
tion in itself is a public function and that private schools in
doing the work of the state should be subject to the same consti-
tutional restraints as a governmental body.33
However, in oblter
dicta, or language that is not binding precedent, the United States
Supreme Court recently indicated that private bias in nonpublic
schools is in itself not barred by the Constitution.34
In that
case, however, the Court, following a long line of precedent on
what indicia of state involvement will constitute
"state action"
sufficient to trigger constitutional restraints, found it uncon-
stitutional for a state to provide free textbooks to racially
discriminatory private schools, holding that, "A State may not
grant the type of tangible finaneial aid here involved if that
aid has a significant tendency to facilitate, reinforce, and
support private discrimination."35
It is of interest to note that the Court has not faced a
situation in which segregated private school without any tan-
lible state support have in fact usurped to a significant degree
the role of the public school system in a community.36
Where there
32 The lieterature and cases on this subject are voluminous.
Cf. Adickes v. S.H. Kress Co., 398 U:S. 144 (1970); Moose Lodge
No. 107 v. IFT57-467773=63 (1972).
33 quillory v. Administrators of Tulane Univ., 203 F.Supp.
855
(E.D. La. 1961T vacated" on other gds., 316 Fes. 2d 489 (1962); see
also, Evans v. Newton, 382 U.S. 296 (1966).
34 Norwood v. Harrison, 37 L.Ed. 2d 723, 733-734 (1973).
35 Ibid., at 732.
36 See E. Jenkins, School Conflict in South is Intensifying as
Academies Challenge Public System' New York Imes, Aug. 19, 1973
at 1, col. '3.

Bo cart AVAILABLE
is significant transfer of white students, teachers, and
administrators from public to private schools and where tax
support for the public system decreases while increased private
funding goes to the private system, the Court might then hold
that the state cannot avoid desegregation by allowing racially
discriminatory, nominally private groups to assume a primary
role in providing education to the community. 37
Such a holding
would not be a great extension of the Court's decision in Griffin
v. School Bd., where it found unconstitutional state action in
the closing of the public schools to avoid desegregation and the
contemrlraneous establishment of segregated private schools.38
Instead of relying on individuals to seek judicial inter-
pretation and enforcement of the Constitution to remedy private
school discrimination, state legislatures play make such discrimi-
nation illegal. Mile same states for thtz purpose have enacted
fair educational practices eatiSIMIK others have included private
schools in the coverage of laws prohibiting in public accommoda-
tions, one critic ham concluded that these measures are not
enforced and have had little, if any, impact.39
A significant development in the area of legislative pro-
hibition of nonpublic school discrimination against nonwhites is
=11..
37 Segregation Academies and State Action, Note, 82 Yale
L.J. 1436, 1456-1458 (1973).
38 377 U.S. 218 (1964).
39 Dorgan, J.
"Racial Discrimination in 'Private' Schools,"
in POW CgrItiolS,fer lanomplic Schoqs 144-146 (D. Erickson ed.,
19607'

4/16
the recent interpretation of Title 42 United States Code section
1Q81 by the Federal District Court for the Eastern District of
Virginia in Gonzalez v. Fairfax - Brewster, Inc. 40
Section 1981
provides inter alia that ".
.
.A11 persons.
.
.shall have the same
right in every State and Territory to make and enforce contracts.
.
as is enjoyed by white citizens.
.
.
."
In Gonzalez, which is now
on appeal, the court found that the private schools in question,
despite their stated nondiscriminatory policies, were in fact open
to every white child and that their only criteria for exclusion
was on the basis of race, so that in denying admission to non-
whites they had violated section 1981.
There are many possible reasons for the relative inaction
by states in prohibiting arbitrary discrimination In nonpublic
school admissions, not the least of which are lack of strong pub-
lic support and the difficulty there would be in determining when
nonacceptance is due to socially unacceptable reasons, such as
race, or to "legitimate" reasons such as intelligence or ability to
give money to the school.
There is also the difficult constitu-
tional question that would have to be confronted of whether it
would vi .Mate the free exercise of religion to prohibit a religious
school from discriminating racially where such nondiscrimination
would conflict with the school's religious purposes.
A similar
conflif,t in principles would be posed where the racially discri-
minatory religious schools would compete with and to some degree
supplant the desegregated public school system, so that their
40 42 LW 2077, July 27, 1973.

4/17
discriminatory policy might constitute state action in violation
of the equal protection clause of the fourteenth amendment.41
Most likely, the resolution of this conflict in constitutional
principles will depend on the relative importance the Court
attaches in a specific situation to the social interest served
by, on the one hand, desegregated education and, on the other
hand, the freedom of the school to observe its particular
religious practices.
III
OF STATE INTERESTS, THE CONSTITUTION, AND JUDICIAL REVIEW:
ARE THERE ANY LIMITS ON STATE INTERFERENCE
WITH NON-PUBLIC SCHOOLS?
If a regulation has any reasonable relation to the public
welfare, then under the doctrines of federal and most state courts
the due process clause of the Constitution will not protect the
regulated party from the state's interference.
As noted above,
because education is so closely identified with the welfare of
society and with the state's role as ultimate guardian of the
welfare of children, the state is allowed enormous discretion in
regulating all aspects of education, including the operation of
nonpublic schools.
Since the 1930s and cases such as Carolene Products,
dis-
cussed above, the federal courts have generally abandoned the
doctrine of substantive due process of law by which judges struck
41 See supra, text at note 37.

)4/18
down regulatory measures which they believed unwarranted as a
matter of policy. 42
This change in legal theory is of more than
academic interest to nonpublic school educators since the three
Supreme Court decisions, Meyer, Pierce, and Farrington) dis-
c,A,:sed by Professor Erickson in chapter
2
which found that
nonpublic schools have both the right to exist and maintain a
degree of autonomous control, were based on the theory that the
challenged state regulations violated substantive due process
of law.
Therefore, if the protections granted by these decisions
are to remain viable, they must depend on a constitutional right
other than the one on which they were originally founded.
In the
absence of any recent Supreme Court decisions dealing directly
with the constitutionality of nonpublic school regulations
(except
perhaps Wisconsin v. Yoder, which only adds to the uncertainty), it
should be noted that analysis in this area is based more on
speculation than on precedent.
However, from a brief review
of recent Supreme Court decisions and their relation to Meyer,
Pierce, and Farrington, it is probably safe to conclude that the
Court would not now limit the rights granted in these three cases
and might even expand those rights under the first amendment.
The Supreme Court, while viewing more expansively the state's
discretion to enact measures for the social welfare, has also
rime the 1q30c viewed far more narrowly the state's power to
restrict liberties associated with speech, press, assembly, and
religion guaranteed by the first and fourteenth amendments.
The
2 Ferguson v. Skrupa, 372 U.S. 726,729, 730 (1q63).

4/10
difference in the test that the Court applies to a challenged
law when such liberties are involved was well stated by the Court
in West Virginia v. Barnette:
The right of a State to regulate, for example,
a public utility may well include, so far as
the due process test is concerned, power to
impose all of the restrictions which a legis-
lature may have a "rational basis" for adopt-
ing.
But freedoms of speech, of press and of
assembly, and of worship may not be infringed
on such slender grounds.
They are susceptible
of restriction only to prevent grave and immedi-
ate danger to interests which the state may
lawfully protect.
.
.
.43
In weighing the interests for and against a contested regu-
lation the court demands that the scales fall decisively on the
side of public necessity to justify any infringement of religious,
political, or thought-related liberties. 44
In Barnette the
public necessity of expelling students for refusing to salute the
flag was held insufficient to justify the denial of the first
amendment's protection of freedom of thought and belief; "neither
our domestic tranquility in peace nor our martial. effort in war
depend on compelling little children to participate in a ceremony
which ends in nothing for them but a fear of spiritual condemna-
tion. u45
In order to understand what relation this expanded first amend-
ment protection has to the rights previously granted nonpublic schools
43 West Virginia State Board of Educ. v. Barnette, 319 U.S.
524 (19427STm.eeasooereer,.., 406 (1963).
44 Cf. Feiner v. New York, 340 U.S. 315 (1951), concurring
opinion of Frankharter, S.
45 Barnette,
supra note 46, concurring opinion of Black and
Douglas,-77777-it 643.

4/20
under the abandoned substantive due process doctrine, we shall
look briefly at the holdings in Meyer, Pierce, and Farrington
and their interpretations in later Supreme Court decisions.
In Meyer v. Nebraska, the Court held that the State's
interest in fostering "a homogeneous people with American ideals"
by prohibiting the teaching of modern foreign languages to stu-
dents below ninth grade was insufficient justification for the
resulting interference with the rights of three groups: language
teachers to engage in their occupation, parents to control the
education of their children, and pupils to acquire knowledge.46
Although the Court found these rights to be guaranteed under the
due process clause (the first amendment then not being considered
applicable to states through the feurteenth amendment's due pro-
cells clause), it is clear that because the infringed-upon activities
were speech-related and of no significant danger to the public they
would now fall well within the protection of the first amendment.
Similarly, in Pierce, the Court did not hold it unconstitu-
tional for the state to prohibit attendance at private school
because this would violate a first amendment right to learn or
teach, but because, by interfering with the private schools' patrons,
it would destroy the schools' business and property. 47
Yet, the
Court in dicta also discussed the parents' freedom to control
their children's education in language that makes it clear that
46 Meyer, supra, note 24, at 401.
47 Pierce, supra, note 13, at 535-536.

4A,1
BEST COPY AVAILABLE
the Court was concerned with interference with rights that are
now protected under the first amendment:
Under the doctrine of Meyer v. Nebraska,
262 U. S. 390, we think it entirely plain that
the Act of 1922 unreasonably interferes with
the liberty of parents and guardians to direct
the upbringing and education of children under
their control.
As often heretofore pointed
out, rights guaranteed by the Constitution may
not be abridged by legislation which has no
reasonalble relation to some purpose within the
competency of the State.
The fundamental theory
of liberty upon which all goverments in this
Union repose exludes any general power of the
Sate to standardize its children by forcing them
to accept instruction from public teachers only.
The child is not the mere creature of the State;
those who nurture him and direct his destiny
have the right, coupled with the high duty, to
recognizeAnd prepare him for additional obli-
gations. *0
Finally, in Farrington a year later, the Court found
that the State's restrictive foreign language school regulations,
which would have driven such schools out of business, were in
violation of substantive due process.
The Court based this hold-
ing, as in Pierce, on the threatened destruction of the school's
property interest.
However, the Court emphasized the violation
of the parents' right to control their children's education even
more than the interference with property rights:
They(the challenged regulations)give affirma-
tive direction concerning the intimate and essential
details of such schools, intrust their control to public
officers, and deny both owners and patrons reasonable
choice and discretion in respect of teachers, curriculum
and text-books.
Enforcement of the Act probably would
48 Ibid., at 534-535.

destroy most, if not all, of them; and,
certainly,
it would deprive parents of fair opportunity to
procure for their children, instruction which they
think important and we cannot say is harmful.
The
Japanese parent has the right to direct the educa-
tion of his own child without unreasonable
restric-
tions; the Constitution protects him as well as those
who speak another tongue.4"
Although it is clear that these decisions did not
rest on the first amendment's protection of freedom of speech
or religion, the Supreme Court in Griswold v. Connecticut and
Wisconsin v. Yoder construed Meyer and Pierce as being based on
First amendment principles.5°
Although Griswold concerned the
existence of a constitutional right
to marital privacy and
its violation by a statute forbidding use of contraceptives,
the Court interpreted Pierce and Meyer as providing first
amendment protection against laws that "contract the spectrum
of available knowledge:"
The right to educate a child in a school of
the parents' choice--whether public or private
or parochial--is also not mentioned /in the
Constitution or Bill of Rights]. Nor is the
right to study any particular subject or any
foreign language.
Yet the First Amendment has
been construed to include certain of those
rights.
By Pierce v. Society of Sisters, supra, the
right to educate one's children as one chooses is
made applicable to the States by the force of the
First and Fourteenth Amendments.
By Meer v.
Nebraska, supra, the same dignity is g -fen
he
righf to study the lerman language in a private
school.
In other words, the. State may not, con-
sistently with the spirit of the Firct Amenlment,
49 Farrington,
supra, note 24, at 2(18.
50 Iriswold v. C:onnecticut, 391 U.S. 470 (1)Ac)); Wisconsin
v. Yoder, supra, note
14.

4/23
contract the spectrum of available knowleige.
The right of freedom of speech and press in-
cludes not only the right to utter or to print,
but the right to distribute, the eight to re-
oeive, the right to ream llitation7 and freedom
of inquiry, freedom of thcaght, and freedom to
teach Laitatiorg--indeed the freedom of the entire
university community L7Citatiolg.
Without those
peripheral rights the 1::pec!fic ri4hts would be
less secure.
And so we reaffirm the principle of
the Pierce and the Meyer cases.51
**This dicta of the Court is vague, and it is notable that
five of the justices joined in three concurring opinions and two
'justices dissented.
Yet, it is still significant authority for
the proposition that the freedom of nonpublic schools to follow
to Some degree their own independent educational programs is
within the scope of the first amendment's protection.
Although a Catholic school as well as a secular military
adademy challenged Oregon's compulsory public school attendance law
in Pierce, the Court did not base its decision on, or even consider,
principles of religious freedom.
However, the significance of
Pierce for the Court in Wisconsin v. Yoder seems. to be its implied
protection of the first amendment right of free exercise of religion:
As that caselPierce suggests, the values of
parental direction of the religious upbringing
and education of their children in their early
and formative years have a high place in our
society.
.
.
.However read, the Court's holding
in Pierce stands as a charter of the rights of
paiirifrfo dire q the religious upbringing of
their children.
51 Griswold, supra, note 53, at 483-484.
52 Wisconsin v. Yoder, supra, note 14, at 1532 and 1542.

4/24
In sum, although the Court has never overturned laws
directly regulating nonpublic schools on first amendment grounds,
dicta in recent cases leave no doubt that this amendment will
offer a degree of protection for the programmatic freedom of
nonpublic schools.
Certainly, restrictions that would destroy
nonpublic schools as in Picrce and Farrington would .violate the
first amendment, as would prohibitions on the teaching of subjects
that present no grave and immediate danger to the public, as in
Meyer.
More difficult balancing-of-interests problems would
arise in terms of certain typical existing nonpublic school
regulations, such as:
a requirement that nonpublic school teach-
ers be certified to teach in public schools;
that nonpublic
schools devote a certain number of hours to classroom instruction;
that they teach specified subjects; or that they offer courses
that are substantially the same as, or equivalent to, those
offerred in the public schools.
The constitutionality of such
regulations has regularly bees upheld by state courts.53
Yet, there is some basis for believing that a careful first amend-
ment analysis of these regulations taking into account the Supreme
Court's recent opinion in Wisconsin v. Yoder might lead to
different result last least a few courts.
Yoder does seem to foreclose a challenge to the afore-
mentioned types of nonpublic school regulations on the grounds
53 State v. Superior Ct., 346 P. 2d 999 (1960); Common-
wealth v7-017,-70 A. 2d 693 (Pa. 1950); Meyerkorth v."1"giatiklip
113-HT W. 2a595 (Neb. 1962); In Re Shinn, supra note 15; Ste hens
v. Bongart, 189L2d 131
N. J. Juv. &
Rel. Ct. 1937) ;
eop e
V.-leiiFicur 263 p. 2d 685 (Cal. Super. Ct., 1953).

4/25
of free exercise of religion, unless the challenger happens to
be Amish or Amish-like.
The Court pointed out the reasonable-
ness and constitutionality of the state's prescribing minimum
standards for nonpublic schools and it warned that courts must
review such requirements with great circumspection for "courts
are not school boards or legislatures, and are ill-equipped to
determine the 'necessity' or discrete aspects of a state's
pro-
gram of compulsory education. .54
Most important, the Court em-
phasized that the state's interest in its program of compulsory
education is not subject to challenge by one whose free exercise
of religion claim is based on beliefs which sre recent in origin
and not "shared by an organized group, and intimately related to
daily living."55
Indeed, the Court stated explicitly
that pro-
bably few religious groups other than the Amish could make the
type of showing of historic communal religious belief necessary
to challenge successfully the state's interest in its program of
compulsory education.56
Thus, the only approach left open for a substantive con-'
stitutional challenge to the aforementioned regulations is based
on the first amendment rights of freedom of speech and press and
the associated protections of "freedom of inquiry, freedom of
thought, and freedom to teach" and the "right to distribute, the
right to receive, and the right to read." 57
The first step in
54
Wisconsin v. Yoder, supra note 14, at 1543.
Ibid., at 1533.
Ibid., at 1543.
57 Griswold v. Connecticut, supra note 53, at 482.

4/26
this approach is to show that the challenged nonpublic school
regulation, whatever its other functions, also interferes with
interests protected by the first amendment.
Once this is shown
the burden shifts to the state to show that its nonpublic
school
regulation serves a compelling state interest.. 58
The most ivbrvasive and inhibiting of the aforementioned
nonpublic school regulations,
the requirement that nonpublic
school programs be equivalent to those of the public schools,
has generated much case law concerning the definition of equi-
valence,59
but apparently no opinions on its first amendment
implications.
This is also true of Illinois' similar require-
ment that children attending private or parochial schools be
"taught the branches of education taught to children of corres-
ponding age and grade in the public schools....4o
Whether
or not the equivalency requirement is given a strict or liberal
construction, ft
it should not require a professional educator
to realize that "freedom of inquiry, freedom of thought and free-
dom to teach" are curtailed if a nonpublic school must follow
the directions of the public school in determining the nature
of its academic program.
The Court has clearly established that
NAACP v. Button
371. U. S. 415 (1963)
''o "Compulsory Education in the United States," 3 Seton
Hall L. R. 349, 364 (1972).
60
Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 122, 26-1(1); People v.
Levisen,
supra, note 16.
61 Because the term "equivalency" is subject to such vary-
ing interpretations and gives little guidance as to what is speci-
fically required by it, a strong constitutional argument may be
also made that it is void because its vagueness and
overbremdth.
Keyishian v. Board of Regents, sera note 25, and N.A.A.C.P. v.
Button, 371 U. S. 415, 433 (1962).

4/27
public school authorities impinge on first amendment protected
rights when they restrict the freedom of public school students
to express their own opinions, whether or not officially approved,
as long as the business of the school is not disrupted.
In our system, students may not be regarded as
closed-circuit recipients of only that which
the State chooses to communicate.
They may not
be confined to the expression,of those sentiments
that are officially approved. o2
A fortiori, the state's attempt to prohibit nonpublic schools
from communicating to their students what is not equivalent to
the officially approved public school curriculum would also
be within the realm of first amendment protection.
Most important,
the equivalency requirement by limiting the nonpublic school's
freedom to innovate and to be different from public schools
endangers its right to survive as an alternative to the public
school, which right the Court has stated in interpreting Pierce
is guaranteed by the first amendment 63
There should thus not be great difficulty in showing that
the equivalency requirement impinges on first amendment protected
freedom.
The second and more difficult step in challenging the
constitutionality of the equivalency requirement is that of re-
butting the state's argument that its regulation serves
compelling
state interests, apart from its effect on first amendment rights. These
62
63
Tinker v.
(19e0).
Griswold
Des Moines
supra note
School Dist.,
53, Wisconsin
393 U. S.
v. Yoder,
503, 511
supra note

4/28
interests, as noted above, are primarily those of protecting
the welfare of children, and assuring an edu..ated, politically
responsible citizenry for the proper functioning of a democratic
!I,
ftrm cf government. -4.
This argument would seem almost irresis-
tible in light of the Supreme Court's holding in Princt v. Massa-
chusetts,
which upheld the conviction of a child's guardian for
violating the child labor laws, despite the fact that the child
had been engaged in selling magazines for the Jehovah's Witnesses,
an activity clearly protected by the free speech and religion
clauses of the first amendment. 65
After cataloguing the various
hild labor laws were intended to cure, the Court stated:
It is too late now to doubt that legislation
lcc-:r
designed to reach such evils is
within tne state's police power, whether against
the parents' claim to control of the child or
one thareligious scruples dictate contrary
action. uu
The implications of Prince, however, may have been
turned against the state by the Court's opinion in Yoder 66a
There the state argued on the authority of Prince that the child's
r.1.71'.. to a secondary education and the state's power as parens
patriae to assure that the child receives the benefits of that
right must take precedence over the first amendment claims of
.11/' :supra TM.
.)-- Prince v. Massachusetts, 321
U. S. 158 (1944)
61; Ibid. at 168-169.
66asuor-, note 14.
In Yoder Amish parents who refused to
send theme Tilildren to high school after completing the eighth
grade were found guilty
of violating the Wisconsin compulsory
education statute which required regular school attendance of
children between seven and sixteen years of age.
The United
States Supreme Court, in affirming the decision of the Wisconsin
Supreme Court, reversed the parents' conviction on the grounds that
the compulsory education statute as applied to members of the Amish
religion who have graduated from the eighth grade violates the
first amendment guarantee of free exercise of religion.

4/29
the parents.
The Court, however, distinguished the situation
in Prince from that of the Amish:
this case, of course, is not one in which
any harm to the physical or mental health of the
child or to the public safety, peace, order, or
welfare has been demonstrated or may be properly
inferred.
The record is to the contrary, and any
reliance on that theory would find no support in
the evidence.?
Professor Kurland has an interesting, though extreme,
reaction to this interpretation of Prince by the Court in Yoder:
Never, I submit, has the concept of the
importance of secondary education received such
a blow from the judiciary.
Secondary education
may not be regarded by a state as essential to
'the physical or mental health of the child or
to the public safety, order, or welfare' of the
state.
Whet is the justification for complusory
secondary education then?
How could a state ever
meet the burden placed on it by the Court here
to show that it has a valid interest inAducating
its children beyond the primary grades?00
It is more likely that the Court was not denigrating the
general importance of secondary education, but rather was comparing
it with the unique alternative education offered by the Amish,
which, it concluded, safeguards the interests of the child and
the public as well as does the state-approved secondary education.
Whichever view is correct, the Court's language is important be-
cause it indicates that the Court may require in a freedom of
speech case, as well as a freedom of religion case, that the state
?Wisconsin v. Yoder, supra note 14, at 1540-1541.
68 Kurland, P. "The Supreme Court, Compulsory Education,
and the First Amendment's Religion Clauses,
75 W. Va. L. R. at 229-
230
(1973).

4/30
assume the heavy burden of showing almost beyond a reasonable
doubt that its interest in specific nonpublic school regulations
outweighs the interest of the regulated
schools in maintaining
their first amendment freedom.
It is useless to predict the outcome of such a balancing
test apart from the facts of a specific case.
It is clear that
the outcome of such a challenge to the equivalency requirement
would depend in part, as did the outcome in Yoder, on how the
Court perceived the relative merits of the specific public and
nonpublic school programs before it.
However, it would be a
mistake, I submit, for a court to limit, as
the Supreme Court
did in Yoder, the scope of its ruling that a nonpublic school
regulation violates Lhe first amendment to the narrow situation
of the particular "good" nonpublic school program before the
court.
This would compound the basic faalacy in the approach of
such restrictive nonpublic school regulations as the equivalency
requirement by establishing only a new officially acceptable
educational methodology69
The principle that needs recognition
is that no educational authority can determine for all students
in our society what is the appropriate method and
ultimate goal
of education.
Justice Jackson in West Virsinia v. Barnette spoke to this
point in response to the argument that educational authorities
should have the discretion to choose the appropriate means
69 See infra, ch.

4/31.
to achieve national unity in order to protect the nation's
security:
Probably no deeper division of our people
could proceed from any provocation than from
finding it necessary to choose what doctrine
and whose program public educational officials
shall compel youth to unite in embracing....
We can have intellectual individualism and the
rich cultural diversities that we owe to excep-
tional minds only at the price of occasional
eccentricity and abnormal attitudes.... But
freedom to differ is not limited to things that
do not matter much.
That would be a mere shadow
of freedom. The test of its substance is the
right to differ as to things that touch the
heart of the existing order.
If there is any
fixed star in our constitutional constellation,
it is
t no official, high or petty, can pre-
scribe
At shall be orthodox in politics,
nationalism,,Keligion, or other matters of
opinion.... fU
As Justice Jackson realized, the first amendment's pro-
hibition against school officials requiring
unified adherence to
orthodox opinion is more than a matter of individual right, but
is of major consequence to the society as a whole.
In a recent
opinion, the Court made this point even more explicit:
The vigilant protection of constitutional
protections is nowhere more vital than in the
community of American schools. 'Citation:7 The
classroom is peculiarly the "marketplace of ideas."
The Nation's future depends upon leaders trained
through wide exposure to that robust exchange of
ideas which discovers truth "out of a multitude
of tongues, iiiithet7 than through any kind of
authoritative selection." 71
70 West Virginia
v. Barnette, supra note 43.
71 Keyishian v. Board of Regents, supra note 25.

4/32
The state clearly has a legitimate interest in assuring
that stulents in nonpublic schools attain a certain minimum stan-
dard oC tonntion clearly necessary for the welfare of the child
and sor.lety.
Yet there is a line that can be drawn between regula-
Ir.oriplish this goal without unnecessarily infringing
rights, and regulations, such as the equivalency
rpQ.,1 )-ement, which violate those rights by prescribing the
!Ipthos nonpublic schools must follow and the fundamental put.-
poL:a6 of nonpublic education.
The approaches to nonpublic school
siiacued below exemplify some alternative ways to
sa4 'r9,! t!"..se int.erests of the state and nonpublic school.
Their
appropi-iateness, however, cannot be determined apart from a con-
sideration of the actual problems that unregulated nonpublic schools
are creating in the state.
Although treatment of this question
IL 3.1-t.s!qe the scope of this chapter, it should be kept in mind
that, legislative acceptance of a regulatory scheme will depend
pri-larily on whether the regulations appear to respond to a felt
;onversely, the best argument against acceptance of
expanded governmental controls of nonpublic schools is the absence
of appreciable social problems caused by uncontrolled nonpublic
In the
Iv
NONPUBLIC SCHOOL RE1ULATION IN ILLINOIS
n.m ; PPTFP
TITH OTHER STATES.
In Illinois, as noted above, there are numerous building,
zonlm-, health, and commercial regulations that apply to the non-
...,;rolretatIr! operations of nonpublic schools.72
Although questions
72 Supra, p. 11.

14/33
are often raised about arbitrary enforcement of such regulations,73
their promulgation is clearly well within the state and local
governmental police power.74
The truancy statute contains the only compulsory Illinois
limitation on the educational aspects of nonpublic school opera-
tions.
It exempts from public school attendance children between
seven and sixteen who attend " a private or a parochial school
where children are taught the branches of education taught to
children of corresponding age and grade in the public schools and
where the instruction of the child in the branches of education
is in the English language."75 This provision was given a liberal
construction in People v. Levisen, in which the Illinois Supreme
Court held that parents did not violate the truancy law by
teaching their third-grade child at home.76
The evidence showed
that the parents were well educated, the child was being taught
third-grade work with regular hours of instruction and study, and
that the child's proficiency was comparable with average third-
grade students.
The court rejected the argument that individual
home instruction could not be instruction in a "private sthote as
required by the statute and found instead that "a school.... is a
place where instruction is imparted to the young, that the number of
See infra, ch. 5.
74
C
of Chicago v. Bethlehem H. T. Church, 93 Ill. App.
2d 30:3(l9a
75
Ill. Rev. Stat. ch
76
People v. Levisen, supra note

4/34
persons being taught does not determine whether the place is a
77
school...."
This construction of the statute is dubious in
terms of both the ordinary meaning of the term "private school"
and the statute's legislative history, which shows that a prior
specific authorization of home instruction had been repealed.
The weight of authority from 'other jurisdictions is also clearly
contrary to the result reached in Levisen.
However, the primary
significance of the opinion is in the standard it sets for deter-
mining compliance with the truancy statute:
Compulsory education laws are enacted to enforce
the natural obligation of parents to provide an
education for their young, an obligation which
corresponds to the parents' right of control over
the child
The object is that all children
shall be educated, not that they shall be educated
in any particular manner or place
The law
is not made to punish those who provide their
children with instruction equal or superior to
that obtainable in the public schools.
It is
made for the parent who fotils or refuses to pro-
perly educate his child. .75)
Despite this apparent liberality in allowing alternative
approaches to instruction, the court put on the parents whose child
is not in public school
"the burden of showing that they have in
good faith provided an adequate course of instruction in the
8o
prescribed branches of learning."
The dourt then added this
dicta:
No parent can be said to have a right to de-
prive his child of educational advantages at
least commensurate with the standards prescribed
for the public schools.°1
171bid. at 576.
78;707T.vate Tutoring, Compulsory
Illinois Supreme Court, 18 U. Chi. L.
79People v. Levisen, supra note
8oIbid., at 578.
81 Ibid.
Education and the
R. 105, 106 (1950).
16, at 577.

1.1 /3
BEST COPY AVAIIABIE
When the two passages are read together, it appears that
a parent may differ in his method of teaching from the public
school, but the results of the teaching must be the same.
Thus,
although some of the court's language calls for allowance of
innovation and diversity in nonpublic school education, courts
could interpret Levisen as allowing little real divergence from
the public school program.
This is what happened in the Appellate Court's decision
in People v. Harrell, which interpreted Levisen as follows:
Our Compulsory School Law, Ill. Rev. St.
Ch. 122, Sec. 26.1 to 26.9, has received a liberal
construction in Illinois courts.
The term
'private school' as a lawful substitute for
public schooling has been extended to include
home schooling, where the teacher is competent,
the required subjects are taught, and the child
receives an education at least equivalent tom
public schooling.
People v. Levisen......*
The court in Harrell affirmed a conviction of parents for violat-
ing the compulaory at`
dance law where their children': private
school was *disorganised, lacking in system, witn mostly in-
experienced teachers attempting to teach from textbooks without
A
uniformity.*
3
A more recent Illinois Appellate Court opinion, however,
gives a more liberal interpretation to Levisen.
8221siallx.1hurall, 34 Ill. App. 2d 205, 207-208 (1962).
83
Ibid., at 209.

fRt
In holding that an experimental dual enrollment,
or shared-time
program, did not violate the compulsory attendance law, the
court in Morton v. Board
of Education of City of Chicago stated:
Since the object of the compulsory attendance
law is that all children be educated and not
that they be educated in any particular manner
or place, part.time enrollment in a public
schbol and part-time enrollment in a nonpublic
school is permitted by section 26-1, so long
as the child receives a complete
' ducation.
See People v. Levisen
The requirement that. a child receive a "complete education"
is
so vague as to be practically meaningless, but in the context of
the court's opinion it does seem to allow for more diversity in
nonpublic school prcgrams than the requirement of equivalency
in Harrell.
In addition to the arguments for allowing diversity in
Illinois nonpublic school programs based on the first amendment
and the opinion in Levisen,
reference may be made to the Illinois
Legislature's declaration of policy in the Nonpublic State ParentAl
Grant Act enacted in 1972. 85
In this Act, two of the legislative
findings are:
(5) government support
of nonpublic edu-
cation contributes to the pluralism of American
society by enabling pirents more readily to
determine the kind of education that their chil-
dren shall receive;
(6) freedom to choose a nonpublic school,meeting
reasonable State standards, is a fundamental
parental liberty and a basic right. 86
It Is certainly reasonable to urge that a court, in interpreting
the Legislature's intent in requiring nonpublic schools to teach
84
69 Ill. App. 2d 38, 45 (1966).
85Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 122,
1022 (1972)
86
Ibid.

4/37
the same branches of education as the public schools, to also
consider the Legislature's declaration of the importance to
pluralism in our society of sareguarding the fundamental right
of parents to determine for themselves the kind of education they
want their children to receive.
Requiring a strict equivalency
between nonpublic and public school education can only defeat
this legislative policy of promoting both pluralism in society
and parents' fundamental liberty reasonably to control their
children's education.
In Illinois enforcement of the compulsory attendance
law and therefore of the educational standards required of nonpublic
schools is left to the local district truant officer, 87
who
regularly works with the school principal in determining whether or
not prosecutions should be undertaken.
Nonpublic schools.tn
Illinois are thus now in a far different position from sui:h schools
in many states in which state education agencies have been granted
broad discretionary enforcement powers over nonpublic schools.
Illustrative of statutes granting wide agency discretion in the
implementation of nonpublic school controls is the Nebraska
provision empowering
the State Board of Education to "establish
rules and regulations.
.
.and procedures for classifying, approving
and accrediting schools, for approving the opening of new schools,
for the continued legal operation of all schools.
.
.
. "88
In
Massachusetts nonpublic schools in order to satisfy the compulsory
87 Ill. Rev. Stat. eh. 122, i26-4 (1961).
88 Rev. Stat. Neb. 1179-328 and 79-1701 (1971).

4.138
attendance law must have the prior approval of the local school
board which may withhold such approval when it is not "satisfied
that the instruction in all the studies required by law equals
in thoroughness and efficiency, and in the progress made therein,
that in the public school in the same town. 1189
Most nonpublic school regulatory statutes fall between these
extremes in prescribing substantive standards that still require
the exercise of considerable discretion in their implementation.
An example of this approach is the Ohio code, which defines the
criteria the state board of education must use in determining
the minimum nonpublic school standards that will satisfy students'
compulsory attendance requirements.
It states that the board's
standards "shall provide adequately for: a curriculum sufficient
to meet the needs of pupils in every community.
.
.,
efficient and
effective instructional materials and equipment.
.
., the proper
organization and administration and supervision of each school.
.
It concludes:
"In the formulation and administration of such
standards for nonpublic schools the board shall also consider the
particular.needs, methods and objectives of said schools, provided
they do not conflict with the provision of a general education of
a high quality.
.
.
."90
It is interesting to note that despite their lengthy
specifications, the Ohio statutory standards have apparently
Rq
Anno. Laws of Mass., (.11.
76, §1 (1"71)
.
90 Ohio Rev. Stat. §3301.07 (D) (14/7)
.

14/39
not provided adequate guidance.
In answer to a questionnaire in
1967, the Ohio Department of Education reported that its authority
over nonpublic schools needed statutory clarification, that it
enforced nonobjective laws less rigorously than objective
ones
because of difficulties in interpretation, and that it needed a
greater delegation of authority over nonpublic schools to fulfill
the legislative policy.91
Not only has the Ohio statute failed
to guide administrators in fulfilling legislative intent, it also
has failed to stop them from trying to exceed that intent.
For,
in its efforts to close down Amish schools, the Ohio Department
of Education has attempted to create and enforce prohibitions that
go beyond what both the legislature and state supreme court have
deemed to be legal regulations.92
This brief view of other states' approaches to nonpublic
school regulation reveals a basic dilemma that cannot be avoided
by states wishing to impose educational standards on nonpublic
schools.
On the one hand, the more specific the statutory
requirement that must be satisfied by nonpublic schools, the less
able some schools will be to make innovative departures from the
traditional methods while the more able others will be to evade
the substance and spirit of the law by purely formal adherence
to its letter.
On the other hand, the more general the statutory
reqviirements and the wider the discretion of enforcement agencies
91 Elson, "State regulation of Nonpublic Schools," in Public
Controls for Non ubiic Schools 122 (D. Erickson, ed., 1969).
Q2 State v. Glick, 175 N.E. 2d 68 (Ohio, 1961).

4/40
to ensure that nonplihlic schools do not endanger the public
gelfare, the less will be the influence of legislative intent
i.ud the ;rea'er the onuortunity for abuse of agency discretion.
Broad delegations of authority to state agencies also run
the risk of violating due process of law and the state consti-
03
tutional requirement of the separation of powers.''
The Illinois
Supreme Court has stated the constitutional standard to be
applied to legislative delegations as follows:
.
.
.Statutes which are so incomplete, vague,
indefinite and uncertain that men of ordi-
nary intelligence must necessarily guess at
their meaning and differ as to their applica-
tion, have uniformly been declared unconstitu-
tional as denying due process.
.
.If it leaves
to a ministerial officer the definition of the
thing to which it shall apply, such definition
not
being commonly known, it is invalid as an
unwarranted and void delegation of legislative_nh
power to an administrative officer.Ztitationsup-?
Nevertheless, the Illinois Supreme Court has
repeatedly recogni7ed
that the legislature may delegate extremely wide discretionary
authority to state agencies in order to accomplish the legisla-
ture's purpose.
The constitutional doctrine of separation of
powers was not intended to confine the legis-
lature to the alternatives of complete inaction
or the imposition of rigidly inflexible laws
which would distort rather than promote
its
objective.
When it is necessary, the legisla-
ture may commit to others the
responsibility
('3 Illinois .onstitution or 10-70, Article II, §1: "The legis-
lative, exe':utive anti judicial branches are separate. No branch shall
exercise powers properly belonging to another.
Rosemont 131d(L.
';t-
Ill. 2d 243,
2c;6-...1
.1c4.
.

4/41
for the accomplishment of the details of
its expressed purpose.
The scope of permis-
sible delegation must be measured in terms
of the complexity and diversity of the con-
ditions which will be encountered in the
enforcement of the statute.
So it has been
said almost from the outset that the legis.
lature may authorize others to do things which
it might properly, but cannot understandingly
or advantageously, do itself.9:'
Even in view of this flexibility given the legislature in
delegating its authority, the actual effectiveness of the recent
Illinois statute conferring certain duties with respect to pri-
vate schools to the newly created State Board of Education must
be viewed with skepticism.96
The Illinois Constitution of 1970
mandates the existence of such a Board which "may establish
goals, determine policies, provide for planning and evaluating
education programs and recommend financing" and which "shall have
such other duties and powers as provided by law."97 The new Act,
which implements this constitutional provision, gives the Board
all of the duties currently delegated to the Superintendent of
Public Instruction and then states that "The Board shall be res-
ponsible for the educational policies and guidelines for public
and private schools, pre-school through grade 12 and Vocational
Education in the State of Illinois."
The Illinois Education Code does not delegate to the Super-
intendent of Public Instruction any mandatory controls over nonpublic
95 Pe
le v. Illinois Toll Hi hwa
Commission, 3 Ill. 2d 218,
233 (195
.
96 Ill Rev. State. ch. 122,11A4(c).
97 Illinois Constitution of 1970, Art. X, 12.

schools, so that the above statute is the only provision which
may be construed to give a state agency such authority.98
Yet,
this provision gives the Board authority only to establish policies
and guidelines for private schools; it does not require private
schools to adhere to any Board pronouncements nor does it confer
on the Board any authority to enforce its guidelines.
Thus, re-
gardless of constitutional considerations, as a matter of statutory
construction, it is highly doubtful that under the present law the
new State Board of Education can exercise any mandatory control
over nonpublic schools whatever.
However, it is conceivable that
a court could make the dubious finding that the authority to compel
nonpublic school compliance with guidelines is implied in the
authority to set the guidelines in accordance with the doctrine
that the legislature would not require the doing of a useless act.
In such event it is likely that the Act with respect to its applica-
tion to nonpublic schools would be deemed a violation of both
separation of powers and due process of law since it both provides
the Board with no standards whatever for applying its discretion
and gives nonpublic schools regulated by the Board no basis for
knowing what their rights and responsibilities are under the Act.
It may be noted, however, that, as Professor Davis has
pointed out, the clear trend of the cases in many states is away
from the requirement that statutory grants of authority contain
standards limitin.; the agency's exertse of its delegated authority.99
98 Ill. Rev. Stat., 1(173, (. 122, §2 -3.7
anl Al.
-3
G9 Davis, "A New Approach to DeledAtion," 16 U.7,htcago L.R.
713, 726 (196(.?).

14/43
Furthermore, it is clear that if it were indeed the legisla-
ture's intent to give the State Board of Education power to set
mandatory controls over nonpublic schools, it would be extremely
easy for the legislature henceforth to add the grant of authority
and the broad standards necessary to accomplish this beyond any
constitutional or constructional doubt.
It would therefore seem
the wisest course for those concerned with protecting nonpublic
schools from unwarranted governmental,interference to attempt to
insure that any future legislative delegation of authority over
nonpublic schools provides, instead of narrow standards, safe-
guards against misuse of agency discretion.
Even where courts
require highly specific legislative standards to guide agency
conduct, it is clear that agencies still haVe sufficient discretion
to decide matters'without regard to, and even in contravention of,
the legislative intent.100
Providing regulated parties with pro-
cedural safeguards, rather
than legislative standards, will
result ill more substantial protection against abuse of agency
discretion.
The choice of the appropriate safeguards depends on the
type of decision an agency is making.
AdminiStrative determina-
tions are based either on issues of policy and law that depend on
general knowledge and legal principles or on issues of specific
faeLs about specific parties that must be resolved on their indi-
vidual grounds.
The former type of determination, common to agency
100 Ibid., at 722-725.

rule-mail ng, requires different procedural safeguards from the
latter type, which iv ,ommon to agency adjudication.
For ex-
anple, when the Superintendent of Public, Instruction makes a
rule .'or teacher oertif';1tion rtandards, the rule Is based on
e:eneral
In''ormation that
arailable to and concerns all the
affected parties equally.
A hearing in which all parties are
allowed to present unrestricted oral or written arguments is
sufficient procedure for making a well-informed decision.
The
requirements of a trial-type hearing, including compliance
with the judicial rules for admission of evidence, cross-examina-
tion, and rebuttal, would demand much more time and would not pre-
sent the issues as well as straightforward arguments by the parties.
Formal trial-type procedures, however, would be appropriate when
the Superintendent determines whether or not a particular teacher
has violated the established standards.
Here, the decision de-
pends on illuminating specific Issues of fact peculiar to the
activities of the individual parties, the exact function for which
trial procedures are designed.
In regulating nonpublic schools a state department of educa-
tion may engage in both types of determinations, making rules on
the basis of broad issues of policy and law and enforcing them
against individual parties on the basis of particular facts. When
these parties contect enforcement there is rarely any reason why
they should be dented the basic safeguards of a judicial
trial,
including the right to specific notice of charges;
sufficient time
to prepare a defense; opportunity to present evidence, to cross-
examine witnesses, and to have a determination based on the record

4/45
of 4110 t'ro-ef!J:m.7.
There would see,1 to be no major problem
in
there .afeguards ._;ine they are usually reouired as
a Tatter of (.on.:ziltu!onal
ide process and to some degree by the
Illinois Administrative Procelure Act. 101
Administrators should
not be reluctant to acrord these safeguards since they are help-
ful in illuminating the facts necessary for a correct decision.
The more difficult problem lies in providing safeguards
against abuse of an agency's power to make comprehensive rules.
As noted above,
the inescapable dilemma in this attempt is that
on the one hand, the rule-making discretion needed to implement
legislative policy is undermined by inflexible procedural safe-
guards, while, on the other hand, if that discretion is not
safeguarded the administrator can largely pursue his own policy,
regardless of legislative intent.
It is true that the rule-making discretion of any agency is
never complete.
The legislature can always revoke its grant of
authority and funds.
Legislative committees, especially those
controlling appropriations, can be highly effective in both pre-
venting deviations from statutory policy and working with adminis-
trators to better understand and satisfy community needs.
A more available check than the legislature on rule-making
discretion is the court, which will strike down rules which are
not
within the granted power, not issued according to proper
procedure, or unreasonable. 102
Although judges may exercise wide
101 Ill.Rev. Stat.,
1971, Ch.110, 1264 et seq.
102 Davis, Administrative Law; Cases-Test-Problems,
1955, p.111.

4/46
discretion in determining reasonableness, they cannot be ex-
pected to provide consistent protection against unwise or
unfair rules.
The court, Mr. Justice Cardozo said, "is not
at liberty to substitute its own discretion for that of adminis-
trative officers who have kept within the bounds of their
administrative powers.
.
.
.1t7iror or unwisdom is not equi-
valent to abuse. "103
Although the success of legislative policy often depends
on enlightened rule-making, there are no safeguards that can
guarantee the making of wise rules.
However, certain procedures,
such as the requirement of an open hearing, can promote sound
103 American Telephone and Telegraph Co. v. United States,
299 U.S.
32 t1.930%
A dramatic example of judicial unsTIIIngness
to overrule agency rule- making despite strong disagreement with
its wisdom is Board of Education of Aberdeen-Huntington Local
School Dist. v. State Board of Education, 1b91(.1t. 2d 31 (Ct.
App. 0111o, 162), fn which the 'stake Board of Education revoked
the charter of a local school board because it was not in com-
pliance with the minimum educational standards set by the State
Board.
Although he found evidence that some of the standards were
violated, the trial judge reversed the charter revocation.
The
appellate court, however, reversed the trial judge, and rein-
stated the revocation and, in noting that the legislature had
not provided adequate funds to meet the minimum standards, ob-
served the following about its own decision:
We can readily understand the feeling of the trial judge
and appreciate the conclusions he reached.
Were we to
do as he must have done--write from the heart instead of
the head--I am quite sure that our conclusions would be
the same as his.
Our sympathies certainly lie in that
direction; however, the law indicates that this is not
proper and that the control of schools is and always has
been vested in the Legislature of our state and not in
the local school boards.
The doctrines of substantial
compliance or comparative compliance with the minimum
standards do not apply here.
It is incumbent upon local
boards and local high schools to scrupulously meet these
minimum requirements.
189 N.E. 2d at 85.

rule-making.
The hearing requirement is based on the assumption
that through exchanging ideas with all the regulated parties the
rule-maker can more fully understand the position of those parties
and, consequently, write wiser and fairer rules.
It is an attempt
to put into practice the salutary jurisprudential principle that
decisions can be made in the public interest only to the extent
that all the interests affected are first fully considered.104
For reasons peculiar to the field of education the policy
of considering all views before making rules is vital to effec-
tive nonpublic selool regulation.
The constant intellectual
ferment in educational thought precludes the possibility that
anyone can make rules to meet all school situations solely an
the basis of his own belief in certain enduring principles of
sound education.
Traditional theories are being supplemented,
amended, or discredited so rapidly that unswerving reliance on
long-accepted, unreexamined ideas inevitably sacrifices the best
for the easiest solutions.
Equally as important as willingness to consider different
ideas is the predisposition to consider ideas from different
people.
More than in most areas of governmental regulations, in
education valuable insights are not limited to persons with pro-
fessional qualifications.
They can come from anyone of intelli-
gence, seriously concerned with educational problems, especially
if they are his own.
104 Stone, "The Twentieth Century Administrative Explosion
and After," 52 U.Col. u. R. U3, 532.
'4

/48
The requirement of notice and hearing before rule-makinr,
Is only one method for promoting fair and intelligent decision-
making by requiring consideration of the views of those affected
4 the decision-making.
Formal hearings may often be overly
tine- consuming, costly, and inappropriate for certain minor types
of decisions. 105
There are numerous more informal methods a
state education agency can use to elicit useful information from
interested and knowledgeable sources.
Probably the most effective procedure for this purpose is
to draft tentative rules and then submit them to the interested
parties for written comments.
A department of education can also
sponsor periodic statewide nonpublic school conventions or hold
smaller, more specialized conferences.
Space in its bulletin
or journal can be devoted to views of nonpublic school officials.
It can initiate informal contacts through questionnaires, tele-
phone calls, or personal consultations.
The industry-committee
system used by the War Production Board and Office of Price Adminis-
tration during World War II could be effectively adapted to non-
public school regulation.
Such advisory committees made up of
professional educators, religious leaders, and community spokesmen
of various types could be the source of valuable ideas in proposing
and reviewing rules governing nonpublic schools.
The agency could
also promote consideration of divergent views by employing people
with diverse school backgrounds.
Finally, inviting detailed
105 Davis, Administrative Law Treatise, 222.11 at pp. 125-126.
-
..101".4,PC,

V /49
criticism of the statutory scheme and agency practices by various
nonagency experts could facilitate periodic reevaluation of the
department's success in regulating nonpublic schools.
Although these tactics could stimulate illuminating exchanges
of ideas, the legislature would be ill-advised to require an agency
to use them.
Their success depends on the administrator's personal
judgment of the type of issue involved, the proper timing, the
disposition of the parties, and the agency's past experiences.
A
statute cannot tell an administrator the proper time to hold a con-
ference or consult outside advisors.
It cannot estimate which
problems could be best solved by soliciting suggestions from know-
ledgeable parties.
Thus, before binding agency discretion by any
of the aforementioned procedural safeguards, the cost in administra-
tive efficiency must also be measured.
But even if the legislature
is willing to sacrifice a high degree of administrative efficiency
for procedural protections, it has been noted that there are no
safeguards that can require agencies to make wise and fair rules.
Legislative oversight except in circumstances having high publicity
value is virtually nonexistent.
Judicial review is almost always
available, but judges are usually reluctant to substitute their
own ideas of wisdom and fairness for those of the agencies.
For wise and fair treatment under statutes delegating broad
rule-making powers nonpublic schools must rely ultimately on the
Intelligence and goodwill of government officials and, of equal
or greater importance, on acceptance by the general public of the
basic methods and goals of nonpublic schools.
Where the legislature

4/50
and agency officials, with the general support
of the public,
are intent on strict controls over nonpublic schools, the above
discussed procedural safeguards and constitutional restraints
will not guarantee nonpublic school officials the freedom they
believe warranted.
The best safeguard against harmful govern-
mental interference in nonpublic school affairs is thus not
reliance on either substantive or procedural legal rights, but
on a constructive and cooperative approach towards the settlement
of differences.
V
ALTERNATIVES TO EXISTING MODES OF
NCNPUBLI C SCHOOL REGULATION:
DISCLOSURE AND SELF-ACCREDITATION.
DISCLOSURE
The importance of disclosure of product information varies
directly with the degree of freedom of choice the prospective
consumer has in choosing between different products.
In regard to
choice of schooling, disclosure could make a significant difference
in a parent's or a student's decision where a large variety of
highly divergent schools are available.
It would make less differ-
ence where the available schools are kept to fairly uniform stan-
dards through regulation and no difference where the public school
is all that is available.
Thus, the decision as to how much dis-
closure should be required of nonpublic schools depends in large
part on the policy decision as to how much freedom parents and
students should have in choosing alternative forms of education.

4"1
Clearly, where the parent and student are deemed the only legi-
timate judge of the appropriate form of education and the role
of the state in assuring a minimum uniform educational standard
is rejected, a high degree of disclosure is warranted in order
that the decision-maker may know the available alternatives and
base his decision on factual assumptions that are true.
To the extent one disagrees' with the reality of classical
economic theory's self-interest maximizing model of man, one will
discount the importance of disclosure in affecting dedisian-making.
Yet, whether or not most people effectively utilize product die-
dlsoure, it is clear that without it consumers are wide open to
abuse in the marketplace and the potential for interest maximiza-
tion is seriously impaired.
Illinois law does not require nonpublic schools.to lake
affirmative disclosures of information to the public.
The sthtute
regulating the granting of adademic degrees
require that
before institutions can grant degrees they disclose to the Super-
intendent of Public Instruction relevant information that the
Superintendent may request, including a description of the pre-
requisite courses of study. 106
No provision is made, however, fore
disseminating this information to the public.
The only statutory provisions with respect to disclosures
to the public are prohibitory, making the dissemination of false
or misleading information illegal.
Thus, the Illinois act regulating
business and vocational schools authorizes the Superintendent of
106 Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 141, 6234 (1971).

4/52
Public Instruction to withhold or revoke the certificate of
approval for such schools which present "to prospective students
information relating to the school, or to employment opportunities
or enrollment in institutions of higher learning after entering
into or completing courses offered by the school, which Is false,
misleading, or fraudulent," or which misrepresents "to students
or prospective students that they are qualified upon completion
of any course for admissions to professional examinations under
any occupational licensing act."107
Similarly, the Illinois
Consulter Fraud Act prohibits in connection with the sale or ad-
vertisement of services the use of any deception, fraud, or mis-
representation or the concealment or omission of any material
fact with intent that others rely on the concealment or omission. 108
Since all nonpublic schools sell and to some degree advertise
their services, they would be subject to the provision of this
Art; Although in the context of Ito other provisions it is clear
that the Act is aimed at businesses involved more in commercially
oriented rather than scholastically oriented activities.
The Consulter Fraud Act obliquely requires affirmative dis-
1Gsure by making it illegal in selling or advertising to omit
any material fact with intent that others rely on the omission.
Obviously, more detailed disclosure requirements are necessary
if nonpublic schools are to be obligated to disclose information
sufficient for prospective consumers to form an intelligent opinion
107 Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 144, 111c1(6) and (17) (1971).
108 Ill. Rev. Stat. ch. 121i, 8262 (1971).

4/53
ac to the relative merits of different nonpublic school pro-
grams.
Before discustAng the contents of an affirmative non-
public zchool disclosure law, two existing disclosure laws are
worthy of consideration, the Federal Consumer Credit Protection
Act 109 and the Securities and Exchange Laws of 1933 and 1934. 110
The Federal Consumer Credit Protection Act, also known as
Truth-in-Lending, requires lenders to disclose in their contracts
figures showing'the actual cost of credit, including the' finance
charge, the cash. price, and the interest rate expressed as an
annual percentage rate.
The theory behind the Act is,that by
requiring all lenders to disclose the cost of credit in simple
uniform terms, the borrower can get the best deal'by comparing
the credit costs of alternative lenders.
This theory is based an
the assumptiont.that were it properly disclosed, the cost of credit
would be a factor on which consumers would relyin deciding where
and whether to borrow.
Studies finding that Truth-in-Lending has
had minor impact on consumer behavior indicate that this assumption
may not have been valid. 111
The Truth-in-Lending approach to disclosure is even more
ineffective for purchasers of nonpublic school services than pur-
chasers of consumer goods.
Unlike the buyer of a typical consumer
good, the parent who is the buyer of educational servies is not
109 15 U.S.C.H. §P160 et sea.
110
15 U.S.C. Iiiii77 et seg.
111 1. Day and W. Brandt, A Study of Consumer Credit Deci-
sions: Im.lications for Present and Oros ectiveteolslifion (Stan -
ore $.,
; ti.
en,
e
mpac
o
ru
n-
n
ng
gisla-
tion: The Massachusetts Experience" (Research Report No. 43 to
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Oct.
1968).

primarily concerned with whether ur not the ,:ost
of a prospe(!tive
purchase will be worth the expectel satisfaction of a present need.
Rather, he 1:: mainly f:oncerned 4:th whether an investment now,
that is irretrievable in terms of hi.: child's intellectual develop-
qient, will have an effect on his chill's mind that will help
hlm achieve in the distant future a variety of life-fulfilling
goals..
Clearly, a framework for disclosure is needed that is more
oomplex than that of simply enumerating a few isolated objective
facts about the tangible characteristics of a particular school.
The approach to disclosure of the Securities and Exchange Acts
provides a more helpful model.
The Securities Act of 1Q33 requires that a company file a
registration statement with the Securities and Exchange Commis-
sion before it can sell its securities. 112
The registration
statement must contain a wide and detailed variety of facts about
the company and its proposed securities, including a description
of the company's property and business, the significant provisions
of the proposed :.ecurlties, information about the company manage-
ment, and an independently audited financial statement.
The Com-
m1:3sion then examines the statements, which are a public record,
to make sure they are complete.
However, it does not attempt to
.,erify the truth of the fart
dirclosed.
After relistration of
their :7ecl.ritler, companies under the Securities Exchange Act of
in4 /lus'
neriodlc reports w!th the 7ommission to keep cur-
rent. all of the information contained in the orio.:inal f3liri
-'2 1=-
§-'7 Pt. :en.
113
1r, U.S.C. §78 et sea.

VrIc.
Most important, both the 1933 and 1934 Acts make it il-
legal to make any false or misleading statement with regard to
any material fact or to omit any material fact that should have
been included to make the other statements accurate.
It is impos-
sible specifically to define what a material fact is, though it
would include those facts which if known by the reasonable buyer
would probably affect his investment judgment.
The Commission is given broad investigatory power in order
to find evidence of statutory violations.
Remedies available
to the Commission include application for an injunction against
allegedly illegal acts, criminarprosecution, and various remedies
such as revoking brokers' registrations.
Individuals harmed by
violations of the Act have a private right of action to seek
damages for the harm suffered.
The foregoing is a far too brief description or a highly
complex subject matter.
However, it does indicate the outline of
a comprehensive and systematic scheme for ensuring accurate dis-
closure to the prospective investor of the wide spectrum of
information that is necessary to make an intelligent predictive
judgment as to an investment's potential for realization in the
future.
The feature of the Securities Acts approach 14hich is
most important for an effective nonpublic school disclosure law
is its general requirement that the prospective investor be given
the complete picture of the facts material to an informed opinion
on an investment's prospect for return in the future.

BEST COPY AVAILABLE
appro,lh to disclosure Is partly normative
'n
rul'r'n; A!r-lor,p-
or r1,01..' whiq, the leiclature believer
inves-
tor: shoull oonide in forminc!,
opinion: and partly
prelietive in also rea:iring ar!curate dirolorure of those N.H.::
whl-h investor: re,;ularly rely on In mlAin,Y, their deL.Ision:. Be-
cause of these normative and predictive element::, the views or
both professional ed.wators and lay persons should be .:onsidered
In determining the speeifle factual matters that z-hould he revealed
under a nonpublic school disclosure law.
Consileration should
also be given to research findings on both the criteria actually
used by parents in choosing nonpublic
schools and the Inlicia
that may be used to predict the achievement of specified goals
by nonpublic schools.
The enforcement agency under a nonpublic
school disclosure law should also be given considerable discretion
in determining what mAtters must be disclosed in order to give
parents and students the information necessary to make intelli-
gent judgments about nonpublic
schools.
One of the major deterrents to violations of the Securities
and Exchange Laws, private civil damage suits by individual
In-
vestorE. who have lost money because of the violation, would? 'learly
not be nearly as potent an enforcement mechanism under a nonpublic
school disclosure law.
Consequently, a more active role by the
enforcement agency would be necessary.
This would he espec.ially
important with regard to enforcing compliance with a provision
imilar to sef!tion 77 of the Securities Act which makes it
Illegal to mislead investors as
to material facts both through

4/57
BEM' COPY AVAILABLE
positive statements and the failure to make positive statements
that should have been made to avoid misleading the investor.
Such
a provision puts a heavy, but necessary, affirmative burden on the
seller to make sure that his statements give the potential buyer
a full and accurate portrayal of his existing and intended opera-
tions.
Without suggesting that the following is a complete list,
seas of the information that a nonpublic school disclosure law
may require a school to submit would include:
(1) financial statement;
(2) physical facilities;
(3) staff, including their education and experience;
(4) curriculum and requirements for graduation;
(5) present students and numbers that have' !ailed and
dropped out;
(4) average and median scores of students on standardized
aptitude and achievement tests;
(7) academic placement and performance of students after
graduation;
(8) statement of the school's basic philosophy and method-
ology of education.
A final element that must also be considered in devising
a disclosure scheme is the cost that would be incurred both by
the individual schools and by the public in its support of an
enforcement agency.
A disclosure scheme that is complex and
costly may have the effect of diminishing rather than maximizing

parental choice in nonpublic school education by driving out of
business thinly capitalized schools that
cannot afford complying
with expensive disclosure requirements.
Therefore, the SEC approach
of making all registrants share in the entire cost of the dis-
closure program would probably be inappropriate because of the
financial situation of a significant proportion of the nonpublic
schools.
Therefore, although the agency enforcing a nonpublic
school disclosure law should have the capacity to vigorously inves-
tigate specific complaints and where warranted to either adminis-
tratively or prosocutorily remedy the violations, it would probably
be too expensive to expect it affirmatively to enforce general
compliance, except possibly through spot checks.
Sufficient in-
centive for schools to comply with disclosure requirements without
an affirmative agcy enforcement program should result from, first,
requiring the disclosures both to be of public record and to be
given to all prospective applicants, and second,
awarding a fixed
amount of money damages to persons given misleading disclosures,
regardless of any provable harm.
The foregoing is not intended to be a complete analysis
and description of a nonpublic school disclosure program, but
rather a tentative view of a possible approach to such disclosure.
There are clearly many additional factors to be considered besides
those discussed above, including the need to mandate such dis-
closure in view of the actual social problems presented by_nonpublic
schools in Illinois.

SEIf COM Ik1INIAB1E
14/59
SELF-ACCREDITATION
For a variety of policy reasons discussed herein by
Professor Erickson, the state may wish to stay out of the area
of direct nonpUblic school regulation and rely instead on the
accreditation of such schools by private accrediting bodies,
such as the seven regional accrediting associations.114 There
..v are a number of ways the state may structure such a relationship.
Accreditation could be a prerequisite for the legal existence
of a nonpublic school, or for the granting of .a degree, or
for the acceptance of a school4sgraduates in 4 state university.
It could also be one of several alternative methods by which a
.3, nonpublic school could attain the state's stamp of.approval.
Whichever method is used, there are inevitable anal problems
when a school either loses its accreditation for is denied accredi-
tation.
In Illinois, as in moat states,courts-exercise a general
policy of noninterference in the affairs of private, nonprofit,
voluntary associations, such as the seven regional accrediting
associations. 115
Nonmembers traditionally-have no right to judi-
cial review of an association's decision denying them membership.
Members who have been expelled, however, have a limited right to
114 Infra, ch. 5.
115 Robinson v. Illinois Hip School Assn., 45 ill. App. 2d
277 (19631; parsons &liege v. north Nntral Aston. of Col. & Sec.
Schools, 271 1r. Supp. 65 7.15-. 111. 19O7).

4/60
judicial intervention in order to determine whether the expulsion
was in accordance with the rules of the association. 116
The
association's rules are deemed to constitute the terms of a binding
contract between the association and the member.
Therefore, an
association owes an obligation to adhere to its rules only to
those who, as members, are party to the contract.
Thus, where
accrediting associations extend membership to accredited schools,
as do the regional accreditation associations, the common law gives
such schools a measure of protection against arbitrary action by
the association.
Although without any private contractual rights
with respect to an association, a nonmember who has received
accreditation would, at least under the better legal theory, also
have a right to judicial review of its disaccreditation. Accredita-
tion of a nonmember school under this theory may be deemed to
confer a fora of membership status which a school relies on, and
which therefore deserves protecti-m against arbitrary removal. 117
Just as nonmembers have no right to membership in an associa-
tion, a party seeking an association's accreditation under common
law would have no right to judicial review of a denial of such
accreditation.
However, as the court noted in Marjorie Webster
Jr. Col. v. Middle States Assn. of College and Secondary Schools: 118
L16 Talton v. Behncke, 199 F.2d 471 (7th Cir. 1952).
117 Comment, Educational Accrediting Agencies, 52 Cornell L.Q.
104, 109 (1966).
113 432 F.'d 650 (C.A. D.C. 1970).

4161
The increasing importance of private
associations in the affairs of individuals
and organizations has led to substantial ex-
pansion of judicial control over "The Inter-
nal Affairs of Associations not for Profit."
Where membership in, or certification. by, such
an association is a virtual prerequisite to the
practice of a given profession, courts have.
scrutinized the standards and procedures em-
ployed by the association notwithstanding their
recognition of the fact that professional so..
cities possess a specialized competence in
evaluating the qualifications of an individual
to engage in professional activities. (Foot-
notes omitted.) 119
The argument that courts should carefully review de-
nials of accreditation by associations which intact have mono-
poly power over successful practice in a given field would be
especially convincing with regard to an association whose *condi..
Utica the state uses as the basis for granting funds or other
privileges and benefits, including of course the right to remain
in operation.
The regional accrediting associations enjoy this
form of monopolistic power with respect to several federal-aid-tomb
education programs.120
Wen without the type of governmental relationship discussed
by Professor Erickson, 121 the regional accrediting associations
are involved in public interest related activities to such a
degree that they may well satisfy the "state action" requirement
of the fourteenth amendment and thereby bring to bear the panoply
of constitutional restraints that apply to governmental actions.
119 Ibid., at 655.
120 Educational Accrediting Agenices, supra note 109, at 125
et seq.
121 infra, ch. 5.

Such an arrr,ument was re.lected with respect to the North Central
Association by one federal ,11:1tref
,o,,irt and accepted with respect
to the Middle States Association by another, a1 though the decision
of the latter was reversed on appeal on other grounds, the higher
court specifically saying it would not decide the "state action"
question. 12P
Whether or not academic accrediting associations are held to
the high standards of substantive and procedural fairness under
the fourteenth amendment, it is clear that because of the
importance of their actions to the public in general and to
the individual schools affected by their actions their decisions
in revoking and denying accreditation are subject to some standard
of judicial review.
In reviewing the substantive fairness of decisions of accred-
iting associations, however, the court is likely to accord sub-
stantial deference to the expertise of the association.
With
respect to the denial of accreditation to a school by the Middle
States Association, the Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia recently stated:
.
.
.judicial review of appellant's standards
should accord substantial deference to appellant's
,judgment regarding the end:: that it serves and
the means most appropriate to those ends.
Accredi-
tation, as carried out by appellant, is as involved
with educational philosophy as with yardsticks to
measure the "quality" of education provided.123
122
College,
123
Parsons College,
3?)
Tr.gilpp. 459,
Marjorie Webster
supra, note 108: Marjorie Webster Jr.
77;77 43 F.2d 6rx)
Jr. College, supra, note 110, at 657.

4/63
The rationale for judicial deference was accorded even
more importance in a case involving revocation of accreditation
by the North Central Association:
Lt7t is urged that the action of the Association
was arbitrary in the substantive sense, without
regard to the fairness of the procedure by which
it was reached.
In Lhis contention, the College
questions the adequacryof the reasons given for
withdrawing its accreditation.
In this field,
the courts are traditionally even more hesitant
to intervene.
The public benefits of accredita-
tion, dispensing information and exposing misrep-
resentation, would not be enhanced by judicial
intrusion.
Evaluation by the peers of the college,
enabled by experience to make comparative judg-
ments, will best serve the paramount interest ininh
the highest practicable standards in education. '"w
With regard to the procedures an accrediting association
must follow in revoking accreditation, the common law sets a
general requirement of fairness, which would include at a minimum
notice of the charge and an opportunity to be heard.125
The
specific procedures that would be appropriate would depend fan
the actual circumstances of the decision-making process.
In
Parsons Colle e v. North Central Association, the court found that
only notice and hearing were warranted:
Here, no trial-type hearing, with confrontation,
cross-examination, and assistance of counsel
would have been suited to the resolution of the
issues to be decided.
The question was not
principally a matter of historical fact, but
rather of the application of a standard of
quality in a field of recognized expertise. Here
there were no witnesses to be called to make
particular accusations.
The members of the
Examining Team were present at the meeting of
the Executive Board, available for questioning
124
125 Chaffee
Profit, 43 Harv.
BEST COPY AVAILABLE'
Parsons Col3ege, supra, note 108, at 74.
The Internal Affairs of Associations Not for

If needed.
Since the Association has no power
to summon witne3:!en or to compel them to testify,
to require thu fll panoply of the procedure of
a Juiicial trial lould freouently make it impos-
sible for the Aszociation to act.
.
.
.(Citations
omitted.)12')
However, where an ao..re,iitine assoc'iation's: revocation or dental
of accreditation is deemed "state action," thereby invoking the
fourteenth amendment's standards of procedural due process, it
is well established that the. ',serious protections associated with
a trial-type hearing including confrontation of witnesses, cross-
examination, and right to counsel would be required.127
In sum, whether or not to entrust the government's role
in regulating nonpublic schools to private accrediting associations
is a basic policy question, which depends on one's assessment of
the best mechanism for resolving issues concerning nonpublic
schools and their relation to the public interest.
However, it
should be noted that th3re is little if any advantage in delegating
such determinations to a private body in order to escape the
restraints on decision-making of the constitutional requirements
of due process and the first amendment.
Where the decisions are
made by private persons who are in effect performing functions
which are normally the duty of the state and which significantly
affect the interests of the public, courts will apply to such
decisions the same constitutional restraints that apply to decisions
of the government.
126 Parsons College, supra, note 10, at 74.
127 Willner v. Committee on Character and Fitness, 373 U.S.
96
102, 103 (1953).

4/65
V
CONCLUSION
The future of the nonpublic school in this country is
not entirely at the mercy of the state.
The first amendment's
protection of the freedom of speech and the included protections
of "freedom of inquiry, freedom of thought, and freedom to
teach11128 guarantee the nonpublic school at least some degree of
independence in developing its own educational programs. Yet, it
would be risky to rely on the first amendment to protect the statute.
agy of the nonpublic school, for the assertion of the constituw
tional right will prevail only if the state fails to convince a
court that its regulations are necessary for the welfare of the
children and the public.
Where a nonpublic school's unusual pro-
gram is not generally accepted as the proven way, the court is
likely to bow to the judgment of the state.
Thus, to maintain ita
independence the nonpublic school cannot stand on its constitutional
rights, for these rights may not give solid support.
Reliable
riv'eguards are possible only if the nonpublic school works with
the state to develop a framework for minimizing the inevitable
conflicts and for resolving them through cooperation rather than
confrontation.
Such a framework, however, depends on each party
recognizing the legitimate interests of the other.
128 Griswold v. Connecticut, supra, note 53.

4/66
There are two pre-eminent justifications urged for the
ct,ate's regulation or nonpublic schools' educational programs.
First, it must assure a politically responsible citizenry,
one
composed of people who can read and understand the nation's in-
stitutions of 0;overnment.
Surely the state without threatening
the integrity of nonpublic schools can require them to show through
objective testing that their students have mastered elementary
reading skills and learned basic facts about our governmental
system.
Second, the state may regulate nonpublic schools in
order to assure that a child's education, or lack thereof, is
not detrimental to his own welfare.
However, there is in this
country an historic tradition, recognized by the Supreme Court
in Wisconsin v. Yoder and by the Illinois Legislature in its
declaration of policy for the Nonpublic State Parental Grant
Act, that the primary role in the upbringing of children is that
of the parent.
The state may intervene in this relationship,
but only when the parent fails in his duty to his child.
In
view of their common goal of benefiting the child, it would
seem
far preferable for the state, rather than initially limiting the
parents' freedom to choose the most appropriate education for his
child, instead to assist the parent in that endeavor. 'Enforcing
a comprehensive dlsclosure law for nonpublic schools is one example
of a way to assist a parent
in this regard.
Even with disclosure required of nonpublic
schools, it
is indisputable that some parents may fail to provide their children

4/67
with an education that is adequate by any standard.
State
intervention is then clearly needed in behalf of the child. Some
states, however, seem to presume that most parents in choosing
schools are incapable of protecting their children's interests.
They therefore attempt to insure through strict regulation that
no school will fall below state-determined minimum standards.
While perhaps preventing unsound practices by some schools, such
comprehensive regulation inhibits an unknown number of others
from attempting new approaches to education that could result
in great benefit to students and community.
Illinois does not take this comprehensive approach
towards nonpublic school regulation.
Where a child attends a
nonpublic school that is beneath acceptable standards, Illinois
resorts to the criminal law to prosecute the parents.
Since
conviction under the truancy law requires proof beyond a reasonable
doubt, there is some protection against an excessively narrow
view of what constitutes an acceptable alternative to public
school.
However, fining and imprisoning parents does not seem
the most appropriate way to achieve the truancy law's real pur-
pose of educating children.
More appropriate would be enforcement
through civil proceedings,with their injunctive remedies and the
contempt power as a last resort.
However, use of even the civil courts is not the best
way for the state to proceed upon initially finding a suspected
violation of the truancy law.
Since complex pedagogical issues
may be at stake, there should be an opportunity for the nonpublic

Bur COPY AVARABLE
school personnel whose program is challenged to appear at an
administrative hearing; and present their '..lews to hearing 4 officers
who ha,.e expertise In edur.ation.
Improvement in the procedures by which Illinois regulates non-
puIlio school attendane will yield scant benefit if the substance
of the law is not also changed.
Requiring a vague measure of equi-
valence between nonpublic school curricula does not necessarily pro-
tect the nonpublic school student in view of the unsatisfactory
conditions of some public schools.
Rather than impose such a
restrictive, all-encompassing requirement as equivalence for non-
public schools, it would seem far wiser to set standards related
to the child's actual needs in becoming an adult proficient in
the skills necessary to get along in life.
Through objective test-
ing the state could determine whether a nonpublic school is succeed-
ing in satisfying these needs without unnecessarily restricting
the nonpublic school'S freedom to innovate.
The foregoing suggestions for changing the framework of non-
public school regulation would reduce, but not eliminate, conflict
between state and nonpublic school. The line between unusual educa-
tional methods with a substantial chance for beneficial results and
methods that threaten students with significant harm to their intellec-
tual, physical, or emotional development may sometimes be a fine one.
In such cases putting the state and nonpublic school to their proof
in a civil legal contest may be the most appropriate way to determine
on which side of the line the particular educational practice falls.
However, one of the primary goals of a nonpublic school regulatory
system should be to reduce such conflicts to the necessary minimum in
. order that the majority of nonpublic schools may retain the indepen-
dence to be a meaningful alternative to the public school system.

CHAPTER 5
SUMMARY AND IMPLICATIONS*
2126 state may not, consistently with the spirit of
the First Amendment, contract the spectrum of available
knowledge.
The right of freedom of speech and press in-
cludes not only the right to utter or to print, but the
right to distribute, the right to receive, the right to
read
.
and freedop of inquiry, freedom of thought,
and freedom to teach.l
The vigilant protection of constitutional protections
is nowhere more vital than in the community of American
schools.
The classroom is peculiarly the "market-
place of ideas."
The Nation's future depends upon
leaders trained through wide exposure to that robust
exchange of ideas Oich 4iscovers truth "out of a multi-
tude of tongues, Lratheirthan through any kind of autho-
rative selection."2
The investigation reported in these pages raises a rather
startling possibility:
While many Americans have resisted the
tendency of government to become Big Brother, the state has
The work reported here was funded by the Continental
Illinois National Bank Foundation and sponsored by the Illinois
Advisory Committee on Nonpublic Schools.
One major impetus for
the study was the Illinois Advisory Committee's concern over new
regulatory policies for
nonpublic schools, reportedly under
consideration in Illinois.
In numerous respects, however, we
have found it analytically useful to examine, not only state
controls for nonpublic, schools, but the state's responsibility
to impose guidelines, standards, safeguards, and other prescrip-
tions in public And nonpublic educational sectors.
Our research
has been in no significant sense empirical.
Rather, the author
has attempted to draw together, analyze, and build upon, numerous
strands of relevant thought from efforts under way elsewhere,
from recently completed investigations, and from literature
spanning many decades.
Early in the study, John Elson of the
Mandel Legal Aid Clinic of the University of Chicago agreed to
provide the legal analysis found in chapter 4.
Further assistance
was obtained from Bruce Cooper of the faculty of the University of
Pennsylvania and James S. Cibulka of the faculty of the University
of Wisconsin at Milwaukee.

5/2
emerged as Super-Parent without widespread challenge, at least
in recent decades.
State legislatures and administrative agencies
have shockingly extensive power--seldom recognized or examined- -
to specify how all children must be reared, despite the limits
this power imposes upon individual liberty, cultural diversity,
and educational experimentation.
Summary of Earlier Chapters
The state has responsibility to help ensure, through
education, (a) that all children will have a reasonable chance to
pursue happiness as autonomous human beings and (b) that the social
fabric upon which virtually everyone's welfare depends will be
preserved.
Children and adults must be protected from conditions
in educational settings that may endanger their physical and
mental health.
Individuals deserve protection againpt fraudulent
business practices--against unscrupulous purveyors of educational
services.
Civil liberties must be preserved.
Of the numerous regulatory approaches that could be
adopted with those ends in view, however, state legislatures have
placed astonishingly extensive reliance upon the most questionable,
liberty-endangering method of all--the method of prescribing the
processes by which all children must be reared during the extensive
periods when school attendance is compulsory.
Little attention
has been given to other ways of fulfilling government's regulatory
responsibility in education.
If state officials know what under-
standings and skills are essential to responsible adulthood, these
understandings and skills can be demanded without imposing
operating specifications on all educational enterprises accepted
for compulsory attendance purposes.
Parents, students, and educa-
tors could be given complete freedom to decide how the specified
competencies would be required, so long as each child demonstrated
periodically (by responding to reputable tests, for example) that
at least normal progress was being made.
Or in keeping with the

5/3
limited relevant evidence3 and much of our political theory,
government could assume (at least until encountering indications
to the contrary) that most parents by far will make responsible,
reasonably rational educational choices if given opportunity to
do so.
The state could then fulfill its responsibility by main-
taining a regulated open market in education.
It could require
all schools to be honest and informative toward students and
parents, could institute procedures and penalties to protect
students and parents against mistreatment, and could leave the
processed of child-rearing unspecified.
There are many other
discernible ways, including several discussed later in this
chapter, in which government can fulfill its regulatory responsi-
bility without imposing standardized child-rearing practices on
everyone and thus seriously intruding upon the liberties that
students, parents, and educators seek to exercise in educational
settings.
To simplify discussion in the present study, we use the
term programmatic, to identify state controls which dictate child-
rearing oroarams, mpthods, or bracedures, thus depriving students,
parents, and educators of the discretion they would otherwise enjoy.
In contrast, one nonprogrammatic regulatory approach already men-
tioned is to specify the essential outcomps of child-rearing while
leaving the methods up to student, parents, and educators.
The
"regulated open market" strategy is also nonprogrammatic.
We have
asserted that the states in this union have placed surprisingly
extensive reliance on programmatic controls.
For instance, when a
state demands that all youngsters attend schools, regardless of
whether they or their parents prefer learning experiences in other
settings, it is imposing programmatic controls.
Thus, numerous
courts have held that home instruction, no matter how impressive
its quality, is not acceptable in lieu of school attendance,4 and
until the recent Supreme Court decision in their favor,5 the Amish
were harassed, arrested, fined, jailed, and deprived of their

5/4
property through sheriffs' sales for substituting their impres-
sively effective post-elementary system of learning-by-apprentice-
ship-to-parents for conventional high schools.6
Obviously, the
states in which these occurrences have taken place are not content
to demand certain essential understandings and skills, but have
insisted upon prescribing the institutional context, in which
these competencies must be developed.
In effect, furthermore,
since schools must fulfill certain requirements to be recognized
for compulsory attendance purposes, these states have dictated
the means, by which the understandings and skills must be acquired.
Laws which spell out teacher qualifications, methods of pupil
management, and curricula are obviously programmatic.
Their
effect is to dictate processes of child-rearing, at least during
the extended periods when attendance is mandatory.
Scores of programmatic controls are spelled out in a 1973
document released by the Office of the Superintendent of Public
Instruction in Springfield, Illinois.?
To cite several examples:
With a few stated exceptions, fiscal penalties are imposed on all
public elementary school districts with fewer than 15 pupils in
average daily attendance, and all high school districts with fewer
than 60 pupils.
Schools must commemorate a specified list of days
honoring "patriotic, civic, cultural, historical, persons or occa-
sions," including, for example, "Leif Erickson Day" and "Arbor and
Bird Day."
Every school district must have an officer designited
as a "superintendent," and every "attendance center" must have an
officer designated as "principal," both of whom are to perform
legally mandated duties.
(By implication, at least, educators are
not free, except by special permission, to experiment with
educational approaches that do not utilize administrators of
these specified types.)
With a few stated exceptions, every
school system must operate its schools for a daily minimum of
five clock-hours and for at least 176 days per year.
The curricu-
lar offerings of elementary and secondary schools are specified
in considerable detail.
(In numerous states other than Illinois,

5/5
school codes contain prohibitions against certain types of
instruction in schools.)
Certain "media services" are requ
ed.
No one who fails to meet certification requirements established
by the state may "teach or supervise."
To qualify as an assistant
superintendent, for instance,
one must have completed 20 semester
hours of graduate courses in "administration and supervision,"
though there is evidence suggesting that these courses may not
only fail to contribute to competence on the job, but may create
a trained incapacity to perform wel1.8
To realize adequately
the inhibiting potential of these controls,
one must recognize,
further, that in Illinois and virtually every other state nonpub-
lic schools are required, usually through vague statutory language,
but sometimes in very specific terms,to be "equivalent" or
generally similar to public schools in order to be acceptable for
compulsory attendance purposes.
In addition, our system of
educational governance permits local majorities (acting in behalf
of the state) to impose a particular style of life in all public
schools in a given area, and our financing arrangements penalize
families for opting out of the public system.9
The state is saying,
by implication, to future citizens, their parents, and even educa-
tors of their own choosing, that they cannot be trusted to determine
what preparation for adulthood is essential in the modern world.
Otherwise, why the compulsion?
Strangely enough, these limits on the discretion of all
parents are confined to areas generally regarded as "education."1°
Except in cases of stark wrong-doing, parents are free to decide,
outside the hours of compulsory school attendance, what will be
provided to their children by way of clothing, shelter, food,
medical care, recreation, discipline, companionship, and neigh-
borhood characteristics.
It also seems strange, at least at first glance, that
government often insists upon dictating a single mode of instruction
even in cases where satisfactory or superior results are being pro-

5/6
duced in other ways.
Of several instances of this tendency
discussed in some detail in chapter 1, perhaps some should
briefly be recounted here to clarify what we mean by program-
matic controls:
in Kansas, an Old Order Amishman named LeRoy
Garber was harassed for many months, arrested, and fined for
allegedly depriving his daughter Sharon of a decent preparation
for adulthood.
But Sharon had mastered (with exceedingly high
grades) every subject required by Kansas law, was gainfully
employed ("the best help we've had yet," according to her
employer), seemed happy and well-adjusted, and in some respects
appeared (along with her father) more broadly educated than one
of the officials involved in the prosecution.
But in imposing
the fine
on Garber, the district
judge declared
(with later
cuncurrence from the state's supreme court!):
"The defendant
has not complied with Kansas compulsory school attendance laws
.
.
.
.
To comply .
.
.
such a child must attend a private or
parochial school having a school month consisting of four weeks
of five days each of six hours per day during which pupils are
under direct supervision of its teacher while they are engaged
together in educational activities."
Similarly, a small "free
school" in a large Midwestern city was
summarily closed and
padlocked for several weeks, apparently because of its unconven-
tionality, though many graduate students and professors from the
city's ilniversities had been favorably impressed with the program,
and though pupils gave every appearance of mastering the state-
prescribed subjects of study.
Not too far away, a rural Quaker
school was threatened with the loss of its state approval, not
because its students were being deprived of the required exposure
to the "practical arts," but because they were encountering these
arts (cooking, sewing, housekeeping, animal husbandry, carpentry,
horticulture, etc.) through direct,
supervised experience, rather
than by sitting in classrooms and
talking about them for the
minimum number of hours prescribed by law.

5/7
This pervasive programmatic bias persists despite almost
total lack of evidence to show that what it prescribes will make
schools better rather than worse.
In examining the fast-growing
literature on "school effects," one is forced to conclude that at
this point we know very little indeed about what separates the
bad schools from the good, though we have many promising avenues
of experimentation yet to explore.
The standardization of pro-
grammatic controls persists, moreover, despite frequent contentions
that it is inefficient.11
Children vary markedly as to the condi-
tions of learning to which they respond.
Some youngsters require
expensive equipment and remedial instruction to overcome their
handicaps.
Others need only minimal attention from a teacher,
find classrooms oppressive, and learn many subjects best at home,
curled up with a book, or tinkering with a ham set.
Still others
have talents and interest that are furthered most effectively
through private lessons, observation of skilled performers, or
experience on the job.
Under our current system, however, a single expenditure
level normally is determined through political mechanisms for
each school district, though logic dictates spending more money
on schooling for some children than for others.
Furthermore, a
striking similarity is reflected in the programs on which the
money is spent.
Giving parents more freedom to determine what
types of schooling will be utilized, and what other learning
experiences will be substituted for schooling: could produce a
more efficient allocation of available funds, and in some respects
(by producing better results among children who do not respond
well to orthodox programs) greater equality of educational oppor-
tunity.
In his presidential address to the American Educational
Research Association in 1972, Robert Glaser observed that though
individualization of instruction had been emphasized in public
statements repeatedly since at least 1911, American schools were
still "characterized by minimal variation in the conditions under

5/8
which individuals are expected to learn."12
The methodology of
our schools is so uniform that opportunities to study the
effects
of unconventional approaches with adequate samples are generally
nonexistent.
Hanushek and Kain, in critiquing the landmark
Coleman study, point out that Coleman examined only an "exceed-
ingly limited" range of educational
practice, not because he was
myopic, but because his national sample of schools exhibited an
extremely narrow range of practice.13
We cannot expect much
progress in educational research, Hanushek and Kain assert,
until many schools engage in "truly radical" experiments.
But
if conventional approaches are required by law, how can we expect
the essential experiments to occur more than spasmodically?
It should be obvious,
however, that the possibility of
casting ineffective practices into legal concrete is not as
ominous in a democracy as the threats to individual liberty and
cultural diversity that programmatic controls may pose.
In most
areas of life, state legislatures and administrative agencies
must be granted wide discretion, so long as their actions are not
demonstrably malicious or arbitrary.
If government were permitted
to take only those actions that were manifestly essential and mani-
festly wise, our complex society could not function.
We have
developed numerous mechanisms,
however, in an effort to give
special protection to rights so vital to a democratic society
that they may be infringed upon only for the most urgent reasons.
Among these fragile yet crucial liberties, according
to the Bill
of Rights and scores
of Supreme Court decisions, are freedom of
speech, freedom of the press, and freedom of assembly.
It is a
fundamental assumption of our political and legal institutions
that the best way to prevent totalitarianism
is to keep the
marketplace of ideas as open and unlimited as possible.
Should schools be regarded as particularly vital forums
for exposing people
to ideas, orthodox and unorthodox?
At least
for those citizens who appear to stop reading and exploring new

5/9
ideas as soon as they leave school,
one could argue that state
control of education is more dangerous to liberty than state
control of the press.
But strangely, many people who profess
passionate attachment to freedom of the press and free speech
see no problem in permitting the state to determine what may and
may not be examined and pursued in schools.
Little attention is given in our society to the fact that
the state, when it prescribes child-rearing practices in areas
of widespread, deeply felt disagreement, is in effect attempting
to impose some selected view of the good life on everyone.
If
programmatic controls are not based on some concept of the life
worth living and the competencies such a life requires, are not
those controls arbitrary and irrational?
But an Old Order
Amishman's view of happy, responsible adulthood is far different
from the concept of most middle-class suburbanites, and it implies
a radically different educational approach.
Who is sufficiently
omniscient to decide which way of life is better for everyone?
The life style that the national mainstream exhibits is anathema
to many American Indians, Blacks, Hutterites, intellectuals, and
proponents of radical countercultures.
Some segments of our
society still place high value on future orientation, achievement
drive, acquisitiveness, individualism, and competition.
To other
people, these tendencies are loathesome, the root of most unhap-
piness.
What values should the schools promote through the cur-
riculum, the social system, or the modus operandi?
Even among
people who espouse the same general ideals, there is dissengion:
some, hoping for gradual, comparatively painless reform, want
children socialized primarily in terms of our imperfect social
order (so these children will not be unhappy misfits), while
others want the young prepared to be forceful agents of change,
even at the risk of personal malaise.
Forms of schooling that
some cultures find congenial are utterly disruptive to others,
to transplant Scarsdale's purportedly superior schools to the
Pine Ridge Sioux reservation, for example, would promote, not

5/10
educational equality but the destruction of the Indian's social
structure.14
As the Supreme Court
itself has recognized, to
force Old Order Amish adolescents into conventional high schools
is virtually to ensure the dismantling of the Old Order.15
It
seems, then, that when state officials enforce programmatic
controls upon dissenting groups
in an ostensible effort to
guarantee "a higher standard
of education," the basic issue is
being obscured by bureaucratic rhetoric.
The basic issue is:
Who has the right to determine what ideals will be expressed
in
the relevant child-rearing programs?
Ir. chapter 4, Elson notes that the courts have not yet
adequately considered the conflict between programmatic
state
controls and the fundamental rights that students, parents,
and
educators seek to exercise in schools.
He suggests, however,
that
the U. S. Supreme Court may be ready to undertake a basic reassess-
ment in this regard.
More stridently, Robert Hutchins complains
concerning "the immaturity of the law, the temper of the
justices,
and the inadequacy of the theory of the First Amendment to which
they resort."16
"Are the decisions of the state with regard to the
curriculum final," he asks, "no
matter how they may restrict and
distort the education of the
young?
When, if ever, does a state
violate the Constitution in limiting the freedom of teachers and
students ? "17
Many other disturbing questions may be asked about
programmatic state controls.
In the absence of clear guidelines,
how far may the state ro?
Could it, for example, control virtually
the entire upbringing of children by extending the hours, days,
and years of compulsory school attendance and further intensifying
its procrrammatic regulation?
If not, why not?
If police can
burst into schools on the allegation that child-rearing practices
therein are unacceptable, why not into homes?
If schools can be
told what must and must not be taught, why not newspapers and
electronic mass media,
especially since the people affected
by
thought control in schools are young and impressionable?
Do we

5/11
be);
!,,,e in "peaceful coexistence" only so far as dissenting
groups beyond our national boundaries are concerned?
Will we
permit parents outside "the land of the free" more discretion to
rear their children in unconventional ways than we will allow
here at home?
Is there not an unreconcilable contradiction between
belief in pluralism and willingness to let the state prescribe how
all children must be reared?
What triumph of democracy is repre-
sented in the freedom to choose nonpublic schools over public
schools if the two institutions are required by law to be funda-
mentally similar?
While programmatic controls seem destructive
of freedom in All schools, inadequate scrutiny has been given to
distinctions among schools which the state itself operates, schools
which the state gives major support but does not operate, and
schools which the state neither operates nor tenirrs sizeable
assistance.
Logically, it would seem that schfiols not operated
by the state should have more freedom from the state's controls
than schools that the state maintains, and that schools receiving
no sizeable state subvention should enjoy more liberty still.
We have argued that programmatic controls in education
menace individual liberty, cultural diversity, and essential
educational experimentation.
It appears, consequently, thi4
unless we can find some compelling rationale for programmatic
controls we will be unable to justify them at all.
In chapter 2 of this report, we examined two major
arguments, the most solid logical underpinnings for programmatic
controls that we could find in searching the relevant literature
and pondering the issues.
These arguments concern the state's
responsibility (a) to ensure that children have a reasonable
chance to pursue happiness as autonomous human beings and (b)
to 'reserve the social fabric upon which virtually everyone's
welfare depends.
Since the issues 4.n question are so fundamental,
we must now briefly recapitulate the discussion in chapter 2.

5/12
a.
The Rights of Children
Though the generally acknowledged rights of children
are numerous and may be articulated in a variety of ways,
probably the aspect most pertinent to programmatic controls is
the right of the child to choose freely among available ideologies,
vocations, and life styles, and to develop the decision-making
capabilities that make choice mope than a fiction--at least to
the extent that inherited characteristics permit.
If the state
must limit the freedom of parents, educators, and even, in the
short run, of children themselves to accomplish this objective,
the interference seems justified.
The ideal of using schools
and colleges to help produce autonomous human beings lies at
the heart of the concept of a liberal education.
To satisfy this liberal criterion, educational
systems
must promote the rationality of children and must function as
forums in which a wide range of options can be examined freely.
This approach is utterly at odds with attempts by state officials
to mold children to some selected vision of the good society.
It also conflicts with attempts by parents to stamp particular
ideologies and life styles into the young by curtailing the
opportunity to decide.
If after considering available alterna-
tives, the individual rejects the national mainstream and becomes
an Amishman, hippy, or radical intellectual, the state has no
ground to complLin.
It is assumed that in an unmanipulated market-
place of ideas, the best values and ideologies will gain majority
support in the long run.
Similarly, if the child of an Old Order
Amishman decides, after viewing the options in a truly neutral
school, that he prefers to work for Standard Oil and live in a
two-car suburban slit-level,
in an important sense his parents
cannot justly accuse the school of alienating their child from
them.
The purpose of the education was not to disparage one way
of life and exalt another, but to make self-determination possible.
When we examine the question of what the state may do to

5/13
promote this autonomy, however, we are unable to articulate a
justification for programmatic controls.
If consensus could be
reached in our society concerning the reasonableness (if not the
clear essentiality) of certain understandings and skills as a
basis for autonomy, this consensus would not justify the current
system of compulsory school attendance and related regulations.
As we have already noted, the state could give parents and
children complete freedom to decide how the specified competen-
cies will be acquired,
so long as each child demonstrates period-
ically (by responding fo national tests,
for instance) that at
least normal progress is being made.
Or if reluctant to allow
that much latitude, the state could at least "license" proposals
from parents and students who wish to substitute other educa-
tional experiences for in-school instruction, so long as the
proposals meet certain criteria of reasonableness, and so long
as students show from time to time that they are learning what
the state demands.
We should emphasize in passing one major advantage of
limiting state educational prescriptions to those understandings
and skills which virtually everyone considers essential to auto-
nomous, happy adulthood:
To establish educational policies on
the basis of agreement among the parties affected is not to
impose a hated way of life on anyone's child, for the state is
merely doing what the parent wants.
In complex societies all over
the world, however, state-controlled education arouses parental
resistance.18
The reason is that child-rearing practices spon-
sored or required by the state in pluralistic societies are at
odds with many parental views of the good life and how to prepare
for it.
Even in pluralistic societies, however, incursions upon
individual liberty will be minimized if the state confines its
directives to areas of almost universal agreement.
Considering further what the state may do to promote the
development of autonomy in the young, we must consider the impor-
tance of introducing individuals, during adolescence and early

5/14
adulthood, to options that are too complex for adequate considera-
tion in the pre-adolescent years.
The freedom to choose means
little if the individual is unaware of alternatives--unacquainted
with ideologies, life styles, and vocations not characteristic
of his immediate community.
It seems plausible to assert,
furthermore, that decision-making skills need more honing than
occurs in the elementary grades if one hopes to make rational
choices in the complex modern world.
A familiarity with the
modes of inquiry of several disciples might help.
More problems
should be manageable, more occupations accessible, and more
leisure activities available after an intensive study of mathe-
matics, belles-lettres, and rhetoric.
An involvement in group
discussion of historical and contemporary issues seems advisable.
Exposure to various sports, fine arts, practical arts, and crafts
is a good way to open up vocational and avocational worlds.
Great ideas from religion, philosophy, and jurisprudence help
illuminate the fundamental dilemmas that all humans must learn
somehow to manage.
Well planned studies of ethnic and religious
groups, of various parts of the globe,
and of alternative
approaches to ethical issues can be argued for quite cogently.
But educational desiderata of this type can be listed
almost indefinitely, far beyond the bounds of student time in
the high school and even the undergraduate college.
We are
forced, then, to confront questions pondered for generations by
proponents of liberal education:
What knowledge is of most worth?
What knowledge is utterly essential?
At this point, we encounter
many enigmas.
To master any area of human endeavor to the extent
some scholars think essential, we must neglect areas that other
scholars think essential.
Available, potentially vital knowledge
has become an infinite ocean.
As a further complication, if
schools and colleges monopolize too much time, many individuals
may be robbed of the capabilities they should develop outside
classroom walls.
And to add to these conundrums, in planning

5/15
today's education we must cope with the demands of tomorrow's
unknown world in an era of precipitous change.
State officials who act as if they know what areas of
knowledge are essential for everyone must possess insights as
yet undiscovered by leading scholars, must be unaware of their
own ignorance, or must be guilty of collosal pretension, for
there is little agreement or certitude among thinkers who have
pondered these dilemmas most deeply.
Redfield observes, for
example:
"If we, like the Homeric gods, were immortal, we could
learn all possibly useful methods and undertake all the activi-
ties for which they prepared us, over an infinite period of time
we could perhaps come to happiness.
As it is we must, in
education as in everything else, make our best guess and launch
ourselves into the void."19
But perhaps we have gone too far in applying to the high
school ideas on liberal education generated mostly in the context
of college-level concerns.
Two considerations must be examined
in this regard:
First, we may be able to identify in the high
school, if not in the college, areas of study probably essential
to Anyone's autonomy.
Second, since precollegiate students are
more easily influenced than their post-secondary confreres,
special steps may be needed to prevent indoctrination and other
infringements on their autonomy.
If some areas of study at the high school level are
indispensible, in virtually everyone's eyes, to the achievement
of individual autonomy, we need not identify them at the present
moment.
The point to make here is the same one made earlier:
If
state officials cannot identify the demonstrably vital outcomes
of schooling, they have no firm basis for programmatic regulation.
If officials can identify indispensible understandings and skills,
they have not thereby created a justification for programmatic
controls.
Why should state intervention not be limited to the
cases in which it is shown that children are not making satis-
factory progress toward the acquisition of those competencies?

5/16
In reaching this conclusion, we must recognize a hypo-
thetical exception, however.20
If there i
only one way to
develop some essential understandings and
ski113, the state is
obviously justified in requiring a single, r;taniard approach.
We have been able to identify no universally
essential area of
the school curriculum that can be pursued
suc.Pssfully only in
standard schools, and for some areas, tnese schools seem an
obviously inferior place for the desired learning to occur.
But the "hidden curriculum" (the set of values and behavior
patterns that formal and informal
organizational procedures
seem designed to promote) may represent a special case.
Dreeben suggests, in this regard, that schooling may
be an essential mechanism for developing the "sentiments an:
capacities" that are imperative for all people who wish "to
participate as adults in an industrial
nation whose dominant
political and economic institutions have not experienced funda-
mental structural change over the past century."21
In schools
children learn, not so much from their studies as from the pat-
terns of behavior that the organizational structure generates,
to relate to others in ways basically different from those
learned
earlier in the family.
In the family, for example,
there is a
tendency tc treat everyone as a
unique human heinir.
In the
bureaucratic spheres that pervade the larger society, the
indi-
vidual must be capable of working with universalistic norms
(which treat all people in a riven category the same, disreoarding
differences among them); of interacting with other people in a
limited, specific way (as,
for example, when a surgPon deals with
the person merely as a patient of a particular type);
of differen-
tiating the attributes of an organizational position from the
characteristics of the individual occupying the position (as when
a worker calmly obeys a forman he dislikes); and
of forming and
tolerating the transient,
shallow social relationships that are
so cwilmon in organizational life.

5/17
On the basis of analyses of this type, we may attempt
to justify compulsory attendance at conventional schools by
asserting that this policy is designed to provide children,
by means of the "hidden curriculum," with competencies entirely
essential to the autonomy that is possible in the modern age.
In this connection, again, the example of the Old Order Amish
is illuminating, for though the simple elementary schools they
usually attend exhibit few of the norms of which Dreeben speaks,
and though the Plain People almost never attend high schools,
they seem typically viewed by employers as superb producers and
by bankers and other businessmen as superb clients.22
There
are still many instances, furthermore, of non-Amish individuals
who, despite extremely limited formal schooling, have achieved
extraordinary success in bureaucratic spheres.
It seems obvious,
then, that some people can acquire the competencies of which
Dreeben writes without being conditioned for many years by the
hidden curriculum of the conventional school.
For all we know,
most people can.
Even without examining the desirability of
preparing children to be smooth cogs in organizational machinery,
then, we conclude that we have not yet found a compelling reason
why a state should impose the structure of the conventional
school on everyone.
We must consider now the impressionability of children
and adolescents.
On the negative side, we are concerned with
protecting the young from indoctrination.
On the positive side,
we want to provide a forum (a cafeteria of alternatives) in which
youngsters will confront a wide range of options and develop the
capacity to make wise, autonomous choices.
Directly pertinent here is a fundamental theme of the
literature on liberal education:
to liberate, a school or
college must free the student from the biasing impact of all
parochialisms, be they ethnic, religious, national, or ideologi-
cal.
The autonomous human being, in this view, makes his choices

5/18
as an individual. unburdened by prior commitments
to any group
position.
We may argue, then, that the child must be educated
in a neutral school, not a school operated by a private com-
munity or a special interest group.
But the question of whether the state has the capacity
to guarantee the neutrality of any school is both crucial to
our analysis and generally neglected.
If the state cannot ensure
that an educational forum is unbiased, it obviously cannot
invoke
the ideal of individual autonomy as a justification for requiring
all children to spend many years within that forum.
Official school observances seem at first glance to be
the easiest segment of school activity to neutralize.
There is
nothing subtle or hidden about them.
But evidence on the
ineffectiveness of legal directives in education is sufficient
to give anyone serious pause.
Whatever one may think of Supreme
Court rulings on prayer and Bible reading in public schools, the
record is clear:
the rulings have been widely flouted, and
apparently no one can do much about the flouting.23
Locally
powerful groups run schools in keeping with their own viewpoints,
in Important respects.
Many scholars insist that it is unrealistic to expect
schools to maintain an unbiased stance.
Neutrality can hardly
be achieved unless school officials disregard demands for
privileged treatment from the same constituency that granted
them power and privilege.
After examining several societies,
especially our own, the late
sociologist-anthropologist Jules
Henry concluded that autonomy-promoting education was not pos-
sible in schools maintained by any society or cultural group. 24
The logic of his analysis is straightforward:
No social system
can be expected to take deliberate self-destructive steps.
Sinf'e every social system Henry had examined or read about,
including our own, seemed based upon obviously illogical assump-
tions, every one of these social systems depended for its survival

5/19
upon the inculcation of "socially necessary ignorance."
There is room to suggest that some of Henry's specific
charges are extreme.
So far as we can determine, however, no
respected body of opinion in the social sciences regards the
schools of any society as neutral with respect to the ideologies
and life styles they present for the consideration of the young.
At least one major historical treatise has as its central theme
the remarkable correspondence of schools with the social orders
that have sponsored them.25
Part of the explanation for biased
schools is the myopia that comes naturally with socialization to
any life view.
When most people in a given locality find a
school congenial, they usually consider complaints about dis-
crimination to be unreasonable.
But if easily detected observances are a problem, the
curriculum is much more diffir.ult to neutralize.
Here again,
what one person views as neutrality is outright antagonism to
another.
For instances some citizens view an education denuded
of theism as neutral.
Others disagree stridently.
As for the gly curricular materials are presented, wide-
spread efforts have been made in recent years to render instruc-
tional approaches more conducive to independent inquiry.
Teachers
have been urged repeatedly,
in many ways, not to present the
Pniences dogmatically, as bodies of facts to be assimilated, but
to familiarize students with the modes of investigation scientists
use to seek knowledge.
The latter approach is
liberating.
But
how can the. state make certain that every child will be given
this type of educational experience, especially since the number
of teachers is so large that we cannot possibly have exceptionally
qualified people in most classrooms?
There is research to suggest
that despite more than a decade of extensive efforts, funded by
millions of federal and foundation dollars, to produce inquiry-
oriented instruction in the physical and biological sciences,

5/20
teachers as a whole--including those who have participated
extensively in special institutes--merely adapt the new
materials to the old methods.26
In connection with the presentation of controversial
topics in schools, furthermore, a major complication inheres
in the fact that children are profoundly influenced by those
comparatively few adults with whom they identify strongly.
How then can we keep individual teachers and administrators
from stamping out, through the influence they exert over the
young, minority ideologies and life styles?
As one approach,
we could forbid discussion of all value-related topics, since
few individuals seem capable of presenting positions with which
they disagree as cogently as they present positions with which
they agree.
But since virtually every aspect of life is funda-
mentally significant to someone, this policy would place a taboo
on almost everything, and make the widely documented boredom of
the classroom more deadly than ever.
And even if we could
prevent teachers from presenting unbalanced discussions of value-
related topics, we would have to reckon with such nonverbal
influences as an attractive or repugnant personality.
When
admiring and beginning to identify with a teacher, a youngster
is likely to acquire some of the teacher's attitudes and values.
There is no reasonable way to eliminate these biases.
Further-
more, we cannot expect teachers even to attempt to hide those
prejudices of which they are unaware.
(One need not study much
anthropology to discover that every culture is shot through with
unexamined assumptions that members of other cultures find
repugnant.)
But the aspect of the school that is probably most
potent, yet most difficult to neutralize, is the student sub-
culture, particillarly during the pre-adolescent and adolescent
years.
Educators as yet know little about it, to say nothing
of learning how to control it.
As James Coleman's study suggests,

5/21
conformity to the norms of student peer groups is apparently
induced by the "rating and dating system," wnich mercilessly
dispenses popularity,
respect, acceptance into the crowd,
praise, awe, support,
aid, isolation, ridicule,
exclusion,
disdain, discouragement,
and disrespect.27
It seems patently ridiculous to proclaim educational
neutrality when a child
from a pacifist minority attends a
public school in wartime, when a few Jehovah's Witness children
are required to rub shoulders with many peers who consider
"Russellite" doctrines inane, when a few Navaho children, reared
to practice mutual assistance,
are placed in a school where moe.,
students compete ruthlessly, and in a hundred other settings
where merciless social sanctions are exercised against children
who behave in accordance with minority ideologies, values, and
life styles.
Whether capitulating to these pressures or main-
taining his or her integrity, the individual may acquire
permanent scars. 28
As if these impediments to school neutrality and indi-
vidual autonomy were not enough to cause despair, we must add
the contention considered earlier--that the organizational
structure of a school, in its formal and informal aspects, far
from being a mere container into which ideas of many sorts can
be poured, is itself a potent instrument (a "hidden curriculum")
for socializing children to a particular life style.
In this
light, since it seems difficult to conceive of continuing,
purposive social activity bereft of structure,
the notion of
an unbiased education seems equally difficult to conceive.
Some
life style must be maintained in any school, but every life
style is odious and threatening from some cultural and ideologi-
cal standpoints.
Several scholars are charging that public schools in
the United States have been seriously biased from their inception,
despite the carefully nurtured myth of neutrality. 29
(Nonpublic
schools also have been far from neutral.)
As one manifestation

5/22
of this bias, the homogeneous approach to instruction that pro-
grammatic state controls encourage, as we noted earlier, may
deny many children the special programs their cultural backgrounds
demand, and thus may rob these children of equal opportunity,
withholding the very prerequisites of autonomy that were invoked
to justify the controls.
Also, this treat-everyone-the-same
approach is a threat to minority cultures themselves.
On the basis of the foregoing analysis, we are
forced to
conclude that the ideal of the neutral educational forum, being
unattainable by any means now discernible, can hardly be used to
justify programmatic controls.
There is no neutral school.
If
it could be demonstrated that some schools, even if not neutral,
were much more conducive than other schools to the development
of individual autonomy, we might be able to construct a some-
what plausible case for channelling children into the former
schools rather than the latter, but we can discern no reliable
criteria for making such distinctions among schools.
What many
people consider a close approach to neutrality may turn out, on
closer analysis, to close off important options, and what many
people consider unusually confining approaches to education
may have a surprisingly liberating effect.
Pertinent here is
the fact that graduates of Amish vchools seem to move readily
into mainstream society when they decide
to do so, whereas the
public high school appears to create a trained incapacity to
live as an Old Order Amishman. 30
If all schools lack neutrality.
we are forced to choose between the indoctrinating potential of
state programmatic controls and the indoctrinating potential of
schools operated by citizen groups of various shades of opinion
and life style.
Of the two potential tyrannies, surely the
tyranny of the small community is far less lethal, since its
impact will be limited in a media-pervaded
society such as ours.
But our history books reek with the human anguish produced by
government intrusions on liberty.

5/23
Consequertly, if a state wants to approach neutrality
in the education of its young, the most realistic, humane strategy
may be to encourage a great diversity of child rearing approaches,
none of them entirely neutral, but all tending to balance each
other off in the national dialog to which they contribute.
Of
course, the state can also urge all schools to decrease bias and
to maximize the range of options considered by the young.
It is
probably feasible to reduce the parochialism of most schools.
The question is whether state programmatic
controls facilitate
or impede progress to that end.
We have criticized as unrealistic the liberal ideal of
providing all children with neutral schools.
Now we must assess
the possibility that attempts to free the student from the
biasing impact of all parochialisms--ethnic,
religious, national,
ideological--are not only unrealistic but counterproductive.
The
individualistic critical-analytic method that liberal
educators
have tried for so long to promote is antagonistic to the very
emphases upon community, tradition, ritual, and history that may
be essential to psychological health and thus--deep irony! - -to
autonomy and rational decision making for most people.
This
hostile posture toward tradition, ritual, and community may con-
ceivably contribute to an often -noted anti- historical neglect of
the dialog with the past, to an unconcern for human wholeness,
and thus to the narrow-minded logic that produces massacres of
women and children in the name of national honor, bombings con-
cealed by deceit in the federal executive,
and the warped
morality of Watergate and the Ellsberg trial.
Strangely, as Fein notes, though it is now widely
recognized that participation in a relatively small, cohesive
community is essential, for most people, to the development of
a sense of identity and the ability to relate humanely to others,
the educational implications of that recognition have been left
largely unexamined.31
Obviously, schools cannot simultaneously

5/24
foster in the student a strong identification with his natal
group, and dismantle in the student, on the other hand, the
community loyalties and commitments that so many liberals view
as impediments to autonomy.
Since the liberal ideal of freeing
the student from all parochialisms is destructive of community,
it may be profoundly counterproductive for most people.
The
possibility must be entertained, then,
contradictory as it may
seem, that our society will make more
progress toward ration-
ality by encouraging community loyalties than by attempting to
destroy them.
Even the most insulated of communities
(for
example, the Amish) have exhibited
profound adaptations over
time.32
In a basic sense, no group can escape involvement in
our national
dialog.
The extent to which individuals can be
kept ignorant of options in a world so permeated by mass media
may be more limited than critics of dissenting groups generally
imagine.
We should probably be surprised, nut that youngsters
become aware of options outside their small neighborhoods, but
that any cultural diversity survives in the age of the transistor.
Perhaps the most rational
interchange of ide :s will
occur when communities are secure from attacks upon their unique
values and when individuals are free from doubt about who they
are.
Since we can find no way to dismiss these possibilities,
we see no cogent way to argue that the state has a right to
impose programmatic controls wedded to the liberal
ideal of
individual autonomy unbiased by community commitment.
b.
The Survival of Society
A second major rationale asserts that programmatic con-
trols are indispensible to the preservation of society, and thus
to virtually everyone' well being.
It is often asserted
that schools must be used--through
state compulsion if necessary--to provide all
future citizens
with a significant body
of common experiences and viewpoints, on

5/25
the theory that this commonality is essential to the preservation
of society.
One problem here is that no one knows when a society
has developed too much commonality for its
own good.
Furthermore,
state officials are probably the last group we should trust to
decide how much commonality is essential to the general weal.
It
is in the interest of these officials to discourage the dissen-
sion and diversity that may jeopardize their positions, subject
them to challenge, and make public institutions more difficult
to govern smoothly.
Some efforts to promote unity, in fact, may
backfire.
We discussed;earlier the likelihood that most people
in the United States are unable to identify more than
super-
ficially with mass society.
There is some evidence to suggest
that individuals who have developed the secure sense of identity
found in purportedly disunifying sub-groups are more capable,
not less, of involving themselves in national affairs.33
If the state requires schools to promote commonality of
viewpoint and experience, some programs must be mandated in
schools and some must be outlawed.
Otherwise, since the ocean
of available materials and styles of learning is so vast, there
may be little commonality among the offerings of different
schools.
Who then should he trusted to decide what all educa-
tional programs must hold in common?
Whose version of national
unity should be enforced upon everyone?
To quote the Supreme
Court:
Struggles to coerce uniformity of sentiment in support
of some end thought essential to their time and country
have been waged by many good as well as by evil men.
.
.
As government pressure toward unity becomes greater,
so strife becomes more bitter as to whose unity it shall
be.34
This issue is often avoided by means of the fiction that
schools simply should emphasize what "all groups have in common."35
We noted earlier that certain outcomes of education may be con-
sidered essential or highly desiraole by virtually all citizens
in our society, but that these areas of agreement are probably

5/26
very minimal.
Even a cursory look at educational history reveals,
however, that the unity the public (and often many nonpublic)
schools have sought to promote is neither limited in compass nor
composed exclusively of what "all groups have in common."
So pervasive is the domain of common experiences and
understandings promoted through state programmatic controls and
related policies that some scholars think government has adopted
an official "civil religion" and designated
the public school
as an established church. 36
That religion, such scholars
assert, is comprised of the values, beliefs, myths,
loyalties,
ceremonies, etc., generally subsumed under the rubric,
"The
American Way of Life."
If the "commonality" promoted in schools
is a way of life, we may be certain that it is viewed as hostile
and repugnant by numerous cultural groups.
If it is a religion,
or if it performs the essential
functions of a religion, the
danger arises that it will be as destructive of the liberty of
dissenters as any religious establishment.
Parents whose child
is alienated from them by far-from-neutral schools are not
likely to be comforted by the contention that what these schools
promote is "not really religion."
Apart from these definitional problems, it seems evident
that the unity promoted by state-controlled schools has never
been limited to the ideals all groups in our society hold in
common.
Reactions to the tide of immigration which hit American
shores in the late 1800's and early 1900's made this state of
affairs particularly clear.
"Let us now be reminded," Calvin
Stowe declared, "that unless we educate our immigrants, they
will be our ruin.
.
It is altogether essential to our
national strength and peace, if not even to our national existence,
that the foreigners who settle on our soil
should cease to be
Europeans and become Americans."37
The intent of "Americaniza-
tion" was clear, at least in the minds of many influentials:
the dominance of Anglo-Saxon culture.38
Diversity, ethnic and
religious, was characterized as a "problem that needed to
be

5/27
obliterated.
At times the significant WASPish Americanization
thrust was challenged, but not with much discernible success--
at least until very recently.
Lately, a reawakening self-consciousness among ethnic
groups has prompted bitter protests concerning the purportedly
neutral unity the schools have been promoting.J9 Adding to the
chorus of dissent have been many p3ople who grew up from birth
in the "good life" that the officially promoted "unity" repre-
sents, only to reject its most fundamental values!
And in the
wake of Vietnam, unauthorized bombings in Cambodia, Watergate,
the ecology movement, and various "counter-cultural" develop-
ments, it now seems clear that the officially defined "commonal-
ity" around which all groups in our society join hands in the
schools is largely a facade.
We have returned, obviously, to a theme discussed
earlier.
In a previous passage, we documented the non-neutrality
of schools which the states, under the pretense of developing
individual autonomy, compel children to attend.
Now we conclude
that the states, while purporting to accentuate only the values
all groups in our society hold in common, use programmatic cont-
rols to promote a distinctly biased version of national unity.
We have no argument, as earlier passages have indicated,
with the contention that the nation's youth must be given a
basic understanding of society's vital institutions (political,
economic, legal, etc.), as a prerequisite for responsible
participation in democratic processes.
We halrI demonstrated,
however, that programmatic controls are not essential to the
achievement of these ends.
As for the more sweeping insistence
that children must be forced by law into institutions that will
inculcate devotion to our political system, the idea deserves-
rejection, both because it demands indoctrination in whatever
ideals are officially held as good at a particular time, and
because it is unrealistic.
To repeat a previous argument, to
demand a free press while permitting the state to control ano-

5/28
ther, equally vital, marketplace of ideas seems inconsistent
in the extreme.
In chapter 2 we presented a review of the research on
children's "political socialization," concluding that schools
have little impact on children's patriotism or other political
attitudes, no latter how much state officials may wish to use
education for such purposes, outlawing all programs that do
not attempt to promote attachment to the institutions of our
society.
But though schools do not seem to have much power of
indoctrination, at least for the majority of children, they AR
appear capable, when working at cross -purposes with home and
community, to wreak psychological havoc in the child, and con-
sequently, to disrupt cohesive communties over a period of time.
In some respects,
ironically,
it seems that schools have more
potential to cause harm than to work the good that state controls
are purported to guarantee.
Finally, let us consider the assertion that society
cannot survive unless schools inculcate, through the hidden
curriculum or other means, the habits and attitudes without
which modern organizations could not exist.
The problem here
is that we can find merely assertions, but no firm evidence.
Different scholars present different definitions of the capa-
bilities that are allegedly essential.
Furthermore, over a
period of generations, exceedingly complex organizations
have
been built and manned by people whose schooling was very minimal
and sometimes most primitive in nature.
As the forces of auto-
mation spread, it cannot be assumed that the characteristics
which make organizational life possible today will do so to-
morrow.
If we grant the state the right to impose programmatic
controls to promote the competencies "needed" in a complex
society, then, we are in effect granting the state the right to
make arbitrary decisions about what are the needed
competencies.

5/29
We have analyzed the state's responsibility to promote
the development of autonomy in the young and to preserve the
social framework that is essential to virtually everyone's
autonomy and happiness.
We have been unable to identify any
compelling rationale for programmatic state controls.
But
controls as pervasive as these can hardly be accidental.
In
chapter three, consequently, we examined what may be some
latent" or "hidden" functions of programmatic state controls
in education.
For the purposes of this summary, we
1 merely
list several of them, without significant discussion
docu-
mentation:
1.
Since many programmatic controls in education are
more firmly linked to the self-interests of organized profes-
sional educators than to any demonstrated social need, some
scholars view these controls largely as a manifestation of the
current '''tyranny of the expert."
Efforts by educators to
improve their own status and security through programmatic
controls may have been significantly abetted by other factors
mentioned in this list.
2.
The precedent for many programmatic controls was
established at a time when there was widespread fear that
incoming hordes of immigrants would destroy national unity,
Balkanizing the United States into a collection of foreign
enclaves.
3.
During the municipal reform movement early in the
present century, the idea was widely promoted and accepted
that the only way to escape the political corruption of the
times was to entrust major social institutions to the care of
experts.
In education, the ideology was firmly established
that only "qualified professionals" should prescribe instruc-
tion programs for children.
4.
The widely promoted ideals of a liberal education,
as we have seen, were interpreted to mean that giving parents

5/30
and small communities much control over education would destroy
the autonomy-promoting "neutrality" of schools.
5.
Since relatively powerless, often rather silent
minorities (such as the Amish) were virtually the only groups
recognizing (until recently) the liberty-destroying potential
of programmatic controls, the proponents of these controls had
little significant resistance to overcome.
Roman Catholics
were a major exception in this regard, but they were preoccu
pied with religious prejudice of a particular kind.
Once the
public schools ceased to be militantly Protestant, most
Catholics apparently assumed that general neutrality had been
achieved.
6.
Since schools have been notoriously ineffective
instruments of indoctrination thus far (with the exception of
the apparent power, mentioned earlier, to wreak havoc on minori-
ties not caught up in the cultural mainstream), the coercive
potential of programmatic controls has not yet been widely
recognized.
Furthermore, though the principle is widely ac-
cepted that the state may go very far indeed in dictating the
educational experiences to which all children must be exposed,
state legislatures and administrative agencies have thus far
exercised restraint, though blatant violations of liberty have
occurred from time to time (e.g., in the case of the Jehovah's
Witnesses and the Old Order Amish).
But in the future, if
educators learn how to construct more powerful instructional
systems, and if the states intensify their programmatic grip
on schools, liberty may he threatened much more obviously.
To a major extent, then, programmatic controls in
education may be viewed as a historical accident.
But conditions
in our society have changed so drastically that the assumptions
involved in those controls may be anachronistic in the extreme.
The fact seems difficult to escape that our society is rather
seriously threatened by disunity at the present time.
But the
apparent causes of the disunity, such as political corruption
and inequality rendered transparent by the mass media, are

5/31
hardly factors the schools can be expected to influence, at
least by means of a continuing thrust toward commonality of
viewpoint.
In fact, it can be argued that a preoccupation
with unity has helped produce the cultural biases and program
homogeneity in the schools that are at least partially respon-
sible for inequality and, ultimately, the disunity that
inequality produces in the electronic age.
In addition, we
seem to have paid far too if the attention to the influence
of the mass media--now unprecedented in pervasiveness and
impact--as perhaps a virtually overwhelming instrument for
providing our citizens with a background of common experience.
Perhaps adequate analysis of this phenomenon would lead to the
conclusion that such forces as child socialization should be
marshalled as much as possible in favor of the opposite pole,
lest we soon bid goodbye to the last vestiges of some types
of diversity we should treasure the most.
For the many reasons discussed in this lengthy summary,
we are inclined to conclude that the states in this Union should
now take steps toward abandonment of programmatic controls,some-
what as accrediting associations for higher education, under
attack for their traditional rigidity, have been doing for
years. 40
We see no way of reconciling this nation's basic
democratic principles with the now-pervasive role of the state
as Super-Parent.
IDDlicati2= rQr -Illinois and Itg Nompubliceilgols
Illinois appears to exhibit one of the nation's most
favorable climates for educational experimentation and diversity.
The state's Office of Superintendent of Public Instruction (OSPI)
has taken numerous steps to encourage the development of
"alter-
native schools" within public school systems.
Reportedly, the
Superintendent of Public Instruction told an audience of local
school superintendents during the last week of September,
1973,

5/32
that he favored return of more curriculum control to local dis-
tricts and was considering state educational regulations that
might well be eliminated in the future.
So far as nonpublic schools are concerned, the reputa-
tion of the State of Illinois for widely influential experimenta-
tion extends several decades into the past.
In his definitive
history of the Progressive Era, Cremin described one Illinois
nonpublic school (the Laboratory Soho,
it the University of
Chicago) as "the most interesting experimental venture in
American education."41
"Indeed," he observed, "there are those
who insist that there has been nothing since to match it in
excitement, quality, and contribution." 42
At the present time,
numerous nonpublic schools in the state are engaged in trail-
blazing that could have a national impact, including (to cite
just a few examples) CAM Academy, St. Mary's Center for Learning,
the Southern School, and the Van Gorder-Walden School.
It
appears that Illinois is the only state with significant Amish
settlements that has not harassed the Plain People over their
unconventional educational programs.
It is one of the few states
whose courts have upheld home instruction as a valid substitute,
when well executed, for compulsory school attendance.
And as
Elson points out in chapter 4 of this report, programmatic con-
trols for nonpublic schools in Illinois are among the most
minimal in the nation today.
There are numerous indications, however, that Illinois
officials are considering the imposition of additional program-
matic controls on nonpublic schools.
In the OSPI document from
which numei-olm comm.-10g of 4-vese contv4-ls ware takoni toward the
beginning of this chapter, the type of school apparently to be
affected by the projected regulatory program is defined as
"public, private, and parochial."
The Illinois Advisory Commit-
tee on Nonpublic Schools, the sponsor of the present study,
reports a distinct impression that OSPI is weighing new policies
of regulation for nonpublic schools in the state.
Apparently

5/33
OSPI has declared a moratorium on the "recognition" of new non-
public schools because it intends to shift its relevant policies.
The state's new board of education has
been given vaguely defined
purview over nonpublic schools.
No doubt deliberations under way in Springfield in this
regard are well intentioned.
But with all due respect, and par-
ticularly in the light of the state's proud tradition of educa-
tional freedom and diversity, we think that any move toward
intensifying or extending controls over nonpublic schools at
this point would be a grievous error, especially if the new
thrust is programmatic.
The effect might well be to make the
state's nonpublic schools worse, not better.
For the many
reasons discussed earlier, we think the discretion students,
parents, and educators seek to exercise in educational settings
is far too vital to individual liberty, cultural diversity, and
essential experimentation to be infringed upon unnecessarily.
Later in this chapter, we will take the liberty of suggesting to
state officials an alternative strategy for improving nonpublic
education, a strategy which could mark Illinois as the most en-
lightened, forward-looking state in the nation, so far as these
vital issues are concerned.
If elementary and secondary education were fertile
territory for get-rich-quick entrepreneurs, or if many parents
were complaining of shoddy treatment in nonpublic schools, we
could readily understand why more onerous controls are being
considered--if indeed they are.
(Trade schools are obviously
another matter.)
But severe fiscal difficulties and enrollment
declines in Illinois nonpublic scnools have been documented
extensively. 43
Efforts in the state legislature to provide
financial relief have been struck down by the courts, even so
far as indirect benefits widely available in other states are
concerned.
As a long-time serious student of nonpublic schools,
the author has encountered not a single "fast-buck" institution
amonp these schools in Illinois, but many examples of teachers

5/34
and patrons who are keeping experimental schools alive at great
sacrifice, and numerous instances of promising, badly needed
schools that have floundered because patrons, personnel, and
supporters could no longer sustain the necessary physical and
fiscal effort.
If Illinois is looking for neglectful parents
and teachers to regulate, almost any educator in the state
could suggest more likely areas in which to find them.
It should be recognized furthermore, that two signifi
cant regulatory safeguards are already operative in the states
nonpublic schools.
Since each school involves several
(or many)
families who participate voluntarily.
it necessarily represents
a process of consensus,
in ease the state is concerned about the
possibility that individual families may subject their children
04
to educational extremes.'
In addition, the state may assume
that the viewpoints and competencies of professional educators
are reflected in the programs.
(The author knows of no excep
tion to this tendency.)
There is a marked trend, in fact, for
new educational ventures in the nonpublic sector to be designed
and promoted by teachers and administrators who decide, after
years of experience in conventional schools, that there must be
a better way to educate children.
In some respects, these
individuals are in a better position to advise state officials
than to be regulated by them.
The time could come, of course, when the need for state
repulation of nonpublic schools would be evident in Illinois.
Such a situation could occur, for instance, if for reasons as
yet not diPcernible these sehoois obtained access to abundant
fipr-R1 rpqmirces.
At that point, no donbt, some people would
enter the field with the
intention of battening on the available
largesse.
With clear evidence in hand that such a problem
existed, the state might logically consider two responses:
First, the state might demand that all schools, public
and nonpublic, give evidence
(by means of tests, etc.) that

5/35
they are producing the understandings and skills that are
demonstrably essential to responsible adulthood.
A program
of this kind should be based upon extensive discussion and
study, however, to ensure that state officials are not arbi-
trarily defining what are the indispensable understandings and
skills, and to ensure that the testing program is not biased
against experimental programs for the development of those
competencies.
We should reemphasize, furthermore, that we have
been able to find no valid reason why the state should be
permitted to require schools to produce outcomes that are not
almost universally regarded as essential.
Second, the state could rightfully respond to some
future demonstrated need for new controls over nonpublic schools
by instituting certain "regulated market" mechanisms to keep
schools honest and informative toward their patrons and to
provide ready avenues of redress for aggrieved students and
parents. 5
There is room to suspect that, if given systematic
findinrs concerning the effectiveness of schools in achieving
self-stated coals, parents will be far more rigorous than any
state agency in demanding excellence. 46
If a parent discovers
he is paving for services inferior to those available elsewhere
for the same money, action is likely to follow.
Representatives of each type of nonpublic school in the
state should Participate with state officials and consulting
scholars in deciding what information all schools should pro-
vide to parents.
In the case of Amish schools, for example,
data mirht be published revularly concerning the accomplishments
of the graduates in Old Order communities and elsewhere.
What
handicaps do these graduates feel?
What successes have they
experienced as farmers and housewives?
What lo they believe
their school should have done for them that it did not do?
The
results of achievement tests in the basic skill subjects should
probably be included.
In the case of "proll schools," comprehen-
hensiye evidence should be made available concerning the colleges

5/36
to which alumni gain admission and the success of these alumni
in subsequent studies.
Remedial schools should be required
to
produce data concerning the results they attain with students
having specified problems.
Catholic, Lutheran, and Seventh Day
Adventist schools might systematically compile facts of the
type
Greeley and Rossi gathered
in their national study.'?
Christopher Jencks and his colleagues suggest that all
schools should provide clients with budgetary information, that
the physical facilities available for various purposes deemed
important by the school and its patrons should be described
accurately, and that the qualifications of teachers (not neces-
sarily in terms of typical certification standards, we would
hope) should be listed. 48
The Jencks group makes the telling
point, furthermore, that no school failing to provide parents
with adequate information deserves to be called
"public."
From
this viewpoint, thousands of publicly financed schools are
distinctly private at the present time, run much like closed
corporations, while many privately financed schools are dis-
tinctly public. 49
As one possible strategy, the state could publish a
handbook, chiefly for the use of parents, providing evidence
from each school,
public and nonpublic, on the success it is
achieving with the type of student it enrolls and toward the
goals it avows.
On a scientific sampling basis, public offi-
cers could audit the materials as a means of ensuring their
accuracy.
All this could be done without interfering with the
diverse objectives and methods of different schools.
Along with the
information-disseminating mechanism,
the state could, as we have already noted, develop readily
available avenues through which students and parents
could
seek redress of grievances.
Several relevant ideas are pre-
sented by Elson in chapter 4 of this study, by the Jencks group
in its report on Education Vouchers, and in model state legisla-
tion recently drafted
by a task force of the Education Commission

5/3?
of the States. 50
All these sources should be examined, but
above all there should be extensive consultation tc ensure that
regulations introduced in Illinois will be carefully fitted to
conditions existing in the state at the time.
There are those who will argue, of course, that even
the two above-mentioned regulatory approaches (testing for
clearly essential competencies and maintaining a regulated open
market in education) are not enough, since some schools function-
ing within this framework may still find ways of victimizing
their patrons, and some groups of parents may still subject
their young to pedagogical extremes.
As the director of a
current study of accreditation of post-secondary institutions
aptly observes, "Those who seek to evade and exploit govp.nment
r.egula+40rs and priva+A rItendards are as astute and diligent as,
and more fast-footel than, those who seek to enforce them. «51
But realistically, the most we can ask is that "planners, social
scientist, legislators, or administrators
acknowledge, and
try to remedy, the most grievous and inevitable consequences."52
If we insist upon attempting to devise a foolproof regulatory
system, we may obliterate virtually all opportunity for the
unusual educational experiments that are needed to advance the
field, may drastically curtail basic liberties, and may still
be confronted with bad schools and evasive individuals.
(Anyone
who thinks current programmatic controls represent a good way to
guarantee a high quality of education either is easily misled or
has failed to visit many schools.)
As the Supreme Court once
asserted:
"We can have intellectual individualism and the rich
cultural diversities that we owe to exceptional minds only at
the price of occasional eccentricity and abnormal attitudes."53
We noted in chapter 2, however, that New Mexico has
exempted the members of a regional association (for all practical
purposes an accrediting association) of nonpublic schools from
most of the state's programmatic controls, but refuses to grant

5/38
similar liberty to individual schools, or even to local or
state-wide associations.
New Mexico's theory La that local and
statewide associations are too susceptible to extreme ideas in
education, while regional and national groups are more likely
to be protected from these extremes through the broadly based
consensus that they need to operate.
In the light of evidence
examined earlier concerning the serious dearth of radical experi-
mentation in American schools, we consider this position educa-
tionally unsound.
Furthermore, when required at broader and
broader levels, consensus guarantees that the final product will
be less and less closely adapted to the needs and interests of
individual families and thus more and more destructive of free-
dom.
The concept of requiring that the insights of competent
educators be reflected in school programs also is amenable to
misapplication.
As numerous scholars have pointed out in great
detail, the criteria by which most states define the competence
of educators are often ridiculous, as when an Einstein is
defined as incapable of teaching high school mathematics or
when administrators are required to amass course credits that
may reflect a trained
incapacity to perform well.
Another mis-
application of the principle of requiring professional judgments
to be reflected in child-rearing programs is the common practice
of having state legislators write into law, or having state
administrative agencies draft into regulations, whatever program-
matic guidelines for schools professional organizations of
educators consider warranted.
As we have pointed out, no firm
empirical basis yet exists for demonstrating what these guide-
lines should be, even if it could be assumed (as clearly it
cannot) that all groups in our society must pursue
the same
official version of the good life.
What we are most likely to
end up with, then, is the type of regulatory system so prevalent
in education today--a system that promotes the status and security
of the educational profession, but has little demonstrable rela-

5/39
tionship to instructional quality.
If the basic guidelines of
child-rearing programs are designed, not through state legisla-
tures and bureaus, which professional associatio.ls may be
expected to influence profoundly, but by competent individual
educators acting in concert with parents, less professional
self-aggrandizement and more adaptation of programs to the
diverse needs of children seems likely to result.
In additon,
there will be less opportunity for state officials to use
readily available regulatory systems in an effort to indoctrin-
ate and stamp out dissent.
It is probably obvious by now that we think Illinois
should begin at once to abandon its existing programmatic
regulations for nonpublic schools.
We could cite numerous
examples of promising innovations inhibited by the state's
vague yet bothersome requirement that nonpublic schools offer
specified subjects of study and generally be "equivalent" to
public schools.
But we would rather suggest to the state,
partly because we applaud the enlightened leadership its offi-
cials have demonstrated thus far, a positive policy that could
have profound international impact.
Our proposal is that all
nonpublic schools in Illinois that will cooperate in a far-
reaching longitudinal experiment, to be described in general
terms below, be offered, in return for the cooperation, complete
freedom from all existing programmatic controls in the state.
As an essential part of the experiment, participating schools
could be required to gather systematic information (by means
of the best methods leading scholars can identify) concerning
a wide range of educational outcomes (especially the outcomes
that these schools particularly espouse), concerning any inno-
vations that occur, and concerning the reactions of parents and
other interested persons during the course of the experiment.
To avoid running afoul of current constitutional rulings con-
cerning aid to church-related schools, the state should pay only
the actual costs of gathering the data it needs to advance our

5/40
knowledge of instructional and organizational relationships in
education.
The participating schools should be allocated
randomly to several groups.
Jne group should be excused, for
the five years or so during which the experiment operates,
From all state controls, programmatic or nonprogrammatic,
except health, safety, and applicable civil rights regulations.
Each of the other participating school groups should be subjected
to a different version of the "regulated market" system discussed
earlier.
One or two of these versions should involve positive
encouragement by the state of programs that depart significantly
from the beaten path, in terms of needs that representatives of
nonpublic schools in Illinois (perhaps the members of the
Illinois Advisory Committee on Nonpublic Schools) are in a good
position to identify.
There may be some need, for example, for
state intervention in the case of unconventional schools that
are harassed by local authorities through arbitrary enforcement
of local ordinances and other obstructive devices.
The assis-
tance of first-rank experts on research design should be obtained
in an effort to compensate for the problems that "reforms as
experiments" inevitably pose. 54
We are convinced that a venture
of this kind could produce unprecedented information concerning
the types of information parents are most likely to use well
when selecting educational programs for their children, and
concerning other effects of several approaches to the nonpro-
grammatic regulation of nonpdblic schools.
The resultant find-
ings could easily illuminate the issue of how to make public as
well as nonpulgic sqnools more accountable to their constituencies.
More generally, John Elson has discussed in chapter 4
several procedural safeguards that the state should probably
utilize, especially in the light of recent developments
in
Springfield.
Prominent among these is the policy, already in
use in Illinois but probably warranting elaboration, of consult-
ing extensively with representatives of nonpublic schools concern-
ing proposed state policies that affect
their interests.

5/41
Even apart from what the state may do, several steps
may deserve consideration by nonpublic schools in Illinois.
As Elson forcefully demonstrates in chapter 4, no legal proce-
dures can compensate fully for misinformation and distrust.
We have observed that important safeguards are by necessity
reflected in the operation of nonpublic schools in Illinois,
particularly during this era of fiscal emergencies and enrol-
lment declines.
But both state officials and common citizens
seem (a) unaware of these, (b) unaware of the information and
attention to complaints that patrons If nonpublic schools
generally demand (since their patronage is voluntary) and (c)
.
unaware of the variegated problems and accomplishments of non-
public schools.
One encounters widespread misunderstanding of the ways
in which nonpublic schools are organized and operated -- including,
for example, the idea that Catholic schools (which scholars often
characterize as a "non-system") are highly centralized, governed
by the Vatican, some national office, or even the local bishop.
While it does not seem advisable at this time for the Illinois
Advisory Committee on Nonpublic Schools (IACNS) to Constitute
itself as an accrediting agency and to seek recognition as such
from state and federal officials, IACNS might well map out the
road that leads to the accreditation function
(in case that
strategy should ever become essential in the effort to ward off
programmatic controls), and to take some of the first steps in
that direction without mrrrittinp 4tepif further.
Those first
steps, perhaps warranted by the current situation, might
include some of the following:
IACNS could articulate and publicize the information-
giving, complaint-processing, and other patron-protecting
mechanisms that its member schools maintain.
It could study
ways of improving these procedures.
it could provide its own
avenue of appeal and redress for parents and students who believe
they have not been treated equitably by its member schools.
It

5/42
could investigate serious allegations of this type and assure
the public that it will
strike from its membership list any
schools that do not live up to its ethical standards.
In
addition, IACNS could consider possible ways of facilitating
individual and collective self-studies and external evaluations
on the part of its members.
Important assistance in this
regard is available from the recent work of several accrediting
agencies, which have been attempting to devise evaluative pro-
cedures that do not inhibit radical departures from convention-
ality."
Further ideas may soon be accessible from several
current studies of accreditation.56The existence of a self-
policing organi1ation of nonpublic schools might provide a
reasonable alternative on those occasions when a state might
otherwise be forced to utilize its own procedures of school
"recognition" or "approval" in connection with state or federal
benefits that can be made available only through some mechanism
that differentiates, at least ostensibly, between the "more
reliable" and "less reliable" schools.
As perhaps the most important step of all, IACNS could
maintain a systematic effort to acquaint state officials and the
general public with their special educational objectives, with
the frequently surprising diversity of students they serve,
with their fRqcinating history and traditions, with their dif-
ficulties, with their dreams, and with their demonstrable
accomplishments.
Schools seem more likely to accomplish this
formidable task collectively than individually.
Broader Implications
While the comments in the preceding passage are
addressed to Illinois and its nonpublic schools, virtually the
same implications apply elsewhere, though in many states the
need for regulatory reform affecting nonpublic schools is much
more urgent than it is in Illinois.
But our concern should extend beyond the nonpublic

5/43
schools.
Public school teachers and adminstrators often exhibit
justifiable resentment when one argues for special freedom to
experiment in nonpublic schools.
Public educators frequently
are frustrated by demands imposed by the state and the agencies
it empowers to act in its behalf.
We feel obliged to suggest,
then, even if very sketchily, some ways of loosening the state's
standardizing grip in the public schools.
We applaud the efforts of the Illinois Superintendent of
Public Instruction to diminish the state's prescriptions con-
cerning the curriculum and other phases of public school opera-
tion, thus permitting more discretion at the local level.
His
encouragement of "alternative schools" within public school
systems establishes another important principle that should be
extended.
If alternative schools are desirable as a way of
matching programs to differential student needs and interests,
why not alternatives smaller in scope than a total school, and
why not alternative learning experiences outside school?
We
see no good reason, as we mentioned in chapter 1, why public
school authorities at virtually all levelp (from the classroom
to the state department) should not be required to entertain
proposals made by students, parents, arid educators as individuals,
small groups, or larger collectivitiesproposals to substitute
various learning opportunities, conventional or unconventional,
inside or outside school walls, for programs the state custom-
arily requires,
Within such A frRMPWirk
4.1.4s00M. wa would
SelAmm encolInte,- exeTnles, as we often do today, of rotentiAl
Chopins who must leave their.
r.; anoc 1.1 parinipate in what is
for them an inane classroom discussion of baroque music, of
Olympic skating champions whose high school graduation diplomas
are held un for lack of ohvsical education crediti, and
of many
other children who could learn inestimahl:, more of what is
important hnd useful to them in st-ttina's that the law now makes
generally inaccessible di-:n thfl
r,rcl[ne,re
PPrir'ds r
c=nul-
gory school attendance.

5/44
Proposals for activities to be accepted in liew of
generally required programs could be evaluated in terms of
clearly stated standards of reasonableness.
As a safeguard
against too-conventional rulings, the state could permit
students, parents, and teachers whose proposals were rejected
to appeal to a panel composed of people of acknowledged breadth
and integrity, drawn largely from outside the "educational
establishment."
We are inclined to believe, however, that one major
linchpin of programmatic controls is the long-standing practice
of requiring schools to free parents from child-care responsi-
bilities for extended perio:is of time and to keep the young off
the streets and the
job market.
The idea of abandoning com-
pulsive mechanisms in education may be frightening to many
people because it conjures multitudes of children and adoles-
cents turned loose with their energies unharnessed.
We tend to
agree with Bereiter,
however, that the custodial function is a
major impediment to school effectiveness. 57
In many inner
cities, if schools could concentrate their resources in an all-
out effort to develop the basic communicative skills during the
first few years of instruction, releasing youngsters as soon
as success had been achieved, a much higher average level of
achievement might be produced with much less money.
Baby-sitters
need not be r'ofessional educators.
Current arrangements
require, instead, that available funds for a child's schooling be
dissipated to a significant extent in an effort to keep the
youngster corralled and controlled for a
period as close as
possible to twelve years.
It seems surprising that mo few
questions have been asked about the right of the state to
insist that children be held in custody in schools so fewer
complications will arise in homes, streets, and job markets.
Since the courts are beginning to develop the doctrine that
children have essentially the same civil rirhts as adults,

5/45
surely we will soon confront the question of why children may
be kept in custody without due process of law, simply to
facilitate certain social processes, while adults may move about
freely.
It will be difficult to develop ways of relieving schools
of the custodial function.
Reimer proposes that we allocate
child-care functions to other institutions by making major parts
of the city safe for children to roam and explore, by sending
many boys and girls to rural areas for extended periods, by
developing universally available child-care centers, and by
utilizing new apprenticeship programs,58
Since the possibility
of relieving schools of the responsibility that jails assume
for adults has received so little attention, few promising possi-
bilities have yet been identified.
But the question deserves
sustained attention.
If there were no need to wonder, for
example, about what problems adolescents could cause if not
cooped up five days a week, it might make eminent sense to abolish
compulsory attendance during the adolescent years and to use the
resources thus saved on the early development of essential skills
and on later educational opportunities made available on a life-
long basis.
Young people who respond well to classroom instruc-
tion could remain in classrooms.
Those who do not could indulge
their interests elsewhere, often with much better results than
are now achieved.
The state would not be forcing individuals
into culturally and ideologically biased schools during the years
when influences outside the home have their most powerful impact.
And people who elect, during adolescence or early adulthood, to
abandon some parochial life style could enter a nearby educational
way station at any time to acquire the competencies they require
in the wider world.
Changes in occupation and way of life are
becoming an accepted, frequently encountered phenomenon, and the
trend seems certain to intensify.
Large numbers of citizens--not
just a few people from dissenting subcultures--will require
periodic retraining.
The notion that education is something

5/46
provided in classrooms primarily for children is surely anti-
quated, due to be replaced by a system of educational opportuni-
ties made available to all citizens continuously, in many settings
and through many media.
The advent of the "learning society" may
turn out to be the ultimate demise of state programmatic controls
in education.
We should emphasize in closing that we do not contend,
along with many radical critics today, that schools are neces-
sarily bad places for children and other living things, that the
majority of the young do not respond reasonably well to fairly
co ,,-'14 onel pedagogical approaches, or that most people in the
United States find repugnant the values most schools promote.
Our concern is for the sizeable minorities who find the way of
life perpetuated in mainstream schools foreign and alienative,
for the many children who learn best in unconventional ways, and
for the radical experiments that seem essential to educational
progress.
Our sympathies are with all students, parents, and
educators who prefer child-rearing practices outlawed or
severely inhibited by a state that has acquired, in a society
built on libertarian principles, the prerogatives of a Super-
Parent.

5/47
tisIte,31.1211
1.
Griswold v.Conneqtiglit, 381 U.S. 479 (1965), at 483-84.
2,
KeviOian v. hoard of Regents, 385 U.S. 589 (1967), at
603-04,
3.
In his reanalysis of historical data in England and
New York, E. G. West concludes tNat compulsory attendance laws
were unnecessary in the light of the efforts parents were already
making to educate their children, and
that these laws may even
have reduced the supply of schooling.
See E. G. West, "The
Political Economy of American Public School Legislation," Journal
of Law an
Economics 10 (Oct 1967), 101-1281 and his Ed4c4ttlop
and the State (London:
Institute of Economic 4ffeirs, 1465).
4.
sae chapter 4, p. 4/34.
5.
Wisconsin v. Yoder,
406 U.S. 205, 92 S. Ct. 1526 (1972).
6.
Donald A. Erickson, "The Plain People vs. the Common
Schools," Saturday Review 49 (Nov. 19, 1966),
pp. 85-87, 102-103;
"The 'Plain People' and American Democracy," Commenapy 45
(.Ian. t
1968), 36-441 "The Persecution of LeRoy Garber," School Review 78
(Nov., 1969), 81-90.
7.
Office of the Superintendent of Public Instruction, "The
Illinois Program for Evaluation, Supervision, and
Recognition of
Schools" (Circular Series A, No. 160; Springfield, Ill.:
the
Office, 1973, offset).
8.
Edwin M. Bridges and Melany E. Baehr, "The Future of
Administrator Selection Procedures," Adnantstratoris i4otebook,
Vol. 19 (January, 1971).
9.
When the child attends a public school, the costs are
taken out of tax revenues, but when the child attends a nonpublic
school, the costs must be provided through private investment
(usually on the part of the parent), even though the parent must
continue to pay his share of the tax bill for public education.
10.
Donald A. Erickson, "Freedom's Two Educational Impera-
tives:
A Proposal," in Donald A. Erickson, ed., Public Controls
for Nonpublic Schools (Chicago;
University of Chieago Press,
1969), p. 164; and E. G. West, "The Economies
of Compulsory Edu-
cation" (pre-publication mamascript, 1972).
11,
Milton Friedman, Ca italism and Freedom (Chicaro!
Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 1062
,
pp.
c-107; John E. Coons, William
H. Clune III, and Stephen D. Sugarman, Private Wealth and PAhlj.c

5/48
Education (Cambridge,
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press,
1970), esp. chapter 61 Charles S. Benson, "Economic Analysis
of
Institutional Alternatives for Providing Education
(Private,
Public Sector)," in Roe L. Johns et al eds., BcollomAc FAcIors
Affgctinc=the Firan^inc rg Fdle.a4inn,
National Fducetional
Finance Project, Vol. 2 (Gainesville, Fla., the Project,
1970),
pp. 121-172.
12.
Robert Glaser, "Individuals and Learning:
the New
Aptitudes," Educational Researcher 1 (June. 1972), 5-13.
13.
Eric A. Hanushek and John F. Kain, "On the Value of
Eauality of Educational Optortunity as a Guide to Public Policy,"
in Frederick Mosteller and Daniel P. Moynihan,
eds., On Eauality
or
6
Eftattonal OPPortqnitv (New York:
Random House, 1972), pp.
11-145,
14.
Rosalie Wax, "The Warrior Dropouts," Trangac'tion,
May, 1967, pp. 40-46.
15.
limpnsin v. Yoder, supra,
note 5.
16,
Robert M. Hutchins, "The Constitution of Public Educa-
tion," Center Magazine 2
(July, 1969), 8.
17. 1.
18.
C. Arnold Anderson,
"State Education and
Cultural
Alienation" (pre-publication manuscript, University of Chicago,
1969).
19.
James M. Redfield,
"Platonic Education," in Wayne C.
Booth, ed., The Knowledge Most Worth Having (Chicago:
University
of Chicago Press,
1967)
,
p. 154.
20,
Another conceivable exception, explored later, invol-
ves the possibility that, whereas few demonstrably essential
understandings and
skills can be identified,
exposing children
to a wide range of common experiences (however arbitrarily these
experiences may be selected) is essential to the minimal unity
without which no society can survive.
21.
Robert Dreeben, On What is Learned to Schoql (Reading,
Mass.:
Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 1968).
22.
Erickson, "The Plain People vs. the Common Schools";
"The 'Plain People' and American Democracy";
"The Persecution of
LeRoy Garber."

5/49
21,
Sep, for example, Kenneth M. DClbeare and Phillip E.
Hammond,
S
3
01
Local Practice (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1973);
Donald R. Reich, "The Supreme Court and Public Policy:
The
School Prayer Cases," Phi Delta Ka2pan 58 (September, 1966),
29 -32; Elia Katz. "Patterns of Compliance with the Schempp
Decision," Jogrpal of Public Law 14 (1965); William G. Howard.
"Florida Schools Ignore Ban on Bible Reading," Nation's SS hoofs.
79 (May, 1967)
, 122; William K. Muir, Jr., zrasterin111Euklia
Schools:
Law a/n1 kuitosabangg (Chicago:
University of
Chicago Press, 1967); Arthur Gilbert, "Reactions and Resources,"
in Theodore R. Sizer, ed., Religion, and Public Education
(Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Company, 1967), pp. 37-83; Donald A.
Giannella, ed., Religion and the Public Order, 1964 (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press,
196c),
pp. 243 -352; Theodore
Powell, "The Dangers of Liberty," in Sizer. Religion and Public
gducatigm, p. 140.
11
24.
Jules Henry, "Is Education Possible?" in Erickson, ed..
Control§, pp. 25-10?.
25.
Newton Edwards and Herman G. Richey, The School in the
22,L....L4cs:WOzdszArcal (2d ed.; Boston:
Houghton Mifflin,
1967577
26.
Marshall D. Herron, "The Nature of Scientific Inquiry,"
School Revjew 79 (Feb. 1971), 171 -212; Byron G. Massialas, Nancy
Freetag Sprague, and Jo Ann Sweeney, "Traditional Schools, Paro-
chial Pedagogy," School Review 79 (Aug.. 1971), 561-78.
27.
James S. Coleman, Tile AcIplespent Spc,letv (Glencoe:
The Free Press of Glencoe, 1961).
28.
Bernard C. Rosen, "Conflicting Group Memberships
A
Study of Parent-Peer Cross-Pressures." AmeriqaD SociologicAl
Review 20 (April, 1955), pp. 155-161; Morris Rosenberg, "The
Dissonant Religious Context and Emotional Disturbance,"
in Louis
Schneider, ed., Religion. Culture. and Sociptvl
A Read
in the
Re
on (New York:
John Wiley & Sone, 1964),
pp. 5 9-559. Benjamin S. Bloom,
"Stability and Change in Puman
Characteristics:
Implications for School Reorganization,"
,ducational Adillinigtration Quarterly 2
(Winter, 1966), 46.
29.
Herbert Gintis, "Towards a Political Economy of Edu-
cation:
A Radical Review of Ivan Illich's Deschooling Sopiety,"
Harvard Educational Review 4? (Feb., 1972), 87488 James Steve
Couneils, "The American Curriculum and Intellectual Rpligious
Liberty," Orthodox Observer
30 (May, 1964), 145-46; Annie Stein.
"Strateries for Failure," Harvard Educational Revj.ew 41 (May,
1971), 158-204; Michael B. Katz, Clasp. Bureaucracy and Schools
(New York: Praeger, 1972); Colin Greer, The Great School tgeend
(New York:
Basic Books, 1972); Michael Novak, The Rise of the
meltable
i's
(New York: Macmillan, 1972).

5/50
30.
John A. Hostetler, Amish Society (rev. ed.; Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins Press,
1968).
31.
Leonard Fein, "The Limits of Universalism." in Henry
J. Levin, ed., Co 0 _ 1 't
Co
of
o
S
(Washington, D.C.:
the Brookings Institution,
1970
, pp.
29-90,
32.
Hostetler, Amish Society.
33.
Andrew M. Greeley and Peter H.
Rossi, The $duca4on
of Catholjc Americans
(Chicago:
Aldine Publishing Co., 1966).
34.
West Va. State Bd._ 9f Ed w. v. Barnette, 318 U.S. 624
(1943).
35.
Justice William 0. Douglas, quoted in Robert Michael-
sen, Piety in the Public Sphaol (New York:
The Macmillan
Company, 1970), p. 58.
16.
See, for example:
Robert N. Bellah, "Civil Religion
in America," Deedalvs 96 (Winter, 1967), 1-21; Will Herberg,
Protestant_14,Catholic. Jew (rev. ed.:
Garden City, N.Y.:
Anchor
Books, 1960); Michaelsen,
Piety in the Pgblic School.
37.
Quoted in David B. Tyack, ed., MarningEclinIg_in
Am
a
E.
at o al H'ato
(Waltham, Mass.:
Blaisdell Pub-
lishing Co., 19.7
p. 1 9
38.
Lawrence A. Cremin, The TransformatIon, of the School
(New York:
Vintage Books, 1961), p. 68; Tyack, Tmrning Points,
chapter 7; Charles F. Marden and Gladys Mayer, Minorttics in
American Society (2nd ed.: New York:
American Book Company,
1942).
P. 10.
39.
See, for example:
Stein, "Strategies for Failure ";
Victor G. CiPirelli, "Fducational Models for the Disadvantaged,"
in Herbert J. Walbero and Andrew T. Kogan, eds., aettlirting
Urban Education (San Francisco:
Jossev-Bass, 1972), pp.
31-48;
Katz, Class. Bureaucracy and Schools; James Herndon, The Way It
apszAci_122: (*4ew York:
Bantam Books, 1969); Jonathan Kozol,
Death at an Early AEI (Boston:
Houghton Mifflin Company,
1969);
Wax, "The Warrior Dropouts"; Christopher Jencks, "Private Schools
for Black Children," atixattslimalftwan, Nov. 3,
1968;
Charles A. Valentine, "Deficit,
Difference, and Bicultural Models
of Afro-American Behavior," Harvard Etcati,pnal Review 41
(May,
10711
117.4r7t Wannq Mack Drake, "kno.:^ American Teachers,
Mexi-
can American Students, and Dissonance in Our Schools," Elementary
School JoutBal 73 (January,
1973) 207-12.

5/51
40.
Herbert R. Kells, "Institutional Accreditation:
New Forms of Self-Study," Educational ,ftcord,
(Spring, 1972),
pp. 143-48.
41.
Cremin, Thp Transformation of the School, p.
136.
42.
Jug,
43,
Donald A. Erickson, Cripis in jilinoj Nonpublic
School
(Springfield,'Ill.:
Elementary and Secondary Nonpublic
Schools Study Commission, State of Illinois, 1970).
44.
Cf. Judith C. Areen, "Alternative Schools:
Better
Guardians than Family or State?"
School Review, 81 (February,
1973). 175-93.
45.
Erickson, "Freedom's Two Educational Imperatives,"
pp. 173-74.
46.
We think this despite evidence that in some areas of
life the availability of new information does not appear
to
affect consumer behavior, for cons.ide7ations developed by West
(elora, note 3) are more directly pertinent.
But see G. Day
and W. Brandt, A Study of consumer Credit Pecigions:
;mplica-
tiong for Present and Prospective Legislation (Stanford U.,
1972); R. Pullen, "The Impact of Truth-in-Lending Legislations
The Massachusetts Experience"
(Research Report No. 43 to
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Oct.
1968).
47.
Greeley and Rossi, The EABgation of Catholic Awripans.
48.
Center for the Study of Public Policy,
Edmpation Vqu-
A
largntl,
A Report Prepared under Grant CG
Office of Economic Opportunity
(Cambridge,
the Study of Public Policy, 1970, offset),
49.
50.
Task Force on Model State Legislation for Approval of
Postsecondary Educational Institutions and Authorization to
Grant Degrees, Model Sta'%g Le4slation (Denver:
Education
Commission of the Zltates, 1973).
85 2 for the U. S
Mass.:
Center for
pp. 65-68.
$t.
Harold Orlans; "Adventures in Wonderland, or
The
Blind Men and the Elephant, or The Government and Accrediting"
(address at meeting of American Association for Higher Educa-
tion, Chicago, March 12,
1973), p. 2.
52.
Ibid.

5/52
53.
Wpst Va. natg. Bd. 9f EsIpp. v. Barnette, supra,,
note
34. at 640-41.
54.
Donald T. Campbell, "Reforms as Experiments," American
21.nhologist 24 (April, 1969),
409-29.
cc.
We would particularly recommend for study:
Commission
on Independent Secondary Schools, New England Association of
Schools and Colleges, Manual
School Evaluation (Burlington,
Mass.:
the Association, 1972
56.
A brief overview of relevant studies appears in
Appendix A.
57,
Carl Bereiter, "Schools Without Education,"
Harvard
WugationaARevlow 42 (Aug.,
1972). 390-413.
58.
Everett Reimer,
ool Ig_peact (Garden City, N. Y.:
Doubleday & Co.. 1971), p.
3

APPENDIX A
NOTES ON ACCREDITATION*
When the present study began, we became aware that
considerable relevant work was under way ii
the context of
criticism of the accrediting of colleges and universities.
We made efforts to benefit from these investigations.
In some respects, precollegiate educational institu-
tions seem to lag far behind colleges and universities in
challenging programmatic controls as a threat to liberty,
experimentation, and diversity.
The regional accreditation
associations have been attacked so repeatedly and forcefully
in this regard that they seem generally to be abandoning
evaluative criteria that spell out ha an institution must
be operated in favor of "asking whether the program. process,
or procedure Bound in a college or university] works. "1
The
Federation of Regional Accrediting Commissions for Higher
Education (FRACHE) has initiated a three-year study, directed
by Norman Burns, of new ways of measuring the prodygtp,
rather
than the procgsAgs of education.
Accrediting agencies also
are making attempts to ensure that the clients of institutions
of higher education will be provided with honest, adequate
information as a basis for deciding what colleges and univer-
sities to attend.
The Southern. Association of Colleges and
Schools reportedly has adopted special standards for the
accreditation of open university programs, 2 FRACHE, similarly,
is exploring new approaches to evaluating unorthodox institu-
tions. 3
*The assistance of Bruce S. Cooper in the assembling
of materials leading to this appendix is gratefully acknowledged.

API?
We made strenuous attempts to secure informItion from
9 mmi-er of rewtinen+
undo,.
nv% "leentiV
^elmq-OP4
"""1" tZrns courteou-ly prwridee
wi-ly working draft of
the above-mentioned three-year. FRACHE study. 4
Harold Orlans
gave access .to a number of documents from the federally funded
investigation, then quartered at Brooking.s,
of "Private
Accrediting and Public Funding."
We found the papers from
Orland especially helpful.
Though Frank Newman of Stanford
University had been rather widely quoted in connection with
his federal task force on accreditation, we were unable, despite
many communications, to obtain any written materials from him,
though his final report was reportedly overdue.
The Education
Commission of the states promptly responded to our inquiries
by sending copies of model legislation developed by its Task
Force on Model State Legislation for Approval of Postsecondary
Educational Institutions and Authorization to Grant Degrees.
Ralph C. West send descriptions of work conducted in the aegis
of the Commission on Independent Secondary Schools of the New
England Association of Schools and Colleges, along with the
criteria eventuating from that work.
Useful information was
obtained concerning the "self-accrediting" efforts of the
Montessori Schools in Minnesota. the Pennsylvania Association
of Private Academic Schools, and, in Oklahoma and New Mexico,
the Southwest (ssociation of independent Schools.
We are
grateful to the individuals who provided answers to our
questions in these respects.
As it turned out, severel important analyses of
accreditation at the post-secondary level were as yet incom-
plete and unreported; so the results of our efforts to benefit
from these studies were generally disappointing.
In the mean-
time, however, we think a number of tentative conclusions may
be identified for the benefit of groups considering the probable
benefits and liabilities of pre-collegiate accreditation pro-
cedures:

A/3
t.
2b2r212AMMArIntlXEMDSAA01112=101.13=2tthiA
IMMO.
The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has accepted membership
in the Pennsylvania Association of Private Academic Schools in
3i.eu of compliance with the state's onerous and generally
medieval licencing regulations.
In Minnesota, schools connected
with the Association Montessori Internationale have been granted
exemption from the requirements of the state welfare department.
In New Mexico, the State Department of Education accepts the
evaluative mechanisms of the Southwestern Association of Inde-
pendent Schools as a substitute for state approval
mechanisms,
as does the Oklahoma Board of Regents
for Higher Education.
2.
r n
lt for a
e
grours to provide adequate scope for innovatiop and Alversity.
Schools that have established
their own accrediting
association could easily be tempted to use the influence of the
association to discourage competition, particularly from insti-
tutions that seem distinctly "off-beat."
At least this is one
plausible explanation for the widespread charge (in higher
education) that accrediting associations are hostile toward any-
thing ineonventional.
WP suspect, however,
that an accrediting group seriously
intent upon adopting a more open stance could make significant
progress to that
end.
Particular encouragement may be drawn
from the work of the Commission on Independent Secondary schools
of the New England Association of Schools and Colleges.
The
Commissions's Manual for School Fvaluation exhibits many commend-
able features. 5
Tt is singularly free of programmatic controls.
3.
In the long run. it nay prove necessary for several
eve,
es
each
e v
= a
d
c
Pro.
of
nst'tu-
ace
t of z
t. f _I
o
a
eo
a
o arm,.
While efforts to broader the outlook of accrediting
groups seem essential, there is probably an unavoidable limit on

A 14
the rare of educational objectives that any single agency can
acoomodate.
To quote Harold Orlans, it may be better that
schools plc luded by existing accreditors "form new accrediting
agenoies with standards oe their own than that the standards
of existing agrencies be stretched so far as to become meaning-
less."6
In some particulars, at least, it may be a major
contribution of accreditors to certify to the public that a
school adheres to, and is a reputable representative of, a
particular educational philosophy.
At present, federal agen-
cies exhibit a discouraging (and, we think, unrealistic) habit
of recognizing only one accrediting association for a given
level of education in a particular mr-,,,rap) 4^ -tr^a, but rov.u.,e
he final rap--+e- of -oNreral
major studies now under way will
help produce a modification of that posture.
4.
S
a
d
a
es -eem
ave o
new accrlditinr grups
Y.o
special effort in this regard.
Orlans points out that the current system of federal
recognition of accrediting agencies has permitted enough
flaa:rant fraud to warrant a congressional inquiry.
"In more
than a few cases, poor, ignorant, or handicapped people who
cannot even read English have signed contracts binding them to
repay loans for education they never receive; there are cases
in which student default rates at
individual schools have run
so high that local banks have refused to extend further loans,
but more distant banks continue to do so; in the District of
Columbia, one school has even lost its licence; and vet,
because such schools retain their accreditation, they retain
their eligibility and the benighted government continues to
insure their loans."7
In reaction, one could argue for the
intervention of government.
But on the contrary, there may be

A/5
important stern that an ar.nr0litation agrPn-y rAn rrolvAblv take
to protect the
public! Iraingt unsf.rupulous sohools.
Numerous
stratopiee felr* the protootion of the consumer are sumfrestP4 by
ir chmrter 4 .rri by the
11.7.r!lc Form nn Model
Lppislation
of the Rdu(1.1tion Commission o*' the qtates.
8
6.
Accreditation mechanisms can be prohibitively
expenslytElr manx school e.
The self-studiea,
team visits, and follow-up work that
arP tyricallv involved it accreditation can be expensive in
monetAry terms and enormously costly in terms of staff time and
enerry, all
of which Are already stretched thin in many nonpub-
lic school q.
Pn accreditation agency for elementary end second-
ary achools,
unless dPvisPd almost primarily for elite, liberal-
ly supported institutions, would have to devise imaginative new
ways of evaluating its members to avoid o/rerburdening them.
Perhaps unaccustomed attention should be given, for example,
to
the use of statistical sampling techniques, in lieu of the
holistic evaluations that are now customary.
The problem probs'o-
ly means, furthermore,
that no group of nonpublic schools should
constitute itself as a full-fledged accrediting association
unless that step is clearly warranted.
F.
rnanthecrtantbutciLalax__ul'13sholfi
be faced theta. in assuming the rpaporsibility of evaluating
.choolo in 1
of s ate
lat o
e
sacred t #. azzo
ma
he o en
the door to the full a)Ilicat on of t
Amendment and
consequently to the curtailment of many fr9eakoms
erioyed by stricitly private agencies.
This point is well Analyzed by Elson in chapter 4.
In
assumiro functions customarily performed by government,
private
groups may provide a rationale that permits
them to be treated
as if they were
ag,:encies of the state.

A/6
Not
to Appendix A
1.
Herbert R. Kells, "Institutional Accreditation:
New
Forms of Self-Study," Educational Record, Spring, 1972. p. 144,
P.
Philip W. Semas, "Accrediting Groups are Accused of
Stifling Innovations by Colleges,"
Chroniple of HirhPr Rama-
en 7 (January 15, 1973), 1.
3,
4,
Norman Burns, "Institutional Accrediting:
A Look
Ahead" (mimeographed manuscript, North Centrql Association of
Colleges and Secondary schools, May, 1973).
5.
Commission on Independent Secondary Schools, New
England Association of Schools and Colleges, Manual 41. School
Evaluation (Burlington, Mass.:
the Association, 1972).
6.
Harold ()Hans, "Adventures in Wonderland,
or The Blind
Men and The Elephant, or The Government and Accrediting"
(mimeographed manuscript, The Brookings Institutions, Washington,
D. C., March, 1972), p. 7.
7.
p. 10.
C.
Task Force on Model Legislation for Approval
ct/S.
Postsecondary Educational Institutions and Authorization to
Grant Degrees, Model ,S'tatg L
lati on (Report No. 10: Denver.:
the Commission, 1973

