DOCUSEIT RESUME 
ED 127 531 
CG 010 759 
AUTHOR 
Pedrini, D. T.; Pedrini, Bonnie C. 
TITLE 
Freud, Adler, Jung: From Womb to Tomb. 
PUB DATE 
6 Apr 76 
NOTE 
14p.; Not available in hard copy due to marginal 
legibility of original document 
EDRS PRICE 
MF-$0.8' Plus Postage. HC Not Available from EDRS. 
DESCRIPTORS 
*Adult Development; *Development; *Developmental 
Psychology; Gerontology; *Human Development; 
*Individual Psychology; Maturation; State of the Art 
Reviews; *Theories 
ABSTRACT 
This paper briefly introduces outlines of 
psychoanalysis (Freud), individual psychology (Adler), and analytical 
psychology (Jung). Freud focused on problems of adults as they 
related to childhood; Adler on problems of adults as they related to 
adulthood; and Jung on problems of adults as they related to middle 
and later years. Jungian analytical psychology is singularly 
applicable to the entire life cycle with special meanings fOr 
gerontology. In all this theorizing, however, we should always 
consider reality, and towards this end research is recommended. 
Included is a select bibliography with authorized translations of 
original sources, definitive sources, and explanatory sources. 
(Author) 

FREUD, ADLER, JUNG: FROM WOMB TO TOMB 
D. T. Pedrini and Bonnie C. Pedrini 
University of Nebraska at Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska 68101 
Abstract 
This paper briefly introduces outlines of psychoanalysis (Freud), individual 
psychology (Adler), and analytical psychology (Jung). Freud, focused on prob-
lems of adults as they related to childhood; Adler, on problems of adults 
as they related to adulthood; and Jung, on problems of adults as they related 
to middle and later years. Jungian analytical psychology is singularly 
applicable to the entire life cycle with special meanings for gerontology. 
In all this theorizing, however, we should always consider reality, and towards 
this end research is recommended. Included is a select bibliography with 
authorized translattnns of original sources, definitive sources, and explana-
tory sources. 

Freud 
Freud, in trying to understand humans, leaned heavily upon analogies, 
metaphors, and reified abstractions. His words were steeped with sexual and 
mythological taints. Nevertheless, his resulting psychology (theoretical 
though it may have been) opened up humankind to systematized investigation. 
He considered persons in terms of dynamics (conscious, pre-conscious, and 
unconscious), topography (id, ego, and superego), and economics (repression, 
projection, etc.--the mechanisms of adjustment, the defendants against 
anxiety). 
He took mankind through developmental stages--the oral, anal, phallic, 
latent, and genital; paying particular attention to the bipolarities of 
eros and the death drive, reality and pleasure, as well as the problems of 
progression, fixation, and regression. The energy for human nature was 
libido; and cathexis was the process by which this libido, this energy was 
used. Of crucial importance was the Oedipus complex (sometimes called the 
Oedipal stage or Oedipal situation, beginning during the
phallic stage and 
for some never resolving). The libido was defined as the sex impulse or 
more accurately the love and/or affection impulse. Libido could be sentient, 
sensuous, or sensual. 
Freud in trying to understand humans leaned heavily upon Occidental, 
Central European, Austrian, and Viennese cultures. Yet he considered the 
development of humans everywhere to be based upon a drive (rather than 
instinct) network and the behavior of humans to be manifest of this drive 
(rather than instinct) network. The society, the culture, and the social 
milieu were artifacts based upon sublimation of animalness (and included 
repression, reaction formation, displacement, etc.). These artifacts (the 
society, etc.) resulted from personal struggles against biologic nature; 

and though the artifacts could modify behavior, they could not modify 
progression through the developmental stages (oral, anal, phallic [including 
Oedipal], latent, and genital). Humans, then, were understood in terms of 
dynamics, topography, and economics, with libidinal energy cathecting to 
bipolarities and going through the developmental stages with progression, 
fixation, and regression. This, of course, is only a simplified overview 
of the brilliant insights Freud mastered. Nonetheless, this overview, this 
outline can serve to show Freud and his biologic and psychologie emphasis. 
For gerontology, all of psychoanalysis serves, howèver, not much 
of it has been specified in context. The death drive, regression, and other 
conceptualizations are critical, but there is little focus on old age, per 
se. What is needed is a psychoanalysis of and for the aged. 
Adler 
Adler in trying to understand humankind utilized, in part, the primary 
Freudian concepts of dynamics, topography, and economics. He did not use 
the breakdown or the areas in toto, however, and selected, modified, and 
elaborated only the components he considered irtoortant. 
Adler considered the unconscious and conscious but not as antagonists. 
He emphasized the conscious. In many instances, Adler considered the con-
scious and unconscious as directed toward the same goal. He emphasized the 
ego in his system and did much pioneer work with the bahavioral referents 
of this hypothetical construct. The "will to power" was stressed, the urge 
for dominance and superiority. Adler in his conceptualizations, histori-
cally and developmentally, began with organ inferiority; but he carried 
this biologic-psychologie concept to its logical conclusion, the conclusion 
being a psychologie-sociologic context. Interestingly, his system if called 
"individual psychology." 

The mechanism most considered by Adler was compensation. The other 
mechanisms were described as processes, at times, but they did not have the 
singular strength of compensation. 
The first five years of life were particularly important, according 
to Adler, for a nuclear form of the "style of life." Adler de-emphasized 
the oral and anal stages of Freud and stressed the balance between the 
individual and social drives. Social adjustment, later work adjustment, 
and adjustment to love and marriage were emphasized. Libido as Freud 
understood it was not the energy behind the movement of personality, but 
self-assertive impulse was. Libido for Adler was a libido of power. The 
Oedipus complex was not crucial, was not considered a fundamental fact of 
human development; again he used it in a context of "will for power" and 
considered it symbolically. 
For gerontology, all of individual psychology serves, however, there 
is little focus or old age. The young adult and adult years are emphasized 
with notions of social adjustment including work, marriage, love, etc. But, 
what is needed is an individual psychology of and for the aged. 
Jung 
Jung accepted some aspects of Freudian theory and rejected others. He 
continued with the conscious, unconscious paradigm but carried it ever fur-
ther. He envisioned a personal and a collective unconscious. 'The personal 
unconscious was the forgotten, the repressed, the subliminal; the collec-
tive unconscious was an inheritance from primitive ancestors. These primi-
tive ancestors influenced us in terms of archetypes--primitive ways of 
thinking. This collective unconscious included both primitive thinking and 
Freud's id. 
Jung noted two directions of mental interests (attitudes)--extraversion 
and introversion, as well as four kinds of mental activities (functions)--

thinking. sensing, intuiting, and feeling. Eight main types of individuals 
were seen (combining interests and activities), but intermediate types were 
also admissible, and what an individual was not consciously, he was uncon-
sciously. An ideal type had rhythmic alternations of the two directions 
of interest--extraversion and introversion. 
There were three phases of development for Jung: the first, the 
pre-sexual, included the first three to five years and was characterized by 
nutrition, growth, dependency; the second, the pre-pubertal stage, covered 
the period from three-to-five to puberty and was characterized by sociali-
zation; and the third, the age of maturity, was from puberty onward and 
was characterized by dependability, self-actualization. The middle (-age) 
years were especially important in his system. And Jung, in contrast to 
most psychologists, gave women prominence and importance in his analytical 
psychology. 
Jung utilized the concept of libido, but he included Freud's libido, 
Adler's "will for power," and the whole range of motives. It was a life 
libido. The Oedipus complex was given importance, and it had both a 
semiotic (sign, token--Freud) and symbolic (Adler) meaning. Jung included 
more of Freud than Adler did. 
For gerontology, all of analytical psychology serves, and there is a 
focus on the middle years and beyond. What is needed is application in 
research paradigms. Jung considered his system empirical and scientific, 
but most psychologists consider it nicht Wissenschaft (not science). How-
ever, analytical psychology does give us a theoretical foundation of and 
for the aged. 
Freud, Adler, Jung 
Freud was the founder and master of psychoanalysis. The psychologie 
system of psychoanalysis, as a theoretical schema, has given us great 

insights into the nature of man (especially mankind). Organized, systema-
tized investigation led to these insights. Freud was the "father" and 
teacher. Adler and Jung were not pupils of Freud in the strict sense of 
the word. Each had started on his career before coming under the influence 
of Freud. For a time they did accept his leadership, but soon some of their 
opinions diverged enough for Freud to ask them not to call themselves psycho-
analysts. They had learned many things from Freud. Freud learned some 
things from them Through Adler he was able to get some information as to 
ego psychology and possibly some information as to aggression. Through Jung, 
Freud was able to get some information as to libido and hence incorporated 
his sex libido and ego libido into libido proper And placed it in a life 
drive context. Freud, a brilliant investigator of the nature of man, was 
able to change, modify, and redefine concepts into ever more meaningful 
constructs. 
Of course, these three great men used ideas of their period as well 
as the historical past. Jung's concept of "libido" was similar to Schopen-
hauer's "will to live" or to Bergson's "elan vital." Adler's "will for 
power" was Nietzsche's. And Freud's conceptualization of ideas "as dynamic 
mental entities" were inherited from Herbart and others. 
Nevertheless, these men--Freud, Adler, and Jung--perceived human 
nature in a new, clear, organized manner. The insights Freud mastered and 
communicated were daring departures from the popular, traditional approaches 
of his time. Freud emphasized biologic and psychologie areas. Adler added 
sociologic (society, culture) areas and a spacial context. Jung added 
earthologic (a neologism--the world, not just one society, not just one 
culture) areas and a temporal context (not just for one's lifetime but also 
the historical past and the anticipated future). 

Freud's system emphasized his clinical and scientific nature. To his 
system we can add the practical, business-like Adlerianism. Then we can 
add Jungian philosophic pantheism. At present we accept Freud and are 
accepting Adler, and hopefully in the near future, we gerontologists will 
accept Jung. Let us go forward together. not forgetting as Cattell says, 
the need for objective, behavioral scales. 
In gerontology. the focus ought to be on treatment rather than 
labeling, and on prevention (insofar as possible) rather than treatment. 
And to conclude as Robert Browning began in Rabbi Ben Ezra: 
Grow old along with me! 
The best is yet to be, 
The last of life, for which the first was made. 
Our times are in His hand 
Who saith "A whole I planned, 
Youth shows but half; trust God: see all nor be afraid." 

Sigmund Freud (1856-1939) 
Alfred Adler (1870-1937) 
Carl Gustav Jung (1875-1961) 
Notes and Select Bibliography 
Abstracts of the Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of 
Sigmund Freud. New York: International Universities Press, 1973. 
Adler, A. Problems of Neurosis. A Book of Case Histories. New York: 
Harper Torchbooks, 1964.
Adler, A. Social Interest: A Challenge to Mankind. New York: Capricorn 
Books, 1964.
Adler, A. The Neurotic Constitution: Outline of a Comparative Individual-
istic Psychology and Psychotherapy. New York: Dodd, Mead, 1930. 
Adler, A. The Practice and Theory of individual Psychology. New York: 
Humanities Press, 1968.
Adler, A. The Science of Living. Garden City, N.Y.: Anchor Books, 1969.
Adler, A. Understanding Human Nature. New York: Premier Books, 1957. 
Adler, A. What Life Should Mean to You. New
York: Canricorn Rooks, 105R. 
Anshacher, 1!.L., & Anshacher, Rowena R. (Eds.) Alfred Adler: Suneriority 
and Social interest. A Collection of Later Writings. Evanston, 
I11.: Northrestern 1!niversity Preis, 1970. 
Anshacher, P.1.., & Anshacher, Powena R. (Eds.) The Individual Psychology 
of Alfreu Adler. A Systematic Presentation in Selections from Pis 
Writings. Net•, York: Parner Torchhooks, l064. 
Blum, C.S. Psychoanalytic Theories of Personality. New York: McGraw-Hill,
1953. 

Bottome, Phyllis. Alfred Adler: A Portrait from Life. New York: Vanguard 
Press, 1957. 
Brenner, C. An Elementary Textbook of Psychoanalysis. New York: Inter-
national Universities Press, 1973. 
Cameron, N. Personality Develonment and Pavehonathologv. A Dynamic Annroach. 
Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1963. 
Cattell, R.B. Personality Pinned Down. Psychology Today, 1973, 7, 40-46. 
Cattell, R.B., & Warburton, F.W. Objective Personality and Motivation 
Tests. Urbana, Ill.: U. of Illinois Press, 1967. 
C.C. Jung: Letters. 2 vols. C. Adler, selector and editor. (In collabor-
ation with Aniela Jaffé. Translated by R.F.C. Hull.) New York: 
Bollinpen, Princeton University Press, 1973. 
Clark, R.A. Six Talks on Jung's Psychology. Pittsburgh: The Boxwood 
Press, 1953. 
Dreikurs, R. Fundamentals of Adlerian Psychology. New York: Greenberg, 
1950. 
Evans, R.I. Conversations with Carl Jung and Reactions from Ernest Jones. 
Princeton, N.J.: D. Van Nostrand, 1964. 
renichel, O. The Psychoanalytic Theory of Neurosis. New York: Norton, 
1945. 
Fodor, N., & Gavnor, F. (Eds.) Freud: Dictionary of Psychoanalysis. 
New York: Philosophical Library, 1950. Also published as a paper-
back. New York: Premier Books, 1965. 
Fordham, Frieda An introduction to Jung's Psychology. Baltimore: Penguin 
Books, 1966. 
Freud, S. A Psycho-Analytic Dialogue: The Letters of Sigmund Freud and 
Karl Abraham 1907-1916. Hilda C. Abraham and F.L. Freud, selectors 
and editors. New York: Basic Books, 1966. 

Freud, S. Letters of Sigmund Freud 1573-1939. F.L. Freud, selector and 
editor. Mew York: McGraw-Hill, 1964. 
Freud, S. Psycho-Analysis and Faith: The Letters of Sigmund Freud and 
Oskar Pfister. H. Meng and F.L. Freud, selectors and editors. Few 
York: Basic Books, 1963. 
Freud, S. The Letters of Sigmund Freud and Arnold Zweig. E.L. Freud, 
selector and editor. New York: Harcourt, Brace & World, 1970. 
Freud, S. 7Ie Origins of Psycho-Analysis: Letters to Wilhelm Fliess, 
Drafts and Notes, 1887-1902. Marie Bonaparte, Anna Freud and E. 
Taris, selectors and editors. E. Mosbacher and J. Strachey, author-
ized translation. Introduction by E. Kris. Net York: Basic Books, 
1954. 
Freud, S. The Standard Edition of the Comnlete Psychological Works of 
Sigmund rreud. 74 vols. J. Strachey, authorized translator and 
editor. London: TTogarth, 1953---. 
Grinstein, A. (Ed.) The Index of Psychoanalytic Writings. A continuing 
multi-volume series. New York: International Universities Press, 
1956---. 
Jacobi, Jolande. The Psychology of C.C. .Tuna. New Haven, Conn.: Yale 
University Press, 106'. 
Jaffe, Aniela From the Life and Work of C.G. Jung. New York: Harper 
Colonhon Books, 1971. 
Jones, F. The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud. 3 vols. New York: Basic 
Books, ln53-1957. Also published as a one volume paperback. L. 
Trilling and S. marcun, editors and abridgers. New York: Anchor 
Books, 1963. 

Jung, C. C. Memories Dreams Reflections. Aniela Jaffe', recorder and 
editor. New York: Pantheon, 1963. 
Jung, C. C. Psychological Reflections: A New Anthology of lais Writings 
1905-1961. Jolande Jacobi, selector and editor. (In collaboration with R. F. 
C. Hull.) New York: Bollingen, Princeton University Press, 1973. 
Jung, C. C. The Basic Writings of C. C. Jung. Violet de Laszlo, editor. 
New York: Modern Library, 1959. 
Jung, C. C. The Collected Works of C. G. Jung. 20 vols. H. Read, M. 
Fordham, and r. Adler, editors. R. F. C. Hull, authorized translator. 
New York: Bollingen, Pantheon, 1953--. 
Kline, P. Fact and Fantasy in Freudian Theory. London: Methuen, 1972. 
McCully, R. S. Rorschach Theory and Symbolism: A Jungian Annroach to 
Clinical Material. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1971. 
Orgler, Hertha. Alfred Adler: The Man and His Work. Neer York: Capricorn 
Books, 1965. 
Pedrini, D. T., & Pedrini, Bonnie C. Intellectualization, Obsessive Ideation, 
Compulsion: A Bibliography_. 1972. 4 pages. EDRS order number ED 065 822. 
Defense Mechanisms: A Bibliography. 1973. 8 pages. EDRS order number ED 067 
578. 
Displacement, Substitution, Sublimation: A Bibliography. 1973. 7 
pages. EDRS order number ED 067 579. Identification, Introjection, 
Incorporation, Internalization: A Bibliography. 1973. 15 pages. EARS 
order number 067 580. Reaction Formation: A Bibliography. 1973. 3 
pages. EDRS order number ED 067 581. Projection: A Bibliography. 1973. 
12 pages. EDRS order number ED 076 897. Fixation: A Bihliogranhv. 1973. 
4 pages. EDRS order number ED 076 898. Rationalization: A Bibliography. 
1973. 4 pares. EDRS order number ED 076 920. Repression: A Bibliography. 
1973. 12 pages. EDRS order number ED 076 921. Denial: A Bibliography. 

1973. 4 pages. EDRS order number ED 076 922. Regression: A Biblio-
graphy. 1974. 10 pages. EDRS order number ED 089 166. These articles 
on defense mechanisms include discussions and bibliographies and are 
published by ERIC (Educational Resources Information Center) in RIE 
(Research or Resources in Education). 
Pedrini, D. T., & Pedrini, Bonnie C. Gerontology: C. G. Jung in Schema and 
Annotation. Unpublished manuscript, University of Nebraska at Omaha, 1976. 
Pedrini, D. T., & Pedrini, Lura N. Hamlet's Character: The Question of 
Literary Analysis. The Journal of the American Academy of Psychoanalysis, 
1973, 1, 417-427. 
Rapaport, D. The Structure of Psychoanalytic Theory: A Systematizing Attempt. 
In S. Koch, editor. Psychology: A Study of Science. 
Vol. 3. New York: 
McCraw-Hill, 1959, pp. 55- 183. Also in Psychological Issues, 1960. 
Rapaport, D., & Gill, M. M. The Points of Vien? and Assumptions of Meta-
psychology. The International Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 1959, 40, 153-162. 
Rychlak, J. F. A Philosophy of Science for Personality Theory. Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1968. 
Rychlak, J. F. Introduction to Personality and Psychotherapy. Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1973. 
Sargent, Helen D.; Coyne, Lo]afave; Wallerstein, R. S.,: & Holtzman, W. H. 
An Approach to the Quantitative Problems of Psychoanalytic Research. 
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 1967, 23, 243-291. 
Sarnoff, I. Testing Freudian Concepts. An Experimental Social Anproach. 
New York: Springer, 1971. 
Shakow, D., & Rapaport, D. The Influence of Freud on American Psychology. 
New York: Meridian Books, 1968. 
Storr, A. C. C. Jung. New York: Viking, 1973. 

Whiteley, J. M. (Ed.) Individual Psychology: The Legacy of Alfred Adler. 
The Counseling Psychologist, 1971, 3, No. 1. (Publication of the Division 
of Counseling Psychology, the American Psychological Association.) 
Whitmont, E. C. The Symbolic Quest. Basic Concepts of Analytical Psychology. 
New York: Harper & Row, Colophon edition, 1973. Previously published 
in hardcover edition by C. P. Putnam's Sons for the C. C. Jung Foundation, 
1969. 
Whyte, L. L. The Unconscious Before Freud. New York: Basic Books, 1960. 
Also published as a paper back. New York: Anchor Books, 1962. 
Wollheim, R. Sigmund Freud. New York: Viking Press, 1971. 
Wyss, D. Depth Psychology_: A Critical History. New York: Norton, 1966. 
There is a newer edition entitled Psychoanalytic Schools from the 
Beginning to the Present. 

