CHAPTER II.
EGYPTIAN ARITHMETIC.
11. 
THE preceding pages contain probably all the meagre
facts from which it is still possible to discern how the Greeks
came by their arithmetical nomenclature, both for whole
numbers and for fractions. The subsequent progress of calcu-
lation, that is to say, the further use of the elementary
processes, depends on many conditions which cannot well be
satisfied without a neat and comprehensive visible symbolism.
This boon the Greeks never possessed. Yet even without it a
retentive memory and a clear logical faculty would suffice for the
discovery of many important rules, such for instance as that, in
a proportion, the product of the means is equal to the product
of the extremes. It is probable, therefore, that much of the
Greek arithmetical knowledge dates from a time far anterior to
the works in which we find historical evidence of it. It is
probable, again, that the Greeks derived from Egypt at an early
date as many useful hints on arithmetic as they certainly did on
geometry and other branches of learning. It becomes necessary,
therefore, to introduce in this place some account of Egyptian
arithmetic, both as showing at what date certain arithmetical
rules were known to mankind and as providing a fund of know-
ledge from which the Greeks may have drawn very largely
in prehistoric times. The facts to be now stated are in any case
of great importance, since they furnish the only compact mass of
evidence concerning the difficulties which beset ancient arith-
metic and the way in which they were surmounted.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

16 
EGYPTIAN ARITHMETIC.
12. Quite recently a hieratic papyrus, included in the
Rhind collection of the British Museum, has been deciphered
and found to be a mathematical handbook, containing problems
in arithmetic and geometry1. The latter will be treated on a
later page. The book was written by one Ahmes, (Aahmesu =
moon-born), in the reign of Ra-a-us (Apepa or Apophis of the
Hyksos XVIth or XVIIth dynasty), some time before 1700 B.C.
but it was founded on and follows, not always correctly, an older
work. It is entitled "Directions for obtaining the knowledge of
all dark things," but it contains, in fact, hardly any general rules
of procedure but chiefly mere statements of results, intended
possibly to be explained by a teacher to his pupils. The
numbers with which it deals are mostly fractional and it
is therefore probable that Ahmes wrote for the dlite of the
mathematicians of his time.
He begins with a series of exercises in reducing fractions,
with 2 for numerator, to submultiples. ' Divide 2 by 5' or ' ex-
press 2 divided by 7' etc. is his mode of stating the proposition
and he gives immediately a table of answers, for all fractions
2
of the form ^ 
=• up to $$. He does not state, however, why
he confines himself to 2 as a numerator or how he obtains,
in each case, the series of submultiples which he selects. It is
possible that numerators higher than 2 were subdivided2, but
the second question is the more interesting and has been very
carefully discussed8. It is to be observed that such a fraction as
•gg, which Ahmes distributes in the form ^ ^g jj-% ^ 
may be
expressed also as ^ ffrg, and in various other ways, and
1 Eisenlohr, Ein 
mathematisch.es 
been Eaenmat or Amenemhat IH. The
Handbuch der alten Egypter, Leipzig, 
British Museum possesses also an older
1877. A short account of the papyrus 
leather-roll on a mathematical subject,
was given by Mr Birch in Lepsius' 
but this apparently is too stiff to be
Zeitschrift for 1868, p. 108. It was 
opened.
then supposed to have been copied, 
2 E.g. ^j;=4i + -ZT—i + T!t+-£z> foe
not earlier than 1200 B.C., from an 
last two fractions being copied from
original of about 3400 B.C. The latter 
the table.
was written in the reign of a king 
3 Cantor, Vorlesungen, i. pp. 24—
whose name is not legible in Ahmes' 
28. Eisenlohr, pp. 30—34.
papyrus, but who is supposed to have
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EGYPTIAN ARITHMETIC. 
17
similarly, with all the other fractions, Ahmes has adopted only
one of many alternatives. 
Later on in the book1 he gives a
rule for multiplying a fraction by f. 
"When you are asked
what is | of £, multiply it by 2 and by 6 : that is § of it: and
similarly for every other fraction." 
Here it is meant that the
denominator must be multiplied by 2 and by 6, and Ahmes'
rule is. in effect, that | of - is ^- + r-, and this formula he
6 
a 
za 
Qa
employs in the table for all fractions of which the denominator
is divisible by 3 (e.g. f = £ ^ etc.). But the words ' similarly
for every other fraction' are of twofold application. 
They may
mean that § of any other fraction is to be found by the same
method, or that §, f- etc. of any fraction may be found by
multiplying denominators in a similar manner. 
The evidence
of the table, however, goes to show that Ahmes was ignorant of
the latter of these rules8. For instance, finding f expressed as
^ -j^, one would expect this formula to be used with all
the other fractions of which the denominator is divisible by 5,
but it is used, in fact, only for ^, •$%, -fa. Again, a few of
the examples in the table are, as we say, " proved" by being
treated backwards. Thus if \ is \ + ^g, then \ + -£% should be 2,
and this fact (expressed in the form 1| \ + \ = 2) is what
Ahmes points out. It has been suggested therefore that the
mode by which the fractions of the table were distributed, was
by taking first of all the submultiple which, when multiplied by
the original denominator, should be as nearly as possible 2
(e.g. £ x 7 = I), and then adding the remainder. But this
process is clearly not employed with most of the distributions
(e.g. -fr is given as •& JT ^ instead of £ T ^ etc.). This
neglect of the most simple and obvious analogies is observable
1 Eisenlohr, p. 150. 
table, only five are treated on this
2 The subject is most carefully ex- 
plan. So again if p and q are odd
amined by Cantor. If p be a prime 
, 
,, 
P + q • 
, , 
v.
numbers, then ^ - 2 is a whole number
number, then ^-—— is a whole number,
a 
-
2
1 
1 
n
and 
= ——— + 
. Only
X D
2 
2 
two denominators, out of the forty-
prime denominators occurring in the 
nine, are treated on this principle.
G. G. M. 
2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

18 
EGYPTIAN ARITHMETIC.
throughout the table and we must conclude that it was compiled
empirically, probably by different persons and at different times,
certainly without any general theory.
13. Immediately after the table, Ahmes gives six calcula-
tions, unfortunately mutilated, showing how to divide 1, 3, 6, 7,
8 and 9 loaves respectively among 10 persons1, and then follow
17 examples of seqem calculation, that is, of raising fractions by
addition or multiplication to whole numbers or to other
fractions2. 
For this purpose a common denominator is chosen,
but not necessarily one which is divisible into a whole number
by all the other denominators. Thus, in the problem to increase
i i TV ¥^ TS t° 1; the common denominator taken is evidently
45, for the fractions are stated as 11J, 5J ^, 4J, 1J, 1. The
sum of these is (23£ \ ^) (^). 
Add to this ^ + ^ and the sum
is §. Add £ and the desired 1 is obtained. From other
examples here and elsewhere in the book it is plain that
Ahmes did not use direct division. If it was required to raise
a by multiplication to b, his plan was to multiply a until he
found a product which either was or was nearly b. Thus in
the example, numbered by Eisenlohr (32), where 1£ \ is to be
raised by multiplication to 2, he finds on trial that \\ \ x 1£ -^
produces ^ff. 
The difference, yf^, between this product and 2
is then separately treated3.
14. After this preliminary practice with fractions, Ahmes
proceeds to the solution of simple equations with one unknown*.
Eleven such are given, expressed, for instance, as follows,
(no. 24) ' Heap, its 7th, its whole, it makes 19' (i.e. ^ + x = 19).
In this particular case, Ahmes goes on, in effect, to state
1 Eisenlohr, pp. 49—53. In these 
and adds the necessary products,
examples, the denominator is con- 
Cantor, Varies, i. pp. 31, 32, and 41.
stant, as, in the first table, the numer- 
4 The unknown quantity is called
ator. 
hau or 'heap.' In these examples a
2 Eisenlohr, pp. 53—60. 
pair of legs walking, so to say, with or
8 It should be mentioned that Ahmes 
against the stream of the writing, are
does not multiply directly with a high 
used as mathematical symbols of addi-
number but proceeds by many easy 
tion and subtraction. Three horizontal
stages. In order to multiply by 13, 
arrows indicate 'difference' and a sign
for instance, he multiplies by 2, then 
^ means 'equals.' Cantor, pp. 32, 33.
(doubling) by 4, then (doubling) by 8 
Eisenlohr, pp. 22—26.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EGYPTIAN ARITHMETIC. 
19
See
-=- = 19: divides 19 by 8 and multiplies the quotient (2| ^) by 7
and so finds the desired number 16J £, but he has also various
other methods of treating the two sides. For instance, in
no. 29, .where ultimately \\ x= 10, he first finds the value of
f£ as \\ -fo and then multiplies this by 10, so as to find
oo =1S^\ 
These equations are followed by the table of
Egyptian dry measures, and then are added two examples of
Tunnu- or difference-calculation, i.e. of divisions according to
different rates of profit. 
The examples are ' Divide 100 loaves
so that 50 go to 6 and 50 to 4 persons,' and ' divide 100 loaves
among 5 persons, so that the first 3 get 7 times as much as the
other 2. What is the difference (tunnu) ?' After this, the
writer passes to geometry, but he recurs at the end of the book
to these algebraical problems and gives about twenty more
examples of the same kind. Most of them are simple, but in at
least three Cantor sees evidence that Ahmes was acquainted
with the theory of arithmetical and geometrical series. The
solution which he gives of the second problem above quoted is
as follows: 'the difference is 5J : 23, 17J, 12, 6J, 1. Multiply
by If : 38£, 29^, 20, lOf £, If.' 
The series first given amounts
only to 60, and each of its terms must be multiplied by If, in
order to produce8 the requisite sum 100. The difference 5|
must have been found from the equation
whence 11 (a — 4<b) = 2b and b = 5 | (a — 4&). Ahmes then assumes
(a — 4<b) = 1, and so by experiment finds its true value. Another
example (no. 64) is ' Ten measures of corn for 10 persons. The
difference between each person's share and the next's is ^th of
a measure.' 
The solution runs: ' I find the mean, 1 measure.
Take 1 from 10: remainder 9. Halve the difference, i.e. T^.
Take it 9 times, that gives you \ ^ . 
Add it to the mean.
Deduct ^th of a measure for each person so as to reach the end.'
1 Other examples in Cantor, pp. 
stance of a 'falscher ansatz,' a falsa
32—34. 
positio or 'tentative assumption,' on
a Upon this Cantor (Vorles. p. 36) 
which see below § 70. n.
remarks that it is the first known in-
2—2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

20 
EGYPTIAN ARITHMETIC.
These consecutive sentences mean, in modern algebraical form,
' Find -. Find (n - 1). Find | . Find | x (n -1). Add - to
5 (n — 1),' i.e. these directions imply a knowledge of the formulae
for finding the sum or the first term of an arithmetical progres-
sion. 
The evidence, however, for Ahmes' knowledge of
geometrical series is confined to the fact that in one example
(no. 79) he states such a series and calls it a 'ladder' (Sutek).
15. 
One might naturally expect that a nation, which at
so early a date had acquired so much proficiency in arithmetic,
would in another thousand years make much further progress
or would at least discover and begin to remove the obstacles
which prevented such progress. But the Egyptian intellect,
like the Chinese, seems to have been rather shallow, and the
ancients themselves, who were indebted to Egypt for the
rudiments of many sciences, observed with surprise that no
greater advance was made in that country. In geometry, for
instance, it is certain that the later Egyptians added nothing
whatever to the learning of Ahmes' day, and though. as to
arithmetic there is little or no direct evidence, yet two facts
raise a presumption that Ahmes' book represents the highest
attainment of Egypt in that science. First, no improvement
was made in Egyptian arithmetical symbolism, and secondly,
the Greeks did not derive directly from Egypt any more
arithmetical learning than is given by Ahmes. This latter fact
renders it unnecessary to pursue further in this place an
inquiry into Egyptian arithmetic, but it is probable, never-
theless, as will be seen hereafter, that Egyptians, educated in
Greek learning, made some important additions to Greek
mathematical methods.
16. The theories suggested and the facts adduced in the
foregoing pages may be shortly summarised as follows. Primitive
peoples, when they have learnt to generalise, begin to learn to
count. They commence counting with groups of two or three
things only but soon arrive at counting five. When they reach
this limit, they at once begin to use the fingers, or the fingers
and toes, as the means and basis of calculation and are hence-
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EGYPTIAN ARITHMETIC. 
21
forth committed to a quinary or denary or vigesimal scale.
The gestures used in finger-counting suggest names for five
and the higher units, and with such names and with the use of
the fingers it is possible to attain a fair dexterity in calculation
with whole numbers. It is not so easy, however, to find names
or symbols for fractions, but the difficulty here is very much
reduced if a constant numerator or a constant denominator be
adopted, and one or the other of these devices was, for more
than one reason, employed by all nations which ever got as far
as the arithmetic of fractions. It is evident, nevertheless, that
fractions were at first and remained a stumblingblock to
calculators: for the oldest extant collection of arithmetical
examples is chiefly devoted to them and the latest Greek
writer on arithmetic still uses the ancient devices for expressing
them. Such are the antecedents of Greek arithmetic, so far
as they can be discovered from the evidence of the Greek
language and of the usages of later Greek calculators. It
cannot be doubted, however, that Greece received directly a
good deal of arithmetical learning from Egypt, but this, at
its best, can hardly have dealt with more abstruse subjects than
the solution of simple equations with one unknown and some
portions of the theory of arithmetical and geometrical series.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511707193.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

