34	 Quest Vol. 16 No. 3 | 2020
QUESTONLINE.ORG.ZA
NEWS | COMPUTER SCIENCE
Computer Science meets The Arts
In popular culture, computer scientists are often portrayed 
as techno-geeks who are glued to their screens, bashing 
away on their keyboards and glugging back energy drinks 
to keep them coding through the night. Yet computer 
science is in essence simply the use of computers to study 
information and solve problems. Here, Quest profiles two 
recent MSc graduates who applied their computer science 
skills to their personal interests.
Ballet pose recognition
Margaux Fourie, a lecturer at the University of Johannes- 
burg’s Academy of Computer Science and Software 
Engineering, recently graduated with a master’s degree 
in computer science. Her postgraduate studies gave her 
an opportunity to pursue her twin passions.
“As a computer scientist, I have a passion for solving prob-
lems, but simultaneously I’ve always loved and intensely 
pursued the athletic art form of ballet. At the start of my 
postgraduate studies, these two passions were introduced 
to one another as I began research in pose recognition 
using computer vision,” said Margaux. 
Her journey to a master’s degree was filled with unique 
challenges, adventures and wonderful opportunities. 
Some of the challenges were the limited datasets available 
for ballet, and a lack of experienced dancers available for 
capturing the required data. But the highlights included 
being accepted into an American professional ballet 
company’s programme.
“Being accepted was a dream come true. With the blessing 
of the Faculty of Science, I was afforded the opportunity 
to train with this touring company that I’ve long admired. 
For nine months I was based in Jackson, Mississippi, in the 
USA, where I got to dance alongside a group of extremely 
talented people. It was an incredibly enriching experience 
that involved tours to Mexico and Cuba, along with oppor-
tunities to reach out to communities through dance. On top 
of that, I was surrounded by gifted dancers every day, which 
enabled me to capture a complete dataset for my research.”
Upon returning to South Africa, Margaux had the daunting 
task of completing her dissertation, with only a few months 
remaining to the official deadline.
“It was a challenging yet extremely rewarding process to 
write up the research that took me on an adventure of a 
lifetime,” she said. “The unwavering support I received from 
family and the Academy of Computer Science and Software 
Engineering made it possible to complete the study in time. 
I am grateful to UJ, the Faculty of Science and the Academy 
for generously granting me the opportunities that came 
along with the pursuit of this qualification.” 
Adam Liwinski, CC BY-NC 2.0

QUESTONLINE.ORG.ZA
	
Quest Vol. 16 No. 3 | 2020     35
COMPUTER SCIENCE | NEWS
Margaux jokingly pointed out that her master’s graduation 
was scheduled for 1 April 2020 − April Fool’s Day.
“True to that day’s reputation, my graduation could not take 
place due to the national lockdown. But I am pleased to say 
that I still graduated virtually and got to celebrate the event 
with colleagues and loved ones digitally.” 
In July, Margaux presented her research in the virtual First 
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in HCI 
(Human-Computer Interaction), which had been due to 
take place in Copenhagen. The resulting refereed paper, 
co-authored with her supervisor, Dustin van der Haar, 
proposes a feature importance study for determining which 
body parts play the most significant role in ballet pose 
recognition. The study is based on the use of OpenPose for 
feature extraction, together with Support Vector Machine, 
Random Forest and Gradient Boosted Tree classifiers.
IsiZulu language processing
Research into isiZulu language processing earned Sibonelo 
Dlamini his MSc degree in computer science from the 
University of KwaZulu-Natal (UKZN), where he was 
supervised by Edgar Jembere and Anban Pillay.
Sibonelo completed his schooling at George Campbell 
School of Technology in Durban, after which he registered 
at UKZN for a degree in electronic engineering. He soon 
realised, however, that he was more keen on computer 
programming, and switched to a BSc in computer science. 
“As I progressed through my undergraduate degree, I fell 
more in love with the field of computer programming and 
have been ever since,” he said.
After completing his BSc honours degree in computer 
science, Sibonelo progressed to master’s level, focusing his 
research on natural language processing. This field of study 
combines programming, machine learning and language 
– three areas Sibonelo is passionate about. “It is exciting 
to do research in an area that is a key driver of the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution,” he said.
In his research project, Sibonelo dealt with isiZulu, which 
is an agglutinative language. This means it has a complex 
internal structure, constituted by numerous morphemes 
– the smallest units in a language that have meaning. It is 
therefore more difficult to develop language technologies 
for isiZulu than for English, which has a simpler internal 
structure. Sibonelo tested the hypothesis that incorporating 
information about the internal structure of words of an 
agglutinative language would improve performance on the 
Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD) task. This is a machine-
learning task that determines the correct sense of an 
ambiguous word in text.
Sibonelo’s research goes a long way towards helping 
maintain the relevance of isiZulu in the current information 
age. He explained that people would stop using languages 
if they could not use technologies for tasks like voice 
recognition, information retrieval and grammar-checking. 
“The motivation for my study was to stop the migration of 
language preference from isiZulu to English,” he said. “It will 
preserve the invaluable cultural heritage that the language 
represents for a large section of South African society, and 
retain access to indigenous knowledge, which is encoded in 
the language.”
Sibonelo explained that developing language technologies 
for a language was important because it maintained the 
relevance of the language in the information age. “If we 
don’t create space for indigenous African languages within 
this revolution, we may witness their rapid extinction and 
the erosion of African identity that will necessarily follow,” 
he said. “Through my research, I hope to mitigate this 
potential hazard through the development of state-of-the-
art technologies for agglutinative languages.”
Sibonelo is currently continuing his research at PhD level, 
working towards creating an automatic speech recognition 
solution for isiZulu, since speech is becoming a ubiquitous 
means of interfacing with computers. His future plans are 
to work full-time as an academic because of his passion in 
both research and teaching.
‘Ballet pose recognition’ issued by the University of Johannesburg 
https://www.uj.ac.za/newandevents/
‘isiZulu language processing’ written by Samantha Ngcongo for the 
University of KwaZulu-Natal’s newsletter Ndaba Online, Vol. 8 Issue 19. 
http://ndabaonline.ukzn.ac.za/UkzndabaNewsletter/Vol8-Issue19-caes-
grad   
Margaux Fourie
Sibonelo Dlamini

