1
Viral diseases from wildlife in China 
Could SARS happen again? 

2
This report was researched and written by Dr Lynn Dicks for EJF in 2003. 
Dr Lynn Dicks, Lecturer in Animal Ecology, Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge
 
It was peer reviewed by:  
Professor Robin A. Weiss, Emeritus Professor of Viral Oncology, University College London, UK 
Professor Wolfgang Preiser, Professor of Medical Virology, University of Stellenbosch / National Health 
Laboratory Service (NHLS) Tygerberg, Cape Town, South Africa  
Professor Malcolm Bennett, School of Veterinary Medicine and Science, University of Nottingham, UK
The Environmental Justice Foundation 
(EJF) is a UK-based environmental and 
human rights charity registered in England 
and Wales (1088128).
 
1 Amwell Street
London, EC1R 1UL
United Kingdom
www.ejfoundation.org
Comments on the report, requests for 
further copies or specific queries about 
EJF should be directed to: 
info@ejfoundation.org
This document should be cited as: EJF (2003)  
Viral diseases from wildlife in China.
Could SARS happen again? 
Cover pictures:
Upper left: Machs Einfach (CC BY-NC 2.0)
Upper right: Clurross (CC BY-NC-ND 2.0)
Lower left: Scott Edmunds (CC BY 2.0)
Lower right: Gavin Anderson (CC BY-SA 2.0) 

3
CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY	
5
INTRODUCTION	
	
6
CHAPTER 1 – BASIC VIRUS BIOLOGY	
7
Structure and Replication	
7
Types of Virus	
	
7
A Word on Epidemiology	
8
Virus Transfers Between Humans and Animal Species (Zoonoses)	
9
CHAPTER 2 – CASE STUDIES OF EMERGING VIRAL ZOONOSES	
11
CASE STUDY ONE:  	
INFLUENZA A	
11
CASE STUDY TWO: 	
EBOLA 	
13
CASE STUDY THREE: 	HIV	
14
CASE STUDY FOUR: 	 HANTAVIRUS PULMONARY SYNDROME	
15
CASE STUDY FIVE: 	
HENDRA VIRUSES	
17
CASE STUDY SIX: 	
SARS	
18
CHAPTER 3  – REVIEW OF DIRECT VIRAL ZOONOSES 	
20
What Types of Animal do they Come From?	
20
What Factors Promote the Emergence of New Viruses?	
21
Where Does SARS Fit?		
24
CHAPTER 4 – IS CHINA A LIKELY AREA FOR FURTHER ZOONOTIC VIRUSES TO EMERGE?	
25
1 - Widespread Consumption of Wildlife	
25
2 - Ecological Change	 	
28
3 - Immunosuppression Resulting from AIDS	
30
4 - Selenium Deficiency	
30
RECOMMENDATIONS	
31
APPENDIX I: 	
Virus families containing human and animal viruses	
32
APPENDIX II: 	
Review of viral zoonoses without arthropod vectors	
34
APPENDIX III:   	
Wildlife species reported to have been consumed or sold 
in wildlife markets in China	
41
APPENDIX IV: 	
List of arboviruses	
48
Wet market - Wuhan, China. © Animal Equality

4
PREFACE
It is important to note that this report was written 17 years ago in 2003. We are publishing it here as it was then. 
There are, of course, sections that could be updated; for example, we could add information on ‘swine’ flu H1N1 in 
2009, MERS in 2012, the 2014-2016 Ebola epidemic, and plenty of research which points to bats as the original source 
of coronaviruses.
However, we publish it here exactly as it was in 2003 to show how much we did know at the time. Looking back from 
2020, the six case studies in chapter 2 make sobering reading, especially those on Ebola and SARS. Consider the table 
in Appendix II (pages 34-39), listing 76 viruses known then to be transmissible directly from animals, of which 52 
were classed as public health problems and 49 were new or increasing. The six recommendations to reduce the risk 
of another previously unknown viral disease emerging in China (page 31) could be repeated without much alteration. 
We had all the knowledge we needed to curb dangerous practices and lower the risks of tragic pandemics such 
as the one we are living through in 2020. Now we are scrambling to sequence the new coronavirus that causes 
COVID-19, develop tests, drugs and conduct trials within a few weeks. It is amazing what science can achieve. 
However, translation of knowledge into policies is seriously lacking. We are not even prepared when it comes to the 
very basics of protective equipment for frontline medical staff. Nor did we heed the lessons of SARS in 2003. Instead 
“business as usual” continued, including commerce and practices known to be risky. In 2003, we had a chance to 
shut the stable door before the horse bolted. This time, we are not so lucky. It is imperative that we use the pandemic 
to learn our lesson.
Steve Trent (EJF), Wolfgang Preiser (University of Stellenbosch) and Lynn Dicks (University of Cambridge), April 2020.

5
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
As demonstrated by the recent outbreak of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), viruses can emerge suddenly 
in the human population and spread rapidly, with devastating effect. This report reviews knowledge of viruses that 
transmit directly from animals to humans and asks whether anything can be done to reduce the risk of further virus 
outbreaks from animals in China.
The report begins with an outline of virus biology and important concepts such as zoonosis (transfer of pathogens 
between humans and animals). Six detailed case studies of emerging viral zoonoses are presented: influenza A; Ebola; 
HIV; hantavirus pulmonary syndrome; hendra viruses and SARS.  These illustrate the range of factors associated with 
transfers of disease from animals to humans.
A detailed review of documented viral zoonoses not carried by arthropod vectors is given. 76 viruses are found to fit 
this description. The review compiles scientific knowledge about the animal origins, severity and distribution of these 
diseases and the factors responsible for the transfer to humans. 49 are new or increasing in the human population; 52 
cause fatality or widespread infection; 36 are found in Asia. The majority come from primates, even-toed ungulates 
and rodents. Factors associated with viral disease transfer from wildlife are reviewed from the literature. The most 
important are ecological change, including climate change and changing agricultural practises; and increasing human 
populations, both of which can entail increased contact with wildlife. RNA viruses, transmitted by arthropods, with a 
broad host range are the most likely pathogens to emerge as new diseases from wildlife. 
The SARS virus is assessed in the context of this review. It fits some of the categories of a virus likely to emerge, but 
it could not have been predicted, because it comes from a group of viruses that do not have a broad host range, and 
apparently from a group of animals with little history of zoonosis. 
Three main factors are outlined that make China a likely place for further emergence of directly acquired zoonotic 
viruses. The first is widespread consumption of wildlife species in China. The risk of zoonosis is during contact with 
live animals, their blood and raw meat, or in eating poorly cooked meat. In a review of studies of species consumed in 
China, 226 species were documented. 77% were birds, reptiles and amphibians; 23% were mammals. Since mammals 
form the vast majority of sources of previous direct zoonoses, these are considered in more detail. Most are primates 
and carnivores, with a significant proportion of rodents and ungulates. Of these groups, primates, ungulates and to a 
lesser extent rodents have the greatest history of viral disease transfers. Primates, especially monkeys, are of particular 
concern because they represent three of the  seven most popularly eaten mammal species. This group are the source of 
around a fifth of documented viral zoonoses, and Asian macaques are known to carry viruses with zoonotic potential 
such as a strain of Ebola virus.
Secondly, China is found to be experiencing significant ecological changes that have been linked directly to increased 
risk of zoonosis – specifically deforestation, climate change and increasing rodent populations. Finally, the high 
and increasing number of Chinese carrying HIV (1.5 million) makes the population vulnerable to new viruses 
establishing themselves.
Overall, the risk of further viral zoonoses emerging in China can be considered substantial. Six recommendations are 
suggested to reduce the risk, including reducing the number and quantity of wild species eaten, particularly primates, 
wild pigs and rodents; warning hunters, traders and consumers of the risk of viral zoonosis; encouraging well-inspected 
farming rather than hunting of wildlife and further research to anticipate zoonoses.

6
INTRODUCTION
“If there is any conceivable way a germ can travel from one species to another, some microbe will find it” 
(McNeill, 1976).
Viruses are probably the largest threat to the continued prosperity of mankind. Despite nominal success in combating 
the smallpox virus (Variola), most viruses evade eradication, by continually changing or switching between hosts. 
The majority of human viruses originated in animals. Some scientists claim there has been a dramatic increase in the 
occurrence of new pathogenic viruses in the human population over the last 25 years (Crawford, 2000), and there has 
been an increase in global mortality from infectious disease (Ludwig, Kraus et al., 2003). These increases can be expected 
to continue as a result of increasing ecological change and environmental degradation, and increasingly mobile human 
populations (Morse, 1995; Stöhr and Meslin, 1997; Osterhaus, 2001). As demonstrated by the recent outbreak of Severe 
Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), viruses can emerge suddenly in the human population and spread rapidly, with 
devastating effect. 
This report reviews our knowledge of viruses that can transmit directly from animals to humans and asks whether 
anything can be done to reduce the risk of further virus outbreaks from animals. It does not include other human 
parasites, such as bacteria, which also pose a threat of infection from animals and include well-known zoonoses such 
as the plague bacteria Yersinia pestis, Weil’s disease from rats and Salmonella food poisoning. The report is divided into 
four chapters. Chapter one outlines virus biology, describes some important principles and concepts in virology and 
introduces the concept of zoonoses. Chapter two is a series of six case studies of emerging viral zoonoses. Chapter 
three is a detailed review of documented viral disease transfers, their animal origins and the factors responsible for the 
transfer to humans. Chapter four considers the current situation in China, and how it relates to risk factors identified in 
chapter three. The report ends with a set of recommendations on how to reduce the likelihood of future viral zoonotic 
diseases emerging in China.

7
CHAPTER 1 – BASIC VIRUS BIOLOGY
Structure and Replication
Viruses are distinct from other living organisms, because they do not carry the cellular machinery to metabolise. They 
consist simply of genetic material and a protein coat, and rely on the cells of living organisms to reproduce. When 
an infectious virus particle, known as a virion, infects an organism, it attaches onto its cells and hijacks the cellular 
machinery by injecting virus genes into the nucleus. The cell then produces new virus particles, which in some cases 
rupture the cell as they emerge. 
Most viruses are specific to certain types of cell within their host. Hepatitis viruses recognize liver cells, for example, 
while respiratory viruses infect epithelial cells in the respiratory tract and lungs. Viruses recognise specific receptor 
molecules on the surfaces of cells. A wide variety of different receptor molecules have been identified for different 
viruses, including proteins, carbohydrates or lipids involved in a variety of functions from cellular signaling to adhesion. 
Closely related viruses do not necessarily use the same type of receptor, and some viruses such as hepatitis C use more 
than one (Baranowski, Ruiz-Jarabo et al., 2001).
Proteins that stick out from the outer coat of the virus bind to these receptors and initiate infection. These ‘spike’ proteins 
are often called glycoproteins, because they have a sugar molecule attached. They may be a target of the host’s immune 
response, which learns to recognize the virus by particular sequences in these surface proteins. In the case of influenza, 
a change in a single amino acid can change the cell surface receptor that is used (Baranowski, Ruiz-Jarabo et al., 2001). 
This is why the same person can repeatedly suffer the disease, because the target for the immune system changes.
 
Types of Virus
According to the universal system of virus taxonomy, devised by the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses 
(ICTV), there are currently 71 families of viruses. 24 of these contain viruses that infect humans and animals (listed in 
Appendix I). The universal system classifies viruses according to their biochemical structure and method of replication. 
Specifically, they are divided according to what type of nucleic acid they have (DNA or RNA, single or double stranded); 
whether their genome is a single piece of nucleic acid, or segmented into separate sections, a bit like our chromosomes; 
which way the genome is read (positive or negative) and whether the virus particle is surrounded by a membranous 
envelope or not. Most human pathogenic viruses use RNA although there are notable exceptions, such as pox- and 
herpes viruses.
To some extent, this method of classification is reflected in the epidemiology of the viruses, in that viruses in the same 
taxonomic group often have similar methods of transmission, clinical signs and affect similar types of organism. 
For example, viruses in the family Orthomyxoviridae, the influenza type viruses, are respiratory infections, acquired 
by inhalation or direct contact with mucous membranes. The family Flaviviridae contains viruses causing fever and 
encephalitis, and transmitted by arthropod vector, such as yellow fever, dengue fever and rocio. Viruses in the family 
Arenaviridae usually cause haemorrhagic fever in humans. All but one are carried by rodents mostly from the Muridae 
(mice and rats) and the Cricetidae (voles, lemmings and gerbils) families. The exception, Tacaribe virus from Trinidad, is 
carried by the fruit bat Artibeus sp (Howard, 1998). This pattern is not without exceptions. Almost all the viruses in the 
family Bunyaviridae, for example, are arthropod-borne except for those in the genus Hantavirus, which are transmitted 
by murid rodents (Clement, McKenna et al., 1998). 

8
Viruses can also be classified according to their mode of transmission. Enteric viruses are intestinal and acquired by 
ingestion. Respiratory viruses are acquired by inhalation of ‘fomites’ – small droplets transmitted between hands, nose, 
mouth and eyes. Arboviruses enter directly into the bloodstream via the bites of arthropod vectors, such as ticks or 
mosquitoes. Many other viruses are acquired by close contact, such as sexual contact, involving host body fluids. Most 
virus families contain examples of several of these categories. 
Within a virus family, viruses are classified into genus, then species. Proper names for viral species are decided by the 
ICTV and listed on Index Virum (ICTV, 2003). Identifying and separating different species is difficult, especially because 
viruses cannot be cultured outside host cells and do not survive long alone. A variety of methods are used, falling into 
three categories: serological methods, structural characterisation and genetic methods.  
Serological techniques involve using antibodies created by the host immune system to identify and distinguish different 
viruses. Antibodies are virus-specific molecules produced by an infested organism, which bind to virus particles and are 
instrumental in disabling them. In most cases, they appear in large quantities in host serum, during primary infection 
with a virus. Some serological techniques, such as neutralization, directly measure the capacity of the antibody to block 
a specific viral function. Others focus on the chemical reaction between the antibody and virus. Serological techniques 
are particularly useful in circumstances where isolation of the virus itself is difficult, or in demonstrating previous 
infection rates of non-persistent viruses (see Epidemiology section below). Certain viruses show cross-reactivity with 
antibodies created against other virus species. For example, cowpox antibodies provide protection against smallpox, 
which is why dairy workers largely escaped the latter disease. In other cases, such as influenza, different strains of a 
single virus species produce different antibodies – the strains are called different serotypes.
Virus groups have different shapes and can be viewed under an electron microscope. Coronaviruses, for example, are 
round particles covered in surface projections, or spikes. Filoviruses such as Ebola are long filaments. 
Genetic characterization of viruses plays an increasingly important part in diagnostics and taxonomy. Genome 
sequences specific to many viruses are now available and small quantities of virus can be detected in clinical samples 
either by hybridization with a nucleic acid probe, or by amplifying the viral genome using the polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR). Since virus genomes can mutate and change rapidly, there is currently considerable effort to identify sequences 
that remain stable within virus groups (e.g. Rota, Oberste et al., 2003).  
 
A Word on Epidemiology
Epidemiology is the study of the dynamics of infectious diseases: how they survive and change as populations, and 
interact with their host populations. An important dichotomy in epidemiology is between pathogens that are short-
lived in their host, usually leaving them immune but virus-free, and those that persist, creating a population of more or 
less healthy hosts that carry the virus.
Short-lived pathogens need to infect at least one other host after each infection for the population to persist (Anderson 
and May, 1992). Since they leave the host either dead or immune, they need a host population large enough for there 
always to be naïve host individuals available. The number of new individuals infected after each case can be used to 
predict whether novel viruses, such as the SARS coronavirus, are likely to create an epidemic in a new host population 
(Bull and Dykhuizen, 2003). It is believed that in low density populations, with small social groups isolated from 
one another, as in pre-agricultural humans and many wildlife species, microbes tend to co-evolve with their hosts, 
establishing the latter type - persistent infections that are not highly pathogenic (Weiss, 2001). Examples in humans are 
the herpes viruses and the chickenpox virus. Similarly, many viruses carried by wild animals do not make them sick. 

9
When humans developed agriculture, our population densities became high enough to support non-persistent, 
pathogenic parasites of the former type (Anderson and May, 1992). 
Virus Transfers Between Humans and Animal Species (Zoonoses)
Viruses that naturally transfer between humans and animal species are known as zoonotic viruses, or zoonoses (Palmer, 
Soulsby et al., 1998). Most human infections originally came from an animal source (Weiss, 2001). 61% of all human 
pathogens and 76% of all human viruses are zoonotic (Taylor, Latham et al., 2001). Some, such as the ‘flu virus, are well 
known and have been present in human populations for a very long time. Others are brand new arrivals. The dynamics 
of such diseases are complex. Often there is a ‘reservoir’ population of one or more species, which holds the disease 
permanently in a stable equilibrium (Haydon, Cleaveland et al., 2002). From the reservoir, the disease can occasionally 
transmit to a different host and establish itself in the new population. In other zoonoses, like rabies, each new case 
represents a new infection from an animal. 
Many of our most deadly zoonotic pathogens are arboviruses, carried by insects. They frequently change hosts and 
their dynamics can be affected by changes in patterns of settlement, agriculture or irrigation that affect populations 
of the vectors, and their contact with humans. A list of known arboviruses is included in this report (Appendix IV), but 
the diseases are not dealt with in detail. Prevention and control of arbovirus infections is built almost exclusively on 
diagnosis and treatment in humans, and control of invertebrate hosts (Stöhr and Meslin, 1997), indicating that direct 
transmission from animals is not an important route.
Viruses transmitted directly1 between vertebrate animals and humans are of interest because the likelihood of this kind 
of transfer is closely related to the degree of contact between humans and animals. A detailed review of these viruses is 
given in chapter three.
Changes in virulence when a virus switches host, are frequent, and difficult to predict  (Frank and Jeffrey, 2001). Many 
zoonotic viruses, such as the arenaviruses, hendraviruses and hantaviruses, produce a tolerated persistent infection 
in the reservoir host, with no ill-effects and no detectable immune response (Clement, McKenna et al., 1998; Howard, 
1998). On transfer to humans, they are deadly killers. The opposite can also happen. The arbovirus Sindbis, for example, 
causes disease in birds, but is only dangerous to humans that are immunosupressed (Weiss, 2001). Herpes B virus 
(Cercopithecine herpes virus type 1) is highly prevalent in wild Asian macaques, in 80-100% of which it causes small 
skin lesions of low severity (Meurens, Gallego et al., 2002). In a human bitten by an infected monkey, the virus often 
leads to fatal encephalitis. The disease has killed 24 humans since its discovery in 1932 out of around 40 reported cases 
(Meurens, Gallego et al., 2002). Considering the widespread use of macaques in biomedical science, this low rate of 
transmission between human and animal host has led one author to suggest there may be an unknown immunological 
mechanism preventing cross species transfer of this type of virus (Skinner, Ahmad et al., 2001).
Many authors writing on the subject of zoonotic viruses include a stark warning about the likelihood of future incidences 
producing highly transmissible or pathogenic epidemics (Morse, 1993; Weiss, 2001; Ludwig, Kraus et al., 2003). Close 
surveillance and careful preparation of medical and public health institutions is consistently suggested, rather than any 
attempt to reduce the risk of new zoonoses occurring.
1 ‘Direct’ in this context, and later ‘direct zoonoses’, refers to the lack of intermediate arthropod vector, and should not be understood to exclude viruses transmitted 
between humans and animals via body fluids or environmental reservoirs. 

10
There are virus types common in animals that have not transferred to humans but may have the potential to. Canine 
Distemper virus (Paramyxoviridae), for example, seems to have expanded its host range this century, infecting many 
species of carnivore, including marine mammals (Baumgartner, Alldinger et al., 2003). There has long been concern 
about the zoonotic potential of the cancer causing retroviruses which occur in cows, birds and cats, because of our close 
contact with these animals, and the existence of a similar virus (HTLV-1) already infecting humans (Platt, 1994). The 
latter has since been suggested to be a primate zoonosis (Voevodin, Johnson et al., 1997). Mice have been experimentally 
infected with cow retrovirus via their milk.  Analysis of genetic sequences shows that these retroviruses have switched 
species several times over the last 70 million years (Platt, 1994).
 
How are zoonoses detected?
Identifying a zoonosis event is not easy. Five lines of evidence are available:  prevalence in the natural host; geographic 
coincidence; plausible routes of transmission; similarities in viral genome organization and phylogenetic relatedness 
to viruses in animals.
In some cases, the coincidence of events alone provides very strong evidence. For example, a recent outbreak of 
monkeypox in the mid-West United States was traced to African rats imported as pets (Lutz, 2003). Similarly, Ebola virus 
has been transferred in shipments of monkeys for biomedical research on a number of occasions, although primates are 
probably not the main reservoir. In others cases, this sort of evidence is weak, such as the unproven link between bats 
and Ebola (see case study two).
Molecular genetic ways of identifying the source of a virus can be applied retrospectively. A virus that has co-evolved 
with the human species, rather than being a zoonotic infection, will have a relationship with similar viruses in other 
animals that reflects our own evolutionary relationship with them. Our herpes viruses, for example, are more similar 
to chimpanzee herpes than to a rabbit version (Weiss, 2001). But if a virus appears in humans that is very similar, or 
indistinguishable from one present in an animal species not particularly closely related to ours, this is strong evidence 
of a zoonotic transfer, especially if the virus is associated with an illness not previously observed. A zoonotic origin for 
measles is postulated on the basis of the genetic structure of the virus, although it is an event that probably happened 
7000 to 8000 years ago, when humans first domesticated ruminants (Diamond, 1997).
For some viruses, scientists are unsure. There is uncertainty, for example over the origin of the hepatitis B virus 
(Bollyky, Rambaut et al., 1997; MacDonald, Holmes et al., 2000; Odemuyiwa, Mulders et al., 2001; Simmonds, 2001). 
In 1997, Bollyky et al postulated it was a zoonosis from new world monkeys in the last 500 years. More recently, the 
same group has shown that the related viruses are dispersed throughout the Old World Apes, suggesting we carried 
the virus before we were humans (Macdonald 2000). But one group of human hepatitis B viruses in West Africa is very 
similar to a local chimpanzee form (Odemuyiwa, Mulders et al., 2001).
To avoid catching zoonoses, the best strategy is to identify the natural host reservoir, and sever links with it (Haydon, 
Cleaveland et al., 2002). Those links could be direct or via an intermediate host such as a domestic animal. As we shall 
see, this is not always possible.

11
CHAPTER 2 – CASE STUDIES OF EMERGING VIRAL ZOONOSES
An emerging virus is one that has appeared in a new host population, or whose incidence is increasing (Woolhouse, 
2002). Six case studies of well-known emerging viral zoonoses are presented below. These have been chosen to illustrate 
the range of factors that can influence the transfer of disease from wildlife to humans.  
 
CASE STUDY ONE:  INFLUENZA A
Influenza is a highly contagious acute respiratory illness. It is not usually fatal, although a flu epidemic 
often causes death in the old and weak. Three types of the virus are known to infect humans: influenza A, 
B, C. They have very high epidemic potential. Up to 25% of the world’s population could become ill during a 
single epidemic, and the virus has the potential to kill 30% of its victims (Enserink, 2003). There are 50,000 
influenza deaths per year in the United States (Murphy, 1994). 
Until recently, influenza A was the only one known to move between species under natural conditions. It is 
commonly found in humans, horses, pigs, chickens, aquatic birds, and more rarely occurs in seals, whales, 
mink and cattle. Current understanding is that wild ducks and shorebirds are the primary and most stable 
reservoir of the disease, but versions of it frequently transfer to other animals. Influenza A is known as a 
re-emergent virus, because of this dynamic. The best evidence for transfer of influenza A between species 
is the sporadic transmission of swine influenza to humans (Slemons and Brugh, 1994). Normally, such 
infections occur in people in direct contact with pigs. They are no more serious than ordinary human ‘flu and 
transmission to other humans is limited. There is also direct evidence of transfers of influenza A between 
humans and chickens and humans and seals. In the latter case, the seal flu virus infected the eyes of men 
investigating the outbreak, causing conjunctivitis (Webster, Geraci et al., 1981). In both instances, the infection 
died out of its own accord. 
The danger of a pandemic, or worldwide epidemic, is when a new and highly virulent strain arises. The labels 
given to different strains of influenza A refer to the type of two surface glycoproteins on the outer envelope 
– hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA). Currently there are 15 HA and 9 NA subtypes identified 
(Horimoto and Kawaoka, 2001). Human and swine influenzas are limited to a few of these varieties, but birds 
can be infected by every combination, forming a vast global reservoir of the virus.
New strains usually occur when two different versions of the virus meet in a single host and the genome 
segments are re-sorted in a process called antigenic shift. For example, if a human already carrying the 
flu virus becomes infected with an avian variant, a new combination of envelope glycoproteins can arise. 
Sometimes the new strain is particularly virulent, as in the catastrophic ‘Spanish influenza’ epidemic in 
1918. This was the most devastating viral disease of the twentieth century, and killed more than 20 million 
people worldwide (Granoff and Webster, 1999).
Since the first human influenza virus was isolated in 1933, three more major pandemic strains have been 
described: ‘Asian flu (1957) H2N2, Hong Kong flu (1968) H3N2 and Russian flu (1977). These strains caused 
global outbreaks and high death tolls. The first two strains arose in China, when a human flu acquired new 
genes from the wild duck flu. The same process brought us the Spanish flu. Russian flu was an identical strain 
to the 1968 Hong Kong flu and may have been stored in a freezer in the intervening years. The low death rate 
in this pandemic could be explained by immunity of people over 20 years old acquired during the Hong Kong 
pandemic (Horimoto and Kawaoka, 2001).

12
It has been suggested that the emergence of new flu strains often occurs in China because of the practice of 
combined pig and duck agriculture there (Brown and Alexander, 1998). In this context, natural hosts of influenza 
A are in direct and continuous contact, increasing the chances of a new strain arising by antigenic shift.
 
Avian influenza is enteric and can be spread in water contaminated with faeces. It is less host-specific than 
versions of the virus in mammals and is found in a very wide variety of birds, including poultry, game and 
wild birds. The current strategy for controlling flu involves watching for new strains in pigs or chickens, 
particularly in China. The regularity of pandemics suggests that the likelihood of another increases over time. 
Although significant measures are taken to control avian, swine and equine influenza, there is no feasible 
method for control of influenza in wild free-flying birds. 
Zoonosis of influenza A has generally been considered a rare event. A review of the literature reveals only 
18 cases of pure swine fever directly crossing into people (Wuethrich, 2003). But this is probably a serious 
underestimate of the actual incidence of such a transfer. Usually, only molecular biology can distinguish 
between the different strains of flu, and in the absence of mortality or unusual infection pattern, most 
cases are assumed to be ordinary human flu. A study last summer found that 23% of pig farm workers and 
their families carried antibodies to swine flu strains, compared with less than 1% of urban dwellers (Olsen, 
Brammer et al., 2002). 
In the last seven years, outbreaks of two new strains of avian-derived influenza have been reported in humans, in 
1997 (H5N1) (Osterhaus, 2001), 1999 (H9N2) (Lin, Shaw et al., 2000) and 2003 (H5N1) (WHO, 2003a). Fortunately 
none of these developed into a pandemic, partly because human-human transmission was inefficient and 
partly due to the widespread slaughter of poultry in the affected areas (Shortridge 2001). In each case, the flu 
was passed directly from birds to humans, without any involvement of pigs as a ‘mixing vessel’. It is normally in 
pigs that the switch happens from the enteric avian form to the respiratory mammalian form. In each case, the 
transfer occurred in Hong Kong. In the case of H5N1 in 1997, the event was traced to the Hong Kong waterfowl 
markets, where the virus had transferred from wild birds to chickens. Eighteen people caught the disease, six 
of them died. There is increasing concern among scientists that a new pandemic strain of influenza could arise 
at any time (Horimoto and Kawaoka, 2001; Li, Xu et al., 2003; Webster and Walker, 2003). 
This year an old strain (H7N7) has reappeared in poultry farms in the Netherlands with apparently new 
potential for human infection. This virus has caused conjuncitivitis in at least 83 people and killed one person. 
Although human-human transmission seems weak, it is possible. Flu specialists are worried, because of the 
potential for an avian flu to recombine with genes from a human strain of flu inside a person. In addition, 
antibodies to the H7N7 strain have already been found in Dutch pigs (Enserink, 2003).

13
CASE STUDY TWO: EBOLA 
Ebola virus and its cousin Marburg virus are killers. Their source and natural ecology have vexed the scientific 
community for 35 years and remain a mystery. Both cause haemorrhagic fever, with massive internal 
bleeding often resulting in death. Marburg virus first appeared in 1967. 31 laboratory workers in Germany 
and Yugoslavia were infected. They had been exposed to tissues from African green monkeys (Cercopithecus 
aethiops) imported from Uganda. Seven of them died. When the virus was identified, it was placed in a new 
viral family, the Filoviridae. There have been three subsequent outbreaks of Marburg in South Africa (1975), 
Kenya (1980 and 1987) and in the Democratic Republic of Congo and Zaire in the 1990s.
In 1976 and 1979 there were several outbreaks of another Filovirus causing lethal hameorrhagic fever in Zaire 
and Sudan. It was named Ebola virus. It was mostly confined to hospitals, and transmission between people 
appeared to be by direct contact with infected tissue, or close personal contact. Mortality rates in the initial 
outbreak were 88% in Zaire and 53% in Sudan. There have been seven subsequent outbreaks of the disease in 
Africa, with mortality rates ranging from 50-81%. All have been confined to relatively small areas. Currently 
an epidemic is occurring in Gabon and the Republic of Congo, which so far has affected 143 people, and killed 
128 (90%) (WHO, 2003a). In 1994, a scientist became infected with a different strain of Ebola, the Ivory Coast 
strain, after performing an autopsy on a wild chimpanzee. 
Scientists suspect the disease is initially caught in each outbreak from an infected animal, perhaps a primate 
hunted for ‘bushmeat’ (CDC, 2003). But monkeys and chimpanzees are unlikely to be the natural reservoir 
of Filoviruses, because they become ill and die when they are infected (Ludwig, Kraus et al., 2003). Extensive 
surveys of wildlife, including mammals, birds and insects in the outbreak areas have identified no natural 
host. In 1987, a boy was infected with Marburg virus after spending considerable time in a cave on Mount 
Elgon filled with bats. Bats were also present in large numbers in a cotton factory where there were outbreaks 
of Ebola in 1976 and 1979. They are a strong candidate for the reservoir, because they can be artificially infected 
without becoming ill (Ludwig, Kraus et al., 2003). But no one has managed to isolate the virus from wild bats. 
Scientists remain convinced that the disease is zoonotic, and that outbreaks are triggered by initial infection 
from wildlife (CDC, 2003). Temporal patterns of the outbreaks suggest that the natural host has contact with 
monkeys and or humans for only a short period of the year. Most outbreaks begin in November or December 
(Guenno, 1997). The lack of a natural host is mystifying, leading some scientists to speculate that the disease 
may even be an arthropod or plant virus (Monath, 1999).
In 1989 a new Ebola-type virus appeared in America, in a shipment of macaques (Macaca fascicularis) from 
the Phillipines. No African connection could be found for these monkeys, but they themselves were dying. To 
the horror of scientists, antibodies to the virus were also found in some of the human laboratory workers, but 
they showed no disease symptoms. Rapid euthanasia of monkeys and disease control tactics prevented the 
spread of the outbreak. The disease, named the Reston strain of Ebola, after the quarantine site in America, 
was subsequently found to be present in captive macaques in the Philippines. During a further outbreak of 
the same virus in 1990, also at Reston, the disease was noted to have respiratory involvement. There was high 
concentration of viral antigens in pulmonary secretions and post mortem showed the virus to be reproducing 
in the lung tissue. 80% of infected monkeys died and several workers at the laboratory were infected without 
having had direct contact with the monkeys (Peters, Johnson et al., 1993). The same virus was isolated from 
monkeys from the Philippines in Italy in 1999 and again in the US in 1996 (Rollin, Williams et al., 1999) but 
no humans were infected, due to employment of careful screening and barrier precautions. Again, captive 
macaques and primate facilities in the Philippines were investigated, and the virus was concluded to be rare 
(Miranda, Ksiazek et al., 1999). There have been no surveys for this virus in other Asian wildlife species.

14
This case demonstrates the epidemic potential of the Filoviruses. It happens that the Reston strain does not 
cause human disease. But in the words of Peters, Johnson et al (1993), “the seriousness of the efficient (airborne) 
spread of a filovirus cannot be overestimated.” There seems to have been little further investigation into the 
natural ecology of this strain of Ebola, perhaps due to the lack of immediate public health implications. Ebola 
research is concentrated in Africa.
It is not clear whether there are increasing numbers of Ebola virus outbreaks in central Africa or whether more 
are recorded due to better surveillance from the international health community. If outbreaks are increasing 
in frequency, this has been linked to ecological perturbations caused by deforestation (Guenno, 1997).
CASE STUDY THREE: HIV
HIV-1 is currently responsible for an extremely serious global pandemic, particularly affecting the poor and 
undeveloped nations of the world, with no end in sight (Weiss and Weiss, 2001). 42 million people are infected 
and the numbers are still increasing. In some African countries more than 30% of the adult population have 
the virus (Ludwig, Kraus et al., 2003). 
The disease caused by HIV, Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome, AIDS, is invariably fatal. It was first 
recognized in the USA in 1981 (Gottlieb, Schroff et al., 1981), and a few years later, scientists realized the disease 
was already widespread in Africa (Bayley, Cheingsongpopov et al., 1985; Serwadda, Sewankambo et al., 1985). 
It is a particularly formidable pandemic, because it presents opportunities for other infections, and possible 
zoonoses, to establish themselves in populations with severely weakened immunity. The virus is transmitted 
by direct contact of body fluids and evolves extremely rapidly, both within an individual host and around the 
world (Piot, Bartos et al., 2001). 
It is well established that HIV-1 came to humans from the simian immunodeficiency virus, chimpanzee SIV 
(Gao, Bailes et al., 1999). Analysis of the genetic sequences of the different strains of HIV indicates there 
have been seven separate zoonotic incidents, in the last 100 years. All happened in Africa, where there is 
the greatest variation. HIV-1 appears to have crossed the species barrier 3 times, resulting in the M, N and O 
groups. These groups are as distinct from one another as they are from the chimpanzee SIV (Gao, Bailes et al., 
1999). It is the group M that has spread around the world and caused the pandemic. Another form of HIV, HIV-
2, which is less transmissible but causes local epidemics, also appears to be of primate origin. It arrived from 
the sootey mangabey, Cercocebus atys, and can be subdivided into six or more groups that appear to represent 
separate zoonoses (Gao, Yue et al., 1992). HIV-2 is endemic in West Africa, but has spread to Europe (Portugal) 
and India (Weiss, 2001).
The exact route of HIV zoonosis has been a matter of heated debate amongst scientists. In the case of HIV-
2, the contact between humans and host is through mangabeys hunted for food and orphans kept as pets 
(Hahn, Shaw et al., 2000). Hunting and field-preparation of chimpanzees, a common practice in West Africa, 
is also blamed for the transfer of HIV-1. However, some scientists argue that the ‘cut-hunter’ theory, as it is 
known, has not been carefully studied. It is assumed to be possible, but not proven (Martin, 2001; Weiss and 
Weiss, 2001). Another theory suggests that HIV originally infected humans through the preparation of live 
polio vaccines using chimpanzee kidneys (Hahn, Shaw et al., 2000; Hooper, 2000; Martin, 2001; Weiss and 
Weiss, 2001). The polio vaccine theory has been intensely scrutinized and now looks unlikely. Comparison 

15
between human and primate HIV/SIV viruses suggest that HIV-1 was present in the human population 10-50 
years before the polio vaccines trials began. It is not clear why HIV remained geographically isolated in the 
intervening years, before suddenly enlisting a pandemic in the 1970s. 
The natural primate hosts of HIV/SIV harbour similar levels of the virus to infected humans, but they do not 
become ill or die of AIDS-like illnesses. Twenty-four other species of African primate harbour types of SIV, but 
there is no evidence that any of these have infected humans (Hahn, Shaw et al., 2000). Asian macaques do not 
have SIVs (Granoff and Webster, 1999). 
CASE STUDY FOUR: HANTAVIRUS PULMONARY SYNDROME
Until 1993, Hantaviruses were recognized zoonoses, mostly carried by Murine rodents (Old World rats and 
mice) and causing haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome, HFRS – that is acute renal failure in the context 
of a flu-like febrile illness. Epidemics of this disease have been documented as far back as the American Civil 
War, but the virus was first described in the 1950s, during the Korean War (Earle, 1954). A number of outbreaks 
have since been documented in Asia, Europe and America, largely caused by three strains of hantavirus 
named Hantaan virus, Seoul and Puumala virus (Chu, Rossi et al., 1994). There are tens of thousands of cases 
of Hantaan virus annually in China. But the disease was not particularly feared. Rather, it was considered a 
“somewhat arcane zoonosis, of interest to kidney and rodent specialists” (Jacobson, 2003). 
Then, in the early 1990s, a group of new forms of the virus exploded on the scene in Europe and North America, 
prompting global concern. These viruses attacked not the kidneys, but the lungs. The viruses were classified in the 
same genus, Hantavirus, and a new syndrome was named, hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS), characterized 
by acute respiratory distress in adults, and often fatal pulmonary or cardiac failure (Clement, McKenna et al., 
1998) (Täger, Vial et al., 2003). From 1993 until now, new HPS viruses have been recognised almost every year and 
there are approximately 200 HPS cases annually throughout the Americas (Khan and Khan, 2003).
The outbreaks of HPS were not caused by new viruses, but by viral agents having long existed in their 
Sigmodontine (New World) rodent hosts (Nerurkar, Song et al., 1994). Hantaviruses are single-stranded RNA 
viruses, with a genome segmented into three.  Studies have shown that the newly emerged hantaviruses are 
not a re-assortment of segments from other viruses. Each of the three segments are quite independent of 
previously known viruses (Spiropoulou, Morzunov et al., 1994). The diversity and evolutionary relationships 
of the viruses reflect the evolutionary relationships of the rodent species, indicating a close and ancient 
relationship between rodents and viruses (Clement, McKenna et al., 1998; Monroe, Morzunov et al., 1999). 
However, this also seemed to be true for HIV/SIV viruses, but a recent paper has suggested that frequent 
transmissions between closely related species of host could produce the same pattern (Charleston and 
Robertson, 2002). Overlapping distributions between different rodent species in South America provide 
opportunities for host-switching events (Plyusnin and Morzunov, 2001) and there is increasing recognition 
that host switching may have a role in generating hantavirus diversity (Bohlman, Morzunov et al., 2002). 
Some authors suspect other types of hantavirus may occur in human populations, but are not noted because 
they do not cause severe disease (Täger, Vial et al., 2003).
Hantaviruses are all transmitted from infected rodents to man via excretions in urine, faeces or aerosolized 

16
respiratory droplets (Clement, McKenna et al., 1998). Most sufferers of the disease report sightings of rodents, 
but almost never mention a physical contact. The rodent carriers appear healthy. Person to person transmission 
of hantaviruses has rarely been reported, despite extensive epidemiological studies. As a result, the diseases 
remain localized. However, it seems to be possible in the case of Andes virus. During an outbreak in Argentina 
in 1996 two people were infected who had been in contact with infected people but neither visited the locality 
of the outbreak nor had high exposure to rodents (Wells, Estani et al., 1997). This also happened in Chile the 
following year (Toro, Vega et al., 1998) and research is underway to establish the mechanism of transmission 
(Khan and Young, 2001). 
The New World hantaviruses are causing serious public health problems in South America in the early 21st 
Century, having been first discovered in North America. Two main factors are thought responsible for the 
repeated outbreaks. One is changing weather conditions. The original outbreak of Sin Nombre virus in 
1993 was clearly related to unusual weather conditions. Heavy rains and snow in the previous spring, after 
a long drought, led to an abundance of rodent food, such as piñon nuts and grasshoppers. The numbers of 
deer mouse (Peromyscus maniculatus), the Sin Nombre virus host, were up tenfold on normal levels during 
that year (Stone, 1993). During the nineties, several years of high precipitation caused by El–Niño events 
increased rodent populations generally in the Americas and may have been associated with other outbreaks 
of hantavirus disease (Childs, Ksiazek et al., 1994; Hjelle, Jenison et al., 1994; Spiropoulou, Morzunov et al., 
1994; Hjelle, Jenison et al., 1995; Engelthaler, Mosley et al., 1999; Hjelle and Glass, 2000; Täger, Vial et al., 2003) 
The second factor is changes in land use, which have increased people’s contact with rodents. A recent study 
(Täger, Vial et al., 2003) found infection with the Andes strain of Hantavirus to be correlated with those 
working in the forestry industry. The natural host of this strain is the long-tailed pygmy rice rat (Olgoryzomys 
longicauatus), a species that occurs primarily in temperate forest and is associated with the abundant bamboo-
like forest understorey plant Chusquea quila. The increasing development of the forestry industry has caused 
humans to interact more closely with this rice rat species, and acquire its virus.
Hantaviruses are prevalent in wild rodent populations all around the world. In China for example, Old World 
hantavirus isolates or antigen were found in 55 species of vertebrate, including 37 rodent species (Chen and 
Qui, 1993). The field mouse (Apodemus agrarius) and the brown rat (Rattus norvegicus) were the most important 
vectors with 5.3% and 4.9% testing positive, respectively. A more recent study have found Hantaan-like 
viruses in 9.9% of wild rodents in Ningxia province, China (Kariwa, Zhong et al., 2001). Hantaan virus causes 
an estimated 50-100,000 infections a year in China (Khan and Khan, 2003). Rates of 2.1% have been found in 
rodents in Thailand (Nitatpattana, Henrich et al., 2002). In Uruguay, hantavirus Central Plata strain is carried 
in 2.6% of its host, the yellow pygmy rice rat Oligoryomys flavescens (Delfraro, Clara et al., 2003). Seoul virus 
persists at even higher levels, having been found at frequencies of 33.9% in Rattus norvegicus in Taiwan (Chin, 
Chiueh et al., 2000) and up to 56% in Brazil (Leduc, Smith et al., 1985).
Although rodents are considered the primary reservoir, the viruses have been detected in other mammals, and 
birds – a total of 164 different species from eight different orders, including bats and cats (Clement, McKenna 
et al., 1998). Cat ownership has been described as a risk factor for hantavirus disease in China (Xu, Tang et al., 
1987). Although a recent study in the Netherlands searched for Puumala virus in over 2000 domestic animals, 
including dogs and cats, and found none (Groen, Gerding et al., 1995).
No-one understands why the old and new world strains of Hantavirus cause different diseases. But the virus 
genetics and host range suggest they have evolved independently for a very long time and make it relatively 
unlikely that an HPS-type virus will naturally emerge in the Old World.

17
CASE STUDY FIVE: HENDRA VIRUSES
In the 1990s, a group of three previously unknown viruses suddenly appeared in the human population in 
Australasia, causing highly pathogenic encephalitis in one case. These viruses – Hendra (1994), Menangle 
(1997) and Nipah (1998) virus – belong to the family Paramoxyviridae, and are unusual for that family in 
being able to switch between hosts from different vertebrates classes. Nipah virus was the most serious 
public health incident, killing 105 people, with separate outbreaks in Malaysia and Singapore (Chua, Bellini 
et al., 2000; Field, Young et al., 2001). Menangle virus causes embryonic mortalities, stillbirths, mummified 
foetuses and congenital malformation in pigs (Love, Philbey et al., 2001). Similar symptoms have not been 
recorded in humans, but all the people found carrying antibodies to this virus were men, not women (Chant, 
Chan et al., 1998).
The natural host reservoir for all three turned out to be flying foxes, or fruit bats (Pteropid bats). They had 
transferred to humans via an intermediate. In the case of Nipah and Menangle viruses, outbreaks were traced 
to pig farms and abbatoirs (Bowden, Westenberg et al., 2001; Chua, 2003). Hendra virus came from horses 
(Barclay and Paton, 2000). Why did these viruses all suddenly emerge, within a few years of one another? 
Molecular genetic studies of Hendra and Nipah viruses indicate they are not new or newly recombinant 
viruses. Rather they are ‘old’ and have persisted unknown and non-pathogenic in their hosts, for perhaps 
millennia. Field et al (Field, Young et al., 2001) argue that ecological change is the most plausible explanation 
for their sudden emergence as people killers. Fruit bats are in decline in Australia and southeast Asia, due to 
habitat loss, particularly deforestation, and hunting. They are struggling to find food, and increasingly living 
in closer proximity to man. Nipah virus jumped the species barrier into pigs when pig farms were established 
in the hosts’ natural range in the mid 1990s. It is a classic case of a zoonotic virus emerging in a newly 
encountered host species and may be a direct result of the clearance of rainforest, the bats’ natural habitat 
(Weiss, 2001). The virus then spread rapidly within and between farms due to the intensity of the husbandry 
and frequent transfer of animals. Extensive sampling of wildlife has shown that these viruses reside in no 
other peridomestic species, except for dogs (Field, Young et al., 2001). 
Although the viruses themselves have only so far been isolated from species of Pteropus (flying fox), antibodies 
to Nipah virus were found in five species of bat: four species of fruit bat, two of which were not flying foxes and 
one insectivorous bat (Field, Young et al., 2001). 
  
Scientists warn that this could happen again. The stresses on fruit bat populations have not gone away. During 
the investigations on bats, two further new viruses were found. One, Tioman virus (Chua, Wang et al., 2001) 
comes from the same virus family, but has not been recorded in other species. The other, Australian bat 
lyssavirus, is in the Rhabdoviridae and closely related to the rabies virus. Either of these has the potential also 
to emerge as a serious disease in humans.

18
CASE STUDY SIX: SARS
Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) appeared in the Chinese province of Guangdong in late 2002, 
and was first reported by the World Health Organisation in February 2003. It is a respiratory disease akin to 
pneumonia, easily transmitted between people and with an apparent fatality rate of nearly 10% (WHO, 2003e). 
A previously unknown coronavirus was isolated from SARS patients in March 2003, and is now identified as 
the principle cause of the disease (Kuiken, Fouchier et al., 2003; Drosten, Günther et al, 2003; Ksiazek, Erdman 
et al., 2003; Peiris, Lai et al., 2003). 
Where did the SARS virus come from? Although there is no direct evidence that SARS infected humans via 
wildlife, most experts, including Zhong Nanshan (China’s leading respiratory disease expert), are convinced 
there is a link (Anon, 2003a) and evidence of SARS as an emerging zoonosis is amassing.
The genome of the SARS coronavirus, which has been fully sequenced (Marra, Jones et al., 2003), shows that 
it belongs to a completely new group (group 4) of coronaviruses. Analysis of the sequence suggests it is an 
animal virus for which the natural reservoir host is still unknown and that has recently developed the ability 
to infect humans (Tobler, Ackermann et al., 2003). It is not a mutant of a known coronavirus or a recombinant 
between known viruses. However, a genetic mutation or recombination of an unknown animal virus may 
have happened in a new animal host, as commonly happens with flu (Harnden and Mayon-White, 2003; 
Shaila, 2003). The genome has been stable as the virus passed between humans, suggesting it is well adapted 
to its new host (Kamps and Hoffman, 2003). 
Research shows that SARS coronavirus isolated from humans can easily infect both ferrets (Mustela furo) 
and domestic cats (Felis domesticus), two distantly related carnivores, and transmit from these animals to 
uninfected co-habiting animals (Martine, Haagmans et al, 2003). The ferrets become ill, but the cats do not. 
This research suggests the virus can pass easily between humans and animals and the reservoir may involve 
a range of animal species.
In May 2003, Chinese researchers isolated viruses genetically very similar to the SARS coronavirus from masked 
palm civets (Paguma larvata) and racoon dogs (Nyctereutes procyonoides) collected at Dongmen wildlife market 
in Guangdong (WHO, 2003d; Guan, Zheng et al., 2003). The virus isolated from masked palm civets reacts 
serologically with the human SARS virus and its genome is virtually identical, with the exception of a small 
additional sequence of 29 nucleotides. Four of the six civets included in the study harboured the virus. The 
team also found antibodies reactive against human SARS coronavirus in one Chinese ferret badger (Melogale 
moschata. The researchers carried out the survey following reports that a disproportionate number of the first 
SARS patients were working in southern China’s food industry, often as chefs (Normile and Enserink, 2003).
This evidence does not mean the civet, or other animals harbouring the virus are the reservoir of the SARS 
coronavirus, nor that it arrived in the human population from this source. The survey was limited, involving 
only 25 animals, in eight species, from one market. A subsequent survey by a team from the China Agriculture 
University in Beijing apparently found no trace of SARS in civets or sixty-four other domestic and wild species 
(Enserink, 2003; Normile and Enserink, 2003), despite testing 732 animals. But the specificity and reliability 
of these tests have been questioned (Enserink and Normile, 2003). The WHO want to send four teams of 
international animal-virus hunters into China to work with local researchers and test hundreds of species 
in many markets, but the progress of negotiations is slow according to one report (Enserink and Normile, 
2003). So far 100 species have been tested and ‘some’ are positive (Ansfield, 2003). In June 2003, Yi Guan, a 
virologist from the University of Hong Kong, said related viruses had been found in about 6 species, apparently 

19
including pigs, snakes, monkeys and bats (News24, 2003). In October, PCR evidence of SARS coronavirus in 
fruit bats (Cynopteryx sphinx), Rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta), Chinese water snakes (Enhydris plumbea) 
and Chinese pangolins (Manis pentadactyla) collected at markets in Guangdong, was presented to the WHO 
SARS Scientific Advisory Committee (SARS Animal Reservoir Studies Working Group, 2003). This research 
is not yet published with peer review (Cyranoski, 2003). Evidence of infection with the SARS virus has been 
found in a pet dog and domestic cats in Hong Kong (Martina and Haagmans, 2003; Ng, 2003).
Masked palm civets are generally captured from the wild and raised in farms. They could have caught the 
virus from another wild animal, as pigs catch avian flu viruses. But the predominance of the virus in civets 
suggests that this species was its ‘springboard’ from wildlife to humans (Enserink, 2003). It is possible that 
the loss of 29 nucleotide sequence made the virus able to prey on humans. Two isolates of the human SARS 
virus, early cases from Guangdong, still contain these additional nucleotides (Enserink, 2003). More research 
is required to establish the true dynamics and zoonotic nature of the SARS coronavirus (WHO, 2003e). If a 
natural reservoir host is found, steps can be taken to minimize contact with that host, either direct or indirect, 
as they have with the flying foxes that carry hendra viruses.
Like other coronaviruses, SARS is transmitted between people via respiratory droplets. It is also stable for 
up to four days in faeces and urine from infected people at room temperature, and for one to two days on dry 
surfaces, suggesting there may be a chance of catching the disease indirectly from environmental sources 
(Kamps and Hoffman, 2003; WHO, 2003c). A large outbreak in a private housing estate, Amoy Gardens, in 
Hong Kong in March was traced to an overnight visit by a single patient, leading scientists to suggest the 
disease may have been carried in the ventilation system, and thus is airborne. WHO officials have since 
announced this was unlikely (Anon., 2003b). Instead, Stephen Ng from the Mailman School of Public Health, 
USA, has argued the disease was spread by rats (Ng, 2003). The involvement of black rats, Rattus rattus, 
explains several unusual features of this outbreak, including the distribution of sufferers in floors above the 
apartment visited by the infected man. However, there is no direct evidence – the rats of the apartment block 
were exterminated when the people were evacuated. Rats caught subsequently showed no sign of the disease 
and scientists have been unable to infect other rats with SARS. Ng believes the local Hong Kong rats may have 
been susceptible, or carried a viral cofactor that made them susceptible to the disease. He has strong support 
amongst his colleagues for this hypothesis (pers. comm. Ng, August 2003).
A combination of global panic and well-coordinated scientific and public-health effort seems to have 
succeeded in containing SARS. The last reportable case was detected in Taiwan on June 15th (WHO, 2003f). 
The disease infected 8437 people and killed 813 in over 30 countries (WHO, 2003b). Re-emergence cannot be 
ruled out, either as part of a seasonal pattern (Normile and Enserink, 2003), or via re-infection from an animal 
reservoir, and some scientists think it likely because there has been no reduction in contact between people 
and potential reservoirs in southern China (Enserink and Normile, 2003; pers. comm. Ng 2003; MacKenzie, 
2003). Continued surveillance is intense.
The SARS outbreak cost China an estimated $2.2 billion dollars, and the entire far-east economic region $10.6 
- $15 billion dollars (WHO, 2003e).

20
CHAPTER 3  – REVIEW OF DIRECT VIRAL ZOONOSES 
“SARS reminded us just how little we know about virus transmission and zoonoses.”
Simon Wain-Hobson, Pasteur Institute, Paris. Editor, Journal of General Virology.
A list of viral diseases known or suspected to be transmitted naturally between animals and humans, without involvement 
of an arthropod vector, is presented in Appendix III. This list includes viruses such as AIDS that were transmitted in the 
past and have subsequently evolved in the human population. Measles is not included, although generally agreed to be 
an historic zoonosis, because the transfer occurred thousands of years ago and the evidence is theoretical (Anderson 
and May, 1992). The list includes the prion agent (not strictly a virus) responsible for Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease.
The following sources were used: BIOMEDLINE, PUBMED, ISI Web of Science, world wide web search, Centers for Disease 
Control and Surveillance (CDC, 2003) and World Health Organisation disease reports (WHO, 2003a). References are 
given in Appendix III. Appendix IV provides a list of 98 known arboviruses. 
• 76 zoonotic viruses were found that transmit or have transmitted from animals to humans or vice versa without 
an arthropod vector.
• 49 are newly discovered or increasing in the human population in the last 20 years, and classed as ‘emerging’.
• 52 have caused fatality or widespread infection, and therefore represent serious public health concerns. 
• 36 are found in Asia.
In 67 of these zoonoses, scientists agree the disease naturally transmits between human and animals. In nine cases – 
borna virus, hepatitis B, hepatitis E, HIV-1, human parainfluenza virus 2, influenza B and C, respiratory synctial virus 
and SARS there is still uncertainty in the literature. 
The majority of direct zoonoses (55 viruses, or 72%) are transmitted by relatively close proximity to a living animal, or 
its excretions. Many do not need actual contact, because the virus travels in aerosol, or urine. A smaller proportion (13 
viruses, 17%) require body fluid contact for example with a wound or freshly butchered meat.
 
What Types of Animal do they Come From?
Of the 76 viruses, almost all are transmitted from mammals. Only two are transmitted to humans from birds. One 
is influenza A, for which the natural host reservoir comprises many species of waterfowl around the world. This 
potentially very serious disease is also transmitted from an intermediate host, pigs. The other is Newcastle Disease, not 
a particularly serious pathogen to humans. It is usually caught from poultry but the natural reservoir comprises many 
species of waterfowl and tropical birds (Khan, 1994).
No viruses are transmitted from the other main vertebrate groups, reptiles, amphibians or fish (with the possible exception 
of the SARS coronavirus, which may be carried by reptiles, although evidence is sparse at this stage - see case study six). 
Figure 1a shows the proportion of virus species originating from different mammal taxa. Viruses were assigned to the 
taxon of their natural reservoir host, where this was known or suspected. If not, they were assigned according to species 
that harbour the virus. In cases where no natural host is known but there is a strong suggestion of a group of animals 
in the literature, based on closely related viruses (some hantaviruses, for example), the virus is assigned to that group. 

21
The largest proportion of species carrying disease are rodents, followed by primates, and even-toed ungulates. In the 
latter group, it is mostly from pigs and cows that diseases jump to humans. Pigs are often an intermediate host between 
the natural reservoir and humans, as in influenza and Nipah viruses. 
It is arguable that this analysis is skewed by the large number of different hantavirus and bunyavirus species, which are 
similar and have rodent hosts. To avoid this problem, figure 1b shows the proportion of virus genera originating from 
different host taxa2. In this analysis, rodents are far less important. More than a quarter of the zoonoses came from 
primates and nearly a fifth from even-toed ungulates. 
Figure 1a. Zoonotic virus species by mammal taxa
Figure 1b. Zoonotic virus genera by mammal taxa
What Factors Promote the Emergence of New Viruses?
There are two main routes by which new viruses emerge. One is the evolution of brand new strains. The other is 
the movement of viruses into new species or populations. Despite some notable examples, such as influenza A, the 
appearance of brand new strains of virus is not a major cause of the emergence of new viruses (Morse, 1993). 
Specific factors precipitating disease emergence can be identified in virtually all cases of emerging disease (Morse, 
1995). They include ecological, environmental and demographic factors that place people in increased contact with a 
previously unfamiliar microbe. According to Ludwig (Ludwig, Kraus et al., 2003), the complexity of interactions between 
all these factors render it difficult to predict future viral zoonosis emergences. 
Below is a summary of factors associated with disease emergence in the literature, and prominent examples of zoonotic 
viruses associated with each. 
2  Virus genera not given in  Appendix III. Refer to (ICTV, 2003).

22
Factors associated with disease emergence (not mutually exclusive):
• Ecological disturbance – includes climate change, agricultural change e.g. Hantaviruses
• Increasing human populations/habitat encroachment leading to increased contact with wildlife e.g. 
Nipah virus, possibly Ebola and AIDS
• Movement of people/animals transferring virus to naïve population e.g. West Nile virus, monkeypox
• Change in animal husbandry e.g. Nipah virus; vCJD
• Immunosuppression – no examples yet (Weiss, 2003)
According to Morse (1995), agricultural change is one of the primary causes of new human disease. The emergence of 
the South American haemorrhagic fever diseases known as Junin and Machupo, for example, is attributed to changed 
conditions in maize agriculture favoring the rodent host Calomys musculinus. Increasing human populations have also 
been blamed for increased contact with wildlife, through invasion of natural habitat, particularly deforestation (Stöhr 
and Meslin, 1997; Ludwig, Kraus et al., 2003). Globalisation, the widespread and rapid movement of people, livestock 
and other animals has hugely increased the potential for spread and emergence of new and devastating pathogens.
A number of authors have recently expressed concern that the large proportion of immunosuppressed people in some 
countries due to high levels of infection with AIDS could allow an easy route for zoonotic diseases to establish in humans 
(Weiss, 2001; Ludwig, Kraus et al., 2003). The use of animal tissues in medicine, particularly xenotransplantation, also 
poses a substantial risk of virus transfer, particularly from endogenous retroviruses that are held in a passive state in 
an animal’s genome. Again, immunosuppression of recipients is an important factor (Weiss, 2001; Ludwig, Kraus et al., 
2003; Weiss, 2003). So far, there are no specific reports of diseases emerging in the human population by this route.
The number of potentially pathogenic viruses present in wild animals is impossible to know. At least 520 different viruses 
have been identified from arthropods, and most are of unknown disease potential (Karabostas, 1985). 100 of them cause 
human disease, and another 25 are pathogenic to domestic animals that are known to share human diseases (Monath, 1993).
It seems that certain types of virus are more likely to emerge than others, as a result of their structure and biology.
Recent studies have looked for patterns in the type of pathogen likely to emerge as a human disease (WHO, 2000; 
Cleaveland, Laurenson et al., 2001; Taylor, Latham et al., 2001; Woolhouse, 2002). Certain taxonomic groups of pathogen 
are more likely to emerge than others. Viruses, particularly RNA viruses, are the most likely to emerge (Cleaveland, 
Laurenson et al., 2001). RNA viruses are also much more likely to be zoonotic than DNA viruses (Wain-Hobson and 
Meyerhans, 1999). RNA viruses have high mutation rates, resulting from a high error rate during replication and a lack 
of proof-reading or correction mechanisms (Ludwig, Kraus et al., 2003). They can change and evolve rapidly to suit a new 
environment, such as a new host. 
In Taylor’s review of all human pathogens (Taylor, Latham et al., 2001), zoonotic viruses were the category with the largest 
proportion of emerging diseases. Viruses transmitted by direct or by indirect contact (via food or an environmental 
reservoir) have a much higher proportion of emerging diseases than arboviruses (Taylor, Latham et al., 2001), but 
arboviruses are more likely to emerge because there are more of them.
Infectious agents with a broad host range are much more likely to emerge. Zoonotic pathogens are almost twice as likely 
as non-zoonotic pathogens to emerge (Taylor, Latham et al., 2001). And zoonotic pathogens that can infect both wildlife 
and domestic animals are really the ones to watch (Cleaveland, Laurenson et al., 2001). Woolhouse (Woolhouse, 2002) 
attempts to prioritise the features of pathogens that make them likely to emerge into the human population. Amongst 
viruses, host range is the most important factor.  

23
What type of virus has a broad host range? Hantaviruses have been shown to infect birds and mammals across eight 
different orders (Clement, McKenna et al., 1998). There is some evidence that the type of cell receptors used by a virus 
alters its ability to switch between hosts. Viruses with a host range crossing several taxonomic orders are more likely to 
use ‘conserved’ receptors – that is receptor molecules that are similar in many different species, from human to mouse. 
Examples are the rabies virus and the foot-and-mouth disease virus (Woolhouse, 2002). 
According to Cleaveland, Laurenson et al. (2001), most zoonotic pathogens (including bacterial, Chlamydial, Rickettsial 
and parasitic zoonoses, and arboviruses) are associated with ungulate, carnivore or rodent reservoirs, and a substantial 
minority reside in primates, bats, marine mammals and birds.
The success of a virus that has newly appeared in the human population depends on its ability to transmit from human 
to human. Efficient inter-human transmission is required for a virus to pose a pandemic threat. However, there are 
several high profile cases of deadly zoonotic viruses that did not transmit easily between humans – in which every case 
was a new infection from an animal. For example, the majority of hantavirus infections are primary infections from 
rodents. The same is true for fatal cases of the Hong Kong H5N1 influenza A virus in 1997 (Wain-Hobson and Meyerhans, 
1999). It is feasible that such viruses could alter and become transmissible, as for example in the Ebola Reston virus, or 
the Andes hantavirus.
 
Profile of an emerging pathogen (Woolhouse, 2002)
• An RNA virus
• Zoonotic, with a reservoir host range that is both taxonomically and ecologically broad
• Transmitted by vectors, especially by biting flies that are generalist feeders
• Able to use a cell receptor that is conserved across host species
• Potentially transmissible between humans but currently rare
• Found in areas that are experiencing ecological, demographic or social change
In those cases where a genetically new strain of virus emerges, viruses with large or segmented genomes are most likely 
to produce new strains. Antigenic shift – or re-shuffling of genetic segments, rather than change by mutation, can result 
in far more severe diseases (Wain-Hobson and Meyerhans, 1999).
Another factor that may contribute to the risk of zoonosis becoming a public health issue is the increasing sanitisation 
of society, and the reduction in number of individuals employed in agriculture, or in direct contact with animals. 
This is seldom mentioned in the literature, because it goes against the public health grain. Wain-Hobson argues that 
zoonosis is probably far more frequent than we think, because it often does not result in disease. And because infection 
can prime the immune system to resist other, related viruses, exposure to a wide variety of animal viruses can be 
protective. Dairy workers did not suffer from smallpox, perhaps because many of them had unknowingly been infected 
with cowpox and become immune (Wain-Hobson and Meyerhans, 1999). Similarly, there is slight cross-reactivity in 
immunity between some strains of hantavirus (Sin Nombre and Black Creek Canal) (Hjelle, Chavezgiles et al., 1994; 
Chu, Jennings et al., 1995) However, in other cases, prior exposure to similar viruses can fool the immune cells into 
encouraging viral replication, as happens in dengue virus, where a second infection by a different strain can be even 
more severe (Ananthaswamy, 2003).

24
Where Does SARS Fit?
If SARS is shown to be a zoonosis, which looks increasingly likely (see case study six), it will be the first time a 
coronavirus has been shown to naturally move across a species barrier from an animal into humans. No members of 
this family are mentioned in (Palmer, Soulsby et al., 1998) or (Beran, 1994). However, antibodies to one other human 
coronavirus have been found in pigs (Hirano, Suzuki et al., 1999), implying that the viruses naturally move the other 
way, from people to pigs.  
Coronaviruses (CoV) are responsible for around 30% of common colds in humans (Rota, Oberste et al., 2003). They 
spread easily through the respiratory droplets or the faecal-oral route. Coronaviruses are widespread in animals, 
causing hepatitis in mice, gastroenteritis in pigs and bronchiolitis in birds. They are classified into three groups, on 
the basis of serological cross-reactivity and genome sequence. Groups 1 and 2 contain viruses that infect a variety 
of mammals. Group 3 contains bird coronaviruses. Coronaviruses tend to be very species-specific, and most are 
restricted to a single species (Granoff and Webster, 1999). The two known previously human coronaviruses (HCoV-
229E and HCoV-OC43) are in groups 1 and 2 respectively, and are associated with mild disease, although occasionally 
causing serious infections of the lower respiratory tract in children, and dangerous gut disease in newborns. SARS 
may be the first coronavirus to regularly cause severe disease in humans (Kamps and Hoffman, 2003). 
Does SARS CoV fit the criteria outlined by Woolhouse for a typical emerging pathogen? It is an RNA virus, and it 
appears to be zoonotic. It is almost certainly not transmitted by arthropod vectors.  
Does it have a broad host range? SARS CoV seems to have a much broader host range than other known coronaviruses, 
having been found in at least eight different species, from widely different taxa, including reptiles and humans (see 
case study six). It is not clear what makes SARS CoV different from the other coronaviruses in this respect. Other 
coronaviruses use very species-specific cell receptors, such as the feline aminopeptidase A identified as the receptor 
for feline infectious peritonitis virus (Granoff and Webster, 1999), but the cell receptor used by the SARS CoV is not yet 
known. Because the SARS virus is as different from any of the three known coronavirus groups as they are from each 
other, reading its genome sequence does not provide any further clues to the nature of its animal origins. 
SARS does transmit easily between humans and it did emerge in an area subject to considerable ecological disturbance 
and degradation (see chapter four).
If SARS was transmitted to humans from the masked palm civet, as is currently suspected (Normile and Enserink, 
2003), then it is unusual amongst direct viral zoonoses for emerging from a terrestrial carnivore. Only three other 
viruses came from carnivores, and all are mild diseases, contracted from sealions or seals (see Appendix III). However, 
it remains possible that SARS CoV originally came from rodents, a group with a long history of zoonoses.
Finally, does SARS have a large segmented genome? The coranoviruses have the largest genome of any of the RNA viruses 
(Rota, Oberste et al., 2003), and although it is not segmented, they have a high mutation rate during replication (Granoff and 
Webster, 1999). Their tendency to re-shuffle genes was demonstrated by Haijema et al  (Haijema, Volders et al., 2003), when 
feline coronavirus was induced to take up coat protein genes from a mouse virus, creating a new strain that could also infect 
mice. This implies that genome shuffling can happen if two different strains of coronavirus co-occur in a single host. 
In the context of other direct viral zoonoses, SARS could not have easily have been predicted. While it shares some 
of the characteristics of viruses likely to emerge, it is not a prime candidate. It is from a group of viruses previously 
believed to have narrow host ranges. It seems to have come from an animal group with little history of zoonoses, 
and belongs to a virus group with only one previously known zoonosis. Its emergence should be taken as a sincere 
warning about the risk of direct contact with a large number of wild animal species. 

25
CHAPTER 4 – IS CHINA A LIKELY AREA FOR FURTHER ZOONOTIC VIRUSES TO EMERGE?
“Why does this region (China and Hong Kong) keep throwing up viruses that have the potential to 
threaten the lives of people around the world?”
David Cyranoski, Asian-Pacific correspondent for Nature.  
Disease emergence in China has been the focus of international attention, as a result of influenza A and SARS. The 
continuing re-emergence of flu strains in the region has been blamed on the close proximity of people, pigs and ducks in 
rural areas (see case study). Three more general factors make China a likely area for further zoonotic viruses to emerge: 
widespread hunting and consumption of wildlife; ecological change; and high levels of immunosuppression due to 
AIDS. Finally, there is some evidence that a nutritional selenium deficiency in parts of China renders the population 
more susceptible to the emergence of new viral strains.
  
1 - Widespread Consumption of Wildlife
Wildlife species are widely sold in markets and eaten in restaurants in China, particularly in the southern provinces such 
as Guangdong and Guangxi. Many species are also caught and traded for use in traditional medicines. Both practices are 
ancient and well-established traditions in China, and the trade in wildlife is economically important (Li and Li, 1998). 
However, demand for wildlife has increased with rapid economic development over the last two decades, as more people 
can afford to enjoy wildlife goods (Li and Li, 1998) (ACAP, 2003). Such consumption is already recognized as a public 
health risk (Anon., 2003a), because the contact between people and large numbers of animal species creates ample 
opportunity for disease transfer. 
The risk of contracting a new virus from eating cooked meat is low. Only in one case has cooked meat been the cause of 
a zoonosis, and that is the case of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), a poorly understood infectious agent contracted by 
eating infected nervous tissue. Incidences of cannibalism, either in farmed cattle, in the UK in the 1980s, or in people as 
in Papua New Guinea in the 1950s (Gajdusek 1977) led to outbreaks of the disease. Although a similar disease in sheep, 
scrapie, is naturally transmissible without cannibalism, this type of infectious agent does not appear to cross the species 
barrier readily (Weiss, 2001). 
However, the risk of contracting zoonoses when handling livestock or animal products is substantial (Jemmi, Danuser 
et al., 2000). At a conference in Munich in 1997, entitled ‘Viral zoonoses and food of animal origin: a re-evaluation of 
possible hazards for human health’, the opening speaker considered the consumption of raw meat products, a custom in 
some European countries, to pose the greatest risk of disease transfer (Böhm, 1997; Büttner, Oehmig et al., 1997). 
Eating poorly cooked shellfish can result in the transmission of virus infections, because these animals can harbour 
live viruses through bioaccumulation if they have been harvested from sewage-contaminated water (Hetrick, 1994). 
Large outbreaks of viral gastroenteritis have been traced to shellfish in Australia in the 1970s and in North America. 
The biggest ever outbreak of disease from shellfish was a huge epidemic of Hepatitis A in Shanghai in 1988 that 
hospitalised 310,000 people and killed 31 (SINA, 2003). It was traced to consumption of contaminated ark shells. 
Caliciviruses such as Norwalk virus have caused the highest number of shellfish related outbreaks worldwide 
(Potasman, Paz et al., 2002). Because the viruses have not actually infected the shellfish, these incidents are not 
classed as zoonotic disease transfer.  

26
As a source of food contamination, zoonotic viruses are a greater (although less frequent) threat than external 
contamination with human pathogens, because they are distributed throughout the tissues, and cannot be removed 
by washing or other decontamination treatments (Büttner, Oehmig et al., 1997).  
Arboviruses, normally transmitted by arthropod vectors, have also been contracted from eating poorly cooked meat 
products. This route was implicated in an outbreak of Rift Valley Fever, caused by Phlebovirus, in Egypt in 1977 (Morse 
and Schluderberg, 1990). The virus was caught from sheep/ goat meat and unpasteurised milk during an intense 
epidemic of the disease amongst domestic animals. 
Hunting wild animals, and the subsequent butchering and preparation of the meat poses a serious risk of exposure to 
unencountered and unknown viruses. Inspectors from the US Fish and Wildlife Service consider bushmeat imports to 
be a dangerous biohazard (Lutz, 2003). Three diseases (six virus species) – AIDS, Ebola/Marburg haemorrhagic fever and 
monkeypox - have been linked to acquisition of zoonotic viruses through hunting bushmeat, and four from contact with 
wild primates used for medical science. However, hunting wildlife is unlikely to have previously occurred on the scale 
of the current practice in China. Many restaurants in southern China keep live animals on the premises and slaughter 
them as needed, a custom that could expose restaurant workers to virus-laden blood and excrement (Enserink, 2003). 
The conditions in the wildlife markets of southern China, where animals of many species are held together in close 
quarters, are ideal for cross-species transmissions promoting the emergence of new zoonotic viruses (Normile and 
Enserink, 2003). 
Böhm (Böhm, 1997) stressed that scientists could not expect people to give up culinary customs as a result of newly 
understood risks. Similarly, AIDS expert Simon Wain-Hobson, of the Pasteur Institute in Paris, considers it unreasonable 
to expect poor people in developing countries to stop hunting and consuming ‘bushmeat’ when their livelihoods depend 
on it (pers.comm. Wain-Hobson, 2003). Rather, scientists must find other ways of minimising the risks, such as stringent 
veterinary controls during the production process. This is far more feasible when meat is farmed, less so when meat is 
transferred directly from the wild to the market (Stöhr and Meslin, 1997). 
 
Types of wildlife eaten
A list of 226 species sold in wildlife markets or consumed in restaurants in China is presented in Appendix III. This list 
is compiled from four systematic surveys of the wildlife trade, carried out by Chinese scientists in the last ten years (Li, 
Fuller et al., 1996; Zhijun, Huojie et al., 1996; Li and Li, 1998; Anon., 2000). It is almost certainly not exhaustive, and 
because some animals listed were not identified to species, the number of species given should correctly be prefixed by 
‘at least’. However, this list gives a good idea of the range of different species that are eaten. 

27
Figure 2. Wild species consumed or sold for food in 
southern China, by Class
Figure 3. Types of mammal eaten, or sold to be eaten 
in China
Figure 4a. Mammals observed frequently in at least 
one study
Figure 4b. Mammal species observed in three or 
more studies
The proportion of species in different classes is presented in figure 2. It is clear that birds and reptiles are the most 
popular fare for consumption in China. In the case of birds, the largest risk of contracting zoonoses seems to be 
associated with waterfowl. We have seen from chapter three that the greatest risk of non-arthropod-borne viral 
zoonoses come from mammals. A significant number of wild mammal species are eaten, and the remainder of this 
section focuses on mammals. 

28
The proportion of mammals in each of seven different taxonomic orders is shown in figure 3. To give an idea of which 
mammals are most popular, figure 4a shows mammals that were observed frequently in at least one study. These are 
animals that were recorded at five or six different ports in study 1, in large quantities in study 2, at more than 10% of 
restaurants in study 3, or included in the list of most common species from study 4. Figure 4b shows mammal species 
that were recorded in 3 or more of the 4 studies. 
A relatively small number of mammal species fall into both ‘popularity’ measures, being observed frequently and 
observed in three or more studies. They are the rhesus macaque (Macaca mulatta), the pigtail macaque (Macaca 
nemestrina), the slow loris (Nycticebus coucang), the masked palm civet (Paguma larvata), the large Indian civet (Viverra 
zibetha), the pangolin (Manis sp.) and the Chinese bamboo rat (Rhizomys sinenssis) These seven are China’s favourite 
wild mammals to eat, or perhaps easiest to catch. Wain-Hobson and Meyerhans (1999) and Jemmi, Danuser et al. (2000) 
recommend screening animals for unknown viruses on a global scale, to pre-empt future emerging zoonoses. These 
seven species would be good starting points in China. Macaques are of particular concern, because these monkeys are 
known to carry potentially serious zoonotic viruses – Ebola Reston strain and Cercopithecine herpes virus type 1.
Based on current knowledge of zoonoses (see chapter 3), the greatest risk comes from primates, rodents and even-toed 
ungulates (mostly pigs and cows). Of these groups, primates are the most commonly eaten, and this is especially true 
if we consider the species that are popular (figure 4). Even-toed ungulates are mostly represented by species of deer, 
although the wild pig, Sus scrofa was recorded in all four surveys. Rodents are not eaten very widely, although one of the 
most popular mammal species is a rodent, the Chinese bamboo rat. Carnivores, the source of a significant 5% of direct 
zoonotic transfers worldwide are very widely consumed. Two mammal groups, the lagomorphs (rabbits/hares) and the 
anteaters, are reasonably popular as food and have no history of disease transfer.
  
It is important to stress that previous occurrence of zoonotic disease transfer is not necessarily a good predictor of 
future risk. Recent serious diseases such as hendraviruses, or SARS, have emerged from animal groups (bats and 
carnivores, respectively) with little history of disease transfer.
It is also important to stress that if the arboviruses had been included in this review, the prevalence of birds as natural 
hosts would have been greater. Crimean Congo haemorrhagic fever, West Nile fever and Sindbis virus are examples of 
well-known arboviruses carried by birds. While arboviruses cannot be caught directly from living animals, they can 
potentially be caught through contact with body fluids, for example from milk, or during butchering. 
Although no zoonoses are known to have been transmitted or carried by reptiles, there is a suggestion in the media 
that the SARS virus may have been found in snakes (News24, 2003).
2 - Ecological Change
Large-scale ecological change is occurring in China, particularly deforestation, climate change and desertification. 
There is also evidence that populations of some wild rodents are increasing in China, as a result of various factors, 
including agricultural change and possibly hunting of predators. In the cases of deforestation, climate change 
and increasing rodent populations, there are direct links to the emergence of rodent-borne viral zoonoses in the 
scientific literature.

29
Deforestation
Deforestation has been a large problem in China for more than a century and continues to occur (Zhou, 1995; Rozelle, 
Huang et al., 1997; Young and Wang, 2001; Houghton and Hackler, 2003; Liu, Liu et al., 2003; Wang, Pitman et al., 2003). 
This kind of habitat change directly affects wildlife communities. For example, deforestation in southern Ganus, China, 
resulted in a large increase in density of some rodent species, but a reduced number of species (Giraudoux, Quere et al., 
1998). Giradoux recently demonstrated that conversion of land from forest to grassland near the Qinghai-Tibet plateau 
region of China can lead to increased risk of a human zoonotic disease carried by carnivores (the pathogenic helminth 
Echinococcus multilocularis), through interaction with small mammal communities, which are an intermediate host 
(Giradoux, Craig et al., 2003). 
Climate change
Climate change is almost certainly affecting the annual mean temperature in China, as it is globally (Watson and 
Team, 2001) and in nearby Japan (Yue and Hashino, 2003). Whilst climate change is likely to result in water shortage in 
northern China, in southern China, it may even increase rainfall (Tao, Yokozawa et al., 2003), an effect associated with 
the outbreak of hantaviruses in the Americas, due to the resultant increase in rodent food source (see case study four). 
Climate change also increases rodent numbers more directly, because it is cold in winter that reduces their numbers 
(Saul, 1996).
Desertification
Desertification is a serious problem in China (e.g. Runnstrom, 2000; Xu, Lin et al., 2002; Zhao, Wu et al., 2002), although 
mostly in the North and West of the country, so not in areas where consumption of wild animals is most popular. We can 
find no direct connection between desertification and disease transfers in the literature, but this degradative process is 
an ecological change that will put some wild species under stress.
Rodent populations
An explosive increase in rodent populations, particularly rats and mice, in China has been reported in the news (e.g. 
BBCi, 2001; Reuters, 2003). Rat populations are soaring in China, with an average of three or four rats per person, rising 
to 20 or 30 in Guangxi, according to Zhou Fang, a Chinese professor in zoology (Jian and Jun, 2003). This increase has 
been blamed on the removal of predators such as snakes and owls for consumption in restaurants (BBCi, 2001; Jian and 
Jun, 2003). In the 1990s, the snake trade in China saw an estimated 1000 tonnes of snake a year (Jian and Jun, 2003). It has 
now increased to at least 3000 tonnes a year, just in the southern city of Guangzhou, according to a Chinese government 
agency (ACAP, 2003). A survey by the China Wildlife Conservation Association in 2001 showed snake numbers had 
declined drastically in some provinces where they used to be common (BBCi, 2001) and Chinese farmers have been 
claiming huge crop losses to rodents in recent years (BBCi, 2001). In 1998 the Vietnamese Government blamed wildlife 
trade to China for a fall in populations of cats, and encouraged farmers to raise cats and enhance populations, in a Prime 
Ministerial Decree (number 09/1998/CT) (Singleton, Kenney et al., 2003). 
The scientific literature confirms there has been an increase in the frequency of outbreaks of rodents across Asia and 
Australia (Singleton, Hinds et al., 2003). For example, serious outbreaks of Brandt’s voles (Microtus brandti) in Inner 
Mongolia have increased from one every seven years in 1970 to one every 3 to 5 years (Zhang, Pech et al., 2003). And there 
are suggestions that rodent numbers are increasing all over the world (Saul, 1996). 

30
However, the allegation that hunting of predators is responsible is not corroborated by scientific literature. Experts 
from the CSIRO Rodent Research Group (see Appendix V) in Australia stress there are too many factors influencing the 
ecology of rodents to be sure of an influence of predator numbers (pers.comm. Singleton, 2003). 
We could find no published evidence of medium-long term change in predator numbers in China. In the case of Brandt’s 
voles, the study showed the main factor responsible to be the increase in livestock numbers leading to greater areas of 
the voles’ favoured short grass habitat (Zhang, Pech et al., 2003). Likewise in Vietnam, the most compelling evidence is 
that greater intensity of rice cropping is responsible for the increase in rodent impacts (Singleton, Kenney et al., 2003). 
There is no unequivocal evidence that rodent populations are controlled by predators, and more research is required 
(Singleton, Kenney et al., 2003). 
Whatever the immediate cause, an increase in wild rodent populations could increase human contact with rodents and 
therefore increase the likelihood of disease transfers. The same effect is feared as a result of the spread of particularly 
virulent form of West Nile virus that has just arrived in Central America from North America. This arbovirus kills birds 
of prey and could lead to an increase in rodent numbers through lack of predators (Ananthaswamy, 2003). Rodents 
in these countries are known to carry deadly hantaviruses and bunyaviruses. In China, there is a theory that SARS is 
transmitted by rats (Ng, 2003). Research on wild rats, Rattus norvegicus, in the UK has shown that the more rodents there 
are, the greater number of diseases each animal carries (Webster and Macdonald, 1995). So higher rodent density not 
only increases contact with human, it increases the risk of disease transfer with each contact event.
All these ecological changes affect species in unpredictable ways. Ecological disturbance is a key factor implicated in 
the emergence of new viruses (see chapter 3). Populations of wild animals under stress may themselves carry more 
pathogens and come into increasing contact with humans due to habitat loss. China, and other governments around the 
world, should be taking steps to minimize direct contact between people and wildlife species, as well as to reverse the 
trends of habitat and energy over-use that are largely responsible for these changes.
3 - Immunosuppression Resulting from AIDS
AIDS is a growing epidemic in China. A million and a half Chinese people are now living with HIV and official estimates 
foresee a manifold increase in that number over the coming decade (BBCi, 2002; UNAIDS/WHO, 2002)
An immunosuppressed population represents ample opportunity for otherwise benign or harmless viruses to establish 
themselves and perhaps cause harm to humans (Sawitzky, 1997; Woolhouse, 2002; Ludwig, Kraus et al., 2003). For 
example, the only known fatal case of the cowpox virus was in an 18-year-old man whose immune system was suppressed 
by steroid drugs (Czerny, Zeller-Lue et al., 1997). He caught the virus from his cat, and it killed him. 
4 - Selenium Deficiency
A team of scientists led by Melinda Beck at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill have argued that nutritional 
selenium deficiency in the population may be a factor in the risk of new virus strains emerging from China (Nelson, 
Shi et al., 2001; Cyranoski, 2003). They have shown that both Coxsackievirus B3 and influenza A viruses mutate at 
higher rates and can produce virulent strains more quickly when they infect selenium-deficient mice (Beck, Shi et al., 
1995; Nelson, Shi et al., 2001). Beck suspects this phenomenon might explain the high incidence of Keshan disease, a 
weakening of heart muscle, in some Chinese populations (Levander and Beck, 1997). This link is tentative and dismissed 
as speculation by other scientists (Pearson, Clarke et al., 2003). 

31
RECOMMENDATIONS
The risk of another previously unknown viral disease emerging in China as a result of direct 
contact between people and wildlife species is substantial. The following steps are recommended 
to reduce the risk.
1	
Reduce hunting and consumption of wildlife, particularly primates, wild pigs and rodents. Li, Fuller 
et al. (1996) and Zhijun, Huojie et al. (1996) recommend strengthening enforcement of China’s Wild 
Animal Protection Law (1989), particularly by training and deploying teams of wildlife inspectors in 
the southern port towns. 
2	
If overall consumption cannot be reduced, consider limiting wildlife consumption to a number of 
known species, reducing contact with novel species. Based on this review of past zoonotic virus 
transfers, it is best to eat rabbits and hares. However, such advice must be balanced by conservation 
considerations for these species. 
3	
Promote farm-based production of ‘wildlife’ species, and oblige farmers to have regular veterinary 
inspections for disease, as recommended by Stöhr and Meslin (1997).
4	
Post health warnings in restaurants and wildlife markets, warning consumers and traders about 
the risk of contracting novel diseases from wild animals and their raw meat. The following is a 
suggested text:
76 different viruses can be caught directly from wild animals. Two-thirds of them are serious diseases 
that spread rapidly to other people, or kill. Experts warn there could be many more unknown viruses, 
waiting to infect and kill humans, especially in monkeys. Close contact with wild animals and their raw 
meat puts you at risk. Buying the meat of wild animals puts thousands of people at risk.  
5 	
Encourage research to survey potentially zoonotic viruses in mammals, as recommended by Wain-
Hobson and Meyerhans (1999) and Jemmi, Danuser et al. (2000). Begin with the three primate 
species most commonly eaten: the rhesus macaque (Macaca mulatta), the pigtail macaque (Macaca 
nemestrina), and the slow loris (Nycticebus coucang). Also include Macaca fascicularis, source of the 
Reston Ebola virus.
6	
Encourage long term research to monitor wild rodent populations and the link with predator 
populations, to establish whether excessive hunting is causing an indirect risk of disease transfer 
by leading to high rodent densities.

32
APPENDIX I: Virus families containing human and animal viruses
Adapted from (Fields, 1996)
Virus family
Characteristics
Well-known examples 
of zoonoses
RNA Viruses
Picornaviridae
Caliciviridae
Astroviridae
Single-stranded RNA 
Positive-sense
Nonsegmented
Non-enveloped
Togaviridae
Flaviviridae
Single-stranded RNA
Positive-sense
Nonsegmented
Enveloped
Coronaviridae
Single-stranded RNA
Positive-sense
Nonsegmented
Enveloped
Nested set transcription
SARS
Paramyxoviridae
Rhabdoviridae
Filoviridae
Single-stranded RNA
Negative-sense
Nonsegmented
Enveloped
Hendra, Nipah
Rabies
Ebola
Orthomyxoviridae
Bunyaviridae
Arenaviridae
Single-stranded RNA
Negative-sense (some ambisense genes)
Segmented
Enveloped
Influenza A
Hantavirus and Lassa fever
Reoviridae
Birnaviridae
Double-stranded RNA
Positive-sense
Segmented
Non-enveloped
Retroviridae
Single-stranded RNA
Positive-sense
DNA intermediate step in replication
HIV

33
 
DNA Viruses
Hepadnaviridae
Double-stranded/single-stranded DNA
Enveloped
Retroid DNA step in replication
Circoviridae
Parvoviridae
Single-stranded DNA
Non-enveloped
Papovaviridae
Adenoviridae
Double-stranded DNA
Non-enveloped
Herpesviridae
Poxviridae
Iridoviridae
Unnamed family African 
Swine Fever
Double-stranded DNA
Enveloped
Monkeypox
 
SUBVIRAL AGENTS
Deltavirus
Single stranded RNA
Negative sense
Non-segmented
Defective, satellite
Prions – agents of 
spongiform 
encephalopathies
No known nucleic acid
‘self-replicating’ proteins
vCJD

34
APPENDIX II: Review of viral zoonoses without arthropod vectors
Viruses are listed alphabetically by family and grouped into genera where applicable. Emerging viruses, those that are 
new or increasing in the human populations in the last 20 years, are underlined. References for each family of viruses 
are given below the table. Diseases are classed as a public health problem if there have been one or more fatalities, and/
or more than 100 people have been infected with the virus at one time.
Transmission routes are divided into three categories: direct contact (by fomites, droplets, aerosol, saliva, urine, fecal-oral 
route); indirect contact (virus can be carried in an environmental reservoir such as water or food); and internal contact 
(blood, tissue or other internal body fluid/sexual contact required). Blank cells imply that no information was found.
HF=haemorrhagic fever; HFRS=haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome 
HPS=hantavirus pulmonary syndrome 
CJD=Creutzfeldt Jakob Disease
* = known to be natural reservoir; φ = suspected reservoir, little or no evidence.
∞ = disease known to be more commonly acquired from other humans than direct from animals.
Virus name
Disease
Virus 
family
Public 
health 
issue?
Animal host 
(*=known to be natural 
reservoir)
Distribution
Main 
transmission 
route
Human-
human 
transmission? 
Factors associated 
with zoonotic 
transfer
Guanarito virus
HF
Arenaviridae
Yes
Cotton rat* Sigmodon 
alstoin
Venezuela
Direct/
indirect
 Rare
Junin virus
HF
Arenaviridae
Yes
Voles* Calomys 
musculinus, Calomys 
laucha, Akadon azarae
Pampas, 
Argentina
Direct/
indirect
No
Agricultural change
Lassa virus
HF
Arenaviridae
Yes
Rat* Mastomys natalensis
W. Africa
Direct/
indirect
Yes ∞
Contact with 
domestic rodents
Lymphocytic 
choriomeningitis 
virus
flu-like/
meningitis
Arenaviridae
Yes
Domestic mouse* Mus 
musculus, other rodents
Worldwide
Direct
No
Contact with 
domestic rodents
Machupo virus
HF
Arenaviridae
Yes
Vole* Calomys callosus
Bolivia
Direct/
indirect
Low
Agricultural change
Sabia virus
HF
Arenaviridae
No
Rodentsφ
Brazil
No
Laboratory contact
Borna virus
Psychiatric?
Bornaviridae
Maybe
Many vertebrates, esp. 
horses
Europe, Japan, 
USA
Unknown

35
Virus name
Disease
Virus 
family
Public 
health 
issue?
Animal host 
(*=known to be natural 
reservoir)
Distribution
Main 
transmission 
route
Human-
human 
transmission? 
Factors associated 
with zoonotic 
transfer
Andes
HPS
Bunyaviridae
Yes
Rice rat* Oligoryzomys sp. Argentina, 
Chile
Direct
Yes
increased forestry
Bayou virus
HPS
Bunyaviridae
Yes
Rice rat* Oryzomys 
paluastris
USA
Direct
Rare
Changes in rodent 
ecology/climate?
Bermejo
HPS
Bunyaviridae
Yes
Oligoryzomys*
Bolivia
Direct
Rare
Changes in rodent 
ecology/climate?
Black Creek Canal 
virus
HPS
Bunyaviridae
Yes
Cotton rat* Sigmodon 
hispidus
USA
Direct
Rare
Changes in rodent 
ecology/climate?
Central Plata 
virus
HPS
Bunyaviridae
Yes
Yellow pygmy rice rat* 
Oligoryzomys flavescens, 
Argentina, 
Uruguay
Direct
Rare
Changes in rodent 
ecology/climate?
Choclo
HPS
Bunyaviridae
Yes
Unknown (rodentφ)
Panama
Direct
Rare
Changes in rodent 
ecology/climate?
Dobrava-Belgrade 
virus
HFRS
Bunyaviridae
Yes
Yellow-necked mouse* 
Apodemus flavicollis
Yugoslavia
Direct
Rare
Hantaan virus
HFRS
Bunyaviridae
Yes
Field mouse* Apodemus 
agrarius 
Asia, Europe, 
USA
Direct
Rare
HU39694
HPS
Bunyaviridae
Yes
Unknown (rodentφ)
Argentina
Direct
Rare
Changes in rodent 
ecology/climate?
Juquitiba
HPS
Bunyaviridae
Yes
Rodentsφ
Brazil
Direct
Rare
Changes in rodent 
ecology/climate?
Laguna negra
HPS
Bunyaviridae
Yes
Vesper mouse* Calomys 
laucha
Paraguay, 
Bolivia
Direct
Rare
Changes in rodent 
ecology/climate?
Lechiguanas
HPS
Bunyaviridae
Yes
Rodentφ
Argentina
Direct
Rare
Changes in rodent 
ecology/climate?
Monongahela 
virus
HPS
Bunyaviridae
Yes
White-footed mouse* 
Peromyscus leucopus 
USA, Canada
Direct
Rare
Changes in rodent 
ecology/climate?
New York virus
HPS
Bunyaviridae
Yes
White-footed mouse* 
Peromyscus leucopus
USA
Direct
Rare
Changes in rodent 
ecology/climate?
Oran virus
HPS
Bunyaviridae
Yes
Rodentφ
Argentina
Direct
Rare
Changes in rodent 
ecology/climate?

36
Virus name
Disease
Virus 
family
Public 
health 
issue? 
Animal host 
(*=known to be natural 
reservoir)
Distribution
Main 
transmission 
route
Human-
human 
transmission? 
Factors associated 
with zoonotic 
transfer
Puumala virus
HFRS
Bunyaviridae
Yes
Voles* Clethrionomys. 
House mouse Mus 
musculus 
Europe, Asia
Direct
Rare
Changes in rodent 
ecology/climate?
Sin Nombre virus
HPS
Bunyaviridae
Yes
Deer mouse* Peromyscus 
maniulcatus
USA
Direct
Rare
Changes in rodent 
ecology/climate?
Soeul virus
HFRS
Bunyaviridae
Yes
Rats* Rattus rattus, R. 
norvegicus
Worldwide
Direct
Rare
Kasokero virus
Flu-like
Bunyaviridae
No
Bats Rousettus 
aegyptiacus
Uganda
Yes
Laboratory contact
San Miguel 
sealion virus
Vesicles, flu-
like
Calciviridae
No
Sealions*, pigs
USA
Direct
No
Laboratory contact
Human 
Coronavirus OC43 
Common cold
Coronaviridae
Yes
Pigs
Worldwide in 
humans; pigs 
in Japan
Direct
Yes ∞
SARS virus
Severe Acute 
Respiratory 
Syndrome
Coronoviridae
Yes
Several carnivore 
speciesφ, possibly other 
mammals and reptiles
Asia, Europe, 
USA, Canada
Direct, 
possibly 
indirect?
Yes
Contact with 
wildlife?
Cote D’Ivoire 
Ebola virus
HF
Filoviridae
Yes
Monkeys; bats?φ
W. Africa
Direct/ 
internal
Yes
Contact with sick 
chimpanzee
Marburg virus
HF
Filoviridae
Yes
Monkeys; bats?φ
Africa, Europe
Internal
Yes
Imported lab. 
monkeys
Reston Ebola 
virus
None
Filoviridae
No
monkeys
USA, 
Philippines
Direct
No
Laboratory contact
Sudan Ebola virus
HF
Filoviridae
Yes
Monkeys; bats?φ
Africa
Direct/
internal
Yes ∞
Hunting bushmeat?
Zaire Ebola virus
HF
Filoviridae
Yes
Monkeys; bats?φ
Africa
Direct/
internal
Yes ∞
Hunting bushmeat?
Hepatitis B virus
Hepatitis
Hepadnaviridae
Yes
Chimpanzees
Worldwide
Internal
Yes ∞
Contact with wild 
chmpanzees?
Cercopitechine 
herpes virus 1
Encephalitis
Herpesviridae
Yes
Primates, mainly 
Macaca sp.*
Mostly old 
world tropics
Internal
Yes
Contact with 
laboratory monkeys

37
Virus name
Disease
Virus 
family
Public 
health 
issue? 
Animal host 
(*=known to be natural 
reservoir)
Distribution
Main 
transmission 
route
Human-
human 
transmission? 
Factors associated 
with zoonotic 
transfer
Suid herpesvirus 
1
Aujeszky’s
(rabies-like)
Herpesviridae
No
Pigs
Worldwide in 
pigs
Internal (bite)
No
Rare, 
unsubstantiated
Influenza A
Respiratory
Orthomyxoviridae
Yes
Wildfowl*, poultry, pigs
Worldwide
Direct
Yes ∞
Genetic change, pig/
duck agriculture
Influenza B
Respiratory
Orthomyxoviridae
Yes
Seals
Worldwide
Direct
Yes ∞
Influenza C
Respiratory
Orthomyxoviridae
Yes
Pigs
Worldwide
Direct
Yes ∞
Hendra virus
Respiratory
Paramyxoviridae
Yes
Horses, fruit bats* 
(Pteropus sp.)
Australia
Direct
Yes
Pressure on bat 
ecology
Menangle virus
Mild fever, 
reproductive
Paramyxoviridae
No
Pigs, fruit bats* 
(Pteropus sp.)
Australia
Direct
No
Pressure on bat 
ecology
Nipah virus
Encephalitis
Paramyxoviridae
Yes
Pigs, fruit bats* 
(Pteropus sp.)
Malaysia, 
Singapore
Direct
Yes
Pressure on bat 
ecology/ 
Human 
parainfluenza 
virus 2
Respiratory
Paramyxoviridae
Yes
Dogs, monkeys?
Worldwide
Direct
Yes ∞
Contact in medical 
laboratories?
Newcastle disease 
virus
Conjunctivitis, 
flu-like
Paramyxoviridae
No
Birds
Worldwide
Direct
No
Contact with poultry
Human 
Respiratory 
Syncytial virus
Respiratory
Paramyxoviridae
Yes
Chimpanzees, cattle
Worldwide
Direct
Yes ∞
Encephalomyoca-
rditis virus
various
Picornaviridae
No
Includes ruminants, 
primates, rodents, 
chickens, insects
Worldwide
Uncertain
Unknown
Foot and mouth 
disease virus
Vesicles/
lesions
Picornaviridae
No
Hooved animals esp. 
pigs, cows
Worldwide
Direct/
indirect
No
Contact with cows/
pigs
Hepatitis A
Liver disease
Picornaviridae
Yes
Higher primates 
including chimpanzees 
Worldwide
Direct
Yes ∞
Swine vesicular 
disease virus
Various 
symptoms
Picornaviridae
No
Pigs
Europe, Hong 
Kong, Japan
Direct
Contact with 
infected pigs
Buffalopox virus
Hand lesions
Poxviridae
No
Buffalo Bubalus bubalis; 
rodents?φ
India
Direct
Rare
Contact with 
infected animals

38
Virus name
Disease
Virus 
family
Public 
health 
issue? 
Animal host 
(*=known to be natural 
reservoir)
Distribution
Main 
transmission 
route
Human-
human 
transmission? 
Factors associated 
with zoonotic 
transfer
Cowpox virus
Lesions
Poxviridae
No
Cattle, cats, rodents* 
(wild voles in UK)
Worldwide
Direct
Rare
Contact with 
infected cattle
Monkeypox virus
Lesions
Poxviridae
Yes
Squirrels* Funiscuirus sp.  
Monkeys
Africa, USA
Direct
Yes
Hunting bushmeat, 
imported pets (USA)
Bovine popular 
stomatitis virus
Lesions
Poxviridae
No
Cattle
Worldwide
Direct
Rare
Contact with 
infected cattle
Orf virus
Lesions
Poxviridae
No
Domestic sheep/goats
Worldwide
Direct
Rare
Contact with 
infected sheep
Pseudocowpox 
virus
Lesions
Poxviridae
No
Domestic cattle
Worldwide
Direct
Rare
Contact with 
infected cattle
Sealpox virus
Lesions
Poxviridae
No
Seals (various species)
USA, Canada, 
Europe
Direct
Rare
Contact with 
infected seals
Tanapox virus 
Lesions/
fever
Poxviridae
No
Monkeys, reservoir 
unknown
Central Africa
Unknown
Rare
Associated with 
rivers
Yaba monkey 
tumour virus
Fibrous 
tomours
Poxviridae
No
Monkeys
Africa/USA
Unknown
Contact in medical 
laboratories
BSE agents
vCJD
Prions
Yes
Cattle
UK
Indirect 
(infected 
meat)
Yes
Bad husbandry and 
food processing
Rotavirus A
Gastroenter-tis
Reoviridae
Yes
Wide range mammals 
and birds, not rodents
Worldwide
Direct 
Yes ∞
Contact with 
infected animal 
faeces
Rotavirus B
Gastroenter-tis
Reoviridae
Likely 
Pigs, cows, rats
Worldwide
Direct
Yes ∞
Contact with 
infected animal 
faeces
Rotavirus C
Gastroenter-tis Reoviridae
Likely
Cows
Worldwide
Direct 
Yes ∞
Contact with 
infected animal 
faeces
Rotavirus D
Gastroenter-tis
Reoviridae
Likely
Wide range mammals
Worldwide
Direct 
Yes ∞
Contact with 
infected animal 
faeces
Rotavirus E
Gastroenter-tis
Reoviridae
Likely
Wide range mammals
Worldwide
Direct 
Yes ∞
Contact with 
infected animal 
faeces
Rotavirus F
Gastroenter-tis
Reoviridae
Likely
Wide range mammals
Worldwide
Direct 
Yes ∞
Contact with 
infected animal 
faeces

39
Virus name
Disease
Virus 
family
Public 
health 
issue? 
Animal host 
(*=known to be natural 
reservoir)
Distribution
Main 
transmission 
route
Human-
human 
transmission? 
Factors associated 
with zoonotic 
transfer
HIV-1
AIDS
Retroviridae
Yes
Chimpanzee Pan 
troglodytes troglodytes
Worldwide
 Internal
Yes ∞
Hunting wildlife/
medical practise?
HIV-2
AIDS
Retroviridae
Yes
Sooty mangabey 
Cerocebus atys
West Africa
Internal 
Yes ∞
Hunting wildlife
Human 
T-lymphotropic 
virus-1
Leukaemia, 
paralysis
Retroviridae
Yes
Primates
Worldwide
Internal
Yes ∞
Rabies virus
Rabies
Rhabdoviridae
Yes
Mammals, small-
medium sized 
omnivores, especially 
dogs
Almost 
worldwide
Internal (bite)
No
Bite from infected 
animal
Australian bat 
lyssavirus
Rabies-like
Rhabdoviridae
Yes
Fruit bats Pteropus sp.
Australia
Internal (bite)
No
Bite from infected 
animal
Duvenhage virus
Rabies-like
Rhabdoviridae
Yes
Bats
Worldwide
Internal (bite)
No
Bite from infected 
animal
European bat 
lyssavirus 1
Rabies-like 
Rhabdoviridae
Yes
Insectivorous bats
Europe
Internal (bite)
No
Bite from infected 
animal
European bat 
lyssavirus 2
Rabies-like 
Rhabdoviridae
Yes
Insectivorous bats 
(Myotis spp.)
Europe
Internal (bite)
No
Bite from infected 
animal
Mokola virus
Rabies-like
Rhabdoviridae
Yes
Dogs, cats, rodents
Africa
Internal (bite)
No
Bite from infected 
animal
Hepatitis E
Hepatitis
Unclassified 
(Caliciviridae?)
Yes
Many mammals, 
including primates, 
rodents, pigs.
Asia, Africa, 
Indian 
subcontinent
Indirect 
(water)
Yes ∞

40
REFERENCES USED TO COMPILE REVIEW
General: (Beran, 1994; Palmer, Soulsby et al., 1998; Granoff and Webster, 1999; Taylor, Latham et al., 2001)
Specific to virus family/genus
Arenaviruses: (Monath, 1987; Salas, 1991; Childs, 1994; Coimbra, Nassar et al., 1994; Howard, 1998)
Bornaviridae: (Hatalski, Lewis et al., 1997; Boucher, Barbillon et al., 1999)
Hantaviruses: (Lee, Lee et al., 1978; Avsic-Zupanc, Xiao et al., 1992; Nichol, Spiropoulou et al., 1993; Chu, Rossi et al., 
1994; Diglisic, Xiao et al., 1994; Peters, 1994; Song, Baek et al., 1994; Morzunov, Feldmann et al., 1995; Rollin, Ksiazek et 
al., 1995; Levis, Rowe et al., 1997; Williams, Bryan et al., 1997; Clement, McKenna et al., 1998; Johnson, de Souza et al., 
1999; Rhodes, Huang et al., 2000; Vincent, Quiroz et al., 2000; Della Valle, Edelstein et al., 2002; Padula, Della Valle et 
al., 2002; Delfraro, Clara et al., 2003; Täger, Vial et al., 2003)
Other Bunyaviridae: (Kalunda, Mukwaya et al., 1986)
Coronaviridae: (Hirano, Suzuki et al., 1999; Enserink, 2003; Normile and Enserink, 2003)
Caliciviridae: (Bankowski and Sawyer, 1994)
Filoviridae: (Peters, Jonhson et al., 1993; McCormick and Fisher-Hoch, 1994; Lloyd, 1998; Monath, 1999)
Hepatitis B: (Bollyky, Rambaut et al., 1997; Odemuyiwa, Mulders et al., 2001)
Herpesviridae: (Brown, 1998; Meurens, Gallego et al., 2002)
Influenza: (Webster, Geraci et al., 1981; Kimura, Abiko et al., 1997; Subbarao, Klimov et al., 1998; Osterhaus, 
Rimmelzwaan et al., 2000; Horimoto and Kawaoka, 2001)
Hendraviruses: (Chant, Chan et al., 1998; Philbey, Kirkland et al., 1998; Barclay and Paton, 2000; Chua, Bellini et al., 
2000; Field, Young et al., 2001; Wang and Eaton, 2001; Wang, Chua et al, 2003)
Other Paramyxoviridae: (Hsiung and Chang, 1994; Khan, 1994; Lehmkuhl, 1994; Morgan-Capner and Bryden, 1998)
Picornoviridae: (Brown, Goodridge et al., 1976; Morgan-Capner and Bryden, 1998)
Poxviridae: (Falk, 1978; Jezek and Fenner, 1988; Douglass, Richardson et al., 1994; Reid, 1998; Chantrey, Meyer et al., 
1999; Pastoret, Bennett et al., 2000; Lutz, 2003)
Prions: (Will, Ironside et al., 1996)
Retroviruses: (Voevodin, Johnson et al., 1997; Gao, Bailes et al., 1999; Gessain and Mahieux, 1999; Hahn, Shaw et al., 
2000; Weiss and Weiss, 2001)
Rhabdoviridae: (King, 1998)

41
APPENDIX III:   Wildlife species reported to have been consumed or sold 
in wildlife markets in China
Four systematic surveys of species traded in wildlife markets in southern China are summarized here. All were carried 
out in the late 90s. The first three are published in the scientific literature. The fourth was carried out by CWCA, and 
reported in the Chinese press.
Species are separated by class, into mammals, birds and reptiles. Mammals are further divided into orders, because of 
their greater relevance in disease transfer to humans. Within each taxonomic group, species are listed in alphabetical 
order for ease of reference. Common names are given where available. Where species were grouped into a genus in any 
one of the surveys, species identified from that genus in other surveys are placed in the same group.  
Reference 1 (Zhijun, Huojie et al., 1996) recorded live animals being imported through 6 ports in the Province of Yunnan 
from May 1998 to December 1999. These species could have been destined for consumption or for use as medicines or 
even pets. However, most of them were also observed being transferred directly to wildlife markets and restaurants. 
Number of ports (out of six) the species was recorded at is given.
Reference 2 (Li, Fuller et al., 1996) is a survey of wildlife trade in Guangdon Province and Guangxi Zhuang Nationality 
Autonomous Region, in 1994.  Trade markets, trade sites on the Vietnam border were monitored and wildlife and forestry 
officials were interviewed to compile a list of species being traded. Species presence across nine markets was recorded as 
rare (+), common (++) or in large quantities (+++). The highest rating is shown here.
Reference 3 (Li and Li, 1998) surveyed wildlife markets in towns near the China Vietnam border between 1993 and 1996, 
and inspected middle-high quality restaurants in Donxing, Pingxiang, Longzhou and Nanning. Twenty types of wildlife 
were found in restaurants. The highest percentage of restaurants serving these species in any of the three one-month 
survey periods is given, to nearest per cent. * = local or commercial name, species not identified.
Reference 4 (Anon., 2000) was a survey of wildlife eaten by people in China, published by CWCA in Chinese only. The 
survey was carried out from Septmber to December 1999, and surveyed restaurants, food stores and street markets  in 
Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou, Nanning, Chongqing, Changsha, Fuzhou, Nanchang, Haikou, Guiyang, Kunming, Xi’an, 
Chengdu, Zhengzhou,Nanjing, Harbin, and Sanming, Quanzhou,Xiamen, Wuzhou and Guilin.  EJF have obtained only a 
list of the most common species, from a brief report of the survey sent by Zhang Zhengwang, of Beijing Normal University. 
♦ = Species not observed in markets or restaurants by any study, but seen traded at one port.

42
Class/Order
Species 
(common name)
Latin name
Quantity observed 
Study
MAMMALIA: 
Primates
Hoolock gibbon
Hylobates hoolock
1/6 ports
1
Gibbon
Hylobates sp.
3/6 ports
1
Assam macaque
Macaca assamensis 
+++
2, 3
Crab-eating macaque
Macaca fascicularis 
1/6 ports
++
1, 2, 3
Rhesus macaque
Macaca mulatta
5/6 ports
+++
1, 2, 3
Pigtail macaque
Macaca nemestrina
2/6 ports
+++
1, 2, 3
Stump-tailed macaque
Macacca arctioides
++ 
2, 3
Slow loris
Nycticebus coucang
4/6 ports
+++
1, 2, 3
Pygmy loris
Nycticebus pygmaeus
1/6 ports
1
Sureli
Presbytis sp.
3/6 ports
1
Tonkin snub-nosed monkey
Pygathrix avunculus
3
Francois’ leaf monkey
Trachypithecus francoisi
++
2, 3, 4
Carnivores
Owston’s palm civet
Chrotogale owstoni
++
2
Asian wild dog
Cuon alpinus
3/6 ports
1
Leopard cat
Felis bengalensis
++
2% rests.
2, 3
Jungle cat
Felis chaus
5/6 ports
1
Asiatic golden cat
Felis temmincki
3/6 ports
1
Malayan sun bear
Helarctos malayanus
2/6 ports
1
Crab-eating mongoose
Herpestes urva
++
2, 3
Otter
Lutra sp.
5/6 ports
1
Badger
Meles meles
+
2
Chinese ferret badger
Melogale moschata
+
3% rests. 
2, 3
Siberian weasel
Mustela sibirica
++
2
Clouded leopard
Neofelis nebulosa
2/6 ports
1
Masked palm civet
Paguma larvata
5/6 ports
+++
35% rests.
1,2,3,4
Leopard
Panthera pardus
4/6 ports
1
Tiger
Panthera tigris♦
1/6 ports
1
Spotted linsang
Prionodon pardicolor
+++
2
Asiatic black bear
Selenarctos thibetanus
5/6 ports
++
1, 2
Brown bear
Ursus arctos
+
2
Large Indian civet
Viverra zibetha
2/6 ports
+++
1, 2, 3
Small Indian civet
Viverricula indica
3/6 ports
++
2% rests.
1, 2, 3
Red fox
Vulpes vulpes
10% rests.
3

43
Even-toed 
ungulates
Roe deer
Capreolus capreolus
4
Red deer
Cervus elaphus
+++
2
Sika deer
Cervus nippon
++
2
Sambar 
Cervus unicolor
4/6 ports
+++
1, 2
Indian muntjac
Muntiacus muntjak
3/6 ports
+++
1, 2
Chinese muntjac
Muntiacus reevesi
+++
2, 4
Saiga antelope
Saiga tatarica
+
2
Wild pig
Sus scrofa
2/6 ports
+
2% rests.
1, 2, 3, 4
Elephants
Asian elephant
Elephas maximus 
2/6 ports
1
Anteaters
Pangolin
Manis sp. (mostly pentidactyla)
6/6 ports
+++
36% rests.
1, 2, 3
Rabbits and hares
Cape hare
Lepus capensis
4
Chinese hare
Lepus sinensis
+++
8% rests.
2
Squirrel
Callosciurus erythraeus
3
Rodents
Malayan porcupine
Hystrix Brachyura
+
2
Himalayan porcupine
Hystrix hodgsoni
4/6 ports
1
Chinese mountain rat
Niviventer coxingi
+++
2
Black Giant Squirrel
Ratufa bicolor
+++
2
Chinese bamboo rat
Rhizomys sinensis
6/6 ports
+++
22% rests.
1, 2, 4
AVES: 
Birds
Hawks
Accipiter spp.
4/6 ports
++
1, 2, 3
Mynas
Acridotheres spp.
6/6 ports
1
Mandarin duck
Aix galericulata
++
2
Common kingfisher
Alcedo atthis
++
2
White-breasted water hen
Amaurornis pheonicurus
2/6 ports
1, 3
Golden crested myna
Ampeliceps coronatus
4/6 ports
1
Ducks
Anas spp.
1/6 ports
+++
2% rests.
1, 2, 3
Bar-headed goose
Anser indicus
3/6 ports
1
Malabar pied hornbill
Anthracoceros coronatus
2/6 ports
1
Eagles
Aquila spp.
2/6 ports
+
8% rests.
1, 2, 3
Sichuan partridge
Arbophila rufipectus
+
2
Green-legged hill partridge
Arborophila chloropus
1/6 ports
1
Grey heron
Ardea cinerea
1/6 ports
1
Purple heron
Ardea pupurea
3/6 ports
1
Long-eared owl
Asio otus
++
2
Black baza
Aviceda leuphotes♦
1/6 ports
1
Mountain Bamboo-partridge
Bambusicola fytchii
++
2

44
Chinese Bamboo-partridge
Bambusicola thoracica
++
2, 4
Eurasian eagle-owl
Bubo bubo
++
2, 3
Bubo niaplensis
1/6 ports
1
Greater coucal
Centropus sinensis	
1/6 ports
1, 3
Emerald dove
Chalcophaps indica
3/6 ports
1
Lady Amherst pheasant
Chrysolophus amherstiae
4/6 ports
1
Golden pheasant
Chrysolophus pictus
Contunix spp.
4
Oriental magpie robin
Copsychus saularis
2/6 ports
1
Whooper swan
Cygnus cygnus
2% rests.
3
Lesser whistling duck
Dendrocygna javanica
1/6 ports
1
Mountain imperial pigeon
Ducula badia
2/6 ports
1
Yellow-breasted bunting
Emberiza aureola
3% rests.
3
Avadavat
Estrilda amandava
1/6 ports
1
Falcons
Falco spp.
3/6 ports
++
1, 2
Chinese francolin
Francolinus pintadaenus
4/6 ports
1, 3, 4
Barred rail
Gallus gallus
6/6 ports
1
Hwamei
Garrulax canorus
1/6 ports
+++
1, 2
Black-throated laughingthrush
Garrulax chinensis
3/6 ports
1
White-crested laughingthrush
Garrulax leucolophus
2/6 ports
1
Spot-breasted laughingthrush
Garrulax merulinus
1/6 ports
1
Lesser necklaced laughingthrush
Garrulax monileger
1/6 ports
1
Greater necklaced laughingthrush
Garrulax pectoralis
1/6 ports
1
White-browed laughingthrush
Garrulax sannio
++
2
Asian barred owlet
Glaucidium cucloides
++
2
Eurasian pygmy-owl
Glaucidium passerinum
++
2
Common hill myna
Gracula religiosa
6/6 ports
1
Griffon vulture
Gyps fulvus
3/6 ports
1
Kingfishers
Halcyon spp.
++
2
Silver-eared mesia
Leiothrix argentauris
++
2
Silver-eared mesia
Leiothrix argentauris
3/6 ports
1
Red-billed leiothrix
Leiothrix lutea
++
2
Red-faced liocichla
Liocichla phoenicea
1/6 ports
1
Edward’s pheasant
Lophura edwardsi
1/6 ports
1
Silver pheasant
Lophura nycthemera
1/6 ports
++
1, 2
Black kite
Milvus migrans
++
2
Brown hawk owl
Ninox scutulata
3/6 ports
1
Orioles
Oriolus spp.
+++
2
Tree sparrow
Passer montanus
1/6 ports
1, 4
Green peafowl
Pavo muticus
4/6 ports
1
Scarlet minivet
Pericrocotus flammeus
++
2
Common pheasant
Phasianus colchicus
3/6 ports
10% rests.
1,3,4
Asian bay owl
Phodilus badius
1/6 ports
1

45
Magpie
Pica pica
4
Grey peacock pheasant
Polyplectron bicalcaratum
5/6 ports
1
Coral-billed scimitar babbler
Pomatorhinus ferruginosus
1/6 ports
1
Large scimitar babbler
Pomatorhinus hypoleucos
1/6 ports
1
Purple gallinule
Porphyrio porphyrio
5/6 ports
1
Long-tailed broadbill
Psarisomus dalhousiae
++
2
Moustached parakeet
Psittacula alexandri
4/6 ports
1, 3
Plum-headed parakeet
Psittacula cyanocephala
1/6 ports ++
1, 2
Derbyan parakeet
Psittacula derbiana
2/6 ports
1
Rose-ringed parakeet
Psittacula krameri
1/6 ports
+++
1, 2
Blue-breasted banded rail
Rallus striatus
2/6 ports
1
Silver breasted broadbill
Serilophus lunatus
++
2
Crested serpent eagle
Spilornis cheela
2/6 ports
1
Wallace’s hawk eagle
Spizaetus nanus
1/6 ports
1
Crested finchbill
Spizixos canifrons
++
2
Collared finchbill
Spizixos semitorques
++
2
Spotted dove
Streptopelia chinensis
1/6 ports
+++
1, 2, 4
Oriental turtle-dove
Streptopelia orientalis
1/6 ports
+++ 
1, 2, 4
Red collared-dove
Streptopelia tranquebarica
1/6 ports +++
1, 2, 4
Starlings
Sturnus sp.
6/6 ports
1
Bar-tailed pheasant
Syrmaticus humiae
2/6 ports
1
Pin-tailed green pigeon
Treron apicauda
4/6 ports
1
Wedge-tailed green pigeon
Treron sphenura
2/6 ports
1
Yellow-legged button quail
Turnix tanki
2/6 ports
1
African grass owl
Tyto capensis
2/6 ports
1, 3
Houtouying
Tytonidae
3
Japanese white-eye
Zosterops japonica
1/6 ports
1
Oriental white-eye
Zosterops palpebrosa
2/6 ports
1
REPTILIA
Mountain horned dragon
Acanthosaura armata
4/6 ports
1
Hundred-pace pit viper
Agkistrodon acutus
2/6 ports
1
Vipers
Agkistrodon spp.
1/6 ports
+++
1, 2, 3
Fea’s viper
Azemiops feae
2/6 ports
1
Banded krait
Bungarus fasciatus
4/6 ports
+++
1, 2, 3
Many-banded krait
Bungarus multicinctus
4/6 ports
+++
1, 2, 3
Common garden lizard
Calotes versicolor
+++
2% rests.
2, 3
Loggerhead turtle
Caretta caretta
3
Chinese broad-headed pond turtle
Chinemys megalocephala
+++
2
Chinese three-keeled pond turtle
Chinemys reevesii
++++
2, 3
Spotted terrapin
Clemmys bealei
3/6 ports
1

46
Four-eyed turtle
Clemmys quadriocellata
3/6 ports
1
Snake-eating turtle
Cuora hainanensis
3/6 ports
1
Chinese three-striped box turtle
Cuora trifasciata
+++
2, 3
Yunnan box turtle
Cuora yunnanensis
++
2, 3
Asian leaf turtle
Cyclemys dentata
+++
2
Keeled box turtle
Cyclemys mouhotii
3/6 ports
1
Yellow-margined box turtle
Cystoclemmys flavomarginata
++
2
Sharp-nosed viper
Deinagkistrodon acutus
+++
2
Leatherback
Dermochelys coriacea
+++
2
Yellow banded wolf snake
Dinodon flavozonatum
3/6 ports
1
Mandarin rat snake
Elaphe mandarina
3/6 ports
1
Moellendorff’s rat snake
Elaphe moellendorffi
4/6 ports
+++
1, 2, 3
Copperhaed trincket snake
Elaphe radiata
4/6 ports
+++
1,2, 3
Taiwan beauty snake
Elaphe taeniurus
4/6 ports
1, 3
Mangrove water snake
Enhydris bennetti
3/6 ports
1
Rainbow water snake
Enhydris enhydris
3/6 ports
1
Asian green snake
Entechinus major
4/6 ports
1
Hawksbill turtle
Eretmochelys imbricata
+++
2
Tokay
Gekko gecko
4/6 ports
+++
40% rests.
1, 2, 3
Geckos
Gekko spp.
+++
2
Black breasted leaf turtle
Geoemyda spengleri
+++
4/6 ports
1, 2, 3
Crowned river turtle
Hardella thurjii
++
2
Elongated tortoise
Indotestudo elongata
+++
2
Olive Ridley sea turtle
Lepidochelys olivacea
3
Wolf snake
Lycodon laoensis
1/6 ports
1
Impressed tortoise
Manouria impressa
+++
2
Asian yellow pond turtle
Mauremys mutica
3/6 ports
+++
1, 2
Common small-headed sea snake
Microcephalophis gracilis
3
Asian cobra
Naja naja
4/6 ports
+++
1, 2, 3
Chinese stripe-necked turtle
Ocadia sinensis
4/6 ports
1, 3
Greater green snake
Opheodrys major
3
King cobra
Ophiophagus hannah
4/6 ports
+++
1, 2, 3
Chinese slug snake
Pareas chinensis
1/6 ports
1
Chinese slug snake
Pareas hamptoni
3/6 ports
1
Asian giant softshell turtle
Pelochelys bibroni
+++
2
Asian water dragon
Physignathus cocincinus
++
2
Chinese water dragon
Physignathus cocincinus
4/6 ports
1,3
Plagiopholis chinensis
1/6 ports
1
Assamese mountain snake
Plagiopholis nuchalis
2/6 ports
1

47
Big-headed turtle
Platysternon megacephalum
3/6 ports
1,3
Bamboo snake
Pseudoxenodon bambusicola
4/6 ports
1
Indochinese rat snake
Ptyas korros
4/6 ports
1, 3
Common rat snake
Ptyas mucosus
3/6 ports
+++
1, 2, 3
Burmese python
Python molurus
4/6 ports
+++
1, 2, 3
Rhabdophis leonardi
2/6 ports
1
Oriental long-tailed lizard
Takydromus sexlineatus
++
2
Coahuilan box turtle
Terrapene coahuila
++
2
Elongated tortoise
Testudo elongata
2/6 ports
1
Central Asian tortoise
Testudo horsfieldii
+++
2
Impressed tortoise
Testudo impressa
2/6 ports
1
Yagui*
Testudoformes
3
Zhenggui*
Testudoformes
3
White-lipped pit viper
Trimeresurus albolabris
4/6 ports
1
Jerdon’s pit viper
Trimeresurus jerdonii
4/6 ports
1
Trimeresurus mucrosquamatus
4/6 ports
1
Stejneger’s pit viper
Trimeresurus stejnegeri
4/6 ports
+++
1, 2
Trionyx impressa
3/6 ports
1
Chinese softshell turtle
Trionyx sinensis
4/6 ports
+++
49% rests.
1, 2, 3
Wattle-necked softshell turtle
Trionyx steindachneri
4/6 ports
++
1, 2, 3
Water skink
Tropidophorus berdmorei
3/6 ports
1
Common worm snake
Typhlops braminus
+++
2
Yellow monitor 
Varanus flavescens
+++
2
Sepik monitor
Varanus jobiensis
+++
2
Water monitor
Varanus salvator
4/6 ports
+++
37% rests.
1, 2, 3
Russell’s Viper
Vipera russelli
+++
2
Xenopeltis hainanensis
3/6 ports
1
Xenopeltis unicolor
3/6 ports
1
Chinese rat snake
Zaocys dhumnades
1/6 ports
+++
1, 2
Zaocys dhumnades
2/6 ports
1
AMPHIBIA
Chinese giant salamander
Andrias davidianus
+++
2
Toads
Bufo spp.
+++
2
Boulenger’s Toad 
Rana boulengeri
+++
2
Rana japonica
++
2
Rana nigromaculata
3
Tiger frog
Rana tigerina
+++
2

48
APPENDIX IV: List of arboviruses
This is an alphabetical list of viruses known to cause disease in humans that are transmitted by arthropod vectors. The 
list is derived from an electronic appendix to (Taylor, Latham et al., 2001). The majority are carried by mosquitos, ticks 
or sand-flies. In some cases, such as Apoi virus and Phnom-Penh bat virus, the vector is not yet identified. Emerging 
viruses are underlined. All are zoonotic.
•	Apoi virus
•	Bagaza virus
•	Bangui virus
•	Banna virus
•	Banzi virus
•	Barmah Forest virus
•	Batkon virus
•	Bebaru virus
•	Bhanja virus
•	Bovine ephemeral fever virus
•	Bunyamwera virus
•	Bussuquara virus
•	Bwamba virus
•	California encephalitis virus
•	Candiru virus complex
•	Caraparu virus
•	Catu virus
•	Chandipura virus
•	Changuinola virus
•	Chikungunya virus
•	Chim virus
•	Colorado tick fever virus
•	Crimean Congo haemorrhagic 
fever virus
•	Dakar bat virus
•	Dengue virus
•	Dhori virus
•	Dugbe vius
•	Eastern equine encephalitis virus
•	Edge Hill virus
•	European tick-borne 
encephalitis virus
•	Everglades virus
•	Eyach virus
•	Far Eastern tick-borne 
encephalitis virus
•	Gan gan virus
•	Getah virus
•	Guama virus
•	Guarea virus
•	Hughes virus
•	Igbo-ora virus
•	Ilheus virus
•	Issyk Kul virus
•	Japanese encephalitis virus
•	Kairi virus
•	Kedougou virus
•	Kemerovo virus
•	Kokobera virus
•	Koutango virus
•	Kyasanur forest disease virus
•	Lanjan virus
•	Lebombo virus
•	Louping ill virus
•	Madrid virus
•	Marituba virus
•	Mayaro virus
•	Mucambo virus
•	Murray Valley encephalitis virus
•	Nyando virus
•	Ockelbo virus
•	Omsk haemorrhagic fever virus
•	O’nyong-nyong virus
•	Oriboca virus
•	Oropouche virus
•	Orungo virus
•	Phnom-Penh bat virus
•	Piry virus
•	Powassan virus
•	Punta Toro virus
•	Quaranfil virus
•	Rift Valley Fever virus
•	Rocio virus
•	Ross river virus
•	Royal Farm virus
•	Salehabad virus
•	Sandfly fever Naples virus
•	Sandfly fevervirus group
•	Saumarez Reef virus
•	Semliki Forest virus
•	Sepik virus
•	Sindbis virus
•	St. Louis encephalitis virus
•	Tacaiuma virus
•	Tamdy virus
•	Tataguine virus
•	Thogoto virus
•	Trubanaman virus
•	Tyuleniy virus
•	Usutu virus
•	Venezuelan equine 
encephalitis virus
•	Vesicular stomatitis virus
•	Wad medani virus
•	Wanowrie virus
•	Wesselsbron virus
•	West Nile virus
•	Western equine encephalitis virus
•	Wyeomyia virus
•	Yellow fever virus
•	Yogue virus
•	Zika virus

49
•	 ACAP (2003). ACAP China - taking ACAP into the new millenium. Asian 
Conservation Awareness Programme. http://www.acapworldwide.com/
china.htm
•	 Ananthaswamy, A. (2003). Death in the sun. New Scientist 179(2405): 12-13
•	 Anderson, R. M. and R. M. May (1992). Infectious diseases of humans: 
dynamics and control. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
•	 Anon. (2000). China Youth Daily, Beijing.January 21 2000
•	 Anon. (2003a). Chinese expert warns of possible renewed SARS outbreak. 
People’s Daily, Xinhua News Agency. 5 June 2003. http://english.peopledaily.
com.cn/200306/05/eng20030605_117699.shtml
•	 Anon. (2003b). South China Morning Post, Hong Kong, 17 May 2003
•	 Ansfield, J. (2003). China is ‘premature’ in lifting SARS animal ban, says 
WHO. Reuters. 26 August 2003
•	 Avsic-Zupanc, T., S. Y. Xiao, et al. (1992). Characterisation of Dobrava virus: 
a hantavirus from Slovenia, Yugoslavia. Journal of Medical Virology 38: 132-137
•	 Bankowski, R. A. and J. C. Sawyer (1994). Vesicular exanthema of swine 
and marine calciviral infections. Handbook of Zoonoses Section B: Viral. G. W. 
Beran. CRC Press, London, Tokyo: 445-452.
•	 Baranowski, E., C. M. Ruiz-Jarabo, et al. (2001). Evolution of cell recognition 
by viruses. Science 292: 1102-1105
•	 Barclay, A. J. and D. J. Paton (2000). Hendra (equine morbillivirus). 
Veterinary Journal 160(3): 169-176
•	 Baumgartner, W., S. Alldinger, et al. (2003). Canine distemper virus - an 
agent looking for new hosts. Deutsche Tierarztliche Wochenschrift 110(4): 137-
•	 Bayley, A. C., R. Cheingsongpopov, et al. (1985). HTLV-Iii serology 
distinguishes atypical and endemic Kaposis Sarcoma in Africa. Lancet 1(8425): 
359-361
•	 BBCi (2001). China snake craze threatens crops. BBC News. 28 January 
2001. http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/asia-pacific/1141525.stm
•	 BBCi (2001). China’s snakes ‘at risk’. BBC News. 6 December 2001. 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/asia-pacific/1695255.stm
•	 BBCi (2002). China facing AIDS ‘time bomb’. BBC News. 27 June 2002. 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/asia-pacific/2069943.stm
•	 Beck, M. A., Q. Shi, et al. (1995). Rapid genomic evolution of a nonvirulent 
coxsackievirus B3 in selenium-deficient mice results in selection of identical 
virulent isolates. Nature Medicine 1(5): 433-436
•	 Beran, G. W., Ed. (1994). Handbook of Zoonoses Section B: Viral. CRC Press, 
London, Tokyo.
•	 Bohlman, M. C., S. P. Morzunov, et al. (2002). Analysis of hantavirus genetic 
diversity in Argentina: S segment-derived phylogeny. Journal of Virology 76(8): 
3765-3773
•	 Böhm, H. (1997). Viral zoonoses and food of animal origin: a re-evaluation 
of possible hazards for human health. Archives of Virology supplement 13: V-VI
•	 Bollyky, P. L., A. Rambaut, et al. (1997). Hepatitis B virus has a recent new 
world evolutionary origin. Hepatology 26(4): 765-765
•	 Boucher, J. M., E. Barbillon, et al. (1999). Borna disease: a possible emerging 
zoonosis. Veterinary Research 30(6): 549-557
•	 Bowden, T. R., M. Westenberg, et al. (2001). Molecular characterization of 
Menangle virus, a novel paramyxovirus which infects pigs, fruit bats, and 
humans. Virology 283(2): 358-373
•	 Brown, D. W. G. (1998). Herpes B virus. Zoonoses. S. R. Palmer, E. J. L. 
Soulsby and D. I. H. Simpson. Oxford University Press, Oxford: 353-363.
•	 Brown, F., D. Goodridge, et al. (1976). Infection of man by swine vesicular 
disease virus. Journal of Comparative Pathology 86: 409-414
•	 Brown, I. H. and D. J. Alexander (1998). Influenza. Zoonoses. S. R. Palmer, 
E. J. L. Soulsby and D. I. H. Simpson. Oxford University Press, Oxford: 365-386.
•	 Bull, J. and D. Dykhuizen (2003) Epidemics in waiting. Nature 426: 609-610.
•	 Büttner, M., A. Oehmig, et al. (1997). Detection of virus or virus specific 
nucleic acid in foodstuff or bioproducts - hazards and risk assessment. 
Archives of Virology [Suppl.] 13: 57-66
•	 CDC (2003). Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website. 
http://www.cdc.gov/
•	 CDC (2003). Ebola haemorrhagic fever information sheet. Special 
Pathogens Branch, Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. 
http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dvrd/spb/mnpages/dispages/ebola.htm
•	 Chant, K., R. Chan, et al. (1998). Probable human infection with a newly 
described virus in the family Paramyxoviridae. Emerging Infectious Diseases 
4(2). http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/EID/vol4no2/chant.htm
•	 Chantrey, J., H. Meyer, et al. (1999). Cowpox: reservoir hosts and geographic 
range. Epidemiology and Infection 122(3): 455-460
•	 Charleston, M. A. and D. L. Robertson (2002). Preferential host switching 
by primate lentiviruses can account for phylogenetic similarity with the 
primate phylogeny. Systematic Biology 51(3): 528-535
•	 Chen, H. X. and F. X. Qui (1993). Epidemiological survey: epidemiological 
surveillance on the haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome in China. 
Chinese Medical Journal 106: 857-863
•	 Childs, J. E. (1994). Lymphocytic choriomeningitis. Handbook of Zoonoses 
Section B: Viral. G. W. Beran. CRC Press, London, Tokyo: 463-471.
•	 Childs, J. E., T. G. Ksiazek, et al. (1994). Serologic and genetic identification 
of Peromyscus maniculatus as the primary rodent reservoir for a new 
Hantavirus in the southwestern United-States. Journal of Infectious Diseases 
169(6): 1271-1280
•	 Chin, C., T. S. Chiueh, et al. (2000). Hantavirus infection in Taiwan: the 
experience of a geographically unique area. Journal of Medical Virology 60(2): 
237-247
•	 Chu, Y. K., G. Jennings, et al. (1995). Cross-neutralization of Hantaviruses 
with immune sera from experimentally infected animals and from 
hemorrhagic-fever with renal syndrome and hantavirus pulmonary 
syndrome patients. Journal of Infectious Diseases 172(6): 1581-1584
•	 Chu, Y. K., C. Rossi, et al. (1994). Serological relationships among viruses in 
the hantavirus genus, family Bunyaviridae. Virology 198: 196-204
•	 Chua, K. B. (2003). Nipah virus outbreak in Malaysia. Journal of Clinical 
Virology 26(3): 265-275
•	 Chua, K. B., W. J. Bellini, et al. (2000). Nipah virus: a recently emergent 
deadly paramyxovirus. Science 288(5470): 1432-1435
•	 Chua, K. B., L. F. Wang, et al. (2001). Tioman virus, a novel paramyxovirus 
isolated from fruit bats in Malaysia. Virology 283(2): 215-229
•	 Cleaveland, S., M. K. Laurenson, et al. (2001). Diseases of humans and 
their domestic mammals: pathogen characteristics, host range and the risk 
of emergence. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series 
B-Biological Sciences 356(1411): 991-999
•	 Clement, J., P. McKenna, et al. (1998). Hantaviruses. Zoonoses. S. R. Palmer, 
E. J. L. Soulsby and D. I. H. Simpson. Oxford University Press, Oxford: 331-351.
•	 Coimbra, T. L. M., E. S. Nassar, et al. (1994). New arenavirus isolated in 
Brazil. Lancet 343(8894): 391-392
•	 Crawford, D. H. (2000). The invisible enemy - a natural history of viruses. 
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
•	 Cyranoski, D. (2003). Nature web focus: where did the SARS virus come 
from? Nature On-line. http://www.nature.com/nature/focus/sars/sars2.html
•	 Czerny, C. P., C. Zeller-Lue, et al. (1997). Characterization of a cowpox-
like orthopox virus which has caused a lethal infection in man. Archives of 
Virology [Suppl] 13: 13-24
•	 Delfraro, A., M. Clara, et al. (2003). Yellow pygmy rice rat (Oligoryzomys 
flavescens) and hantavirus pulmonary syndrome in Uruguay. Emerging 
Infectious Diseases 9(7). http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/EID/vol9no7/03-0044.htm
REFERENCES

50
•	 Della Valle, M. G., A. Edelstein, et al. (2002). Andes virus associated with 
hantavirus pulmonary syndrome in northern Argentina and determination of 
the precise site of infection. American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 
66(6): 713-720
•	 Diamond, J. (1997). Guns, germs and steel. Vintage, London.
•	 Diglisic, G., S.-Y. Xiao, et al. (1994). Isolation of a Puumala-like virus 
from Mus musculus captured in Yugoslavia and its association with severe 
haemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome. Journal of Infectious Diseases 169: 
204-207
•	 Douglass, N. J., M. Richardson, et al. (1994). Evidence for recent genetic 
variation in monkeypox viruses. Journal of General Virology 75: 1303-1309
•	 Drosten, C., S. Günther et al. (2003) Identification of a novel coronavirus 
in patients with severe acute respiratory syndrome. New England Journal of 
Medicine 348:1995-2005.
•	 Earle, D. P. (1954). Symposium on epidemic hemorrhagic fever. American 
Journal of Medicine 16: 617-793
•	 Engelthaler, D. M., D. G. Mosley, et al. (1999). Climatic and environmental 
patterns associated with hantavirus pulmonary syndrome, Four Corners 
region, United States. Emerging Infectious Diseases 5(1): 87-94
•	 Enserink, M. (2003). Avian flu outbreak sets off alarm bells. Science 300: 718
•	 Enserink, M. (2003). Clues to the animal origins of SARS. Science 300: 1351
•	 Enserink, M. and D. Normile (2003) Search for SARS origins stalls. Science 
302: 766-767.
•	 Falk, E. S. (1978). Parapox infections of reindeer and musk ox associated 
with unusual human infections. British Journal of Dermatology 99: 647-654
•	 Field, H., P. Young, et al. (2001). The natural history of Hendra and Nipah 
viruses. Microbes and Infection 3(4): 307-314
•	 Fields, J. (1996). Virology. Lippincott-Raven, New York.
•	 Frank, S. A. and J. S. Jeffrey (2001). The probability of severe disease in 
zoonotic and commensal infections. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London 
Series B-Biological Sciences 268(1462): 53-60
•	 Gao, F., E. Bailes, et al. (1999). Origin of HIV-1 in the chimpanzee Pan 
troglodytes troglodytes. Nature 397(6718): 436-441
•	 Gao, F., L. Yue, et al. (1992). Human infection by genetically diverse SIVsm-
related HIV-2 in West Africa. Nature 358(6386): 495-499
•	 Gessain, A. and R. Mahieux (1999). Genetic diversity and molecular 
epidemiology of HTLV and related simian retoviruses. HIV and the New 
Viruses. A. G. Dalgleish and R. A. Weiss. Academic Press, London: 281-327.
•	 Giradoux, P., P. S. Craig, et al. (2003). Interactions between landscape 
changes and host communities can regulate Echinococcus multilocularis 
transmission. Parasitology 127: S1-S11
•	 Giraudoux, P., J. P. Quere, et al. (1998). Distribution of small mammals along 
a deforestation gradient in southern Gansu, central China. Acta Theriologica 
43(4): 349-362
•	 Gottlieb, M. S., R. Schroff, et al. (1981). Pneumocystis-carinii pneumonia 
and mucosal candidiasis in previously healthy homosexual men - evidence of 
a new acquired cellular immunodeficiency. New England Journal of Medicine 
305(24): 1425-1431
•	 Granoff, A. and R. G. Webster (1999). Encyclopedia of virology. Academic 
Press.
•	 Groen, J., M. N. Gerding, et al. (1995). Hantavirus infections in the 
Netherlands - epidemiology and disease. Epidemiology and Infection 114(2): 
373-383
•	 Guan, Y., B.J. Zheng et al. (2003). Isolation and characterization of viruses 
related to the SARS Coronavirus from animals in southern China. Science 302: 
276-278. 
•	 Guenno, B. L. (1997). Haemorrhagic fevers and ecological perturbations. 
Arvchives of Virology [Suppl.] 13: 191-199
•	 Hahn, B. H., G. M. Shaw, et al. (2000). AIDS - AIDS as a zoonosis: Scientific 
and public health implications. Science 287(5453): 607-614
•	 Haijema, B. J., H. Volders, et al. (2003). Switching species tropism: an 
effective way to manipulate the feline coronavirus genome. Journal of Virology 
77: 4528-4538
•	 Harnden, A. and R. Mayon-White (2003). Severe acute respiratory 
syndrome - novel virus, recurring theme. British Journal of General Practice 
53(491): 434-435
•	 Hatalski, C. G., A. J. Lewis, et al. (1997). Borna disease. Emerging Infectious 
Diseases 3: 129-135
•	 Haydon, D. T., S. Cleaveland, et al. (2002). Identifying reservoirs of 
infection: a conceptual and practical challenge. Emerging Infectious Diseases 
8(12): 1468-1473
•	 Hetrick, F. M. (1994). Viral diseases of fish and their relation to public 
health. Handbook of Zoonoses Section B: Viral. G. W. Beran. CRC Press, London, 
Tokyo: 537-553.
•	 Hirano, N., Y. Suzuki, et al. (1999). Pigs with highly prevalent antibodies to 
human coronavirus and swine haemagglutinating encephalomyelitis virus in 
the Tohoku District of Japan. Epidemiology and Infection 122(3): 545-551
•	 Hjelle, B, S.A. Jenison et al., (1994). A novel Hantavirus associated with 
an outbreak of fatal respiratory disease in the southwest United States: 
evolutionary relationships to known Hantaviruses. Journal of Virology 68: 
592-596
•	 Hjelle, B., F. Chavezgiles, et al. (1994). Dominant glycoprotein epitope of 
4-Corners-Hantavirus is conserved across a wide geographical area. Journal of 
General Virology 75: 2881-2888
•	 Hjelle, B. and G. E. Glass (2000). Outbreak of hantavirus infection in the 
four corners region of the United States in the wake of the 1997-1998 El Nino-
southern oscillation. Journal of Infectious Diseases 181(5): 1569-1573
•	 Hjelle, B., S. A. Jenison, et al. (1995). Clinical, microbiological and 
epidemiological aspects. Critical Reviews in Clinical Laboratory Sciences 32: 
469-508
•	 Hooper, E. (2000). The river: a journey back to the source of HIV and AIDS. 
Penguin, London.
•	 Horimoto, T. and Y. Kawaoka (2001). Pandemic threat posed by avian 
influenza A viruses. Clinical Microbiology Reviews 14(1): 129-149. 
http://cmr.asm.org/cgi/content/abstract/14/1/129
•	 Houghton, R. A. and J. L. Hackler (2003). Sources and sinks of carbon from 
land-use change in China. Global Biogeochemical Cycles 17(2): art. no.1034
•	 Howard, C. R. (1998). Arenaviruses. Zoonoses. S. R. Palmer, E. J. L. Soulsby 
and D. I. H. Simpson. Oxford University Press, Oxford: 297-310.
•	 Hsiung, G. D. and P. W. Chang (1994). Parainfluenza viral infection. 
Handbook of Zoonoses Section B: Viral. G. W. Beran. CRC Press, London, Tokyo: 
409-421.
•	 ICTV (2003). The universal virus database. International Committee on 
Taxonomy of Viruses. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ICTVdb/index.htm
•	 Jacobson, A. Emerging and re-emerging viruses: an essay. date unknown. 
http://www.tulane.edu/~dmsander/WWW/335/Emergin1.html
•	 Jemmi, T., J. Danuser, et al. (2000). Zoonoses as a risk when handling 
livestock or animal products. Schweizer Archiv Fur Tierheilkunde 142(12): 665-671
•	 Jezek, Z. and F. Fenner (1988). Human Monkeypox. S. Karger, Basel.
•	 Jian, L. H. and Y. Jun (2003). Living space: a feature programme on animal 
protection. International Primate Protection League. http://www.aapn.org/
reuteraward.html
•	 Johnson, A. M., L. T. M. de Souza, et al. (1999). Genetic investigation of 
novel hantaviruses causing fatal HPS in Brazil. Journal of Medical Virology 
59(4): 527-535
•	 Kalunda, M., L. G. Mukwaya, et al. (1986). Kasokero virus - a new human 
pathogen from bats (Rousettus- Aegyptiacus) in Uganda. American Journal of 
Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 35(2): 387-392
•	 Kamps, B. S. and C. Hoffman (2003). SARS Reference. Flying Publisher. 
www.sarsreference.com/sarsref/virol.htm

51
•	 Karabostas, N., Ed. (1985). International catalogue of arboviruses including 
certain other viruses of vertebrates. American Society of Tropical Medicine and 
Hygeine, San Antonio, Texas.
•	 Kariwa, H., C. B. Zhong, et al. (2001). Epizootiological survey of hantavirus 
among rodent species in Ningxia Hui Autonomous Province, China. Japanese 
Journal of Veterinary Research 49(2): 105-114
•	 Khan, A. and A. S. Khan (2003). Hantaviruses: a tale of two hemispheres. 
Panminerva Medica 45(1): 43-51
•	 Khan, A. S. and J. C. Young (2001). Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome: at the 
crossroads. Current Opinion in Infectious Diseases 14(2): 205-209
•	 Khan, M. I. (1994). Newcastle Disease. Handbook of Zoonoses Section B: Viral. 
G. W. Beran. CRC Press, London, Tokyo: 473-481.
•	 Kimura, H., C. Abiko, et al. (1997). Interspecies transmission of influenza C 
virus between humans and pigs. Virus Research 48(1): 71-79
•	 King, A. A. (1998). Rabies. Zoonoses. S. R. Palmer, E. J. L. Soulsby and D. I. H. 
Simpson. Oxford University Press, Oxford: 436-458.
•	 Ksiazek, T.G., D. Erdman et al. (2003). A novel coronavirus associated with 
associated with severe acute respiratory syndrome. New England Journal of 
Medicine 348: 1967-1976. 
•	 Kuiken, T., R. A. M. Fouchier, et al. (2003). Newly discovered coronavirus 
as the primary cause of severe acute respiratory syndrome. Lancet 362(9380): 
263-270
•	 Leduc, J. W., G. A. Smith, et al. (1985). Isolation of a hantaan-related virus 
from Brazilian rats and serologic evidence of its widespread distribution in 
south  America. American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 34(4): 810-815
•	 Lee, H. W., P. W. Lee, et al. (1978). Isolation of the etiological agent of Korean 
haemorrhagic fever. Journal of Infectious Diseases 137: 298-308
•	 Lehmkuhl, H. D. (1994). Respiratory Synctial Virus Infection. Handbook of 
Zoonoses Section B: Viral. G. W. Beran. CRC Press, London, Tokyo: 397-407.
•	 Levander, O. A. and M. A. Beck (1997). Interacting nutritional and 
infectious etiologies of Keshan disease - insights from Coxsackie virus 
B-induced myocarditis in mice deficient in selenium or vitamin E. Biological 
Trace Element Research 56(1): 5-21
•	 Levis, S., J. E. Rowe, et al. (1997). New hantaviruses causing hantavirus 
pulmonary syndrome in central Argentina. Lancet 349(9057): 998-999
•	 Li, K. S., K. M. Xu, et al. (2003). Characterization of H9 subtype influenza 
viruses from the ducks of southern China: a candidate for the next influenza 
pandemic in humans? Journal of Virology 77(12): 6988-6994
•	 Li, W., T. K. Fuller, et al. (1996). A survey of wildlife trade in Guangxi and 
Guangdong, China. TRAFFIC Bulletin 16(1): 9-16
•	 Li, Y. M. and D. M. Li (1998). The dynamics of trade in live wildlife across 
the Guangxi border between China and Vietnam during 1993-1996 and its 
control strategies. Biodiversity and Conservation 7(7): 895-914
•	 Lin, Y. P., M. Shaw, et al. (2000). Avian-to-human transmission of H9N2 
subtype influenza A viruses: Relationship between H9N2 and H5N1 human 
isolates. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America 97(17): 9654-9658
•	 Liu, J. Y., M. L. Liu, et al. (2003). Study on spatial pattern of land-use change 
in China during 1995-2000. Science in China Series D-Earth Sciences 46(4): 373
•	 Lloyd, G. (1998). Marburg and Ebola viruses. Zoonoses. S. R. Palmer, E. J. L. 
Soulsby and D. I. H. Simpson. Oxford University Press, Oxford: 387-399.
•	 Love, R. J., A. W. Philbey, et al. (2001). Reproductive disease and congenital 
malformations caused by Menangle virus in pigs. Australian Veterinary Journal 
79(3): 192-198
•	 Ludwig, B., F. B. Kraus, et al. (2003). Viral zoonoses - a threat under control? 
Intervirology 46(2): 71-78
•	 Lutz, K. (2003). Exotic meat imports feared for disease link. Boston Globe, 
Boston.17 July 2003
•	 MacDonald, D. M., E. C. Holmes, et al. (2000). Detection of hepatitis B virus 
infection in wild-born chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes verus): phylogenetic 
relationships with human and other primate genotypes. Journal of Virology 
74(9): 4253-4257
•	 MacKenzie, D. (2003). Fears grow that SARS could make a comeback. New 
Scientist 179(2409): 9
•	 Marra, M. A., S. J. M. Jones, et al. (2003). The genome sequence of the SARS-
associated coronavirus. Science 300(5624): 1399-1404
•	 Martin, B. (2001). The burden of proof and the origin of acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London 
Series B-Biological Sciences 356(1410): 939-943
•	 Martina, B.E.E., B.L. Haagmans et al. (2003) SARS virus infection of cats 
and ferrets. Nature 425:915. 
•	 McCormick, J. B. and S. P. Fisher-Hoch (1994). Zoonoses caused by 
Filoviridae. Handbook of Zoonoses Section B: Viral. G. W. Beran. CRC Press, 
London, Tokyo: 375-383.
•	 McNeill, W. H. (1976). Plagues and peoples. Penguin, London.
•	 Meurens, F., P. Gallego, et al. (2002). B virus, an underevaluated zoonotic 
alphaherpesvirus. Annales De Medecine Veterinaire 146(1): 1-8
•	 Miranda, M. E., T. G. Ksiazek, et al. (1999). Epidemiology of Ebola (subtype 
Reston) virus in the Philippines, 1996. Journal of Infectious Diseases 179: 
S115-S119
•	 Monath, T. B. (1999). Ecology of Marburg and Ebola viruses: speculations 
and directions for future research. Journal of Infectious Diseases 179(S1): 
s127-s138
•	 Monath, T. P. (1987). Lassa fever - new issues raised by field studies in West 
Africa. Journal of Infectious Diseases 155: 433-436
•	 Monath, T. P. (1993). Arthropod-borne viruses. Emerging viruses. S. S. 
Morse. Oxford University Press: 138-148.
•	 Monroe, M. C., S. P. Morzunov, et al. (1999). Genetic diversity and 
distribution of Peromyscus-borne hantaviruses in North America. Emerging 
Infectious Diseases 5(1): 75-86
•	 Morgan-Capner, P. and A. S. Bryden (1998). Vesicular diseases. Zoonoses. 
S. R. Palmer, E. J. L. Soulsby and D. I. H. Simpson. Oxford University Press, 
Oxford: 319-329.
•	 Morse, S. S. (1993). Origins of Emerging Viruses. Emerging viruses. S. S. 
Morse. Oxford University Press: 10-28.
•	 Morse, S. S. (1995). Factors in the emergence of infectious diseases. 
Emerging Infectious Diseases 1: 7-15. http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/eid/vol1no1/
morse.htm
•	 Morse, S. S. and A. Schluderberg (1990). Emerging viruses: the evolution of 
viruses and viral diseases. Journal of Infectious Diseases 162: 1-7
•	 Morzunov, S. P., H. Feldmann, et al. (1995). Newly recognized virus 
associated with a fatal case of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome in Louisiana. 
Journal of Virology 69(3): 1980-1983
•	 Murphy, F. A. (1994). Infectious Diseases. Advanced Virology Research 43: 2-52
•	 Nelson, H. K., Q. Shi, et al. (2001). Host nutritional selenium status as a 
driving force for influenza virus mutations. Faseb Journal 15(8): U488-U499
•	 Nerurkar, V. R., J. W. Song, et al. (1994). Genetic evidence for a hantavirus 
enzootic in deer mice (Peromyscus maniculatus) captured a decade before the 
recognition of hantavirus pulmonary syndrome. Virology 204(2): 563-568
•	 News24 (2003). SARS found in pigs and snakes. Xinhua News Agency. 
4 June 2003. http://www.news24.com/News24/World/Sars/0,,2-10-
1488_1368983,00.html
•	 Ng, S. K. C. (2003). Possible role of an animal vector in the SARS outbreak 
at Amoy Gardens. Lancet 362: 570-572
•	 Nichol, S. T., C. F. Spiropoulou, et al. (1993). Genetic identification of a 
hantavirus associated with an outbreak of acute respiratory illness. Science 
262(5135): 914-917
•	 Nitatpattana, N., T. Henrich, et al. (2002). Hantaan virus antibody 
prevalence in rodent populations of several provinces of northeastern 
Thailand. Tropical Medicine & International Health 7(10): 840-845

52
•	 Normile, D. and M. Enserink (2003). Tracking the roots of a killer. Science 
301: 297-299
•	 Odemuyiwa, S. O., M. N. Mulders, et al. (2001). Phylogenetic analysis of new 
hepatitis B virus isolates from Nigeria supports endemicity of genotype E in 
west Africa. Journal of Medical Virology 65(3): 463-469
•	 Olsen, C. W., L. Brammer, et al. (2002). Serological evidence of H1 swine 
influenza virus infection in swine farm residents and employees. Emerging 
Infectious Diseases 8(8). http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/EID/vol8no8/pdf/01-
0474.pdf
•	 Osterhaus, A. (2001). Catastrophes after crossing species barriers. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series B-Biological 
Sciences 356(1410): 791-793
•	 Osterhaus, A., G. F. Rimmelzwaan, et al. (2000). Influenza B virus in seals. 
Science 288(5468): 1051-1053
•	 Padula, P., M. G. Della Valle, et al. (2002). Andes virus and first case report 
of Bermejo virus causing fatal pulmonary syndrome. Emerging Infectious 
Diseases 8(4): 437-439
•	 Palmer, S. R., E. J. L. Soulsby, et al. (1998). Zoonoses: biology, clinical practice 
and public health control. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
•	 Pastoret, P. P., M. Bennett, et al. (2000). Animals, public health and the 
example of cowpox. Revue Scientifique Et Technique De L’Office International 
Des Epizooties 19(1): 23-32
•	 Pearson, H., T. Clarke, et al. (2003). SARS: what have we learned? Nature 
424: 121-126
•	 Peiris, J. S. M., S. T. Lai, et al. (2003). Coronavirus as a possible cause of 
severe acute respiratory syndrome. Lancet 361(9366): 1319-1325
•	 Peters, C. J. (1994). Molecular techniques identify a new strain of 
hantavirus. ASM News 60(5): 242-243
•	 Peters, C. J., E. D. Johnson, et al. (1993). Filoviruses. Emerging viruses. S. S. 
Morse. Oxford University Press: 159-175.
•	 Philbey, A. W., P. D. Kirkland, et al. (1998). An apparently new virus (family 
Paramyxoviridae) infectious for pigs, humans, and fruit bats. Emerging 
Infectious Diseases 4(2)
•	 Piot, P., M. Bartos, et al. (2001). The global impact of HIV/AIDS. Nature 
410(6831): 968-973
•	 Platt, K. B. (1994). Infections caused by Oncovirinae. Handbook of Zoonoses 
Section B: Viral. G. W. Beran. CRC Press, London, Tokyo: 511-515.
•	 Plyusnin, A. and S. P. Morzunov (2001). Virus evolution and genetic 
divesity of hantaviruses and their rodent hosts. Hantaviruses. C. S. 
Schmaljohn and S. T. Nichol. Springer-Verlag, Berlin: 47-75.
•	 Potasman, I., A. Paz, et al. (2002). Infectious outbreaks associated with 
bivalve shellfish consumption: a worldwide perspective. Clinical Infectious 
Diseases 35(8): 921-928
•	 Reid, H. W. (1998). Poxviruses. Zoonoses. S. R. Palmer, E. J. L. Soulsby and D. 
I. H. Simpson. Oxford University Press, Oxford: 416-421.
•	 Reuters (2003). Rat-borne diseases on the rise, scientists warn. News in 
Science. 11 Feb 2003. http://www.abc.net.au/science/news/stories/s781304.htm
•	 Rhodes, L. V., C. Huang, et al. (2000). Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome 
associated with Monongahela virus, Pennsylvania. Emerging Infectious 
Diseases 6(6): 616-621
•	 Rollin, P. E., T. G. Ksiazek, et al. (1995). Isolation of Black-Creek-Canal 
virus, a new hantavirus from Sigmodon hispidus in Florida. Journal of Medical 
Virology 46(1): 35-39
•	 Rollin, P. E., R. J. Williams, et al. (1999). Ebola (subtype Reston) virus among 
quarantined nonhuman primates recently imported from the Philippines to 
the United States. Journal of Infectious Diseases 179: S108-S114
•	 Rota, P. A., M. S. Oberste, et al. (2003). Characterization of a novel 
coronavirus associated with severe acute respiratory syndrome. Science 
300(5624): 1394-1399
•	 Rozelle, S., J. K. Huang, et al. (1997). Poverty, population and environmental 
degradation in China. Food Policy 22(3): 229-251
•	 Runnstrom, M. C. (2000). Is northern China winning the battle against 
desertification? Satellite remote sensing as a tool to study biomass trends on 
the Ordos Plateau in semiarid China. Ambio 29(8): 468-476
•	 Salas, R. (1991). Venezuelan haemorrhagic fever. Lancet 338: 1033-1036
•	 SARS Animal Reservoir Studies Working Group (2003).Report to SARS 
Scientific Advisory Committee, 20-21 October, Geneva, Switzerland. 
•	 Saul, H. (1996). Year of the rat. New Scientist 152(2050): 32
•	 Sawitzky, D. (1997). Transmission, species specificity and pathogenicity of 
Aujeszky’s disease virus. Archives of Virology [Suppl.] 13: 201-206
•	 Serwadda, D., N. K. Sewankambo, et al. (1985). Slim disease - a new disease 
in Uganda and its association with HTLV-Iii infection. Lancet 2(8460): 849-852
•	 Shaila, M. S. (2003). Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS): an old virus 
jumping into a new host or a new creation? Journal of Biosciences 28(4): 359-360
•	 Simmonds, P. (2001). Reconstructing the origins of human hepatitis 
viruses. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series 
B-Biological Sciences 356(1411): 1013-1026
•	 SINA (2003). Culinary revolution. SINA. 22 May 2003. http://edu.sina.com.
cn/en/2003-05-22/12211.html
•	 Singleton, G. R., L. A. Hinds, et al., Eds. (2003). Rats, Mice and People: Rodent 
Biology and Management. ACIAR, Canberra.
•	 Singleton, G. R., A. Kenney, et al. (2003). Myth, dogma and rodent 
management: good stories ruined by data? Rats, Mice and People: Rodent 
Biology and Management. L. A. H. G.R.Singleton, C.J.Krebs and D.M.Spratt. 
ACIAR, Canberra.: 554-560.
•	  Skinner, G. R. B., A. Ahmad, et al. (2001). The infrequency of 
transmission of herpesviruses between humans and animals: postulation 
of an unrecognised protective host mechanism. Comparative Immunology 
Microbiology and Infectious Diseases 24(4): 255-269
•	 Slemons, R. D. and M. Brugh (1994). Influenza. Handbook of Zoonoses 
Section B: Viral. G. W. Beran. CRC Press, London, Tokyo: 385-396.
•	 Song, J. W., L. J. Baek, et al. (1994). Isolation of pathogenic hantavirus from 
white-footed mouse (Peromyscus leucopus). Lancet 344(8937): 1637
•	 Spiropoulou, C., S. Morzunov, et al. (1994). Genome structure and 
variability of a virus causing hantavirus pulmonary syndrome. Virology 200: 
715-723
•	 Stöhr, K. and F. X. Meslin (1997). The role of veterinary public health in the 
prevention of zoonoses. Archives of Virology [Suppl.] 13: 207-218
•	 Stone, R. (1993). The mouse-piñon nut connection. Science 262: 833
•	 Subbarao, K., A. Klimov, et al. (1998). Characterization of an avian influenza 
A (H5N1) virus isolated from a child with a fatal respiratory illness. Science 
279(5349): 393-396
•	 Täger, M. F., P. C. Vial, et al. (2003). Hantavirus prevalence in the IX region 
of Chile. Journal of Emerging Infectious Diseases 9(7). http://www.cdc.gov/
ncidod/EID/vol9no7/02-0587.htm
•	 Tao, F., M. Yokozawa, et al. (2003). Future climate change, the agricultural 
water cycle, and. agricultural production in China. Agriculture Ecosystems & 
Environment 95(1): 203-215
•	 Taylor, L. H., S. M. Latham, et al. (2001). Risk factors for human disease 
emergence. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series 
B-Biological Sciences 356(1411): 983-989
•	 Tobler, K., M. Ackermann, et al. (2003). SARS-agent and lessons to be 
learned from pathogenic coronaviruses of animals. Schweizer Archiv Fur 
Tierheilkunde 145(7): 316-322
•	 Toro, J., J. D. Vega, et al. (1998). An outbreak of hantavirus pulmonary 
syndrome, Chile, 1997. Emerging Infectious Diseases 4(4): 687-694
•	 UNAIDS/WHO (2002). AIDS Epidemic Update. Joint United Nations 
Programme on HIV/AIDS,

53
•	 World Health Organisation. http://www.unaids.org/worldaidsday/2002/
press/update/epiupdate2002_en.doc
•	 Vincent, M. J., E. Quiroz, et al. (2000). Hantavirus pulmonary syndrome 
in Panama: identification of novel hantaviruses and their likely reservoirs. 
Virology 277(1): 14-19
•	 Voevodin, A. F., B. K. Johnson, et al. (1997). Phylogenetic analysis of 
simian T-lymphotropic virus type I (STLV-I) in common chimpanzees (Pan 
troglodytes): evidence for interspecies transmission of the virus between 
chimpanzees and humans in Central Africa. Virology 238(2): 212-220
•	 Wain-Hobson, S. and A. Meyerhans (1999). On viral epidemics, zoonoses 
and memory. Trends in Microbiology 7(10): 389-391
•	 Wang, H., A. J. Pitman, et al. (2003). The impact of land-cover modification 
on the June meteorology of China since 1700, simulated using a regional 
climate model. International Journal of Climatology 23(5): 511-527
•	 Wang, L-F., K.B. Chua et al (2003) Genomic diversity of emerging 
paramyxoviruses. Current Genomics 4: 109-121.
•	 Wang, L-F. and Eaton, B.T. (2001) Emerging paramyxoviruses. Infectious 
Disease Review 3:52-69.  
•	 Watson, R. T. and C. W. Team (2001). Climate change 2001: synthesis report. 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Geneva. http://www.ipcc.ch/
pub/reports.htm
•	 Webster, J. P. and D. W. Macdonald (1995). Parasites of wild brown rats 
(Rattus norvegicus) on UK farms. Parasitology 111: 247-255
•	 Webster, R. G., J. Geraci, et al. (1981). Conjunctivitis in humans caused by 
influenza A virus of seals. New England Journal of Medicine 304: 911
•	 Webster, R. G. and E. J. Walker (2003). Influenza - the world is teetering 
on the edge of a pandemic that could kill a large fraction of the human 
population. American Scientist 91(2): 122-129
•	 Weiss, R. A. (2001). The Leeuwenhoek lecture 2001. Animal origins of 
human infectious disease. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London series B 356(957-977)
•	 Weiss, R. A. (2003). Cross-species infections. Current Topics in Microbiology 
and Immunology 278: 48-71
•	 Weiss, R. A. and H. A. Weiss (2001). The emergence of human 
immunodeficiency viruses and AIDS. New Challenges to Health: the threat 
of virus infection. P. Goodwin and G. L. Smith. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge: 125-153.
•	 Wells, R. M., S. S. Estani, et al. (1997). An unusual Hantavirus outbreak in 
southern Argentina: person-to-person transmission? Emerging Infectious 
Diseases 3(2): 171-174
•	 WHO (2000). World Health Report - 2000. World Health Organisation
•	 WHO (2003a). Communicable Disease Surveillance and Response archive. 
World Health Organisation. http://www.who.int/disease-outbreak-news/
disease/bydisease.htm
•	 WHO (2003b). Cumulative number of reported probable cases of SARS, 11 
July 2003. World Health Organisation. 11 July 2003. http://www.who.int/csr/
sars/country/2003_07_11/en/
•	 WHO (2003c). First data on resistance and stability of SARS coronavirus 
compiled by members of WHO laboratory network. World Health 
Organisation. 4 May 2003. www.who.int/csr/sars/survival_2003_05_04/en
•	 WHO (2003d). SARS situation update 64: situation in Toronto, detection 
of SARS-like virus in wild animals. World Health Organisation. 23 May 2003. 
http://www.who.int/csr/don/2003_05_23b/en/
•	 WHO (2003e). SARS situation update 95: SARS: chronology of a serial 
killer.  04 July 2003. World Health Organisation. 04 July 2003. 
http://www.who.int/csr/don/2003_07_05/en/
•	 WHO (2003f). SARS situation update 96: Taiwan, China: SARS 
transmission interrupted in last outbreak area. 5 July 2003. World Health 
Organisation. 05 July 2003. http://www.who.int/csr/don/2003_07_05/en/
•	 Will, R. G., J. W. Ironside, et al. (1996). A new variant of Creutzfeldt-Jakob 
disease in the UK. Lancet 347(9006): 921-925
•	 Williams, R. J., R. T. Bryan, et al. (1997). An outbreak of hantavirus 
pulmonary syndrome in western Paraguay. American Journal of Tropical 
Medicine and Hygiene 57(3): 274-282
•	 Woolhouse, M. E. J. (2002). Population biology of emerging and re-
emerging pathogens. Trends in Microbiology 10(10): S3-S7
•	 Wuethrich, B. (2003). Chasing the fickle swine flu. Science 299: 1052-1055
•	 Xu, X. K., Z. H. Lin, et al. (2002). Temporal-spatial characteristics of 
vegetation cover and desertification of China by using remote sensing data. 
Progress in Natural Science 12(1): 45-49
•	 Xu, Z. Y., Y. W. Tang, et al. (1987). Cats - source of protection or infection - 
a case-control study of hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome. American 
Journal of Epidemiology 126(5): 942-948
•	 Young, S. S. and C. Y. Wang (2001). Land-cover change analysis of China 
using global-scale Pathfinder AVHRR Landcover (PAL) data, 1982-92. 
International Journal of Remote Sensing 22(8): 1457-1477
•	 Yue, S. and M. Hashino (2003). Temperature trends in Japan: 1900-1996. 
Theoretical and Applied Climatology 75(1-2): 15-27
•	 Zhang, Z., R. Pech, et al. (2003). Extrinsic and intrinsic factors determine 
the eruptive dynamics of Brandt’s voles Microtus brandti in Inner Mongolia, 
China. Oikos 100: 299-310
•	 Zhao, J. Z., G. Wu, et al. (2002). Strategies to combat desertification for the 
twenty-first century in China. International Journal of Sustainable Development 
and World Ecology 9(3): 292-297
•	 Zhijun, W., C. Huojie, et al. (1996). The status on live wildlife trade near the 
port areas in Yunnan. Conserving China’s Biodiversity. J. S. Peter, S. Wang and 
Y. Xie. China Environmental Science Press, Beijing: 197-210.
•	 Zhou, G. Y. (1995). Influences of tropical forest changes on environmental 
quality in Hainan Province, PR of China. Ecological Engineering 4(3): 223-229

