
Electricians’ On-Site Companion
‘This book is must for all electricians to have in their toolkit. It gives good 
practical advice on how to tackle real-life situations and doesn’t just focus 
on how to pass an examination.’
– David Nunan, Steve Willis Training Ltd.
This book contains everything electricians need to know about working on 
site, covering not only the health and safety aspects of site work, but also 
the techniques and testing knowledge required from the modern-day electri-
cian. Regulations issues are included alongside step-by-step instructions for 
each task, after which testing information, checklists and example forms 
are given so that site workers can ensure they have done everything required 
of them.
 Christopher Kitcher has been working in the electrical industry for over 
50 years. As well as having been both a contractor and a builder, for many 
years Chris was a Lecturer in Electrical Installation at Central Sussex Col-
lege and is still an NICEIC inspector for the Microgeneration Certiﬁ cation 
Scheme (MCS). For the last 17 years he has worked in the college environ-
ment while maintaining his electrical skills by periodically working on site.


Electricians’ On-Site 
Companion 
Christopher Kitcher

First published 2018
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
711 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10017
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2018 Christopher Kitcher
The right of Christopher Kitcher to be identiﬁ ed as author of this work has 
been asserted by him in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, 
Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or 
utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now 
known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any 
information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from 
the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or 
registered trademarks, and are used only for identiﬁ cation and explanation 
without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Kitcher, Chris, author.
Title: Electricians’ on-site companion / Christopher Kitcher.
Description: New York, NY : Routledge, 2018. | Includes bibliographical 
 references and index.
Identiﬁ ers: LCCN 2017009250 | ISBN 9781138683327 (pbk. : alk. paper) | 
 ISBN 9781138309326 (hardcover) | ISBN 9781315544571 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Electric wiring—Handbooks, manuals, etc. | Buildings—Electric 
 equipment—Installation—Handbooks, manuals, etc. | Electric engineering— 
 Insurance requirements—Handbooks, manuals, etc.
Classiﬁ cation: LCC TK3205 .K38 2018 | DDC 621.319/24—dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017009250
ISBN: 978-1-138-30932-6 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-138-68332-7 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-315-54457-1 (ebk)
Typeset in Sabon 
by Apex CoVantage, LLC

Contents
 1 Design considerations 
1
Characteristics of the supply that is available 4
Nature of demand 4
External inﬂ uences/environmental conditions 5
Electromagnetic inﬂ uences 10
Utilisation 11
Construction of buildings 12
 2 Types of supply system and earthing arrangements 
17
TT supply system 17
TN-S supply system 19
TN-C-S supply system 20
Earthing 22
 3 Earth electrodes 
23
Earth electrodes 23
Circuit protective conductors 24
Selecting the correct size of circuit protective conductor 30
 4 Protective bonding 
33
 5 Diversity 
38
Calculating the diversity of a cooker 38
Diversity on complete installations 39
 6 Cable calculation 
42
Earth fault loop impedance 46
Twin and earth 70°C thermoplastic PVC cable 48

vi  Contents
  7	 Socket outlet circuits
51
Ring final circuits  51
Adding an outlet to an existing ring  53
Radial circuits for socket outlets  55
Fused connection units  56
  8	 Safe isolation
58
Equipment required  58
Single-phase isolation  60
Three-phase isolation  63
  9	 Isolation and switching
65
Origin  65
Distribution boards and consumer units  66
Circuit breakers  66
Motors  66
Functional switching  67
Isolation  68
Switching off for mechanical maintenance  69
Emergency switching   70
Firefighters’ switch  71
10	 Periodic inspection volt drop
73
11	 Installing an electric shower
79
12	 Two-way and intermediate switching
85
Intermediate switching  89
13	 Fault finding in central heating
92
Room thermostats  92
Programmable room stats  94
Cylinder thermostats  94
Unvented cylinder  95
Heating circulation pump  97
Motorised valves  102
Two-port valve   102
Three-port diverter valve  107
Three-port mid-position valve   107

Contents  vii
14	 Electrical installation fault finding
109
Ring final circuit  109
Interpretation of ring final test results  110
RCD tripping   113
Insulation resistance  114
Identifying a lost switch line on a three-plate lighting circuit  115
Immersion heater not working  116
Changing/replacing an immersion heater  120
15	 Changing an immersion heater
121
Unvented cylinder   127
16	 RCD tripping faults
130
RCBO trips and will not reset  133
Power circuit  133
Lighting circuit  135
17	 Electric motors
136
Polarisation testing of electric motors  141
18	 Use of RCDs
142
Testing of RCDs  147
Insulation resistance tests  148
Earth fault loop impedance tests with RCDs  148
19	 Calculating the maximum Zs
151
Fuses  154
RCBOs  154
20	 Fire protection
156
Fire protection in dwellings  157
Escape routes  159
Index
161


Chapter 1
Design considerations
It is vital for a satisfactory outcome to any electrical installation that it is 
designed correctly. It doesn’t matter whether the installation is a single cir-
cuit or a full installation, the same rules apply.
The statutory document that applies to all electrical installations is the 
Electricity at Work Regulations 1989 (EWAR 1989). These regulations are 
made under the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 (HASWA 1974) and 
quite clearly state that although BS 761 wiring regulations are non-statutory, 
compliance with them will be likely to achieve compliance with the relevant 
parts of the EAWR.
The HASWA places a duty of care on employers, the self-employed and 
on employees. EAWR also places responsibilities on everyone at a place 
of work – this, of course, means employers, self-employed persons and 
employees.
An employer is any person or body that employs one or more persons 
under a contract of employment or apprenticeship, and it is the employer’s 
duty to comply with the EAWR. It is the employee’s duty to co-operate with 
their employer to enable the duty placed on the employer by the EWAR to 
be complied with.
Under normal circumstances, the person who has the electrical installa-
tion under their control is classed as the duty holder; this may apply to the 
whole installation or just the part of the electrical installation which is being 
worked on. Of course, if there is no work being carried out the duty holder 
would be the managing director or owner as it is his duty to ensure that the 
EAWR are complied with in any place of work.
The important thing to remember is that the EWAR applies to everyone 
wherever work is being carried out, and that the duties in some of the regu-
lations are subject to the term ‘reasonably practicable’. Where the term ‘rea-
sonably practicable’ is not used, then the regulation is said to be absolute 
and must be adhered to.
When a person has to do something so far as reasonably practicable, they 
must assess the magnitude of the risk for the work activity against the cost 
in terms of physical difficulty, trouble, time and the expense that would be 

2  Design considerations
involved in eliminating or reducing the risk. The term ‘reasonably practica-
ble’ would be acceptable where the risks to health and safety for a particular 
job are low, and the cost or technical difficulties to reduce the risk are high.
Where the risk is high and may result in death, then the level of duty 
would always be absolute and cost would not form part of the equation.
When designing any electrical installation, all regulations that have or 
may have an effect on it must be taken into account. None of these regula-
tions is more important than the others, although of course some may be 
more relevant.
As an example, the Health and Safety at Work Act will always form part 
of any electrical design but Part P of the building regulations will not apply 
to buildings other than dwellings.
All of the relevant statutory regulations are in place to ensure that electri-
cal installations are installed safely and remain safe; one of the major require-
ments is that materials and equipment are manufactured and installed to a 
high standard. During the design stage it is important that we ensure that 
all materials that are intended to be used in the installation are to a British 
or harmonised standard.
BS 7671: 2008 has been adopted as the British Standard for electrical 
installations; it is not a statutory document but compliance with this stan-
dard will ensure compliance with the other statutory regulations. Chapter 51 
of BS 7671 requires that all equipment complies with a British or harmon-
ised standard.
This regulation is not intended to prevent the use of non-BS equipment, 
but it makes it quite clear that any equipment that does not have a British 
or harmonised standard must be compared with the standards and that any 
differences must be verified by the designer or installer. Any differences must 
not result in a lesser degree of safety, and the use of the equipment must be 
recorded on the inspection and test documentation that is completed for the 
work.
An example would be where a wrought-iron light fitting has been made 
by the local blacksmith. This would not have a BS, however it could be 
installed providing the person installing it was happy that it was safe, and 
that the correct documentation was completed.
If it was just the installation of a light fitting then it would be recorded on 
a minor works certificate (Figure 1.1) in Part 1, Item 4, which is headed as 
‘Details of departures’, provided, of course, that the fitting was being con-
nected to an existing circuit. New inventions that have not yet been given a 
British Standard would also need to be entered as a departure.
BS 7671 consists of 7 parts and 16 appendices; each part is broken up 
into chapters.
Each regulation has a number, and in the system used the first digit is the 
part number, the second digit is the chapter and the third digit is the section; 
the remaining digits are the actual regulation number.

Figure 1.1

4  Design considerations
Example: regulation 421.1.1
This will tell us that the regulation is Part 4, Chapter 2, section 1. This cov-
ers the General Requirements of this chapter. Then we have the 1.1, which 
shows us that it is the first regulation in that section and is the first part of 
that regulation.
Any regulation ending with a number in the 200 range is specific to the UK.
Example: regulation 422.4.203
This tells us that the regulation is Part 4, Chapter 2, section 2. It is regula-
tion 4, which covers combustible construction materials and is section 203 
of the actual regulation. This is specific to UK installations only.
For all electrical installations the basic requirements are the same:
·	
It must be designed to provide protection of persons, livestock and 
property. 
·	
It must ensure the proper functioning of the electrical installation.
Before any design can begin, the following basic information about the 
installation will be required; it will also need to be entered onto the installa-
tion documentation on completion of the work. 
Characteristics of the supply that is available
  i.	 Is it AC or DC?
 ii.	 Purpose and number of conductors:
o	 Is the installation single phase or three phase and neutral?
o	 Is there a supplier’s earth connection?
o	 Is there a PEN conductor (TN-C-S)?
iii.	 Values and tolerances:
o	 Nominal voltage available, voltage tolerances. For a supply from 
the DNO the voltage tolerance is +10% and −6%
o	 Maximum current that is available
o	 Prospective short circuit current (Isc)
o	 External earth fault loop impedance (Ze)
 iv.	 Has the DNO any particular requirements?
Nature of demand
Once it has been decided that the supply is suitable for the requirements of 
the installation the next step is to decide on the types of circuits required. 

Design considerations  5
This will need to include anything within the proposed installation that 
will require an electrical supply.
Items that need to be considered are:
  i.	 The location of points that will require a supply
 ii.	 Loads that will be expected on circuits
iii.	 Variation of demands due to weekend use and seasons
 iv.	 Special conditions such as harmonics and start up currents
  v.	 Any requirements for information technology, controls and signalling 
 vi.	 Any anticipated future demand due to additions and alterations 
External influences/environmental conditions
Will the installation be subjected to any unusual conditions that will need to 
be taken into account during the design stage? These could be any that are 
listed in Appendix 5 of BS 7671.
Environment 
Consideration should be given to the following: 
Ambient temperature
Any high or low ambient temperatures that may be within the installation 
in places such as boiler houses, food preparation and cold storage areas.
Along with higher than usual temperatures humidity could also be a cause 
for concern as it could promote corrosion or dampness.
Water and corrosion
The presence of water whether it is between negligible or total submersion 
needs to be considered. Any equipment used will need to be capable of 
preventing the ingress of water and should be selected using the correct IP 
codes. As an example, external sockets and switches should be to IP56 and, 
of course, should be corrosion resistant. Corrosion could also be caused by 
chemicals either in liquid, powder or atmospheric form; these could be pres-
ent continuously or only now and then.
Foreign bodies
In most cases this would be the presence of dust. It may be negligible but on 
occasion could be very heavy. Consideration must be given to the type of use 
that the building is being put to. Joinery workshops and granary stores are 
good examples of installations that may require a greater degree of protection.

6  Design considerations
Impact and vibration
All parts of all installations must be selected and erected to prevent damage 
by impact, abrasion, penetration, tension or compression. The type of protec-
tion will depend on the installation. As an example, cables buried in walls or 
below floors may require RCD protection or mechanical protection; this does 
not mean that cables clipped directly to a surface do not require protection. 
Where flat profile PVC cables are clipped on the surface in a loft space sup-
plying a light or power point, it would be unlikely that additional mechani-
cal protection would be required. This is because the outer sheath of PVC is 
classed as mechanical protection. It is also possible for this type of cable to 
be buried directly in the wall and plastered over with no further protection 
other than an RCD. It is usual, though, to protect the cable with capping or 
conduit; this is really just to protect it from damage that may be caused by a 
plasterer’s trowel. When steel capping is used it is not a requirement for it to 
be earthed, as once it is plastered over it really is just a piece of metal. 
I have noticed that on occasion some installers use the cpc to earth the 
metal capping and then consider it as earthed mechanical protection. This, 
of course, would not comply with BS 7671 as all electrical connections need 
to be accessible for future inspection, and would not be at all practical as 
galvanised capping has no provision for the connection of conductors.
On occasions when cables are to be buried in walls and for some reason 
RCDs are not to be installed, then the use of robust mechanical protection 
that will prevent the penetration of nails/screws can be used. Under these 
conditions, the protection need not be earthed. Usually, it is easier to use a 
less robust material and ensure that it is earthed; this would usually form or 
be part of the sheath of a cable.
The types of cable that would be suitable for burying directly into a wall could 
be: steel wire armoured, FP 200 Gold, Mineral, Flexishield (see Figure 1.2).
All of these cables are easy to terminate and will provide the required 
protection if installed correctly.
There are many ways in which protection from impact and vibration can be 
provided; this will depend on the type of use and level of protection required. 
In most cases there will be more than one method of protection that will be 
suitable. It is important to give some consideration to the appropriate type of 
protection. As previously mentioned, the outer sheath of flat twin and earth 
cable can be classed as mechanical protection (Figure 1.3), and is suitable 
protection for cables clipped direct to various surfaces, particularly where 
there is no risk of impact during normal use. In practice, it is often easier to 
use a piece of plastic conduit or mini trunking as it can often be quicker and 
the end result may look better.
If the installation is commercial or industrial, then, of course, the use of 
steel conduit and trunking should be considered along with all of the other 
types containment systems and cable types. This would include the use of 
busbar trunking systems, dado trunking systems and the like.

Design considerations  7
Vibration can sometimes be a problem and then there are various meth-
ods that can be used to prevent damage. One of the most common causes 
for concern with regards to vibration is the connection to motors and equip-
ment with moving parts.
All methods of connection need to be thought about carefully because 
often it is not only vibration that needs to be considered. Other external 
Figure 1.2
Figure 1.3

8  Design considerations
influences may need to be considered as well, which could be anything 
from corrosion, dust and impact, etc., as well as the adjustment of belts and 
chains, so it is important that the correct method is chosen.
In many cases, vibration and adjustment can be accommodated by the use 
of flexible conduit (Figure 1.4).
Flora and fauna
Consideration must always be given to any plant life or animal life that may 
exist in a particular region. All electrical installations must be protected 
from damage that may be caused by the growth of plants or the activity of 
animals that may be present.
As an example, the growth of ivy around a conduit installation may well 
cause damage a few years down the line; the ivy could wrap around the 
conduit and eventually force it off of the wall. In this instance, it would 
not be wise to use plastic conduit as it may bend and crack. Where steel 
conduit is to be used the fixings must be of good quality and well fixed; if 
in doubt, put the fixings closer together for added support. Whenever we 
install equipment we must assume that it is going to be in place for many 
years and thought must be given to anything that could possibly cause dam-
age over a prolonged period.
‘Fauna’ is a term given to animal life, especially those of a particular region 
or area. Fauna is, of course, more difficult to provide protection for as creatures 
like mice, rats and squirrels can get into most buildings with very little effort. 
Any electrician will tell you that these creatures love to chew on cable 
insulation; it would be impossible to protect every cable from a mouse that 
Figure 1.4

Design considerations  9
wants to chew a cable. However, where there are a lot of mice, such as a 
grain store on a farm, precaution against damage from mice is a must. Care 
must be taken to ensure that they cannot get into the cable containment 
system by making sure that all equipment meets the required IP code and 
that all lids are secure. 
Other problems can be caused by the ingress of ants making nests in the 
base of lamp posts and conduit boxes; all of these things should be consid-
ered as indicated in Section AK and AL in Appendix 5.
An IP code is an international protection marking that is designed to clas-
sify the levels of protection against the intrusion of bodily parts, dust, solid 
foreign objects and liquids.
Table 1.1a sets out the IP codes that are commonly used in BS 7671. 
Table 1.1a
Degree of protection against the ingress of dust and foreign objects – 1st number
First 
number
Level of protection 
Definition
0
No protection 
1
No penetration by an object 
of 50mm diameter or greater
50mm ball shall not pass through hole
2
No penetration by an object 
of 12.5mm or greater
12.5mm ball shall not pass through hole
3
No penetration by an object 
of 2.5mm diameter or greater
2.5mm ball shall not pass through hole
4
No penetration by an object 
of 1mm diameter or greater
1mm ball shall not pass through hole
5
Dust protected
Dust protected enough to prevent any dust 
affecting equipment operation
6
Dust proof
No ingress of dust possible
Degree of protection against the ingress of liquids – 2nd number
Second 
number
Level of protection 
Definition
0
Not protected
1
Vertically falling water
Vertically falling drops of water will cause no 
harm
2
Vertically falling water when 
enclosure tilted up to 15°
Vertically falling drops of water will cause no 
harm
3
Spraying water
Vertically spraying water at an angle of 60° 
from vertical will cause no harm
(Continued)

10  Design considerations
The code used in BS 7671 consists of two digits and a letter; the first digit indi-
cates the level of protection against the ingress of dust and solid foreign objects.
The second digit indicates the level of protection against the ingress of liquids.
The letter indicates the level of protection from specific items.
Where an X is used, it means that there is no protection. As an example, 
the front surface of an electrical enclosure installed indoors has to com-
ply with the minimum of IP2X. This indicates that penetration by a sphere 
12.5mm in diameter will be prevented. Clearly, the hole could be 12mm in 
diameter but it will not prevent the ingress of liquids. However, as the enclo-
sure is indoors the presence of liquids is unlikely. For that reason, water 
protection is not required and an X is used.
Electromagnetic influences
Many things can be the cause of electromagnetic disturbances. These can 
include the switching of:
·	
Electric motors
·	
Inductive loads
·	
Transformers
·	
Discharge lighting
·	
IT equipment
Degree of protection against the ingress of liquids – 2nd number
Second 
number
Level of protection 
Definition
5
Jets of water
Jets of water from any direction will cause no 
harm
6
Powerful Jets of water
Powerful jets of water from any direction will 
cause no harm
7
Temporary immersion
Temporary immersion to a depth of 1m will 
not result in harmful effects due to water 
penetration
8
Continuous immersion
Continuous immersion will not result in 
harmful effects due to water penetration 
First additional letter 
A
Protected from access by the back of a hand
B
Protected from access by a British Standard 
finger 12mm in diameter and 80mm long
C
Protected against access with a tool
D
Protected against access by a wire probe 
100mm long
Table 1.1a   (Continued)

Design considerations  11
Where there is a possibility of damage or interference being caused by 
voltage surges or electromagnetic disturbances, precautions should be 
taken. Consideration should be given to the use of:
·	
Surge protection devices
·	
Screened data cables with bypass conductors fitted
·	
An equipotential bonding network where the following are connected 
to the network:
  (i)	Metal containment systems, conductive sheaths and armouring of 
data transmission cables or information technology equipment
 (ii)	Functional earthing conductors
(iii)	Protective conductors
Where equipment such as information technology equipment contain 
components that operate at high frequency and use a functional earth, it is 
important to ensure that the bonding conductors have a very low imped-
ance. This can be achieved by the use of individual bonds, which need to 
be kept as short as possible, where possible consideration should be given 
to the use of a bonding grid such as described in Annex A444 of BS 7671.
Utilisation
Consideration must always be given to what the building is being used for, as 
obviously this has an effect on the installation for many reasons. One of the 
first things to consider is the capability of the persons using the installation.
Where the installation is to be used by ordinary persons then all that is 
required is that the system will operate safely under any external influences 
that may be present.
Where it is known that children are going to be present, higher levels of IP 
rating should be required; any equipment such as heaters with a high surface 
temperature exceeding 80°C should be made inaccessible to touch.
If areas of the installation are to be used by disabled persons, the charac-
teristics of the installation should be suitable for the nature of the disability. 
As an example, switches and sockets may need to be made inaccessible to 
prevent misuse. 
Additional consideration would need to be given in areas such as prisons 
or unattended installations such as illuminated bus stops, telephone booths, 
town maps. These areas may be open to vandalism and perhaps the system 
would be better if it was completely contained within the building structure, 
or where it has to be surface mounted, tamper-proof screws and additional 
fixings should be considered.
Perhaps the installation will allow the user to be in contact with earth, 
which, of course, will increase the risk of electric shock. This is the reason 
that some installations are subject to additional requirements by BS 7671; 
examples of this would be construction sites and agricultural installations.

12  Design considerations
Will the contact with earth be continuous or will it be low? Where it is 
continuous, then converting TN-C-S and TN-S systems to TT may be con-
sidered, along with using non-conductive containment systems. If the risk 
of contact with earth is nonexistent, such as a second-floor flat, then there 
would be no reason to consider any special precautions.
Regardless of the type of installation, consideration must always be given 
to evacuation of the area in the event of an emergency.
In any area that may form part of an escape route, methods must be 
in place to prevent the collapse of any part of the electrical system that 
may block the route. Plastic trunking or conduit must be fixed with metal 
restraints to prevent it falling down in the event of a fire (reg. 521.11).
In areas where there are difficult conditions for evacuation or high density 
occupation, consideration must also be given to using flame retardant and 
low smoke emission materials (reg. 422.1) 
The storage and use of materials has to be taken into consideration. In 
areas where combustible materials are used or stored there will always be 
an increased risk of fire. As an example, a carpenter’s workshop will have 
wood and wood shavings scattered around. This is, of course, a fire risk. 
Where particular types of adhesives are used or perhaps fuel/gases are 
stored, there will be a risk of explosion. There will also be a risk of explo-
sion where there is a build-up of dust. Under these conditions it is impor-
tant to ensure that the materials used for the installation are suitable. The 
dangerous substances and explosive atmospheres regulations 2002 should 
be used to decide the level of risk and as a minimum any testing carried out 
should be intrinsically safe.
Due consideration must also be given to any materials/substances that 
may cause contamination; anything from powders to acids may present 
a problem and the parts of the installation that may be affected must be 
designed around them.
Construction of buildings
Fire propagation
The construction of a building will always have to be taken into consider-
ation when designing an electrical installation. The system must be designed 
taking into account the type of construction materials used.
The first consideration would always be fire. Clearly, timber-framed 
buildings or perhaps even large tents or marquees would be considered com-
bustible and the materials used for the electrical installation must be selected 
to provide the best protection.
One source of information when working in marquees is a guide that is 
produced by the Performance Textiles Association. Their trading name is 

Design considerations  13
MUTA and they produce a best practice guide, which can be found on their 
website (www.mutamarq.org.uk). 
Where installations are near combustible construction materials, regula-
tion 422.4 should be applied; this regulation states that measures must be 
taken to ensure that electrical equipment cannot cause ignition of walls, 
floors or ceilings. 
Where pre-fabricated buildings are being erected, any boxes and enclosures 
that are installed in premade walls must have protection to at least IP3X where 
the wall is likely to be drilled during erection. This is to prevent any dust/shav-
ings finding their way into the enclosure and creating a possible fire risk. 
Precautions must also be taken to ensure that all enclosures installed on 
or in combustible materials will not affect the surrounding materials due to 
any temperature rise caused by the operating of the installation. It is always 
worth remembering that parts of the electrical installation can safely oper-
ate at temperatures of up to 70°C.
Of course, it is not only the temperature of the installation that needs to 
be taken into account, as other equipment such as heaters and lamps could 
also cause a problem if they are installed without giving due consideration 
to where they are sited. 
Lamps, such as halogen ones, should have a protective screen to prevent 
and hot particles falling on, or being projected onto any combustible sur-
faces. The light source of a lamp should also be kept at a suitable distance 
from any surface that may be affected by the heat emitted from it. 
Where manufacturers’ guidance is not available, regulation 422.3.1 gives 
some guidance but common sense must also be applied, and consideration 
must be given to:
·	
The maximum power likely to be dissipated by the lamp.
·	
The type of material the lamp is fitted to or where the heat from the 
lamp is directed. Is it fire resistant?
As an example, the regulation uses a spotlight or projector. But, of course, 
some types of luminaires may get hotter than the examples given and in 
these cases the distances should be increased. The example distances pro-
vided are shown in Table 1.1b:
Table 1.1b
Maximum rating in watts
Minimum distance from surface
Up to 100W
0.5m
Over 100 and up to 300W
0.8m
Over 300 and up to 500W
1.0m

14  Design considerations
Table 55.3 in BS 7671 provides a list of symbols with explanations that 
should be found on any British standard light fitting. 
The first three symbols shown are the ones used prior to the latest edition 
of BS EN 60598-1: 2008. The last three symbols are from the latest edition 
and you will see from the descriptions that only luminaires that are not per-
mitted to be fitted are marked.
Fittings with these symbols indicate:
F
The luminaire is suitable for mounting on normally flammable surfaces. 
However, you need to be aware that the latest edition of BS EN 60598-1 
does not require this type of fitting to be marked at all. Only luminaires that 
must not be fitted to combustible surfaces need to be marked. 
F
The luminaire can be mounted on normally flammable surfaces and also 
be covered with thermally insulating material if required.
F
The luminaire must not be mounted any combustible surface.
A recessed luminaire that is not suitable for mounting onto normally 
flammable surfaces.
A surface luminaire that is not suitable for mounting onto a normally 
flammable surface.

Design considerations  15
A luminaire that is not suitable for covering with thermally insulating 
material.
Structural movement
Many buildings are subject to structural movement and, of course, when 
installing an electrical system this has to be taken into account. Where long 
runs of conduit or trunking are installed along walls, the expansion of the 
wall will be different to the expansion of the steel or plastic containment.
Where equipment is fixed and is reasonably solid, consideration must 
always be given to expansion, particularly over long runs that may be sub-
jected to temperature changes. Where plastic conduit is to be used a special 
coupler should be used that has an elongated socket that will allow the con-
duit to expand and contract without compromising the containment system.
The expansion coupler is glued at the short end and the long end is left 
as a push fit. Always be aware of the temperature during installation when 
using them. If it is cold, allow some room for expansion; if it’s hot, then 
allow some room for contraction (see Figure 1.5).
If it is cold, there would be little point in pushing the conduit into the cou-
pler right down to the stop, as the whole idea is to let the conduit expand as 
it heats up. Usually, if the conduit is around halfway into the coupler it will 
be about right whatever the temperature.
For an installation where steel is used the solution is not quite so simple. 
On a long run of conduit that is exposed to major changes in temperature, 
it is important to allow for expansion. Usually, there is enough play in the 
saddles to allow the tube to move. However, attention should be paid to the 
fixings as the movement may put a bit more stress on them and instead of 
expanding the tube may try and buckle.
To allow for expansion of the tube it is often a good idea to put a U shape 
in it, which will serve a double purpose. Not only will it allow the tube to 
Figure 1.5

16  Design considerations
expand, it will provide a low point to allow any water that has found its 
way into the conduit system to drain out. Of course, you will need to drill a 
hole in it at its lowest point. It’s not a bad idea to put a through box in the 
bottom of the U; this will make the pulling of cables easier and it can have 
a hole drilled in the bottom of it instead of drilling the conduit (Figure 1.6). 
Trunking can be dealt with by extending the slots in the trunking where it 
joins to the trunking connector and drilling slightly larger fixing holes and 
using screws and washers to allow for expansion. In situations where the 
joints need to move then it is important that the integrity of the earth conti-
nuity of the trunking is maintained; this can be achieved by fixing a flexible 
lead across the joint (Figure 1.7).
Drainage
Hole
Figure 1.6
Figure 1.7

Chapter 2
Types of supply system 
and earthing arrangements
We have three types of system that are in common use and they are referred 
to as TT, TN-S and TN-C-S.
Where the letter T is used when identifying supply systems, it represents 
earth. T is used because it is the first letter of ‘terra’, which is the Latin word 
used for earth, dirt or land.
TT supply system
A TT system is normally a supply in which the cables are run into the build-
ing above ground. The abbreviation TT indicates that the supply system and 
the installation have two points of earth.
In many rural areas and some urban areas you will see electricity cables 
suspended above ground by poles that look exactly the same as telegraph 
poles, the difference being that they usually have four wires suspended from 
them, one above the other.
In most domestic properties two cables are run into the house; these are 
the line and neutral. In this type of installation the earth for the property is 
not supplied by the district network operator (DNO). As we know an earth-
ing system is vital to the safety of most installations. Where we have a TT 
system, the earth has to be provided by the installer of the electrical instal-
lation. This is carried out by using an earth electrode which is dedicated to 
the installation.
An earth electrode is driven into the ground in a convenient position, and 
an earthing conductor is connected to it and run into the consumer unit; this 
will provide the earth for the property (see Figure 2.1).
As you can see from Figure 2.1, when there is an electrical fault to earth, 
the fault current will flow through the electrical supply line conductor to the 
consumer’s electrode and then through the earth (soil) back to the supply 
transformer electrode. The fault current will then flow through the trans-
former winding to the origin of the supply. 
A TT system can usually be identified at the service head (Figure 2.2). This 
is because there will be no sign of an earthing conductor being connected to 

Figure 2.1
Figure 2.2

Supply systems and earthing arrangements  19
the service head, or the supply cable. Most, if not all, TT systems require an 
RCD to be installed to ensure that disconnection times are met in the event 
of an earth fault.
The resistance of the suppliers earth electrode is stated as being 21Ω but, 
of course, this value cannot be stated as Ze because the resistance of the 
consumer’s earth electrode and the resistance of the earth between both 
the distributor’s electrode and the consumer’s electrode has to be taken 
into account. Further explanation of this is provided in the earth electrode 
section.
TN-S supply system
A TN-S supply system uses only one point of earth and this is supplied to us 
by the DNO. As can be seen from Figure 2.3, the point at which the system 
is connected to earth is at the supply transformer. In the event of a fault, 
the current can flow through the sheath of the supply cable or perhaps a 
separate earthing conductor. The abbreviation TN-S is earth and neutral 
separate; this is because the earth and the neutral are completely separate 
throughout the installation.
This type of supply is usually taken into the house underground. The 
cable is lead covered and protected by a steel sheath that is covered in hes-
sian. A connection is made to the lead sheath by the DNO and this provides 
the earth for the system (Figure 2.4). In most installations where the supply 
is provided through a TN-S system the resistance of the fault path is quite 
low with a typical maximum Ze of 0.8Ω. 
Figure 2.3

20  Supply systems and earthing arrangements
TN-C-S supply system
A TN-C-S system also uses a single point of earth. The difference between 
this system and the TN-S system is that the supply neutral in a TN-C-S 
system serves a dual purpose; not only is it used as the neutral conductor, 
it is also used as the supplier’s earth (Figure 2.5). In this system the supply 
neutral is known as the PEN conductor (protective earth and neutral).
In modern houses this type of supply would be run into the house under-
ground. However, there is no reason why it could not be overhead and, in 
fact, many TT systems have been converted to TN-C-S systems. As you can 
see by the drawing, the earthing of this system is provided by connecting an 
earthing conductor to the supply neutral at the service head (Figure 2.6). 
This connection must be made by the DNO and must not be made by any-
one else.
TN-C-S systems are often referred to as PME systems (protective multiple 
earthing).
Figure 2.4

Supply systems and earthing arrangements  21
Figure 2.5
Figure 2.6

22  Supply systems and earthing arrangements
Earthing
To prevent damage to property, or injury to persons or livestock when there 
is a fault to earth, it is a requirement that the system is installed so that the 
supply to the fault is interrupted very quickly. To ensure that this is the case, 
the supply system and each circuit must be co-ordinated correctly to ensure 
that the protective device will operate when required.
This relies on the resistance of the earth fault path being low enough to 
allow the amount of current to flow that is required to operate the protec-
tive device in the required time.
In the first instance it is necessary to select the correct size of the supply 
earthing conductor. Where the system is a TN-S system, the earthing con-
ductor must be a minimum of half the size of the meter tails.
Example:
·	
16mm2 tails = 10mm2 copper earthing conductor
·	
25mm2 tails = 16mm2 copper earthing conductor
For a TN-C-S supply a 16mm2 copper earthing conductor should be used 
for all installations with meter tails up to and including 35mm2.
TT systems are dealt with differently because they use an earth electrode 
and an RCD; the earth fault current will be a lot lower than that which 
would occur in the other systems. 
Providing the earthing conductor is not buried and is protected against 
corrosion and mechanical damage it can be 2.5mm2. This would require 
the conductor to be enclosed in mini trunking or conduit. In cases where the 
conductor is not protected it can be 4mm2 copper.
In some instances where the earth electrode is a distance from the build-
ing, it is necessary for the conductor to be buried in the ground. In these 
situations the conductor can be 2.5mm2 providing it is protected against 
corrosion and mechanical damage. 
Where the conductor is protected against corrosion only, then it must 
be a minimum of 16mm2. If it is not protected against corrosion, then the 
minimum size is 25mm2.

Chapter 3
Earth electrodes
Earth electrodes
The most common use of an earth electrode is for providing an earth for a 
TT system. 
A copper-plated steel rod is the most common type of earth electrode for 
use in a domestic installation; a steel pipe can also be used. Earth plates and 
underground structural metalwork can also be used where suitable. 
Before installing an earth electrode, consideration must be given to where it is 
going to be positioned. Ideally, it should be placed away from areas where it 
is likely to get damaged or to come into contact with chemicals that may cause 
it to corrode. It must also be in an area where the soil is unlikely to freeze. 
An ideal area is one that is in the shade and where the soil has less chance 
of drying out. A standard rod electrode used in a domestic installation would 
be driven into the ground to a depth of around 1m. Ideally, the electrode 
will be installed in an inspection pit (Figure 3.1). In most cases a lightweight 
plastic enclosure can be used.
Figure 3.1

24  Earth electrodes
Where an earth electrode is used for protection on a TT system, it is 
important that the electrode provides a low enough resistance to allow 
enough earth fault current to flow. To operate a 30mA RCD a fault current 
of 30mA is required. To allow 30mA to flow through the earth fault path 
the resistance of the earth fault loop must be no greater than .
50
0 03
1667
=
Ω.
Within a TT installation the touch voltage under fault conditions must 
never be permitted to rise above 50V. To calculate the maximum resistance 
of the earth fault loop path we can use Ohm’s law and divide the voltage by 
the current flow in amperes.
As the trip rating of the RCD used is given as 30mA we need to divide 
30 by 1000 to convert it to amperes. We can see that the maximum earth 
permitted earth fault path is 1667Ω.
The problem with using this value is that it will be unstable. Due to the 
nature of soil, the resistance will change almost daily.
In dry weather the resistance will be higher than it will be in wet weather. 
If we were to test the resistance of our electrode on a wet day it may have a 
low enough resistance to make it suitable for use. If the soil were to dry out, 
as it would in the summer, the resistance will rise, and it may rise above the 
permitted maximum value. 
To ensure that the earthing system remains effective, the maximum resis-
tance of the earth fault loop is limited to 200Ω. Any resistance above this 
will be considered unstable. 
Circuit protective conductors (cpcs)
The resistance of the supply side of the installation is something that we 
have no control over. The symbol for the supply resistance, which is usually 
referred to as the external impedance, is Ze. This is because the resistance 
of an AC circuit is referred to as impedance, and the letter used for imped-
ance is Z.
All final circuits that have a current rating of up to and including 32A 
must automatically disconnect from the supply in the event of a fault to 
earth within 0.4 of a second. This requires that the impedance (resistance) 
of the circuit must be low enough to allow the required amount of current 
to flow. The value of resistance for each circuit is known as Zs and this is 
made up of the resistance of Ze plus the resistance of the circuit line (R1) 
and circuit protective conductor (R2 earth). The formula used for Zs is: 
Zs = R1 + R2 and Figure 3.2 shows how this value is made up.
As you can see, the value of Ze is made up of the resistance of the supply 
line and the resistance of the path that the fault current would take back 
to the supply transformer; this is known as the earth fault return path. As 
seen in the previous drawings, in a TT system the earth fault path is through 
the mass of earth. For calculation purposes, this is given a value of 21Ω, 

Earth electrodes  25
although, of course, in reality it could be anything as the true resistance will 
depend on the type and size of the earth electrode used, along with the type 
of soil and the soil condition, which will depend on the weather.
A TN-S system that uses the metallic sheath of the supply cable will have 
a maximum Ze value of 0.8Ω and a TN-C-S system will have a maximum 
Ze value of 0.35Ω.
To ensure that enough current can flow to operate the protective devices, 
the circuit cables that we install must be very carefully calculated to prevent 
the Zs value from exceeding the permitted value.
Tables are provided for us that show the maximum permitted value of 
Zs for the type and rating of the protective device that is being used; it is 
up to us to use the correct size of cable to ensure that these values are not 
exceeded. Circuits that are installed with a Zs value that is too high could 
result in electric shock, fire or cable damage. 
A BS 3036 semi enclosed rewirable fuse (Figure 3.3)
The measured Zs value for BS 3036 fuses must not exceed those shown in 
Table 3.1.
BS 88 cartridge fuse and BS 1361 cartridge fuse
The measured Zs values for BS 88 cartridge fuses must not exceed those in 
Table 3.1.
Figure 3.2

Figure 3.3
Figure 3.4

Table 3.1
MCBs and RCDs
Rating of MCB in amps
3
6
10
16
20
32
40
50
63
Type B
Max measured Zs for
both 0.4 and 5 seconds
11.65
5.87
3.5
2.2
1.75
1.1
0.88
0.7
0.56
Type C
Max measured Zs for
both 0.4 and 5 seconds
5.82
2.91
1.75
1.09
0.87
0.55
0.44
0.35
0.56
Type D
Max measured Zs for
both 0.4 and 5 seconds
2.91
1.46
0.88
0.55
0.44
0.28
0.22
0.18
0.28
Rated residual operating current
Nominal voltage
50–120V
121–230V
231–400V
>400V
30
1667
1667
1553
1667
Max Zs
100
500
500
460
500
300
167
167
153
167
500
100
100
92
100
Earth electrode resistances below 200Ω may be unstable
Rating of fuse in amps
5
6
10
15
16
20
25
30
32
BS 1361
Max measured
Zs for 0.4 seconds
8Ω
2.5Ω
1.29Ω
0.7Ω
BS 88
Max measured
Zs for 0.4 seconds
7.9Ω
6.2Ω
3.7Ω
1.84Ω
1.34Ω
1.09Ω
0.6Ω
BS 3036
Max measured
Zs for 0.4 seconds
7.3Ω
1.9Ω
1.3Ω
0.83Ω
Use 0.4 seconds for circuits up to and including 32A and 5 seconds for above 32A

28  Earth electrodes
The measured Zs value of a circuit protected by a BS 1361 cartridge fuse 
must not exceed those in Table 3.1.
Figure 3.5 is of a fuse holder for a domestic cartridge fuse.
BS EN 60898 circuit breaker (Figure 3.6)
The measured Zs value for circuits protected by BS EN 60898 circuit break-
ers must not exceed those in Table 3.1.
Let’s look at how an electric shock could occur if the earth was not cor-
rectly connected or the circuit resistance to earth (Zs) was too high. In Fig-
ure 3.7 we have an electric cooker that has become live due to a fault on 
one of its oven elements. For some reason, the earthing conductor has not 
been connected. 
Figure 3.5

Figure 3.7
Figure 3.6

30  Earth electrodes
In this situation the case of the cooker will become live, although the ele-
ments that are not damaged will continue to work correctly. If you were to 
touch the cooker at the same time as you touched the water tap, there is a 
very good chance that you would receive an electric shock. This is because 
the tap will be at 0V and the cooker will be at a voltage considerably higher, 
probably 230V. As there is now a difference in pressure the current will be 
able to flow from the cooker through your body to the tap.
As you can see, earthing is very important as it is part of the safety system 
of an installation. 
Selecting the correct size of circuit protective 
conductor
Before we can select the correct size of the cable that we will use, we need to 
measure the external earth loop impedance Ze. We have already seen previ-
ously in this chapter that the maximum values for each system are provided, 
and if we need to we can use these values for calculation purposes if it is 
difficult to measure the value before the circuit is installed.
·	
TT =21Ω
·	
TN-S = 0.8Ω
·	
TN-C-S =0.35Ω
Once we know the Ze value of the system we need to calculate the resistance of 
the fault path that the current will take through the cable. This the R1 + R2 value 
for the total length of the cable used. Before we can calculate R1 + R2 for the 
total length we need to know the resistance per metre of the cable. Table 3.1b 
provides us with these values. 
Table 3.1b  Resistance per metre of copper conductors at an ambient temperature of 
20°C in mΩ/mm
Conductor cross-sectional area mm2
Resistance per metre (mΩ/m)
1
18.10
1.5
12.10
2.5
7.41
4.0
4.61
6.0
3.08
10.0
1.83
16.0
1.15

Earth electrodes  31
As an example let’s say we need to install a cable for a new radial socket 
outlet and the information which we have is:
Supply system is a TN-C-S with a Ze value of 0.35Ω.
Circuit protection is a BS EN 60898 circuit breaker 16A Type B.
The cable that we want to use is 2.5mm2 with a 1.5mm2 circuit protective 
conductor. 
The cable is 17 metres long. 
Using this information, it is quite a simple process to check that the circuit 
will meet the requirements of BS 7671 with regards to earth fault protection.
Step 1 
We must now calculate the resistance for the length of cable. Using the table 
we can see that the resistance per metre given for a 2.5mm2 copper conduc-
tor is 7.41mΩ per metre and the resistance of 1.5mm2 is 12.1mΩ per metre. 
If we now add them together we can see that the resistance of our cable is 
19.1mΩ per metre.
We are going to use 17 metres of this cable.
17 × 19.51 = 331.7mΩ
This value is in milli Ω and we need to convert it to Ω by dividing it by 1000.
331 7
1000
0 33
.
.
=
(We only need to use the first two decimal places.) This is the R1 + R2 value 
of our cable at 20°C.
When our cables are under load the temperature of the copper conduc-
tors increases. As the temperature rises, the resistance of the copper con-
ductor also increases. It increases at a rate of 2% for each 5°C rise in 
temperature.
When we are using thermoplastic flat twin cable we expect it to reach 
70°C if it is fully loaded. That is why it is called 70°C thermoplastic cable. 
If we are carrying out cable calculation properly we need to take this rise 
temperature and resistance into account.
For a new circuit we need to multiply R1 + R2 by 1.2. This will increase 
the value of resistance by 20%. In other words, it will show us what the 
resistance of the conductors will be at 70°C.
So:
0.33Ω × 1.2 = 0.396Ω 

32  Earth electrodes
It is better to round the value up rather than down or you can use the 
exact figure.
Step 2
Now we can add the R1 + R2 to the Ze, our supply, to find the total Zs of 
our circuit, as Zs = Ze + R1 + R2.
0.396 + 0.35 = 0.746Ω 
The total Zs of our circuit is 0.746Ω.
Step 3
We must now refer to Table 3.1 to see what the maximum permissible value is 
for our circuit, which is being protected by a 16A Type B circuit breaker.
As we can see, it is 2.73Ω. This is higher than the calculated value for our 
circuit, which means that it will be suitable.
Zs in a TT system
You may well be thinking that the previous calculation carried out on a TT 
system would result in a very high value of Zs, which, of course, would be 
correct. The same cable used for a circuit connected to a TT system would 
give a Zs value of:
Zs = Ze + R1 + R2 21Ω + 0.396Ω = 21.396Ω 
This value of Zs would make the use of the circuit unacceptable. This is 
because, due to the nature of a TT system, it has a high Ze to begin with.
With TT systems it is normal to have a high Zs value and for this reason 
we must use a device called a residual current device (RCD) for protection 
from earth faults. This device measures the amount of current that is flow-
ing in the line conductor and the neutral conductor. 
In a good circuit the current should be the same in both conductors. 
When there is a fault to earth this will result in an imbalance as some of the 
current will flow in the cpc. When this happens the RCD will operate and 
cut off the supply to the circuit. 
The use of an RCD for protection is not restricted to TT supplies. In some 
instances it is very difficult to install a circuit that meets a low enough Zs 
value for the circuit protection used on any type of supply. In these instances, 
it is permitted to use an RCD to ensure a fast disconnection of the supply. 
It is important that every effort is made to ensure a low enough R1 + R2 
wherever possible.

Chapter 4
Protective bonding
As well as having earthing as protection we must also have protective bond-
ing. The correct installation of protective bonding considerably reduces the 
risk of electric shock within an electrical system. As we have seen earlier, 
there must be an imbalance of pressure for electricity to flow. Protective 
bonding prevents an imbalance of pressure by joining all metal parts that 
could become live during a fault.
In Figure 4.1 we have an item of Class 1 equipment that has a fault to 
earth and is within an equipotential zone.
If the protective device did not operate because the fault current was not 
high enough, or perhaps the device was faulty or incorrectly installed, then 
everything that was connected to the main earth terminal would become 
live. 
The correct installation of protective bonding will ensure that there will 
be no difference in potential between any exposed conductive parts and 
extraneous conductive parts within the installation as it creates an equi­
potential zone. 
Figure 4.1

34  Protective bonding
Everything within this zone will be live, but it will all be at the same 
potential and in this situation the current will not be able to flow from one 
live part to another. This will, of course, considerably reduce the risk of 
electric shock.
There are two types of protective bonding.
Main protective bonding is where a conductor is used to connect the main 
earthing terminal to extraneous conductive parts within the installation. 
Generally this would include:
·	
Metal water service pipes
·	
Metal gas installation pipes
·	
Oil service pipes installation
·	
Exposed structural steel of the building 
·	
Metal central heating system
·	
Air conditioning system
Where any kind of bonding is carried out it is extremely important that it 
is installed correctly. We must always use the correct type of earth clamp to 
BS 951 (Figure 4.2), which must be fitted in the correct position within the 
installation. BS 951 earth clamps often have coloured markings; a red mark-
ing means that they must only be used in dry environments where condensa-
tion will not take place. These earth clamps should not be used to bond cold 
water pipes as they often get very wet with condensation.
The clamps that are coloured blue or green may be used in damp 
atmospheres.
The connection to the metal services entering the building should be on 
the consumer’s side of the installation, within 600mm of the service meter. 
Where the service meter is external the connection can be made inside the 
building as near as possible after the point of entry before any branch in 
the pipe work. It is also permissible to make the bonding connection in the 
Figure 4.2

Protective bonding  35
service meter box outside of the building; in these cases the cable must enter 
the box through its own dedicated hole (Figure 4.3).
Where the services entering the building are plastic, bonding must still be 
made to the metal installation pipes.
As a general rule, there is no requirement to bond plastic installation 
pipes, although in some installations where large pipes are used and the 
water has additives such as central heating protection protective bonding 
may be installed. This would require the use of metal inserts to attach the 
earth clamps to.
For TT, TN-S and TN-C-S systems there are calculations that can be 
made to select the size of main protective bonding conductors. The simplest 
method is to use 10mm2 copper conductors as a minimum. Main protective 
bonding must have a resistance of 0.05Ω or less. In practical terms, this lim-
its the length of a 10mm2 copper conductor to 25m; where a length of more 
than 25m is required, then the size must be increased to 16mm.
Protective supplementary bonding is used to connect all of the extraneous 
conductive parts to all of the exposed conductive parts within a building. 
The use of protective supplementary bonding is often misunderstood; its 
function is to ensure that all of the metal parts within a certain area of an 
installation will rise to the same potential.
When there is an electrical earth fault within an installation, all of the 
metalwork that is connected in some way to the main earthing bar within 
the consumer’s unit will become live. This, of course, includes any Class 1 
equipment that is plugged in or connected to the installation in some way. 
In most cases the fault will operate the protective device instantly and there 
will not be a problem. However, if for some reason the protective device 
does not operate, not only will all of the metalwork connected to the earth 
terminal become live, any metalwork that is touching the earthed metal-
work will also become live. This could include steel baths and bath taps, 
Figure 4.3

36  Protective bonding
radiators, paperwork and, in fact, anything metal. Where they do become 
live it is likely that they will become live at a different potential, which could 
present a high level of shock risk, particularly in a room containing a bath 
or a shower.
To reduce the risk of electric shock protective supplementary bonding is 
installed. When installed correctly the supplementary bonding will ensure 
that the potential on all bonded metalwork will be the same, which of course 
will prevent any current flowing through a person who happens to touch 
two parts at the same time (Figure 4.4).
The difference between main protective bonding and supplementary pro-
tective bonding is as follows.
Main protective bonding is used to join all extraneous conductive parts 
within a building, such as the water and gas installation to the main earthing 
terminal. Protective supplementary bonding is used to connect all exposed 
and extraneous conductive parts within an area such as the bathroom. It is 
not necessary to connect this bonding conductor to the main earthing termi-
nal, just the exposed and extraneous conductive parts together. 
Where bonding is installed it is a requirement that all connections are 
made using the correct type of earth clamps to BS 951, and of course that 
the correct size of bonding conductor is used. Where the conductor is pro-
tected against mechanical damage by installing it in mini trunking or con-
duit the minimum size is 2.5mm2. For a conductor that is clipped directly or 
run under flooring, then the minimum size is 4mm2. In most instances, it is 
easier and cheaper to use 4mm2. 
The conductor used for all types of bonding must be identified by using 
green and yellow coloured cables just as you would for earthing conduc-
tors. Where the bonding is to be carried out in bathrooms that have copper 
plumbing the pipe work can be used as a conductor where required. This, 
Figure 4.4

Protective bonding  37
of course, is very helpful as the bonding conductors can be installed between 
the pipes supplying taps on the bath or/and basin only.
Bonding conductors must also be run from pipe work into any electrical 
points within the area being bonded. Remembering that the pipes can be 
used as bonding conductors, there is no problem with connecting from an 
electrical point to a pipe in the roof, as long as the pipe is connected to those 
being bonded.
Where you can be sure that the plumbing is all copper the bonding can be 
carried out in the airing cupboard simply by connecting a bonding conduc-
tor to each pipe (Figure 4.5).
In buildings that have plastic plumbing, or have RCD protection for all 
circuits in the bathroom, it is unlikely that bonding will be required.
Figure 4.5

Chapter 5
Diversity
In most, if not all, installations the full load will never be used and for that 
reason diversity can be applied not only to circuits to help us select the cor-
rect cable size. It can also be applied to whole installations to help us make a 
realistic assessment of the total amount of energy required from the supply.
I think that one of the best examples that could be used to explain the 
use of diversity is when a cooker is to be installed. It would be very unusual 
for a cooker to have all of its individual components drawing current at the 
same time. 
Calculating the diversity of a cooker
When wiring a cooker point the same process should be followed as for all 
other circuits. Planning is very important and will save problems and time.
When we are installing a point for a cooker we need to ensure that the 
cable is a suitable size to carry the current required as cookers vary greatly 
in loading. 
First, we must calculate the total load of the cooker. This is often given in 
the user instructions but if we can’t find it we can always calculate it.
As an example let’s take a cooker with the following:
•	
Two hob plates with a maximum output of
1.5kW each = 3kW
•	
One hob plate with a maximum output of
2kW = 2kW
•	
One hob plate with a maximum output of
1kW = 1kW
•	
One oven with a maximum output of
4.5kW = 4.5kW
•	
One small oven with a maximum output of
2kW = 2kW
•	
One grill with a maximum output of
2.5kW = 2.5kW
This will give us a total load of 15kW, which can now be converted to 
amperes by dividing by the voltage.
15000
230
65 2
=
. A
 

Diversity  39
This type of load is not unusual for a cooker; however, it is unlikely that in a 
domestic installation the whole of the load will be on at any one time, even on 
Christmas Day. This is because all of the elements are controlled by thermostats 
and all of the ingredients that require cooking require different cooking times. 
Taking all of this into consideration, we can use something called diver-
sity. This is something that will be explained in detail and a cooker is a good 
place to start.
Because not all of the loads of the cooker will be on together, we can carry 
out a simple diversity calculation to take this into account. 
From the total load of 65.2A we can use 10A. 
This leaves 65.2 – 10 = 55.2A
Of the current that is left we can use 30%.
55.2 × 30% = 16.56A
Now, we must add to the 16.65A the 10A that we subtracted, which 
equals 26.65A, and this is the total load that we need to allow for the cooker 
circuit.
This is why most cooker circuits are rated at 32A and are wired in 
6.00 mm2 cable.
Some cooker outlets have a 13A socket outlet incorporated in them. In these 
cases, another 5A must be added to the total, which in this case is 26.65 + 5 = 
31.65A. This, of course, still allows us to use a 32A protective device.
This calculation can be used for all domestic cooker installations.
It is not unusual for the oven to come prefitted with a 13A plug top and 
the hob to be a separate piece of equipment. In these instances, it is desir-
able to wire a 13A socket from the load side of the cooker outlet, as well as 
connecting the hob to the cooker outlet as well. 
Where the hob is sited in a different part of the kitchen from the oven, it is 
acceptable to simply plug the oven directly into the ring and use the cooker 
outlet for the hob. It is a requirement that the cooker switch is within 2 metres 
of the cooker. Where there is a distance between the hob and the oven, using 
a socket outlet for the oven is a good way of complying, and diversity would 
only be needed for the hob, which may reduce the cable size even further.
Diversity on complete installations
The same principle that was used for the cooker can pretty much be used for 
complete installations.
It would not be unusual for a dwelling to have the following circuits:
·	
One 32A cooker circuit
·	
Two 32A ring final circuits
·	
One 16A immersion heater circuit
·	
Two 6A lighting circuits

40  Diversity
If added together, the total load could be as much as 124A. If we consider 
that the maximum rating of a single-phase domestic supply is 100A, with 
many of the supplies only 80A or even 60A, we can see that even a small 
installation will, in total, exceed the supply. If we were to install a 10kW 
electric shower we could add at least another 45A to this and the total 
demand would be getting close to double the rating of the supply.
This is, of course, where diversity helps us, as when we apply to the dis-
trict network operator (DNO) for a supply they will need to be told the 
maximum demand taking into account diversity. This is because it is fairly 
obvious that not everything will be used together.
Diversity tables are available to help us (Table 5.1) but they are only 
intended as a guide and even if we use them the calculated demand in many 
installations will exceed the rating of the supply.
Table 5.1
Purpose of the final circuit 
to which diversity applies
Individual households 
including individual 
dwellings in a block
Small shops, stores, 
offices and small business 
premises 
Lighting
66% of total demand
90% of total demand
Heating and power
100% of total load up 
to 10A and 50% of the 
remainder
100% of largest load and 
75% of the remainder
Cooking appliances
The first 10A and then 
30% of the remaining load. 
+ 5A if a socket outlet is 
included 
100% of the largest + 80% 
of 2nd largest then 60% of 
the remainder
Motors (not lift motors)
100% of largest motor + 
80% of the 2nd largest and 
60% of the remainder
Instantaneous water 
heaters (showers)
100% of the first two 
largest added and 25% of 
the remainder
100% of the first two 
largest added and 25% of 
the remainder
Thermostatic water 
heaters (immersion 
heater)
No diversity
No diversity
Floor heating
No diversity
No diversity
Storage and space heating 
No diversity
No diversity
Socket outlet circuits, 
ring or radial (13A outlet 
circuits)
100% of largest demand + 
40% of remainder
100% of largest demand + 
50% of all others 
Socket outlets other than 
those above and any fixed 
equipment not listed
100% of largest point used 
+ 40% of all others
10% of largest used + 70% 
of all others

Diversity  41
Using Table 5.1, let’s look at applying diversity to the example we used 
earlier:
• 
One 32A cooker (diversity already applied to this)
= 32A
• 
One 32A ring final circuit at 100%
= 32A
• 
One 32A ring final circuit at 40%
= 12.8A
• 
One 16A immersion heater at 100%, 3kW heater
= 13A
• 
Two 6A lighting circuits at 66%
= 7.92A
• 
Total
 97.72 A
Note: where a fixed load such as an immersion heater is connected, the 
actual load can be used.
Using the diversity tables, this installation just about scrapes in below the 
rating of the supply fuse. If we were to add the shower that was mentioned 
earlier, the maximum demand will be much higher. In reality, the load will 
be far less than this.
Most domestic ring circuits will never be loaded up to their full capacity. 
The highest load in most houses will come from the kitchen when items of 
equipment such as the washing machine and dishwasher are used. Most 
other equipment in a kitchen are possibly high current but will be used for 
a short time only. Where a dwelling has central heating it is unlikely that 
the immersion heater will be used on a regular basis. Unless you have chil-
dren like mine, it is unlikely that 66% of all lights will be on at the same 
time. Even if they were, it is extremely unlikely that each circuit will have 
nine 100W lamps, which is what would be required if the circuit load was 
to be 4A.
 
9
100
230
3 91A
×
= .
When working out the maximum demand, common sense has to be used 
and we must remember that not everything will be on at the same time. In 
reality, most equipment will only be used intermittently.
It is fair to say that many installations have far more circuits and greater 
loads that the one used in our example. Ask around and see if you can find 
anyone whose supply fuse has operated due to overload. It is very unlikely 
that you will.
Diversity can be used to calculate maximum demand but realistic val-
ues must be used and a great deal of thought should be given to what 
equipment is likely to be used and when. You cannot simply keep adding 
circuits, because if you do, overloads can occur and the supply fuse may 
melt.

Chapter 6
Cable calculation
Basic cable calculation is a simple process providing you follow the correct 
sequence of steps.
Once the method of cable installation has been decided, it is time to look 
at selecting the correct type and size of cable that will be suitable for the job. 
Of course, the type of cable used will depend on the installation, but 
the procedure for calculating the correct size is pretty much the same for 
all cables. It is really important, however, that the correct tables from the 
wiring regulations are used, particularly the tables from Appendix 4 of 
BS 7671.
As an example: a circuit to supply a 4kW wall mounted heater is to be 
installed in steel conduit using single core 70°C thermoplastic cables. The 
circuit is 36m long and the ambient temperature is not expected to rise 
above 30°C.
The circuit is to be protected by a BS EN 60898 Type B circuit breaker 
and the conduit will contain two other circuits.
The installation is a 230 volt single-phase TN-C-S supply with a mea-
sured Ze of 0.28Ω.
With the information available it is now possible to calculate the cable 
size a step at a time.
Step 1
Calculate the design current required for the load. This is referred to as Ib.
Ib =
kW
voltage
4000
230
17 39
=
.
A
The design current Ib is 17.39A.

Cable calculation  43
Now we have the design current we can carry out step 2, which is to select 
a protective device for the circuit.
Step 2
In the example we can see that we are to use a Type B to BS EN 60898 cir-
cuit breaker. The nearest rating of circuit breaker is going to be 20A.
Step 3
Step 3 is to look for any factors that may affect the temperature of the 
cables. These are known as rating factors.
Clearly, the temperature in which the cable is operating will be a factor. 
This is because if the cable heats up it will increase in resistance, and this 
will mean that its current carrying capacity will be reduced and the voltage 
drop will be increased.
The first factor to look at is the ambient temperature. Table 4B1 in 
Appendix 4 is the rating factor table and the symbol used to represent this 
factor is Ca. 
Using the table we can see that Ca is 1.00 for a 70°C thermoplastic cable 
operating in an ambient air temperature of 30°C.
Ca is 1.00.
The next condition that will affect the cable is that it is installed in a con-
duit containing two other circuits. As we have no information other than 
that there are two circuits, we have to assume that the additional circuits 
are fully loaded and may be operating at a temperature of 70 (see note on 
operating conditions).
Table 4C1 is the table to be used for grouping and the symbol used to 
represent this is Cg.
From the evidence we have we can see that the circuit is enclosed in a 
conduit that will contain a total of three circuits. Using Table 4C1, this 
installation is item 1, the grouping factor for three circuits installed as item 
1 the rating factor is 0.7.
Step 4
We now need to calculate the minimum size cable that will carry the current 
under the circuit installation conditions. The method that is used is to divide 
the rating of the protective device by the rating factors.
The information we need to use is:
·	
Rating of the protective device = 20A
·	
Rating factor for ambient temperature = 1
·	
Rating factor for cable grouping = 0.70

44  Cable calculation
20
1
0 70
28 57
×
(
)
=
.
.
A
This is the minimum rating of the cable that we can use under these conditions.
Step 5
Now we need to select a cable from the correct table in Appendix 4 of the 
wiring regulations. For single core 70°C thermoplastic insulated cables the 
table is 4D1A.
Column 4 is reference method B for cables enclosed in conduit or trunk-
ing fixed on to a wall. We now need to look down the column until we reach 
a figure of ≥ 28.57A.
The nearest we can get is 32A, and if we now look across to the left we 
can see that in column one we need to use a 4mm2 cable.
Now we have chosen a cable that can carry the load current we need to 
check that it meets all of the volt drop limitations this will be a maximum 
of 5% for this type of circuit. 
Step 6
We now need to look at Table 4C1B. Column 3 is the mV/A/m and we can 
see that the volt drop for a 4mm2 cable is 11 mV/A/m.
This is telling us that the voltage drop in our cable will be 11 thousandths 
of a volt for every amp and every metre. Our calculation will be just as it is 
shown – mV/A/m = 11 × 17.39 × = 6886 – but, of course, this is in millivolts 
and we need the answer in volts. To do this, we need to divide the answer by 
1000. Rather than mess around doing the calculation in stages it is far easier 
to carry it out as one calculation.
Note that it is the design current that we use for volt drop.
11 17 39
36
1000
×
×
=
.
6.88
This shows that our circuit will meet the volt drop requirements. In this 
instance the volt drop must be ≤ 11.5 volts as it is a power circuit with a 
limitation of 5%.
There is a shortcut that is often useful when calculating cables for volt drop.
The information we need is the:
·	
Design current Ib = 17.39A
·	
Length of circuit = 36m
·	
Maximum volt drop for the circuit 5% = 11.5 volts

Cable calculation  45
Once we have this information we can make life a little easier by trans-
posing the original calculation of:
mV
A
L
volt drop 
×
×
=
1000
Complete the bits we know for our circuit:
mV×
×
=
17 39
36
1000
11 5
.
.
Now we can transpose to find the mV:
11 5
1000
17 39
36
.
.
×
×
= mV
If we now complete the calculation we can see that the mV is 18.36mV/A/m.
All we need to do now is look at Table 4C1B and find a cable with a volt 
drop of less than 18.36mV/A/m. We can see that a 2.5mm2 cable is less, and 
therefore it will comply with the volt drop requirements for the circuit. Now 
we need just to check that a 2.5mm2 cable can carry the required current. 
Column 4 of Table 4C1A shows that the cable can only carry 24A, which 
will not be enough for us. All we need to do now is look down the column 
until we find a cable that can carry 28.57A and use that, as we know that 
the smaller cable of 2.5mm2 is OK for volt drop.
There are other rating factors that could affect some circuits but will not 
affect the circuit that we are to install. Almost anything that will affect the 
temperature of the cable will have a rating factor. 
In earlier editions of BS 7671 they were referred to as correction factors. 
Now they are known as rating factors but the initial letter used is still C.
The rating factors used are:
·	
Ca for ambient temperature
·	
Cg for grouping
·	
Cr for semi-enclosed fuses
·	
Ci for thermal insulation
·	
Cc for circuits buried in the ground
·	
Cd for the depth of burial 
The tables required for use with these rating factors are all found in 
Appendix 4 with the exception of Ci. The table that can be used for this is 
Table 52.2, which can be found in Chapter 52 of BS 7671.

46  Cable calculation
Earth fault loop impedance
Now that the cable size has been calculated, the next stage of the circuit 
design is to confirm that the circuit protection will operate within the 
required time in the event of an earth fault or a short circuit. 
This again can be carried out in simple steps.
Step 1
We need to know the value of the external loop impedance Ze. This is given 
to us in the scenario as being 0.28Ω.
If the value is not available we will need to measure it using an earth fault 
loop impedance tester. To carry out this test the supply at the board being 
tested must be isolated.
Once isolated, disconnect the incoming earthing conductor and test 
between this conductor and the incoming supply. The measured value will 
be the Ze for the board being tested (Figure 6.1).
Step 2
Calculate the resistance of the circuit line and earth. This is known as R1 + R2 
with R1 being the resistance of the line conductor and R2 the resistance of 
the circuit protective conductor.
Figure 6.1

Cable calculation  47
The resistance values of copper conductors at a temperature of 20°C can 
be found in Table 6.1a below.
The cable being used for this circuit is 4mm2 for both live conductors and 
cpc. From the table a 4mm2 conductor has a resistance of 4.61mΩ/m. The 
circuit has a line conductor and a cpc, both of which are 36m long. The best 
method is to just add the resistance of the line and cpc together, which will 
give use a resistance of 9.22mΩ/m.
The calculation is to multiply the resistance per metre by the length, which 
will give us the total resistance of the cable.
9 22
36
1000
0 33
.
.
×
=
Ω
0.33Ω will be the resistance (R1 + R2) of the cable at 20°C. When the cable 
is under load it may be that it will be running at a temperature of 70°C, so 
we will have to allow for the increase in conductor resistance by using a 
multiplier of 1.2 (this is explained in Chapter 3).
The resistance of R1 + R2 by the multiplier is:
0.33Ω × 1.2 = 0.396Ω 
0.396Ω will be the resistance of our circuit R1 + R2 at a temperature of 70°C.
Step 3
Next, we must add the R1 + R2 to the Ze as the calculation is usually set out 
as Zs = Ze + (R1 + R2).
Zs = 0.23Ω + 0.396Ω = 0.626Ω
Table 6.1a
Conductor cross-
sectional area in mm2
Resistance of the 
conductor at 20°C 
mΩ/m
Twin and earth 
combinations
mm2
R1 + R2 in
mΩ/m
Line
cpc
1
18.10
1
1
36.20
1.5
12.10
1.5
1
30.20
2.5
7.41
2.5
1.5
19.51
4
4.61
4
1.5
16.71
6
3.08
6
2.5
10.49
10
1.83
10
4
6.44
16
1.83
16
6
4.23

48  Cable calculation
The total earth fault loop impedance for our circuit when operating will be 
0.626Ω.
Step 4
Now we need to compare the value against the values given for protective 
devices in BS 7671, or if the table is not available it is a very simple exercise 
to calculate the maximum permitted Zs for a circuit breaker to BS EN 60898.
The circuit breaker is a 20A Type B, which we know must operate within 
0.1sec when five times its rating is passed through it.
20 × 5A = 100A
To calculate resistance we use Ohm’s law. 
The voltage that the circuit is operating at is 230 volts.
V
I
for our calculation 
Ω=
=
230
100
2 3
. Ω
We now have to adjust this value using the factor Cmin, which is 0.95.
2.3Ω × 0.95 = 2.185 Ω
Providing our Zs value is ≤ 2.185Ω, the circuit is satisfactory.
Twin and earth 70°C thermoplastic PVC cable
When wiring circuits using 70°C thermoplastic, the process for cable selec-
tion is pretty much the same as the method shown in the scenario used in 
the previous example. The differences will be the installation method and 
the size of the cpc.
Generally, the cables are installed in the building structure, which may 
contain insulation, and the cpc is smaller than the live conductors.
If we use the previous scenario we can see the difference: the rating fac-
tors will remain the same as will the circuit protection. This means that 
the required rating of the cable will be the same – for our scenario it was 
28.57A.
At this point of the calculation we need to consider the installation 
method used to install the cable. Table 6.1b is used to identify the installa-
tion method for flat twin and earth. This table is used in conjunction with 
Table 4D5A in BS 7671 to identify the current rating of a cable depending 
on how it is to be installed.
There are four methods to choose from, shown in Table 6.1b.

Cable calculation  49
Let’s assume that our cables are in a stud wall touching one surface of the 
wall – this will be method 102.
Now we need to look at Table 4D5A, which is specifically for use with 
flat twin and earth cables.
Column 4 is method 102; if we look down this column we can see that 
the nearest rating to 28.57A is 35A. Now look to the left of the table and 
we can see that the cable now needs to be a 6mm2 cable. Using this cable 
will make a difference to voltage drop and earth fault loop values. In this 
instance, the live conductors are a larger cross-sectional area, which means 
the voltage drop will be less due to the conductors having a lower resistance. 
The earth fault loop impedance will need checking as the cpc in a twin 
and earth cable is usually smaller than the live conductors. A 6mm2 cable 
will normally have a 2.5mm2 cpc.
If we look at the cable resistance table we can see that the 6mm2 live 
conductors have a resistance of 3.08mΩ/m and the 2.5mm2 cpc will have a 
resistance of 7.41mΩ/m. If we add them together we can see that the total 
resistance (R1 + R2) per metre is 10.49mΩ/m.
If we now carry out the calculation as before using the new value:
10 49
36
1 2
1000
0 45
.
.
.
×
×
=
Ω
Remember Zs = Ze + (R1+ R2) or using our values 0.23Ω + 0.45Ω = 
0.68Ω:
Zs = 0.6Ω
This again, is much less than the maximum permitted for a 20A Type B BS 
EN 60898 circuit breaker, so the circuit will be OK.
There is one more regulation that we have to satisfy. Table 54.7 BS 7671 
shows us that the minimum size of a cpc in any circuit with conductors 
Table 6.1b
Method 100
Flat twin and earth cables clipped to a joist, or touching the 
plasterboard ceiling but not covered by more than 100mm of 
thermal insulation
Method 101
Flat twin and earth cables clipped to a joist, or touching the 
plasterboard ceiling but covered by thermal insulation with a 
thickness of more than 100mm
Method 102
Flat twin and earth cables situated in a stud wall with the cable 
touching the inner wall surface or plasterboard ceiling
Method 103
Flat twin and earth cables situated in a stud wall not touching 
the inner wall surface and surrounded by thermal insulation

50  Cable calculation
≤ 16mm2 must not be smaller than the live conductors, unless the conduc-
tor size is calculated to ensure that it satisfies thermal constraints. In other 
words, we need to check that the cable will not be destroyed during the time 
it takes for the fault protection to operate.
For this, we need to carry out a calculation known as the adiabatic equa-
tion. This is the calculation used to check that the size of cpc we are using is 
suitable, not to calculate the size of the cpc. The calculation is:
S
I
t
k
=
×
2
To carry out this calculation the information required is:
I = the value of fault current that can flow through the circuit including 
the protective device. This can be calculated using the Zs for the circuit and 
dividing it into the circuit voltage.
230
0 68
.
 = 338.23A
I = 338.23A
T = the operating time for the device. As it is a circuit breaker this will be 
0.1 seconds.
k = the factor for the conductor taking into account the material, resistiv-
ity and heat capacity. This value can be found in Table 43.1 or Tables 54.2 
through to 5 in BS 7671 depending on the conductor material. As this is 
70°C thermoplastic the value will be 115.
S = is the minimum cross-sectional area of the cable in mm2.
Using the values we now have we can complete the calculation:
338 23
0 1
115
0 93
2
2
.
.
.
×
=
mm
As our cpc is 2.5mm2 it will be suitable.
The result of the calculation does not mean that we can reduce the size 
of the cpc. If we did that it would alter the R1 + R2 values, which in turn 
would alter the fault current and possibly the disconnection time. Always 
remember that this calculation is just a check.

Chapter 7
Socket outlet circuits
Most circuits that we install here in the UK are of the radial type where 
the cable simply loops in and out of each point and stops at the last outlet. 
However, an exception is made for circuits supplying socket outlets.
Ring final circuits
The most common type of socket outlet circuit in the UK, particularly in a 
domestic environment, is known as a ring final circuit (Figure 7.1). In this 
type of circuit the cable starts at the consumer unit; it then loops from one 
outlet to another and then back to the consumer unit forming a complete 
ring of cable.
The benefit of this type of circuit is that smaller cross-sectional area cables 
can be used – most commonly this would be 2.5mm2 live conductors with 
a 1.5mm cpc. Also, the circuit can accommodate a large number of outlets 
and voltage drop around the circuit is normally very low.
Figure 7.1

52  Socket outlet circuits
The rules for ring final circuits are as follows:
·	
Maximum area served is 1002m.
·	
There is no limit to the number of outlets on a single circuit.
·	
A ring circuit can have as many socket outlets spurred from it as there 
are socket outlets on the ring.
·	
An unlimited number of fused connection units can be spurred from the 
ring.
·	
A spur cannot be taken from a spur. 
·	
Maximum protective device size is 32A.
Wherever possible, it is always better to try and include all of the outlets 
within the ring but on occasion it is useful to spur off the ring, particularly 
if an additional socket is being added at a later date.
The advantage of a ring circuit is that socket outlets can be installed to 
supply a greater area while using a relatively small cable. However, it is very 
important that the circuit is wired correctly and any alterations to it are car-
ried out carefully.
The disadvantages of using a ring circuit are that dangers can arise and 
not be obvious to users. An example would be where one of the conductors 
on the ring became open circuit (Figure 7.2). The circuit would operate nor-
mally, although the result would be that the cable is vulnerable to overload. 
The cable would only be capable of carrying a load of 20A but would be 
protected by a 32A device. Also, the value of the circuit Zs would increase 
and the circuit device may not operate in the event of a fault.
This is another good reason why periodic testing of installations is 
important.
Figure 7.2

Socket outlet circuits  53
Adding an outlet to an existing ring
As mentioned earlier, it is possible to add more sockets to a ring circuit if 
required but there are certain rules that have to be followed. When we add 
a socket to a ring it is known as a spur. We can spur as many double socket 
outlets to a ring as there are sockets on the ring. The socket on the ring can 
be a single or a twin socket.
When a socket has been spurred from the ring the cable supplying the 
socket is the spur and it is known as an unfused spur; the socket is not the 
spur. The spur can be taken from an existing socket outlet or a junction box 
can be cut into the circuit and the spur can be taken from that (Figure 7.3). 
Under no circumstances can a spur be taken from a socket that is already 
a spur. A ring circuit is wired in 2.5mm2 cable, which can safely carry a load 
of around 20A minimum; this depends on the installation method. The cir-
cuit is protected by a 30 or 32A protective device and the reason that this is 
permitted is because the circuit is wired as a ring, and the current can flow 
through the circuit along both legs of it. This, of course, provides a capacity 
of 40A, which will comply with our regulations as the cable rating is ≥ than 
the rating of the protective device.
When we spur a cable from the ring we must in most cases use the same 
size cable that the ring is wired in. When we spur a 2.5m2 cable from the 
ring it is a single cable with a minimum current capacity of 20A. This is fine 
for one twin socket outlet as even if we load the socket outlet to its capac-
ity it will not overload the cable, although the cable is rated at less than the 
protective device, it is permitted. 
The reason for this is that any item of equipment that is plugged into the 
socket outlet will be fused in the plug top. This will prevent the equipment 
overloading and in turn the cable as a maximum load of only 26A will be 
Figure 7.3

54  Socket outlet circuits
drawn. If a second outlet was spurred from the spurred outlet a maximum 
of 52A could be drawn, which of course would result in the overloading of 
the spur (Figure 7.4).
Where more than one outlet is required it is possible to spur from a socket 
outlet to a fused connection unit first. The cable in this instance would be 
called a fused spur as opposed to the unfused spur used for spurring a socket 
outlet. Once a fused connection unit has been spurred any number of socket 
outlets can be taken from the outgoing side of the spur as the 13A fuse in 
the connection unit will protect the cable (Figure 7.5).
Possible 
overload 
on cable
Figure 7.4
Fused 
connectio n unit
 
13A 
fuse 
Figure 7.5

Socket outlet circuits  55
Not all equipment has or even requires a 13A plug; very often, it is more 
convenient to permanently connect an item of equipment to a fused con-
nection unit. It is permissible to spur as many fused connection units from 
a ring as required; there is no limit to the number providing a spur is not 
taken from a spur.
Radial circuits for socket outlets
Another method of installing socket outlets is by using a circuit called a 
radial; this method is preferred by many installers and designers as it is not 
as open to abuse as ring circuits.
A radial circuit consists of any number of socket outlets wired by looping 
a cable from the consumer unit to each socket in turn and terminating at the 
final outlet on the ring (Figure 7.6).
The circuit is usually wired in either 4mm2 live conductors with a 1.5mm2 
cpc, or 2.5mm2 live conductors with a 1.5mm2 cpc. 
Circuits wired in 4mm2 can be protected by a device rated up to 32A and 
serve an area of up to 75m2. Those wired in 2.5mm2 can be protected by a 
device of up to 20A and serve an area of up to 50m2.
The attraction for this type of circuit is that it cannot be compromised by 
breaks in cables and spurs being installed. In the event of the circuit conduc-
tors becoming disconnected or broken, all of the outlets after the break will 
not work, which is not the case with ring final circuits.
Figure 7.6

56  Socket outlet circuits
Spurs that are either fused or unfused can be added as and when required. 
Spurs can be taken from spurs with no risk of overload; this can be clearly 
seen in the radial diagram.
There is one point worth considering: where the circuit is used in areas 
where the load is likely to be high, such as a kitchen, it is advisable to use 
4mm2 live conductors. This is also good advice where ring final circuits are 
wired in areas with heavy loads. 
Fused connection units
Fused connection units can be installed and used for various purposes. They 
can be switched or unswitched and they can also have an integral RCD. 
Where a fused connection unit is being installed on a ring circuit, there is no 
limit to the number of them that can be installed. However, the same rules 
apply for fused connection units on a ring. It is not permissible to spur from 
a unit that has already been spurred, unless of course the supply for them is 
taken from the load side of a spur (Figure 7.7).
Consideration should always be given to what the fused connection is 
going to be used for, as fused connection units must never be used to supply 
equipment that is rated at greater than 3kW. As with anything else in the 
Figure 7.7

Socket outlet circuits  57
electrical world, it is better not to load a fused spur to its capacity, particu-
larly where the load is to be on for long periods. 
Where these situations cannot be avoided, it is always a good idea to use a 
good quality brand of connection unit. Any equipment that is used has to be 
to a BS or BS EN standard but this is the minimum standard required – for 
that reason some manufacturers are better than others. 
Very often, fused connection units are used above kitchen worktops to 
provide isolation for socket outlets that are behind washing machines, 
dishwashers and similar pieces of equipment where the cord supplying the 
equipment needs to be hidden (Figure 7.8).
Where a fused connection unit is to be used for equipment such as alarm 
panels it is usual to use an unfused switch spur, which, of course, will pre-
vent unintentional switching off of equipment. 
If it is important to see at a glance whether or not the connection unit is 
on, a neon indicated spur can be used. Care must always be taken to ensure 
that the connection unit is connected correctly, with the supply and load 
being connected to the correct terminals.
Figure 7.8

Chapter 8
Safe isolation
Safe isolation is a very important skill and it is vital that it is carried out 
using the correct procedure. When carried out correctly, it eliminates as 
far as possible human error, which is the cause of most electric shocks. 
The Electricity at Work Regulations do not permit live working unless it 
is unreasonable in all circumstances not to work live, and even then all 
possible safety precautions have to be in place to make it reasonable to 
work live.
Of course, it is impossible for anyone involved in electrical work not to 
have to work live at some point, as live testing is a requirement and even 
safe isolation involves an element of live testing. This is acceptable but 
should be kept to a minimum and all possible safety precautions must be 
in place. 
The correct equipment must be available and it must comply with all 
of the HSE safety recommendations. The HSE produce a document GS38, 
which sets out the safety requirements for the equipment used for measur-
ing voltage current and resistance. This is a non-statutory document but 
compliance with it will ensure that the correct levels of safety with regards 
to testers, probes and test leads are achieved.
Equipment required
A voltage indicator such as a two pole voltage detector is the preferred 
device. This will have simple indicator lamps that will show the level of volt-
age present. This type of device is ideal as it has no switches and cannot be 
turned off or put on the wrong setting. 
The probes must have the minimum of exposed metal tips, certainly no 
longer than 4mm (Figure 8.1).
Signs must be used to show that the circuit or system has been isolated 
intentionally (Figure 8.2).

Figure 8.1
Figure 8.2

60  Safe isolation
A range of lock offs must also be available. Unfortunately, there is no 
such thing as a universal lock off, which means that you have to have a good 
selection along with suitable padlocks (Figure 8.3).
Another useful piece of equipment is a proving unit. This is a device 
that can be used to check the correct operation of the voltage indicator 
(Figure 8.4).
Once you have made sure that you have all of the correct equipment in 
good working order and a suitable lock off for the type of device that you 
are going to lock off, it is safe to begin.
One important point is to make sure that anyone who is going to be 
affected by the loss of the supply is aware of what’s going on. 
Single-phase isolation
Step 1
Using the voltage indicator, check that the circuit to be isolated is live. This 
will also show that the voltage indicator is working. If the circuit is showing 
as being dead, then further checks are required to find out why – perhaps 
the voltage indicator or the circuit is faulty. Whatever it is, it has to be sorted 
out before the circuit can be isolated as you need to be sure that you are in 
control of the circuit that is being isolated.
Figure 8.3

Figure 8.4

62  Safe isolation
Step 2
Once you are sure the circuit is live you must identify the point of isolation 
and turn it off, lock it off and then put a sign on it to show that it has been 
locked off intentionally.
Step 3
Check that the circuit is dead by testing between the live conductors and 
then the live conductors and earth.
Step 4
Now check that the voltage indicator is still working by testing it on a 
known live supply, or if that is not possible the proving unit can be used.
Step 5
I always check again that the circuit is dead before I start work. This may be 
a belt and braces approach but it is better to be safe than sorry.
Check that the circuit is live
Identify the point of isolation
Fix notice by the point of isolation
Use a voltage indicator/test lamp to check 
that the circuit is dead
Prove that the voltage indicator/test lamp is functioning 
correctly by checking it on a known supply or proving unit
Recheck that the circuit is dead and, if it 
is, then it is safe to commence work
Isolate and lock off

Safe isolation  63
Where a piece of fixed equipment is supplied by a fused connection unit 
the same isolation procedure is used and the lock can be fitted through the 
fuse carrier (Figure 8.5).
Three-phase isolation
This requires the same equipment as single-phase isolation. The only addi-
tional equipment that may be needed are larger padlocks and lock off devices.
Step 1
Use the voltage indicator to check that the installation is live. You must test 
between all three lines, all three lines and neutral, all three lines and earth, 
then, last of all, neutral to earth. It often helps if you count the tests as you 
do them, as there are ten tests.
If, for some reason, the voltage indicator does not illuminate it is impor-
tant to find out why. It could be that the voltage indicator is not working or 
is may be that the supply to the isolation point has been lost for some other 
reason. If that is the case you must find out why, as you need to ensure that 
the system is under your control.
Step 2
Switch off the device that is being used as isolation, lock off and put up a 
sign.
Figure 8.5

64  Safe isolation
Step 3
Use the voltage indicator to carry out the ten steps described in step 1.
Step 4
Re-prove the voltage indicator on the proving device or a known live supply.
Step 5
Once again, I always repeat the ten-step test just to be sure.

Chapter 9
Isolation and switching
It is important that all electrical installations and all parts of the installation 
can be isolated safely.
The requirement of BS 7671 is that isolation must be possible at the origin 
of the installation, each circuit, every item of equipment and every motor.
One very important thing to remember about any device used for isola-
tion is that it must be able to be locked in the open position or placed in a 
lockable enclosure/cupboard to prevent inadvertent or unauthorised closure.
Every means of isolation must have a facility allowing it to be locked off, 
and the on and off position must be clearly marked.
Isolators can be various devices and it is important that the function of 
each of these is understood.
A disconnector is a device used for isolation purposes only and should not 
be used for switching as it is not intended to be used under load.
A load switch is a device used for functional switching under load; some 
of these devices can be used for isolation as well. A lighting switch would be 
an example of a load switch but, of course, this cannot be used for isolation.
A switch disconnector is used to switch off under load and can also be 
used for isolation.
Circuit breakers are capable of making, carrying and breaking currents 
under normal conditions. They are also capable of breaking currents under 
fault conditions and in most cased are designed to be used as isolators.
Origin
For single and poly phased circuits a linked switch must be provided that 
will isolate the supply. This switch must also be able to interrupt the supply 
while it is on full load.
Where the isolator is for a single-phase supply that may be used by 
unskilled persons, it must be a double pole device.
Three-phase supplies can be treated slightly differently. Where the three-
phase supply is part of a TT system it is important that the isolator inter-
rupts all live conductors. This means all line conductors and the neutral. 
Where the supply forms part of a TN-S or TN-C-S system only the line 
conductors need to be operated.

66  Isolation and switching
Any device used at the origin of the installation must be able to be switched 
while under load on load. This type of device will have a symbol that indi-
cates that it is suitable for on load switching (Figure 9.1). If the device has 
a symbol shown in Figure 9.2, is should only be used for isolation off load.
Distribution boards and consumer units
Apart from the origin of the larger installations there may well be more than one 
distribution board or consumer unit; these boards must be able to be isolated 
without interrupting the supply to other boards or circuits. The main switch on 
these must switch all live conductors if the system is TT and all line conductors 
if the system is TN. Again, these devices must be capable of operating on load.
Circuit breakers
Every installation must be divided into circuits. This is to:
·	
Avoid danger and minimise inconvenience in the event of a fault.
·	
Allow for safe inspection, testing and maintenance.
·	
Take into account any dangers that may arise due to the failure of a 
single circuit.
·	
Reduce the possibility of nuisance tripping of RCDs due to the accumu-
lation of protective conductor currents.
·	
Prevent unintended energisation of circuits intended to be isolated.
Isolation of circuits can be achieved by using circuit breakers and fuses. 
Where these devices are used in this situation, they will also be used to pro-
vide protection.
Motors
All fixed electric motors must have a means of isolation. All motors with a 
rating of 375W or greater must have not only a means of isolation but also 
be provided with control equipment that incorporates overload protection. 
Figure 9.1
Figure 9.2

Isolation and switching  67
These are generally referred to as motor starters. The motor starter must 
also be able to prevent automatic restarting in the event of an overload or 
fault; this is often known as a no volt coil. Any isolation provided for a 
motor must also isolate the control gear. 
Where the isolator cannot be installed in a position where it is obvious 
which motor it is being used to isolate, it must be clearly labelled. 
As well as the need for circuits to be isolated, any items of electrical equip-
ment supplied by the circuits must also be able to be switched on and off as 
well as isolated.
Although we need to switch equipment on and off, this switching on and 
off is often for different reasons and different terminology is used.
Functional switching
Functional switching is used where parts of a circuit or parts of the installation 
need to be able to be controlled independently of the rest of the installation. 
A lighting point would be a good example.
There are various devices that may be used for functional switching; 
they must all be capable of switching under load. When installing switches 
for lighting it is always better to use a good quality switch, particularly 
when switching fluorescent fittings or extra low voltage luminaires supplied 
through a transformer. These types of light fittings may be inductive and 
when the switch is opened the arcing caused by the inductive loads may 
burn the switch contacts.
Clearly, functional switching will require the device to operate while 
under load, these types of devices could be:
·	
Light switches
·	
Cooker switches
·	
Passive infrared detectors
·	
Circuit breakers
·	
RCDs
·	
Isolating switches (not isolators); where isolating switches can be used 
for functional switching they must have the symbol 
 marked on 
them
·	
Where the device is marked with 
 this symbol indicates that it is 
suitable for isolation only; not switching
·	
Plug and socket outlets rated up to and including 32A
·	
Switched fused connection units
·	
Contactors
Although circuit breakers, RCDs and main installation switches are capa-
ble of switching off under load, they are not intended for regular/frequent 
load switching. In all cases it is preferable to use a switch that is intended 
and designed for frequent use.

68  Isolation and switching
Isolation
Although some devices used for isolation can be used to switch under load, 
the purpose of an isolator is to separate a part of the installation or some-
times the whole of an installation from every source of electrical energy. 
Where the isolator is not a switched disconnector, it should not be used 
to switch loads. It is important to ensure any load is turned off using its 
functional switch before isolating the circuit.
Repeated use of an isolator to switch loads will result in pitting of the 
contacts, which in turn could result in a high resistance connection when 
the isolator is closed and under load. This, of course, will produce heat that 
could be harmful to the installation. 
Plugs and sockets make ideal isolators, as do plug-in ceiling roses provid-
ing they are used to isolate the piece of equipment that you are working on.
Fused connection units are also very good for isolating small items of 
equipment; a padlock can be put through the fuse carrier (Figure 9.3).
Figure 9.3

Isolation and switching  69
When carrying out isolation on a TT or IT system it is important to 
remember that BS 7671 requires that all live conductors are isolated. This, 
of course, means all line conductors and the neutral conductor. On any 
TN-S or TN-C-S system, only the line conductors need to be isolated. 
Switching off for mechanical maintenance
This is pretty much the same as isolation, although the device must be 
capable of switching the load. All must be labelled, and lockable in the off 
position.
The open position of the contacts must be clearly visible. A switch with 
the symbols O and I (Figure 9.4) would be suitable.
The devices used for this could be:
·	
Circuit breaker (for TT or IT systems this must be double pole for single 
phase and four pole for three phase and N, as all live conductors must 
be disconnected)
·	
Multipole switch 
·	
Control switch operating a contactor or starter
·	
Plug and socket outlet up to and including 16A rating
Figure 9.4

70  Isolation and switching
Emergency switching 
We tend to think that emergency switching is used just for switching equip-
ment off. It is as well to remember that it can also be used for switching on.
The purpose of emergency switching is to control the supply in a manner 
that will remove any unexpected danger.
When installing an emergency stop system on TT and IT supply systems 
the same rules apply as for isolation and all live conductors must be sepa-
rated from the supply.
Where emergency switching is required in a work area that may have 
several items of electrical equipment and socket outlets, the most practical 
method of providing emergency switching is to use a number of push but-
tons that break the control circuit to a contactor (Figure 9.5).
The contactor could be placed into the supply feeding a distribution 
board. The control a circuit would then be passed through a number of 
emergency stop buttons (Figure 9.6) located in accessible areas. 
An emergency stop button once pushed must latch in the off position 
unless the stopping and re-energising of the button is under the control of 
the same person. 
In a work environment where there are a few people working it is not 
unusual for the stop button to lock in the off position and the system to only 
Emergency 
stop buttons
Stop
Hold on 
contact
O/L
Coil
M
Figure 9.5
Figure 9.6

Isolation and switching  71
be able to be re-energised by the use of a key to unlock the button (Figure 9.7).  
This ensures that the system cannot be re-energised until the reason for the 
emergency stop has been found.
In most instances, the best device to use for emergency switching is a stop 
push button. Where these are used the button should be red with a contrast-
ing background.
Firefighters’ switch
Firefighters’ switches are intended to be used by firefighters to switch off 
any external or internal lighting installations that exceed low voltage (1000 
volts) (Figure 9.8).
Figure 9.7
Figure 9.8

72  Isolation and switching
Where the device is used to isolate exterior installations it should be 
placed outside of the building next to the equipment it is intended to isolate. 
If it is not possible to site the switch adjacent to the equipment, then a notice 
indicating the position must be fixed near the equipment. 
For equipment sited inside the building, the switch should be installed 
at the main entrance. If this is not possible, then the position of the switch 
must be agreed with the local fire authority.
Unless otherwise agreed by the local fire authority, all firefighters’ switches 
must be fixed so that they can be clearly seen and reasonably accessible to 
firefighters. They should be a maximum of 2.75m from the standing sur-
face beneath the switch. All firefighters’ switches must be coloured red and 
clearly marked with a label reading ‘FIREFIGHTERS’ SWITCH’ (Figure 9.9). 
The size of the label must be a minimum of 150mm × 100mm with a mini-
mum of 36 point lettering.
The switch must be clearly marked on and off, with the off position being 
at the top. There must be a mechanical device to prevent the switch being 
returned to the off position accidentally.
Figure 9.9

Chapter 10
Periodic inspection volt drop
Calculation of volt drop when carrying 
out a periodic inspection and test
As we know, it is now a requirement of BS 7671 that volt drop is verified for 
each circuit (reg. 612.14). 
Voltage drop can be verified by measuring the voltage at the origin of the 
supply and then again at the furthest point on the circuit. Of course, this 
requires the circuit to be loaded up to its maximum.
This is simple process when it is a fixed load such as an immersion heater 
or a room heater, but it can be more difficult if we are dealing with a socket 
outlet, cooker or lighting circuit.
Calculation is by far a much simpler process, which can be done using 
dead test values. To carry out a periodic inspection we must have available 
the R1 + R2 value for each circuit.
As a check we can simply multiply the R1 + R2 value by either the load 
current if it is known, or the rating of the circuit protective device. This 
must then be multiplied by a factor of 1.2, which is to correct for the rise in 
temperature when the circuit is under load.
Often, the R2 will be a conductor with a smaller CSA than the live con-
ductors. This, of course, will result in the calculation showing a higher volt-
age drop than there would be in reality, which doesn’t matter providing the 
volt drop calculated is less than the permitted value. Remember, this is only 
a check!
Where this calculation gives a value greater than that permitted it may 
be that if the R1 + RN value was to be used in the calculation the volt drop 
would possibly comply. Of course, many test certificates will not show the 
value for RN but don’t despair, as a simple calculation will give you all of the 
information you need.
As an example, let’s take a circuit that is wired using a 2.5mm2/1.5mm2 
twin and earth cable that has an R1 + R2 value of 0.6Ω. The circuit is pro-
tected by a 20A device.
Using the R1 + R2 value of 0.6Ω, we can now calculate the voltage drop 
for the circuit.
0.6 × 1.2 × 20 = 14.4 volts 

74  Periodic inspection volt drop
Clearly this is far too high. However, if we use R1 + RN we may end up with 
an acceptable result. The problem is we do not have RN but we can find out 
what it is by using a very simple calculation.
CSA
CSA
CSA
line
line
cpc
+
×
+
−
(
)
R
R
R
1
2
2
To put figures to this:
2 5
2 5
1 5
0 625
0 6
0 375
.
.
.
.
.
.
+
=
×
=
Ω
0.375Ω is the resistance of R2. Therefore if we subtract this value from the  
R1 + R2 value, we will have the value of R1.
0.6Ω – 0.375Ω = 0.225Ω
The resistance of the line conductor is 0.225Ω.
If we now double this value we will have the value of R1 + RN.
0.225 + 0.225 = 0.45Ω
Now we can carry out the voltage drop calculation using 0.45Ω as the resis-
tance value.
0.45 × 20 × 1.2 = 10.8 volts
This shows the volt drop to be OK.
As you can see, this is a simple calculation, which once it has been per-
formed a couple of times will become second nature. It is also much easier 
than trying to measure the volt drop by applying loads to circuits.
An added bonus is that it can be carried out in the comfort of your van. 
If you just want to use the R1 + R2 values, then Table 10.1 will indicate 
whether or not the readings are acceptable. 
When using the table it is important to remember that it should only be 
used when the R1 + R2 values have been measured accurately with no paral-
lel paths present. Where parallel paths are present, lower inaccurate voltage 
drop values will be shown.

Table 10.1
Conductor size mm2
Measured R1 + R2
Max load 
current (amps)
Volt drop
Max  
length (m)
10mm2–10mm2
0.151
63
<11.5
41.43
10mm2–10mm2
0.09
63
<6.9
24.87
10mm2–10mm2
0.191
50
<11.5
52
10mm2–10mm2
0.114
50
<6.9
31.33
10mm2–10mm2
0.238
40
<11.5
65.25
10mm2–10mm2
0.143
40
<6.9
39.3
10mm2–10mm2
0.297
32
<11.5
81.3
10mm2–10mm2
0.178
32
<6.9
48.97
10mm2–10mm2
0.475
20
<11.5
130.5
10mm2–10mm2
0.286
20
<6.9
78.61
10mm2–10mm2
0.599
16
<11.5
163.5
10mm2–10mm2
0.360
16
<6.9
98.2
10mm2–4mm2
0.266
63
<11.5
41.43
10mm2–4mm2
0.160
63
<6.9
24.87
10mm2–4mm2
0.33
50
<11.5
52
10mm2–4mm2
0.201
50
<6.9
31.33
10mm2–4mm2
6.5
40
<11.5
65.25
10mm2–4mm2
0.25
40
<6.9
39.3
10mm2–4mm2
0.523
32
<11.5
81.3
10mm2–4mm2
0.315
32
<6.9
48.97
10mm2–4mm2
0.840
20
<11.5
130.5
10mm2–4mm2
0.506
20
<6.9
78.61
10mm2–4mm2
1.05
16
<11.5
163.5
10mm2–4mm2
0.632
16
<6.9
98.2
6mm2–6mm2
0.239
40
<11.5
38.79
6mm2–6mm2
0.143
40
<6.9
23.36
6mm2–6mm2
0.298
32
<11.5
48.48
6mm2–6mm2
0.178
32
<6.9
29.5
6mm2–6mm2
0.478
20
<11.5
77.58
6mm2–6mm2
0.286
20
<6.9
46.72
6mm2–6mm2
0.597
16
<11.5
96.97
6mm2–6mm2
0.357
16
<6.9
58.4
6mm2–6mm2
0.735
13
<11.5
119.35
6mm2–6mm2
0.44
13
<6.9
71.7
6mm2–6mm2
0.956
10
<11.5
155.16
6mm2–6mm2
0.572
10
<6.9
93.44
(Continued)

6mm2–2.5mm2
0.406
40
<11.5
38.79
6mm2–2.5mm2
0.245
40
<6.9
23.36
6mm2–2.5mm2
0.508
32
<11.5
48.48
6mm2–2.5mm2
0.309
32
<6.9
29.5
6mm2–2.5mm2
0.81
20
<11.5
77.58
6mm2–2.5mm2
0.49
20
<6.9
46.72
6mm2–2.5mm2
1.01
16
<11.5
96.97
6mm2–2.5mm2
0.612
16
<6.9
58.4
6mm2–2.5mm2
1.25
13
<11.5
119.35
6mm2–2.5mm2
0.752
13
<6.9
71.7
6mm2–2.5mm2
1.627
10
<11.5
155.16
6mm2–2.5mm2
0.98
10
<6.9
93.44
4mm2–4mm2
0.299
32
<11.5
32.4
4mm2–4mm2
0.18
32
<6.9
19.5
4mm2–4mm2
0.478
20
<11.5
51.84
4mm2–4mm2
0.285
20
<6.9
31
4mm2–4mm2
0.597
16
<11.5
64.8
4mm2–4mm2
0.359
16
<6.9
39
4mm2–4mm2
0.734
13
<11.5
79.7
4mm2–4mm2
0.442
13
<6.9
48.01
4mm2–4mm2
0.958
10
<11.5
104
4mm2–4mm2
0.577
10
<6.9
62.65
4mm2–4mm2
1.59
6
<11.5
172
4mm2–4mm2
0.955
6
<6.9
103
4mm2–1.5mm2
0.541
32
<11.5
32.4
4mm2–1.5mm2
0.325
32
<6.9
19.5
4mm2–1.5mm2
0.866
20
<11.5
51.84
4mm2–1.5mm2
0.51
20
<6.9
31
4mm2–1.5mm2
1.08
16
<11.5
64.8
4mm2–1.5mm2
0.65
16
<6.9
39
4mm2–1.5mm2
1.33
13
<11.5
79.7
4mm2–1.5mm2
0.247
13
<6.9
48.1
4mm2–1.5mm2
1.73
10
<11.5
104
4mm2–1.5mm2
1.04
10
<6.9
62.65
4mm2–1.5mm2
2.87
6
<11.5
172
4mm2–1.5mm2
1.72
6
<6.9
103
Table 10.1  (Continued)
Conductor size mm2
Measured R1 + R2
Max load 
current (amps)
Volt drop
Max  
length (m)

2.5mm2–2.5mm2
0.354Ω
27
<11.5
23.88
2.5mm2–2.5mm2
0.212
27
<6.9
14.3
2.5mm2–2.5mm2
0.48
20
<11.5
32.38
2.5mm2–2.5mm2
0.287
20
<6.9
19.5
2.5mm2–2.5mm2
0.59
16
<11.5
39.81
2.5mm2–2.5mm2
0.355
16
<6.9
23.97
2.5mm2–2.5mm2
0.737
13
<11.5
49.70
2.5mm2–2.5mm2
0.44
13
<6.9
29.93
2.5mm2–1.5mm2
0.46Ω
27
<11.5
23.88
2.5mm2–1.5mm2
0.277
27
<6.9
14.3
2.5mm2–1.5mm2
0.755
20
<11.5
32.38
2.5mm2–1.5mm2
0.16
20
<6.9
19.5
2.5mm2–1.5mm2
0.77
16
<11.5
39.81
2.5mm2–1.5mm2
0.2
16
<6.9
23.97
2.5mm2–1.5mm2
0.96
13
<11.5
49.70
2.5mm2–1.5mm2
0.26
13
<6.9
29.93
1.5mm2–1.5mm2
0.479
20
<11.5
16.49
1.5mm2–1.5mm2
0.288
20
<6.9
9.9
1.5mm2–1.5mm2
0.598
16
<11.5
20.6
1.5mm2–1.5mm2
0.36
16
<6.9
12.4
1.5mm2–1.5mm2
0.736
13
<11.5
25.3
1.5mm2–1.5mm2
0.44
13
<6.9
15.24
1.5mm2–1.5mm2
0.96
10
<11.5
32.89
1.5mm2–1.5mm2
0.57
10
<6.9
19.81
1.5mm2–1.5mm2
1.59
6
<11.5
54.59
1.5mm2–1.5mm2
0.954
6
<6.9
32.88
1.5mm2–1.0mm2
0.497
20
<11.5
16.49
1.5mm2–1.0mm2
0.29
20
<6.9
9.9
1.5mm2–1.0mm2
0.622
16
<11.5
20.6
1.5mm2–1.0mm2
0.374
16
<6.9
12.4
1.5mm2–1.0mm2
0.764
13
<11.5
25.3
1.5mm2–1.0mm2
0.46
13
<6.9
15.24
1.5mm2–1.0mm2
0.99
10
<11.5
32.89
1.5mm2–1.0mm2
0.598
10
<6.9
19.81
1.5mm2–1.0mm2
1.64
6
<11.5
54.59
1.5mm2–1.0mm2
0.99
6
<6.9
32.88
Table 10.1  (Continued)
Conductor size mm2
Measured R1 + R2
Max load 
current (amps)
Volt drop
Max  
length (m)
(Continued)

1.0mm2–1.0mm2
0.598
16
<11.5
16.51
1.0mm2–1.0mm2
0.36
16
<6.9
9.94
1.0mm2–1.0mm2
0.95
10
<11.5
26.41
1.0mm2–1.0mm2
0.57
10
<6.9
15.9
1.0mm2–1.0mm2
1.59
6
<11.5
44.26
1.0mm2–1.0mm2
0.957
6
<6.9
26.66
Table 10.1  (Continued)
Conductor size mm2
Measured R1 + R2
Max load 
current (amps)
Volt drop
Max  
length (m)

Chapter 11
Installing an electric shower
The first thing to remember when installing an electric shower is that if it is 
in a dwelling, it will be notifiable under Part P of the building regulations 
and an electrical installation certificate must be completed.
There are some important things that must be checked first. 
The electric shower must have a mains water supply. It is unlikely that 
it will work correctly off stored water system because the water pressure 
or flow rate will not be high enough. Most electric showers will require a 
minimum pressure of 1 bar and a flow rate of 8 litres per minute, but it is a 
good idea just to check the data for the type and model of shower that you 
intend to fit. Data sheets and instruction manuals can usually be found on 
the Internet.
Once you have checked that the water supply is suitable, the next step is 
to check that the electricity supply is suitable and capable of carrying the 
additional load. Again, the current rating of the shower can be found on the 
shower data sheet. If the rating is given in kilowatts (kW) a simple calcula-
tion will provide you with the current rating. Let’s say that the shower is 
going to be rated at 9.5kW. The current rating can be found by:
power rating
volts
 (in this case 
 A)
9500
230
41 3
=
.
Having found the current rating you now need to look at the consumer unit 
to see if there is a spare way that will be required to accommodate the new 
circuit. You will also need to check that the supply and existing installation 
is suitable for the additional load. Items that need to be checked are: 
The rating of the supply fuse and tails
If the supply fuse is 80A or 100A, there would not normally be a problem 
in a domestic installation unless, of course, there were a lot of heavy loads 
connected that will be used at the same time as the new shower. Where the 
supply fuse is 60A more consideration should be given to the other loads 

80  Installing an electric shower
connected to the installation. As an example, are they likely to be used at the 
same time as the shower? If they are, will the total load being used exceed 
the rating of the supply? You have to remember that the additional load 
while it’s operating is two-thirds of the installations capacity.
It’s not a bad idea to ask the occupier if they have ever had problems with 
the supply fuse. If you have any concerns it may be a good idea to speak to 
the supply company and ask them to change the service head for a higher 
current rating. This will not normally present a problem.
Condition of the consumer unit
It really doesn’t matter if the consumer unit and protective devices are old 
as long as they are in good condition – rewirable fuses are perfectly accept-
able to use. You must remember, though, that the new circuit must comply 
with the current edition of BS 7671. This, of course, means that the shower 
circuit will need to be RCD protected. If there are no spare ways, then the 
choices are to upgrade the consumer unit or install a Henley block in the 
tails and fit a second small unit for the shower (Figure 11.1).
Earthing and bonding
When a new circuit is to be installed, the earthing and bonding must be 
compliant with the current edition of BS 7671. The size of the earthing and 
bonding conductors will be dependent on the rating of the supply. How-
ever, if it has to be upgraded, then it is just as easy to install the maximum 
required sizes. For a 100A TN supply the earthing conductor will be 16mm2 
and the main bonding conductors will be 10mm2. For a TT system, the 
earthing conductor can be 4mm2 in some cases. 
Now that you have confirmed the suitability of the water and electricity sup-
ply it is time to consider the actual installation of the supplies to the shower.
Water
As described earlier, the water supply must be of a sufficient pressure and 
flow rate, which will usually require connection to the main water supply. 
If the system is one that uses tanks to store cold water, usually in the roof, 
it is usually quite simple to find the parts of the system that are fed by the 
mains. Hot taps will not be fed by the mains so it is not worth considering 
those. Main supply water is going to be found at the cold tap in the kitchen 
and the supplies to the tanks in the roof, possibly in other cold taps around 
the building and often the supplies to WC cisterns. The easiest way to find 
out is to turn off the water at the main stop cock and then go around the 
house turning on taps and flushing toilets. If there is no water at the tap, 
or the cistern of the toilet does not refill, you will have found a part of the 

Installing an electric shower  81
system that is connected to the main supply. It is normally a good idea to 
turn on the kitchen cold tap first and let it run to drain out any water that 
may be in the pipes.
It’s fairly obvious that you need to decide on which is the simplest route 
to run the water pipe to the shower. In most cases, the best place to find a 
Figure 11.1

82  Installing an electric shower
main supply that is easy to get to the shower is to connect to the pipe work 
supplying the tank in the roof. The pipe supplying the water to the ball 
valve is the one to look for. When installing the water supply to the shower, 
remember to fit an isolating valve that is reasonably accessible so that once 
the pipe has been connected to the supply it can be isolated, and the water 
to the rest of the building can be turned on.
If the water system in the house is an unvented system with no cold water 
storage all of the cold taps and cisterns will be connected to the main water 
supply and will be suitable to connect to. You will need to make sure that it 
is a pipe supplying cold water, though.
Electricity
With regard to the electrical installation, it is important to remember that 
all circuits supplying equipment in a bathroom must have additional protec-
tion. This requires that the circuits are protected by an RCD with a maxi-
mum trip rating of 30mA.
In the calculation we used a 9.5kW shower that had a current rating of 
41.3A. The next step is to select a protective device. Assuming the protec-
tion is a circuit breaker, the nearest rating above 41.3A will normally be 
50A and it would need to be a Type B.
There is not really a need to get into cable calculations when fitting a 
shower, as the manufacturer’s instructions will dictate the size of the cable 
that you should use. It may be that you can calculate a smaller size but you 
should remember that manufacturers’ instructions must always be followed. 
Another thing to remember is that because the shower circuit cannot over-
load there is no need to provide overload protection, although fault protec-
tion must be provided. 
In other words, the circuit conductors can be rated at a lower current than 
the protective device because the shower is a fixed resistive load that will 
either operate up to its full load, or not operate at all. Of course, it could 
short-circuit if, for example, the element were to corrode, but fault protec-
tion will prevent any damage being done to the circuit.
Having decided on the cable size and current rating of the circuit pro-
tection, the cable can be installed. Of course, the method of installation 
depends on the type of building and the route that the cable will follow. 
Where possible, it is better to avoid any thermal insulation or indeed any-
thing that may get hot; never be tempted to install cables in notches along-
side hot pipes.
Where thermal insulation cannot be avoided it will not present too much 
of a problem, as the nature of a shower means that it is not going to be 
drawing current for more than a few minutes in most cases. However, every 
installation must be considered on its own merits and sometimes judge-
ments need to be made.

Installing an electric shower  83
All pieces of electrical equipment must have a suitable method of isolation 
and any fixed equipment installed in a room containing a bath or a shower 
will require a double pole switch as a method of isolation. The switch can 
be inside or outside of the room and it can be a plate switch-mounted on a 
wall or a cord switch on the ceiling. The choice of switch often depends on 
where it is to be installed.
Rooms containing a bath or a shower have particular zones (Figure 11.2).
The switch for a shower must be outside of zone 2, although if a cord 
switch is used the cord is permitted to hang down into zone 1. Wherever 
possible, I prefer to use a wall-mounted switch as sometimes the large cables 
required for electric showers can make the connections in a cord switch 
difficult. 
When a cord switch is used it is always a good idea to use one with an 
indicator lamp, which will enable the user to see if the device is switched on 
or off. This is not normally as important with a wall-mounted switch as the 
on and off functions are marked and much easier to see.
Before installing a shower it is important that consideration is given to the 
positioning of the shower. Ideally, the shower should be able to be turned on 
Figure 11.2

84  Installing an electric shower
without the person using it getting wet before they want to. Remember, the 
water from an electric shower will be cold when first switched on.
When the shower installation has been completed, the first check should 
be for any water leaks. Remember, the water is at mains pressure and gener-
ally any leaks will appear quite quickly. Clearly, the water installation must 
be tested before any joints are covered up. 
Once you are sure the water is OK, then the electrical initial verification 
should take place, and an electrical installation certificate must be com-
pleted and given to the local building control. 

Chapter 12
Two-way and intermediate 
switching
There are many situations that require a lighting point to be controlled 
by more than one switch. An example of this would be in a dwelling that 
has stairs and the landing/hall light needs to be switched at the bottom 
and the top of the stairs. This type of switch circuit is known as two-way 
switching.
The circuit diagram shown shows how the circuit works (Figure 12.1).
A junction box system used in this type of circuit would be fine and can be 
connected just as the circuit shows. In the circuit diagram it can be seen that 
the permanent live is fed into the common of one switch, and the switched 
return is taken from the common of the other switch (Figure 12.2). This 
type of wiring is fine for a junction box system or a conduit system where 
single core cables are used, but it is not very practical for use in a three-plate 
system.
Figure 12.1

86  Two-way and intermediate switching
Where the system is a three-plate loop in system the most common type of 
two-way wiring circuit used is an extended two-way circuit (Figure 12.3). In 
this type of circuit all that is required is that three-core cable is run from the 
one-way switching position to the second switch position. 
The standard colours of the cores in a three-core cable are brown, black 
and grey. As they are all to be used as line conductors, they must have a 
small piece of brown sleeving placed over them to identify them. When 
Figure 12.2
Figure 12.3

Two-way and intermediate switching  87
all of the cables have been installed and the outer sheathing removed, one 
switch should have two brown conductors and one each of blue, black and 
grey. The second switch will have one each of brown, black and grey. Both 
switches should have two bare cpcs, which will need to be covered com-
pletely with green and yellow earth sleeving.
When making the connections, the colours used are for identification 
only; the method shown in Figure 12.3 is the one that I would use. Provid-
ing the conductors are connected in the terminals as shown the colours are 
not important.
The switches required will be two-way switches and will have three termi-
nals, which will be identified as common, L1 and L2 (Figure 12.4).
Figure 12.4

88  Two-way and intermediate switching
At switch one with five line conductors, connect (Figure 12.5): 
·	
Two browns into terminal L1
·	
Black and blue into terminal L2
·	
Grey into common
At switch two with three line conductors, connect (Figure 12.6):
·	
Brown to L1
·	
Black to L2
·	
Grey to common
The cpcs must be joined and terminated in the earthing terminal of 
the mounting box. If there is not a terminal provided, then the earthing 
conductors must be connected into a suitable connector such as a block 
connector.
Figure 12.5

Two-way and intermediate switching  89
Figure 12.6
Intermediate switching
‘Intermediate switching’ is the term given to a system where the same light or 
lights can be switched on and off from a number of positions (Figure 12.7).
As with the two-way system, the circuit is fine for a junction box system 
but not practical for use with a three-plate system. A much simpler method 
is to use the same method as an extended two-way system and add switches 
as required by looping the three-core cable in and out of the additional 
switches.
At switch one there will be a switch line and return from the light and a 
three-core, which will go to switch two.

90  Two-way and intermediate switching
Switch two will have one three-core in and one three-core out. This will 
be the same for all of the switches apart from the final switch, which will 
only have one three-core.
The first and last switch will be two-way switches with three terminals. 
The other switches will be intermediate switches that will have four termi-
nals marked as illustrated in Figure 12.8. Be very careful, as a double pole 
switch will look very similar.
The connections at the switches are as follows (all conductors to have 
brown identification).
Switch one
·	
Two brown conductors into terminal L1
·	
Black and blue conductors into terminal L2
·	
Grey conductor into the common
At switch two and all other intermediate switches
·	
Grey conductors to be joined and terminated into a connector.
·	
Brown and black conductor of one cable terminated in L1 and one in 
L2 on top or bottom of the switch.
·	
Brown and black conductor of the other cable terminated to the remain-
ing L1 and L2.
It is very important that the conductors of each cable are terminated at 
the same end of the switch (top or bottom).
Figure 12.7

Two-way and intermediate switching  91
Figure 12.8
At the final switch
·	
Grey terminated into the common terminal
·	
Brown terminated into L1
·	
Black terminated into L2
Providing all of the connections are made correctly, the light/s will be able 
to be controlled from any switch position.

Chapter 13
Fault finding in central heating
There is one important rule with fault finding on new central heating sys-
tems that are just being commissioned, and that is to always check your 
wiring first, before looking for faulty components. Of course, if the system 
has been working correctly for a while, then it can be assumed that the wir-
ing is correct, unless, of course, someone has been messing around with it. 
Room thermostats
Although room thermostats can be seen as simple adjustable switches that 
just turn on the central heating when the temperature drops below the set 
level, they are a little more complicated than that.
Many room thermostats have what is known as an anticipator fitted (Fig-
ure 13.1), which is a small heater that operates when the system is calling 
for heat. The purpose of the anticipator is to prevent a large temperature 
difference between the on and off action of the switch.
Figure 13.1

Fault finding in central heating  93
The anticipator is a small heater that only turns on when the switch is 
closed; the switch is usually a bi-metal strip, which of course bends with the 
change of heat. This type of thermostat requires a neutral at the thermostat 
position and great care must be taken when connections are made; if the 
line and switch return are connected around the wrong way the device will 
still operate and the user may not notice the difference. There will be a large 
dwell between on and off temperatures and the system will use more energy.
Problems often occur when room stats are removed and a note of the 
connections is not made. When this happens it is important that the line, 
switched line and neutral are identified correctly.
Method
1	
With the system isolated, separate all of the ends at the room thermostat.
2	
Now turn on the heating system but turn off the central heating and hot 
water at the programmer. Using a voltage indicator test between each 
conductor to earth; there should be no voltage.
3	
Now turn on the central heating at the programmer. Using a voltage 
indicator, test each conductor to earth – the one that lights up is the 
incoming line.
4	
With the central heating still on, test between the known incoming line 
and the other two conductors. The one that indicates 230 volts will be 
the neutral. 
5	
Now isolate the supply to the heating system. Use the isolation proce-
dure to prove it is dead and then connect the room thermostat, ensuring 
that the line and switch return are to the correct terminals (Figure 13.2).
Figure 13.2

94  Fault finding in central heating
It should also be noted that some electronic room stats do not require a 
neutral conductor.
Programmable room stats
These are devices that work as a room stat and also as a timing device. The 
benefits that are associated with using a programmable room stat are that 
they are usually wireless, and they allow the heating to not only come on 
at various times of the day but also at different temperatures. The biggest 
problem with using this type of room stat is that they can be difficult to set 
up, and most of the problems associated with them are due to the user fid-
dling with the settings, and not understanding how to set it back up. 
Cylinder thermostats
Most cylinder stats are quite simple devices with three contacts that are 
marked as C (common), NO (normally open) and NC (normally closed) 
(Figure 13.3). These devices rarely go wrong and the correct operation of 
them is easy to test.
Obviously, the circuit needs to be isolated first. Then disconnect the cable 
from the terminal marked C and test for continuity between C and NO and 
then C and NC. If the cylinder is up to temperature the resistance readings 
will be low resistance between C and NO (closed circuit) and high resistance 
between C and NC (open circuit), as the stat will have operated to switch off 
Figure 13.3

Fault finding in central heating  95
the heating. If you turn the stat up the reading between C and NC will be a 
closed circuit and between C and NO will show as an open circuit.
Where a cylinder stat has been connected to an unvented hot water cylin-
der the wiring will also pass through a thermal cut out (Figure 13.4). This 
is required as a secondary safety device and provides a second level of pro-
tection. Most immersion heaters are now fitted with their own thermal cut 
outs; if you have one without a thermal cut out you can wire the immersion 
through the cut out that is part of the cylinder. 
Unvented cylinder
Where unvented cylinders are used on a wet heating system there must be 
at least three levels of protection. These would consist of a cylinder stat to 
control the water temperature, a thermal cut out to prevent the water boiling 
if the cylinder stat malfunctioned, and a motorised valve that is spring loaded 
to close when the supply to it is cut off due to high temperature (Figure 13.5).
These safety devices are very important and should never be ignored. 
Unvented cylinders work at mains pressure and when the water heats up it 
expands. The cylinder is basically a sealed container, which, of course, will 
have no room for expansion. For this reason, unvented cylinders must have 
expansion vessels fitted so that when the water expands it will be safe.
Figure 13.4

96  Fault finding in central heating
A major problem would be if the water were to boil, as when water is 
converted to steam at atmospheric pressure it expands by a ratio of 1:1700. 
While the water and steam are contained in a pressurised cylinder they will 
not present a problem other than being really hot. The problem arises if the 
cylinder ruptures under pressure, because as the boiling water escapes into 
atmospheric pressure it expands 1700 times. This is like a bomb going off 
and will literally destroy buildings and kill.
This is why there are three levels of protection. The first is the cylinder 
stat, which just controls the water temperature; the second, which is the 
overheat limit stat, is in place in case the cylinder stat does not operate cor-
rectly – the overheat stat must trip out and only be able to be reset manu-
ally. The third level would be installed where the cylinder is heated from a 
wet heating system; a spring return two-port valve should be fitted to the 
secondary heating coil with the valve wired through the overheat limit stat. 
Once the limit stat trips, the supply that is holding the valve open will cut 
off and the valve will close, preventing any more hot water passing through 
the cylinder. There are other temperature relief valves fitted but they are 
non-electrical. 
Figure 13.5

Fault finding in central heating  97
Heating circulation pump
Most modern heating fluid-filled heating systems rely on a pump that is used 
to circulate the heated fluid around the system. Heating pumps are very 
reliable but, of course, as with any mechanical/electrical component they 
occasionally stop working. Often, it is a fault of another component but 
sometimes it is the pump itself.
Common problems
Where the pump is used for heating only and is not needed during the sum-
mer months it sometimes seizes up, and when the heating is turned on the 
boiler may work but the heating system does not because the pump is not 
circulating any heating fluid round the system.
The first step is to check that the pump is not running. Just because the 
heating is not on does not mean that it is the pump at fault. It could be that 
a motorised valve has not opened. 
In most cases if the pump is running it can be heard. However, that is not 
always the case. Sometimes, the pump may get very hot, so be careful when 
you touch it. Of course, the heating fluid will heat the pump but often it is 
much hotter if it is seized.
A good and very simple method of checking if a pump is rotating is to 
listen to it using a screwdriver, or piece of wood resting against one side of 
the pump (Figure 13.6).
Figure 13.6

98  Fault finding in central heating
If you are still unsure, then the best way is to check the shaft for rotation; 
all that is required is for the cap on the side of the pump to be unscrewed 
(Figure 13.7). It is a good idea to put a cloth or small container under the 
pump when you unscrew the cap, as it will leak a bit of water. Don’t worry, 
though, as it will not pour out and flood the place. Once the cap is off, 
gently put a screwdriver in the end of the pump housing (Figure 13.8). If it 
is rotating you will feel it against the screwdriver. If it is not rotating, then 
you can move on to the next step, which is to check at the pump electrical 
terminals to see if there are 230 volts.
If the pump has a supply to it, then it could be one of three things and you 
will need to check them all.
To check to see if it is seized, put a screwdriver onto the end of the pump 
shaft and give it a twist. Try it a few times, as if it is seized it may take a few 
turns to completely free it. After a few twists of the screwdriver it should 
just keep going.
If it does run, turn it off and let it stop and then turn it back on again to see 
if it starts on its own accord. If it does not restart, repeat the process a couple 
of times just to ensure that the shaft is rotating freely. If the pump only keeps 
running when you spin it, then it is indicating that the pump start capacitor 
is faulty (Figure 13.9). It is a simple job just to replace the capacitor.
Figure 13.7

Figure 13.8
Figure 13.9

100  Fault finding in central heating
If the pump will not run at all, rotates freely and it has a supply to it, then it 
probably is a faulty pump. It is possible to check the resistance of the wind­
ings but in reality if you have carried out all of the checks described, then 
just replacing the pump is the best option.
Where the central heating pump is accessible it is not usually a difficult 
job to change one, providing of course that it has isolation valves that are 
working correctly. Usually, the most difficult part once it has been isolated 
is to release the unions to the pump (Figure 13.10), particularly if they have 
been sealed using boss white or similar.
When the pump is not easy to get at to work on, or you can’t get the 
unions undone, it is often possible just to change the motor by unscrewing 
it from the body. 
Make sure that you have the same model replacement pump as the one 
that is already installed. Take the motor off the new pump so that it is ready 
Figure 13.10

Fault finding in central heating  101
to be fitted to the existing pump body (Figure 13.11) and that the pump is 
isolated from the electrical supply and that the water isolation valves are 
off. Put a container or towel under the pump, as it will be full of fluid and 
it will probably be black. Now undo the Allen screws that are holding the 
old pump motor in place, but do not take them completely out just in case 
the water isolation valves have not shut off properly. It may take a light tap 
with a hammer to free the motor from the body. When it begins to free just 
hold it to let the water out; you will soon know if the valves have held by 
the amount of water that flows out.
As soon as the water stops, take the old motor completely off, clean out 
the body if necessary and fit the new motor onto the old body, making sure 
that you have the gasket in place. Once you are sure that the motor is fitted 
correctly and all of the screws have been tightened, undo the heating isola­
tion valves and check for leaks.
Where the pump has been fitted in a tight space and is difficult to get to it 
is a good idea to carry out the electrical connections to it before you fit it to 
the old body. Also remember that the seals in the pump are made of carbon 
and the pump should never be run without any water in it, as running it may 
damage the seals. 
Figure 13.11

102  Fault finding in central heating
Motorised valves
These are valves that open and close electrically. There are two-port valves 
that just open to allow water to flow, and close to prevent the flow of water. 
These are generally referred to as zone valves (Figure 13.12).
There are also three-port diverter valves that either divert the water one 
way or the other (Figure 13.13) and three-port mid-position valves that 
divert the water one way or the other and will also allow the water to flow 
both ways when required. The three-port valves look identical, so be very 
careful to ensure you know which valve you are dealing with.
There are various things that can go wrong with a motorised valve. Some 
can be repaired just by changing an internal component and others will 
require a complete valve replacement.
Two-port valve 
Most two-port valves are made to open when the motor is energised and 
spring back to shut when the motor is de-energised. The motor is a 230-volt 
synchronous motor, which is very easy to change (Figure 13.14).
Figure 13.12  Body cut away to show how it works

Figure 13.13
Figure 13.14

104  Fault finding in central heating
The same motor is suitable for all valves described here.
Before rushing into changing the motor, a few simple checks are a good 
idea. The first check is to make sure that the motor is being energised when 
it should be by turning on the heating or hot water and checking the voltage 
at the motor terminals with a voltage indicator. 
If there is voltage, then clearly it is the motor that is at fault. If there is 
no voltage, then the fault will be elsewhere and the wiring should be traced 
back and the voltage measured at each point. 
To change the motor it is just a matter of undoing two retaining screws 
and disconnecting the wires to get the motor out (Figure 13.15), and revers­
ing the procedure to put the new motor back. The resistance of a good 
motor is around 2400Ω. Usually, if a motor is faulty it will just go open 
circuit and then when you measure the resistance it will be very high, often 
in megohms.
To make life easier, on modern valves it is usually possible to remove the 
valve head from the valve body, but be very careful as this was not possible 
on the older type of valves. The good news is that it is a simple task to tell 
the difference between the valve heads that can be removed safely and those 
that can’t.
Figure 13.15

Fault finding in central heating  105
As you can see, on the top of the casing there is a pip (Figure 13.16). 
Where this pip is present, it is safe to remove the power head from the valve 
without the risk of flooding. If the power head does not have a pip it is 
always best to seek advice from the manufacturer.
·	
A two-port valve will have five wires
·	
Green and yellow = earth wire
·	
Blue = neutral
·	
Brown = motor supply
·	
Grey = permanent live
Figure 13.16

106  Fault finding in central heating
·	
Orange = switched line
·	
White = (only on 28mm bsp valve) for use as auxiliary control, as it is 
on the third terminal of the micro switch – it connects to orange when 
the valve is in the closed position (Figure 13.17)
One important thing to remember about the colours is that, although the 
brown, blue and green/yellow have specific purposes, the grey and orange 
are just the line and return conductors from a switch, which will do the job 
however they are connected.
The micro switch inside the valve head is normally open when the valve 
is at rest and only closes when the valve opens. For that reason, if it is sus­
pected that the micro switch is faulty, and you need to carry out a dead test 
to check that it closes when the valve is open you have to use the manual 
lever (Figure 13.18).
You will see that on the lever end of the valve head that there is a notch 
that can be used to hold the valve open. This will not activate the micro 
switch when resting in the notch. To activate the micro switch you must 
push the lever as far past the notch as possible. Normally, you can hear a 
faint click when the micro switch turns on.
If you are trying to trace a fault on the system where the hot water will 
not turn off and the valve and switch appear to be operating correctly, the 
problem could be with the small rubber ball inside the valve body, which 
is used to close off the port. Occasionally, the ball gets damaged/falls apart 
and does not close off the port correctly.
It is also worth checking that the valve stem moves freely. It sometimes 
seizes and become a bit tight during the summer through lack of use, pre­
venting the motor from opening the valve. With the body removed just turn 
the valve stem back and forth until it feels free. 
Motor
White on 
28mm 
zone valve only 
Figure 13.17

Fault finding in central heating  107
Three-port diverter valve
The operation of the motor can be checked using the same procedure as for 
the two-port valve. 
The valve only has three connections: a green/yellow, which is the earth; a 
brown, which is the supply; and a blue, which is the neutral.
When there is no supply to the brown this type of valve is spring loaded 
to automatically return and close port A, which is the central heating port. 
This, of course, will leave port B open.
The simplest way to check this type of valve is just to energise the motor 
and check that the spindle rotates to close the valve and then de-energise the 
valve to check that it closes. If the valve appears to open and close correctly 
but it is still letting water through, then it will be one of two things. Either 
the valve is not opening and closing fully, in which case the stem may be 
seized slightly, or the ball used to close the opening has become damaged.
Three-port mid-position valve 
The same motor checks as for the two-port valve can be used to check that 
the motor is serviceable.
Figure 13.18

108  Fault finding in central heating
This type of valve has five connections: a green/yellow, which is the earth; 
a blue, which is the neutral; and a grey and a white wire, which are control 
wires. There is also an orange, which becomes live when heating or domes­
tic hot water is called for; this usually supplies a feed to the pump and boiler.
With the neutral connected, if you energise both grey and white, the valve 
should move to port B and open port A for the central heating. When the 
valve opens to port B the orange wire also becomes live.
With the neutral connected, and the grey and white wires disconnected 
the valve should spring return to close port A and open port B for domestic 
hot water.
With the neutral connected and only the white energised the valve should 
stop in mid-position, allowing water to flow both for heating and domestic 
hot water. The orange should also become live.
So, in a summary:
·	
No power to valve, port B open for HW
·	
Power to white wire only, valve in mid-position
·	
Power to both grey and white wires, there will be an output on the 
orange wire
·	
Power to grey wire, valve held in the last position and, if the last posi­
tion was CH, then there will be 100 volts of output on the orange wire.

Chapter 14
Electrical installation fault finding
As far as I am concerned, the most effective method of fault finding is to 
work methodically. This, combined with experience and a bit of luck, usu­
ally ends up with the correct result. Of course, not all faults are the same 
and some are very difficult to find, but once found they are usually quite 
simple to correct. 
I find that it is always better to step back and think about what you are 
doing, and not jump in with both feet and start taking things apart. The 
very first step is to gain as much evidence/information as possible; ask the 
customer or the person who has discovered a fault to provide as much infor­
mation as possible, as this will help.
I always ask if anyone else has been trying to find the fault. Has anything 
been disconnected? This information could have a massive effect on the 
way you approach a fault. For instance, if something has been working, but 
will not work now and has not been touched other than to switch it on and 
off, that indicates it is a genuine fault and that something in the circuit has 
failed. If, however, someone has been pulling it around and disconnecting 
things that they know nothing about, you will have a different job on your 
hands, as you cannot be sure that it is connected correctly. 
Ring final circuit
Let’s say we have a ring, which, when we measure end-to-end values we 
notice has no continuity between the ends of the line conductor but all of 
the other conductors measure are as expected.
Of course, the break could be at any point in the ring and is probably just 
a cable snapped at one of the terminations. As with most fault finding, we 
need a bit of luck mixed with our knowledge. The most important thing to 
remember is to work methodically.
It could be that we have not installed the ring and have no idea as to the 
route of the cables. We now have to just take a calculated guess as to how 
the ring is wired.

110  Electrical installation fault finding
Take a socket off somewhere around the middle of the ring.
·	
At the board, link L and E of one end of the ring.
·	
At the socket, test between L and E of one of the ring ends using a low 
resistance ohm-metre.
·	
If you have continuity, go to the board and split the joined ends, but 
mark which ones they were.
·	
Now test L–E again at socket and if the circuit is open resistance you 
will know that the break is not on the end of the ring which you have 
tested. Again, mark the end that is OK.
·	
Now join the L–E of the other end of ring at board.
·	
Test L–N at the socket of the unmarked end and the circuit should be 
open circuit.
·	
If it is open circuit, join the L–E of the end just tested.
Now comes the tricky bit, as you have to guess which part of the ring has 
the break. You need to take a chance on which way the ring has been run, 
and take a socket off somewhere between the board and the socket.
·	
Disconnect conductors from the socket.
·	
Test between L and E of both cables.
·	
If both ends are open circuit there is a good chance that you are work­
ing on the wrong side of the ring. The best way to find out is to join L–E 
of the ends that you marked at the socket and board, test again at the 
socket and you should have a closed circuit. If that is the case, then just 
put the socket back on and choose another somewhere else on the ring.
·	
If, however, when you take the socket off and measure the ends one of 
them is closed circuit and the other is open circuit, you will be looking 
in the right place.
·	
Now you need to guess which way the cable that is open circuit runs; it 
may go to the board or it may go to the first socket that you removed.
·	
Take another socket off between the socket you have just tested, and 
either the first socket or the board. This is your choice and also a bit of 
luck is needed.
·	
You need to keep doing this until the fault has been found; it is just a 
process that keeps halving the faulty section.
Of course, once the fault has been found, then all of the connections need to 
be remade and a complete-ring final circuit test will need to be carried out.
Interpretation of ring final test results
Let’s assume that we have a ring circuit wired in 2.5mm2 thermoplastic 
70°C twin and earth cable. The cpc is going to be 1.5mm2.

Electrical installation fault finding  111
The test between the ends of the line conductor gives a reading of 
0.6Ω. From this value we will know to expect a value of 0.6Ω when we 
­measure the N conductor end to end and a value of 1.67 times 0.6Ω (0.6 × 
1.67 = 1Ω) when we measure the cpc end to end. If the values differ from 
these by very much, then immediately we should recognise that there is 
probably a loose connection (high resistance joint) in one of the sockets. 
Before we proceed with the rest of the test we should correct the problem.
Once corrected, we will have values of R1 0.6Ω, Rn 0.6Ω and R2 1Ω.
When we cross connect the line and N conductors we know from these 
values that we will expect a resistance value between L and N at each socket 
of 
.
.
.
.
0 6 0 6
4
0 3
+
=
Ω In reality, though, we will know that the expected resistance 
value will be half of the line conductor resistance.
When we cross connect the line and cpcs we will expect a value 
of 0 6 1
4
0 4
.
.
+ =
Ω. Always remember, though, that as the cpc is a smaller CSA 
than the line conductor, the value will be slightly lower on the sockets nearer 
to the cross connection but will gradually increase to 0.4Ω as you measure 
the sockets nearer to the centre of the ring.
In Table 14.1 are some measured values that, if interpreted correctly, will 
give us a good idea of how a problem could be identified.
Now let’s look at how these values have been interpreted to find the possible 
faults/inconsistencies. Before we do, though, I should say that if you ever install 
a ring that has all of the faults listed above, you should seriously consider 
becoming a plumber!
Table 14.1
L– L = 0.6Ω
N–N = 
0.6Ω
cpc–cpc = 1Ω
L–N cross 
connected 0.3Ω
   L–cpc cross 
   connected 0.4Ω
Socket 
L–N
L–E
1
0.3Ω
0.4Ω
correct
2
No reading
0.4Ω
Reverse L–E
3
0.6Ω
0.4Ω
High resistance N 
connection
4
0.6Ω
0.8Ω
Possible spur or high 
resistance L connection
5
0.3Ω
0.7Ω
High resistance E 
connection
6
0.3Ω
No reading
Reverse L–N
7
No reading
No reading
Reverse N–E

112  Electrical installation fault finding
Socket 1
We can see that the values are as expected (Figure 14.1).
Socket 2
As we look at a socket face (A) we expect the connections to be as shown 
as in Figure 14.2.
If the connections were as shown in (B) the reading when measured 
between L and E would be as expected but would be open circuit between 
L and N, proving that the socket has been connected incorrectly or the N 
conductors have dropped out of the terminal. 
Socket 3
The value shows us that it must be a loose N connection as L–E are as 
expected (see Figure 14.3).
Socket 4
As the values are both high it will show either a spur or a loose connection 
on the conductor which is common to both tests. This, of course, is the line 
conductor (Figure 14.4).
Socket 5
If it is OK between L and N but high between L and E it must be a loose 
earth connection (Figure 14.5).
Figure 14.1
L
N
E
A
L
E
N
B x
Figure 14.2
E
N
L
A 
E
L
N
B x
N
E
L
Figure 14.3
Figure 14.4
Figure 14.5

Electrical installation fault finding  113
Socket 6
No reading between L and E but a correct reading between L and N will 
show that L–N are reversed as shown in socket (B).
Socket 7
If there is no reading at either measurement it must show that the NE are 
reversed as shown.
All of these mistakes are very easy to make, and it is a good reason to carry 
out all tests correctly as human error is very difficult to eliminate. 
RCD tripping 
If the circuit is protected by an RCBO, then, of course, the first step is to 
disconnect as much of the equipment connected to the circuit as possible. If it 
is a power circuit, then unplug everything that you can find, switch off fused 
connection units, then try and reset the RCBO. If it will not reset, isolate the 
circuit and disconnect the line conductors but not the cpc. The cpc should 
be left connected to the earth bar, as the fault may be between the circuit live 
conductors and another exposed or extraneous conductive part, not neces­
sarily between the live conductors and the cpc. 
Now carry out an insulation resistance test between the live conduc­
tors joined together and the earth bar. I usually carry out the test at 250V 
first just in case there is surge protection. Now split the circuit around 
the centre. This will indicate which side of the circuit has the fault. Split 
the faulty side of circuit again until you have found where the fault is. 
Of course, it is not always that easy, as the fault may be under the floor 
(crushed cable, rodent damage) but at least the test will narrow down the 
area for you.
If the fault is on a lighting circuit, switch off all of the lights and then try 
and reset the RCBO. If it resets, then just switch on the lights one at a time 
until you find the one that trips the RCBO.
If, however, the RCBO will not reset, then have a good look around for 
any switches that look like they may have been disturbed, or light fittings 
that have been recently fitted. If there is nothing obvious, then isolate the 
circuit and disconnect the live conductors. Do not disconnect the cpc.
Where installations are protected by an RCD main switch, the obvious 
process is to switch off all of the circuit breakers or remove all of the fuses. 
Switch on the RCD and replace the protective devices one at a time until the 
RCD trips, remove the device that trips the circuit and replace all of the oth­
ers just to be sure that the fault is only on one circuit. This will then identify 
the circuit and then you can begin the fault finding.
If the RCD will not reset when all of the protective devices have been 
removed, it will indicate that the fault is a neutral to earth fault. The proce­
dure now is to remove the neutrals one at a time and carry out an insulation 

114  Electrical installation fault finding
resistance test between the disconnected N and earth until the faulty circuit 
is found. Once found, replace all of the other disconnected neutrals and pro­
tective devices and switch on the RCD. If it stays on, then you have found 
the faulty circuit.
Something to be aware of when fault finding and RCDs are involved is a 
situation that often arises when RCBOs are used along with an RCD main 
switch. Occasionally, the main RCD will trip, as well as the RCBO, even if 
the main switch is time delayed or higher rated. 
This is because most RCBOs are single pole and although they identify 
an N to E fault and disconnect, the N remains connected and in turn causes 
the RCD to trip. 
When upgrading consumer units to comply with BS 7671 and a split 
board is used with two or three RCDs, it is important to ensure that the neu­
trals and line conductors are connected to the same section of the board. If a 
mistake is made you will soon discover that when something is connected to 
the circuit the RCD will trip – this, of course, will look like a faulty circuit. 
Insulation resistance
When insulation resistance testing, always take care as the test is usually 
carried out at 500V DC. The test leads and probes/clips should comply with 
GS38 and it is really important that the tester is checked for correct opera­
tion by connecting the leads together and pushing test button. This should 
provide a reading of 0.00. Now part the leads and repeat the test and a 
reading of the maximum resistance should be seen such as >300MΩ, but 
this will depend on the tester being used.
Remember, that this is a dead test and the circuit or complete installation 
must be isolated before testing can begin.
Let’s assume that we are going to test a complete installation for a condition 
report and that isolation has be achieved by switching off at the main switch.
Now we must look around the building for any fixed appliances that may 
be switched on – any found should be switched off.
Unplug anything that is plugged into a socket outlet. Isolate any controls 
for the heating/hot water system; this is usually just a matter of switching 
off or unplugging the heating control supply.
Check that any neon indicator switches are turned off, as well as any 
equipment that may be damaged by the test voltage; this could include motion 
sensors and dimmer switches. These should be either bypassed or linked 
across. 
Remove any lamps where possible. If discharge lamps are used, such as 
fluorescent fittings which have control gear fitted, or even any lamps that are 
difficult to access, just turn off the switch that would operate them.
What we have done is to try and remove any equipment that may result in 
giving us a low reading due to our test current passing through it.

Electrical installation fault finding  115
With the main switch off and all of the circuit breakers on or protective 
devices in place, we can begin the test.
The first test that I would carry out is between live conductors and I 
would always start at 250V. This is because any equipment that we have 
missed but that could be damaged at 500V will show up as a bad reading 
but will not be damaged. 
If the test results in a low reading, then I would look around again just 
to check for anything that has been missed; a simple method to narrow the 
search would be to turn off all of the circuit breakers or remove protective 
devices. Carry out the test again but switch on the circuit breakers/replace 
devices one at a time; this should identify the circuit with the problem.
Identifying a lost switch line on a three-plate 
lighting circuit
I am sure that I am not the only person to get numerous calls throughout the 
year after someone has taken down a light fitting, and finds that when they 
reconnect it there is a bang! The story is usually that they have connected all 
of the blues/blacks together, and all of the brown/reds together, and when 
the light is switched on all of the other lights go out.
I find the simplest method is this.
Isolate the circuit (it probably already is, but by accident). Don’t ever take 
anyone else’s word that a circuit is dead. Always carry out the procedure 
yourself and always lock off correctly. Better safe than sorry!
Once isolated, disconnect all of the blues/blacks, turn the switch on and 
connect a buzzer or low resistance ohm-metre to the browns/reds and one 
blue/black. Test each blue/black to the brown/reds until you get a reading. 
Once you have a reading you must now turn off the switch. If the reading 
disappears you have found the switch return. If it does not disappear you 
will most likely have found a live pair coming from another light, in which 
case move on to another blue/black. 
Example
I was once asked to repair some swimming pool lights that had stopped 
working. I followed the normal procedure of finding out as much informa­
tion about the lights as possible, and when they stopped working. Gaining 
as much evidence as possible is vital.
The information was: 
·	
The lights were quite new and were LED colour-changing lights con­
trolled electronically by a remote control. 
·	
There were three underwater lights, which were supplied by a trans­
former with a 12V AC output. 

116  Electrical installation fault finding
·	
The transformer was fed from by dedicated circuit, which had its own 
control switch on the pool switch panel. 
·	
The client said that the lights had previously worked but only for a very 
short time. 
·	
Each light was fed by its own cable, which was run into a trunking.
·	
The cables were joined together in the trunking using a crimped connec­
tor. A single cable was taken from the crimp to the supply transformer.
·	
It was not possible to gain access to the lights without draining the pool. 
To find the fault: I checked the supply to transformer. This was OK, as 
it measured 230V. Next, I checked the secondary side of the transformer, 
remembering it is AC. It had an output of 12V.
My first thought was that it was the lamps that had gone faulty, but it was 
pretty unlikely that all of them would be faulty and the only way to find out 
would be to drain the pool. 
Then, I checked the voltage at the crimp, which again measured 12V. 
Before draining the pool I thought that I would put a load test on the trans­
former. I connected a 12V car lamp to the transformer and it worked. This 
at least proved the transformer.
I was still not convinced that the lamps were faulty and decided to split 
one of the cables between the crimps and lamp, tested between live conduc­
tors and there was no voltage. This seemed strange, as there was voltage up 
to the crimps, so I decided to split the crimps carefully. I found that on the 
outgoing side of the neutral the crimp was squashed onto the insulation; the 
copper wire was not touching the metal of the crimp and therefore was not 
completing the circuit.
The lamps had worked for a short while because the wires were twisted 
together with one strand longer than the others. When it was first crimped 
the single strand of the outgoing cables was touching the incoming cable. 
This single strand could carry the current for a short while, but when the 
lamps were left on for a long period it acted like a fuse on overload and 
melted, breaking the circuit.
This was a pretty obscure and confusing fault, but, by working methodi­
cally and not jumping around all over the place, the fault was found reason­
ably quickly. 
Immersion heater not working
The faults on immersion heaters are usually quite easy to identify, although 
there are many symptoms and various ways of identifying the faults.
Where the circuit is protected by an RCD, the breakdown of an immer­
sion heater element will usually result in the RCD tripping. The most com­
mon cause of element breakdown is the corrosion of the protective tube 
around the heating element; when the tube ruptures water can penetrate and 

Electrical installation fault finding  117
will soak into the magnesium oxide surrounding the element. This soaked 
magnesium oxide will provide a low resistance between the element and the 
outer protective case, which of course will be earthed.
The easiest way to prove this fault is to just to turn off the local isolator 
to the immersion heater and then turn on the RCD. If it stays on, then it will 
show that the immersion heater is the problem and will need to be replaced.
Always be aware, though, that the isolator needs to be double pole. If it is not, 
then the RCD may still trip as it will detect the leakage between earth and neutral.
Where an RCD is not part of the circuit a damaged element will not usually 
operate a circuit breaker, and the only symptom may be that the immersion 
heater is not working. This type of fault will require a methodical approach.
Always check the obvious. Is the circuit switched on? If it is connected by 
a switched fuse connection unit (fused spur), is the fuse in the connection 
unit the correct size? Is it in good condition? If yes, then switch off the local 
isolation to the heater and remove the cover of the immersion heater. 
Visually inspect the connections in the immersion heater just to ensure 
that the connections have not overheated or come loose. 
If it has an integral overheat trip, press the trip button (Figure 14.6). If it 
clicks it will mean that it has reset.
Figure 14.6

118  Electrical installation fault finding
Now turn on the local isolation and, using a voltage indicator to GS38, test 
between the ends of the element within the immersion heater (Figure 14.7).
If the voltage indicator shows that the full voltage is present, then it will 
indicate that the thermostat is closed and that the element has a supply to it.
If there is no supply to the heater element, then test between the incom­
ing supply to the thermostat and neutral or earth (Figure 14.8). If there is 
a supply voltage, then at least you will know that the circuit is working 
up to the thermostat. This will indicate that the heater thermostat may be 
faulty or perhaps has been turned down. Check the setting just in case – it 
should be at a maximum of 60°C. If the water is hot because it has been 
heated by a boiler it may be that the temperature stat has turned off.
It worth just turning it to full temperature and then testing at the heater ele­
ment ends again. If they are still showing as dead, then replace the thermostat.
If the ends are live, then clearly there is a problem with the element.
At this point we have a couple of options:
Switch the heater off and place a clamp meter around the line conductor 
to the heater or the incoming line at the meter (Figure 14.9). Now switch 
the heater on; if the current showing on the clamp meter increases by the 
current rating of the element it will show the heater is working correctly. 
A 3kW element will increase the current by 13A. You can also carry out 
this test at the meter tails if the immersion is difficult to get to. Just test it 
with the immersion off and then turn the immersion on to see if the current 
increases by the current rating of the immersion.
Figure 14.7

Figure 14.8
Figure 14.9

120  Electrical installation fault finding
If the current does not increase and you have a supply to the element it 
will show that the element has gone open circuit.
As a final check it is worth isolating the element and carrying out an insula­
tion resistance test between one of the element ends to earth (Figure 14.10). A 
low reading will show that the element case has eroded away and allowed water 
to get into the magnesium oxide insulation surrounding the heater element.
Changing/replacing an immersion heater
Once you are sure that the immersion heater needs replacing, then the 
removal of the old heater is usually the most difficult part of the exercise, as 
the cylinder will need to be drained.
There are many scenarios and it would be impossible to describe them 
all. The next chapter will deal with top and bottom elements in a standard 
vented cylinder. I will also describe the procedure for replacing an element 
in an unvented cylinder.
Before we start, be warned that there is always a danger of damaging the cyl­
inder when removing the old element, particularly if the cylinder is an old one.
Figure 14.10

Chapter 15
Changing an immersion heater
Before you start read this chapter, and if you are concerned, employ the 
services of a plumber.
·	
Isolate and disconnect the electrical supply to the immersion heater.
·	
Locate the cold feed into the cylinder (this is usually the 22mm pipe that 
enters the cylinder at its lowest point). See Figure 15.1.
·	
Once the inlet has been located trace the pipe away from the cylinder 
until you reach a valve; this is normally a gate valve (Figure 15.2). Once 
you have located it try and turn it off; very often, the gate valve will be 
seized up so be careful. You can use a pair of grips for leverage but do 
not apply too much pressure; the valve stem is made of brass and will 
shear easily. 
Figure 15.1

122  Changing an immersion heater
·	
Unfortunately, it is not uncommon for the valve to shut but then seize 
shut, which presents an even worse problem. If there is any doubt that 
the valve is serviceable, then don’t force it.
If you are concerned about the valve it will probably be better to drain 
the cold water storage tank, which is usually located in the loft. This will be 
where the water is stored to supply the hot water cylinder and cold taps in 
the bathroom.
To drain the cold water tank there are several methods that can be used.
·	
Method 1. Go into the loft and turn off the stop cock in the cold supply 
to the cold water storage tank. If there is no valve, tie up the ball valve, 
which is in the cold water storage tank. Isolating the tank supply this 
way will allow the cold water to remain on to all taps supplied by the 
main water supply.
·	
Method 2. Turn off the main stop cock in the pipe supplying the build­
ing (Figure 15.3), or turn off the supply by using the stop tap, which 
is in the box on the pavement (Figure 15.4). This may need a simple 
square key or a socket with a long extension (Figure 15.5).
·	
Once the cold supply to the cylinder has been isolated, open the hot taps 
in the kitchen and the bathroom. If it has been possible to isolate the hot 
water cylinder locally there will not be much water flowing out of the 
taps and it will stop quite quickly. 
Figure 15.2

Figure 15.3
Figure 15.4
Figure 15.5

124  Changing an immersion heater
If you have isolated the cold water storage tank the water will flow for a 
while as the storage tank will have to empty. Opening the cold taps in the 
bath will speed things up a bit as this is usually supplied from the cold stor­
age tank as well.
Once the water has stopped flowing from the tap it will mean that all of 
the pipes are empty, but not the cylinder – this is the next step.
·	
At or near the bottom of the hot water cylinder there should be a drain 
off valve. It is often fitted to the cold supply pipe to the cylinder as in 
Figure 15.6.
·	
Fit a hose over the end of the drain off valve. If the immersion heater 
is on the top of the cylinder you will not need to drain much water out 
and you can just put the end of the hose into a bucket. Make sure you 
put a towel or a tray below the drain off as it will leak a bit.
·	
Where the immersion heater is fitted to the bottom of the cylinder the 
water from the cylinder must be drained to below the immersion heater. 
This will require the end of the hose to be lower than the immersion heater.
Often, particularly on older cylinders, the washer in the drain valve gets 
stuck to the seat of the valve and will not allow any water to flow out. This 
can be a pain to deal with.
You can completely unscrew the valve (Figure 15.7). Dig the washer 
out and block up the hole using your thumb (Figure 15.8). If you use this 
method make sure you have someone with you just in case the hose moves 
Figure 15.6

Figure 15.7
Figure 15.8

126  Changing an immersion heater
or you need help with anything. Remember that once you have taken out 
the washer the cylinder will need to drain down completely before you can 
take your thumb away. If the water is still hot you will need to use a rag or 
towel to block the hole.
On occasion, it may be impossible to drain the cylinder from the bottom. 
In these cases, I undo the hot water outlet pipe at the top of the cylinder and 
siphon the water from the cylinder. This is a simple procedure providing you 
think about what you are doing.
·	
Make sure you have a long enough hose to be able to siphon the water 
to a point below the cylinder, preferably outside into a drain.
·	
Fill the hose with water and then block the lowest end of the hose so 
that the hose remains full up.
·	
Push the hose into the top of the tank and get the end as close to the 
bottom of the tank as possible.
·	
Unblock the other end of the hose and let the water siphon out. 
·	
Once the water is below the immersion heater you can stop draining down.
·	
It is always better to use an immersion heater spanner to undo the 
immersion heater (Figure 15.9).
·	
It is often difficult to get enough leverage on an immersion heater span­
ner; where there is enough space a steel tube placed over the end will 
usually help. A pair of 24-inch Stilsons will also do the job when opened 
up fully.
·	
Do not use a hammer to try and get the spanner turning, as you will end 
up damaging the cylinder.
Figure 15.9

Changing an immersion heater  127
Unfortunately, on old cylinders where the copper has corroded inside, the 
thread which the immersion heater screws into will often split where it joins 
the cylinder. This can’t be avoided and when it happens the cylinder will 
require replacement. 
Once the heater is out, the replacement is quite simple to fit. When I fit 
immersion heaters I try not to use a sealant that sets, as it makes the removal 
of worn-out heaters very difficult. The fibre washer that is supplied with the 
heater is normally good enough to get a good seal. If in doubt, try and use 
a sealant that remains soft.
·	
Ensure the surface of the boss on the cylinder is clean and smooth.
·	
Fit the fibre washer over the thread of the heater and then screw the 
heater into the boss.
·	
If you have to bend the element a bit don’t worry, as it will not harm it.
·	
Tighten the immersion heater using the correct spanner; be careful not 
to damage the cylinder.
·	
Once you are sure the immersion is fitted correctly, turn off all of the 
taps except the bath tap. 
·	
If the drain valve on the cylinder was used, check the washer and replace 
it if necessary.
·	
Where the cold storage tank has had to be drained because the gate 
valve to the cylinder supply did not work, it would be sensible to replace 
the valve while the system is drained down.
·	
Once you are happy that the drain off is shut and all disconnected pipes 
are connected, it is time to open up the valves to fill the cylinder or refill 
the cold water storage tank.
·	
Where the storage tank has been drained the cylinder will fill as the tank 
fills.
·	
While it is filling you can reconnect the electric supply to it. Check that the 
flexible cord does not need replacing. If it does, be sure to use heat-resistant 
cord. Where possible use crimped lugs or ferrules on the end of the cord.
·	
Set thermostat to 60°C.
·	
Once the cylinder has filled, check for leaks and switch on heater. It will 
take a while to heat up but just to check it is working you can use the 
clamp meter on the meter tails to check the increase in current.
Unvented cylinder 
Where there is an immersion heater fitted into an unvented cylinder the tests 
carried out to check that it is functioning are much the same as for a vented 
cylinder. 
Always check that there is a supply at the element ends and then just work 
back from there, but be sure that you follow all of the safety precautions 
regarding safe isolation. 

128  Changing an immersion heater
Changing an immersion heater on an unvented cylinder is usually a lot eas­
ier than changing one on a vented cylinder. This is because the isolation valve 
is normally a lever type that is situated close to the cylinder (Figure 15.10).
The cold fill pipe is normally the one that enters the cylinder at the low­
est point. Quite often, this is where you will find the drain off valve as well 
(Figure 15.11).
Before you start, make sure you switch off and isolate any heating system 
that may be used to heat up the cylinder. This is because a heating system 
will have some electrical safety features to prevent the cylinder overheating. 
The wiring may pass through parts of the cylinder and will be live even if 
the immersion heater is isolated.
Now isolate the immersion heater. Once that is done turn off the water 
isolation valve and open a hot tap. This will be under pressure for a short 
while as the expansion vessel will be pressurised. 
After a very short time the water will stop running. Now connect a hose 
to the cylinder drain off point, put the other end of the hose outside or in a 
sink/WC that is lower than the drain off point and undo the drain off valve. 
Let the water run until it stops. 
This may take a while, particularly on cylinders that have been installed 
for a while and those that are in hard water areas. The limescale can some­
times build up to a level above the drain off and partially block it. When it 
is completely blocked, the siphon method previously explained for a vented 
system will work well.
Figure 15.10

Changing an immersion heater  129
Once it is drained, remove the immersion heater using an immersion heater 
spanner. If there is a lot of limescale in the cylinder now is a good time to 
remove it using something to spoon it out through the immersion heater hole.
Clean the surface of the immersion heater boss and install the new immer­
sion heater and tighten using the immersion heater spanner. Try not to use 
any sealant that will set, as it will make replacement more difficult next time.
Now turn the water supply back on leaving the hot tap open. While the 
cylinder is filling reconnect the immersion heater and set it to 60°C. Once 
the cylinder is full, water will come out of the hot tap. When this happens, 
turn the hot tap off.
Check for any leaks. If there are any, they will show now as the cylinder 
will be under pressure. When you are satisfied that the cylinder is not leak­
ing, check that the immersion heater is working by using a clamp meter, or 
just wait a short while to see if the outlet at the top of the tank is getting 
warm. Once you are satisfied that it is working, re-energise any heating 
system that has been switched off and check that it is operating correctly.
Figure 15.11

Chapter 16
RCD tripping faults
It is rare these days for RCDs to cause nuisance tripping. Usually, when an 
RCD trips it is because something is wrong. It is unlikely to be the RCD that 
is causing the problem. 
One important thing to remember is that an RCD will only trip on a 
fault between live conductors and earth. It will not trip when there is a fault 
between live conductors or when there is an overload.
Where the RCD is part of a split board and is a new connection, it is 
always worth checking that the neutrals of the circuits are all connected to 
the correct neutral terminal. In other words, check that all of the circuits that 
are protected by the RCD that keeps tripping are connected to the neutral 
terminal corresponding to the side of the board that the RCD is protecting.
If a circuit neutral is connected wrongly, and a load is connected to the 
circuit, the RCD will detect more current in the neutral than the line conductor, 
as the neutral conductor and line conductor pass through it and trip.
Where everything seems to be connected correctly, it is worth carrying out 
what is called a ramp test before starting to take things apart. A ramp test 
will tell you how much current is passing through the test instrument before 
the RCD trips. Clearly, if a 30mA RCD trips at a current of, say, 20mA it 
could be prone to nuisance tripping.
The problem with this test is that if it is carried out on a circuit while all 
of the other circuits on the board are still connected, any small earth fault 
currents on other circuits will have an effect on the RCD. Although the test 
instrument is showing 20mA it is only measuring the current that is passing 
through the test instrument. It will not be able to measure any leakage cur­
rent that is in the rest of the system.
Before you change the RCD, isolate it from all of the other circuits and test 
it on its own. If it still trips at 20mA, then change it. As a precaution I would 
always test the rest of the circuits on the board between live conductors and 
earth to check if there are any low readings, just to satisfy my own mind that 
I have cured the fault.
Where the RCD is part of an older circuit that has been working for 
some time but has just started tripping, it is unlikely to be the RCD causing 

RCD tripping faults  131
the problem. Once again, the very first thing I would do is gain as much 
information about the fault as possible. Ask whoever is using the instal­
lation questions as these will usually give you some clues as to what the 
problem is.
Always remember that many people have no idea at all of the way any 
electrical systems work. Don’t be embarrassed about asking the obvious, 
even if the person seems to know what they are talking about.
·	
How often does it trip?
·	
Did it trip just once and won’t reset?
·	
Did it reset a few times before it began not resetting at all?
·	
Does it trip when you plug something in or switch a particular part of 
the circuit on?
·	
Has any work been done around the house: shelves put up, floorboards 
screwed down?
·	
Have any light fittings or switches been changed?
·	
Have you plugged in anything new recently?
·	
Has there been a water leak anywhere recently?
Once you have asked the questions, then it’s time to have a bit of a poke 
around.
The first objective is to try and detect the circuit that is causing the prob­
lem. Of course, if the board has RCBOs then the circuit causing the problem 
will be obvious. Always remember, though, that most RCBOs are single 
pole, and when you switch them off or they trip, the circuit may be off but 
if the fault is between neutral and earth the fault will still be there. 
Where the circuit is part of a system that is protected by a single RCD, 
or even part of a split board, then the problem circuit will not be obvious.
Switch off all of the circuits that are protected by the problem RCD. Now 
switch the RCD on. If it stays on, then turn on the circuit breaker nearest the 
RCD. If it stays on, leave it on and switch on the next one. Keep doing this 
until the RCD trips. With a bit of luck the circuit breaker that you switched 
on just before the RCD tripped will be for the problem circuit.
However, don’t get overexcited as the problem may be a build-up of small 
leakages over several circuits. This is simple to check – just turn all of the 
circuit breakers off and switch on the RCD. Now switch on the circuit breaker 
that caused the RCD to trip; if the RCD trips again you have found your 
problem circuit.
On the rare occasion when the RCD does not trip it may mean that more 
than one circuit is involved. Starting with the circuit breaker nearest to the 
one that you have switched on, switch the circuit breakers on one at a time 
until the RCD trips.
Now turn off all the circuit breakers other than the first and last ones 
that you switched on and try to reset the RCD. If it resets, then switch on 

132  RCD tripping faults
another breaker. Keep repeating this process until you have found the com­
bination of circuits that trips the RCD and those circuits which don’t.
Disconnect the live conductors of the problem circuits one circuit at a 
time (not the cpcs). Now carry out and insulation test between the live con­
ductors joined together and the earth bar. This will show you which are the 
problematic circuits.
Where you find it is only one circuit causing the RCD to trip, things are 
slightly easier.
The RCD is acting as a main switch and it trips but will not reset.
·	
Switch off all circuit breakers or remove all fuses.
·	
Reset the RCD.
·	
If it resets, switch on the circuit breakers or replace fuses one at a time. 
When the RCD trips you have found the problem circuit.
·	
If the RCD does not reset, this could indicate an N to E fault.
·	
Remove the neutrals one at a time; each time one is removed, try and 
reset the RCD. If the RCD does not reset, do not reconnect the N but 
disconnect another one.
·	
Once the RCD resets, mark the last N disconnected for identification 
purposes.
·	
Reconnect the other neutrals one at a time, ensuring that each time you 
reconnect a neutral the RCD is switched off for isolation purposes.
·	
The fault will be on the circuit where the identified N is used.
·	
If with all of the neutrals disconnected and all of the circuit breakers 
turned off the RCD will still not set, it will indicate that the RCD is 
faulty. However, it is always a good idea to carry out a test on the RCD 
with nothing connected to it just to be sure.
Always be aware that it may not be one circuit that is causing the prob­
lem. If, for instance, the RCD has a trip rating of 30mA it could be that a 
number of circuits have a very small leakage. When all of the circuits are 
operational the accumulative value of the leakages may well be more than 
the trip rating of the RCD. 
This is often the case where there are a lot of heating elements being 
used in an installation. It is not unusual for these elements to have very 
low insulation resistance values, particularly if they have not been used for 
a while. The metal tubes in which the element is contained can have very 
small hairline cracks that allow moisture to be absorbed by the insulating 
material, which is usually magnesium oxide. This is very hydroscopic and 
readily absorbs moisture.
Heating and cooking equipment with a rating ≥ 3kW are permitted to 
have an insulation resistance value of 0.3mΩ. 
Where a number of heaters are being used, it is often beneficial to run 
them for a while to dry them out and then test them again.

RCD tripping faults  133
RCBO trips and will not reset
·	
Check that neutrals are connected to the correct side of board if it is a 
split board.
·	
If the RCD is protecting a power circuit isolate all loads. If it is protect­
ing a lighting circuit, switch off all lights.
·	
Try and reset the RCD. If it resets, re-energise loads one at a time. When 
the RCD trips you will have found your problem. If the RCD is on a 
lighting circuit, switch the lights on one at a time until the RCD trips. 
Again, you will have found the problem.
·	
If the RCD will not set, disconnect the line and neutral of the circuit 
(do not disconnect the earth) and carry out an insulation resistance test 
between the joined live conductors and earth.
Power circuit
Check all socket outlets and unplug anything that is plugged in, switch off/
isolate any fixed equipment such as electric fires, and make sure showers, 
cookers and the like are isolated from the circuit.
Now switch the circuit back on and hope that the RCD remains on. If it 
does, then you are well on the way to solving the problem. If it is a socket 
outlet circuit, leave the circuit on and start plugging things back in. When 
the RCD trips you have found your problem.
If it is a radial circuit supplying a piece of equipment such as a cooker 
or shower, then isolate the equipment and test it with an insulation tester 
between live conductors and earth.
On circuits that trip when everything is disconnected, then clearly there is 
a problem with the circuit. Now visually inspect as much of the circuit and 
accessories as you can see to check for anything that looks like it could be a 
problem. Look for damaged cables/accessories.
Disconnect from the supply end the live conductors only, and carry out 
an insulation test between live conductors and the main earthing bar (Fig­
ure 16.1). Of course, you are expecting a low reading below, say, 0.008MΩ 
because this is the value of resistance that will cause a 30mA RCD to trip. 
Example:
230
0 03
7666
V
A
.
=
Ω
which, of course, is as near to 0.008MΩ as you can get.
But, of course, anything below 1MΩ will require attention.
Remove the accessory at the end of the circuit and check for damage to 
the conductor insulation/pinched cables, disconnect the accessory and sepa­
rate the conductor ends. Now carry out the insulation test again. 

134  RCD tripping faults
If the resistance values have increased to an acceptable level, then you have 
found your problem.
If you have both ends of the cable disconnected, with the conductor ends 
separated, and are still getting a low reading, then, of course, it is showing 
you that the cable is damaged. If it is a radial circuit supplying only one 
item of equipment, the only option is to try and trace the circuit cable and 
perhaps cut into it around the halfway point and test each way to see if you 
can narrow down the point of the fault.
If it is a radial or ring final circuit, things become a little easier. Split the 
circuit somewhere around the centre of it. Of course, you can only guess at 
where the centre is but anywhere will do to start with.
Make sure the ends of the circuit are separated at the supply point and at 
the point at which you are beginning your search.
Now test between live conductors and the cpc on all of the cables where 
you have split the circuit. One of them should provide you with a good read­
ing and the other with a low reading. At the supply point test between live 
conductors and earth. If the reading is still low, then the fault is between the 
separated point and the supply point. If the reading is clear, then the fault is 
between the separated point and the end of the circuit.
Figure 16.1

RCD tripping faults  135
Now split the circuit again between the two ends of the circuit that has 
the fault and repeat the process as before. Keep doing this until you have 
pinpointed the section of cable that has the problem. Once you have found 
the section of cable it is just a matter of trying to find the problem or replac­
ing the cable. 
Lighting circuit
Where possible switch off all of the lights. When you have done that, try and 
reset the RCD. If it resets just turn the lights on one at a time until the RCD 
trips. When it trips you will have found the part of the circuit that the fault 
is on – now you just have to locate the problem.
If the RCD does not reset with all of the lights off, carry out a visual check 
on everything, paying particular attention to anything that is outside and 
could have moisture in. If a visual check does not produce a solution, then 
turn all of the light switches to the off position, disconnect the live conductors 
at the supply end of the circuit and carry out an insulation test between live 
conductors and earth. It is worth switching any two-way or intermediate 
switches just to make sure that they are in the off position. If the reading 
is satisfactory, say above 1MΩ, then turn each light on one at a time while 
carrying out the test. When you get a low reading you will have found the 
problem area.
When the resistance value is low with all of the light switches in the off 
position, then you must follow the same procedure as for the power circuit. 
Lighting is often easier to work with than power as splitting the circuit is a 
simple process. 
Split the circuit somewhere near the middle, test both ways and continue 
doing that until you have found the part of the cable that is giving the 
problem. 

Chapter 17
Electric motors
As a general rule, electric motors are very reliable. Occasionally, though, 
they do develop faults, particularly where the motor is working close to its 
power limit. Before we look at the fault-finding side of motors, it is worth 
mentioning that it is a good idea to try and identify the cause of the prob­
lem. Although motors do sometimes just wear out, in most instances there 
will be a reason.
Common problems are:
·	
Has the motor got suitable ventilation? Check to see if the end cover is 
blocked. Is the fan blade able to rotate? Sometimes, they come loose. 
Is the motor in an enclosure of any kind? If so, has it got suitable 
ventilation?
·	
Check the voltage – a drop in voltage will result in an increase in cur­
rent. As a simple example: a single-phase motor with an output of 1kW 
and a power factor of 0.85 will draw a current from the supply of 
1000
230
0 85
5 11
.
.
×
=
A from the supply.
If the voltage drops to say 200V, then the motor will draw 
1000
200 0 85
5 88
×
(
) =
.
.
A. 
This, of course, will make the motor run hotter and reduce its life expectancy. 
The same will apply to three-phase motors and, of course, the larger the motor, 
the greater the current.
·	
If the motor is three-phase, then check that all three phases are present 
at the motor terminals. 
If there is voltage, check each phase to earth to ensure that the voltage 
is the same on each phase. An imbalance will cause the motor to run hot. 
If there is only voltage on two phases or an imbalance, check at the motor 
starter. Measure the voltage at the supply side of the starter. Obviously, 
if the voltage is correct, then the problem is with the starter. Sometimes, 
particularly on a motor circuit that is starting and stopping frequently, the 

Electric motors  137
contacts of the starter burn and cause a high resistance, which in turn affects 
the voltage.
·	
Check that the equipment which the motor is providing power to is run­
ning freely, because a piece of seized or tight equipment will cause the 
motor to overload.
A good sign of the equipment seizing up is if the motor starter has begun 
tripping. Usually, this is because the motor is overloading due to a problem 
with the equipment, not because there is a fault with the motor. Never just 
increase the overload settings on the starter, as this will just add to the 
problem. It may be a quick fix but the motor will get hotter and eventually 
burn out.
·	
If it is possible to disconnect the motor from whatever it is that it is driv­
ing, check that the spindle rotates freely. 
If the spindle does not rotate freely, then check at the fan end of the motor 
to see if the fan blade has jammed or is jamming.
If the problem is not there, then it could be that the motor bearings are 
seizing; this usually results in a rumbling sound when the motor is spun. The 
fan jamming or the bearings seizing are both very simple to detect. 
While the motor is disconnected I would carry out the tests as described 
next, anyway.
Just place a long screwdriver onto the bearing housing the motor. Place the 
handle of the screwdriver against your ear and rotate the spindle. You will 
hear if the bearings are wearing; good bearings make virtually no sound at all. 
If you are concerned that a three-phase motor is just not sounding right, 
perhaps it sounds like it is working too hard, it is a good idea to use a clamp 
meter to check that the current drawn by each phase is the same. The best 
place to check this is at the motor starter. Set the clamp meter to a suitable 
current rating. Start the motor and place the meter around each phase in 
turn (Figure 17.1). They should all be carrying the same current or very close 
to the same. If the readings are different, then there is something wrong; it 
could be that the motor windings are burning out, or possibly a problem 
with the starter contacts. It will not be that the motor is overloaded, as even 
under those circumstances the motor will have the same current on all three 
phases.
Once all of those things have been checked, we can look at the motor.
Once it has been isolated and disconnected, a good indication (and often 
the best) is to just put your nose near the terminal box and give it a sniff. 
An acrid burnt smell will tell you the motor windings have overheated and 
melted the varnish that the windings are coated in.

138  Electric motors
A three-phase motor will normally have three windings, and each wind­
ing will have two ends (Figure 17.2). Motor windings are usually marked 
V1 V2 – U1 U2 – W1 W2 (three windings marked at each end with the 
same letter). Three-phase motor windings can be connected in star or delta, 
sometimes referred to as mesh. A three-phase motor can run continuously 
in either star or delta. In star, the motor will run slower than in delta but it 
will not draw as much current or produce as much energy.
As an example:
A star connected motor has windings with a resistance of 10Ω per wind­
ing on a supply voltage of 400V.
The calculation to find the current in each phase is:
400
3
R
current in each phase 
×
(
)
=
400
10
1 732
23
×
(
)
=
.
A
 
This can be simplified for star as 230
10
23
=
A.
Figure 17.1

Electric motors  139
The same motor is connected in delta. The calculation to find the current 
in each phase is 400
10
40
=
A. 
As shown, the current in a motor connected in delta is 1.732 times greater 
than the current in the star connected motor.
Total power for both motors can be calculated as follows:
Power in watts = line voltage × current × √3
Star  	
 400 × 23 × 1.732 = 15,934W
Delta 	
 400 × 40 × 1.732 = 27,712W
As you can see, the power output for a motor connected in delta is considerably 
higher than that of a motor connected in star, but then so is the current use.
A star connected motor will have three ends of the windings joined 
together, and a delta connected motor will have six separate terminals. Let’s 
say V2, U2 and W2 are joined (see Figure 17.3) and V1, U1 and W1 are 
connected to separate terminals. 
Figure 17.2
U1
V1
W1 
W2
 
U2 
V2 
Delta 
Figure 17.3
U1
V1
W1 
W2
U2 
V2 
Star 

140  Electric motors
If by any misfortune the ends of the windings are not identified because 
the markings have come off, it’s no problem. Use a low resistance ohm-metre 
(there is no real need to zero the leads for this test but it becomes a habit after 
a while if you do a lot of testing). All you need to do is just pick a winding end 
and test that end to all of the others in turn until you get a resistance value. 
Once you have found a pair, mark them and then carry out the same procedure 
with the four remaining ends and, of course, you will end up with three pairs.
Providing the resistances of each winding is the same or very close, we can 
move on to the next step. 
Using an insulation resistance tester set at 500V, test between each pair of 
windings, and then each winding to the case of the motor. All of the mea­
sured values should be very high, certainly above 1MΩ. 
Values below this may be acceptable on motors that have not been used 
for a long period; the value may be low due to it being stored in a damp 
atmosphere. The winding resistances should all be the same but the insula­
tion resistance may be low. In these cases it is a good idea to either store 
the motor in a warm and dry environment, or if you are in more of a hurry 
connect the motor and let it run for a few hours. This will allow the motor 
to warm up and dry out.
After a few hours, carry out the insulation test again. You will usually find 
that the resistance value will have increased; this will prove that it is just 
dampness.
W1 
W2 
V1 
V2 
U1 
U2 
Star connected  

Electric motors  141
Polarisation testing of electric motors
Without going into the detail of the calculation, this is a test that is carried 
out to check for any deterioration of the windings due to perhaps a build-up 
of dust, dirt or moisture.
For this test you will need a good quality insulation resistance tester set at 
500V DC or above, it is important that the windings are joined and shorted 
to the body of the motor before the test is carried out. If the motor is in use 
or has had other tests carried out on it, the windings should remain shorted 
to earth for 20 minutes or so to ensure that the PI test is a valid one.
To carry out the test, make sure that the motor windings and the body of 
the motor are not touching. Test at ≥ 500V DC for one minute and record 
the reading. Let’s just say we you have a measured value of 7MΩ.
Now repeat the test for a period of ten minutes and record the reading. 
Let’s say 30MΩ.
Now we divide the ten-minute test by the one minute test:
 
30
7
4 28
=
.
If the first insulation test provides a reading of 4GΩ or above, then it is 
not worth carrying out the PI test as the reading indicates that the motor is 
in good condition.
                  Table 17.1
Polarisation index results
PI result
Condition of motor
<1.0
Hazardous
1.0–2.0
Bad condition
2.0–3.0
Usable
3.0–4.0 
Good
4.0–5.0
Excellent

Chapter 18
Use of RCDs
Due to changes in the wiring regulations over the past 20 years or so the 
use of RCDs has become common practice. Before the 16th edition wiring 
regulations were introduced, the use of RCDs was pretty much limited to 
TT systems or circuits that could not meet the maximum Zs values.
There is no doubt that RCDs do save lives. However, occasionally than 
can be difficult to deal with because of things like nuisance tripping, high Zs 
values when testing and even the fear of damage when testing.
A basic RCD is a device that is used to detect earth faults. The RCD moni­
tors the amount of current flowing in the line conductor and the neutral. 
Clearly, the amount of current flowing in each live conductor on a single 
circuit or a complete single-phase installation will be the same. 
When an earth fault occurs and some of the current leaks to earth the 
result will be more current flowing in one live conductor than the other. 
Once the fault current reaches the trip rating of the RCD the device will 
automatically switch off. This is the operating principle of all RCDs. How­
ever, RCDs come in various forms.
All RCDs used in the UK should be manufactured to European standards 
and can be identified by looking at their BS EN numbers.
Some of the older RCDs will have only BS not BS EN numbers. BS 4293 
was the British Standard for RCDs and this was superseded in 2012 by BS 
EN 61008.
It is a good idea to look at what the numbers stand for.
BS 4293 is an RCD that will detect an earth fault and switch off, but it 
will not switch off if there is an overcurrent. In other words, if the circuit 
is overloaded or there is a short circuit between live conductors it will only 
switch off for an earth fault.
This type of device is commonly found on slightly older properties, used 
as a main switch on the consumer unit or sometimes as a main switch before 
the consumer unit.
BS EN 61008-1 type RCDs are now listed as an RCCB. This indicates 
that it is a residual current circuit breaker without overload (Figure 18.1).
These are now used instead of the older BS 4293 RCDs, usually as a main 
switch (Figure 18.2).

Use of RCDs  143
Zs values BS EN 61009-1 type RCDs are now listed as RCCBO. This 
indicates that it is a residual current circuit breaker with overload; these 
can be used to take the place of circuit breakers where RCD protection is 
required for individual circuits. These are common in domestic installations 
as the rating of them is quite limited, although they are also used in indus­
trial and commercial installations (Figure 18.3). 
In industrial and commercial installations, all classifications would need 
to be considered, although when using higher rated devices they may be 
referred to as a CBRs (circuit breakers with residual current protection).
Of course, RCD protection can be incorporated into individual socket out­
lets and these would be referred to as SRCDs. Where RCD protection is incor­
porated into fused connection units they would be referred to as SRCBO, as, 
of course, the fuse in the connection unit would provide overload protection.
There is often confusion when referring to RCDs and for that reason it is 
important to recognise the markings on them. In general they indicate the 
electrical characteristics of the device (Figure 18.4).
The first marking is I or A and this indicates the maximum load rating of 
the device.
Next, there will be I∆n. This shows the trip rating of the device.
Figure 18.1
Figure 18.2

Figure 18.3

Use of RCDs  145
Some devices have an inbuilt time delay. This is because where two RCDs 
are connected in series it is not possible to discriminate as to which device 
will operate first, even if they have different trip ratings (I∆n). The only 
way that discrimination is possible between RCDs is to have an inbuilt 
time delay. This will prevent the device recognising a fault for a very short 
period of time. This will allow the chosen device to operate before the time 
Figure 18.4

146  Use of RCDs
delayed device. Time delayed or selective type RCDs are marked with an S 
(Figure 18.5).
Recognising the trip rating (I∆n) of an RCD is vitally important, as the 
selection of the wrong rating could result in serious safety issues.
Devices are available in a range of trip and load ratings. It is pretty obvi­
ous that any RCD used should be able to carry the required load, but it is 
the trip rating that needs to be fully understood.
I∆n 2000mA
A high rated RCD could be up to 2000mA (2 seconds) and these would 
be used generally in temporary entertainment supplies or some industrial 
applications. These are often adjustable but adjustment must not be possible 
without the use of a tool (see regulation 531.2.10).
I∆n 300mA
This rating of RCD would normally be the upper limit used for fire protec­
tion (see regulations 422.3.9 and 532.1).
Figure 18.5

Use of RCDs  147
I∆n 100mA 
Often used where the disconnection time required for a circuit cannot be met 
because the earth fault loop impedance (measured Zs) is not low enough to 
meet the requirements of BS 7671.
I∆n 30mA
Used where disconnection times cannot be met due to high Zs values but more 
commonly now used for additional protection for socket outlets (see regula­
tion 411.3.3), circuits buried in walls with no mechanical earthed protection 
(see regulation 522.6) and circuits in bathrooms (see regulation 701.411.3.3).
I∆n below 30mA
These are more sensitive devices that can used for protection in areas where 
there is perhaps a greater risk of electric shock, such as work benches. They 
are possibly used with socket outlets in schools that may be used by stu­
dents, and also in certain areas of hospitals where the level of fatal electric 
shock may be reduced due to health issues.
RCD types A, B and AC
As well as having different classifications such as RCCB and RCCBO, they 
are also rated as A, B and AC.
Type A will trip an AC and pulsating DC.
Type B will trip on AC and also pulsating and steady DC. This type of device 
should be used where RCD protection is required on photovoltaic systems.
AC will trip on AC and is suitable for most installations.
All of these devices will operate on sudden or slowly rising currents.
Testing of RCDs
The disconnection time of an RCD can only be tested using a dedicated 
RCD test meter.
Table 18.1a
RCDs to BS 4293 and RCD socket outlets to BS 7288
Test at 50% of trip rating 
Must not trip within 2 seconds
Test at 100% of trip rating
Must trip within 200ms
After the tests have been carried out, it is important that the functional test button is 
pushed and that the device trips. Check that there is a test label present, which indicates 
to the user the necessity for the test button to be pushed quarterly. 

148  Use of RCDs
Devices used for additional protection I∆n ≤ 30mA
Test at five times the trip rating 
Must trip within 40ms
Insulation resistance tests
There is no problem with carrying out a 500V insulation test through an 
RCD as they are manufactured to withstand this level of voltage. RCDs 
can, however, affect the value of the insulation results. If an insulation test 
through an RCD gives results lower than expected it may be necessary to 
disconnect the RCD and test the circuit individually.
Earth fault loop impedance tests with RCDs
When carrying out a high current earth fault loop test the test instruments 
inject a test current of up to 25A into the circuit. This, of course, will trip the 
RCD. 
The older types of RCDs can be tested using a tester with what is called a 
‘D’ lock mechanism. This type of test instrument uses DC to desensitise the 
trip coil, which will prevent it from operating during the earth fault loop test.
This type of instrument will not work on BS EN 61008 or 61009 RCDs, 
as the desensitising current will cause them to trip.
The easiest method used to carry out an earth fault loop test on RCDs is 
to use a low current tester that uses a test current of 15mA – this will not 
trip a healthy RCD. 
There is an added problem with carrying out earth fault loop tests that 
have RCDs in the circuit, as the RCD, particularly RCBOs, often result in 
false high readings. There are, of course, methods that can be used to over­
come the problem.
Method 1
·	
Take a Zs reading at the supply side of the RCD and make a note of it. 
Say, 0.39Ω.
·	
Take a Zs reading at the load side of the RCD and make a note of it. Say, 
0.76Ω.
Table 18.1b
RCCBs and RCBOs to BS EN 61008 and 61009 
Test at 50% of trip rating 
Must not trip within 2 seconds
Test at 100% of trip rating
Must trip within 300ms 
After the tests have been carried out, it is important that the functional test button is 
pushed and that the device trips. Check that there is a test label present, which indicates 
to the user the necessity for the test button to be pushed quarterly.

Use of RCDs  149
·	
Take a Zs reading at the furthest point on the circuit and make a note 
of it. Say, 0.95Ω.
·	
Now subtract the first reading from the second reading. The result will 
be the added resistance of the RCD.
0.76Ω – 0.39Ω = 0.37Ω
·	
Now subtract the resistance of the RCD from the Zs value measured at 
the end of the circuit and this will be the circuit Zs.
0.95Ω – 0.37Ω = 0.58Ω
Zs = 0.58Ω 
Method 2
·	
Take a Zs reading at the supply side of the RCD.
·	
Measure R1 + R2 for the circuit and add the two resistances together. 
This will provide you with the calculated resistance.
Method 3
This is my preferred method but it does not suit everyone, although it is a 
very simple process and it can be carried out as follows:
·	
Isolate the circuit to be tested.
·	
Link phase and earth at the furthest point of the circuit using a lead 
with a crocodile clip on each end (Figure 18.6). If it is a socket outlet, 
then a plug top with earth and phase linked can be used. (It is advisable 
to clearly mark the plug top.) 
Figure 18.6

150  Use of RCDs
·	
Use a high current earth fault loop impedance test instrument. 
·	
Place one probe (black) onto the isolated terminal of the circuit protec­
tive device. 
·	
Place the other probe (red) onto the incoming phase of the RCD or 
main switch (Figure 18.7).
·	
Operate the instrument and record the result. 
·	
This will be Zs for the circuit and the RCD will not have tripped.
·	
If your test instrument is a three-lead instrument, connect the black and 
green leads.
·	
The one problem with this test is if you don’t remember to remove the 
line earth link, the RCD will keep tripping. But it will remind you that 
the link is still in place.
Figure 18.7

Chapter 19
Calculating the maximum Zs
There are three types of BS EN 60898 circuit breakers – Type B, C and D. 
The main purpose of circuit breakers and fuses is to provide protection 
for the circuit cables. This means that they have to break current flow before 
any damage can occur to the cable insulation.
Damage can be caused to cable insulation when the cable heats up due 
to too much current passing through the conductor. There are two rea­
sons why a cable could overheat. One is overcurrent, which occurs when 
the current passing through a conductor is greater than the rated current 
carrying capacity of the conductor. Overcurrent would occur when live 
conductors touch or a line conductor touches earth, resulting in a low 
resistance fault. This, of course, would result in a high current flowing in 
the circuit. 
The other is known as overload current and is found in a circuit that has 
been designed correctly but is overloaded, possibly by too many current-
using pieces of equipment being connected to a circuit or even a motor 
overloading or seizing.
Both of these conditions would have the effect of heating up a conductor, 
the difference being that overcurrent would heat the conductor up quickly 
and overload would heat the conductor gradually.
Circuit breakers and fuses have to be able deal with both of these condi­
tions. A fuse is just a strip of metal or a piece of wire that will either melt 
instantly on overcurrent or slowly on overload. All protective devices must 
be able to withstand an overload current for a short period of time; on over­
load a piece of wire will take a while to get hot enough to melt.
Circuit breakers are designed to cope with both of these conditions.
On overcurrent that produces a sudden rush of current will operate a 
solenoid and switch off the device within 0.1 of a second. 
Type B circuit breakers must operate within 0.1sec when a current 
of between three and five times the rated current of the device passes 
through it. A Type C circuit breaker must operate between five and ten 
times its rating and a Type D must operate between ten and 20 times its 
rating.

152  Calculating the maximum Zs
On overload the characteristics of circuit breakers must comply with the 
required British Standards, which are:
·	
Must not switch off within 1 hour when overloaded by 1.13 times its 
rating.
·	
Must switch off within 1 hour when overloaded by 1.45 times its rating.
·	
Must switch off within 2 minutes when overloaded by 2.55 times its 
rating.
To achieve this, a bi-metal strip within the device is used (Figure 19.1).
To calculate Zs for a circuit breaker is quite a simple task. Of course, it is 
always easier just to look up values on a chart but there are occasions when 
a chart is not available.
Figure 19.1

Calculating the maximum Zs  153
Step 1
Calculate the current required to operate the device.
As we have seen, a Type B will be five times its rating, Type C ten times 
and Type D 20 times.
Example: a 20A Type B circuit breaker must operate at a maximum of:
5 × its rating 
5 × 20 = 100 
This shows that the circuit breaker must operate instantly when a current of 
100A is passed through it.
If the circuit breaker was a 20A Type C, then it would require:
10 × its rating 
10 × 20 = 200
Step 2
Calculate the resistance that would allow the required current to flow. To 
carry out this calculation we require the value of the voltage that the circuit 
is operating at. For most installations this would be 230V. There is also a 
minimum voltage factor that must be applied; this is to take into account 
of voltage fluctuations which may occur in the supply system. The voltage 
factor is known as Cmin and is 0.95. This Cmin value has to be applied to the 
nominal supply voltage and the result divided by the current, which would 
cause automatic disconnection of the circuit breaker.
Example for a 20 A Type B:
230
0 95
100
2 19
v
Cmin
×
=
.
.
Ω
The maximum Zs value for a BS EN 60898 circuit breaker is 2.19Ω and this 
is the value that can be found in BS 7671:Amd 3.
This value is the one that should be used when carrying out a calculation 
for circuit conductor sizes, as it is the maximum value. However, when car­
rying out electrical testing this value becomes difficult to confirm without 
dismantling the circuit and measuring the R1 + R2 values.
We know that when conductors carry current they heat up. When they 
heat up they increase in temperature. When a copper conductor heats up it 
increases in resistance by 2% for every 5°C change in temperature. When 
we carry out an earth loop impedance test on a circuit we generally have 
no idea of the temperature of the conductors. This is because the conduc­
tors could be in containment with other circuits. The other circuits could 

154  Calculating the maximum Zs
be under load and hot. Some of this heat would be transferred to the circuit 
under test, which would, of course, increase the temperature of the conduc­
tors. The room temperature may also be high and this would also have an 
effect on the conductors under test.
If we were to carry out an earth fault loop impedance test on a circuit 
protected by a 20A Type B circuit breaker and the measured value was 2Ω, 
we could assume that the circuit was perfectly acceptable. Unfortunately, we 
may be wrong because we do not know the temperature of the conductors 
during the test.
To compensate for these temperatures we can use a method/calculation 
known as the rule of thumb. All that is required is for us to multiply the max­
imum Zs by a figure of 0.8 and compare the result to the measured value.
The measured value of Zs must be lower than the corrected value of Zs.
Example: 2.19 × 0.8 =1.75Ω.
Now if we compare the corrected value of 1.75Ω to the measured value of 
2Ω we can see that the corrected value is less than the measured value. This 
indicates that the circuit is unsatisfactory because the resistance will rise 
to a value of above 2.3Ω if the conductor were ever to reach its maximum 
operating temperature. 
Fuses
As described earlier, all circuit breakers when installed correctly will oper­
ate on overcurrent within 0.1sec, although the requirements of BS 7671 are 
that circuits on TN systems with a current rating of up to and including 32A 
need to operate within 0.4sec, and circuits above 32A must operate within 
5sec. For TT systems the disconnection times are 0.2sec for circuits up to 
and including 32A.
Because the overcurrent part of a circuit breaker is operated by a solenoid 
that is activated by a high current, the 0.1sec is simple to predict. Where 
fuses are involved the overcurrent has to melt the fuse element. This will 
take slightly longer and on occasion can take the full 0.4sec. Of course, this 
depends on the magnitude of the fault current.
There are, of course, exceptions. Distribution circuits (sub mains) can be 
permitted to have an extended disconnection time of 5sec for TN systems 
and 1sec for TT systems. Clearly, this will only apply to fuses, as all circuit 
breakers will operate within 0.1sec providing the fault current reaches the 
required values. Lower fault currents will result in the device operating time 
being extended to probably 10sec or more.
RCBOs
The difference between an RCBO and a circuit breaker is that an RCBO 
contains a residual current detection device; this detects an imbalance 
between the live conductors when a fault to earth occurs. The overload and 

Calculating the maximum Zs  155
short-circuit parts of an RCBO operate in exactly the same way as a circuit 
breaker, with the disconnection times being the same. It is the earth fault 
current part of the device that is different. The product standard for RCBOs 
and RCDs to BS EN 61008-1 and BS EN 61009-1 state that they must oper­
ate within a maximum of 300ms (0.3sec) at their rated trip current.
Compliance with BS 7671 requires that circuits up to and including 32A 
connected to a TT system must disconnect under fault conditions within 
200ms (0.2sec). If the fault is between live conductors, this will not present 
a problem as the solenoid part of the device will operate within 0.1sec. It is 
when the fault is an earth fault that problems may arise when an RCBO is 
installed in a TT system.
As previously explained, the fault current part of a circuit breaker requires 
a high inrush of current to operate it quickly. This is fine where the fault is 
between live conductors on TN and TT systems, as usually the short current 
is quite high due to the low resistance of the conductors. 
Problems arise when we are required to connect to TT systems due to the 
fact that the Zs values are normally quite high as we have to rely on earth 
electrodes. Most earth electrodes will provide quite high Ze values; these are 
usually overcome by the use of residual current devices. RCBOs are circuit 
breakers thar contain a residual current device. This, of course, means that 
they can be used to provide protection where Zs values exceed the permitted 
maximum Zs.
As we have seen, the requirements for TT systems are that a protective 
device must operate within 0.2sec under fault conditions and that the prod­
uct standard for RCDs states that they must operate within 0.3sec at the trip 
current rating of the RCD. This often causes confusion, particularly where 
RCBOs are used where the circuit has high Zs values. 
The product standard for RCDs and RCBOs states that, although they 
have to disconnect within 300ms at their rated trip current value, they also 
have to trip within 150ms at twice their current rating. When using these 
devices for earth fault protection on TT systems compliance with the dis­
connection times permitted in BS 7671 is achieved because it is accepted 
that any fault currents will be significantly higher than the residual operat­
ing current of the RCD or RCBO.

Chapter 20
Fire protection
With the increased use of RCDs in electrical installations, consideration 
must be given to the type of circuit being installed. We are aware that bur­
ied cables must meet certain requirements, which often requires the use of 
RCDs.
Clearly, the use of RCDs alongside fire alarm systems is not a good idea.
Approved document B along with other British Standards such as BS 
5839-1 and BS 5839-6 forbid the use of RCDs in fire alarm supplies, unless 
it cannot be avoided to comply with the requirements of BS 7671.
As we know, these British Standards do not stand alone and have to be 
complied with alongside all other British Standards; just as with the wiring 
regulations the installer cannot be selective, all parts of the standards need 
to be met. A list of the British Standards that may affect installations can be 
found in Appendix 1 of BS 7671 Requirements for Electrical Installations.
A TT installation would be a good example of this. Where the use of 
RCDs cannot be avoided, the device must be completely segregated from the 
rest of the installation to ensure that a fault in the general installation will 
not result in a loss of supply to the fire detection system.
Although nuisance tripping is pretty much a thing of the past these days, 
an RCD in the system could be seen as an unnecessary risk, which needs to 
be avoided.
The use of time delayed RCDs would not be a suitable solution where 
used as a main switch on a board containing RCBOs, as many RCBOs are 
only single pole. Although the device will trip on a N–E fault the fault will 
still remain and trip the time delayed device.
A better option would be just to use RCBOs for all of the circuits and 
a simple on/off main switch, or even the use of double insulation may be 
considered. 
Providing the circuit is under supervision and is only used to supply an 
all-insulated alarm panel, cables installed in an all-insulated containment 
system that is surface mounted would be a suitable solution. 
It should also be remembered that, because the fire alarm system cannot 
overload, overcurrent protection is not required and cables with a lower 

Fire protection  157
rating than the protective device can be installed if required. Short circuit 
and earth fault protection must, of course, remain in place.
In general, the use of RCDs alongside fire alarms or any fire detection 
system should be avoided wherever possible. As already mentioned, where 
TT systems are involved the two options are to use RCDs or preferably an 
all-insulated system.
Sometimes, however, the client will require the supply cable to the alarm 
supply to be buried within the building structure. As we know, all buried 
cables need some kind of additional protection. The use of RCDs would 
often be the simplest method for protecting most buried cables. 
Where the cable is for fire protection and the use of RCDs needs to be 
avoided, consideration should be given to wiring the alarm supply circuit in 
FP200 gold or flexi shield cable, as this is by far simpler to use for this sort 
of job than, say, steel wire armoured cable or mineral insulated cable.
Fire protection in dwellings
Approved document B: Fire safety, Volume 1 sets out the requirements for 
fire protection in dwellings.
A dwelling is a residential unit that is occupied by a single person, peo­
ple who are living together as a family, or a residential unit occupied by 
not more than six people living together in a single household. This also 
includes a residential building where care is provided for up to six people.
Flats or buildings containing flats are not classed as dwelling houses.
As a minimum, dwelling houses with a floor area of up to 200m2 per 
storey should be provided with a fire detection system to at least Grade D. 
This means that each alarm (smoke or heat) must be mains powered with 
an integral backup in case of mains failure. Where there is more than one 
alarm, they must be interconnected and connected to the same circuit.
In a typical installation in a house where the floor area does not exceed 
200m2 on any storey and the kitchen is separated from the rest of the house 
by a door/s, there must be one smoke alarm on each hall or landing and one 
in the master bedroom.
Where the kitchen is not separated from the rest of the house there must 
be a heat or smoke alarm in the kitchen and a smoke alarm in each hall or 
landing. 
For both scenarios the hall or landings would be classed as circulation 
spaces. The smoke alarms should be sited within 7.5m of every room and 
a minimum of 300mm from any luminaire. In some cases, more than one 
alarm may be required in a single circulation space.
The electrical supply can be a dedicated supply, in which case it is a good 
idea to clearly label the circuit. However, a better source for the mains sup­
ply would be another circuit, such as a lighting circuit, which is regularly 
used. This will, of course, provide a good indicator of any power failure.

158  Fire protection
Larger houses with a floor area exceeding 200m2 have to be fitted with a 
fire detection and alarm system to a minimum of Grade B.
Bungalows with a floor area exceeding 200m2 can have a Grade D 
installation.
A Grade B system is a fire detection and fire alarm system that incorpo­
rates fire detectors and alarm sounders. Smoke and heat alarms would not 
fall into this category.
The mains supply must be a dedicated circuit that is used only for the fire 
detection system. It must also have a standby system that will maintain the 
system for a minimum of 72 hours. After 72 hours there must be enough 
energy left to supply the alarm load for a minimum of 15 minutes.
The mains supply must be clearly labelled ‘FIRE ALARM: DO NOT 
SWITCH OFF’ and the wiring system for the alarm must be fire resisting. 
This can be achieved by using fire-resisting cables or a fire-resisting contain­
ment or support system.
When using a Grade A system it is a requirement that all cables supplying 
a fire alarm system are segregated from other parts of the electrical installa­
tion. This can be achieved by using segregated trunking (Figure 20.1) with 
sheathed multi-core cables, or by installing sheathed multi-core cables that 
are physically separated from other parts of the installation.
Apart from grades of systems, there are also categories of system. Gener­
ally, these are made up of two letters and a number. 
The letters indicate the following:
·	
L is protection of life.
·	
P is for protection of property.
·	
D is for dwelling.
Figure 20.1

Fire protection  159
Escape routes
Fire escapes must be identified. An escape route can be any route from any 
building or room, and care must be taken when installing containment sys­
tems and cables to ensure that in the event of a fire they do not collapse and 
block the route. 
Consideration must be given to the type of system; a metallic system 
would simply require the fixings to be suitable and not be affected by the 
high temperatures that will be present in a fire.
Where plastic containment systems are used or cables are fixed directly to 
the surface, it is important that the cables are secured to prevent them from 
collapsing. 
The method used to secure cables installed in trunking is to fix a purpose-
made clip (Figure 20.2) inside the trunking, which is secured through the 
Category
Description
LD
The fire detection system intended for the protection of life in dwellings. LD 
is used to indicate dwellings, whereas L is for protection of life in any building
LD1
This system has detectors in all circulation spaces that form escape routes, and 
in all rooms where a fire may start. This excludes bath/shower rooms and WCs
LD2
This system has detectors in all circulation spaces that form escape routes, 
and in all rooms/areas that have a high fire risk. These rooms would be 
kitchens, living rooms, etc.
LD3
This system has detectors in all circulation spaces that form escape routes
PD
This would be for protection of property. PD indicates dwellings, and where 
the letter P is used it is intended for protection of all types of property
PD1
Detectors fitted in all rooms where a fire may start, excluding bath/shower 
rooms and WCs
PD2
Detectors fitted in rooms that are deemed to have a higher risk of fire
Figure 20.2

160  Fire protection
trunking using a screw. Wherever possible, it is preferable to use a masonry 
screw that is fixed directly into the brick or concrete (Figure 20.3). Due to 
the very high temperatures that would be present in a fire, it is possible that 
a plastic plug holding the screw may soften and eventually allow the screw 
to pull out.
The major problem with cables and containment systems collapsing 
is that the situation would put any firefighters at risk, not particularly when 
they enter the building but when they try to get out of the building or room. 
There have been fatalities and serious injuries caused by the cables getting 
tangled in the firefighters’ breathing apparatus. 
These requirements have a major influence on the way that we use plastic 
containment systems. Many installations, particularly rewires carried out in 
flats, require that the circuits are installed in surface trunking. 
As any exit from a room may be classed as an escape route, any parts of 
the installation that may collapse in a fire must be secured. This, of course, 
means that the cables must be secured correctly. These rules also apply to 
data cables, phone cables and alarm systems.
Figure 20.3

Index
Adiabatic equation 50
Airing cupboard 37
Ambient temperature 5, 12 
Atmospheres Regulation 2002 12
Bathroom 36 
Bonding grid 11
British Standard 2
BS 3036 25
BS 1361 25
BS 88 25
BS 951 34
BS 7671 2, 10
BS light fitting symbol 14
BS EN 60898 26
Buried cables 6
Bus stops 1
Cable calculation 42
Capacitor 99
Cartridge fuse 25
Characteristics of supply 4
Circulating pump 97 
Circuit breaker 28, 66, 152
Circuit protective conductors 24, 30
Clamp meter 119
Conduit 16
Contents 5
Construction of buildings 12
Consumers unit 66
Combustible materials 13
CPC 6
Cylinder thermostats 94
Delta 139
Details of departures 2
Design considerations 1
Disconnector 65
Distribution board 66
Diverter valve 107
Diversity 38
Drain off 121
Duty holder 1
Earth Electrode 23
Earthing 22, 79
Earth Fault loop impedance 46
Earthing arrangements 17
Electric shock 11 
Electric shower 79
Electrical fault finding 109
Electricity at work regulations 1989 1, 58
Electromagnetic influence 10 
Emergency switching 70
Emergency stop 70 
Escape routes 157
Environment 5
Evacuation 12 
Expansion 15
Expansion coupler 15
External influence 5
Explosion 12
Exposed conductive parts 35 
Extraneous conductive parts 34
Extended 2 way 86
Fault finding central heating 92
Fire propagation 12 
Fire protection 156
Firefighters switch 71 
Fire risk 12, 156
Flexible conduit 8
Flexishield cable 6
Flora and fauna 8
Foreign bodies 5
FP 200 Gold 6
Functional switching 67
Fused connection units 56

162  Index
Gate valve 122
Gas meter 35
Handicapped 11
Health and safety at work act 1, 2
Impact and vibration 6
Immersion heater 116
Immersion heater spanner 126
Installation methods 49
Insulation resistance 114
Intermediate switching 85, 89 
IP codes 9
Isolation 68
Isolation and switching 65
Lamps 13
Light fitting symbols 14
Load switch 65
Main protective bonding 34 
Mechanical maintenance 69
Mechanical protection 6
Metal capping 6
Meter tails 22, 79 
Mice 9
Mid position valve 107
Minor works certificate 3
Motorised valve 102 
Motors 66, 136
Nature of demand 4
Non statutory regulations 1
Origin of supply 65
Part P 2
PEN conductor 20
Performance textiles association 12
Periodic inspection volt drop 72
Plastic conduit 8
Polarisation test 141
Pre-fabricated buildings 13
Programmable room stat 94
Protective bonding 31
Protective equipotential bonding 29, 79
PVC 6
R1 + R2 30
Radial socket outlets 55
Rating factors 45
RCBO tripping 133
RCD 6, 24, 142
RCD on lighting circuit 135
RCD tripping 113, 130
Rewirable fuse 25
Replacing an immersion heater 121
Ring final circuit 51, 109
Room thermostat 92
Safe isolation 58
Single phase isolation 60
Socket outlet circuits 51 
Spurs 53
Supplementary bonding 35
Suppliers earth electrode 19
Supply systems 17
Supply fuse 79
Supply voltage tolerance 4 
Star 139
Statutory regulations 1
Steel conduit 8
Steel wire armoured cable 6 
Stored materials 12 
Stop cock 123, 128
Structural movement 15 
Switch disconnector 65
Synchronous motor 1.4 102
Telephone booths 11 
Three phase isolation 63
Three plate lighting 115
Three port valve 102 
TN-C-S 12, 20, 22, 30, 35
TN-S 12, 19, 30, 35
Town maps 11
Trunking 16
TT 12, 17, 23, 30, 32, 35
Two way switching 85
Two port valve 102
Utilisation 11
Unvented cylinder 95, 127
Volt drop 44
Volt drop table 75
Water and corrosion 5
Water supply 80
Ze 24, 30, 46
Zs 31, 151

