153
Management in the Active Classroom: Part 2 | EL Education
World Café
Purpose 
To discuss a topic or various topics, rotating the leadership role and mixing groups of students. This protocol is an 
extensive exercise in listening and speaking skills.
Materials
•	 Chart/poster paper
•	 Marker for the leader/recorder
Procedure
1.	
Form three groups of three or four and sit together at a table. 
2.	
Each group should select a “leader.” The leader’s role is to record the major points of the conversation that takes 
place at the table and to then summarize the conversation using the recorded notes.
3.	
The group discusses the topic at hand until time is called. Groups can be discussing the same topic or related 
topics.
4.	
The leader stays put; the rest of the group rotates to the next table.
5.	
The leader (the one who didn’t move) presents a summary of the conversation recorded from the former group 
to the new group.
6.	
Each table selects a new leader.
7.	
Again, the new leader’s role is to record the major points of the conversation that takes place at the table and to 
then summarize the conversation using the recorded notes.
8.	
The group discusses the topic at hand until time is called.
9.	
Repeat the process, ideally until all students have had a chance to lead. 
10.	 After the final round, the last group of leaders presents to the whole group rather than reporting out to a “next 
rotation.”
Variations
•	 Mix the Room: For large groups, begin with everyone in a circle. Number off around the circle, from one to 
five. The teacher provides a prompt, and at the teacher’s signal, each group of five clusters into a small circle 
to discuss a topic for a designated amount of time. The teacher then signals for the ones to advance to the next 
cluster. Ones then provide a summary of the last group’s discussion before the newly formed group discusses a 
second prompt. Each time a new prompt is given, the teacher asks a different number to move forward to the 
next cluster, thus “mixing the room” for each new prompt.
References
Adapted from: www.theworldcafe.com
Protocols and Strategies

