See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/16315837
EMG and EEG biofeedback training in the treatment of a
10-year-old hyperactive boy with a developmental
reading disorder
Article  in  Biofeedback and Self-Regulation · April 1983
DOI: 10.1007/BF01000534 · Source: PubMed
CITATIONS
72
READS
261
2 authors, including:
Michael A. Tansey
Emtee Associates, LLC
14 PUBLICATIONS   432 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Michael A. Tansey on 20 November 2017.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Biofeedback and Self-Regulation, Vol. 8, No. 1, 1983 
EMG and EEG Biofeedback Training 
in the Treatment of a 10-Year-Old 
Hyperactive Boy with a Developmental 
Reading Disorder 
Michael A. Tansey 1 
Union, New Jersey 
Richard L. Bruner 
Hightstown, New Jersey 
The serial application of electromyographic (EMG) and sensorimotor 
(SMR) biofeedback training was attempted with a lO-year-old boy 
presenting a triad of symptoms: an attention deficit disorder with 
hyperactivity, developmental reading disorder, and ocular instability. 
Symptom elimination was achieved, for all three aspects of the triad, 
following the procedure o f first conditioning a decrease in EMG-monitored 
muscle tension and then conditioning increases in the amplitude of 
sensorimotor rhythm over the Rolandic cortex. The learned reduction of 
monitored EMG levels was accompanied by a reduction in the child's 
motoric activity level to below that which had been achieved by past • 
administration of Ritalin. In addition, the attention deficit disorder with 
hyperactivity was no longer diagnosable following the EMG biofeedback 
training. The learned increase in the amplitude of monitored SMR was 
accompanied by remediation of the developmental reading disorder and the 
ocular instability. These results remained unchanged, as ascertained by 
follow-ups conducted over a 24-month period subsequent to the 
termination of biofeedback training. 
~Address all correspondence to Dr. Michael A. Tansey, 2810 Morris Avenue, Union, New 
Jersey 07083. 
25 
0363-3586/83/0300-0025503,00/0 © 1983 Plenum Publishing Corporalion 

26 
Tansey and Brunet 
The understanding of hyperactivity and the clinical approaches utilized in 
treating it have undergone an evolution-from a physiochemical to a 
cerebral-cognitive viewpoint-which, in turn, is reflected in the progression 
of the descriptive diagnoses assigned to this condition. These descriptive 
diagnoses, which reflect changing clinical approaches, have identified 
hyperactivity as minimal brain damage, minimal brain dysfunction, 
minimal cerebral dysfunction, a hyperkinetic reaction of childhood, a 
hyperkinetic syndrome, a hyperkinetic child syndrome, and, currently, an 
attention deficit disorder with hyperactivity (American 
Psychiatric 
Association, 1980). The present descriptive diagnosis recognizes the 
attentional difficulties that are the most persistent of symptoms for the 
hyperactive child. Other, overt, behavioral symptomology associated with 
this diagnosis may include motoric overactivity, impulsivity, distractibility, 
short attention 
span, low frustration tolerance, emotionality, and 
aggressive behavior. 
Historically, there have been two different theoretical traditions 
concerned with the treatment of the hyperactive child: medical and 
physiological. In the medical model, the predominant treatment for the 
hyperactive child was to place him on stimulant drug therapy. Stimulant 
drug therapy, usually relying upon the administration of Ritalin (methyl- 
phenidate), often had a substantive effect on motor function, while 
being relatively ineffective in treating attentional deficits, information 
processing, low frustration tolerance, high distractibility, and emotional 
lability. In addition, it has been noted that stimulant drug therapy benefits 
only ,45 to 60°70 of those hyperactive children so treated (Safer & Allen, 
1976; Hampstead, 1979). 
An alternative orientation, developed by psychologists, has been the 
utilization of behavior modification and operant conditioning techniques, 
as a source of learned self-control for the hyperactive individual. These 
techniques have been broadly applied when treating undesirable behaviors, 
especially when coupled with 
attentional 
training 
and 
relaxation 
procedures. While behaviors such as sitting (Pihl, 1967; Twardoz & Sajiraj, 
1972; Braud & Holiday, 1974), being more attentive to immediate tasks, 
and the completion of assigned work (Allen, Henkel, Harris, Baer, & 
Reynolds, 1967; Toffler, 1972; Pigeon & Enger, 1972) have yielded to 
operant conditioning procedures, low frustration tolerance, impulsivity, 
distractibility, 
information 
processing, 
and emotional lability have 
continued to be resistant to behavior modification techniques. More 
recently, psychologists have been utilizing biofeedback training as a potent 
source of learned self-control for the hyperactive child. Biofeedback 
training has been found to have significant impact on hyperactivity and its 
behavioral concomitants through self-regulation of both attentional and 

EMG and EEG Biofeedback Training of a Hyperactive Child 
27 
physiologic process. This utilization of biofeedback training is very much in 
keeping with the current understanding of hyperactivity and is a continuation 
of the psychological orientation toward its treatment. 
Biofeedback training has been applied to the treatment of 
hyperactivity along two major lines: the reduction of muscle tension levels 
through electromyographic (EMG) feedback, and the operant conditioning 
of brain-wave activity through electroencephalographic (EEG) feedback. 
Learned reduction of muscle tension levels, monitored over the central 
forehead, has been reported to have been efficacious in the treatment of 
hyperactivity (Braud, Lupin, & Braud, 1974, 1975; Braud, 1978; 
Hampstead, 1979). Electroencephalographically monitored cerebral activity 
has been reported to be amenable to operant conditioning. In addition, it 
has been shown that such conditioning is associated with clear reductions in 
hyperkinetic behavior (Lubar & Shouse, 1976; Shouse & Lubar, 1979). With 
respect to EEG biofeedback training, conditioned increases in the 
sensorimotor rhythm (SMR), monitored as a 12-Hz to 14-Hz brain wave 
over the Rolandic cortex, resulted in clear reductions in hyperkinetic 
behavior, when hyperactivity rather than distractibility was the principal 
symptom. While both EMG and SMR biofeedback training have been 
reported to be treatment alternatives to stimulant drug therapy, neither 
procedure has been reported to have been used in conjunction with the 
other in the treatment of hyperactivity. 
In this report, the authors describe an attempt to differentiate the 
treatment effects of EMG and SMR biofeedback training. The results are 
presented in the context of a single-case study wherein a 10-year-old 
hyperactive boy is treated with a serial application of EMG and SMR 
biofeedback training. 
BACKGROUND AND HISTORY 
John/ a 10-year-old Caucasian male, was brought for biofeedback 
training by his mother. Background information was obtained from the 
mother and school records. In bringing her son, the mother stated: "My son 
is hyperactive and I would like you to teach him to calm down and do better • 
in school." John's mother scheduled his intake evaluation subsequent to her 
being informed that John would be retained in the fourth grade the 
following year. 
ZThe child's name has been changed in order to preserve confidentiality. 

28 
Tansey and Bruner 
In grade 2, at the age of 7½ years, John was classified by the school's 
child study team as perceptually impaired. That evaluation, and subsequent 
classification, was prompted by the findings that John reversed letter and 
numbers from left to right, horizontally as well as vertically, was possessed 
of above-average intellectual potential, exhibited a high degree of anxiety, 
engaged in an unusual amount of physical activity within the class- 
room, and had maintained a history of behavioral and academic difficulties 
since entering first grade. As of his 3rd month in second grade, John was 
placed in a class for the perceptually impaired. After 2 months in the special 
education setting, he was diagnosed as hyperactive. Ritalin was prescribed 
for the hyperactivity and was continued throughout John's subsequent 
second-, third-, and fourth-grade experiences in classes for the perceptually 
impaired. 
Due 
to 
ongoing 
hyperactive 
behavior 
and 
academic 
underachievement, John was scheduled to repeat the fourth grade in a class 
for the perceptually impaired. 
EXAMINATION AND FINDINGS 
A week previous to John's intake session, his pediatrician had taken 
him off the Ritalin to assess the efficacy of biofeedback training. The 
therapist 3 found John to exhibit motoric overactivity, extreme impulsivity, 
a short attention span, low frustration tolerance, high distractibility, and a 
rigid approach to the handling of his daily routine. In addition, his reading 
comprehension and word study skills (as measured by his school's child 
study team) were found to be lagging more than 1 year behind expected 
levels. John also evidenced difficulties with saccadic fixation and ocular 
pursuit movements. Specifically, he was unable to move his eyes smoothly 
along a horizontal axis with his head in a stationary position. In addition, 
he could not move his head from side to side while keeping his eyes fixated 
on an object held before him. For John, reading entailed his moving his 
head from side to side in order to track the words across a line of print. This 
visual approach style was evidenced by John's skipping words, not noticing 
his missing the commas and periods, and a consistent inability to retain an 
understanding of what he had just "read." 
On intake, John's baseline EMG was 60 microvolts (peak to peak). 
The reading was taken from the central forehead area. GSR readings were 
an identical 110 K on the second and third fingers of each hand. Thermal 
readings for both hands were in the low 90s. These measurements plus 
3Michael A. Tansey, Ph.D., was the therapist. 

EMG and EEG Biofeedback Training of a Hyperactive Child 
29 
previously obtained data were used to establish the provisional diagnoses of 
(1) attention deficit disorder with hyperactivity, 314.01; DSM III (American 
Psychiatric Association, 1980); (2) developmental reading disorder, 315.00, 
DSM III (American Psychiatric Association, 1980); and (3) ocular instability 
characterized 
by inadequate saccadic 
fixation and 
ocular 
pursuit 
movements. 
John was accepted for biofeedback training for his attention deficit 
disorder with hyperactivity. It was recommended that he be examined by an 
opthalmologist for his ocular instability. 
METHOD 
Apparatus and Procedure 
For the first three 40-minute once-weekly biofeedback training 
sessions, a Nova Systems 4 (Model A3) electromyometer was utilized in 
assisting John to reduce muscle tension levels, as monitored over the central 
forehead area. This unit is able to provide visual feedback in the form of a 
meter needle deflection. The position of the pointer of the peak-to-peak 
microvolt meter provides one mode of visual feedback. A higher EMG level 
produced a meter pointer movement to the right; a lower EMG level 
produced a meter pointer movement to the left. Additional visual feedback 
was provided by a Nova Systems Light Box. In the light box's light bar 
mode (used exclusively for this case), 10 LEDs turn on in sequence, forming 
a bar of red lights. A lower EMG causes the lighted LEDs to go out sequen- 
tially from right to left. The higher EMG level causes increasing numbers of 
LEDs to light up sequentially from left to right. 
Procedure 
Instructions to the child before the EMG training were as follows: 
"You're going to let the needle come down and the lights go out; as you do, 
let yourself become hollow and heavy." Immediately after the electrodes 
were attached, the child was given a visual image to facilitate the learning 
process. He was told: "It will be easier to let go and let the needle come 
down, and the lights go out, if you just let yourself be a hollow, heavy rock; 
quiet, hollow, and heavy-let go and let the lights go out and the needle go 
down." The child was trained with eyes open for 40 minutes each session. 
4Nova Systems, 97 North Chatsworth Avenue, Larchmont, New York 10538. 

30 
Tansey and Bruner 
Intermittent positive verbal reinforcement (verbal praise for meter and LED 
change) was provided every few minutes. Every 10 minutes, the visual 
imagery-laden instructions were repeated. In monitoring the EMG, three 
saline electrodes were used. The active electrode was placed so that its 6.5 
cm x 1.3 cm contact surface lay vertically along the center of the forehead. 
The reference and ground electrodes were placed on opposite ears via 
earclips. 
Immediately following John's three EMG training sessions, EEG 
biofeedback training of the sensorimotor rhythm (SMR) commenced. For 
the 20 once-weekly 40-minute SMR training sessions, a Nova Systems 
(Model A3) electroencephalograph was used to assist John in emitting the 
14 _+ .7-Hz brain wave over the Rolandic cortex. Specifically, the 3 dB 
points for the EEG's 14-Hz band-pass filter were at 13.3 Hz and 14.7 Hz. In 
operation, with an 8-microvolt threshold setting (peak-to-peak), the filtered 
14-Hz signal is protected from contamination by alpha (down 27 dB at 10 
Hz) and by low-amplitude scalp EMG (down 27 dB at 20 Hz) up through 
their attaining amplitude levels of approximately 160 microvolts (peak to 
peak). 
In monitoring SMR, as in monitoring the EMG, three saline electrodes 
were used (impedance level in saline of 1 Kohm). Electrode contact with the 
skin/scalp surface was accepted as adequate upon obtaining impedance 
readings of less than 20 Kohms. The active electrode was placed so that its 
6.5 cm × 1.3 cm contact surface lay lengthwise along the midline of the top 
of the skull (overlying the cerebral longitudinal fissure), centering about 2.6 
cm behind Cz. In this position, the length of the active electrode centers 
over the Rolandic cortex (pre- and postcentral gyri) of both the right and 
left hemispheres. The reference and ground electrodes were placed on 
opposite ears via earclips (see Figure 1). 
The monitored SMR was then transmitted to the electroencephalo- 
graph for signal processing and subsequent auditory feedback. The unit 
provided both amplitude and frequency-modulated audio feedback. The 
feedback tone is modulated so that the larger the amplitude of the SMR 
signal, the louder the tone. In addition, the repetition rate of the tone (the 
number of beats per second) accords with the rate of occurrence of the 
monitored brain wave. An EEG frequency-modulated Sonalert was 
attached to the electroencephalograph to transform the usual muted clicks of 
the unit's auditory tone into more pleasant beeps. The phase shift capability 
of the unit is set for 225 °. This seems to have a brain-wave driving effect. 
This phase shift setting seems to adjust the audio feedback signals so that 
they become synchronous with the brain waves monitored. The authors 
have seen much more rapid acquisition of EEG biofeedback training when 
this phase shift setting is used. 

EMG and EEG Biofeedback Training of a Hyperactive Child 
31 
Earclip 
_~ Reference ~lectrode 
,\ 
\ i Difforontia 
 I I oo . 
[ 
\ \l . Preamp.. 
1 ] Band-Reject 
1 
] /I Reoeetz°n 
J I per Octave 
\ 
//I 
~o ~ 
II 
Fig. 1. Diagram and flow chart depicting EEG electrode placement and sub- 
sequent signal processing. 
Instructions to the child during SMR training were as follows: "Just let 
yourself be a hollow, heavy rock; quiet, hollow, and heavy-let go and let 
the beeps come out." He was trained with his eyes closed for a 40-minute 
period each session. Sessions were scheduled once weekly. Intermittent 
positive reinforcement (verbal praise for "beep" production) was provided 
every few minutes. Every 10 minutes, the visual imagery-laden instructions 
were repeated. 
The child's mother was requested to provide a weekly record of her 
son's overall behavior, including academic performance, and to report her 
findings at the beginning of each session (both EMG and SMR). In 
addition, at the end of each session, the child was instructed to practice 
being a hollow, heavy rock at home at least once a day. A contract was 
made with the child to provide a tangible reward, in the form of a matchbox 

32 
Tansey and Bruner 
car, at the end of each EMG and SMR training session, contingent upon 
"letting a lot of beeps come out," or "letting that needle and those lights go 
down even more." 
RESULTS 
This 10-year-old boy showed specific and positive responses to both 
EMG and SMR biofeedback training. The initial three EMG training 
sessions enabled John to reduce his central forehead tension levels from a 
baseline of 60 (peak-to-peak) microvolts to 5 microvolts (see Table I). 
During these 3 weeks, John's motoric activity level, as observed by his 
mother and the therapist, was seen to become increasingly under control. 
He was no longer "hyperactive." His behavior was marked by the absence of 
overactivity, distractibility, and poor self-control. By the end of the week, 
following his third EMG training session, the behavioral manifestations of 
hyperactivity were no longer in evidence. He was noted to be, in all 
situations, more calm and under control than when he had been prescribed 
Ritalin. The ocular instability, as well as the developmental reading disorder 
with information-processing deficits (inability to understand nor retain 
visually derived information as transmitted by a line of print), was still 
unchanged. 
As a result of John's 20 SMR biofeedback training sessions, he 
acquired the ability to produce SMR in greater frequency and amplitude 
(see Table II). Concurrent with this change in monitored SMR, specific 
Table I. EMG (Central Forehead Placement) 
Muscle Tension Levels a for the First Three 
Training Sessions 
Training sessions 
Duration of training b 
1 
2 
3 
Baseline 
60 
50 
5 
5 
60 
25 
5 
10 
60 
20 
5 
15 
60 
5 
6 
20 
45 
5 
5 
25 
45 
6 
5 
30 
20 
5 
5 
35 
45 
4 
5 
40 
10 
4 
4 
aMuscle tension levels in peak-to-peak micro- 
volts. 
bNumbers in the column indicate minutes of 
training. 

EMG and EEG Biofeedback Training of a Hyperactive Child 
33 
Table II. Acquisition of Sensorimotor Rhythm 
Acquisition of 
Training session 
sensorimotor rhythm a 
Baseline 
10 
1 
10 
2 
10 
3 
10 
4 
10 
5 
10 
6 
12 
7 
12 
8 
12 
9 
16 
10 
16 
11 
16 
12 
16 
13 
16 
14 
24 
15 
24 
16 
24 
17 
24 
18 
24 
19 
24 
20 
24 
aSensorimotor rhythm measured in peak-to- 
peak microvolts. 
remediation was noted in his remaining symptomology. His ability to read 
and comprehend what it was that he had just read improved significantly. 
Prior to his SMR training, John could not read a line of print smoothly and 
be aware of skipping some words, commas, and periods. In addition, at 
that time he was unable to accurately recall the line he had just read. As of 
his fourth SMR training session, he tracked smoothly, skipped no words, 
stopped at all the commas and periods, and was able to relate, in his own 
words, what he had just read. 
At intake, a recommendation was made for John to be evaluated and, 
if possible, treated by an ophthalmologist for his ocular instability. This 
recommendation was not acted upon. The therapist was not notified of this 
lack of follow-through on the ocular examination and subsequent treatment 
until John's 18th SMR training session. When John showed a significant 
improvement in his reading ability, as of the 4th SMR training session, it 
was assumed to be more a function of his recommended ocular therapy than 
of the SMR training. As such, a reexamination of his ocular and reading 
functioning was not performed at that time. When, after 14 SMR training 
sessions, it was ascertained that no ocular therapy was initiated, a 
reexamination of John's ocular and reading functioning was performed. He 

34 
Tansey and Brunet 
was found to be able to track smoothly along a horizontal axis while 
keeping his head stationary. He was also now able to move his head from 
side to side while keeping his eyes fixated upon an object in front of him. 
His reading style was now characterized by eye rather than head movement, 
in order to track along a horizontal line of print. 
The ongoing and positive transitions-from hyperactive to self- 
controlled, from reading-disabled with ocular anomalies to reading-able 
without ocular anomalies-were accompanied by decreases in EMG and 
increases in amplitude of SMR, respectively. Prior to biofeedback training, 
John was scheduled to be retained in a fourth-grade class for the 
perceptually impaired, because of insufficient academic progress. His first 
biofeedback training session coincided with the end of the school year, 
wherein he was recommended for retention. As of John's eighth SMR 
training session, he was enrolled in a normal fourth-grade class. The 
termination of John's biofeedback training coincided with the conclusion of 
the first academic quarter within his normal class setting. He had achieved 
better than passing grades in all academic areas (see Table III). 
Three months following the cessation of John's biofeedback training, 
we received this note from his mother: "Thought you would be interested in 
[John's] latest report card. Spelling A. Reading B. Not bad for someone 
who couldn't read or spell last year." Throughout the academic year, John 
maintained and improved his academic performance. Follow-ups, 
conducted during a period of 24 months posttermination, revealed that 
John 
was 
continuing 
to 
maintain 
the 
attentional, 
behavioral, 
neuromuscular, information-processing, and academic progress that 
accompanied his biofeedback training. 
Table III. Academic Progress in a Regular Fourth-Grade Class Placement 
Academic quarter 
Schoolsubject 
1" 
2 b 
3 
4 
Reading 
C 
B 
B 
B 
Spelling 
B 
A 
B 
A 
Mathematics 
A 
A 
A 
B 
Language 
B 
B 
B 
B 
Science 
C 
B 
B 
C 
Social studies 
C 
C 
A 
B 
Art 
B 
B 
A 
A 
Music 
A 
C 
B 
B 
Physical education 
A 
A 
A 
A 
Handwriting 
C 
C 
C 
C 
Total number of A's 
3 
3 
4 
3 
Total number of B's 
3 
4 
5 
5 
Total number of C's 
4 
3 
1 
2 
~Biofeedback training was initiated prior to the start of the first academic quarter. 
1'Biofeedback training had terminated prior to the beginning of the second academic 
quarter. 

EMG and EEG Biofeedback Training of a Hyperactive Child 
35 
DISCUSSION 
The results clearly show differential effects for EMG and SMR 
biofeedback training, as utilized in this case study. The recipient of the 
serial application of EMG and SMR biofeedback training presented a triad 
of symptoms: attention deficit disorder with hyperactivity, developmental 
reading disorder, and ocular instability. While the initial treatment 
objective was to treat the hyperactivity, symptom elimination was 
successfully achieved for all three aspects of the triad, following the 
procedure of first lowering EMG-monitored muscle tension and then 
conditioning increases in the frequency and amplitude of SMR as 
monitored over the Rolandic cortex. 
Operant conditioning of lower EMG levels was adopted as the initial 
treatment modality due to the child's very high baseline EMG. The EMG 
biofeedback training resulted in significant reductions of monitored EMG 
levels. Such lowering of EMG levels, over the central forehead area, was 
directly followed by a reduction in motoric activity levels to below that 
which had been achieved by past administration of Ritalin. In addition, the 
remaining behavioral manifestations of his attention deficit disorder with 
hyperactivity were noted by their absence. These results were maintained 
throughout subsequent SMR biofeedback training, as well as on follow-ups 
conducted during a period of 24 months following his termination from 
biofeedback training. 
In reporting our findings with respect to the responsivity of the child, 
his developmental reading disorder, and his ocular instability to SMR 
biofeedback training, we are mindful of treating each as a separate clinical 
entity. It is also important to differentiate between the SMR biofeedback 
training received and the EMG biofeedback training preceding it. While 
both SMR and EMG biofeedback training have been mentioned as 
treatments for hyperactivity, they differ in the process monitored and 
subsequently conditioned, EMG having as its referent the conditioning of 
the amounts of electrical discharge in muscle fibers, while SMR has as its 
referent the conditioning of neural discharge over the Rolandic cortex. 
Noting that SMR has been monitored over the Rolandic cortex of the right 
hemisphere (Kaplan, 1975) and of the left hemisphere (Finley, Smith, & 
Etherton, 1975; Kuhlman & Allison, 1977; Sterman, 1973), and from both 
right and left hemispheres (Lubar & Shouse, 1976; Shouse & Lubar, 1979), 
the authors utilized the previously detailed electrode placement to maximize 
the monitoring and subsequent conditioning of SMR via a single-channel 
electroencephalograph. 
While there is little argument as to the discomfort and fatigue that 
ocular anomalies lend to a reading task, there is a growing and significant 
literature concluding that reading disorders stem from deficits in 

36 
Tansey and Bruner 
information processing, in essence a symbolic learning disorder rooted 
in cerebral dysfunction, rather than being caused by oculomotor 
dysfunction. At very best, the literature shows oculomotor anomalies to be 
a concurrent dysfunction whose manifestation is determined by deficits of 
volitional control and internal coordination of the eye muscles. 
Developmental reading disorders are then viewed in terms of the efficacy of 
cerebral mechanisms,that store visually derived information and its selective 
retrieval (Benton, 1975; Critchley, 1970; Fox, Orr, & Rourke, 1975; 
Lawson, 1968). In this context, we may entertain the possibility that the 
SMR training procedure, which was accompanied by both increased 
amplitude of SMR and the remediation of the developmental reading 
disorder, may have had some effect on the efficacy of the cerebral 
processing mechanisms involved with reading tasks. In addition, we may 
also entertain the possibility that the SMR training procedure, which was 
concurrent with.the cessation of this child's ocular anomalies, may have had 
some effect on the volitational control and coordination of the muscles 
involved in such ocular function. 
Even though remediation of the presenting symptoms was clearly 
linked with a learned reduction of EMG and a learned increase in amplitude 
of SMR, the generalizability of our findings is limited by their being based 
on a single-case study. Further research into the effects of the procedures 
described in this study needs tO be performed. One avenue of additional 
investigation may be to assess whether the serial ordering of the EMG and 
SMR biofeedback training had a substantial effect on the results obtained. 
It is our hope that this single-case study may serve as a useful pilot for 
studies with larger numbers of subjects and thereby further our knowledge 
of the utility of biofeedback training. 
Alien, E. K., Henkel, L. B., Harris, F. R., Baer, D. M., & Reynolds, N. J. Control of 
hyperactivity by social reinforcement of attending behavior. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 1967, 58, 231-237. 
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders 
(3rd ed.), DSM-IIL Washington, D.C.: Author, 1980. 
Benton, A. L. Developmental dyslexia: Neurological aspects. In W. J. Friedlander (Ed.), 
Advances in neurology (Vol. 7). New York: Raven Press, 1975. 
Braud, L. W. The effects of EMG biofeedback and progressive relaxation upon hyperactivity 
and its behavioral concomitants. Biofeedback and Self-Regulation, 1978, 3, 69-89. 
Braud, L. W., & Holiday, E. E. The effects of reinforcement on sitting behavior in a 
hyperactive girl. Unpublished manuscript, 1974. 
Braud, L. W., Lupin, M. N., & Braud, W. G. The use of EMG (electromyographic) 
biofeedback in the control of hyperactivity. Paper presented at the l lth Annual 
International Convention for Learning Disabilities, Houston, February 1974. 

EMG and EEG Biofeedback Training of a Hyperactive Child 
37 
Bradu, L. W., Lupin, M. N., & Braud, W. G. The use of EMG (electromyographic) 
biofeedback in the control of hyperactivity. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 1975, 
8(7), 21-26. 
Critchley, M. The dyslexic child. Springfield, Illinois: Charles C Thomas, 1970. 
Findley, W. W., Smith, H. A., & Etherton, M. D. Reduction of seizures and normalization 
of the EEG in a severe epileptic following sensorimotor biofeedback training: 
Preliminary study. Biological Psychology, 1975, 2, 189-203. 
Fox, F. J., Orr, R. R., & Rourke, B. P. Short-comings of tile standard optometric visual 
analysis for the diagnosis of reading problems. Canadian Journal of Optometry, 
1975, 37, 57-61. 
Hampstead, W. J. The effects of EMG-assisted relaxation training with hyperkinetic children: 
A behavioral alternative. Biofeedback and Self-Regulation, 1979, 4, 113-125. 
Kaplan, B. J. Biofeedback in epileptics: Equivocal relationship of reinforced EEG frequency 
frequency to seizure reduction. Epilepsia, 1975, 16, 477-485. 
Kuhlman, W. N., & Allison, T. EEG biofeedback training in the treatment of epilepsy: 
Some questions and some answers. Pavlovian Journal of Biological Science, 1977, 
12, 112-122. 
Lawson, L. Opthalmological factors in learning disabilities. In H. R. Myklebust (Ed.), 
Progress in learning disabi6ties (Vol. 1). New York: Grune and Stratton, 1968. 
Lubar, J. F., & Shouse, M. N. EEG and behavioral changes in a byperkinetic child 
concurrent with training of the sensorimotor rhythm (SMR). Biofeedback and 
Self-Regulation, 1976, 3, 293-306. 
Pigeon, G., & Enger, A. Increasing assignment completion and accuracy in a hyperactive first 
grade student. School Application of Learning Theory, 1972, 4, 24-30. 
Pihl, R. D. Conditioning procedures with hyperactive children. Neurology, 1967, 17, 421-423. 
Safer, D., & Allen, R. Hyperactive children. Baltimore: University Park Press, 1976. 
Shouse, M. N., & Lubar, J. F. Operant conditioning of EEG rhythms and Ritalin 
in the treatment of hyperkinesis. Biofeedback and Self-Regulation, 1979, 4, 299-312. 
Sterman, M. B. Neuropbysiologic and clinical studies of sensorimotor EEG biofeedback 
training: Some effects on epilepsy. In L. Birk (Ed.), Biofeedback: Behavioral 
Medicine. New York: Grune and Stratton, 1973. 
Toffler, A. E. The effect of intervention on children classified as minimal brain damaged 
by psychological testing which has been confirmed or disconfirmed by EEG evaluation. 
Dissertation Abstracts International, 1972, 32(10-B), 6062-6063. 
Twardosz, S., & Sajiraj, T. Multiple effects of a procedure to increase sitting in a hyper- 
active, retarded boy. Journal of Applied Behavioral Analysis, 1972, 5, 73-78. 
View publication stats

