1 
 
 
Enthymemes in Hebrews 
By Michael Morrison 
 
In order to study the argument in Hebrews, it is helpful to see how the author 
supports his points, particularly with enthymemes.1 Although the enthymeme is not the 
only type of argumentation used in Hebrews, and not the only way in which Hebrews 
attempts to persuade the readers,2 the enthymeme is a prominent form of argumentation 
in Hebrews.  
People rarely use formal logic in their rhetoric. Chaim Perelman and Lucie 
Olbrechts-Tyteca list numerous methods that people use to support their conclusions: the 
rule of justice, arguments by comparison, the argument of direction, argument from 
authority, illustration, model, analogy, and many others.3 Rather than following rigorous 
logic, arguments often appeal to experience, generalities and probabilities. They do not 
even state all the facts. Don Compier writes, “Any writer assumes that his or her readers 
could read between the lines; the author did not need to state all the presuppositions and 
implicit knowledge held in common with contemporary readers.”4 In everyday 
                                                 
1 An enthymeme is an incomplete syllogism—an argument in which the logic depends on a premise that is 
not stated. Aristotle had a different definition of enthymeme; the definition I use goes back to Quintilian 
and Demetrius (David E. Aune, Westminster Dictionary of New Testament and Early Christian Literature 
and Rhetoric [Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2003], 150). 
2 Aristotle wrote that there are three components of persuasion: ethos, pathos, and logos, which correspond 
to 1) the attitude of the audience toward the speaker, which can change during the message, 2) the emotions 
of the audience, and the way that the speaker can change the mood during the message, and 3) the rational 
part of the message, the facts and implications that are brought out in the message, coupled with the beliefs 
the audience had before the message began (Aristotle, The Art of Rhetoric I.1.2 [trans. H. C. Lawson-
Tancred; New York: Penguin, 1991], 74). Part of a persuasive message, such as the introduction, might be 
only tangentially related to the main purpose—it is designed instead to increase the audience’s confidence 
in the speaker, and thus improve their willingness to listen and accept what is said. The warning passages in 
Hebrews 6 and 10 are good examples of how the author uses pathos in the attempt to persuade.  
3 Chaim Perelman and Lucie Olbrechts-Tyteca, The New Rhetoric: A Treatise on Argumentation (trans. 
John Wilkinson and Purcell Weaver; Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame, 1969), 185-410. These are 
descriptive of what speakers actually use; they are not prescriptive.  
4 Don H. Compier, What Is Rhetorical Theology?: Textual Practice and Public Discourse (Harrisburg: 
Trinity Press International, 1999), xx. “The argumentation process begins with premises the audience 

2 
argumentation, people rarely argue their case with complete syllogisms. That would be 
tedious and insult the intelligence of the reader. More often, the argument assumes that 
the readers can supply the missing premise based on already existing beliefs that the 
author and readers share in common. Rhetorically, it can be good to use enthymemes 
because they involve the reader in supplying part of the argument and thereby encourage 
ownership of the conclusion as well. 
Since an ancient writer could omit information that the readers already knew, a 
modern analyst may probe the logic of the argument to reveal assumptions of the author 
and readers. Lauri Thurén writes, “One of the most fruitful, but also difficult tasks, is to 
reveal hidden, implicit elements in an argumentative structure…. We shall ask which 
basic information he omits, supposing that the addressees are familiar with it, and 
furthermore, what kind of statements he chooses as a starting-point for his argumentation 
taking their agreement for granted.”5 In charity to the author, we attempt to supply a 
premise that makes the most sense.6 If the argument would be valid only if a particular 
concept is included, then we may conclude that the audience probably had that concept, 
or at least that the author assumed that the audience had it. An audience with that concept 
is the audience implied by the text. The author may have been mistaken, but the author is 
likely to know the audience better than we do.  
Since much of Hebrews is a carefully structured argument using enthymemes7—
                                                                                                                                                 
accepts” (Sonja K. Foss, Karen A. Foss, and Robert Trapp, Contemporary Perspectives on Rhetoric [3rd 
ed.; Prospect Heights, Ill.: Waveland, 2002], 90). 
5 Lauri Thurén, Rhetorical Strategy of 1 Peter with Special Regard to Ambiguous Expressions (Åbo: Åbo 
Academy, 1990), 85, 56. 
6 Frans H. van Eemeren gives this principle for analyzing the author: “The goal should be…to determine 
(1) to which proposition in the context and situation concerned the speaker or writer can be held committed 
to that not only (2) makes the underlying argument of the argumentation valid, but also (3) adds something 
informative to the explicit argumentation” (“Argumentation Theory: An Overview of Approaches and 
Research Themes,” pp. 9-26 in Ericksson et al., Rhetorical Argumentation, 20). Van Eemeren wants 
argumentation to be more logical than it often is, but his principle is correct: If we can make the argument 
valid by supplying a certain premise, then we give the author and audience the benefit of the doubt by 
attributing that premise to them, unless we have reason otherwise. 
7 In a study of Heb 5, Thomas H. Olbricht writes, “Hebrews contains some of the most rigorously argued 
positions in the New Testament…. His modus operandi is therefore moving from one enthymeme to 
another, the foundations being laid in the prior enthymemes” (“Anticipating and Presenting the Case for 
Christ as High Priest in Hebrews,” pp. 355-72 in Rhetorical Argumentation in Biblical Texts: Essays from 
the Lund 2000 Conference [ed. Anders Eriksson, Thomas H. Olbricht, and Walter Übelacker; Emory 

3 
often using  to indicate a reason or  for a conclusion—it lends itself well to an 
analysis of enthymemes. But since the analysis of enthymemes tends to focus on the 
rational aspects of a message, and people are often influenced by their emotions, the 
analysis should be supplemented at points by consideration of ethos and pathos.8 Further, 
not every verse involves an enthymeme—some simply report facts or assert a point 
without attempting to provide support, or make exhortations based on authority rather 
than providing reasons. 
An analysis of enthymemes has three benefits: 1) it forces a close reading of the 
text, requiring careful attention to grammar and the way that ideas connect with one 
another, 2) it helps in analyzing the overall flow of the argument, and 3) it helps identify 
beliefs that the author assumed that the readers would have. In this way enthymemes can 
shed light on the readers implied by the text and the purpose of the writing.  
An enthymeme is an incomplete syllogism. A syllogism includes a major premise 
(a general principle), a minor premise (a specific situation), and a conclusion based on 
how the specific situation fits into the general principle. Here is a classic illustration: 
• Major premise: All humans are mortal (a general principle). 
• Minor premise: Socrates is a human (a specific case). 
• Conclusion: Socrates is mortal (the specific case applied in the general 
principle).9 
 
                                                                                                                                                 
Studies in Early Christianity; Harrisburg: Trinity Press International, 2002], 355, 363).  
 
For other studies of biblical enthymemes, see Vernon K. Robbins, “From Enthymeme to Theology 
in Luke 11:1-13,” pp. 191-214 in Literary Studies in Luke-Acts: Essays in Honor of Joseph B. Tyson (ed. 
Richard P. Thompson and Thomas E. Phillips; Macon: Mercer University Press, 1998), Marc J. Debanné, 
“An Enthymematic Reading of Philippians: Towards a Typology of Pauline Arguments,” pp. 482-503 in 
Rhetorical Criticism and the Bible (ed. Stanley E. Porter and Dennis L. Stamps; JSNTSup 195; London: 
Sheffield, 2002), and Marc J. Debanné, “Enthymemes in the Letters of Paul” (Ph.D. thesis, McGill 
University, 2002). 
8 Thurén criticizes one of the pioneers in argumentation theory: “Despite the rhetorical features in 
Perelman’s theory, it deals only with cognitive argumentation, not persuasion. In persuasion, convincing 
techniques and strategies…do not suffice; the critical factors are, according to classical rhetoric, ethos and 
pathos…These are to a great extent ignored by Perelman” (Argument and Theology in 1 Peter: The Origins 
of Christian Paraenesis [JSNTSup 114; Sheffield: Sheffield Academic, 1995], 40). He also notes that 
“some forms of persuasion have little to do with even implicit argumentation (cf. e.g. the persuasive force 
of repetition…)…. It is necessary to add the volitional, emotional aspect to the argumentation analysis, that 
is, to ask what kind of emotions the author attempts to provoke in order to elicit assent” (ibid., 50, 54). 
9 Nancey C. Murphy, Reasoning and Rhetoric in Religion (Eugene: Wipf & Stock, 2001), 33. 

4 
This structure may also be cast into other formats. Stephen Toulmin describes the 
structure of an argument as “warrant” (the general principle), “ground” (the specific 
situation) and the “claim” (conclusion).10 In many arguments, the claim is presented first, 
followed by the ground and/or warrant. For example: Socrates is mortal, because he is a 
human, and all humans are mortal. If the warrant or claim is omitted, readers can easily 
figure out what it was. If the text says only that “Socrates is mortal, because he is 
human,” readers may think to themselves, “We can substitute ‘mortal’ for ‘human’ 
because all humans are mortal.” However, speakers can sometimes hide faulty logic by 
using an enthymeme; the listeners supply a premise that seems to make sense of the 
argument but upon closer examination can be seen to have exceptions. 
In some arguments, it is difficult to distinguish between warrants and grounds, or 
between major and minor premises, and for my purposes, it is not essential that they be 
differentiated—I am more interested in identifying the hidden premises than in 
categorizing them. I also find that Toulmin’s model of argumentation is more helpful for 
analyzing hidden premises, whereas the argumentation theory of Perelman and Olbrects-
Tyteca may categorize arguments, but does not suggest further analysis into the beliefs of 
the readers. 
Let us look now at Hebrews. In broad outline, Hebrews may be divided into three 
major sections, divided by transition passages in 4:14-16 and 10:19-22. Those two 
transition passages form an inclusio11 introducing and then summarizing the central 
section of the epistle. Heb 4:14-16 announces the topic: “Since we have a great high 
priest…let us hold fast to our confession…. Let us therefore approach the throne of grace 
with confidence.”12 Heb 10:19-22 repeats those key concepts as a summary and 
launching pad for further exhortations: “Since we have confidence to enter the 
                                                 
10 Stephen Toulmin, The Uses of Argument (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1958); see 
summaries in Murphy 1-42 and Foss et al., Contemporary Perspectives, 117-53. For a critique, see Frans 
H. van Eemeren et al., Fundamentals of Argumentation Theory: A Handbook of Historical Backgrounds 
and Contemporary Developments (Mahwah, N.J.: Erlbaum, 1996), 129-58. The warrant is sometimes 
supported by backing or qualified in some way, such as by giving a rebuttal to possible exceptions, but this 
is not important in Hebrews. 
11 The repetition of words at the beginning and end of a section is called inclusio. It is especially distinctive 
when the words are not used in the intervening text. 
12 Scriptures are quoted, unless noted otherwise, from the New Revised Standard Version.  

5 
sanctuary…and a great priest over the house of God, let us approach with a true heart…. 
Let us hold fast to the confession.”13 The author wants the readers to know doctrine—but 
that is not his main goal. He informs them about doctrine as a step toward another goal: 
he wants them to hold fast to Jesus Christ. 
Now let us survey the arguments in Hebrews chapter by chapter.14 Space does not 
permit me to develop all the observations that will be made, nor all the questions that a 
survey of this epistle will inevitably touch on. Nor will I be able to comment on all the 
rhetorical devices and strategies—I am focusing on enthymemes to see what they imply 
about the audience. For other rhetorical devices, see the commentaries.15  
 
Hebrews 1—Jesus better than angels 
Heb 1:1-4 begins with a number of assertions, most of which are not argued—
they are simply asserted.16 Only 1:4 is followed by any rationale; the others are just stated 
as if they are already accepted by the readers. It would be foolish for a speaker to begin 
with several assertions that were neither supported nor accepted by the readers,17 and 
assuming that the author of Hebrews is not foolish, I conclude that he believed that his 
audience would accept these ideas without protest. This implies an audience that accepted 
the following: 
                                                 
13 Paul Ellingworth writes, “4:14-16 prepare the presentation of Jesus as high priest, while 10:19-31 draw 
consequences from it” (The Epistle to the Hebrews [NIGTC; Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1993], 516).  
14 I use chapter numbers for my subheads primarily to help my readers find material. The argument in 
Hebrews does not necessarily have a break at those points. I am not presenting an outline of the epistle.  
15 Two recent commentaries pay particular attention to rhetoric: David A. deSilva, Perseverance in 
Gratitude: A Socio-Rhetorical Commentary on the Epistle ‘to the Hebrews’ (Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 
2000) and Craig R. Koester, The Epistle to the Hebrews: A New Translation with Introduction and 
Commentary (AB 36; New York: Doubleday, 2001).  
16 Some religious discourse is based on assertion, based primarily on the authority of the one who asserts. 
But many religious texts, including Hebrews, give reasons for some of the assertions that are made. These 
reasons may eventually rest on authorities such as Scripture or tradition, but argumentation rather than 
mere assertion is used.  
17 Hugh W. Montefiore writes, “It is improbable that any epistle would open with controversial or un-
familiar Christological statements” (The Epistle to the Hebrews [BNTC; London: A & C Black, 1964], 37). 
deSilva says that an introductory polemic would be “bad rhetorical form, running the risk of alienating the 
hearers by ‘correcting’ them too quickly (before trust has been fully established within the speech)” 
(Perseverance, 95). Koester writes, “Rhetorically, it was good practice to establish common ground with 
the audience by reinforcing what they already knew to be true” (Hebrews, 182). 

6 
• 
Some Jewish books are authoritative.18 
• 
The Son of God appeared on earth, spoke, resolved the problem of sin,19 initiated 
a new age in history, and is now seated in heaven. 
• 
The Son was the means of creation, and he now has authority over all things and 
sustains all things.  
• 
The Son is like God in glory, being, and authority. 
In short, the readers had a high Christology.20 However, people who believed that 
the Son had authority over all things, and that he was seated at the right hand of the 
Supreme Being, would probably already believe that he was superior to the angels. 
Nevertheless, this last assertion is defended in some detail, and this is where the 
argumentation structure of Hebrews begins. Verse 4 is supported by reasoning in verse 5, 
signaled by the word : 
• Claim in 1:4: The Son is superior to the angels.21 
• Ground stated in 1:5: He is called the Son, and angels are not (implied in the 
rhetorical question).22 
• Unstated warrant, the premise that completes the logic: {The name “Son” is 
better than the name “angel,” and a better name indicates a better person.} (I 
use curved brackets to indicate premises that are unstated—ideas that the 
author apparently assumed that the readers would be able to supply.)23 
 
We can also state the argument in two syllogisms—the conclusion of one being 
used as the premise for the second: 
                                                 
18 We cannot call these books the Hebrew Bible, since the author used the Greek version. It would also be 
inappropriate to call them the Septuagint, since we do not know whether the author and readers accepted all 
the books now included in that term. The limits of their canon cannot be determined.  
19 “Purification for sins” may be a disputed point, for it receives extensive support in later chapters. 
20 Harold W. Attridge says, “Hebrews does not introduce a high christology to its audience but develops 
and deepens affirmations that they already have” (The Epistle to the Hebrews [Hermenia; Philadelphia: 
Fortress, 1989], 164). 
21 English translations used in the enthymemes are based on the NRSV, but I have frequently abbreviated or 
deviated from it. 
22 “The link is directly with 1:4, which propounds the thesis for which vv. 5-13 will provide scriptural 
support” (Ellingworth, Hebrews, 111). I quote Ellingworth at numerous points in this study because he 
pays the most attention to connecting words. He supports my analysis at most points, but I find it necessary 
to argue against his view in a number of places.  
23 This does not imply that the author is illogical or is doing anything improper; it is just that he is able to 
draw on the already existing beliefs of the readers. 

7 
• Major premise: {The designation “Son” is better that the word “angel.”}  
• Minor premise: The person being talked about24 was called “Son” in 
Scripture.25 (This assumes that the readers already believe that these verses 
apply to Jesus—a crucial point that is never defended, again indicating an 
audience with a high Christology.) 
• Conclusion: Jesus has been given a better name than the angels (1:4b). 
 
• Jesus has been given a better name that the angels. 
• {A better name indicates a better person.} 
• Conclusion: Jesus is better than the angels (1:4a). 
 
The author makes no attempt to defend the idea that the magnitude of superiority 
in names is proportional to the magnitude in ontological superiority. It seems to be a 
rhetorical flourish that did not require support, since the audience was already in 
agreement with the primary assertion, that Jesus is better than the angels. This latter 
assertion is essential to the author; the relative magnitude is not needed for the argument. 
Verse 6 then introduces another enthymeme in support of 1:4a. Although the 
argument, as with most in Hebrews, could be presented in the form of a syllogism (with 
the conclusion last), Hebrews usually presents the claim first, followed by one reason, 
from which we must discern a warrant. Although the author’s thinking may have begun 
with premises and ended with conclusions, our analysis must begin with what is stated in 
the text. Toulmin’s format, stating the claim first, is usually better for presenting the 
analysis, so I will use that format in most cases: 
• 
Claim: The Son is superior to the angels.  
• 
Ground, based on Scripture: Angels are told to worship the Son (again, it 
is assumed without argument that the Son is called the firstborn and that 
this verse is about him.)26  
• 
Unstated warrant: {Worship is given from the inferior to the superior.} 
                                                 
24 The name Jesus is not used until 2:9, but it is used there as if the readers are familiar with it. 
25 The first quote comes from Ps 2:7, which was originally about the kings of Israel, but was often 
understood as a messianic prophecy. The second quote is from 2 Sam 7:14, which was originally about 
Solomon, but came to be applied to the end-time Son of David, the Messiah. 
26 The Greek version of Deut 32:43 says this; the Hebrew version does not. Although the LXX says that the 
angels should worship God, the author here assumes, without giving evidence, that the verse is actually 
about worshipping the Son. He apparently believes that these readers already understand the verse in this 
way. The author was formerly part of the community and knew its beliefs. The second quote is from the 
LXX of Psalm 104:4; the Hebrew version has a different emphasis. 

8 
 
Verses 7 and 8 also support 1:4a: 
 
• 
Claim: The Son is better than the angels. 
• 
Ground: The angels are servants, whereas the Son has an eternal throne.27 
• 
Unstated warrant: {A ruler (anyone with a throne) is better than a 
servant.} 
 
Verse 9 contains its own enthymeme: 
 
• 
Ground: The Son loved righteousness. 
• 
Warrant: {God rewards those who love righteousness.} 
• 
Conclusion: Therefore (	

) God anointed him [as king] above his 
companions. 
 
This enthymeme supports the claim implied in 1:8, that Jesus has become a king, 
but the mention of “throne” and “scepter” had already made that clear.  
The function of verses 10-12 (quoted from Ps 102:25-27) is less clear—why does 
the author say that the Son was the Creator,28 and that he, unlike the creation, is eternal? 
What does this passage have to do with angels? Perhaps the missing thought is that the 
angels are in the realm of change, which implies that they are lesser beings than the Son, 
who is in the realm of the eternal and unchanging.29 But more likely, these verses are part 
of the praise for the Son that begins in 1:8. The angels are servants, but the Son is 
exalted, and two points of evidence are given in support of his exalted status: 1) The Son 
has been anointed and given an eternal throne and scepter, and 2) The Son is eternal, 
unlike the world he created. That the Son is Creator is assumed but not exploited; it is 
                                                 
27 The author makes no comment on the Son being called God, as if this concept would not trouble the 
readers. The quote is from Ps 45:6-7; the parallel structure indicates that angels are servants. As 
Ellingworth comments on 1:13, “The messianic interpretation of the text, and more specifically its 
application to Christ [i.e., Jesus]…are presupposed in Hebrews” (Hebrews, 130). 
28 It is again assumed that the readers will accept without question this christological interpretation of a 
verse originally about God. As in 1:2c, the readers are assumed to accept the Son as Creator. 
29 It is unlikely that the readers believed that angels would eventually die; angels would also have “years 
that will never end.” But they are in the realm of change, and in Greek philosophy, it was often assumed 
that the immutable was automatically better than anything that could change, and this philosophy seems to 
be reflected in Hebrews. 

9 
simply an incidental part of the source quotation. The point made in 1:11-12 is eternality, 
not creativity. The logic can be schematized in this way: 
• 
Claim: The Son is better than the angels (1:4a). 
• 
Ground: The Son is praised as 1) God and Lord,30 2) with an eternal 
throne, 3) with the scepter (representing power) of God’s kingdom, 
4) anointed and honored above his companions, 5) the Creator, and 
6) remaining eternally; whereas the angels are called servants. 
• 
Warrant: {Those who are praised and given authority are better than those 
called servants.} 
 
The comparison with angels is explicitly resumed in 1:13-14: 
• 
Claim: The Son is better than the angels (1:4a). 
• 
Ground: The Son was exalted to the right hand of God, but angels are 
spirits in the divine service, sent to serve humans.31 
• 
{Those who have authority are better than those called servants.}32 
 
The rhetorical question that begins 1:13 is similar to the question that begins 1:5, 
thus forming an inclusio that indicates that the discussion is drawing to a close; a similar 
sense of completion is given by the use of 
	in 1:14, which forms an inclusio 
with 
	in 1:7. By mentioning “those who are to inherit salvation”33 rather 
than the simpler word “humans,” the author draws the readers into the discussion and 
prepares for the exhortation that follows in Heb 2 (which also uses “salvation”).  
What is the rhetorical purpose of the catena of quotations used in Heb 1? If the 
author could assume that the readers would accept all the christological interpretations of 
the quoted verses, it seems to me that the readers would already be in agreement that 
                                                 
30 Although the author does not stress these titles, they support his point. 
31 The quote is from Ps 110:1, which plays a crucial role in Hebrews. Heb 1:3d alludes to the same verse. 
The logic ignores the possibility that the Son was also sent to serve humans. The stronger point is that it 
was the Son, and not the angelic servants, who was exalted to power next to God. 
32 James Thompson points out the role of authority in 1:14 (The Letter to the Hebrews [Living Word 
Commentary; Austin: Sweet, 1971], 34) 
33 Ellingworth observes that the term 	 “is never explained and must be considered traditional”—
i.e., well known to the readers (Hebrews, 133). 

10 
Jesus Christ is better than the angels.34 Although it might seem that the author is 
belaboring the point with several supporting texts, the fact that he does not attempt to 
support his interpretations indicates that he assumes that the readers are already in 
substantial agreement on these points.  
Even as early as 1:3, in the exordium, the author assumes that his readers already 
believe that Jesus has been exalted to the right hand of God (the credibility of the entire 
epistle hangs on this concept, which is never defended), and that would in itself make 
him superior to the angels. The readers know that Jesus appeared to be less than the 
angels while a human (acknowledged by the author in 2:5, 9), and they may not 
understand the purpose for that abasement, but they do not seem to challenge that he was 
exalted above the angels. It would be poor rhetorical strategy to hit the readers with 
points of contention so soon in the epistle; it would be wiser to establish rapport with the 
readers by giving several points of agreement. The rhetorical purpose of this comparison 
can then be seen by the use the author makes of it in the parenesis that begins chapter 2. 
 
Hebrews 2:1-4—a plea for attention 
Heb 2:1 begins with 	

	signaling that a conclusion is being drawn—the 
conclusion that “we must pay greater attention to what we have heard.” We might ask, 
Greater than what? Verse 2 shows that the point of comparison is “the message declared 
through angels”—that is, the law of Moses.35 The author wants the readers to be more 
attentive to a recent message of salvation than to the traditional focus of Judaism. This is 
the parenetic conclusion and the rhetorical purpose of Heb 1:5-14.36 Actually, this 
                                                 
34 “The writer, especially at this early stage in his argument, is not trying to prove theses which his readers 
were likely to question…. At present, he is building on beliefs which he appears to assume that his readers 
will readily accept” (Ellingworth, Hebrews, 109, 137). 
35 Ellingworth suggests two other possible answers to the question, “Greater than what?” First, “closer 
attention than you have been paying,” and second, “closer attention than the Israelites paid to God’s 
commandments in OT times” (Hebrews, 135). I believe that my suggestion has better support in the 
context, and it better addresses the readers’ situation.  
36 Ellingworth implies the same when he writes, “A clue to the place of angels in the structure of the 
argument is provided in Heb. 2:2, which…refers to the tradition that angels acted as mediators when the 
Law was given to Moses” (Hebrews, 104). Other scholars who support this view include: 
• 
Kenneth Schenck writes, “The contrast between Christ and the angels is a part of the contrast 
between the two covenants…. It is very relevant to the author’s contrast between the two 

11 
exhortation is the central theme of the entire epistle—in effect, the propositio: Look to 
Jesus, not the law.37 Subsequent exhortations flesh out the way in which readers should 
be attentive to Jesus—to not neglect him, to consider him, to not harden their hearts, to 
enter the rest he offers, to hold fast to a confession about him, to draw near to God 
through him, to fix their eyes on him, etc.—and throughout the epistle, Jesus is contrasted 
over against the law, the old covenant, the message of angels.  
The author has begun with points of agreement, and in a sudden shift, has used 
that agreement as the basis for an attention-getting point of correction. The readers could 
go through Heb 1 saying, “Yes, yes. I agree with you again and again, so why are you 
telling me things I already know?” And the author responds by saying, “You38 believe 
that Jesus is great, but you are not acting like it. You are giving more attention to the old 
message than to the new and better message.” This allows the author to appeal for the 
readers to be attentive to what he has to say. “You agree that Jesus is superior, so I exhort 
you to be attentive to the message about him.” The logic is this: 
                                                                                                                                                 
covenants, even if this contrast is not made very explicit in Heb. 1” (Understanding the Book of 
Hebrews: The Story Behind the Sermon [Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2003], 75, 43).  
• 
Koester writes, “Angels are important because they were associated with the giving of the Law” 
(Hebrews, 200). From the beginning, the epistle is concerned with contrasting Christ and the law 
of Moses.  
• 
Edvin Larsson writes, “The whole comparison in Heb 1-2 is to be understood as a demonstration 
of the superiority of the new revelation over the old. The relationship between the angels and the 
Old Testament is the very reason why the author discusses their position at all (“How Mighty Was 
the Mighty Minority?” pp. 93-105 in Mighty Minorities? Minorities in Early Christianity, 
Positions and Strategies [ed. David Hellholm, Halvor Moxnes, and Turid Karlsen Seim; Oslo: 
Scandinavian University Press, 1995], 103).  
• 
C. K. Barrett writes, “There seems to be no evidence for such an angel-christology in the first 
century…. The heavily underlined contrast in Hebrews 1 must have an internal explanation, and 
there is no need to look further than Hebrews 2:2-4” (“The Christology of Hebrews,” pp. 110-27 
in Who Do You Say That I Am? Essays on Christology [ed. Mark Allan Powell and David R. 
Bauer; Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 1999], 116).  
• 
Scott Walker Hahn writes, “These verses actually serve to reveal the author’s main purpose in 
arguing for Christ’s superiority to the angels in the preceding chapter…. He is really intent on 
showing that Christ is a superior mediator of a new and better covenant, over and against those 
who mediated the ‘old covenant’ (8:6, 13): the angels (chs. 1-2), Moses and Joshua (chs. 3-4), 
Aaron and the Levites (chs. 5-7)” (“Kinship by Covenant: A Biblical Theological Study of 
Covenant Types and Texts in the Old and New Testaments,” [Ph.D. diss., Marquette University, 
1995], 508-9). 
37 Normally, the propositio is a statement, but in an epistle that consistently drives toward exhortation, it 
seems appropriate to allow an exhortation to express the main thrust of the work. 
38 The author uses the rhetorically softer “we,” but I use “you” to make the exhortation more obvious. 

12 
• 
Conclusion: The message spoken through Jesus is more important than the 
message (the law) declared through angels.39  
• 
Ground: Jesus is better than the angels (1:4a, buttressed by 1:5-14,40 now 
used as the premise of a new argument, taking the author one step toward 
his goal). 
• 
Warrant: {The importance of the message corresponds to the importance 
of the messenger.} 
 
This conclusion is used in another enthymeme: 
 
• 
Conclusion: We should pay greater attention to Jesus than to Moses. 
• 
Ground: The message of Jesus is more important than the law of Moses. 
• 
Warrant: {People should be more attentive to important messages than to 
messages that are of lesser importance.}41 
 
The purpose of this exhortation is given at the end of 2:1: “so that [
] we do 
not drift away from it.” The author explains why this is a desirable goal in 2:2-3, using 
the word :  
• 
Claim: People will be punished for transgressing the message of Christ 
(implied in the rhetorical question of 2:3a). 
• 
Ground: Because people were punished for transgressing the law of 
Moses. (The word 	in 2:2 implies a condition in agreement with fact.) 
• 
Warrant: {If people were justly punished for transgressing an angelic 
message, people will be justly punished for transgressing the more 
important message.}42  
 
                                                 
39 Although Hebrews is concerned mainly with a message about Jesus, Heb 2:3 indicates that it was a 
message spoken through him. This may reflect a belief that Jesus applied Ps 110:1 to himself, but it is more 
likely explained by Hebrews’ pattern of attributing Scripture to words spoken by God, or Christ (cf. 10:5). 
40 Ellingworth agrees, but offers an alternative: “The author is…likely to be thinking of the entire argument 
of chap. 1. Another possibility is that 	

 refers to the final words of 1:14, which though 
grammatically subordinate are a major theme in the epistle. The meaning would then be: ‘because God 
intends to give us salvation as a permanent possession, we must be all the more attentive to what he and 
others have said about it’” (Hebrews, 135).  
41 The hidden premises in this case, and in many others in this paper, is a commonplace that does not reveal 
anything significant about the readers. But it is helpful to state the premise as part of the attempt to 
understand the argument. 
42 B.F. Westcott writes, “The necessity of heedful care is grounded on the certainty of retribution. This 
certainty is proportional to the authority of the revelation” (The Epistle to the Hebrews [1903, 1920; repr. 
Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1980], 37). 

13 
The argument implies that anyone who neglects the message takes an 
unacceptable risk of transgression and therefore punishment.43 However, a more 
important message does not necessarily carry stricter penalties. Indeed, the author later 
argues that the new covenant (which is at least part of the message of Jesus) is better in 
terms of forgiveness; the author assumes but does not prove that penalties are involved.44   
It is possible that the author is using—in a rhetorical question rather than in a 
statement—an ad hominem argument that appeals to a belief of the readers, but is not a 
belief that the author shares. That is, he knows that the readers view their relationship 
with God in terms of a contract rather than a promise of grace, and he is using their 
mistaken view for the time being to correct their view. The problem with this explanation 
is that the author continues to give dire warnings even after explaining that the new 
covenant entails forgiveness. It is therefore likely that he also views the message of Jesus 
as a contract that requires punishments for transgressions. 
The author is using an argument from the lesser to the greater (a minore ad maius, 
or qal wahomer),45 but changing the terms of the comparison in midstream: If even a 
small infraction of the Torah deserved punishment, then (he implies) it is virtually certain 
that complete neglect of the new message will also be punished. In general, qal wahomer 
                                                 
43 “Hope and fear are intertwined throughout Hebrews” (Ellingworth, Hebrews, 139). The argument could 
be presented as an enthymeme with two unstated premises:  
 
{We do not want to risk punishment.} 
 
{If we ignore the message, we take a risk of transgression.} 
 
Consequently, we do not want to neglect the message, which means that we need to give it 
      more attention. 
44 J. C. Fenton asks whether there is “a flaw in the logic…. It could be that the reason why God provided 
better things for us was to show that he is merciful and loving; and if that were the case, then the 
conclusion that he would punish us more severely would not be valid” (“The Argument in Hebrews,” pp. 
175-181 in Studia Evangelica Vol. VII [ed. Elizabeth A. Livingstone; Berlin: Akademie, 1982], 180). 
45 There is another way to construe the argument—not as qal wahomer, but as relying on the readers’ sense 
of guilt: “Every transgression of the law will be punished—and we have all transgressed, so we will not 
escape, except through the message of salvation that Jesus brought. If we neglect the rescue that the Lord 
offers, we will not escape the penalties of the old message [cf. 9:15]. Since we need salvation, and Jesus 
brought a valid offer, we should not ignore his message.” This line of reasoning would be good only if the 
readers believed that penalties of the law of Moses were still valid (but cf. 8:13). This line of reasoning 
would also diminish the rhetorical significance of 1:5-14—there is no need to argue that Jesus is better than 
angels if he simply brought a message that counteracted their message. If this had been the thought of the 
author, I would expect him to argue that because Jesus is better, he had the authority to rescue us from 
punishment, or perhaps that Jesus is better because he brought rescue. But neither of these seems to be 
suggested. Rather, the argument is that people should listen to Jesus because he is better, not because his 
message has better promises (that will be argued later, but it is not the point here). 

14 
arguments rely on analogies, not logic, and they are effective only when the analogies are 
accepted as valid. What the logic proves is simply that the message of salvation is valid 
(	 the term used for the angelic message in 2:2).  
• 
Claim: The message is valid. 
• 
Ground: It was declared through the Lord. Evidence of this was given to 
us by people who heard him. 
• 
Warrant: {A message given by God is valid.}  
 
• 
Claim: The message is valid. 
• 
Ground: Various miracles and divine gifts accompanied the eyewitness 
testimony.46 
• 
Warrant: {Evidence of validity can be further strengthened by miracles.}  
 
What the author does not prove, however, is that the message entails punishment. 
The law of Moses promised that transgressions would be punished, and since it was valid, 
those punishments had to be carried out. But unless the new message threatens 
punishment, punishments do not have to be inflicted in order for the message to remain 
valid. If the new message promises only blessings, then any talk of punishment is a non 
sequitur. The author assumes but never proves that the message of Jesus requires 
punishment; this is apparently an assumption he expected the readers to share. 
 
Hebrews 2:5-18—Jesus made mortal 
Verse 5, with the word , is more difficult to place in the logical flow. It signals 
that the author is resuming the argument, bringing angels back into the discussion—but 
(unlike in Heb 1) he does not indicate where he is going, and it is not clear what  
should be related to. Ellingworth suggests that it “apparently refers back to 1:4-14.”47 
                                                 
46 The text does not say whether the readers have seen the miracles, or only heard about them. 
47 Ellingworth, Hebrews, 111. Westcott says that it “refers directly to the signs of divine power among 
believers” (Hebrews, 41), but the logic of that eludes me. I prefer a suggestion made by Lee Maxey: It 
simply indicates that a new topic has begun: “The use of the postpositive completitive  is relatively 
common in Heb. It is partly employed to indicate to the oral reader and auditors of Heb that a long periodic 
sentence, like that of 10:32-33, has ended (cf. Heb 1:5; 2:5, 16; 4:14; 7:1; 8:3; 10:26; and 12:3)” (“The 
Rhetoric of Response: A Classical Rhetorical Reading of Hebrews 10:32-12:13” [Ph.D. diss., Claremont 
Graduate University, 2002], 148). 

15 
However, I see most of Heb 2 as continuing to support the exhortation implied in 2:1—
people should pay more attention to Jesus than to the angel-mediated law.  
Why should people listen to Jesus rather than the angelic message? Verse 5 
explains why: God has not given angels authority over the world to come.48 Instead, 
Scripture says that a human (	or 		translated as “mortals” by 
the NRSV) will be given authority over the world to come. Therefore, if people want to 
be in that world, they should look to a human rather than to angels for the right to be 
there (i.e., salvation). The eschatological hope does not depend on angels—it depends on 
a human, because Scripture says that the world to come is under human authority. 
Consequently, no one should focus on the message of angels. Because of the lengthy 
quote from Ps 8:4-5, the enthymeme spans several verses: 
• 
Claim: If we want to be part of the world to come, we should be attentive 
to a message brought by the human who will rule that world {not to the 
message of angels—implied as the counterpart to the statement of 2:5}. 
• 
Ground: The world to come will be ruled by a human49 (2:6-8), not by an 
angel (stated in 2:5). 
• 
Warrant: {People should listen (i.e., obey) to their rulers.} 
 
The author is responding to an objection that he does not articulate50: Jesus may 
be superior to the angels now, but his message was given while he was a human, and the 
message concerns what he did as a human, and since humans are inferior to angels, the 
message is inferior to theirs. In response to this possible objection, the author is pointing 
out that people should expect the message of salvation to center on a human, since 
everything (	; 2:8) was promised to humanity. Verse 8 has its own enthymeme: 
• 
Claim: Everything will be subject to humanity, even if that cannot be seen 
yet.51 
                                                 
48 In the thinking of the author, the “world to come” may have already begun, since the “last days” had 
begun and Christ was seated in glory. However, there is more yet to come (9:28; 10:37; 12:26). 
49 The logic is this:  
    {The world to come is included in “everything.”} 
    Scripture promises that everything will be put under the rule of humanity. 
    Therefore the world to come will be under human rule. 
50 It is not clear whether the objection was held by some readers, or whether the author is forestalling 
possible objections. Rather than refuting a serious objection, he may be strengthening his credibility by first 
developing an argument that the readers are likely to have little objection to. 
51 In Toulmin’s terminology, this latter clause is a rebuttal, addressing an objection. 

16 
• 
Ground: Scripture promises glory, honor, and authority over everything to 
humanity, without stating any exceptions.52  
• 
Warrant: {Whatever Scripture says is certain, because God said it,53 and 
he keeps his promises.} 
 
Verses 8d-9 present another step of the argument: “We do not yet () see 
everything in subjection to [humanity54], but we do see Jesus…crowned with glory and 
honor.” What is the point—that humanity will in the future be given authority over 
everything, or that Jesus has already fulfilled the promise? It is likely both (the  
shows that the author believes that the promise was given to humanity in general), but the 
author’s purpose here is not to exalt humanity, but to point the readers to Jesus; he is 
explaining that it was necessary for this superior being to be a human. Verse 9 shows that 
the author believes Jesus to be the specific referent of Ps 8:5—“for a little while lower 
than the angels, now crowned with glory and honor.”55 The result is this syllogism: 
• 
God crowned humanity with glory and honor, with authority over all 
things. 
• 
Jesus has been crowned with glory and honor (2:9) and is now at God’s 
right hand (1:13), which means that he has been given authority. 
• 
Therefore, Jesus is the human who has authority over all things, including 
the world to come.56 
 
Other humans may follow Jesus into glory, but they do so by following Jesus.57 So 
the purpose of the passage can be paraphrased: Why be more attentive to Jesus than to the 
                                                 
52 Westcott suggests that  in 2:8 “points back to v. 5, so that the connexion is: God did not subject the 
future world to angels, for He promised man an absolute sovereignty” (Hebrews, 45). 
53 The psalmist actually said it to God (this may be the reason for the vague introductory formula of 2:6), 
but the author assumes that the psalmist’s words are inspired.  
54 The Greek is singular: 
 
55 The NRSV obscures this connection by the use of plural words. I suggest the following translation as a 
possible way to preserve the ambiguity that the author exploited—in such a way that Jesus can be “the 
human”: “What is a person, that you are mindful of each one, or a human being, that you care for one? You 
have made the human for a little while lower than the angels; you have crowned the human with glory and 
honor, subjecting all things to the human.” It is apparent from 2:9 that the author believed 	 
to be Jesus, whether or not he knew the tradition given in the Gospels. 
56 This is a paraphrase, not a syllogism. If we put this into syllogistic form, the unstated premise would be 
that if someone is given a seat next to God in authority, then that person has been given authority over all 
things. 

17 
angel-delivered law? Because the world to come will be ruled by Jesus, not the angels. If 
we want to be part of that world, we need to look to its leader. 
 
Verse 9 summarizes: Jesus was made lower than the angels “for a little while”58—
the fact that he was human does not make him inferior, since that was only a temporary 
situation. Verse 9 also mentions that Jesus was crowned because of his death, but the 
author does not attempt to support that causation.59 Third, 2:9 says that Jesus was made 
temporarily lower than the angels so that [] he could die for everyone. The author 
does not support “for everyone,” but supports the necessity of death starting in 2:10, 
which uses . The author is responding to a possible objection: “Doesn’t the death of 
Jesus show that he was inferior to angels?” So the author says,  
Although he is superior, he had to be lower for a while, because Ps 
8 says that the future world will be under humanity, and so the ruler of 
everything had to become human. I will show that it was necessary for our 
Savior to die. The fact that Jesus died does not disprove my argument—it 
is all the more reason that we should be attentive to Jesus, because it 
confirms his role in our salvation. 
 
 
The claim is presented in 2:9: Jesus was made mortal so he could die for 
everyone; this is then supported by 2:10: …for it was appropriate for God to complete the 
Savior60 through suffering (and death). But this assertion also needs support, so the 
author supports it with a chain of argumentation that ends in 2:17: The Savior had to be 
like the people he saved. Koester suggests that the missing thought is God’s desire to 
save: “Since he created people for glory, it is fitting that he should provide a way for 
                                                                                                                                                 
57 “Jesus fulfills the psalm first and is in the process of bringing the psalm to its complete fulfillment for all 
the ‘human children’” (deSilva, Perseverance, 114). “Jesus’ suffering led to his glory and made him the 
source of salvation for others. Listeners can therefore trust that as they follow Jesus, God will bring them to 
glory as well” (Koester, Hebrews, 225). 
58 This implies that he was originally greater than the angels, in keeping with the author’s Christology. The 
author has understood Ps 8:5 in a temporal sense, which the LXX permits but the Hebrew text does not. 
59 Ellingworth says, “To understand the words to mean that Christ’s death was the direct cause of his 
exaltation is unnecessary and runs counter to the thought of the passage” (Hebrews, 155). Even so, this is 
the way the words would normally be understood. The idea can be explained by including more of the 
context: He was exalted not just because he died, but because he died to save others. Such a death, enabled 
by the grace of God, qualified him to be the human given authority over all things. Westcott says that “the 
grace of God…seems to be the necessary starting point of the argument in the next section” (Hebrews, 46). 
60 The author does not simply refer to “the Savior”—he calls him the author of the salvation of many 
children, subtly preparing the way for the quotes in 2:12-13. 

18 
them to reach this end.”61 Verse 14 uses the logical connector , and 2:17 uses , 
showing that they are drawing conclusions from the previous verses; they express what 
the passage is driving at—it shows why Jesus could not be perfect (i.e., completely 
prepared for his salvific role)62 without dying. I will put the somewhat repetitious 
argument into enthymemes: 
• 
Claim: The Savior had to suffer (2:10c). 
• 
Ground: Because () the Savior and the saved (the Sanctifier and the 
sanctified) have a common heritage—they are all human (2:11). 
• 
Warrant: {Humans have to suffer—i.e., to die (cf. 9:27).}  
 
• 
Claim: Jesus is in the same (human) family as people are (thus this verse 
supports the premise of 2:11, that we are all from one). 
• 
Ground: Jesus speaks of humans as his siblings in Ps 22:2263 (2:12). 
• 
Warrant: {If he calls them siblings, they are in the same family.}  
 
• 
Claim: We are in the same family. 
• 
Ground: In Isa 8:17-18,64 he refers to children given to him [as siblings]. 
• 
Warrant: {If he is given children, he is in the same family as they are.}  
 
Verse 14 uses  to introduce the conclusion: 
 
• 
Ground: Since () all humans have flesh and blood (2:14a)… 
• 
{and since he is in the same family}, 
• 
Jesus became human.  
 
Verse 14 contains an unproven assertion: That Jesus became mortal for the 
purpose of [] destroying the devil through his own death.65 Verse 15 gives another 
                                                 
61 Koester, Hebrews, 235. 
62 Several commentators note that  is used in Lev 21:10 and other verses to refer to the consecration 
of a priest. Although this may have been in the author’s mind, the readers would be unlikely to have this 
technical meaning in mind, for at this point in the epistle, there has been nothing in the context to suggest it.  
63 Ps 22 is treated as a messianic psalm several times in the NT; there is no effort to defend its use here. 
“The author …expected his readers to be aware, of the already traditional Christian understanding” 
(Ellingworth, Hebrews, 167). 
64 It is odd that Isa 8:17 is separated from Isa 8:18 by 	. Perhaps the author wanted to ensure that 
both verses were given attention. 
65 This is an incidental claim; the devil plays no role in the argument of the epistle. It is a throw-away 
comment indicating that the author believed that death was caused by the devil.  

19 
reason: He became mortal so that by dying, he might free all humans from death. Why 
would his death free others from death? The author does not say. This, like the similar 
assertion in 2:9, is not followed by supporting argumentation. The epistle later argues that 
his death is a means of atonement and cleansing; the unstated premise is that death is due 
to sin, and permission to approach God (which Jesus enables through his death) shows 
that sins are forgiven and is therefore tantamount to salvation and eternal life.66 The idea 
is that if sins are forgiven, then that removes the only thing preventing people from 
having the eternal life that God promised. But the author does not demonstrate that God 
promised eternal life to the righteous; he assumes that the readers already believe that.	
 
Rather than simply saying that Jesus has freed people from death, 2:15 says that 
Jesus has freed people from fear and slavery, thus appealing to the emotions of the 
readers. Verse 16 mentions angels once again, just to dismiss them: “For [] it is clear 
that he did not come to help angels.”67 Of course—no one thought he did, nor do angels 
need help. They are mentioned here as a rhetorical foil, so the readers have no choice but 
to agree with the author. There is some sleight-of-hand involved in the logic.68 The 
original question was, Did the Savior have to die? Here it is shifted to, Did Jesus come to 
                                                 
66 The author uses a variety of terms for salvation without explicitly saying that they refer to the same 
thing: purification for sins, the coming world, sanctification, freed from the fear of death, the house of God, 
the sabbath rest of God, resurrection of the dead, the age to come, the promised eternal inheritance, 
perfection, entering the heavenly sanctuary, the city with foundations, a heavenly country, Mt. Zion, the 
heavenly Jerusalem, the firstborn enrolled in heaven, a kingdom that cannot be shaken, etc. 
67 This assumes the NRSV translation “helps.” It is also possible that the Greek πιλαµβνεται (“he takes 
hold”) refers to a transformation: He does not assume the essence of angels, but rather he became one of 
the children of Abraham. In this way of understanding the verse, it is a restatement, not a supporting 
argument. Verse 14 says that he became human; 2:16 “would be a mere repetition of v. 14a” (Westcott, 
Hebrews, 55). Verse 17 would then be illogical: He therefore had to become like his siblings. The θεν that 
begins 2:17 implies that a reason rather than a restatement has been given in 2:16. Ellingworth writes, “If 
this were the meaning of v. 16, it would mark no advance over what was said in v. 14a, and the 
introductory  would be meaningless” (Hebrews, 177).  
68 C. Clifton Black II notes that rhetoric is sometimes “quasi-logical”: “Quintillian is fully aware that a 
certain degree of legerdemain characterizes the ‘logic’ of some arguments; he and other theorists, from 
Aristotle on, describe the logos of a speech as either proof or the appearance of proof” (“The Rhetorical 
Form of the Hellenistic Jewish and Early Christian Sermon: A Response to Lawrence Wills,” HTR 81 
[1988]: 11). Similarly, Vernon K. Robbins notes that “rationales juxtaposed with assertions regularly break 
the bounds of any easily reconstructed logic” (“The Present and Future of Rhetorical Analysis,” in The 
Rhetorical Analysis of Scripture: Essays from the 1995 London Conference [ed. S. E. Porter and T. H. 
Olbricht; JSNTSup 146; Sheffield: Sheffield Academic, 1997], 36). 

20 
save angels, or humans? The readers will have to say “humans, of course,” reinforcing by 
association the propriety of the Savior being a mortal. 
 
Instead of saying that Jesus came to save humans, 2:17 says that he came to help 
“the descendants of Abraham.” The author’s earlier argument included all humanity; here 
(perhaps due to the author’s fondness of variety) it is focused on the family of Abraham. 
The author makes no attempt to clarify that this means all who believe; he simply 
assumes that the readers will know that they are included in this designation.  
• 
Datum: He came to help the descendants of Abraham (2:16). 
• 
Conclusion: Therefore () he had to become like his siblings in every 
way (2:17). 
• 
Warrant: {A Savior must share in the essence of those who are saved.} 
 
The case for this warrant rests on two points: 1) that all authority was given to a 
human (2:5-9), and 2) that the messiah used family terms for his people (2:11-14). The 
author suggests that the humanity of the Savior was not only predicted in Scripture, it is 
somehow logically appropriate (although the author does not prove this with any logic). 
 
Verse 17 adds a new reason for the incarnation: “so that [] he might be a 
merciful and faithful high priest.”69 His role as high priest is not yet stated as a self-
sacrifice—the purpose is simply “to make a sacrifice of atonement for the sins of the 
people.” However, 2:9 argues that Jesus was made human so that he could die for 
everyone; 2:14 says that he was made human so that he could conquer death through his 
death; the implication involved in putting the three verses together is that the “sacrifice of 
atonement” was himself, that his death brings salvation by atoning for sins. This will be 
made explicit later, especially in 7:27.  
Heb 2:18, using , gives a supporting enthymeme: 
• 
Claim: Jesus can help those who are tested. 
• 
Ground: Because Jesus was tested when he suffered. 
• 
Warrant: {One who has been tested can help those who are being tested.} 
                                                 
69 This is the first use of this title, which becomes a key term later in the epistle. Although the term is used 
casually, as if the readers were already familiar with it, it is also possible that it was new to the readers—
the author expected them to keep listening for an explanation. In previous purpose clauses (2:9 and 2:14), 
the author went on to provide support for the statement. Ellingworth calls this verse “a nerve center of the 
epistle” (Hebrews, 179); several commentators call it the propositio (see list in Koester, Hebrews, 219). 
Scripture did not require priests to be merciful; the mention of mercy here suggests a need of the readers. 

21 
 
This is relevant to 2:17 in two ways: 1) Jesus can be merciful, and therefore 
willing to help others, because he has been tested. 2) Because he was tested—and passed 
the test—he was able to be called faithful, and to atone for human sins. The key part of 
point 2 is stated explicitly in 4:15: Jesus can sympathize with our weaknesses (i.e., be 
merciful) because he “has been tested [same word—] as we are, yet without sin.” 
Sinlessness is probably implied in 2:18, too, since anyone who collapses under testing is 
a dubious source of help for others. However, the author’s stress in 2:18 is on mercy, not 
atonement, since it ends by saying that Jesus is able to help those who are being tested70 
(which presumably includes the readers). The assumption is that the readers want a 
Savior who is able to help them when they are tested. The connection between 2:17 and 
2:18 is allusive, shown in the following enthymeme: 
• 
Claim: Jesus had to be made human (2:17a). 
• 
Ground: Because () {only a Savior who has been tested by suffering as 
a human can help humans who are being tested (implied in 2:18a).} 
• 
Warrant: {It was necessary for the Savior to be able to help humans in 
their tests (implied in 2:17b and 2:18b).}  
 
 
Hebrews 3—Jesus more faithful than Moses 
Heb 3:1 uses  to move into another exhortation: Since Jesus can help us, let 
us think more about him. The author calls the readers , echoing 2:17, and uses 
, a word that has important associations in later chapters. He also calls Jesus 
an apostle, a word that is not developed further, and high priest, which will be. Just as he 
did in 2:1, the author is using an argument as a rhetorical device calling for attentiveness. 
He supports what he said in 2:17—first that Jesus was faithful, later that he is merciful. 
• 
Jesus can help us (2:18). 
• 
We should therefore consider Jesus (3:1). 
• 
Warrant: {If we want help, we should be attentive to people who can help 
us.} 
 
                                                 
70 Atonement is the appropriate help for those who fail their tests, but that does not seem to be in the 
author’s thought at this point. 

22 
He makes an assertion in 3:2—that Jesus was faithful—and follows it with a  
sentence in 3:3. This sentence does not explain why Jesus was faithful, but rather, why 
the author can say he was faithful.  
• 
Claim: We must consider Jesus faithful (3:1-2). 
• 
Ground: Because () Jesus is worthy of more glory than Moses (3:3).  
• 
Warrant: {Anyone given more honor than Moses must also be considered 
faithful, because Moses is honored because he was faithful.}71  
 
Verse 3 also includes a comparative argument: 
 
• 
Claim: Jesus has more honor than Moses. 
• 
Warrant: Builders have more honor than the houses they build. 
• 
Ground: {Jesus corresponds to the builder, Moses to the house.}72  
 
Heb 1:2 has already said that Jesus is the agent of creation, so it is not strange that 
Jesus is here called the builder. However, Heb 3:4, using the word , takes another 
step. Ellingworth73 suggests that it refers to 3:2: 
• 
Claim: Moses was faithful in all his house (3:2, quoting Num 12:7). 
• 
Ground: Because God is the builder of all things (3:4). 
• 
Implied conclusion: {It was God’s house, not Moses’.} 
 
But the logic fails to address the point that Ellingworth claims it does—3:4 says 
that every house is built by someone, and logically, that “someone” could be Moses, even 
if God is the ultimate builder. For 3:4 to be relevant, it must say something about 
Christ—implying that Christ is the divine builder of the house. This takes the parallels in 
3:3 as relevant also: Jesus is worthy of more honor because he is the builder of the house, 
and he is divine. It is true, as Ellingworth points out when he considers this interpretation, 
that the author does not develop this point,74 but the author did nothing to develop the 
divine vocative in 1:8, either. That is not the purpose of this epistle. The enthymeme is: 
                                                 
71 “ appears to connect v. 3, not directly with v. 2, but with 			 in v. 1, and indirectly (via , 
v. 1) with the whole previous argument about the supremacy of Christ” (Ellingworth, Hebrews, 204).  
72 This is the more common interpretation, but Ellingworth denies that the parallels are intended: “The 
meaning is simply ‘A is greater than B, just as C is greater than D’” (ibid., 203). But it would be odd to 
compare something totally unrelated; the proximity suggests some similarity. 
73 Ibid., 205. 
74 Ibid., 206. 

23 
• 
Claim: Jesus is worthy of more honor, just as a builder is (3:3). 
• 
Ground: For () the builder of all things is divine (3:4). 
• 
Implied warrant: {Jesus is the builder of all things, and the builder of this 
house in particular.} 
 
It would have been sufficient to argue that Jesus was the builder of the house—
e.g., “for every house is built by someone, and the builder of this house is Jesus.” 
However, the author expands it by talking about the builder of all things.75 Once this has 
been done, the builder analogy is abandoned; only the house analogy is used in 3:5-6. 
These verses argue that 1) Moses was faithful as a servant and 2) Christ was faithful as a 
son. The assumption seems to be that the faithfulness of a son is more honorable than the 
faithfulness of a servant—an assumption that may have been accepted in the first century, 
but is not necessarily true. The passage assumes part of what it labors to prove: that Jesus 
was faithful in all his tests. Again, the readers are assumed to have a high Christology.  
The other argument in this passage is that Jesus is more honorable than Moses. 
The author could have pointed out incidents in which Moses fell short, but he did not. In 
keeping with Greek rhetorical conventions of praise by comparison (synkrisis), he does 
not denigrate the lesser person (except the hint in 3:17).76 Rather, he bases the argument 
on ontological difference, not behavioral difference. Both persons were accepted as 
thoroughly faithful, but Jesus was counted as more honorable simply because of his 
ontological superiority.77  
The argument could have been simple: A son is better than a servant, so Jesus the 
son is better than Moses the servant. So why has the author used a more circuitous and 
less logical route? Probably because the question revolved not just around Moses, but 
also around faithfulness. The author appeals to readers who valued faithfulness and 
viewed Moses as a good example of faithfulness. They apparently wanted to be faithful 
                                                 
75 Since Jesus is the maker of all things (1:2), and the house is a thing, he is the maker of it as well. The 
argument assumes that Jesus is divine. 
76 As Robert H. Smith observes, “It would have undermined his proportional comparison to point to any 
flaws in the character or work of Moses” (Hebrews [ACNT; Minneapolis: Augsburg, 1984], 57). It is more 
surprising, then, that when the author compares new and old covenants, he points out flaws in the old. 
77 Schenck points out that the passage supports the author’s eventual goal of contrasting the old and new 
covenants: “The author’s discussion of Christ and Moses in Heb. 3:1-6 implicitly contrasts the two 
‘covenants’ with which these two individuals are associated” (Understanding, 60). 

24 
to Moses. The author grants their argument, but tries to trump it in two ways. Yes, Num 
12:7 says that Moses was faithful in all of God’s house, but Jesus is more worthy of 
allegiance because he is 1) the builder and 2) the son. He has been given more glory than 
Moses, showing that he had a better faithfulness—and since he set a better example, 
people should be faithful to him, more than to the good-but-lesser example. 
The author uses the “house” concept again in 3:6, saying that the readers are the 
house of God and/or Christ78 if they hold firm—i.e., if they are faithful. This becomes an 
implied exhortation: If they want to be part of his household (i.e., his family, used here as 
a metaphor of salvation), then they will hold firm to the confidence they have in him.  
In 3:7, the author launches into a more direct exhortation, using the word .  
• 
Ground: Christ is a faithful son (3:6a). 
• 
Conclusion: We should therefore listen, not harden our hearts (3:7). 
• 
Warrant: {We should listen to faithful examples.} 
 
Or it could support a different claim:  
• 
Ground: We want to hold firm to our confidence (implied in 3:6b). 
• 
Conclusion: We should therefore listen, not harden our hearts (3:7). 
• 
Warrant: {If we don’t listen, we won’t hold firm.}  
 
The first possibility treats 3:6bc as a parenthetical thought; the second possibility 
takes it as a step in the argument, which is why I prefer it.  
Heb 3:7-11 contains a long quote from Ps 95:7-1179; Heb 3:10 includes another 
enthymeme using 	Although the enthymeme originates with the LXX, the author 
quotes it with approval: 
• 
Claim: God was angry with them. 
• 
Because that generation provoked and tested God.80 
                                                 
78 The 
 is ambiguous. The author may not have seen much distinction between the house of God and 
the house of Christ, and was willing to let the ambiguity stand. “House of God” could remind readers of the 
temple, but the author does not do anything to reinforce that association.  
79 This section of the epistle may have originated as a sermon based on Ps 95. Ellingworth notes in chapter 
4 that the “cyclical nature of the argument… can perhaps best be understood on the presupposition that the 
author is not primarily concerned to give new teaching…but to strengthen the readers’ conviction about 
truths which they already accept” (Hebrews, 237). 
80 Verse 9 says that the people saw God’s works for 40 years. In the Torah, however, 40 years was the 
punishment, not the cause of the punishment.  

25 
• 
{God is angry with persistent rebels.} 
 
Verse 11 says that a consequence of God’s anger is that he did not give that 
generation the blessing he had offered. This could be viewed as an enthymeme, or simply 
as a synonym or expression of God’s wrath.  
Verse 12 includes a direct exhortation with strong, emotionally charged words: Be 
careful that you do not have an evil, unbelieving (or unfaithful) heart that falls away from 
God. These words, immediately following a description of disobedience and 
punishment,81 make the warning here much stronger than the warning in 2:1-3. The 
second-person imperative in 3:12 is more direct than the first-person plural indicative and 
hypothetical question of 2:1-3, indicating that the author believes that he is dealing with a 
real possibility for the readers. 
What he suggested in 2:1-3 becomes here a direct command. The author first 
suggested that the readers would not want to drift away; here he implies that they need to 
avoid a deliberate refusal to do God’s will. The argument implies that the readers are in a 
comparable situation: God is still angered by rebellion, and the readers do not want to 
experience punishment the way the ancient Israelites did, so they do not want to provoke 
him the way the ancients did. The readers may not think they are moving a significant 
amount, but the author warns them that they are in danger of moving too far. The 
implication is that they will provoke God if they do not hold on to their confidence (3:6) 
and assurance (3:14). How do they hold firm? By paying attention to the message of 
Christ (2:1), and remembering that he was faithful and worthy of more honor than Moses 
(3:1-3). 
In brief, the argument is: “They disobeyed and God punished them. So readers, be 
careful—you might experience the same, if you go down the path that you are tempted to 
go.” The author has yet to demonstrate that the “path” they have in mind is really 
tantamount to apostasy (he never directly says that, for he never directly describes their 
temptation), but he says here that the danger is indeed that serious. The solution he offers 
                                                 
81 Strictly speaking, the text says not that the Israelites were punished, but that they were not given a 
blessing. Anyone who knew the history would know that this was a punishment.  

26 
(without supporting argumentation) is mutual encouragement (3:13).82 He implies in a 
	clause that if the readers encourage one another daily, none of them will be deceived 
by sin and thereby have their hearts hardened. He does not say what sort of sin might 
deceive them, but it is apparently the sin of ignoring Jesus, which amounts, in the 
author’s analysis, to rebellion against God.  
What were the readers to encourage one another to do? In context, it was the 
admonition of Ps 95:7: Listen to God, and be willing to obey.83 (And as the epistle 
argues, the readers can listen to God only if they are attentive to the message of Jesus.)	
Heb 3:14 amounts to a paraphrase of 3:6: If we hold fast, then we belong to 
Christ—we are his house, and we have become his partners (
, used previously in 
reference to Christ in 1:9 and for the readers in 3:1). In brief, the argument is: Exhort one 
another, because () you are partakers of Christ if you keep your faith in him. Although 
3:14 uses , the logic is too weak to construct an enthymeme. A more direct conclusion 
is the logical contrapositive: If a person does not hold firm in the future, then that person 
is not now a partner of Christ.  
The author repeats the exhortation of Ps 95:7-8 and in 3:16, uses  to resume 
the argument with a series of rhetorical questions. As a supporting reason, he asks, Who 
were the people who heard and yet disobeyed? He answers: “All those who left Egypt…” 
He could have stopped there, but he adds the words 	 . Why did the author 
mention Moses in this negative context? In 3:16-18, the author asks three times: Who 
was it…who was it…who was it? And the answer he gives is: The people led by 
Moses… those who sinned…who were disobedient. Through parallelism, Moses is put in 
bad company. There is an obvious parenetic response to the problem of disobedience, and 
an obvious response to the problem of sin. But what is the alternative to the “problem” of 
following Moses? The author leaves it to the imagination. The rhetorical questions have 
pointed out that it is not enough to follow Moses.84 The enthymeme is:  
                                                 
82 The mutual exhortation that is explicit in 3:13 is also implied in 3:12, when the author tells them to take 
care that “none of you” falls away. He wants the readers to make sure that everyone remains together. 
83 “The addressees are urged to exhort one another by saying the words of the psalm itself” (Attridge, 
Hebrews, 120).  
84 Robert P. Gordon points out that in Heb 3 and 11, “the role of Moses as law-giver is played down” 
(Hebrews [Readings; Sheffield: Sheffield Academic, 2000], 57). Pamela Eisenbaum observes that “Moses 
is held at least partly responsible for the people’s failures” (“Heroes and History in Hebrews 11,” pp. 380-

27 
• 
Claim: We should exhort one another daily, hold our confidence firm, and 
not harden our hearts (3:13-15). 
• 
Because () they followed Moses, sinned, and disobeyed… (3:16-18). 
• 
{Daily exhortations will help us be faithful and avoid making the same 
mistakes.} 
 
Verse 19 draws the conclusion: “So we see that they were unable to enter because 
of unbelief [ 
].” However, the author has said nothing up to this point about 
πστι (the first occurrence is in 4:2, two verses below). But he has used πστο (faithful) 
three times; he is concerned about faithfulness. It seems that with  
 the author is 
referring more to unfaithfulness than introducing a new thought about unbelief. At this 
point in the epistle, it would be a non sequitur for the author to say, “God punished the 
disobedient and we can see from this that the people did not believe.” This would 
presuppose the point made in 11:6, that a person must have faith to please God. The 
author may be moving toward the concept of faith, but at this point faithfulness seems to 
be the dominant concern. 
Verse 18 repeats the thought from Ps 95:11 that the blessing God offered the 
Israelites was to enter his rest. Verse 19 repeats the word “enter” in preparation for the 
argument in chapter 4. 
 
Hebrews 4—entering God’s rest 
Chapter 4 begins with an enthymeme using the word , but some connecting 
thoughts are unexpressed:  
• 
God withheld the promise from them because of disobedience (3:17-19). 
• 
{That will also happen to us, if we do the same thing.}85  
• 
Conclusion: {God will withhold blessings from us if we disobey.} 
 
• 
Claim: We should take care, so that we do not fall short (4:1). 
• 
If we fall short (disobey), we will not enjoy the promise (implied in 4:1b). 
• 
{We should make every effort to receive the blessings.} 
                                                                                                                                                 
96 in Early Christian Interpretation of the Scriptures of Israel: Investigations and Proposals [ed. Craig A. 
Evans and James A. Sanders; Sheffield: Sheffield Academic, 1997], 388). 
85 The more general premise is that God always punishes disobedience—probably based on the belief that 
God does not change, coupled with the observation that he punished the Israelites who disobeyed in the 
wilderness. Contraindications could heavily qualify this premise.  

28 
 
The argument assumes that the rest is still available, a point also assumed in 4:6, 
but not proven until 4:9. Verse 2 reasons on the basis that the readers’ situation is 
comparable to the ancient one: 
• 
Claim: We should take care not to fall short (4:1). 
• 
For [] we have blessings offered to us, just as they did (4:2a). 
• 
{Those who are offered blessings should strive to get them.} 
 
Verse 2b makes two claims about the Israelites: 1) The message did not benefit 
them (3:17-19) and 2) They lacked πστι.86 The author has already argued that the 
people were not faithful, and that is the meaning of πστι that is most likely meant here. 
But the participle implies that the association is due to causation, and most English 
translations supply the word “because”: The message did not benefit them because they 
were not faithful, implying that πστι is essential for enjoying a divine promise.  
Verse 3, by using , looks like a supporting argument,87 but it is really another 
assertion: Those who believe, and (it is implied) only those who believe, receive the 
promise of God (in this case, rest). By using a form of  
, the author mentions 
belief, but he does nothing in subsequent verses to reinforce the necessity of belief per 
se.88 Nothing is said about the content of the belief, although the author eventually 
exhorts the readers to be faithful to their “confession” (4:14). 
• 
Claim: We enter his rest (4:3).89 
                                                 
86 My truncated statement at this point works with both textual variants: They were not united by faith with 
those who did hear, or the people who heard did not unite the message with faith. 
87 Ellingworth argues that 4:3 supports the claim made in 4:2a (Hebrews, 244). The enthymeme might be: 
The good news came to us, for we who have believed enter that rest. This indicates that the rest is 
equivalent to the salvation offered by the gospel, but it is more by assertion than logical support. 
88 “The theme of faith [like many others]…is first introduced in passing, and later becomes more 
prominent” (Ellingworth, Hebrews, 243). 
89 The present tense suggests that believers are currently entering the rest. However, it is also possible to 
understand the verb as a gnomic present, talking about a future entry. Ellingworth says, “Nowhere else does 
the author suggest a full and unconditional realization of the Christian hope in the present…. It is therefore 
preferable to understand 
	 as an emphatic equivalent of the future tense” (Hebrews, 246). 
However, Ellingworth is unfairly stacking the deck by implying that the rest is in the present only if it is a 
“full and unconditional realization.” As in other areas of NT eschatology, a partial realization (“already but 
not yet”) should be considered. Smith points out that “The rest is not a completely future quantity. If it 
were, the ancients could hardly be faulted for failing to enter” (Hebrews, 64). The rest, like salvation, is a 
future reward that people begin to experience in this life. Dmitri Royster writes, “The rest of which the 

29 
• 
God offers us rest, and we believe (it? him?). 
• 
{Only those who believe receive God’s blessings (cf. 11:6).}  
 
Subsequent verses, instead of supporting the necessity of belief, argue that the rest 
is still a valid offer (4:3b-11) and urge the readers to hold fast and approach God through 
Christ (4:14-16). Presumably the readers will be blessed only if Christ has a central role 
in their relationship with God. The reasoning begins in 4:3b, but I cannot put it in the 
form of an enthymeme. The point is that the rest is still available, but the evidence given 
is that God rested in the past, at creation (4:3c-4).90 The connecting link may be that the 
psalmist was not talking about occupying the land of Canaan, that God is still resting 
from his creative work, so it is still available. 
The author proves that the rest began in the past with a quote from Scripture: His 
works are finished, for91 it says, “And God rested…” But the author did not need to prove 
that the creation rest was in the past! I suspect that this is included as a subtle devaluation 
of the Sabbath. The author says “on the seventh day” as part of the quote from Gen 2:2—
that seems reasonable—but there was no need for the author to preface the quote with a 
reminder that God is talking “about the seventh day.” He is drawing extra attention to the 
seventh day, including it in the comparison. The author is implying that not only is the 
“rest” that God offers not the creation rest, it is not the weekly Sabbath (a memorial of 
the creation rest), either.92 Just as Moses is not directly denigrated but is less than Jesus, 
the Sabbath is not directly criticized, but it is not what God exhorts his people to enter. 
• 
God exhorts93 people in the psalm: Listen right now, and do not be like 
those who failed to enter my rest (4:5). 
                                                                                                                                                 
Apostle speaks is the kingdom of heaven. But a foretaste of that kingdom is already provided in the 
assembly of the faithful…. So the faithful do enter (or better, ‘are entering’) into the rest even now” (The 
Epistle to the Hebrews: A Commentary [Crestwood, N.Y.: St. Vladimir’s Seminary, 2003], 59). 
90 Michael Magill writes, “God entered His rest on the seventh day. This proves that the concept of ‘rest’ in 
Ps 95 is not limited to the promised land in Moses’ day, but refers to something existing since the seventh 
day of creation” (New Testament Transline [Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2002], 831). 
91 The word  is used to introduce a scripture; it does not form an enthymeme. 
92 The logic used in 4:8 could easily be applied to the Sabbath: If the weekly Sabbath had given them rest, 
then God would not have spoken in Ps 95 of another day (the word “rest” would have been sufficient; the 
word “day” hints that the author is talking about the Sabbath). 
93 The argument assumes that not only did God exhort people in the psalmist’s day (4:7), but that he 
continues to exhort people through the psalm.  

30 
• 
Conclusion: Therefore [] the offer of rest still remains open (4:6a). 
• 
Warrant: {When God exhorts people to listen to a warning about failure, it 
means that the possibility of success is still open.}  
 
• 
Claim: God offers the blessing to others (indirectly supporting the author’s 
assertion that the “rest” is still an open offer). 
• 
The first group of people failed to enter because of disobedience (4:6c). 
• 
{God will always make good on his plans, so if the first group fails, the 
offer will be extended to others.} 
 
In 4:8, he uses  to respond to a possible objection: 
 
• 
Claim: {The “rest” is not the land}, which the people received in Joshua’s 
day (4:8). 
• 
God exhorts people in David’s day (who were in the land) to enter his rest 
(4:7b). 
• 
{If the land of Canaan was the “rest” he spoke of, he would not exhort 
people in the land to enter his rest.}94 
 
• 
Claim: {Since there are no other possibilities}, a sabbath rest still remains 
for the people of God (4:9). 
• 
The rest is not the creation rest (4:3c-4), nor the land (4:8). 
• 
{If the “rest” has not been claimed, the offer is still open, since God 
always makes good on his plans.}  
 
“Sabbath rest” is a translation of 		
, but the logical connectors in 4:9-
11 make no sense unless the author is using it as a synonym of 		. He 
apparently uses the new word to indicate that the weekly Sabbath typifies the 
eschatological rest.95 What the original Sabbath pictured still remains as an offer from 
God. Verse 10 then gives a reason: A rest still remains, for () a person at rest is no 
longer working.96 The person being exhorted is apparently still working, but it is not clear 
                                                 
94 The author does not address the possibility that Joshua could have given the people military rest, which 
was subsequently lost—thus the psalmist exhorted people to experience national security by obeying God.  
95 See a longer discussion in Michael Morrison, Sabbath, Circumcision, and Tithing: Which Old Testament 
Laws Apply to Christians? (San Jose: Writers Club, 2002), 157-58.		
96 This logic implies that “the person” is not Jesus, as some have suggested. It would not be logical to say 
that a rest remains for us because Jesus has rested from his works. It also indicates that the “rest” is future, 
and 4:3 is a gnomic present.  

31 
what sort of “work” is in view97: 
• 
Claim: We have not entered his rest, and God still exhorts us to, so the 
offer of rest still remains open (4:6, 9). 
• 
The person who has entered God’s rest is now resting (4:10a). 
• 
{We are not yet resting.} 
 
The author draws the discussion to a close by using  in 4:11:  
 
• 
Claim: We should therefore make every effort to enter that rest (4:11). 
• 
God still exhorts us to enter his rest. 
• 
{We should strive to receive the blessing God offers.} 
 
How do people “strive” to enter God’s rest? The author does not say, although the 
discussion implies that people enter by believing something (4:3), being obedient (4:6), 
and maintaining their confession (of Christ) (4:14b). The purpose () of diligence is 
that no one will fall though disobedience (4:11b).  
This concludes the discussion of “rest” that began in 3:7—but what was the 
purpose of this discussion? It does not seem well suited to the overall parenetic purpose 
of Hebrews. It uses rest as a metaphor of salvation, but this metaphor is not used in the 
remainder of the epistle. It stresses the need for obedience, but does not specify what 
commands are in view, with the possible exception of 3:14. The passage could be 
removed from Hebrews with little damage—the thought would go immediately from 
Jesus as a faithful Son (3:6) to an exhortation to hold fast to him (4:14). I get the 
impression that 3:7-4:11 (perhaps 4:12-13 as well) was originally an independent sermon 
based on Ps 95.  
Even if this theory is correct, we must still ask why the author included this 
passage in his epistle. Perhaps we can deduce the situation from the author’s emphasis—
although he states that people who believe enter God’s rest, he makes no attempt to prove 
that point. Rather, he tries to prove that the offer of rest is still valid, as if that is the 
primary question that the readers had. Since the author does not draw attention to the 
meaning of “rest,” nor does he use the word later in the epistle, the readers probably were 
                                                 
97 Donald A. Hagner observes that the “work” is never defined: “It is the idea of rest itself that is important, 
not the nature of the work that one no longer needs to do” (Encountering the Book of Hebrews 
[Encountering Biblical Studies; Grand Rapids: Baker, 2002], 75). 

32 
not concerned about this word; it just happened to be in the psalm the author used. The 
stress seems to be that God has an offer that extends beyond Moses, and beyond Joshua, 
perhaps in response to readers who looked only to the past.  
The passage stresses obedience, but it is difficult to imagine an audience that 
viewed the Scriptures as authoritative (which is assumed throughout the epistle) and yet 
did not already accept the importance of obedience. Indeed, the author has already 
assumed the need for obedience in the warning he gives in 2:2-3, and faithfulness is 
assumed to be a virtue in 3:2-6. When the author argues for obedience, he is probably 
appealing to a value that the readers already held (building rapport, or ethos), but he says 
that the call to listen (3:7) is not just about the past—it is also about the future. But he 
does little to specify what the readers were to obey, and he will later argue that the law 
has been changed (7:12, 18, etc.). Although the epistle has some miscellaneous 
exhortations in chapter 13, the primary “obedience” advocated is being faithful to the 
confession of Christ. 
Heb 4:12-13 have no vocabulary connections with preceding or subsequent 
verses—no hook words or theme words—and may have been a preexisting unit. They are 
used here (with ) as a reason for diligence. They make assertions that the author 
makes no attempt to support—presumably the readers would be in substantial agreement 
with the idea.  
• 
Claim: We should make every effort to avoid disobedience (4:11). 
• 
God’s word exposes everyone’s thoughts for judgment (4:12-13). 
• 
{Disobedience will be punished.} 
 
Verse 14 continues the thought: Since disobedience will be punished, people 
should therefore () hold fast to the confession, because they have help in heaven. It 
again assumes that the readers have a high Christology, that they believe that Jesus is the 
“great high priest” in heaven. This is presented as a reason for the readers to hold fast to 
their confession—and presumably the confession entails a belief that Jesus is now in 
heaven, as 1:3 implies, and that he helps people avoid punishment.98 However, what is 
                                                 
98 Ellingworth recognizes that the surface logic is inadequate: “! does not draw an inference from what 
immediately precedes” (Hebrews, 266). However, the logic is good if the high priest helps people avoid 
punishment, which is implied in 5:1. I paraphrase: God will punish all sin. Therefore, since we have an 
intermediary who can give us the help we definitely need, we need to stay in his good graces. It is not clear 

33 
the logical connection between having a high priest and holding fast to the confession? 
The connection is given in 4:15-16, culminating in the thought that this is the (only) way 
that the readers can find the mercy and grace they need. 
• 
Claim: Jesus our high priest can sympathize with us (4:15a).99 
• 
Jesus was tested just like us, but he did not sin (4:15b).  
• 
{Sympathy comes from similar experiences.} 
 
• 
Claim: We can be sure that Jesus will give us mercy and grace when we 
need it (4:16b).100 
• 
Because () Jesus can sympathize with us (4:15a). 
• 
{Someone who has sympathy for us will be merciful to us.}  
 
• 
Jesus will give us mercy and grace. 
• 
{We need mercy and grace.}101  
• 
Conclusion: We should therefore () approach the throne with boldness 
(4:16). 
 
Why should the readers approach the throne of grace? So that () they can 
receive grace. This implies that the throne is occupied by the source of grace—and the 
context says that this is Jesus, the merciful and sympathetic high priest—and the readers 
should maintain their confession about him because they need the grace that only he 
provides. Since disobedience will be punished (4:11), and God judges all people (4:13), 
they need the help of Jesus Christ, the intermediary, the source of mercy and grace. They 
can go to his throne confidently because they know that he sympathizes with their 
weaknesses. That is why they need to maintain their confession—because in the face of 
judgment, they need the help of Jesus.  
 
                                                                                                                                                 
whether the confession included “high priest.” The author used that title without comment earlier, as if it 
were an already accepted idea. But he develops the concept later in the epistle as a new teaching. Perhaps 
the readers had accepted the word without giving it much content; the author therefore uses it several times 
early in his epistle to make it seem like he is building on something they already believed. 
99 “By the negative form of the sentence he recognizes the presence of an objection which he meets by 
anticipation” (Westcott, Hebrews, 106). 
100 Although it is possible that the “time of need” is the eschatological day of judgment, the passage seems 
to presume it is a present reality. 
101 The need for mercy may be a conclusion implied from the judgment mentioned in 4:12. The author 
assumes that all people fall short of God’s requirements and therefore need mercy. 

34 
Hebrews 5—a subject hard to explain 
Heb 5 begins by giving a reason for the exhortation in 4:16: 
• 
Claim: People should approach the throne with boldness (4:16a). 
• 
Because () high priests are assigned to help people in their relationship 
with God and offer sacrifices for sins (5:1-2).102 
• 
{People can be bold when asking people to do their assigned jobs.} 
 
Verse 1 says that high priests are appointed for a purpose (): to offer 
sacrifices. This assertion is common knowledge,103 but is stated so that the author can 
develop the thought. He has already named Jesus as the high priest, so he implies here 
that Jesus “is put in charge of things pertaining to God” and that he offered a sacrifice.104 
The author has already hinted at the sacrifice Jesus offered (see 2:17), and will develop it 
later. Here he speaks in general terms. Verse 2 adds that Jesus can deal gently with 
people, since he also experienced weakness (cf. 2:18; 4:15):  
• 
A priest can deal gently with people (5:2a). 
• 
Since () he is also subject to weakness (5:2b). 
• 
{A person who has been weak will have sympathy for the weak.}105 
 
Because () of weakness, priests had to offer sacrifices for their own sins: 
• 
Claim: They had to offer sacrifices for their own sins. 
• 
Human high priests sin because they are weak. 
• 
{Priests offer sacrifices for sin.} 
                                                 
102 Ellingworth argues against the connection I have drawn above, saying that  “does not, as P. E. 
Hughes believes, express a logical connection with what precedes, and it is not directly related to the 
exhortations 
" (4:14) and  #" (4:16)” (Hebrews, 272). He advocates a connection to 
4:15 instead, but the connection with  #" seems to make more sense. Westcott also says that 
“ is explanatory and not directly argumentative” (Hebrews, 117). William L. Lane argues for a 
connection with 4:15-16 as a whole (Hebrews 1-8 [WBC 47A; Dallas: Word, 1991], 111). The connection I 
have sketched implies that the “throne of grace” is occupied by the high priest. 
103 Olbricht observes that the author “offers no warrant for this claim, under the assumption that it is 
common knowledge” (“Anticipating,” 361). 
104 Heb 5:1 uses the plural—sacrifices—but neither the number nor the tense should be pressed—the author 
later uses the aorist to say that Jesus offered one sacrifice (7:27b). 
105 Olbricht offers a similar syllogism (“Anticipating,” 363), but my other enthymemes differ considerably 
from his syllogisms. First-century high priests were hardly known for their gentleness with common 
people—the author is describing “the way things ought to be.” Ellingworth observes, “The general 
description of high priesthood is selective and from the beginning has in view the person, and probably the 
earthly life, of Jesus” (Hebrews, 271-72; cf. Attridge, Hebrews, 144). 

35 
 
Although verses 4-5 present similarities rather than claiming to be a logical 
conclusion, they advance the argument with a complete syllogism:  
• 
Priests do not appoint themselves (5:4a; Aaron is cited as a supporting 
illustration). 
• 
Christ is a priest (4:14).  
• 
Therefore, he did not appoint himself (5:5, supported by the citations in 5b 
and 6 in which God calls Christ a Son and priest). 
 
Heb 5:5b cites Ps 2:7 for the second time (the first time was in 1:5), but 5:6 cites 
Ps 110:4 for the first time (Ps 110:1 was cited in 1:14). In this verse the author 
introduces—without drawing attention to it—a crucial component of the epistle’s main 
argument. He implies that Ps 2:7 and 110:4 are parallel in meaning: the appointment as a 
Son is equivalent to appointment as a priest forever. The author does not say that directly, 
but suggests it by the juxtaposition of the citations. Ps 110:1 (already assumed to be about 
the Son) provides the bridge between those thoughts: The one who called him Son is also 
the one who set him at the right hand and declared him to be a priest forever. The name 
Melchizedek has also been introduced, so far without comment. 
 
Verse 7 supports 4:15—that Jesus had weakness, but without sin. It is asserted 
that he offered prayers,106 and was heard “because of his reverent submission,” but this is 
not defended; the author assumes that the readers already view Jesus as fully obedient, 
and he probably assumes that they know the Gethsemane tradition.  
Heb 5:8 asserts that the Son learned obedience from his difficulties. This is not 
essential to the author’s argument, but is probably given as an example that the readers 
could readily apply to themselves—that they should also learn from their difficulties.107 
Verse 9 has an implied imperative—that the readers should obey Christ. 
• 
Since Christ saves all who obey him, we should obey. 
                                                 
106 The author has stated that all high priests offer something (5:1), then that Jesus was appointed to be a 
priest (5:6); the readers could be expected to conclude that Jesus will offer something. Although the author 
will eventually say that he offered himself (7:27), the use of the word “offered” in 5:7 cannot be 
accidental—it “probably…corresponded in some sense to the high priest’s sacrifice for himself” 
(Ellingworth, Hebrews, 292).  
107 deSilva suggests that “Jesus provides a model here for what the audience is being called to do…. The 
pattern of enduring hardship and calling upon the Lord for help is affirmed as the ‘normal’ condition” 
(Perseverance, 191-92). 

36 
 
Verses 9-10 imply a connection between salvation and the high priesthood: 
• 
Claim: The Son is the source of eternal salvation… 
• 
{because} he has been designated a priest according to the order of 
Melchizedek. 
• 
{The priest according to the order of Melchizedek is a source of 
salvation.} 
 
The author has brought the discussion back to Melchizedek and says that he will 
address this108 further, but first he gives a long appeal for attention and a warning that 
implies that the subject is a matter of life and death. The difficulty is blamed on the 
readers: 
• 
Claim: This subject is hard to explain (5:11).109 
• 
Since () you have become dull. 
• 
{It is hard to explain things to anyone who is dull.} 
 
Verse 12 then presents evidence in support of the claim that the readers are dull: 
 
• 
Claim: You are dull of understanding.110 
• 
Since () you are old enough, but have forgotten the basics of God. 
• 
{A person who forgets the basic elements is dull of understanding.} 
 
This conclusion is mixed with an analogy about infants being unable to handle 
solid food; the implication is that the basic teachings are not wrong, but are milk; the 
teaching about Melchizedek is solid food (and therefore necessary for maturity). The 
logic implied in the metaphor is allusive, not exact: 
• 
Claim: You need the basic elements again—the doctrinal milk (5:12b). 
                                                 
108 The author says that he has much to say “about him” (or “it”), which could mean salvation through 
Christ in general (chapters 7-10) or Melchizedek in particular (chapter 7 only). But since the author has just 
brought the discussion back to the word Melchizedek, that is probably the intended meaning. Westcott 
disagrees, saying that the reference is to Christ: “The mysteries to which the apostle refers do not lie 
properly in his person, but in Him whom he foreshadowed” (Hebrews, 131). Ellingworth notes that the 
author has a “tendency to use personal pronouns without specifying to whom they refer” (Hebrews, 219). 
109 Another possibility is that the author says he has much to say because the people are dull, but it seems 
more natural to take the difficulty rather than the quantity as a consequence of the dullness. 
110 deSilva says that the passage cannot be used “as an accurate reading of the hearers’ spiritual pulse” 
because the author has used hyperbole to shame the readers (Perseverance, 210-11). This is verified by the 
fact that the author presses onward into the difficult topic, and it suggests caution for similar passages. 

37 
• 
Since () only those who are experienced in distinguishing good and 
evil, who are skilled in the word of righteousness, can handle solid food 
(5:13-14). 
• 
{You are unable to handle advanced teaching.}  
 
• 
Milk-drinkers are unskilled in the word of righteousness. 
• 
For () they are infants. 
• 
{Neophytes are unskilled in the word.} 
 
The author implies that what he wants to say about Christ/Melchizedek requires 
skill in “the word of righteousness”111 and it is a matter of distinguishing good and evil, 
but the epistle does nothing to support this connection. It seems instead that the author is 
presenting his message in terms that are attractive to the readers: the readers valued 
righteousness and discernment, and the author is implying that if they value these things 
then they will want to listen to what he has to say. The passage insults the readers, but 
also appeals to them: If you want to grow, if you value righteousness, if you want to 
know what is good, then listen to what I have to say. 
 
Hebrews 6—a plea for diligence 
 
“Therefore [],” Heb 6:1 begins, “let us go on to perfection”—showing that the 
point of 5:11-14 was (despite the initial appearance) not to say that the readers were 
infants who could handle only milk. Rather, the focus is on 5:14: Solid food is for the 
mature, so we are therefore going to go toward it. Although the passage is an insult on the 
surface, the logic of 6:1 implies that the readers are able to be mature. 
• 
Claim: You want solid food, so I will give it. 
• 
Solid food is for the mature. 
• 
{You are able to be mature, skilled and trained.} 
 
Heb 6:1 indicates that the author will leave behind the basic teaching about Christ 
and will not lay the foundation again, which he defines as six doctrines in 6:1-2 (which 
are not specifically about Christ). This suggests that “the basic teaching” is about Christ, 
                                                 
111 “The most natural understanding of the ‘word of righteousness’ may thus simply be the ‘oracles of God’ 
themselves, that is, the LXX” (deSilva, Perseverance, 212). 

38 
and the author has already reviewed it.112 The “foundation” is different, and he will not 
address it. The six teachings are remedial topics113 that the readers do not need to review. 
The rhetorical effect is to assure the readers: We are not going back to that extreme—I 
will not treat you like babies. A more subtle rhetorical result is that the readers will 
complain about the conclusion only at the risk of categorizing themselves as babies who 
could not comprehend the argument. 
 
Verse 4 supports the decision to go forward with an important unstated premise: 
• 
Claim: We will go forward toward maturity (6:1, 3). 
• 
Since () terrible punishment awaits apostates (6:4-6). 
• 
{If we don’t go forward, we will drift away.}  
 
If the premise had been put into words, it might have been disputed, but by 
leaving it as an implication, the author minimizes the chances of dispute and proceeds as 
if it were true. The author further eliminates objections by stating in 6:9 that the scenario 
does not apply to the audience. Nevertheless, the point is still implied that the readers are 
in mortal danger if they are not willing to go forward with the author. Another rhetorical 
strategy can be seen in the author’s use of allusive metaphors: “enlightened,” “tasted the 
heavenly gift, and have shared in the Holy Spirit,” “tasted the goodness of the word of 
God and the powers of the age to come.” By using metaphors, the author avoids direct 
accusation—and invites the readers to see themselves in the metaphors—before the 
negative action and result is mentioned at the end of v. 6.114 
                                                 
112  As noted above, many of the arguments in Heb 1-5 assume that the readers already have a high 
Christology, and the author is reminding them of things they already believe but have neglected. 
113 The six doctrines may have been appropriate for proselytes, though the absence of circumcision 
indicates that it is not conversion to Judaism that is being discussed. Jean-Pierre Delville argues that it is a 
list for conversion to belief in Jesus (“L’Épître aux Hébreux à la Lumière du Prosélytisme Juif,” RCat 10 
[1985]: 323-368). If the readers were Gentiles, as Delville believes, the author means that he will not 
regress to something they once had to learn; if the readers are Jews, as I believe, he means that he will not 
regress to doctrines they had known from childhood, and which only late-comers had to study. The author 
demonstrably uses hyperbole in 5:11-12, so it would not be odd for him to refer here to doctrines that are 
ridiculously remedial, corresponding to “milk.” 
114 Thompson makes the helpful observation that the author’s rhetoric is shaped by the fact that he “is not 
speaking to apostates who wish to return to the church; he is warning those who might commit apostasy of 
the gravity of such an act” (Hebrews, 141). Olbricht notes ways in which argumentation in this warning 
passage differs from the author’s style elsewhere: 1) “the language is…interlaced with second person 
pronouns,” 2) “the warrants do not depend upon texts from Scripture,” and 3) “the author depends much 
more on widespread metaphors” (“Anticipating,” 366).  

39 
Verse 6 implies causation with a participle: They cannot be renewed, crucifying 
the Son of God again.115 The logic is again allusive rather than direct—it implies that 
those who fall away are crucifying Jesus again and (by?) holding him up for public 
contempt. The enthymeme is nearly tautological: 
• 
Claim: They cannot be restored. 
• 
{They are crucifying him again.} 
• 
{Those who put Christ to public shame would never reverse themselves.} 
 
Verse 7 uses  to introduce a supporting analogy. As usual, the author does not 
directly say that apostates will be punished, but he implies it by analogy. As in 5:12-14, 
the readers are expected to draw the connections and combine the analogies into a 
coherent argument: 
• 
Claim: Such people cannot be restored to repentance (6:6) {and will be 
burned.} 
• 
Those who have tasted the things of Christ and then crucify and ridicule 
him are like land that gets rain and then produces thorns (implied in 6:8). 
• 
{If people produce thorns, they will be treated like thorns—with fire.}  
 
Right after this implied threat, the author eases the pressure by assuring the 
readers that they are not in this category.116 He gives a reason for his opinion in 6:10: 
• 
Claim: We are confident that you will fare better than apostates (i.e., that 
you will continue in your good works) (6:9). 
• 
Since () God can be counted on to reward good works… 
• 
and you have done good works (6:10). 
 
The logic implied in 6:10 (and 5:9b) is soteriologically interesting, for it implies 
that a person’s salvation is based, at least in part, on works: It would be unjust for God to 
condemn a person who had done good works. However, the author probably does not 
mean “…even if the person falls away from Christ.” If we take 6:9 literally, the author 
would say that a person who has done good work will not fall away, perhaps because God 
will ensure that the person does not. In effect, it would be unjust for God to allow a good 
                                                 
115 Although 			 means “crucify,” “again” seems to be implied by the context, not just the prefix. 
116 Attridge observes that “the expression of confidence is a conventional rhetorical device…as part of an 
attempt to persuade the addressees” (Hebrews, 174). The warnings and the assurances may be colored by 
rhetorical exaggeration. 

40 
worker to fall away and thereby deserve condemnation. However, the author wants to 
motivate the readers to continue their work, not rest on past accomplishments, and he 
implies in 6:11-12 that salvation is contingent on perseverance.  
There is some inconsistency in saying that salvation is certain (6:9-10) and the 
rhetorical tone exhorting the need for perseverance, which implies contingency (6:11-12). 
The author is writing a motivational exhortation, not a treatise about how people are 
saved, so it is unwise to assume that the soteriological implications are abstract truths. 
Rather, they serve a rhetorical function: to balance threat with assurance. If the warnings 
of 6:4-8 could not possibly apply to the readers (as 6:9 suggests), it is strange that the 
author would even include this “soteriological” digression in his motivational treatise. 
For the exhortations to be rhetorically meaningful, the warning must have at least a 
potential relevance to the readers. 
Heb 6:11-12 gives two equivalent purpose clauses: We want you to be diligent so 
that you will inherit the promises, and your diligence is for the purpose of realizing the 
eschatological hope. The implication is that if the readers are sluggish, they will not 
inherit the promises. The logic again implies the need for works: 
• 
Claim: We want you to be diligent (6:11). 
• 
We want you to have that assurance. 
• 
If you are diligent, you will realize the full assurance of hope.117 {That is, 
since God saves the diligent, you can be assured of salvation if you are 
diligent.} 
 
• 
Claim: We want you to be diligent so you are not sluggish.118 
• 
People inherit the promises through 119 and patience (6:12b). 
• 
{If you are sluggish, you will not be patient and faithful and you will fall 
away.} 
 
The author supports the argument with 6:13-20. Although we might expect this 
section to support the claim it follows—that people are saved through  and patience 
(6:12b)—the emphasis of the section is assurance, mentioned in 6:11b. Although the 
                                                 
117 The parallel between 6:11 and 6:12 implies an equivalence between the assurance of hope and inheriting 
the promises—i.e., salvation. To have assurance until the end, it is necessary to be diligent until the end. 
118 This is a truism. Ellingworth says that  probably refers to result rather than purpose (Hebrews, 333). 
119 Again, the best translation is faithfulness. It is contrasted with indolence and inactivity, not doubt.  

41 
author mentions that Abraham was patient (6:15), there is no further mention of diligence 
or the necessity of perseverance. Rather, the focus is now on God’s guarantee.  
• 
Claim: You can be fully assured that you will receive what you hope for 
(6:11). 
• 
Since () God made the strongest possible oath (6:13). 
• 
{We can be confident in anything that God promises.} 
  
• 
Since () no one is greater than God…  
• 
God swore by himself (6:13, alluding to Gen 22:16). 
• 
{Oaths generally refer to someone greater (made explicit in 6:16, and a 
principle used again in 7:7).}  
 
A simple assertion from God is as good as an oath, so why did God swear? 
Apparently to give Abraham (and his heirs—6:17) more assurance, even though the 
promise would not be immediately fulfilled.120 Verse 15 associates Abraham’s patience 
with receipt of the promise, but there is no logical connection. Due to God’s oath, the 
promise was certain whether or not Abraham was patient—and he had no choice but to 
wait. So why does the author point out that Abraham was patient? Presumably the author 
wants the readers to be patient. This otherwise unnecessary point may hint that the 
readers were giving up hope on a promise associated with Christ (the parousia?). The 
author supports his point by supplying the premise involved in 6:13: that people swear by 
someone greater than themselves in an attempt to confirm their words. In 6:17-18, he 
transitions toward God’s promise to the readers. 
• 
God gave an oath to stress the certainty of his promise121 so that ()… 
• 
we would be encouraged to seize the hope set before us. 
• 
{We are more willing to persevere when we know the promise is certain.} 
 
However, what has been sworn to the readers? The author implies that they are 
“the heirs of the promise”—heirs of the promise God gave Abraham. But Gen 22 does 
not promise salvation to either Abraham or his heirs—the author assumes that the readers 
already believe that God promises eternal life to Abraham’s descendants, and this is so 
                                                 
120 Westcott points out that “the interposition of an oath implied delay in the fulfilment of the promise. No 
oath would have been required if the blessing had been about to follow immediately” (Hebrews, 158). 
121 Two unchangeable things (the purpose [i.e., the  promise] and the oath) are not logically more certain 
than one, but are psychologically more reassuring.  

42 
strongly taken for granted that it can serve as a foundation for the author’s argument. The 
readers have no doubt that God offers salvation; the question seems to be whether Christ 
is a necessary agent in that salvation. Heb 6:13-20 is not needed to prove the availability 
of salvation, but it serves several rhetorical purposes: 1) it conveys an expectation that the 
readers will be successful and hence should not give up hope, 2) it introduces the 
principle that the blessing is given by a superior, a belief that is used in 7:7, and 3) it 
underscores the validity of God’s oath—a point that will be used in 7:21 to support 
Christ’s role as high priest.122 
Heb 6 concludes with some assertions—that the hope of salvation is reliable, that 
Jesus has entered God’s presence, that he is a forerunner on our behalf, and that he is “a 
high priest forever according to the order of Melchizedek.” The author implies, by the 
participle, that Jesus is a forerunner because he became a high priest. The author has 
subtly expanded the role of a high priest—Levitical high priests served as representatives, 
not forerunners; there was never any suggestion in the Torah that other people would 
eventually enter the Holy of Holies because of the work done by the high priest. Just as 
the author does with some other concepts, he introduces this idea without drawing 
attention to it, allows it to lie dormant for a while, and will develop it later. 
 
Hebrews 7:1-10—Melchizedek greater than Levi 
In chapter 7, the author resumes the discussion of Melchizedek. He calls Jesus a 
high priest in 2:17; 3:1, and 4:14-15; he enlarges this to “high priest according to the 
order of Melchizedek” (quoting Ps 110:4) in 5:6; 5:10; and 6:20. After telling the readers 
in 5:11 to expect more on this subject, and after a lengthy plea for attentiveness, he 
addresses it in detail in Heb 7.123 The first three verses describe Melchizedek and serve 
several rhetorical purposes. Verses 1-2a present data that will be used in later verses; 
3:2b-c presents etymologies that will not be used, but imply parallels with Christ; they 
                                                 
122 Thompson notes, “The author is here laying the groundwork for a point that he does not state explicitly 
until 7:20ff.: that Christians have an oath as ground for faith” (Hebrews, 92). 
123 Heb 7:1 has , but no enthymeme can be constructed; the word simply indicates that the argument 
continues. “ is explanatory, introducing a development from 6:20 rather than a logical consequence” 
(Ellingworth, Hebrews, 354).  

43 
show the author to be knowledgeable. The eloquence of v. 3 is used to mention a point 
that will be crucial later in the chapter—that Melchizedek “remains a priest forever.” 
Heb 7:4 implies an argument: “See how great Melchizedek is! Even Abraham the 
patriarch gave him a tenth of the spoils.” This makes a claim, and then offers a supporting 
reason.  
• 
Claim: Melchizedek is great124 (7:4). 
• 
Ground: Melchizedek received tithes from Abraham {who is great}. 
• 
Implied warrant: {The person who receives tithes is superior to the one 
who gives them.}125 
 
Verse 5 is the first use in Hebrews of 
. It is an unnecessary word here 
(“commandment in the law” is redundant), but it puts the word “law” into the discussion, 
subtly preparing readers for more discussion in 7:12, 19.126  
In 7:6-7, the author moves from tithes to blessings, and argues that Melchizedek 
is greater than Abraham: “Melchizedek collected tithes from Abraham and blessed him 
who had received the promises. It is beyond dispute that the inferior is blessed by the 
superior” (7:7). 
• 
Major premise: The inferior is blessed by the superior.127 
• 
Minor premise: Melchizedek blessed Abraham (7:6). 
• 
Conclusion: {Melchizedek is superior to Abraham.}128 
                                                 
124 Although the author will soon argue that Melchizedek is greater than Abraham, at the beginning of the 
argument he is content to say “great.” Verse 5 presents the Levites as kindred (a term of equality) of the 
other Israelites. As with other topics, the author reserves the more forceful words for later in the epistle.  
125 “It is assumed throughout that the receiver of tithe is greater than the giver of tithe” (Westcott, Hebrews, 
175). 
126 The law is associated in 7:5 with the Levites, who are inferior to Melchizedek, giving a hint (which later 
verses will make explicit) that the law is inferior to the new Melchizedek, Jesus. 
127 The principle has exceptions, not only of people blessing God, but also blessing human superiors (e.g., 1 
Kings 1:47). Wilhelm C. Linss argues that the statement “presupposes…a certain meaning of . 
Once this meaning is granted, the axiom is clear” (“Logical Terminology in the Epistle to the Hebrews,” 
CTM 37 [1966]: 367). The context here may assume that the Levites gave a blessing (Deut 10:8) when the 
people gave tithes; in such a context the superior person blessed the inferior. 
             Since no logical connectors are used, it is possible for the argument to be constructed the other 
way: As we can see in the matter of tithing, Melchizedek is greater than Abraham, and here we see that 
Abraham was blessed by Melchizedek, so in this case the lesser was blessed by the greater. But such an 
argument would not only be based on a conclusion the author did not make, it would be pointless, not 
advancing the argument. The blessing seems to be introduced to support Melchizedek’s superiority.  
128 Magill writes, “Levitical priests had a commandment authorizing them to collect a tenth, even though 

44 
 
This is one of the rare cases in Hebrews that the major or general premise is 
stated, and the conclusion is not stated—perhaps because in this case the conclusion 
might have been offensive; it was better that readers formulate the conclusion on their 
own. As Weiß says, the construction asks the readers to use their own judgment: “Das ist 
rhetorisch-didaktischer Stil, der an das eigene Urteilsvermögen der Adressaten appelliert, 
und zwar in dem Sinne, daß die Größe und Überlegenheit des Melchisedek gegenüber 
Abraham aus der in Gen 14 geschilderten Abgabe des Zehnten an Melchisedek durch 
Abraham notwendig zu folgern ist.”129 
Verses 9-10 make the point that “Levi” (meaning the Levitical priests—7:9 refers 
to people who receive tithes, but Levi himself never did) paid tithes to Melchizedek.  
• 
Claim: Levi/the Levitical priests paid tithes through Abraham. 
• 
Grounds: For he was (they were) in the loins of Abraham when Abraham 
tithed. 
• 
Warrant: {Whatever ancestors do, they do it for all their descendants.}  
 
Such a warrant might be questioned.130 As the author admits, the logic is irregular 
(perhaps it is intended to be humorous131). But he is putting the Levites back into the 
discussion. Whereas 7:5 used them as an illustration of equality, 7:9 now sets the scene 
for a comparison of Levites and Melchizedek. Since the readers probably considered 
Abraham superior to Levi, and tithe-receivers as superior to tithe-givers, the implication 
could already be drawn that Melchizedek is greater than Levi, and from this the author 
could argue that any priest like Melchizedek is also superior to the Levitical priesthood. 
                                                                                                                                                 
collecting it from their own brothers. Melchizedek had no commandment, yet collected it from Abraham, to 
whom he was no relation! Melchizedek is greater than Abraham, and by extension, the Levitical priests” 
(Transline, 837).  
129 Hans-Friedrich Weiß, Der Brief an die Hebraer: Übersetzt und erklärt (KEK; 15th ed., Göttingen: 
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1991), 388-89. See also Olbricht, “Amplification,” 370. 
130 Montefiore writes, “The patriarch acts in the name of all his future family” (Hebrews, 122). Ceslas 
Spicq agrees: “L’ancêtre d’une race agit au nom de tous ses descendants et les représente, surtout en Israël 
où la descendance charnelle était la garantie de toutes les bénédictions et de l’espérance du salut” (L’Épître 
aux Hébreux [SB; Paris: Gabalda, 1977], 123). If the logic is correct, then Jesus also paid tithes to 
Melchizedek (Attridge, Hebrews, 107). But the author acknowledges that the argument is irregular. 
131 “Listeners may even have found it humorous to think that Levi paid tithes while he was still in 
Abraham’s loins. Such humor was often useful for speakers because it helped maintain rapport with the 
listeners and revive those who had grown weary by more weighty arguments” (Koester, Hebrews, 352).  

45 
The author is not interested in comparing Christ with Melchizedek, or even with Levi—
the goal of the passage is to show that Christ is superior to the Levitical priests.132 But the 
author leaves this last step to the readers’ imagination for now (stronger arguments will 
come in 7:16, 20)—the argument is left implying that Melchizedek (and by implication, 
Christ) is greater than Levi (and by implication, his descendants). 
 
Hebrews 7:11-19—a major change in the law 
The author begins to approach the subject from another angle in 7:11,133 showing 
that the Levitical priesthood was inadequate. He begins, not by citing inadequacies (that 
could make him sound like a complainer), but by showing that Scripture implied an 
inadequacy: “Now if perfection had been attainable through the Levitical priesthood—for 
the people received the law under this priesthood—what further need would there have 
been to speak of another priest arising according to the order of Melchizedek?”134 If we 
transpose the rhetorical question into the statement it implies, we get:  
• 
Claim: The Levitical priesthood did not bring people to completion.135 
• 
Ground: Ps 110:4 describes a new priesthood.136 
• 
Implied warrant: {If one arrangement produces the desired results, there is 
no need to predict another.} 
                                                 
132 “Dans l’épître, la comparaison-contraste de base est entre le sacerdoce lévitique et Jésus (cf. 5.1-10); 
après 7.17, Melchisédek va disparaître définitivement de la scène” (Samuel Bénétreau, L’Épître aux 
Hébreux [CEB; Vaux-sur-Seine: Edifac, 1990], 2:29).  
133 The verse begins (postpositively) with "	, implying that a conclusion is being drawn, but in a 
rhetorical question it is difficult to translate this. “ zu Beginn von V. 11 leitet also nicht eine 
Schlußfolgerung aus dem vorangehenden Abschnitt ein, sondern will von vornherein auf die diesem Bedin-
gungssatz selbst innewohnende Logik aufmerksam machen” (Weiß, Der Brief, 394). 
134 Linss notes that in Hebrews, all rhetorical questions with an interrogative pronoun have the answer 
“none” (“Logical Terminology,” 368). 
135 It is unfortunate that translations continue to use “perfection” for  and cognates; the meaning is 
“to bring to a goal”—in this case the word seems to be used as a synonym of salvation. Westcott gives 
“destiny” as an equivalent (Hebrews, 187). “Completion” sounds odd in English because it does not specify 
the goal—but then neither does . For more, see the excursus in deSilva, Perseverance, 194-204. 
136 It is not known whether the author viewed Ps 110:4 as a prophecy. He never addresses the idea that the 
Davidic kings were appointed as priests in the order of Melchizedek. That would have reduced the 
effectiveness of his argument, though he could still have argued that only Jesus fulfilled the verse, for only 
he had an eternal life. Montefiore suggests that the author is countering an argument that the Levitical 
priesthood, since it came later, superseded the Melchizedek priesthood (Hebrews, 123). But even after the 
law was given, God promised to restore the Melchizedek priesthood—a point the author repeats in 7:28.  

46 
 
A hidden assumption here is that there can be only one priesthood137—that the 
Melchizedek priesthood necessarily replaced rather than supplemented the Levitical 
priesthood. The author does not consider the possibility that one priesthood could be in 
heaven while the other worked on earth. The author also assumes that the announcement 
of another priesthood implies the need for a new priesthood.138 This could have been 
argued (such as by noting that Ps 110:4 indicates that the new priesthood will last 
forever), but the author does not; the assertion is enough. 
Heb 7:11 again mentions “the law” (even though it is not necessary for the 
argument) because important conclusions will soon be drawn about it in this section. 
“Now if perfection had been attainable through the levitical priesthood—for the people 
received the law under this priesthood—what further need would there have been to 
speak of another139 priest arising according to the order of Melchizedek?” The verse 
presents the following argument: 
• 
Claim: The old priesthood could not accomplish what God wanted 
(7:11a). 
• 
Ground: God promised a new priesthood in Ps 110:4 (implied in 7:11c). 
• 
{If God promises a new priesthood, it means that the previous one was 
inadequate; God does not do unnecessary things.} 
 
The verse implies a logical connection between salvation, priesthood, and law. 
The author asks whether the priesthood can bring  because he wants to know 
whether salvation can be attained through that priesthood. Notice the reason he gives: 
• 
Implied claim: We want to know whether salvation was attainable through 
the levitical priesthood. 
• 
Because () the law was given under the priesthood… (7:11b).140 
                                                 
137 Spicq (Hébreux SB, 137) and Westcott (Hebrews, 216) make the same observation. It suggests that the 
readers came from a Jewish background, since Gentiles would be aware of a multiplicity of priesthoods and 
might question this assumption. deSilva observes another assumption: “Another ‘given’ within the 
institution of priesthood is that individuals may not volunteer their services or select themselves for the 
honored office” (Perseverance, 188). Gentiles would be less likely to hold that assumption. 
138 Ellingworth notes that the argument “presupposes that God would not have done anything unnecessary” 
(Hebrews, 372). 
139 The author uses an inoffensive term (“another, different”) before using the stronger word “better.”  
140 Donald A. Hagner writes that this “cannot be taken literally, since that priesthood did not precede the 
Mosaic law. What seems to be meant is that the priestly system is basic to the entire superstructure of the 

47 
 Why does he mention this?  
• 
Unstated connection: {Because we want to know whether the law brings 
salvation, so we are asking first about the priesthood, because that is the 
context in which the law was given.}141 
 
 at the beginning of 7:12 connects it to 7:11—salvation was not through the 
priesthood, because a change in priesthood implies a change in the law.142 As Otto 
Michel puts it, “Am Schicksal des Priestertums hängt nach Hebr das Schicksal des 
Gesetzes.”143 However, the logic seems circular:  
• 
Claim: Salvation was not available through the priesthood (7:11a). 
• 
Ground: For when there is a change in priesthood, there is a change in the 
law (7:12)—{and the priesthood has been changed}. 
• 
{Since the law was given on the basis of the priesthood, it loses validity 
when its basis does; they stand or fall together.}144 
 
                                                                                                                                                 
law” (Hebrews [NIBC 14; Peabody: Hendrickson, 1990], 103-4). Spicq notes that “La thèse peut paraître 
excessive et accorder au sacerdoce un rôle exorbitant. Il ne faut pas la radicaliser; le v. 5 a rappelé que 
l’ordre de prélever la dîme émanait de la’ loi, c’est-à-dire que le sacerdoce était également fondé sur la loi ” 
(Hébreux SB, 37). Thomas Lea notes that priests, including Aaron, “had no part in receiving the Law” 
(Hebrews and James [HNTC; Nashville: Holman, 1999], 144). Heb 7:13-14 also implies that the law 
assigned the priests.  
Lane (Hebrews 1-8, 174) and Koester (Hebrews, 353), citing similar uses of the Greek words in 
Philo, argue that the meaning is “the law was given concerning the priesthood.” This would eliminate the 
problem in 7:11, but 7:12 still reasons as if the priesthood is foundational to the law, and 7:19 still draws 
conclusions about the law as a whole because the commandment about priesthood has been changed.  
Since the priesthood and the law were inseparable, it is unlikely that the readers would notice any 
inconsistency as to which is logically prior. Erich Gräßer argues that “In der Sache ist natürlich beides 
richtig.... das levitische Priestertum seine Begründung in der Tora hat (7,5; 8,4; 10,8), wie umgekehrt die 
Tora auf jenem basiert (7,11). Sie stehen und fallen miteinander” (An die Hebräer [EKK 17; Zurich: 
Benziger, 1993], 2:37, 39). 
141 “It is assumed that the object of the Law was to bring or to prepare for bringing the people to 
‘perfection’” (Westcott, Hebrews, 180). The analysis shows the purpose of the passage (which is otherwise 
not stated)—the readers were interested in salvation by means of the law. The parenthetical comment “for 
the people received the law under this priesthood” makes the crucial link from priesthood to law. 
142 Lane calls the  in 7:12 “explanatory” (Hebrews 1-8, 181). Westcott says, “The  may refer to the 
main thought of v. 11 or to the parenthesis…. The former connexion appears to be the more natural” 
(Hebrews, 181). As shown above, I believe that the connection with v. 11 is logical. 
143 Otto Michel, Der Brief an die Hebräer: Übersetzt und erklärt (13th ed; KEK; Göttingen: Vandenhoeck 
& Ruprecht, 1936, 1975), 270. 
144 This is an example of what Robbins calls “abductive reasoning”—it “works off of suggestion rather than 
formal logic” (“From Enthymeme,” 193). Debanné argues that some enthymemes “invite the listener to 
perform a mental step that is best described neither as a syllogism nor even as logical” (“Enthymatic 

48 
The author first shows that the priesthood has been changed, and concludes from 
that, that the commandment about priesthood has also changed, and he broadens that 
conclusion to argue that the entire law has changed. But he states the conclusion as if it 
were a premise, a general principle that did not need to be proved.  
Some commentators have taken 7:12 as support for the parenthetical comment in 
7:11b, but that logic does not work. It would go like this: The law was given under the 
priesthood, for when the priesthood changes, the law also does. However, the real flow of 
the passage is the reverse: The law changes when the priesthood does, because the law 
was given in association with the priesthood.145 The evidence does not support as much 
as is being claimed—the author has given evidence for a change in the priesthood, but not 
specifically about the law. The author apparently believes that any change in the 
priesthood automatically entails a change in the law, for the law is the only legitimate 
source of priestly appointments, and if God did something outside of the law, it could 
only mean that the law itself had been changed—not just one particular commandment 
about priests, but the law as a broader category.  
The author is shifting the discussion from the priesthood to the law, treating them 
as an inseparable pair. He could have argued more simply that the priesthood did not 
bring salvation, for God changed it, with the assumption being that God changes things 
for the better. This is essentially the argument of 7:11. But the author expands the 
discussion to the law in 7:12-19, then goes back to the priesthood in 7:20 without 
building anything on his conclusion about the law.146 This passage about the law might 
                                                                                                                                                 
Reading,” 484). He argues that these illogical constructs can be called “enthymemes,” but it does not seem 
necessary to dilute the definition of “enthymeme”—illogical constructs can be called “arguments.” 
145 Ellingworth writes, “The force of  has been differently assessed. Bleek believed it to link v. 12 with 
the main clause of v. 11; that is, to indicate that a change in the priesthood would not have taken place 
without urgent reason, since it would have entailed a complete change of law. If meaning is given 
precedence over grammar, it seems more natural to take the  as linking v. 12 with the parenthetical 	
			
$%	"
$
, v. 11; so most later commentators” (Hebrews, 373-74). As explained 
above, the “link” is rhetorical rather than logical.  
146 That is, he does not base further conclusions on the word “law.” When the author states that cleansing 
rituals were imposed for a limited time (9:10), he may be basing that conclusion on the fact that the laws 
were ineffective (7:19), but more likely, on the conclusion that the old covenant is terminated (8:13). Even 
then, the connection is not made explicit.  

49 
look like an unnecessary tangent, but we should ask why the author goes out of his way 
to make this point.  
Apparently the readers needed to know not just that the Levitical priesthood was 
obsolete, but also that the law of Moses was no longer valid. The author makes this point 
forcefully in 7:18-19, and then goes back to the topic of priesthood, a topic on which the 
readers were more likely to be in agreement (it was addressed with no argumentation in 
earlier chapters).147 The law will again be declared obsolete in 8:13, after which the 
author describes the tabernacle, another area of agreement. The law is again rejected in 
Heb 10, culminating in the declaration that offerings are unnecessary (10:18); the author 
then moves immediately into an exhortation for faithfulness (10:19-25) and a strong 
warning (10:26-31). The author says three times that the law is obsolete, he makes its 
termination the conclusion of his longest doctrinal exposition, and he makes it the 
launching point for his most vigorous exhortation. This is also the first exhortation in the 
epistle (2:1-3)—the readers are told to pay more attention to the message of Christ than to 
“the message declared through angels” (a circumlocution for the law of Moses). The 
exhortations for the new over against the old grow stronger from that point, and are the 
focus of the final contrast in Heb 12:18-24. 
The author’s treatment of “the law” is consistent with the thesis that this was a 
sensitive subject for the readers.148 In 7:12 the word “change” (
	
) is vague—it 
could mean a slight revision or a major overhaul. The author will soon argue for the latter 
(the law is “changed” as thoroughly as the priesthood is—a total replacement), but he 
initially uses a less offensive term. As with the priesthood, he assumes that the law was 
exclusive—there could not be an addition to the law, such as a law appointing an 
additional priesthood. As later verses show, the author viewed the law as a monolith that 
was either valid in entirety, or obsolete. A change in the priesthood implied that the 
whole law was obsolete, since the law was built on the basis of the priesthood. 
                                                 
147 “The priesthood of Christ is accepted without dispute” (Lea, Hebrews and James, 134). “The author 
assumes the priesthood of Jesus now to be established beyond the shadow of a doubt. This was probably 
part of their learned Christian culture” (deSilva, Perseverance, 281). However, the readers had apparently 
not explored the implications of Christ’s priesthood. 
148 Ellingworth refers to the author’s “tact in approaching readers who appear to have held the OT cultus in 
high esteem” (Hebrews, 408). 

50 
Heb 7:13 also includes , supporting 7:12: 
• 
Claim: The law has been changed (7:12). 
• 
Ground: For God appointed a priest who was not from Levi (7:13). 
• 
Warrant: No one from that other tribe was ever a priest {Num 18:7 did not 
allow it}. 
 
The author takes the unusual step of repeating the points in the very next verse, 
even though they were common knowledge: Jesus was descended from Judah, and 
Moses149 never authorized anyone from Judah to be a priest. God acted contrary to the 
law, showing that the law is no longer valid. The author is stressing the connection 
between priesthood and law.  
“It is even more obvious,” the author says in 7:15, assuring his readers that the 
logic is secure. Heb 7:14 begins with “it is evident” and 7:15 begins with “it is even more 
obvious”; the conceptual similarities suggest that these verses support the same point—
verse 12: The change in the priesthood implies a change in the law.150  
• 
Claim: The law has been changed (7:12). 
• 
Ground: The law appointed priests descended from Aaron; the new 
Melchizedek was appointed not by a law about genealogy, but by having 
the power of an eternal151 life (7:15-16). 
• 
Implied warrant: {When a priest is appointed on a completely different 
basis, it shows that the law has been changed.} (Again assuming the 
priesthood is a replacement, not an addition.) 
 
The scriptures in Heb 1, which are offered with little attempt to prove that they 
apply to Jesus, imply that the readers had a high Christology—they already accepted 
                                                 
149 “Moses” is here a synonym for the law. Although the author normally says that Scripture was spoken by 
God, as part of his rhetorical strategy, he avoids saying that for the law.  
150 However, Westcott argues that 7:15 supports 7:11a: “Is it the abrogation of the Law which is more 
abundantly proved by the language of the Psalm? or the inefficacy of the Levitical priesthood?... The 
thought of the abrogation of the Law is really secondary” (Hebrews, 183). But that would mean that 7:15 
merely restates the point already made clear in 7:11. Verse 16 indicates that the argument in 7:15 has to do 
with the law. 
151 “Indestructible” may imply a contrast with the Levitical priesthood, but it may just be part of the 
author’s fondness for word variety. Ellingworth suggests that it refers to “destruction by death” (Hebrews, 
379)—Jesus died, but death could not destroy him. Westcott says, “Other priests were made priests in 
virtue of a special ordinance: He was made priest in virtue of His inherent nature” (Hebrews, 185). 

51 
Christ as living eternally. However, the author supports this point by again citing Ps 
110:4: 
• 
Claim: Christ became a priest through the power of an eternal life (7:16). 
• 
For () he was appointed a priest forever (7:17). 
• 
{Someone appointed forever must live forever.} 
 
Heb 7:18 uses ; this verse again supports 7:12:152 
• 
Claim: The law itself has been changed (7:12b). 
• 
We know this because () the earlier commandment (i.e., the law 
restricting the priesthood to Levi) has been abrogated… (7:18). 
• 
{If a key commandment is abrogated, the entire law has lost its authority.} 
 
If the author had tried to argue the unstated premise, the readers might have 
balked. But as a matter of rhetorical strategy, the author has glossed over the possibly 
controversial statement and has simply expressed his conclusion, along with the 
frequent153 use of  (and the words “necessarily,” “evident” and “obvious”154) to assure 
the readers that the conclusion is well supported with logic.  
Verse 18 calls the commandment about priesthood weak and ineffective, terms 
much more pointed than 7:11, which merely said (gingerly, in the form of a rhetorical 
question) that the commandment did not bring us salvation. It then says that the 
commandment is abrogated—cancelled in entirety—because it was ineffective.155 Verse 
19 expands this to the law as a whole—and although this is really a conclusion, it is 
expressed as a premise, as if it had already been proven:  
                                                 
152 Westcott says that “the  goes back to v. 15” (ibid., 186). I argued above that v. 15 itself supports 
7:12b. In Westcott’s view, the argument would flow like this: The inefficacy of the old priesthood (7:11) is 
obvious when another priest arises (7:15), because the commandment about priesthood was abrogated 
(7:18). But the author stated that much in 7:11-12; the subsequent verses seem designed not to belabor the 
point but to expand it to include the word “law.” 
153 Heb 7 uses  13 times, more than any other chapter in Hebrews. It is used nine times in 7:10-20, 
showing the author’s concern to argue (or at least to make it appear like he is arguing) very carefully—
suggesting to me that the topic is a sensitive one for the readers. 
154 Ellingworth calls these words “rhetorical devices intended to enhance the persuasiveness of the 
argument” (Hebrews, 371). 
155 “In unserem Fall wird davon ausgegangen, daß der rechtliche Akt der Ungültigmachung dann geschieht, 
wenn ein Gebot oder eine Verordnung sich als ,schwach und nutzlos’ erweisen” (August Strobel, Der Brief 
an die Hebräer [NTD 9/2; 13th ed.; Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1991], 86). 

52 
• 
Claim: The commandment about priesthood was weak and ineffective 
(7:18b). 
• 
For the law156 made nothing perfect (i.e., did not bring anyone salvation) 
(7:19a). 
• 
{If the law as a whole is ineffective, individual laws are, too.}  
 
The logic goes like this: The law as a whole could not bring salvation; therefore 
we can say it was weak and ineffective, and the law was therefore set aside (the 
commandment about priesthood demonstrates that for one of the key laws). 
Ontologically, the ineffectiveness of the law predated its abrogation, but 
epistemologically, it is when we see that a key commandment is abrogated, that we then 
understand that the law was ineffective, for God would not set aside an effective law, nor 
appoint a new priesthood if the old had been effective. Rhetorically, 7:19a serves to 
remind the readers that the author is not just arguing that one commandment has been 
abrogated—the law as a whole has the same problem and shares the same fate.157 The 
author has moved in this section from the priesthood to the law, from a rhetorical 
question about an unreal condition to a clear statement: The law cannot bring salvation.  
 
Hebrews 7:20-28—the new priesthood superior to the old 
But the author does not take away something the readers valued without also 
offering something better as a replacement. The criticism of the law is sandwiched by a 

… construction: On one hand, the law is abrogated; on the other, a better hope is 
offered, through which readers may approach God (this “approach,” it is implied, is 
tantamount to the  that the law and priesthood could not bring). This is followed 
by another 
… construction in 7:20-21, again contrasting the old priesthood with the 
new: There was no divine oath for the Levites, but there was one for the new 
                                                 
156 Heb 7:11 had said only that the priesthood did not bring perfection; the author has again expanded the 
scope of his criticism to the entire law. “On note dans cette section un décalage, ou plutôt un élargissement: 
le non-accomplissement mis au compte du sacerdoce lévitique au départ (v. 11), est référé à toute la loi (v. 
19)” (Bénétreau, Hébreux, 2:41). The author views priesthood and law as two sides of the same coin, but 
begins with priesthood and moves toward the law as a whole, suggesting that the point about priesthood 
was more palatable to the readers; the law was a more sensitive topic. 
157 Spicq writes, “Cette abrogation officielle et comme judiciaire, c’est d’abord celle de l’ordonnance 
mosaïque (entolè) prescrivant un sacerdoce héréditaire, mais sa suppression entraîne celle de toute la Loi, 
puisque le sacerdoce était la base de toute l’institution mosaïque” (Hébreux SB, 126). 

53 
Melchizedek, as shown by Ps 110:4, this time quoted to include the word “sworn.”  in 
the middle of 7:20 introduces the supporting scripture rather than creating an enthymeme: 
It was with an oath, for the scripture says that the Lord has sworn that Christ is a priest.158  
The words immediately following  are not about the better hope, but about the 
old priesthood. These words are included because the author is creating a proportional 
argument, signaled by the comparative words 		  in 7:20a and 
 
 in 7:22. 
Just as much as Jesus’ appointment by oath is better than the Levites’ appointment 
without an oath, his covenant is equally better than theirs. As is usually the case in 
Hebrews with an argument from lesser to greater, it is an argument by analogy, which 
cannot be logically proven. But as Weiß says, the statement has the character of a 
conclusion that the readers are expected to find obvious.159 
The author introduces the word covenant here, which will be prominent in coming 
chapters. As he has done with other key words, he simply mentions it here, but will 
address it at length later. The assumption may be that that a priesthood must be given in 
conjunction with a covenant,160 but the text does not give a rationale. The author assumes 
that the readers want to approach God by means of a covenant—a Jewish idea, since 
	 meant “last will and testament” in non-Jewish Greek.161 He implies that the 
“better hope,” which replaced the law (7:19b), is found in this “better covenant.” 
                                                 
158 “The final paragraph of chap. 7 leaves Melchizedek entirely behind, to the extent of omitting the last 
line of Ps. 110:4. The focus is now on Jesus” (Ellingworth, Hebrews, 382). Ellingworth also suggests that 
the author is implicitly dealing with a problem—Scripture says that the Levitical priests were appointed 
forever (Exod 29:28; 40:15). The author’s thought may be that “a simple command…is less binding than an 
oath” (ibid., 384-85). As Simon Kistemaker says, “A law can be annulled; an oath lasts forever” 
(Exposition of the Epistle to the Hebrews [NTC 19; Grand Rapids: Baker, 1984], 200).  
159 “Die Aussage in V. 22 hat somit den Charakter einer Schlußfolgerung, mit der sich der Autor wieder an 
das Urteilsvermögen seiner Adressaten wendet” (Weiß, Der Brief, 409). 
160 A less likely assumption is that a divine oath implies a covenant, but the author says nothing about a 
covenant with Abraham even though he mentions God’s oath with Abraham. Philip Edgcumbe Hughes 
favors the connection between covenant and priesthood: “The new and better covenant and the new and 
better priesthood are closely bound up with each other” (A Commentary on the Epistle to the Hebrews 
[Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1977], 267). “Hebrews…presumes that priesthood and cult constitute the 
cornerstone of a people’s relationship to God” (Attridge, Hebrews, 253). 
161 Westcott writes, “The idea of a ‘testament’ was indeed foreign to the Jews till the time of the Herods” 
(Hebrews, 299). If the readers were Gentile proselytes, it could be risky for the author to assume a uniquely 
Jewish view of 	. 

54 
• 
Claim: Jesus is the guarantee162 of a better covenant. 
• 
Ground: Levites were appointed without oath; Jesus was appointed by a 
divine oath, coupled with a promise to never change, to be a priest forever. 
• 
Warrant: {The quality of the covenant is reflected in the way that priests 
are appointed.}163 
 
Verses 23-24 use another 
… contrast: There was a long succession of 
Levitical priests because they died,164 but Jesus never dies and therefore one priest is 
good for eternity.165 
• 
Jesus holds his priesthood permanently. 
• 
Because he lives forever. 
• 
{Priests lose their appointment only by death.} 
 
Verse 17 seems to imply that he lives forever because he was appointed forever; 
verse 24 argues almost the reverse: that he serves forever because he lives forever.166 The 
readers would probably not notice this circularity because they did not question Jesus’ 
eternality. His eternal priesthood is then used to draw a conclusion in 7:25: 
• 
Claim (introduced by ): Jesus is always able to save people who 
approach God through him. 
                                                 
162 Bénétreau comments on the appearance of the word “guarantee”: “Le raisonnement développé dans le v. 
22 surprend. On s’attendrait à ce que l’Ecriture et le serment qu’elle atteste servent de garantie à 
l’excellence du statut de prêtre éternel. Mais il n’en est rien : c’est Jésus lui-même qui est déclaré garant, 
répondant (terme juridique). En fait, l’auteur a sauté une étape du raisonnement, qu’on pourrait aisément 
reconstituer. Le serment divin garantit le sacerdoce du Christ : établi dans cette fonction centrale de 
médiation, le Christ, qui est aussi le Fils, devient la garantie, le point d’inébranlable solidité, pour les 
dispositions nouvelles voulues par Dieu” (Hébreux, 2:42).  
163 “The comparison implies a reason: because Jesus’ appointment involved God’s oath, it was superior to 
the old dispensation” (Ellingworth, Hebrews, 383). 
164 “Christ’s ‘indestructible life’ made it possible for him to fulfill the for ever of Psalm 110:4 (vs. 16). The 
corollary is stated here: Levitical priests were prevented by death from being priests for ever…. The author 
assumes that for ever cannot apply to a hereditary succession of priests and can therefore apply only to one 
who has been raised from the dead” (Thompson, Hebrews, 104, bold type changed to italics). 
165 The author did not need to mention that there were “many” priests, but by doing so, he would refute an 
argument the readers might have been facing: Someone might say that the Levitical cult is good because it 
has a long history and a long line of priests, whereas this new sect has none. The author takes this argument 
in favor of the old covenant and turns it into an argument against by pointing out that death is the reason 
that there were so many priests in the old system. If a priest is really effective in salvation, the author 
believes, there is no need for any more than one. 
166 Bénétreau also observes “l’impression d’un raisonnement circulaire” (Hébreux, 2:43).  

55 
• 
Ground: Jesus holds his priesthood permanently (7:24).167 
• 
{A priest can help people only while he lives.} 
 
In order for the readers to conclude that Jesus can always save people, simply 
because he holds his priesthood forever, the readers would need to hold several beliefs 
about the priesthood: 1) that people try to approach God through a priest, 2) that people 
are to be saved in doing this,168 and 3) that the readers want to approach God and be 
saved. The Levitical priests could not save people because they were themselves in need 
of salvation. Jesus is an effective priest because he continues forever, is therefore always 
able to intercede, is therefore always able to save. The implied exhortation is that the 
readers should approach God through Jesus (this is made explicit in 10:22). 
Verse 25b uses a participle to imply cause: 
• 
Claim: Jesus is always able to save.169 
• 
{Since} Jesus always lives to intercede for his people. 
• 
Assumption: {As long as Jesus can intercede for his people, he will save 
them; or since Jesus has the soteriological goal, he is able and willing to 
help others get it.} 
 
Here it is assumed that salvation is possible only because of intercession; although 
the Levitical priests acted as intercessors through their sacrifices, they were ineffective. 
Verse 26 supports the efficacy of Jesus’ intercession and salvation: 
• 
Claim: Jesus is able to save his people (7:25). 
• 
Warrant: For it was fitting170 for us to have a high priest171 who is holy, 
sinless, and in heaven (7:26). 
                                                 
167 Westcott paraphrases the argument in this way: “Because His priesthood is absolute and final, He is able 
to fulfil completely the ideal office of the priest” (Hebrews, 190). 
168 The author, looking to Christ, has expanded the function of a priest beyond the initial description in 5:1. 
169 “Able to save completely” (NRSV footnote) does not follow well from Jesus being alive forever. The 
author would probably deny that a Levitical priest was able to save at all, even while he was alive. The key 
concern is not whether the priest is alive, but whether he is alive forever—i.e., he cannot give something he 
does not himself have. 
170 Here, as in 2:10, 	implies necessity, not just suitability. As George Wesley Buchanan comments, 
“The author’s logic is consistent: He reasoned that something’s existence proves its necessity” (To the 
Hebrews [AB 36; Garden City: Doubleday: 1972], 137). 
171 The author uses “high priest” here for the first time since 6:20. The author has already argued that Christ 
is a priest like Melchizedek, who was “great”—and “great priest” (cf. 4:14) is a synonym in the LXX for 
high priest. If anyone claims that Christ is a priest, but not a high priest, the author might argue that Christ 

56 
• 
Ground: {Jesus supplies what is “fitting”—he is holy, sinless, and in 
heaven.} 
 
Verse 27 introduces the topic of sacrifices, stating that Jesus does not need to 
offer daily sacrifices, “first for his own sins, and then for those of the people.” Why not? 
We might expect the answer to be “because he had no sin,” but that is not the answer 
given at the end of 7:27. There, the reason is simply that Jesus did this “once for all when 
he offered himself.”172 It is taken for granted that Jesus had no sin (4:15), and so did not 
need to offer a sacrifice for his own sins. His sacrifice was therefore for others—but why 
was his one sacrifice good for all other people? Although this is presented as a premise 
supporting a previous conclusion, it is actually an assertion that needs support.173 
Although previous verses have indicated that Jesus’ death was salvific (2:9, 14, 17; 5:9), 
the author has not explained the rationale.  
Verse 28 provides support for the contrast given in 7:27. Two thoughts are 
intertwined; they might be separated in this way:  
• 
Claim: Levitical priests had to offer sacrifices for themselves and for 
others (7:27b; 5:3). 
• 
Ground: For the law appointed priests who were weak and who sinned 
(7:28a). 
• 
Warrant: {If priests sin, they have to offer sacrifices for their own sins.}  
 
• 
Claim: Christ does not need to offer daily sacrifices (7:27a). 
• 
Ground: For the oath appointed a Son who is sinless (7:28b). 
• 
Warrant: {If priests do not sin, they do not have to offer sacrifices for their 
own sins.} 
                                                                                                                                                 
entered the heavenly holy place, fulfilling the symbolism of a ritual that only the high priest could do. The 
author might also point out that Melchizedek, as the first priest mentioned in Scripture, was the #$ . 
172 This is the first use of & in the epistle, and the first overt mention that his death was a self-
sacrifice. “Once again our author mentions in passing for the first time a doctrine which will, in a later 
chapter, receive extended explanation” (Montefiore, Hebrews, 130). 
173 The conclusion is stated, and one premise is stated, but it is not clear what the missing premise is.  
• {unstated premise} 
• Since () Jesus offered himself once for all… 
• Claim: He does not need to offer daily sacrifices.  
If we try to supply the missing premise in such a way as to create a complete syllogism, we might end up 
with something like, If a holy, blameless, undefiled high priest offers himself, it is not needed for his own 
sins and is consequently effective for all the sins that anyone might ever commit. However, this is simply a 
restatement of what needs to be proved. I conclude that this  clause does not form an enthymeme. 

57 
In verse 28 the author again goes out of his way to remind the readers that the law 
is weak; he now adds the comment that the oath came afterwards—the sequence implies 
that the law was not enough, and also implies that the oath replaced the law. Further, this 
verse says that Jesus has reached the goal that the readers want.174 He is able to deliver 
the goods because he has them.  
 
Hebrews 8—end of the old covenant 
The author summarizes his main point175 in 8:1—“We have such a high priest”—
that is, one described in 7:26 as sinless and in heaven, able to save those who approach 
God through him. Heb 8:2-6 presents a number of ideas in a short chain of arguments, 
which are later developed in more detail: Jesus must offer something, he serves in 
heaven, the Levitical sanctuary is a copy, and the covenant and ministry of Jesus is 
superior to the old covenant and old ministry. Verse 2 says that Jesus is a minister in the 
true and heavenly sanctuary, and this is supported with a reason in 8:3.  
• 
Claim: Jesus is a minister in the true sanctuary (8:2). 
• 
For () as high priest he must minister somewhere (8:3).176 
• 
Jesus does not minister on earth, in the human-made copy (8:4-5). 
 
Since Jesus is not on earth, he must be in heaven (Ps 110:1 could have been 
cited), and since he is serving as a high priest in the presence of God, he must be serving 
in the true tabernacle. Verse 3 is a simple enthymeme: 
• 
All high priests offer sacrifices. 
• 
{Jesus is a high priest, appointed in Ps 110:4.} 
• 
Therefore () he must have something to offer.177 
 
                                                 
174 The verb is . Here again, the translation “perfect” is misleading. Although Jesus is perfect in the 
sense of being without sin, it is not true that he was made perfect. Rather, he was brought to a goal, that of 
being a leader who blazes a trail for others. When humans are brought to completion through the 
intercession of Christ, they presumably have a life similar to his—life in the presence of God. 
175 Heb 8:1 serves not just as a summary of the preceding paragraph, but also describes the main doctrinal 
point of the entire epistle. Yet the author’s purpose is not simply to convey this bit of information—he has 
a hortatory goal: to exhort the readers to remain loyal to this high priest. 
176 Contra Ellingworth, who does not see  in 8:3 as indicating a reason: “It does not connect v. 3 directly 
with v. 2” (Hebrews, 403).  
177 Gräßer sees no purpose in the verse: “Dabei ist nicht ganz klar, welchen Zweck die Aussage von V 3 

58 
Verse 4 then reasons from this conclusion to another: 
• 
If he were on earth, he could not be a priest, since the Law assigns 
Levitical priests to make offerings {and forbids all others}.178 
• 
He is a priest and must offer something (8:4).  
• 
{Therefore he serves in heaven, not on earth} (supporting verse 2).179 
 
Verse 5 argues that the Levitical priests served a copy of the heavenly sanctuary, 
then supports this with  and a quote from Exod 25:40. The purpose of this citation is 
not just to prove that the tabernacle was a copy, but more to prove that the true sanctuary 
is in heaven, and (it is implied) that this is where Jesus is serving as a high priest.180 
• 
Claim: Levitical priests serve a copy of the heavenly sanctuary. 
• 
Ground: Scripture says that Moses made the tabernacle according to a 
pattern shown him on the mountain. 
• 
Assumption: {The pattern shown Moses indicates the existence of 
sanctuary in heaven.} 
 
The readers have been told: 1) Jesus offers something, but not on earth; 2) there is 
a true heavenly sanctuary; 3) Jesus is a high priest in heaven. The conclusion is obvious: 
Jesus offers something in a true heavenly sanctuary. The author will discuss that in more 
detail in chapter 9, where the first tabernacle is described and found deficient, and then 
Christ’s sacrifice is described. The author could have gone from 8:5 directly to 9:1, but 
instead he includes a section about the old and new covenants.  
                                                                                                                                                 
verfolgt. Wenn er fehlte, würde ihn jedenfalls niemand vermissen” (Hebräer, 2:84). The verse states the 
obvious, so perhaps its absence would not be noticed, but rhetorically it not only helps support 8:2, but it 
also suggests a question—“what did he offer?”—that will be answered in 9:26. 
178 This is a logical problem: If the covenant is obsolete, then the law restricting the priesthood to Levi is 
also obsolete (7:18), and Jesus could function on earth—the problem is not the law, but that Jesus is not on 
earth. But the readers, who apparently accepted the legitimacy of the Levitical priesthood, would not notice 
the problem. Besides, the author’s purpose is to argue that Jesus does not minister according to the law. 
Steven K. Stanley resolves the logical error by assuming that Jesus would remain on earth only if he had 
not died: “The meaning of this phrase is that if Jesus were still on earth, if he had not died, then he could 
not be a priest” (“A New Covenant Hermeneutic: The Use of Scripture in Hebrews 8–10” [Ph.D. diss., 
University of Sheffield, 1994], 72, italics added).  
179 Ellingworth has essentially the same syllogism, saying it is the argument of 8:1-6 as a whole (Hebrews, 
399). Weiß also notes the implied conclusion: “Also—so die unausgesprochene Schlußfolgerung—ist das 
hier gemeinte Hohepriestertum notwendig eines von nicht-irdischer, himmlischer Art!” (Der Brief, 435). 
180 “This section stresses the ministry of Jesus much more than that of the Levitical priests…. The contrast 
is mainly one of place (heaven/earth)” (Ellingworth, Hebrews, 399). 

59 
Verse 6 asserts: Just as the ministry of Jesus is superior, his covenant is equally 
superior. The author apparently takes the superior ministry as a point just proven (based 
on the assumption that a ministry in the true sanctuary is superior to ministry in a copy), 
and then states that the new covenant is superior to the same degree ( ').181 As in 7:22, 
he assumes that each priesthood has a covenant associated with it.  
The covenant of Christ was associated in 7:19 with a better hope; in 8:6 it is said 
to have better promises. The author does not say what those promises are—that does not 
seem to be a concern—other than implying that the new covenant is effective in bringing 
completion (7:19, 22).182 Some “promises” might be seen in Jer 31:31-34, but the author 
does not highlight any of them,183 nor adopt any of the key terms, other than “new 
covenant”; his focus in this long quote is 1) to show that a new covenant was prophesied, 
and from that, 2) to argue that the old covenant is obsolete.  
The author will highlight one benefit of the new covenant in 10:17, but in chapter 
8 his purpose is not to describe the new covenant, but simply to argue that it has rendered 
the old one obsolete.184 The readers need to be persuaded that the old covenant is obsolete 
before they are willing to consider any benefits of the new. Heb 8:7-13 does not even 
argue that the covenant is better (although we might expect such an argument to follow 
8:6)—it simply argues that the old is obsolete, implying that the new covenant is now 
operative.185 Any covenant is better than an obsolete one, of course; the assumption is that 
                                                 
181 “The author does not go on to defend the proportion or the correlation he is making. He assumes that his 
audience will accept it based on a common axiom of cause and effect—what is produced by a greater cause 
will be a greater good (Aristotle Rh. 1.7.7)” (deSilva, Perseverance, 283). Ellingworth writes, “It is 
assumed that the copy is inferior to the original” (Hebrews, 408). 
182 If the patriarchs could hope for eternal life with God (11:13), in what way are the new covenant 
promises “better”? Perhaps they are no better than what the ancients hoped for—but they are better than 
what the old covenant promised, for it promised only physical blessings in this life. Eternal life was offered 
to the patriarchs not on the basis of the old covenant, but by grace. 
183 Even after Jer 31 is quoted, Lane can say, “The writer shows no interest in the promises attached to the 
new covenant” (Hebrews 1-8, 210). Ellingworth also notes that Jer 31 “is presented not as a promise but as 
a divine complaint” (Hebrews, 411). Gräßer says, “Von den vier Verheißungen interessiert den Hebr 
nämlich nur die Vergebungsverheißung (V 12)” (Hebräer, 2:98). 
184 Gräßer remarks that the author “zitiert Jer 31,31-34 mit dem einen Ziel, die Aussage von V 13 als 
Quintessenz des Ganzen zu erreichen: Weil die zweite Diatheke »neu« heißt, muß die erste veraltet sein” 
(ibid., 101, italics in original). 
185 Bénétreau writes, “On s’attendrait à ce que soient explicitées les meilleures promesses qui fondent la 
nouvelle alliance annoncées en 8.6. Au contraire, c’est le sort de l’ancienne alliance qui retient l’attention” 

60 
when God gives a new covenant, it is an improvement over the old. 
 
The author begins in 8:7 by arguing that the old covenant had a fault: “For if that 
first [covenant] had been faultless, there would have been no need to look for a second 
one.” The author’s criticism of the old covenant is indirect in two ways: 1) the word 
“covenant” is not in the text, so readers must supply it, and 2) he pairs the old covenant 
with the word “faultless,” but then argues against that pairing; readers have to supply the 
conclusion. 
• 
Jesus is the mediator of a better covenant (8:6). 
• 
For the first covenant had a fault (8:7). 
• 
{God will resolve the problem, and he has done it in Christ.} 
 
• 
If the first was perfect, God would not promise a second (based on the 
assumption that God does not do unnecessary things). 
• 
God promised a second covenant (as will be shown). 
• 
{Therefore the first covenant did have a fault.}  
 
Heb 8:8 explains that the fault was “with them” and then Jer 31:31-34 is 
quoted.186 The author does not attempt to argue that Jesus brought the covenant that Jer 
31 described—he does not show, for example, a correspondence between the prediction 
and the fulfillment—it is sufficient for his purpose here to simply note that a new 
covenant was predicted, showing that the old was inadequate. If the readers accept that 
the old covenant is obsolete, then it is assumed that their only alternative is to accept the 
claim that the new covenant has been put into effect through Jesus Christ (rather than 
being yet future).187 Contrary to his usual procedure, the author offers no comment on the 
                                                                                                                                                 
(Hébreux, 2:59). Ellingworth observes, “At this stage of the argument, the author’s main concern is with 
the supersession of the old covenant and thus with the negative part of the prophecy (v. 9), rather than with 
its stronger positive aspect (vv. 10-12), which is explored later (especially in 10:15-18)” (Hebrews, 413).  
186  in 8:8 introduces the supporting quote. Hughes argues for the textual variant “he finds fault [with 
the covenant] when he says to them” (Hebrews, 298), but this possibility does not affect the argument. 
Ellingworth says that  “probably links it with v. 7a…. Riggenbach links v. 8a only with v. 7b” 
(Hebrews, 415). Such connections would create an enthymeme similar to what I outline above.  
187 If the readers used eucharistic words similar to Luke 22:20 or 1 Cor 11:25, they would already be 
favorably disposed to the idea that Jesus instituted a new covenant; they just had not realized that this 
implied the end of the Mosaic covenant. Gordon observes, “That ‘the days’ (v. 8) of Jer. 31.31 had now 
come would not have been doubted by a writer who could claim in the first sentence of his letter that the 
Christian era belonged in the ‘last days’ (1.2)” (Hebrews, 93). The primary argument in favor of the new 
covenant is simply that the old is obsolete. The only thing that the author argues against—implying that it is 

61 
vast majority of the quote. As Gräßer comments, the disproportion between the quote and 
the terse commentary points out the main goal of the argumentation: “Der zweite Bund 
ist nicht die restitutio des ersten, sondern seine substitutio.”188  
Although Scripture describes the Abrahamic and Mosaic covenants as being in 
force at the same time, the author assumes that only one covenant can be in force at a 
time. If a new is promised, the old is slated for elimination. 
 
Verse 9 includes an argumentation structure within the quote from Jer 31: 
• 
Claim: God will make a covenant that is different from the Sinai covenant 
(8:8). 
• 
Ground: Because (
) they did not continue in my covenant (8:9b). 
• 
Assumption: {The new covenant will be made in such a way that the 
people will not break it.}189  
 
This implication is verified in 8:10-11, which I summarize: Because [
] in the 
new covenant, God will change people so that they will want to be loyal. The author does 
not do anything with the details of Jer 31—he says nothing about law in the heart, God 
being their God, or everyone knowing the Lord (he even omits most of those details when 
he quotes Jer 31 again in Heb 10:16-17).  
Heb 8:12 includes more reasoning from Jer 31: “For [
] I will be merciful 
toward their iniquities, and I will remember their sins no more.” Does this mean that 
everyone will know the Lord because he forgives them—as if knowing God is an 
automatic result of forgiveness? No, the logic seems to be that God will make a new 
covenant because he forgives them, and knowing God is a consequence of the new 
covenant. The old covenant required punishment, and it would be necessary to remove 
that punishment before a new covenant could be enacted. Although the author of 
Hebrews does not develop the thought, the text indicates that forgiveness is the rationale 
                                                                                                                                                 
the only thing vying for the readers’ attention—is the Mosaic covenant. 
188 “Das »Mißverhältnis« zwischen dem ausführlichen Zitat und dieser lapidaren Feststellung fällt natürlich 
auf, stellt aber das eigentliche Argumentationsziel um so deutlicher heraus” (Gräßer, Hebräer, 2:103). 
189 The logic may be paraphrased: “I will make a different kind of covenant, because they kept breaking the 
old one.” The clause apparently explains why it is not good enough to “renew” the old covenant—a new 
and different kind of covenant is needed—and the difference will presumably correct the fault of the old. 
This is also suggested by the author’s introduction of the quote: God finds fault with them. Although 
“them” is initially unclear, the context eventually shows that it refers to the Israelites, who disobeyed. 

62 
preceding the new covenant rather than its result.190  
• 
God will make a new covenant (8:8-11). 
• 
For he will forgive the people (8:12). 
• 
{The old covenant required punishment, so forgiveness has to come before 
a new covenant can be made.} 
 
In verse 13, the author highlights the point he wants to make from this citation: 
“In speaking of ‘a new covenant’ [“covenant” is again not in the text and must be 
supplied by the readers] God has made the first one obsolete.” The conclusion implies 
that the Mosaic covenant became obsolete when Jeremiah wrote the words.191 The logic 
is similar to verse 7, but goes further: 
• 
Claim: God has made (perfect tense) the first covenant obsolete.  
• 
Ground: God predicted a new covenant. 
• 
Warrant: {When the new is predicted, the old is made obsolete—rendered 
obsolete not by the new covenant itself, but by the prediction.} 
 
The author reiterates the point by saying, “And what is obsolete and growing old 
will soon disappear.”192 He will soon describe some details of the old covenant and show 
how Christ is different. But before I examine Heb 9, I want to comment on the author’s 
strategy of comparing Jesus and his covenant to an obsolete and useless arrangement. 
What does this imply about the attitude of the readers toward the old covenant? Some 
commentators argue that the readers were not tempted by the Jewish rituals—the author 
was merely using the rituals as a literary foil to stress the efficacy of Christ. But it would 
be faint praise to say that Christ was better than an arrangement that everyone knew 
                                                 
190 However, in chapter 10, the 
 is omitted, thereby making forgiveness part of the content of the new 
covenant (even though forgiveness would not be needed if everyone knew the Lord and had God’s laws 
written in their hearts). 
191 Kistemaker writes, “God himself in the days of Jeremiah had already declared the covenant made with 
Israel to be obsolete” (Hebrews, 230, see also Westcott, Hebrews, 225). Attridge is similar: “In Hebrews’s 
eyes, the old covenant was near its end as soon as the oracle of a new was spoken” (Hebrews, 229). If the 
covenant became obsolete in Jeremiah’s day, there was a hiatus between the exile and Christ in which 
neither the Sinai covenant nor the new covenant was operative (but God was honoring the promises he 
made to Abraham). That might explain for the author why there was no Davidic king, no Zadokite priests, 
and no mercy seat in the temple. It would render the second temple and its sacrifices irrelevant (hence the 
author’s focus on the tabernacle). Support for this concept might be seen in the quote from the LXX of Jer 
31, especially in a part that deviates from the Hebrew text: “and so I had no concern for them” (8:9d).  
192 By this, the author could mean that the old covenant was destined to disappear shortly after Jeremiah 
made the prediction. Or he could be saying that it would disappear shortly after Hebrews was written.  

63 
didn’t work—that is, better than nothing.193 For a comparison to be an effective form of 
praise, it must compare with something still respected. Timothy Seid writes, “It is 
ridiculous to compare an obviously inferior subject to one which is clearly superior.”194 
The author never says, “The law is good but Christ is better.” Rather, he argues 
that the law was never effective. Theodore Stylianopoulos writes, “The author throughout 
the epistle clearly intends to separate and reject the Mosaic cult as completely valueless. 
He shows little interest in establishing unity and continuity between the Old and New 
Covenants.”195 He is not just presenting Jesus as the better of two alternatives—he is 
saying that Jesus is effective whereas the law is not. He goes beyond the rhetoric of 
comparison196—he is arguing against the law, arguing for supersession. 197 As Manson 
says, if the author simply wanted to highlight the superiority of Christ,  
he could have dispensed with the so-often repeated reminder to his readers 
that the order, the rites and the sacrifices of Judaism were ended. It would 
have been enough to show that Christianity transcended Judaism, the 
noblest religion of the past, without insisting pari passu and all the time 
that it abrogated and superseded it. But the latter insistence would be of 
the very essence of the matter if he were writing to Jewish Christians on 
whom the hand of the past still lay very heavily…. The character of his 
particular emphases all gain in intelligibility and point if we suppose the 
                                                 
193 It might be like a historian saying that the U.S. Constitution is the best possible national charter, because 
it is at least better than the Articles of Confederation—it is better than something weak and useless. 
194 Timothy W. Seid, “Synkrisis in Hebrews 7: The Rhetorical Structure and Strategy,” in The Rhetorical 
Interpretation of Scripture (ed. Stanley E. Porter and Dennis L. Stamps; JSNTSup 180; Sheffield: Sheffield 
Academic, 1999), 347. In personal communication, Seid wrote that he probably based this sentence on 
Aelius Theon’s Progymnasmata, section 10. If the readers already considered the law obsolete and useless, 
and the author wanted to compare Jesus with that law anyway, he would need to acknowledge the problem 
and bolster the comparison by praising the law—e.g., “Even though the law is obsolete, it was the best 
thing anyone had, but now we have something much better in Jesus.” But the author’s persistent polemic 
against the law suggests that the readers had too high a view of the law. 
195 Theodore G. Stylianopoulos, “Shadow and Reality: Reflections on Hebrews 10:1-18,” GOTR 17 (1972): 
218. He concludes, “The Epistle to the Hebrews, except in the case of the interpretation of Old Testament 
‘prophetic’ quotations, never suggests fulfillment of the one covenant by the other, but µετθεσι, 
αναρεσι, σλευσι , and αθτησι of the former” (230).  
196 A synkrisis normally argued that a person is better than an earlier respected person; it did not say 
negative things about the first person. For example, the author says nothing negative about angels, and only 
a hint of anything negative about Moses. For these comparisons, the author might say, They are good but 
Jesus is better. He says the law was valid, but he never says that it did anything good. 
197 The new covenant supersedes the old because it is the reality that the old covenant dimly portrayed. 

64 
group to be conservatively Jewish-Christian in sentiment and tendency.198 
 
To praise the sacrifice of Jesus, it would have been sufficient to comment about 
sacrifices, but the author goes further, to the law as a whole, to the covenant, apparently 
because it is also a subject of concern.199 Throughout chs. 8-10 he weaves the theme of 
covenant, expanding the significance of his conclusions beyond the superiority of Christ 
over the old priesthood, sacrifices and sanctuary, although his point could have been 
made without mentioning covenant at all. The argument implies that the readers valued 
the old covenant as still valid. Kenneth Schenck concludes that many of the readers 
“believed that the Levitical system not only provided legitimate means of atonement in 
addition to that provided by Christ but perhaps even that it was essential for complete and 
continuous atonement…. The Levitical system in some way stands as the audience’s 
main alternative to Christ.”200 
 
Hebrews 9:1-14—Jesus entered heaven by his own blood 
 
“Even201 the first [covenant] had regulations for worship,” the author says in 9:1, 
                                                 
198 Manson, Hebrews, 147, 157. 
199 Gareth Cockerill writes, “By affirming in v. 8 that ‘the law required’ these sacrifices ‘to be made’…the 
author of Hebrews reminds his readers that the sacrifices are part of a covenant or legal system that stands 
or falls together” (“Structure and Interpretation in Hebrews 8:1-10:18: A Symphony in Three Movements,” 
BBR 11 [2001]: 195 n. 58). 
200 Schenck, Understanding, 102, 107. It is not difficult to imagine Jewish readers attracted to the old 
covenant, but it is more difficult to imagine readers with a high Christology (implied in Heb 1 and 
throughout Heb) looking to the old covenant for atonement. Could they accept Jesus as Lord, as an exalted 
being, but not as Savior? We do not need to posit that the readers had such a view—only that they were 
pressured to accept such a view, and the author combats that view. The readers’ more traditional Jewish 
relatives may have been saying, “You can believe in the resurrection and exaltation of Jesus if you want to, 
but in order to be faithful to the Scriptures, you have to look to the Levitical rituals for atonement, for being 
right with God. Your belief about Jesus is harmless if you show solidarity with the Jewish people by 
participating in the synagogue traditions. You don’t have to give up your cherished belief, as long as you 
do what good Jews are supposed to do.” The readers may have been tempted to think that this was an 
acceptable compromise, a position that would avoid persecution, but the author is saying that it amounts to 
apostasy, and it is based on an obsolete law that can never provide access to God. 
201 The 	 is lacking in some early manuscripts, perhaps because the new covenant does not have 
“regulations…and an earthly sanctuary.” The author is setting up a contrast, suggested by the word 
—
but in this case the corresponding  is not found until 9:11—after an intervening 
… sequence in vv. 
4, 6. Ellingworth thinks that the 
 and  are too far apart “to be directly related” (Hebrews, 420), but 
after six 
… contrasts in Heb 7, readers might well expect that 
 in 9:1 introduces another contrast. 
Magill notes that in all three times that "		is used, “it introduces a comparison between the Levitical 

65 
and then backs up that statement (using 202) in 9:2-5 by describing the tabernacle and 
its furnishings.203 These details were apparently common knowledge, and the author does 
nothing with them, so why does he include them? They may have a rhetorical purpose—
they could strengthen the author’s rapport with the audience by reporting details they are 
attracted to;204 they could also raise the author’s credibility by demonstrating his 
knowledge;205 they could make an implicit contrast between the many details of the old 
covenant with the simplicity of the new,206 or they could simply provide a change of 
pace, a pause in the argumentation to relax the audience. The author draws on the basic 
geography of the tabernacle—the fact that the Holy of Holies was behind the curtain—
but ignores all the furniture. There is no argumentation until 9:8, where the author draws 
a conclusion about what he has said in 9:7: 
• 
Claim: The way into the (true) sanctuary was hidden while the first tent 
stood (i.e., had legal standing).207 
• 
Ground: The Levitical high priest could enter the Holy of Holies only once 
a year,208 only with the blood of sacrifices.209 
                                                                                                                                                 
system and the priesthood/ministry of Christ” (Transline, 839). 
202 “ indicates, not a direct logical consequence of v. 1, but a more specific statement” (Ellingworth, 
Hebrews, 422). Spicq likewise says that “le « donc » qui ne conclut rien” (Hébreux SB, 144).  is used 
here, as elsewhere, to introduce evidence from Scripture, although no specific passage is quoted here. 
203 Norbert Hugedé comments on the author’s unannounced switch from first [covenant] to first [tent]: 
“C’est le type de pièges que l’Epître aux Hébreux réserve au lecteur inattentif : les arguments sont supposés 
plus qu’explicités, encore une fois parce que les premiers chrétiens étaient plus à l’aise que nous dans tout 
ce raisonnement. Le pire risque étant aujourd’hui de passer d’un verset à l’autre et de rester devant un 
ensemble incohérent, exposé aux exégèses fantaisistes” (De Sacerdoce du Fils: Commentaire de l’Épître 
aux Hébreux [Paris: Fischbacher, 1983], 115). 
204 “The author follows his usual practice of giving, first, a favourable or at least neutral description of 
circumstances under the old dispensation, and next, mentioning their negative aspects, thus opening the 
way for positive statements about Christ” (Ellingworth, Hebrews, 419). In this, 9:4-5 is like 7:2b-c—a 
summary of information from Scripture, but information that plays no part in the author’s argument. 
205 However, the author makes no attempt to support the details that might be questioned, such as the 
location of the incense altar. If the author is drawing on common knowledge, it would not demonstrate any 
expertise to do so. 
206 The author contrasts the frequency of sacrifice, but not complexity of the rituals. 
207 The tent stopped standing in the literal sense when the first temple was built. The author would probably 
say that the way into the sanctuary was disclosed by the death and ascension of Christ, which happened 
while the temple was still standing but at that moment became obsolete. As noted earlier, the author may 
believe that the old tent lost its legal standing when its covenant became obsolete in the days of Jeremiah.  

66 
• 
Assumptions: {The Holy of Holies was a symbol of the true sanctuary in 
heaven; the entry of the priest represented the entry of the redeemed; the 
rituals and restrictions represented barriers to access.} 
 
Some people might have said that the high priest’s entry, even if only once a year, 
showed that the people could approach God through the old covenant,210 since the priest 
represented the people, and Lev 16:30 states that their sins were atoned. However, the 
author says that it showed the opposite, and he will support that in 9:9-10. 
• 
The offerings do not give people access to God (9:8). 
• 
{Because} sacrifices cannot bring the conscience of the worshipper211 to 
completion (9:9—
 ). 
• 
Assumption: {People would have access if their conscience was clean.} 
 
Verse 9 contains an important point: Sacrifices cannot cleanse the conscience (the 
first use of  in Hebrews). This is a critical point, and it could have been 
contested. One argument in support of this is given in 9:10; another will be given in 10:2.  
• 
Conclusion: Sacrifices cannot cleanse the conscience (9:9). 
• 
Reason (or corollary): Gifts and sacrifices are only for foods, drinks, 
washings and other regulations for the flesh (9:10).212 
• 
Warrant: {External rituals cannot affect the inner person.} 
 
However, the implied warrant might be contested. Someone who believed in the 
efficacy of the Levitical rituals could say, “I made the offering that the law prescribed. I 
                                                                                                                                                 
208 He had to enter several times on the same day: to offer incense, to sprinkle blood, and to retrieve the 
censer. Although the rituals of Yom Kippur are important because the high priest was allowed to enter the 
Holy of Holies only on that day, the day does not have a special role in the author’s argumentation. Rather, 
he paints a composite picture of the sacrifices and rituals, whether they are daily, yearly, with blood, with 
water, for covenant inauguration or covenant maintenance. On 9:13, Ellingworth writes, “The author is 
moving away from specific reference to the Day of Atonement liturgy to the underlying principles of OT 
sacrifice” (Hebrews, 454). 
209 “This is the first of many references to blood” (ibid., 436). 
210 Westcott seems to accidentally support such an argument when he writes in another context, “In a figure 
year by year the people had access to the Presence of God in the person of the High-priest” (Hebrews, 280). 
211 The worshipper here, in context, is only the Levitical high priest, representing all of Israel. 
212 This verse “contains one of the author’s most negative judgments on the levitical order, comparable with 
8:13” (Ellingworth, Hebrews, 442). “Hebrews’ language raises the question whether such regulations 
remain in force after the new age is inaugurated. The strong implication is that they do not; but the author 
does not say so explicitly” (ibid., 444). But if the covenant is obsolete, the regulations are as well. 

67 
did what was required, so God will give me what he promised. I feel forgiven, so why do 
you say there is something wrong with my conscience?” In other words, the person says, 
“The offerings are effective because God says they are,” and our author asserts, “No, they 
aren’t.” He is apparently using conscience as an objective status, not a subjective feeling. 
Further, he says that the offerings were “imposed until the time comes to set 
things right.” The author assumes that he lives in that time—in the “last days” (1:2). The 
offerings were required for only a temporary time—but how did the author conclude 
that? The author does not make it explicit, but it seems to be built on 8:13—the old 
covenant is rendered obsolete by the prediction of a new covenant.213 Therefore the old 
was designed to be temporary, which implies that it was not effective, and the rituals 
therefore symbolized restriction rather than success. Even if all the rituals had been done 
right, the prediction of a new covenant means that the rituals were never effective for 
salvation, and the deficiency is so serious that the solution involves not just a renewed 
heart, but also a new covenant. 
In verse 11, the author begins to describe the ministry of Christ, who is introduced 
as the high priest of good things that were predicted214 (perhaps a reference to Jer 31). 
The author makes several points in contrasting Christ with the old covenant:  
1. Christ entered the sanctuary in heaven (resuming the topic started in 8:1-6), 
2. he did it through his own blood rather than animal blood, 
3. he did it once for all (&), and  
4. he obtained eternal redemption.215  
He supports the claim of redemption with an argument from lesser to greater: 
• 
Claim: Christ obtained eternal redemption.  
                                                 
213 “This ‘time of reformation’ has already been defined in the terms of Jeremiah’s prophecy of the new 
covenant” (Hughes, Hebrews, 325). 
214 Some ancient texts say “good things that have come.” Even if the original is “good things to come,” it 
would seem to correspond literarily to “the time to set things right” in the previous verse, and thus refer to 
something that Christ has already brought.  
215 Verse 14 implies that the redemption he obtained is for others, thus addressing a point left unresolved 
from 7:27.  

68 
• 
Because () just as animal blood cleanses the exterior,216 the blood of 
Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without (spiritual) 
blemish, cleanses the conscience (9:13-14). 
 
If we try to make this an enthymeme, the assumed warrant would almost have to 
be the same as the claim—unless the words “eternal spirit” offer a rationale. Montefiore 
argues that the phrase “through the eternal spirit” means “through his eternal nature,” 
since "	can refer to a person’s self. “He, who in self-sacrifice offered to God his 
full and perfect humanity, was himself eternal by nature; and because of this, the 
salvation that he procured is everlasting.”217 He was perfect in conscience and therefore 
able to help others become perfect in conscience. This would then provide a logical 
premise for the enthymeme: {The eternal spirit, since it is of infinite value, indicates that 
the sacrifice is sufficient for all humans for all time.} 
The author assumes that the Levitical priests, who were “without blemish” on the 
outside, while flawed on the inside, could be effective only on the outside.218 The priests 
were guilty of sin and could not cleanse themselves, much less anyone else. Another 
assumption is that the death of Christ, since it was not needed for himself, is somehow 
effective for all other people (2:9), once for all time. This is not explained,219 but see my 
note on 9:28, below. The blood of a sinless person is obviously more significant than the 
blood of animals, but the extent of that significance is not self-evident.220 We can see the 
more assumptions in the following paraphrase: If hundreds of rituals cleanse the flesh, 
then we can be sure that Christ’s death cleanses the conscience (which gives permission 
                                                 
216 Although Ellingworth believes that some of the readers were Gentile, he also notes that “many non-
Jewish readers would refuse to accept the premise expressed in v. 13” (Hebrews, 453). 
217 Montefiore, Hebrews, 155; also Westcott, Hebrews, 261, Spicq, Hébreux SB, 155, and Thomas Hewitt, 
Hebrews (TNTC; Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1960), 148. Ellingworth does not give his own view, but says 
that if the “eternal spirit” refers to Jesus’ eternal existence, “it would mean essentially the same as” the 
phrase found in 7:16—“the power of an indestructible life” (Hebrews, 457). Elsewhere, he refers to “the 
author’s facility in using different expressions with the same meaning” (ibid., 478).  
218 “Animals are not moral creatures; the unblemished condition…was merely external” (Hughes, Hebrews, 
357).  
219 Jean Héring writes, “How is it to be understood that the sacrifice had supernatural effects, by canceling 
sins and gaining a victory over the devil? Here is a mystery which no New Testament author explains to 
us” (The Epistle to the Hebrews [trans. A. W. Heathcote and P. J. Allcock; London: Epworth, 1970], 81). 
220 Even if Jesus saved only one other person, that would be more than the animal rituals did.  

69 
to approach God, and salvation).221 The author is changing the terms in the middle of the 
argument. He implies that the ministries are analogous, but does not prove it.222 This is 
not to say that his conclusion is wrong—it is just to observe that his rhetorical strategy 
does not always delineate all the steps in the logic. 
 
Hebrews 9:15-28—new covenant had a better sacrifice 
 
Another conclusion is drawn in 9:15—marked as a new paragraph in most 
translations, but introduced as a logical consequence of 9:14: 
• 
Datum: The blood of Christ, who offered himself to God, is able to purify 
the conscience so that people can worship God (9:14). 
• 
Conclusion: For this reason (	

) he is mediator of a new covenant 
(9:15). 
 
How does the author go from 9:14 to 9:15? The assumption seems to be that 
worshipping God with a clean conscience is tantamount to salvation (cf. 7:19), and since 
Christ brings a new means of reaching the soteriological goal, he mediates a new 
covenant.223 This implies that salvation must be based on a covenant—an idea that is 
reflected in 9:15 when the author states the purpose of the new covenant: “so that () 
those who have been called may receive the promised eternal inheritance.” A covenant 
brings salvation.  
Why can people be saved through the covenant Christ brought? Heb 9:15 gives 
this reason: “because (	

) a death has occurred that redeems them from the 
transgressions under the first covenant.” The logic would have been simple if the author 
had said a little less: 
                                                 
221 “Approaching God” is a synonym of salvation in 7:19, 25; it can be done only with a clean conscience, 
only if sins are forgiven. 
222 We cannot expect an epistle to address every question in equal detail. The readers apparently had 
received a lot of teaching about Christ already, and if key questions were resolved to their satisfaction, then 
other claims would probably be accepted as part of the doctrinal package. 
223 Smith writes that the “therefore” of 9:15 “does not look back to the preceding but forward, and the verse 
might better be translated as follows: ‘For the following purpose he is the mediator of a new covenant, so 
that those who are called may receive the promised eternal inheritance’” (Hebrews, 114). However, if a 
clean conscience is the guarantee of salvation, the “therefore” functions in the normal way, as I have 
outlined it above. Ellingworth says that the transition is gradual: “If 	

 is forward-looking, it makes 
a link, not primarily with v. 14…but with the whole of the preceding argument…as far back as 7:22” 
(Hebrews, 459). This is unnecessarily vague; a clear link with v. 14 can be constructed. 

70 
• 
People can be saved through the new covenant. 
• 
Because a death has redeemed them from transgressions. 
• 
{Sins are the only obstacle to salvation, and death atones for sin.} 
 
The problem is that the author says that Christ’s death redeemed people from 
transgressions under the first covenant. However, if the first covenant is obsolete, then 
transgressions of it would be irrelevant for the readers224—the law no longer applies, the 
penalty no longer applies, and there is nothing to redeem. The author seems to be 
thinking of those who lived under the first covenant—thus he uses the perfect tense 
participle $" rather than a present tense participle, and he has moved from the 
first person “our” of 9:14 to the third person “those” of 9:15. The ancients committed 
transgressions, but the first covenant was not able to remove sins from their record, so 
they “did not receive what was promised” (11:39). The death of Christ redeems them 
retroactively, and thus they could be made perfect along with “us” (11:40).  
The author has argued that the rituals of the old covenant were ineffective in 
salvation (9:8-10); readers might well wonder about Moses, David, the prophets, and 
other people God called during that time period—how will they be saved? After saying 
that Christ brings salvation (9:11-14), the author returns to the old covenant in the section 
that begins with 9:15. Since Christ brings salvation, he is the mediator of a new covenant, 
with the result that those formerly called might be saved, because a death has occurred to 
redeem them from their transgressions. The argument is this: 
• 
Claim: The Israelites who were called may be saved. 
• 
Ground: Because a death has taken place to redeem them from 
transgressions that occurred when they lived, under the first covenant. 
• 
Warrant: {The first covenant required a death for redemption, and this is 
the only barrier to salvation.}225 
 
                                                 
224 However, if the readers did not know that the old covenant was obsolete, they would want redemption, 
and hence they would think that the argument was relevant to their needs. The warrant involved would be 
similar to what I propose above: The covenant required a death for redemption. 
225 “In his death Jesus identified himself with the transgressors and took upon himself the curse sanctions of 
the covenant that were invoked whenever the stipulations of the covenant were ignored” (William L. Lane, 
Hebrews 9-13 [WBC 47B; Dallas: Word, 1991], 242). “The establishment of a New Covenant…required as 
its preliminary condition the discharge of man’s existing obligations” (Westcott, Hebrews, 264). “Die Ver-
heißung eines neuen Testamentes hat nicht wahr werden können, ohne daß zugleich radikale Befreiung von 
der alten Ordnung geschehen ist” (Strobel, Der Brief, 110). 

71 
The logic implies that the first covenant required a death, and 9:16 supports 
this:226 “For where there is a covenant, death of the covenant-maker must be borne” (my 
literal translation). That is, when transgressions have taken place in the context of a 
covenant, the transgressors must die. I am following here the proposal of Scott Hahn, 
which notes that 9:15 presents the context of a broken covenant.227 For most covenants, 
the parties took an oath invoking their own death as the punishment if they should fail to 
keep the covenant.  
However, the meaning of 	 in Heb 9:16-17 is debated. The majority view 
is that the author is using it in the sense of “will,” its common meaning in non-Jewish 
Greek writings.228 The author is talking about death and inheritance, and although the 
logic is not tight, the point is illustrated by an analogy: Just as a will becomes effective on 
a person’s death, so also a covenant becomes inaugurated with a death. Just as the Mosaic 
covenant was ratified with blood, so also the new covenant was put into effect through 
the death of Jesus. But Hahn, building on the word of J. J. Hughes,229 points out some 
problems with the traditional view:  
1) In other Greek literature, ! and 	 (9:17) refer to validity, not 
execution, and a will is valid when signed; it does not become valid only on 
the death of the testator.  
2) Inheritance before death was sometimes permitted, contra 9:17b.  
3) "	 in 9:16b is a peculiar way to say that a person has died.  
4) 	(	 (plural, 9:17) is a peculiar way to refer to death.  
5) Hebrews uses 	 to mean covenant, and the term is important to the 
argument; a play on words would weaken it. The argument assumes a 
                                                 
226 “The internal logic of the argument indicates that vv. 16-22 should be regarded as a parenthetical 
explanation of v. 15, which in turn is the climax of vv. 11-14” (Lane, Hebrews 9-13, 234). 
227 Scott W. Hahn, “A Broken Covenant and the Curse of Death: A Study of Hebrews 9:15-22,” CBQ 66 
(2004): 416-36.  
228 Ellingworth begins by arguing, “There is prima facie no reason to press the various occurrences of 
	 in vv. 15-20 into a single meaning” (Hebrews, 462). But au contraire, the logical connectors in vv. 
16 and 18 are prima facie evidence that the author is working with a consistent meaning. Westcott writes, 
“The connexion of vv. 15-18 is most close: v. 16 	… : v. 18 	…. This connexion makes it 
most difficult to suppose that the key-word (	) is used in different senses in the course of the verses” 
(Hebrews, 300, ellipses in original). 
229 J. J. Hughes, “Hebrews IX 15 ff. and Galatians III 15ff.,” NovT 21 (1979): 66-91. 

72 
consistent meaning of 	 from 9:15 to 9:22; there is no indication that the 
logic is irregular.230  
6) Nowhere else in Hebrews does the believer’s inheritance come through 
testamentary means, since God is the testator and cannot die.231  
7) A mediator is not involved in the vast majority of testaments.  
8) Hebrews always builds its case on the old covenant cultus, not secular law. 
Hughes, following Westcott, suggests that the meaning of “covenant” works if vv. 
16-17 refer to the animal sacrifices that were done during covenant ratification to 
represent the death of covenant-breakers. But Hahn points out two difficulties with this: 
1) Contra v. 17, not all covenants required animal sacrifices—some involved only 
an oath. Hebrews is not making a general statement about all covenants. 
2) Vv. 16-17 more naturally refer to the actual death of the people who make the 
covenant, not merely to a death symbolized in a ritual.232 
Hahn suggests that these verses refer to a broken covenant—and v. 15b sets that 
context by referring to transgressions of the first covenant. “The purpose of vv. 16-17 is 
to explain why a death [i.e., of Jesus] was necessary.”233 I will summarize Hahn’s view 
by paraphrasing vv. 15-18:  
Jesus is the mediator of a new covenant so that people can receive 
the promises, because a death has occurred to redeem them from the 
penalty that they deserved under the first covenant. Since234 the 
transgressions occurred in the context of a covenant, the transgressors 
must die, for this covenant can be considered valid only if death is carried 
out on transgressors,235 since the covenant specified that death is the 
                                                 
230 Since an analysis of enthymemes attempts to give the author the benefit of the doubt in logic, it has a 
bias toward consistent meanings, rather than an illustration or play on words. 
231 Hahn, “A Broken Covenant,” 422. 
232 Ibid., 430-31. 
233 Ibid., 431, italics in original. 
234 This takes 	with the meaning “since” rather than “where.” “Under different circumstances,… 
transgressions might have been inconsequential or given rise to some lesser punishment, but ‘since there is 
a covenant’…entailing a curse of death for unfaithfulness—‘the death of the covenant maker must be 
borne’” (ibid., 432). 
235 Hahn’s proposal for v. 16 seems to fit the text well, but v. 17 is more difficult. Literally, v. 17 says, “For 
a covenant is valid on dead persons, since it has no force as long as the covenant-maker lives.” In the 
context of the first covenant, it would mean that the covenant was valid for the dead (i.e., the Israelites); as 
long as they lived, the penalty was not being carried out. But to give them life again, they would need to be 

73 
penalty for transgression; the covenant is not being enforced if the 
transgressors are allowed to live. That is why the first covenant was 
inaugurated with blood—to symbolize the death of the covenant-breaker. 
Since the penalty has been carried out in Christ, the old covenant has no 
further claim, and a new covenant can be made. In brief, people can 
receive the new promises because a death has occurred to redeem them 
from the legal claims of the Sinai covenant. 
 
Hahn’s proposal acknowledges that a covenant does not cease to exist when it is 
broken; rather, the penalties are invoked. The covenant could not simply be declared 
obsolete—v. 15 indicates that the transgressions incurred legal consequences that had to 
be fulfilled. The people who died under the old covenant could not be saved without 
being redeemed by a death. The purpose of this passage in Hebrews 9 is to defend the 
necessity of and the efficacy of the death of Jesus in terminating the old covenant and 
inaugurating the new. Here it is in enthymeme form: 
• 
A death (i.e., of Christ) redeemed people under the first covenant (9:15). 
• 
For a covenant requires death of any party who transgresses (9:16). 
• 
{The death of Christ paid the penalty for them.} 
 
• 
A covenant requires death of any covenant-maker who transgresses (9:16). 
• 
For a covenant is valid only when transgressors are dead (9:17a). 
• 
Since () the covenant (involving a self-maledictory oath) is not being 
carried out as long as transgressors are alive (9:17b). 
 
A covenant requires the death of transgressors—therefore () the first 
covenant was inaugurated with blood (9:18). Why? Because that blood showed the 
penalty of transgressing the covenant: death.236 To substantiate that the first covenant was 
enacted with blood, the author summarizes the events of Exod 24 (with a few 
                                                                                                                                                 
redeemed. The Israelites could not be saved under the terms of the old covenant, since it required their 
death. 
236 “Die Verfügung des alten Bundes hat des Todes bzw. des Opferblutes bedurft, woraus sich Folgerungen 
für die Einsicht in die innere Notwendigkeit des Todes Jesu ergeben” (Strobel, Der Brief, 111). Ellingworth 
writes that 	“should relate, as elsewhere in Hebrews (2:17), to what immediately precedes; in this case, 
to the illustration of the will” (Hebrews, 465). However, the logic would not work if “will” were meant—a 
will requires the death of the one who made it, so the first one was inaugurated with blood—but “the first 
one” was not a will, and it was not the blood of the one who made it. Further, contra v. 17, a will is legally 
valid before the testator dies.  

74 
additions).237 This story was most likely common knowledge, so the author’s effort to 
prove the point suggests that he is dealing with something the readers may resist. As part 
of his evidence, he summarizes, “under the law almost everything is purified with blood, 
and without the shedding of blood there is no forgiveness” (9:22).238 There can be no 
forgiveness without blood because the old covenant required death for transgressions, as 
pictured not only by the sprinkling that accompanied the covenant inauguration, but also 
by the ongoing operation of the covenant rituals. This section of Hebrews argues that 
under the old covenant, death was necessary for transgression (not just inauguration), all 
in support of the point that Christ could save the people of the old covenant because he 
died to redeem them (9:15).  
• 
Datum: A covenant requires death for transgressors (9:16). 
• 
Conclusion: Therefore () the first covenant was inaugurated with 
blood (9:18).239 
• 
Hidden premise: {The blood symbolized the penalty of infraction.} 
 
• 
Datum: A covenant requires death for transgressors (9:16). 
• 
Other part of the conclusion: Almost everything is cleansed by blood, and 
forgiveness is by blood (9:22). 
                                                 
237 The support from Scripture, as usual, is introduced by . Ellingworth writes, “ introduces, not a 
reason, but a confirmation of the general statement of v. 18 by something more specific” (Hebrews, 467). 
Exod 24 says nothing about water, wool and hyssop, and the tabernacle and vessels did not yet exist. Leon 
Morris surmises, “Perhaps we are meant to see the dedication of the tabernacle as a kind of renewal of the 
covenant” (“Hebrews,” Expositor’s Bible Commentary [Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 1981] 12:89). As with 
the offerings, the author is creating a composite picture based on the entire law. This improves the analogy 
with the new covenant, in which the covenant was inaugurated and the heavenly sanctuary dedicated by 
means of the same offering. In 9:19, the author again mentions “law” without any need to do so.  
238 Montefiore notes that the author does not explain this principle. “It is not even true, for there are other 
means of receiving forgiveness actually prescribed in the Old Testament, such as prayer (Dan. ix. 19), 
fasting (Joel ii. 12), almsgiving (Ecclus. iii. 30), penitence (Psalm li. 17)” (Hebrews, 158). However, the 
principle is explained if Hahn’s view of 9:16 is correct—the covenant required death for transgression, and 
redemption could come only through a better death.  
By using a double negative, the author avoids saying that forgiveness could be obtained through 
Levitical rituals. Ellingworth notes that the author is “careful to avoid stating that the old cultus offered 
forgiveness of sins” (Hebrews, 472, italics in original—the Greek does not include “of sins.”). The author 
later argues that the blood of animals could not bring forgiveness of sins (10:4). He might argue that animal 
blood (or other actions) gave only a “shadow” (10:1) of forgiveness, symbolizing but not actually giving it. 
239 Manipulation of blood did not have any role in sacrifices until the law of Moses (Westcott, Hebrews, 
285). Blood was important in the first Passover, then in the inauguration of the covenant at Sinai; after that, 
it became part of many Levitical sacrifices, including those on the Day of Atonement. 

75 
• 
Premise: {Forgiveness and cleansing come by blood because it represents 
death.} 
 
It was necessary (), 9:23 says, for the tabernacle and other things to be 
“cleansed” (dedicated for sacred purposes) with blood, apparently because that blood 
showed the penalty of covenant transgressions. Since the copies were cleansed by blood, 
the author reasons that the true sanctuary needed better sacrifices.240 Here he is returning 
the discussion back to self-offering of Christ, last mentioned in 9:14. 
• 
Earthly copies required rituals involving animal blood. 
• 
{Since reality is better than an imitation…} 
• 
Therefore () heavenly realities required better sacrifices (9:23).241 
 
Since the tabernacle was an earthly copy of a heavenly reality, it is assumed that 
the old covenant rituals were also copies of heavenly or spiritual realities. Since the old 
covenant required death (pictured by sacrifices and blood rituals) to cleanse the flesh 
(9:13), a better sacrificial death was needed to cleanse the conscience, which the author 
seems to include among the “heavenly things” (9:14, 23).242 He assumes that the new 
covenant requires death for transgressions (because all covenants did), and salvation 
                                                 
240 An argument from lesser to greater could have easily gone the other way: Since heavenly realities are 
better than earthly copies, they need less cleansing. But the author is confident of his assertion because he 
believes that the death of Christ was an efficacious sacrifice.  
               Ellingworth argues for another meaning for “purifying” the heavenly things: “The explanation 
which best accords with the context is well expressed in the (N)JB note: ‘The “purification” of the 
sanctuary, whether the earthly or the heavenly one, does not necessarily imply any previous “impurity”: it 
is a consecratory and inaugural rite’” (Hebrews, 477). Spicq has the same view: “Le ciel n’a pas besoin 
d’être purifié (le verbe katharizesthai n’est pas répété), mais d’être consacré pour devenir un sanctuaire, 
apte à la liturgie dont le nouveau grand prêtre sera l’officiant; c’est une « dédicace »” (Hébreux SB, 159-
60). Again, an argument from lesser to greater could have argued that an eternal reality in heaven needed 
less inauguration. 
241 Ellingworth writes, “The precise force of the logic depends on how  is interpreted…. It relates 
naturally to v. 22b: because there is no remission without blood-shedding, both old and (still more) new 
covenants required sacrifice for…inauguration” (Hebrews, 475). 
242 Attridge, Hebrews, 262. Smith also notes that the conscience is in the spiritual realm—the words flesh 
and conscience “are code words describing the basic components of the human being as bodily and 
spiritual” (Hebrews, 112). N. T. Wright suggests a similar equivalence when he writes, “The effects of his 
sacrifice are to be felt…in the inward depths, the ‘holy of holies’ at the core of each individual person” 
(Hebrews for Everyone [2nd ed.; Louisville: Westminster John Knox, 2004], 96-97). See also Montefiore, 
Hebrews, 160, and F. F. Bruce, The Epistle to the Hebrews (rev. ed.; NICNT; Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 
1990), 228.  

76 
could be effected only through a better sacrifice—giving a life more valuable than the 
lives that were forfeited by sin. The author apparently believes that the death of Christ 
redeemed people who transgress the new covenant as well as those who transgress the 
old, but he does not have occasion to say this because the focal point of the argument is 
the old covenant. 
To recap: The old priesthood did not work, or else God would not have promised 
another. The old covenant did not work, or else God would not have promised another. 
That means the old rituals did not work, and something different was needed to cleanse 
the conscience, forgive sins, and allow people to approach God and live forever. 
Transgressions require death, and the fact that God sent Christ shows that the previous 
arrangement was ineffective—animal sacrifices offered by priests who have sins of their 
own could only illustrate redemption, not give it. The priests cannot even save 
themselves—they all die. The author then argues that Christ accomplished everything 
that was needed: 
• 
Claim: Heavenly things must be cleansed with better sacrifices (9:23).243 
• 
Ground: For ()244 Christ entered the true holy place, heaven itself 
(9:24).  
• 
Warrant: {Christ’s entry into heaven means that the cleansing has been 
done.}245 
 
Verse 25 presents another way in which Christ offered a better sacrifice: 
• 
Claim: Heavenly things must be cleansed with better sacrifices (9:23). 
• 
Ground: Christ offered himself only once (9:24-25).246 
                                                 
243 Claus-Peter März argues that the verse implies a heavenly victim: “Die formelhaft verkürzte Aussage 
will wohl andeuten, daß der Eintritt ins himmlische Heiligtum nicht durch irdische, sondern nur durch ein 
»himmlisches« Opfer ermöglicht werden kann” (Hebräerbrief [NEchtB; Würzburg: Echter, 1989], 59).  
244 Here  might introduce a conclusion: Because heavenly things required better sacrifices, Jesus entered 
heaven. But the way it is stated, the sense is epistemological: We know that heaven needed better sacrifices 
because that is where Christ went, and we know that better sacrifices were needed because that is what 
Christ offered.  
245 This verse does not say whether the cleansing was done when Christ died, or when he went to heaven. It 
does say that his purpose in heaven is “now to appear in the presence of God on our behalf.” 
246 Verse 25 includes a small comment that may reveal the thinking of the author: He seems to fault the 
Levitical priest for offering “blood that is not his own.” Since the priest sinned, he deserved death, and 
killing an animal could not fulfill the real requirement of the covenant oath.  

77 
• 
Warrant: {A truly effective sacrifice does not need to be repeated.} 
 
Verse 26 offers support:  
• 
Claim: Christ offered himself once, not repeatedly (9:24). 
• 
Ground: If he had to offer numerous sacrifices, it would have been 
necessary for him to suffer often even from the beginning of the world 
(9:26a). 
• 
Warrant: He appeared only recently, not at the beginning (9:26b) 
{therefore once was enough}. 
	
If Christ had to die once for every sin, or once for every person, or even once for 
every generation, he would have had to appear at the very beginning and offer a never-
ending series of sacrifices,247 but since he did not appear then, the author concludes that 
repetitious sacrifices are not necessary, and only one sacrifice was needed. Actually, the 
author begins with the belief that Christ was efficacious, and he reasons not from logical 
necessity toward fulfillment, but from what actually happened, to make a conclusion 
about what was necessary.248  
The author then presents death as a parallel (not a proof)249—just as people die 
once, Jesus died only once to bear the sins of many (probably an allusion to Isa 53:12).250 
Just as judgment follows death, Christ will return, bringing salvation (the positive 
counterpart of judgment) to “those who are eagerly waiting for him” (9:27-28).251	
                                                 
247 This may be another example of humor. Spicq calls it a “preuve par l’absurde” (Hébreux SB, 161). 
Westcott says, “It is assumed that the repetition of Christ’s suffering in the future is inconceivable” 
(Hebrews, 275). Ellingworth notes that “the author does not seem to have resolved, and perhaps did not 
ask, the question of the efficacy of Christ’s sacrifice in respect to future sins” (Hebrews, 484). Yet the 
author’s logic would indicate that if Christ’s sacrifice was good for all people, once for all, it would 
necessarily include future sins.  
248 As Ellingworth comments on 7:26, “Such statements are consequences drawn from what he believes 
God has in fact done” (ibid., 393). “The starting-point is not, at least not directly, the historical fact that 
Jesus was crucified only once, but the conviction that his death and enthronement do not need to be 
repeated, because the enthronement shows the permanent efficacy of the death” (Paul Ellingworth, “The 
Old Testament in Hebrews: Exegesis, Method and Hermeneutics” [Ph.D. diss., University of Aberdeen, 
1977], 192). 
249 Ellingworth says that 		  “suggests not only a comparison but a reason” (ibid., 485). It is 
suggestive of propriety, but it is not logical proof. In Perelman’s terminology, it is an argument from 
analogy, but it does not form an enthymeme.  
250 Isaiah 53 is probably the source of the author’s conviction that the death of Jesus paid for all others. 
251 Magill develops the force of 		 : “Just as one follows the other for people, so one will follow the 

78 
The author repeats at the end of 9:26 that Christ removed sin by the sacrifice of 
himself; in 9:28 he repeats that Christ was offered to bear the sins of many. Although this 
idea is not supported with rationale, it has occurred so often in the midst of argumentation 
that readers are likely to feel it has been proven. This will happen again in chapter 10. 
 
Hebrews 10:1-18—Christ’s sacrifice renders all others unnecessary 
Chapter 10 begins in the middle of an argument: 
• 
Claim: Christ will save his people when he returns (9:28).  
• 
Ground: For () the law can never bring anyone to completion (10:1).252 
• 
Warrant: {If God cannot use the law, he will use Christ.}  
 
This assumption—either the law or Christ—pervades the epistle, suggesting that 
this was the choice the readers faced. Although they accepted the ascension of Christ into 
heaven, they looked to the law for worship, atonement and salvation. Although they 
accepted the messianic prophecies that called Jesus the Son of God, he was a figure 
without a function, at least without a function that was defined in the Scriptures the 
readers accepted as authoritative. So the author argues that Jesus is not just sitting in 
heaven, he is the source of salvation, and his death, rather than being an embarrassment, 
was actually the means by which he brought salvation.  
In general, the author gives better reasons for saying that the old approach is 
ineffective, than for proving that Christ is effective. Since the readers apparently had only 
two choices, it was enough to disprove one, and the readers’ positive view of Christ 
would encourage them to accept the author’s view as the only rational choice. 
Heb 10:1 includes another argument: 
• 
Claim: The law cannot bring anyone to completion. 
• 
Ground: Since it has only a shadow of the predicted blessings. 
                                                                                                                                                 
other for Christ. As certain as judgment follows death for us, so certain is His second appearance for us” 
(Transline, 847). There may be an allusion here to the reappearance of the Levitical high priest after 
completing his work in the Holy of Holies. The author here indirectly exhorts the readers to wait. 
252 Ellingworth sees the connection not with 9:28 specifically, but with 9:23-28 as a whole, especially 9:23 
(Hebrews, 492). There are some conceptual parallels between 9:23 and 10:1, but the connection is not a 
logical one. Hugedé notes here, “On voit bien que le ton est celui d’une conclusion. Les remarques 
concernant l’ancien rituel prennent une valeur générale; on ne parle même plus de l’ancienne alliance, mais 
de la loi” (De Sacerdoce, 158). 

79 
• 
Warrant: {A shadow, since it is not the reality, cannot be effective—
otherwise it would be the reality.}  
 
Then he argues from a contrary: 
• 
If sacrifices were effective, they would not be repeated. 
• 
Because the worshippers would be cleansed once for all, and no longer 
have consciousness of sins (10:2). 
• 
{If they are clean and not conscious of sins, no sacrifice is needed.} 
 
The argument illustrates rhetorical strategy, but not tight logic. First, the author 
creates a high criterion of effectiveness—a sacrifice is not considered effective at all 
unless it cleanses “once for all” (&)—a person’s future as well as the past.253 Here, 
the author is using a subjective sense of conscience rather than the earlier objective sense. 
Spicq observes that the author does not consider the possibility that a sinner could be 
forgiven but unaware of it254—a neurotic conscience, perhaps. He does not consider the 
possibility that a sacrifice might effectively cleanse a person retroactively but not provide 
coverage for future infractions.255 In essence, he requires what he is trying to prove—that 
the only effective sacrifice is a singular one. Further, it could be argued that this criterion 
of effectiveness is not yet met, even in the new covenant, since believers still have 
consciousness of sin, or a conscience tainted by sin. Some of those feelings are valid and 
some are not, but they exist, and they do not mean that sacrifices are again necessary.256 
Most likely, the author began reasoning with the belief that Christ’s sacrifice was 
effective, and since it was given only once, he concluded that once is all that is needed, 
and therefore that repetitious sacrifices are a sign of ineffectiveness. 
                                                 
253 “The unstated assumption here is that cleansing the conscience should be a one-time act, that sins will 
not return to beset the conscience anew” (deSilva, Perseverance, 317). The argument works for sacrifices, 
but not for other Levitical rituals. 
254 Spicq, Hébreux SB, 165. “Les avantages des dispositions divines paraissent soumis à l’appréciation de 
leurs utilisateurs” (Bénétreau, Hébreux, 2:97).  
255 Since people continually fall short, a sacrifice that is retroactive only could never be the basis of 
salvation—but that is an argument the author does not make.  
256 If the readers were troubled by an experience of guilt feelings about post-baptismal sin, as Barnabas 
Lindars suggests in The Theology of the Letter to the Hebrews (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1991), 10-14, this verse would mention but not alleviate their concerns. Since the author’s argument would 
not be supported by personal experience, it would be unpersuasive. 

80 
The author makes another assertion in 10:3 and supports it in 10:4:  
• 
Claim: The Levitical sacrifices are a yearly reminder of sins (10:3).257 
• 
Ground: Because it is impossible for animal blood to take away sins 
(10:4). 
• 
Warrant: {Sins must be removed, and an ineffective ritual is only a 
reminder.} 
 
Verse 5 draws a conclusion: 
• 
Animal sacrifices cannot take away sins (10:4). 
• 
Therefore () Christ258 {did something different, as described in 10:5-
9}.259 
• 
Hidden premise: {The divine plan is to save people by taking away their 
sins, so if one approach did not work, another would be used.} 
 
The author quotes Ps 40:6-8 as words of Christ: “Sacrifices and offerings you 
have not desired, but a body260 you have prepared for me.” He then regroups the quote 
into two parts: First, “You have neither desired nor taken pleasure in sacrifices and 
offerings and burnt offerings and sin offerings”—after which the author inserts the 
reminder that “these are offered according to the law,” thus making sure that the readers 
                                                 
257 Jer 31:34 may be another source of the author’s conviction that sacrifices are a reminder of sin—it 
predicts that a day will come when God will no longer remember the people’s sins; this implies that under 
the old covenant God did remember sins (Thompson, Hebrews, 131). 
258 The text has “he”—Christ is not named until 10:10—the author assumes that the readers will accept 
without question that the psalm is messianic. “There is no attempt at argument or justification…. It is 
probable that this Christ-centered understanding of Scripture was generally accepted in the community to 
which Hebrews was originally addressed” (Ellingworth, Hebrews, 499). 
259 Ellingworth agrees: “# is best understood as drawing a conclusion from v. 4” (Hebrews, 499). Spicq 
says that 10:1-5 has “la forme d’un syllogisme presque régulier” (Hébreux SB, 163). Verse 2 is the major 
premise; vv. 3-4 the minor premise; and v. 5 the conclusion. However, the real conclusion to vv. 2-4 would 
be only that the sacrifices were not effective; nothing could be concluded about the efficacy of Christ. 
260 The MT has “ears you have dug for me,” perhaps indicating that God has given the person ears that can 
hear in order to obey. “The ‘body’ is the instrument for fulfilling the divine command, just as the ‘ear’ is 
the instrument for receiving it” (Westcott, Hebrews, 308). The author finds the LXX congenial to his 
argument (he uses the word “body” again in 10:10), but his argument does not depend on the word “body.” 
It would be illogical for the psalm to say that God did not want sacrifices, but that he did want someone to 
sacrifice the body. Perhaps that is why the author is content to let the word echo, rather than support it with 
argumentation. He does not even repeat the “body” clause when he regroups the psalm.  
The author stops the quote just before Ps 40:8b, which says, “your law is within my heart.” 
Although this clause would have tied in well with the quote from Jer 31:33, it would make it more difficult 
for the author to contrast the law with the new covenant (Heb 10:8-9). 

81 
know that he is dealing with the law as a whole, not just the sacrifices. The author 
resumes the quote by saying, “Then he added, ‘See, I have come to do your will’” (10:9). 
Since “your will” comes last, it is emphasized.261  
After this regrouping, the author asserts: “He abolishes the first in order to 
establish the second.” In context, “the first” is simply the first part of the quote—the 
sacrifices—but by implication, it also involves the law as a whole. The author has earlier 
used “the first” as a substantive for the old covenant, and as a substantive for the 
tabernacle. The entire Levitical cluster—priesthood, law, covenant, tabernacle, sacrifices 
and rituals—is obsolete.262 In its stead, Christ has established “the second”—in context, 
doing the will of God, but by implication, the new covenant and new priesthood, 
effective access to the presence of God, and eternal salvation.263  
 
Verse 10 makes another assertion: “By this will, we have been sanctified [i.e., 
given what we need for salvation] through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once 
for all.” The implication is that Christ’s self-offering was effective because Christ came 
to do God’s will. This may be because Christ did God’s will perfectly, had no sin, did not 
deserve death, and hence his body264 was able to atone for others. But would his death 
atone for others if it were an accidental death? Probably not—it seems to be important 
that Christ gave his life willingly.265 The author has already de-emphasized the 
importance of the flesh, and it is not likely that he would argue that a physical body was 
                                                 
261 Ellingworth, Hebrews, 501. 
262 “$A	%is the strongest negative statement the author has made or will make about the OT cultus: 
Christ by his sacrifice ‘abolishes’ or ‘destroys’ it” (ibid., 504). 
263 The author does not develop a new law or new rituals. He does not describe the content of the new 
covenant as well as he does the old; the connections between covenant, law, and priesthood are explicit for 
the old but not described for the new. 
264 “The offering of his body is simply the offering of himself (cf. 9:26)” (Thompson, Hebrews, 133). The 
author could have also said “flesh,” or “blood,” but probably chose “body” here as an echo of Ps 40:6; the 
word “body” is not the way that the author usually describes Christ’s sacrifice. Koester points out the irony: 
“A dead human body ordinarily brought defilement, not sanctification…. Hebrews argues that if 
sanctification occurs through the crucified Christ, then the Law is supplanted” (Hebrews, 440). 
265 His body and blood were in essence no different from that of other humans; the significance of his 
sacrifice must be seen in the spirit, not the flesh, although it was essential (as argued in Heb 2) that it was 
done in the flesh. Attridge writes, “The reality of that sacrifice consists not simply in its physical quality, 
but in the willingness with which it is made. Hence, it is the interior disposition of the act which makes it 
the heavenly or spiritual event that our author holds it to be” (Hebrews, 269).  

82 
effective in removing a spiritual problem, or that flesh (even the flesh of Jesus) could 
cleanse the conscience. Rather, the author seems to believe that sin and the conscience 
are nonmaterial, and must be cleansed by nonmaterial means—in this case, the will. In 
effect, Christ has given a spiritual sacrifice (his will) in a material body, thus 
accomplishing the heavenly reality in an earthly form.266 
With a 
… contrast, 10:11-12 repeats the thoughts of 9:25-26: In contrast to 
the repetitious sacrifices of the old covenant, which “can never take away sins,” Christ 
made one sacrifice effective for all time. This is stated again in 10:14 as an explanation 
for Christ being seated (the appropriate part of Ps 110:1 is quoted): 
• 
After offering a single sacrifice, Christ sat down at the right hand of God 
(10:12-13). 
• 
For () by a single offering he has brought people to completion 
(10:14). 
• 
{A priest sits down only when the work is completed.} 
 
These restatements indicate the author’s main point in this section: a single 
sacrifice as opposed to an endless series of sacrifices. The stress on frequency suggests 
that the readers had viewed the repetitive nature of the Levitical rituals in a positive way, 
and the author responds by arguing that repetitions indicate ineffectiveness. 
As a conclusion to the doctrinal section that began at 7:1, the author again quotes 
from Jer 31 (introduced by ). After citing God’s promise to make another covenant, 
he cites the promise that God will forget their sins. 
• 
Claim: Christ has made a single offering that atones for all sin (10:14). 
• 
Ground: God promised to make a new covenant and forgive sins (10:16).  
• 
Warrant: {Christ was the means by which God dealt with sin.} 
 
The author never attempts to prove that only two possibilities exist—he simply 
assumes that salvation is either by the law, or else it is by Christ. He argues that a new 
priesthood was predicted, and asserts that it was fulfilled by Christ. He argues that a new 
covenant was predicted, and asserts that Christ brought it. He argues that the tabernacle 
was a copy of reality, and asserts that Christ ministered in the reality. He argues that the 
                                                 
266 “Christ’s unique ‘heavenly’ act is ultimately seen to be an earthly one, done in and through a bodily 
sacrifice” (ibid., 216-17). “The sacrifice is that of a completely obedient will, but it finds concrete historical 
expression in a death as real as that of any bull or goat offered in the temple” (Barrett, “Christology,” 124). 

83 
Levitical rituals were ineffective, and asserts that Christ’s sacrifice was effective. He 
assumes that the readers will accept Christ’s death as efficacious if only the Levitical 
rituals are shown to be inadequate. This indicates that the biggest problem that the 
readers had was not objections to the new, but a continuing attraction to the old.  
The longest doctrinal exposition of the epistle ends with these words: “Where 
there is forgiveness of these, there is no longer any offering for sin” (10:18). The 
climax267 of the argument is about sin offerings, not thank offerings, peace offerings, or 
other rituals. Although a few verses in Hebrews indicate that all rituals are equally 
obsolete, the focus in the epistle is on sin offerings, suggesting that they were the primary 
concern of the readers. The grand finale of the longest doctrinal passage in the epistle is 
that the sacrifices are obsolete—suggesting that the readers had been attracted to those 
sacrifices.268 The verse is a simple enthymeme: 
• 
There is no more offering for sin. 
• 
{Because} sins are forgiven and forgotten. 
                                                 
267 Walter G. Übelacker says that we should go to the end of the argument (i.e., 10:18) to see the purpose of 
the central section. “Da der Vf. grundsätzlich immer zusammenfaßt, erwarten wir uns auch hier einen 
Leitfaden” (Der Hebräerbrief als Appell [ConBNT 21; Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell: 1989], 226). He 
concludes that the main purpose of the central section therefore has to do with forgiveness and sacrifices to 
achieve this (ibid.). 
268 Westcott writes, “This is the last—the decisive—word of the argument” (Hebrews, 317). “For the 
person of Jewish descent in the second half of the first century, these words must have struck with 
thunderous finality” (Kistemaker, Hebrews, 283). They may have had political overtones, as well. 
Stanley writes, “The author of Hebrews has chosen to use these verses from Psalm 40 because he 
is able to show by them that abandoning the levitical sacrifices is not as shocking as the readers might 
believe, since these sacrifices never were the ultimate focus of God’s will or desire anyway” (“New 
Covenant,” 176). Stanley notes that 10:1-18 includes four arguments that sacrifices are obsolete: 1) 
repetition shows ineffectiveness, 2) Ps 40 shows that God wanted something else, 3) Ps 110 shows that 
Christ sat down, and 4) the Jer 31 prophecy promises forgiveness (ibid., 182). 
Strobel writes, “Dieser Lehrsatz, der die umfangreiche theologische Erörterung des 
Hohenpriestertums Jesu 4,14-10,18 abschließt, betont die Abschaffung der Opfer, weil Christus eine 
vollkommene Vergebung ermöglicht hat. Das Gesamtergebnis der überaus vielfältigen Überlegungen wird 
in schlichtester Weise noch einmal zusammengefaßt. Man hört heraus, daß mit solcher Grundsatzerklärung 
eine judenchristliche Hörerschaft zu jener Gewißheit gebracht werden soll, die sie die Bindung an das Alte 
endgültig aufgeben läßt” (Der Brief, 124). 
The context implies that the readers desired sacrifices. However, this does not in itself indicate 
when the epistle was written. People could want sacrifices and rituals after the temple was destroyed just as 
well as they could before. Sensitivities about the temple (fears of impending destruction, or angst about a 
recent destruction) may be one reason that the author never mentions it—he keeps the argument more 
objective by dealing with the original tabernacle. And since the tabernacle was a temporary place of 
worship, it may have subtly supported the author’s argument that the rituals were temporary.  

84 
• 
{Sin offerings are appropriate only for unforgiven sin.}  
 
Hebrews 10:19-39—exhortation for faithfulness 
After the lengthy doctrinal section (7:1-10:18), the third major section of the 
epistle is primarily parenetic. Even chapter 11, although not directly hortatory, has a 
parenetic purpose: The author wants the audience to imitate those who have faith.269  
He begins by reasoning: “Therefore (), my friends, since we have confidence 
to enter…and a great priest over the house of God, let us approach with a true heart…. 
Let us hold fast to the confession” (10:19-22). A double reason is given: “Therefore” 
points back to 10:17, and “since” (reflecting a causative participle) points forward to the 
claims of 10:19-20.270 Since sacrifices are not needed, and people can enter by Christ, the 
readers are exhorted to approach God confidently (10:22).  
However, much more is involved in the “therefore” than just 10:18, since this 
exhortation echoes some of the key words of Heb 4:14-16: “Since we have a great high 
priest…let us hold fast to our confession…. Let us therefore approach the throne of grace 
with confidence.” Everything since 4:16 has been driving toward this point: People can 
approach God confidently because Jesus is the high priest. The readers apparently want to 
approach God, and the author argues that they cannot do it with Levitical rituals, but they 
can with Christ, because he has opened a new path and has provided a means of cleansing 
the conscience; the readers should therefore hold fast to their confession—and all that 
goes with the confession. 
• 
Premise: Jesus has opened a way into the sanctuary (10:20). 
• 
Premise: Jesus is high priest (10:21). 
• 
Conclusion: People should approach God, confident that their sins are 
forgiven (10:22). 
 
The author gives more exhortations in 10:23-25, with the implication that these 
also logically follow from faith in Christ. When the readers “hold on to the confession,” 
                                                 
269 “Although the section is expository in form, it is parenetic in function, inviting Christians to emulate the 
example of those who responded to God with active faith” (Lane, Hebrews 9-13, 316). Hagner writes, “The 
author is less concerned with providing information than with motivating his readers” (Encountering, 144). 
270 Although 10:19 seems to give a reason, it is almost tautological to say, “Since we have confidence to 
enter…let us approach with assurance.” I therefore take this as rhetorical strategy, stating a desired result as 
if it were established fact. The author has used synonyms to reduce the appearance of tautology.  

85 
they will also continue meeting together and encouraging one another. Verse 23 has a 
small enthymeme: 
• 
Claim: People should hold fast to the confession of hope without 
wavering. 
• 
Ground: Because he who promised is faithful (to his promises)—he does 
not waver.271 
• 
Warrant: {People should hold fast as long as the promises are good, and in 
this case they are always good.} 
 
However, why is the existence of a high priest reason to meet together to 
encourage one another (10:25)? Is there a connection between sacrifice being 
unnecessary, and meeting being necessary? The author assumes without argument that 
assembling together is an inseparable part of what it means to confess Christ. He is 
thinking in terms of a package, a package that the readers are presumably familiar with—
one religious approach as opposed to another. The author does not explain the logical 
connection between having a high priest (10:21), maintaining the confession (10:23), and 
meeting together (10:24-25). The connection between these ideas is not obvious on the 
surface, which suggests that it is an unstated belief of the author (and presumably the 
readers) that these go together. The passage requires the readers to make several 
assumptions, including a) that the existence of a priest means that they should draw near 
to God, i.e., that this is something they already want to do, and b) that “the hope we 
profess” includes a belief about Jesus that distinguishes “us” from others.  
The author argues for this package by arguing that 1) the alternative is inadequate, 
2) Christ is sufficient, and 3) faith is commendable. The author argues that it is necessary 
for the readers to confess Christ. But the readers cannot logically conclude necessity 
unless all relevant alternatives are addressed. The author is assuming an audience for 
which the only viable religious options are those addressed in Hebrews—namely, the old 
covenant cultus.  
By its use of , Heb 10:26 implies a logical connection between the 
exhortations and the warning: 
• 
Claim: People should hold fast, meet together, and encourage one another. 
                                                 
271 “This provides the sole logical basis (for) for the Christian’s unfaltering confession of hope” (Hughes, 
Hebrews, 414). 

86 
• 
Ground: Because () deliberate sin will be punished.272  
• 
Implied warrant: {Dropping out is a deliberate sin.}273 
 
The author clearly assumes this warrant when he argues: Do not drop out, because 
deliberate sin will be punished. The rhetoric uses a strong emotional appeal (the warning 
passage) without articulating the premise, which might have been questioned. It is a 
rhetorical strategy, not an objective soteriological discussion. The readers may have been 
facing dire threats such as, “If you are not faithful to the covenant of Moses, you will 
suffer the covenant curses.” The author responds with equally severe threats: “Those 
covenant curses are now moot because of Christ; what you really want to avoid is being 
unfaithful to the new covenant. If you go back on it, there is no salvation. Don’t abandon 
the only effective approach to God.”274 
 
An argument from lesser to greater appears in 10:28-29: 
• 
Under the old covenant, transgressors were killed. 
• 
{The new covenant is more important than the old.} 
• 
People who abandon the new covenant deserve worse.275  
 
The author here assumes that the new covenant requires punishments, not just 
brings forgiveness, but he does not elaborate on the nature of the punishment that is 
                                                 
272 Ellingworth argues that  refers to 10:18: “The connection is less with vv. 19-25 than with the 
argument culminating in v. 18…. ‘No further sacrifice for sin is needed’ (v. 18) implies ‘no further 
sacrifice is available’ (v. 26)” (Hebrews, 532). The logic is elliptical—presuming that “willful sin” means 
rejecting the new covenant and its sacrifice. However, since 10:18 has a note of forgiveness, and 10:26 of 
hopelessness, “nevertheless” would be more appropriate than “for” if these two verses were being 
connected. Even with the connection that Ellingworth advocates, the implied warrant would be similar: 
Dropping out is a deliberate rejection of the only true sacrifice for sin. 
273 “Simply leaving the voluntary association called the ‘church’ becomes an active assault on the honor of 
one’s divine benefactor and mediator” (deSilva, Perseverance, 238). Marie E. Isaacs describes it: “To 
abandon the community of faith is to place oneself beyond the efficacy of the new covenant sacrifice” 
(Reading Hebrews and James: A Literary and Theological Commentary [RNT; Macon: Smyth & Helwys, 
2002], 124). Montefiore acknowledges the implication when he writes, “Persistent absenteeism…may have 
been almost tantamount to apostasy,” but then he adds, “but it is not to be equated with it” (Hebrews, 177).  
274 deSilva writes, “The potential apostate is warned that leaving the group does not mean getting out from 
being under hostility and danger—it means exposing oneself to the greatest danger and loss…. They are led 
to consider [apostasy] not as a movement toward what their neighbors would consider just and pious but as 
a movement toward the utmost injustice and impiety toward one who had gone to the most extreme lengths 
(death itself) to bring them the benefits that they now so carelessly spurned” (Perseverance, 355, 239). 
275 Michel comments on the rhetorical strategy: “Es ist geschickt, daß unser Verfasser die Entfaltung des 
Schlusses vom ,,Leichten zum Schweren” dem Leser selbst überläßt” (Hebräer, 352). 

87 
worse than death—the rhetorical question leaves that to the imagination of the readers.276 
The verse also implies that neglecting to meet together is equivalent to despising Christ, 
counting his sacrifice as unholy, and insulting the Spirit of grace. But the author may 
avoid saying these things directly as a matter of rhetorical strategy. He assures the readers 
in 10:39 that such things are not appropriate for them.  
Verse 30 uses  to introduce scriptural support for the concept of punishment: 
• 
People who turn away from God’s covenant deserve punishment (10:29). 
• 
We know this because God said he will judge, and take vengeance 
(10:30).277 
• 
{God doesn’t change, so he still punishes; Scripture is trustworthy.}  
 
Verse 32 also argues by implication rather than statement—after warning the 
readers that God punishes willful sin, the author commands them: “But recall those 
earlier days…” The implication is that if they continue in that earlier behavior, they will 
not be punished—but the author does not directly say that they will be saved by good 
behavior. 
Verses 33-34 include a short enthymeme:  
• 
You were partners with those who were publicly abused.  
• 
For () you had compassion on those who were in prison. 
• 
{Their compassion on prisoners led to the abuse.}278 
 
Verse 34 has another enthymeme, using a participle to indicate reason: 
• 
You cheerfully accepted plundering of your possessions. 
• 
Since you knew that you had something better and more lasting. 
• 
{People are willing to lose a small amount when they have much more.} 
                                                 
276 Fenton comments: “The hidden assumption in the argument of Hebrews is that God’s actions are to be 
understood wholly in terms of retributive justice” (“The Argument,” 180). Montefiore says, “Our 
author…prefers warning to encouragement, and he emphasises the stimulus of fear rather that the attraction 
of love…. Jesus is described as merciful and compassionate. But God is conceived primarily as holy and 
just” (Hebrews, 180). If the readers were afraid of being killed for the faith, then it would be rhetorically 
appropriate in that situation to tell them that apostasy had a punishment worse than death. 
277 It is not necessary to put this verse into an enthymeme;  simply introduces the quote.  
278 This warrant is practically a restatement: You suffered abuse because you showed compassion. 
However, the warrant cannot support the word “cheerfully.” Westcott suggests that the readers were 
cheerful because it was through the trial that they became aware of possessing something greater 
(Hebrews, 335). 

88 
Verse 35 draws a conclusion, using .  
• 
Claim: You should therefore not abandon your confidence (10:35). 
• 
Ground: Because you knew you had better possessions (10:34). 
• 
Warrant: Confidence brings great reward (10:35b). 
 
The author says, “Keep your confidence, because it will be rewarded.” But  
also suggests that there is a connection between past behavior and the current situation. It 
suggests, “You did it before; you can do it again in the face of similar threats, so do not 
quit, because the reward is still available for those who are faithful.” Perhaps the 
implication is also that, if the readers quit now, they will lose whatever reward the 
previous sacrifices earned. Verse 36 adds another reason: 
• 
Do not abandon your confidence. 
• 
Because () you need endurance in order to () receive the promised 
reward.279 
 
However, this is simply a rephrasing: If you give up hope, you will not get the 
reward, so do not give up. After warning the readers about punishment, the author is now 
focusing on the reward. Verse 37 adds support from Scripture:  
• 
Claim: You should not abandon your confidence (10:35). 
• 
Because () the coming one will soon come (10:37; cf. Hab. 2:3-4). 
• 
{You will not have to endure much longer.} 
 
The argument seems to imply something more than this warrant, though it is 
difficult to know what it is. Perhaps the thought is that a short wait means that the readers 
will not have to make many more sacrifices, and thus the great reward is worth the brief 
inconvenience. Motivational rhetoric appeals more to emotion than it does to logic, and 
the author does that by praising the readers’ past performance, promising unspecified 
rewards, playing down the magnitude of the sacrifices, and expressing confidence for the 
future. His indicative sentences imply exhortations: Have faith, and do not shrink back.280  
                                                 
279 Ellingworth says that “ is here used probably of result rather than purpose” (Hebrews, 553). He 
describes 10:36a as “a positive counterpart to v. 35a” (ibid., 552). Carrot and stick are alternated.  
280 Verses 38-39 form a chiasm: faith, shrink back, shrink back, faith. Hebrews abounds in chiasms (and 
other rhetorical devices), but I have not pointed them out because I do not see how they help advance the 
purpose of the epistle, except in the general sense that an esthetically pleasing literary style can keep 
audience attention and increase the credibility of the writer.  

89 
 
Hebrews 11:1-22—faith that pleases God 
Hebrews 11 brings a change of style281 as the author moves into an encomium on 
faith, which (as 12:1 shows) is preparatory to a renewed call for perseverance.  is 
used in 11:2, but in this verse it does not indicate cause.282 Although 11:3 may be making 
a statement rather than an argument, it is possible to form it into an enthymeme: 
• 
Claim: What is seen was made from things that are not visible.283 
• 
Ground: The worlds were prepared by the word of God. 
• 
Warrant: {The word of God is invisible.} 
 
Verse 5 (quoting Gen 5:24) gives a reason for its statement: 
• 
Claim: Enoch was not found.  
• 
Ground: Because God had taken him. 
• 
Warrant: {He could not be found because he was not on earth.} 
 
With this information from Genesis, our author draws a further conclusion: 
• 
Claim: Enoch was taken {to heaven} without dying. 
• 
Ground: Because () he pleased God (allusion to Gen. 5:22). 
• 
Warrant: {When God “takes” a good person, it must be something 
good.}284 
 
Verse 6 includes , making explicit the link implied in 11:5:  
                                                 
281 This change in style could indicate that the author is incorporating a pre-existing homily, but it is also 
possible that the author simply changed style while composing the epistle, just as a preacher may change 
pace during a sermon. 
282 The verse could be construed as an epistemological enthymeme (as 11:16b is)—we know that faith is 
conviction of the invisible because the patriarchs were praised for having such convictions. But this would 
degenerate into circular reasoning: We know that the patriarchs had faith because they acted in accordance 
with the definition of faith that we created based on their behavior. Ellingworth, citing Bleek, says that 
“ suggests ‘because of this kind of faith…’” (Hebrews, 577). But that would say no more than the 
already existing instrumental  with the dative.  
283 Although 	
 usually indicates purpose, here it seems to report a conclusion. “In effect, 		
introduces, not a second event which is the result of the first, but a logical result or implication” (ibid., 
568). 
284 “The implication of v. 6c is that his ‘removal’ was a reward for his faithful life, and evidence that it had 
pleased God” (ibid., 576). 

90 
• 
Scripture testifies that Enoch pleased God (11:5c; Gen 5:22 says “walked 
with God”). 
• 
Since () a person cannot please God without faith (11:6)… 
• 
We conclude that Enoch had faith, and that it was by faith that he was 
taken (11:5a).285 
 
Verses 7 and 8 imply similar enthymemes:  
• 
Claim: Noah acted in faith. 
• 
Ground: He acted on what he was told, not on what he could see. 
• 
Warrant: Acting on “the conviction of things not seen” is defined as faith 
(11:1b). 
 
• 
Claim: Abraham acted in faith. 
• 
Ground: He went to a place he was told about but had not seen. 
• 
Warrant: {With no other explanation for such behavior, Abraham must 
have been acting on faith in the promise.}286 
 
Verses 9-10 include an enthymeme: 
• 
Claim: Abraham lived in the land of promise as if he were a foreigner. 
• 
Ground: For () he looked forward to God’s permanent city.287 
• 
Warrant: {He viewed the heavenly city as his permanent home.} 
 
Verse 11: 
• 
Claim: Someone288 received reproductive power. 
• 
Ground: Since () that person considered God faithful.289 
                                                 
285 Ellingworth notes that v. 6 “is the major premise of a syllogism of which 11:5c formed the minor 
premise” (ibid.). 
286 This ignores Abram’s long stay in Haran, and the fact that many people move to places they have not 
seen. Gordon suggests a way in which the example would be relevant to the readers: “The example of 
Abraham’s abandoning of the assured and the familiar for the uncertainties of life in Canaan could help to 
stiffen the resolve of those who had stepped out in faith without having received any tangible fulfillment of 
the promises that had inspired them in the first place” (Hebrews, 133). Similarly, Thompson writes, “The 
author describes the faith of Abraham (11:8) and Moses as a ‘going out’ or abandonment of security. His 
reason for presenting these heroes in such terms is demonstrated at 13:13 where the author wants to 
encourage his readers to ‘go out’ or abandon their security for the sake of Christ” (Hebrews, 157). 
287 “ introduces the comment on vv. 8f., the reason why Abraham ‘went out’ and began a nomadic life” 
(Ellingworth, Hebrews, 584). Royster observes that the patriarchs were not very “concerned about the 
earthly or material benefits which the land of promise might have brought them” (Hebrews, 181). 
288 I will not delve into the question of whether that person is Abraham or Sarah. See Isaacs, Reading, 132. 

91 
• 
Warrant: {God rewards those who believe his promises (cf. 11:6).}290 
 
On the surface, the verse is tautological: The person received reproductive power 
by faith, since the person had faith. This enthymeme is more rhetorical than logical, and 
the author would probably agree that God’s promises will be kept even if people do not 
believe them. The real purpose of the verse is to encourage readers to consider God 
faithful to his promises.  
 
Verse 12 presents a conclusion: 
• 
Ground: Someone considered God faithful (11:11b).291 
• 
Claim: Therefore () many descendants were born from one man292 
(11:12). 
• 
Unstated connection: {God rewards the faithful.} 
 
Verses 13-16 summarize the previous verses293 and note some logical 
connections: 
• 
The patriarchs said they were strangers and foreigners on earth (11:13, 
alluding to Gen 23:4). 
• 
For () people who speak in this way are seeking a homeland (11:14—
i.e., a homeland that is not on earth).294 
• 
{People who think they are permanent residents do not consider 
themselves strangers.}295 
 
                                                                                                                                                 
289 Ellingworth says that  is causal here: “Abraham’s faith is a response to God’s faithfulness” 
(Hebrews, 589). 
290 Heb 11:6 does not directly say that God rewards those who have faith, though that is implied. In this 
case the reward was commensurate with the promise.  
291 Verse 12 may be connected to 11:11a, but the result is trivial: Someone received the power to have a 
child, so that person had descendants. The connection to 11:11b, as outlined above, seems more in line with 
the author’s purpose. 
292 The participle and substantive numeral in 11:12 are masculine. Abraham was able to father children 
even after Sarah died (Gen 25:1-2), so “dead” does not mean that he was sexually impotent. 
293 Michael R. Cosby notes that “this brief commentary reflects upon the content of 11:8-10, not the 
material in 11:11-12 which immediately precedes it” (The Rhetorical Composition and Function of 
Hebrews 11: In Light of Example Lists in Antiquity [Macon: Mercer University Press, 1988], 44). 
294 “ draws a conclusion from v. 13b; that is, from the fact that Abraham, and by implication all the OT 
heroes of faith, speak of themselves as resident aliens on earth” (Ellingworth, Hebrews, 595).  
295 This ignores the fact that Abraham was an immigrant. Immigrants can call themselves aliens and 
strangers without seeking a different land of their own. The author’s purpose here is not to analyze 
Abraham’s statements objectively, but to exhort the readers to view their own situations as temporary; the 

92 
The logic is almost tautological: They said they were not at home, because they 
believed they were not yet home. The purpose is simply that the readers should not view 
the earth as their permanent home; their eternal home is yet future. Verse 15 offers 
additional rationale: 
• 
If they were thinking of their original land, they could have returned. 
• 
{They did not return.} 
• 
Therefore they were thinking of a different homeland. 
 
No one would have thought that a return to Mesopotamia was ever considered, 
but the argument has a rhetorical purpose. The idea of “return” would be significant for 
Jewish believers who were being urged to return to their former beliefs.296 The author is 
arguing that the patriarchs did not feel “at home” in Canaan, and did not want to return to 
their original home, therefore 11:16 says that they must have wanted a heavenly land 
instead of some other earthly territory.297  
 
Ellingworth identifies the syllogism: 
• 
“they said they were looking for a homeland (v. 14) 
• 
“it could not have been their earthly birthplace (v. 15) 
• 
“so it must have been a home in heaven (v. 16a).”298 
 
Verse 16 contains two logical connectors: 
• 
They desired {i.e., had faith in} a heavenly country. 
• 
{God wants his people to have faith (11:6).} 
• 
Therefore () God is not ashamed (i.e., he is proud) of them.299 
 
                                                                                                                                                 
circumstances of Abraham are described in such a way as to provide a model relevant to the readers. 
deSilva says, “The author has fastened onto aspects of the ways in which the patriarchs’ ‘faith’ was enacted 
that correspond most nearly to the condition of the audience” (Perseverance, 401). 
296 “The implication can hardly be missed that our author does not want his readers to return to their 
previous Judaism” (Hagner, Encountering, 149).  
297 The leaps in logic indicate that the author is not reviewing material the readers already believe; he is not 
trying to argue a disputed point. Here, the author could have pointed out that Abraham did not feel “at 
home” even in the land God had promised him (i.e., the best possible land for him on earth), so his real 
home must be yet future. 
298 Ellingworth, Hebrews, 596. He does not comment on the fact that the conclusion includes a term 
(heaven) not found in the premises. 
299 Ellingworth considers the possibility that  “draws an immediate conclusion from v. 16a,” but rejects 
it because God’s promise normally comes before a person’s faith. He suggests that  instead “refers 

93 
• 
God is not ashamed of them. 
• 
Because () he has prepared a city for them. 
• 
{If God prepares a city for them, that means that he is not ashamed of 
them.} 
 
The author concludes that God is not ashamed of the patriarchs because he sees in 
Scripture that God promises rewards to them. They pleased God, and since a person must 
have faith in order to please God, the patriarchs must have acted in faith. But this analysis 
is only marginally relevant to the author’s purpose. The real purpose is hortatory: 1) Have 
faith in the future homeland because 2) God is pleased with faith and 3) he rewards faith. 
 
No logical connectors are used in 11:17-19, but the verses do support a claim: 
• 
Claim: Abraham acted in faith. 
• 
Warrant: He obediently offered up the heir he had been promised.300 
• 
Ground: He was willing to do that because he believed that God would 
fulfill the promise despite Isaac’s death—he had confidence in something 
that God had promised but could not yet be seen.  
 
Verses 20, 21, and 22 are similar: 
• 
Claim: Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph acted in faith.301 
• 
Ground: Each of them spoke of the future. 
• 
Warrant: {Belief in future promises is defined as faith.} 
 
Hebrews 11:23-40—faith in the face of death 
Verse 23 offers support for the claim that Moses’ parents acted in faith: 
                                                                                                                                                 
forward, elliptically, to a further scriptural allusion” (ibid., 598). But the author normally introduces 
scriptural support with , and the scriptures alluded to are too far forward to be in view. 
300 Some commentators take 	as a logical connector: Abraham received Isaac back because of his 
belief in God’s ability to raise the dead (Attridge, Hebrews, 333; Lane, Hebrews 9-13, 343). Both 
“because” and “from which” work well with the verse, and the author may have been aware of both 
meanings when he wrote it. The enthymeme would be: 
• 
Abraham believed that God could raise the dead. 
• 
{God rewards those who have faith; or, those who have faith get what they believe.} 
• 
Therefore Abraham did get Isaac back, as if from the dead. 
301 In most of these examples, the actions of the person demonstrate faith; in 11:3, 11, faith is simply a 
belief. In 11:20-22, faith is a belief about the future. Although the author exhorts the readers to have beliefs 
about the past (e.g., the atonement and enthronement of Christ) and the present (his intercession), this 
passage focuses on future rewards as the motivation for behavior in the present.  

94 
• 
Claim: By faith, his parents hid Moses for three months. 
• 
Ground: Because () he was beautiful and they were not afraid of the 
king’s edict {presumably the threat of severe punishment}.302 
• 
Implied warrant: {Anyone who defies the king’s threat of punishment 
must believe in something beyond immediate convenience.} 
 
However, the author does not say what Moses’ parents believed. There was no 
prophecy, and no specific command from God; it was just that Moses was a beautiful 
baby.303  
Verses 24-26 argue for the faith of Moses: 
• 
Claim: Moses refused royal privileges because he had faith. 
• 
Ground: He chose difficulties over privilege (11:25-26).304 
• 
Because () he was looking ahead {with faith} to a far better reward 
(11:26b) {and presumably he had to give up short-term benefits to get 
future rewards}. 
 
The result is a tautology—he did this by faith, because he looked to the future 
(i.e., had faith). The enthymemes in this chapter are (in terms of logic) distinctly inferior 
to those in earlier chapters (e.g., 7:1-10:18). That is because the author has a different 
rhetorical purpose and strategy in this chapter. He is not trying to prove a certain 
definition of faith, or prove that Moses acted in faith—the readers already knew that 
Moses had faith. Instead, the author wants to draw exemplary lessons from the life of 
Moses. He is saying, “If someone offers you all the treasures of Egypt (not likely), or if 
you are persecuted with the people of God because of your belief in Christ (much more 
                                                 
302 Ellingworth writes, “It is uncertain whether  here relates (a) to the second clause alone, or (b) to the 
second and third clauses; in other words, whether ‘they did not fear the king’s command’ is intended as the 
expression of their faith, or as a reason for the parents hiding the child” (Hebrews, 609). He supports the 
former, saying, “Logic suggests option (a): the hiding of the child might be more naturally understood as an 
expression of fear.” It is not clear then why the author of Hebrews would say that it was by faith. 
303 This suggests that “beautiful” meant not just pleasing to the parents, but pleasing to God as well (see 
Acts 7:20); the parents defied the edict not through natural love, but through a conviction that God wanted 
the baby to live. “Something in his appearance kindled hope as to his destiny” (Westcott, Hebrews, 371). 
304 The author here equates royal status and wealth with the “fleeting pleasures of sin”; he equates “ill-
treatment with the people of God” with “abuse suffered for the Christ.” How could Moses suffer for the 
Christ? Westcott suggests that it refers to “the reproach which belongs to Him who is the appointed envoy 
of God to a rebellious world…. [It] was endured also by those who in any degree prefigured or represented 
Him” (Hebrews, 372; see also Isaacs, Reading, 135). Thompson notes that “abuse of the anointed is found 
in the LXX Ps 89:51b” (Hebrews, 156). 

95 
likely305), do not give up. The reward is worth the sacrifice. If you want to follow Moses, 
follow him in this regard—do not be dissuaded by external pressures.” Verse 27 presents 
another point of imitation: 
• 
Moses left Egypt in faith, not fearing the king.306 
• 
{We know this} because () he persevered. 
• 
{Why?} It was as though he saw the unseen one.307 
 
Verse 28 indicates a purpose, possibly implying an enthymeme:  
• 
Moses kept the Passover in faith. 
• 
He did it so that () the destroyer would spare the Israelites. 
• 
{God had promised to spare those who kept the Passover, so if Moses did 
it in order to spare destruction, he did it because he believed God.} 
 
Verse 29 includes a contrast between two peoples who acted in identical ways: 
• 
The Israelites passed safely through the Red Sea by faith. 
• 
The Egyptians attempted to pass through but were drowned. 
• 
{The Israelites were acting in obedience to God; the Egyptians were not, 
even though they may have hoped they could pass through.} 
 
Verse 30 requires even more information to be supplied: 
• 
The Israelites acted in faith at Jericho. 
• 
The walls fell down. 
• 
{God had promised that the walls would fall if the Israelites encircled the 
city seven days, and their obedience demonstrated that they had faith.} 
 
Verse 31 argues that Rahab acted in faith: 
                                                 
305 “Vv. 35b and 36 are linked by the theme, directly relevant to the readers’ situation (10:32-39; 12:4), of 
endurance under persecution” (Ellingworth, Hebrews, 627). 
306 Commentators puzzle over this point, pointing out that Moses initially fled in fear, but in the exodus he 
left in faith. Either way, the author may have included this point (and the similar point in 11:23c) because 
the readers were facing a governmental edict. In defense of the exodus theory, I note that Heb 11 includes 
several items slightly out of chronological order—the incident in 11:17 came before 11:13, 11:21b came 
before 11:21a, and the names in 11:32 are not in order. deSilva suggests that the author’s “lack of clarity 
shows his lack of interest on this point.” His main concern, deSilva suggests, is that “Moses left his earthly 
homeland, status, and heritage behind” (Perseverance, 412). 
307 Westcott argues here that the words mean “inasmuch as he saw the unseen” (Hebrews, 373)—
presumably referring to the burning bush. This makes a tautology—he did it by faith, because he did it 
because he saw the unseen. However, the author wants the readers to act as though they see the unseen.  

96 
• 
Rahab did not perish with those who were disobedient.308  
• 
{Because} she received the spies in peace. 
• 
{She received them because she believed God would give the Israelites 
victory, and God spared her because she believed and took action.} 
 
The details stop here, and if enthymemes were to be constructed, they would 
become tautological: This was done by faith, because it would be possible only if the 
person(s) had faith. The author is not trying to prove his points because they were not 
being disputed. Rather, he is trying to encourage the readers to have faith.309 Verse 35b, 
which introduces the more negative outcomes of faith, implies an enthymeme: 
• 
Claim (implied by the context): {The martyrs remained loyal by faith.}  
• 
They accepted torture rather than release {release would come only with 
disobedience—4 Macc 9:13-18310} so that () they would have a better 
resurrection (i.e., better than the resuscitations mentioned in 11:35a). 
• 
{People choose suffering only if they have faith in something better, and 
if they believe they cannot obtain the reward if they accept release.} 
 
Verses 36-39 give a rapid series of unpleasant outcomes, implying that the 
difficulties were endured by choice, and that the people who suffered had faith in a future 
reward—something that was “promised” (11:39). The author asserts that the people were 
commended for their faith, and that they did not receive the reward. Verse 40 gives a 
reason: 
• 
They did not receive the reward that was promised (11:39). 
• 
Because God provided something better for us311 so that () they would 
not be completed without us. 
                                                 
308 “Faith” is here contrasted with “disobedience” rather than lack of belief. For the author, faith is not just 
belief in the invisible—it is obedience. “For Hebrews, faith is faithfulness” (Thompson, Hebrews, 146). 
“The primary dimension of faith for Hebrews is that of endurance, faithfulness” (Schenck, Understanding, 
65). “Faith for our author…is practically interchangeable with obedience” (Hagner, Hebrews, 72).  
309 Verses 28-31 may also be assertions rather than enthymemes. Ellingworth notes that starting with 11:27, 
“there begins a rhetorically effective acceleration of the narrative” (Hebrews, 608). Verse 32 has a 
rhetorical use of : “What more should I say? For time would fail me…” In other words, “I must stop 
now, because it would take too much time to describe more examples, and you do not need more.” 
310 Only the story in 4 Macc gives the martyrs an opportunity for “release” (David A. deSilva, Introduction 
to the Apocrypha [Grand Rapids: Baker, 2002], 371 n. 4). 
311 Cause is implied in this verse with a participle. The author does not explain how it is better for anyone to 
wait than to receive the reward right away. Ellingworth struggles with the question and concludes, “To seek 
to identify the ‘something’ better referentially is to go further than the author chooses to go at the present 

97 
• 
{We would not share in salvation if God had already given the rewards; 
there can be only one time of reward.} 
 
The author does not explain his reasoning—it may depend on Jewish assumptions 
about a millennial age. Rhetorically, he brings the readers into the tension of people who 
look for a reward even as they are persecuted. He reminds the readers that they also have 
something better waiting for them—better than this world—but their belief in that 
promise requires a willingness to endure various difficulties.312 
 
Hebrews 12—perseverance will be rewarded 
 
Hebrews 12 begins with a conclusion, signaled by the word “therefore” 
(	). Although this could refer to 11:40, it more likely refers to all of Heb 11, 
since 12:1 refers to a “great cloud of witnesses.” The exhortation is couched in athletic 
imagery; the basic claim implied in it is that people should persevere in their loyalty to 
Jesus, getting rid of distractions (which might cause a person to fail) and keeping their 
eyes on Jesus, who set a perfect example of faith.  
• 
Claim: We should continue to be loyal to Jesus. 
• 
Ground: Because we have many witnesses surrounding us. 
• 
Warrant: {Their success shows that we can also have success.} 
 
The people mentioned in Heb 11 are witnesses to faith,313 who show that faith is 
needed—and possible—for spiritual success. This also implies that the situation of the 
readers is in some way analogous to the situations reviewed in Heb 11. The author does 
not highlight examples of people who had faith despite boredom, or faith despite a long 
delay, or faith despite lethargy. Rather, the examples are faith in a time of crisis, 
suggesting that the reluctance of the readers is due to external pressures.  
Verse 2 gives a rationale for Jesus’ willingness to endure crucifixion: 
                                                                                                                                                 
stage…. Speculation on what would have happened if OT believers had not had to wait for fulfillment is 
irrelevant and futile” (Hebrews, 636). In other words, the author’s reason is not clear. 
312 Attridge observes that, on the surface, “imprisonment seems to be a rather anticlimactic conclusion” (v. 
36). However, he suggests that “the prominence of the reference to imprisonment here is not accidental” 
(Hebrews, 350), implying it was a threat the readers faced. 
313 Numerous commentators argue against the meaning “spectators”: Bruce, Hebrews, 333; Isaacs, Reading, 
138; Lane, Hebrews 9-13, 408; Royster, Hebrews, 204; Westcott, Hebrews, 391.  

98 
• 
Jesus willingly endured the cross. 
• 
{Because} he counted its shame as unimportant and valued some joy.314 
• 
{The eternal reward (joy) was worth far more than the temporary pain and 
shame of crucifixion.} 
 
Verse 3 has  with an imperative—an unusual construction, apparently 
supporting the exhortation of 12:1-2.315  
• 
Claim: We should be steadfast, focusing on Jesus (12:1-2). 
• 
For () we should consider the one who endured hostility from sinners 
so that () we do not grow weary (12:3). 
• 
{Remembering his example will help us endure.} 
 
The construction suggests that the experience of Jesus is comparable in some way 
to the situation of the readers—that the readers might also have to endure some 
difficulties and despise some shame in order to gain the reward set before them.316 
(Verses 5-11 also indicate that some unpleasant circumstances were affecting the 
readers—although 12:4 suggests that it is not as unpleasant as what Jesus faced.317) They 
are to consider his example because it has similarities to their own. The fact that he 
succeeded in more difficult trials should encourage them to persevere in lesser trials. 
                                                 
314 Although the grammar of the verse might permit the meaning, “Jesus endured the cross instead of 
keeping the joy he already had,” such would give no reason for why Jesus accepted pain instead of 
pleasure. It is possible that the verse does not intend to give a reason, but the situation suggests that a 
reason is being given. Further, 12:3 implies that the example of Jesus is relevant to the readers—and pre-
existent joy is not. They are to endure their difficulties for the hope “set before them” (6:18, using the same 
Greek word). Third, it would be odd to say that joy was “set before” Jesus if he already had it.  
               Even with the meaning of “instead,” the placement of the verse shortly after chapter 11 would 
imply that Jesus did this to obtain some sort of reward—i.e., he would have more happiness by becoming 
human and enduring the cross than he would have if he stayed in heaven. The joy for Jesus is not just being 
in heaven, but in helping others be there as well. The joy “is not something for himself alone, but 
something to be shared with those for whom he died” (Bruce, Hebrews, 339). 
315 “ marks a strong affirmation, ‘by all means consider’…and indicates the close link with v. 2” 
(Ellingworth, Hebrews, 643).  
316 “The addressees are asked to see society’s hostility against them as a token of society’s unworthiness 
[cf. 11:38a], not a mark of the believers’ lack of value or honor…. We, too, are called to look ahead to the 
‘joy’ that God ‘set before us’ as an incentive to endure in costly discipleship” (deSilva, Perseverance, 425, 
438). The crucifixion could provide motivational support for readers who were merely lethargic, but in 
such a case we might expect the author to use an argument from lesser to greater: If someone can be 
faithful even in difficult times, how much more should you find it easy to be faithful in times of peace!  
317 Heb 12:5 may allude to a boxing match rather than martyrdom—but it would be a particularly 
inappropriate metaphor to use if anyone in the recipient community had been killed for the faith. 

99 
Verse 5 implies that if the readers remember that God disciplines his children, 
they will be better able to persevere. Verses 5-6 also include an enthymeme quoted from 
Prov 3:11-12: 
• 
Claim: God’s discipline should be valued and endured (12:5). 
• 
Ground: For () the Lord disciplines those whom he loves (12:6). 
• 
Warrant: {When God does it in love, it is for our good, and valuable.} 
 
The verb in 12:7a may be imperative or indicative; either way, it implies that the 
readers are experiencing difficulties. In a syllogism, the author tells them to view these 
difficulties as divine discipline: 
• 
Expect discipline in the form of difficulties to be endured (12:7a).  
• 
{You are children of God}, and he treats you as his children (12:7b). 
• 
For () all parents discipline their children (12:7c) {so you should 
expect God to discipline you with some unpleasant experiences}. 
 
Verse 8 then reasons from a contrary: All parents discipline their (legitimate) 
children (12:7c, 8b), so if you lack discipline from God, you are not his children (12:8a, 
c). This statement can be put into irrefutable logic: If children, then discipline. The 
contrapositive is: If no discipline, then not children. It would seem that the point has been 
proven, but the author emphasizes the point by adding an argument from lesser to greater: 
• 
We respected our parents who disciplined us (12:9a).318  
• 
We should respect God’s discipline even more (12:9b).  
• 
For () God disciplines for our eternal good, {so it is more valuable}, 
whereas human parents discipline only as best they know how (12:10). 
 
He reminds the readers that discipline can be painful, but that it has good 
results—“the peaceful fruit of righteousness,” which is apparently equivalent to salvation 
(12:11). The author draws the conclusion in 12:12: 
• 
Discipline has extremely valuable results (12:11). 
• 
{You want the results more than you want to avoid the pain.} 
                                                 
318 Verse 10 says that earthly parents discipline “for a short time.” Presumably divine discipline is also “for 
a short time”; the difference is in length of the results. Human discipline has only temporary benefits. 

100 
• 
Therefore () be strong and continue on the right path (12:12-13).319 
 
Verse 14 gives commands without supporting rationale; 12:15 implies an 
enthymeme: 
• 
Do not miss out on God’s grace. 
• 
Avoid any “root of bitterness” that defiles many (i.e., is contagious; cf. 
Deut 29:18). 
• 
{A defiled person misses out on God’s grace.} 
 
Verse 16 continues the thought, implying that Esau was defiled and missed out; 
12:17 gives an analogy to explain how his example is relevant: 
• 
You should not be like Esau, who sold his birthright for one meal (12:16). 
• 
For () he was unable to get the blessing later (12:17). 
• 
{Abandoning Christ in a time of trial is like trading your birthright for a 
temporary desire, and you will be unable to get it back.}320 
 
Verse 17 contains an enthymeme of its own: 
• 
When Esau wanted the blessing, he was rejected.  
• 
For () he found no opportunity for repentance.321 
• 
{Repentance was necessary for the blessing.} 
 
Verse 18 includes , but it does not provide support for 12:17. Rather, it 
supports the exhortations in a span of verses (12:1-14). The supporting reason also 
involves a span of verses—12:17-24:  
• 
Remain loyal to Jesus, and be strong in your difficulties. 
                                                 
319 Ellingworth says that “the conclusion does not follow directly from what precedes” (Hebrews, 657), but 
I think it does. However, the imagery is puzzling—it is not clear whether the athlete is trying to prevent a 
dislocation or to heal one. The author ignores the details to include a variety of emotionally stirring words. 
Ellingworth says that vv. 12-13 exhort “strong members to encourage the weak” (ibid., 657; Lane, Hebrews 
9-13, 428 is similar). Some members might need to be healed, whereas others need prevention.  
320 “Esau is the antithesis of the paragons of faith in chapter 11. He trades off what is unseen and what lies 
in the future for immediate gratification in the present” (Hagner, Hebrews, 222). Gordon observes an irony 
for the readers: “If any of the addressees were converts from Judaism, to go back to their ancestral faith 
would not mean a return to ‘Jacob-Israel’ but an identifying with Esau” (Hebrews, 155).  
321 Was Esau seeking the blessing or repentance? It seems likely that he knew that blessings went with the 
birthright. He sold the birthright, but he later wanted its benefits, so it seems that he had already changed 
his own mind, and the “repentance” he wanted was a change in his father, but that was not possible. Esau’s 
angst might then correspond to the root of “bitterness” (v. 15), which otherwise has no parallel in the story.  

101 
• 
For () you have come to a place of blessings, not to a place of fearful 
punishments.  
• 
{The reward for following Jesus is worth the effort.} 
 
The passage is “the rhetorical climax of the epistle”; “vielleicht der theologisch 
bedeutsamste Abschnitt im ganzen Mahnschreiben.”322 However, the passage does not 
argue a case in the way that previous expository sections do. Rather, it builds on what 
previous passages have developed. The logic is allusive—the first location is not even 
named, nor is the speaker of the “voice” named.323 The passage is more rhetorical than 
logical—a contrast is quickly presented between fear and joy, with the implication that 
the readers will enjoy the good only if they follow the author’s previous exhortations. In 
other words, the description has a parenetic purpose. The place of fear is the location of 
the old covenant; the place of joy and community is found with Jesus, the mediator of the 
new covenant. This is the choice the readers faced: between old and new covenants. 
There was no other option worth discussing.324  
 
Verses 19-20 include a small enthymeme: 
• 
They begged that nothing more be spoken to them (12:19b). 
• 
For () they could not endure the order that required stoning (12:20). 
• 
{They were afraid of hearing something worse?—12:21 refers to fear.} 
 
What role does covenant play in this passage? It has become a rubric for the way 
of Jesus. Ellingworth observes, “The new covenant, Jesus as its mediator, and the blood 
by which the covenant is sealed, are inseparable.”325 He also observes that 	 is 
used “near the climaxes of paraenetic passages” after the central section.326 “The new 
                                                 
322 Ellingworth, Hebrews, 669, and Gräßer, Hebräer, 3:302; cf. Lane, Hebrews 9-13, 448. 
323 Vanhoye observes that the author does not include God in this picture, although Deut 4-5 identifies the 
speaker as the Lord. In several ways, the author distances God from the old covenant. See Albert Vanhoye, 
“Le Dieu de la nouvelle alliance dans l’épître aux Hébreux,” in La notion biblique de Dieu (ed. J. Coppens; 
BETL 41; Gembloux, Belgium: Duculot, 1974), 321. Koester writes, “God remains hidden. The physical 
phenomena…do more to conceal God than reveal him” (Hebrews, 549). 
324 The logic says, “Be faithful to Christ, because you have not come to something bad, but to something 
good.” But to address the options of Gentiles, the author would need to contrast Mt. Olympus with Zion. 
325 Ellingworth, Hebrews, 681-2. Gräßer observes, “Das Besprengungsblut steht als »letztes 
Charakteristikum« des Neuen Bundes »fast selbständig neben Jesus«” (Hebräer, 3:322).  
326 Ellingworth, Hebrews, 385. 

102 
covenant is rarely if ever mentioned without a reference, usually explicit…to the work of 
Christ…. From [8:8] on, the new covenant is never mentioned without an explicit 
reference to the blood of Christ’s sacrifice.”327 The new covenant thereby becomes a term 
connoting forgiveness. Guthrie says, “The new covenant, in essence, has to do with a 
relationship with God established by the forgiveness of sins…and conceptually set 
against the backdrop of God’s working through the people of Israel.”328 
Verses 22-24 make assertions about Mount Zion; 12:25-29 concludes with a 
warning: 
• 
Make sure that you do not refuse the one who is speaking.329 
• 
For () if the Israelites did not escape when they refused Moses,330 we 
will not escape if we refuse the one who warns from heaven.331 
• 
{The principle of punishment for rejection remains the same—there is a 
new offer, but there is still a penalty for refusal.} 
 
Verse 26 continues the contrast: His (the one from heaven) voice shook the earth 
at Sinai, but by warning of only one other shaking, he has promised an unshakeable 
reward. Yet this promise comes with a threat332—yet another reason that the readers 
should not abandon the new covenant, as 12:28 makes explicit: 
• 
We should therefore () show gratitude (equivalent to not refusing). 
• 
 Since we are receiving a kingdom that cannot be shaken. 
• 
{It is appropriate to be grateful for gifts, and not abandon them.}333 
 
                                                 
327 Ibid., 409, 413. 
328 Guthrie, Hebrews, 286. 
329 Who is speaking? The most immediate antecedent is “the sprinkled blood that speaks a better word”—
i.e., the blood of Jesus, which inaugurated the new covenant. But 12:26 implies that the speaker is God. 
330 Some commentators assume that the “one who warned them on earth” was God, but that would not 
provide any contrast with the situation in the new covenant. I conclude that the first warning came from 
Moses. Montefiore says, “The context…and the plain meaning of the Greek, require a contrast between 
Moses and Jesus…. It was Moses who was their divine instructor on earth” (Hebrews, 234). 
331 “Warns” is implied in the parallelism. The author gives warnings, but he has not described any warnings 
spoken from heaven regarding the new covenant. He leaves punishment up to the imagination of the 
readers. 
332 “The use of 	
	 in a warning context is at first puzzling” (Ellingworth, Hebrews, 686). “This 
final catastrophe of the world, however awful in itself, is a ‘promise’” (Westcott, Hebrews, 419). 
333 deSilva notes the cultural expectation of showing gratitude: “Those who receive benefits from a patron 
should not be reticent about publicizing that benefit…. The client who insults rather than honors his or her 

103 
Verse 29 then adds a warning: 
• 
We should be thankful. 
• 
For () our God is a consuming fire.334 
• 
{He will consume us if we are not thankful for his wonderful gift.}  
 
This warning is ironic, for the author has just associated fire and dire threats with 
the old covenant. Moreover, a threat seems to be an odd way to motivate gratitude—but it 
is more understandable if the readers were tempted to adopt rival approaches to worship. 
Others may have been threatening them with divine punishment for abandoning the old 
covenant; the author responds by offering threats for abandoning the new (as well as 
explaining that the old is obsolete, and that violations have already been paid for).335 The 
author may have included these strong warnings to ensure that the readers also feel the 
need for mediation, and for a sacrifice that effectively averts the wrath of God.336 
 
Hebrews 13—miscellaneous exhortations 
 
Chapter 13 presents another dramatic change in writing style. The author 
continues to support his exhortations with reasons, but at first the enthymemes are 
independent rather than being linked together by shared components. Verse 2: 
• 
You should show hospitality to strangers. 
• 
Because () some people have entertained angels without knowing it. 
                                                                                                                                                 
benefactor and who responds with disloyalty rather than reliable service will be excluded from future 
benefits…. The horror and baseness of offending the divine patron should outweigh the temporary 
disadvantages of offending society through continued Christian commitment” (Perseverance, 340, 350, 
354).  
334 Gräßer notes, “&	  denn (Vg.: etenim wie 5,12) zeigt an, daß jetzt das Verhalten der Dankbarkeit V 
28 begründet wird, und zwar durch Hinweis auf den strengen Richtergott” (Hebräer, 3:338). 
335 Gordon points out that 3:12 may involve another reversal—opponents were accusing the readers of 
turning from the living God; the author responds that if they regress they will be doing exactly that 
(Hebrews, 59). 
336 Gräßer says that each major section in Hebrews ends with a warning about God’s judgment (Hebräer, 
3:338). On 3:340, he quotes Barth, who says: “Grace would not be grace, the serious and effective address 
of God to man, the effective establishment of fellowship with him, if God did not oppose man’s opposition 
to Himself, if He left man to go his own way unaccused and uncondemned and unpunished, if He ignored 
the miserable pride of man, if the man of sin had nothing to fear from Him, if it were not a fearful thing to 
fall into His hands (Heb. 1229)” (Karl Barth, Church Dogmatics, vol. IV: The Doctrine of Reconciliation 
[ed. G. W. Bromiley and T. F. Torrance; trans. G. W. Bromiley; Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1956], part 1, p. 
490).  

104 
• 
{You might help angels, too, and presumably be rewarded for it.} 
 
This is not a very good reason to be hospitable—in the extraordinarily slim 
chance of helping angels. However, the author is probably telling them to do something 
that they already know they should do, and the “reason” is given tongue-in-cheek. 
 
In some translations, 13:3 presents an argument: Remember those who are being 
tortured, since you are also in the body. However, the parallels between the first half of 
the verse and the second half suggest that the participle does not supply a reason, but 
describes the circumstances: Remember prisoners as if you were imprisoned with them, 
and remember those who are being tortured as if you were also  '
	.337  
 
Both 13:4 and 13:5 use  to indicate a rationale: 
• 
Marriage is honorable, and should not be defiled. 
• 
For God will judge (punish) fornicators and adulterers. 
• 
{Sexual sins defile marriage.} (No support is given for “honorable.”) 
 
• 
You should be content with what you have, not greedy for money. 
• 
For God says he will never leave you. 
• 
{When God is with us, he will ensure that we have enough.}338 
 
Verse 6 gives a result, introduced by  
: 
• 
God says that he will never forsake us. 
• 
We can therefore say that God helps us, and we do not fear anyone. 
• 
{Being with us means that he gives us sufficient help.}339 
 
Verse 7 uses a participle to imply a reason: 
• 
Considering the outcome of their way of life… 
                                                 
337 Being “in a body” could mean remembering that you are also made of flesh and therefore ought to 
empathize, or it could mean being in the same group with the person—using a metaphor common to the 
culture, found also in Paul. Either way, it means “as though you yourselves were being tortured” (NRSV). 
338 Another possible rationale is that God himself is all that we need, but that is more abstract than our 
author usually is. Verse 6 implies the notion of help, and suggests that persecution might be the reason 
some would not be content. Ellingworth observes that the epistle does not suggest that financial pressures 
were the main danger to faith, “but they may have been a factor contributing to their loss of zeal” 
(Hebrews, 698). Desire for riches “is incompatible with trust in God” (ibid.). 
339 However, the author has already described what enemies can do to God’s people: steal, torture, and kill. 
In the end, all that believers have for sure is God himself, and the promise of future reward. 

105 
• 
You should imitate the faith of those who led you. 
• 
{They had a good outcome, and if you have the same kind of faith you 
will have a similar outcome.} 
 
Verse 8 is not verbally tied to any other verse. However, it may provide a 
rationale for 13:7,340 just as God’s constancy underlies some previous enthymemes, such 
as those in 3:19-4:1.  
• 
Imitate their faith. 
• 
{Because} Christ is always the same. 
• 
{Christ will reward you, too, if you have similar faith.} 
 
Verse 9 gives a rationale, but it is difficult to ascertain the situation341 and 
premise: 
• 
You should not accept strange teachings. 
• 
Because () it is well for the heart to be strengthened by grace, not by 
foods, which have not helped the participants (spiritually, that is). 
• 
{The strange teachings concern foods,342 and will not help you.} 
 
“Strengthening the heart” has no previous parallel in Hebrews, and may be a 
slogan of the opponents—that certain foods would strengthen the heart (perhaps meaning 
a person’s loyalty for or standing with God).343 The strange teachings probably had 
something to do with eating from the altar (13:10), perhaps in a vicarious way through 
synagogue meals.344 So the author responds that a person’s heart will be strengthened 
more by grace than by special foods.  
                                                 
340 “This apparently isolated statement has no syntactical connection with what precedes or follows” (ibid., 
704). Heb 13:8 could theoretically provide a rationale for 13:9: Christ is always the same, so do not be 
carried away by strange teachings. {Since Christ does not change his teachings, strange teachings are 
false.} However, the epistle claims that divine teachings have changed. But the author views reward and 
punishment as a constant, so the connection with 13:7 is more likely.  
341 “The writer refers allusively to a situation which was well known to the first readers, but of which 
modern readers are largely ignorant” (Ellingworth, Hebrews, 705). 
342 “The verse strongly suggests that the false teachings have something to do with foodstuffs” (ibid., 707). 
343 “It was alleged that the competing teachings concerning food will strengthen the heart and keep it from 
defection” (Lane, Hebrews 9-13, 531).  
344 “The allusion is to the consumption of foods in some way connected with Jewish sacrificial meals” 
(ibid., 532). “The sphere of grace is contrasted with a cultus in which salvation, or at least ‘strengthening,’ 
is offered through ritual meals” (Ellingworth, Hebrews, 707). Isaacs concludes that grace is “contrasted… 
over against Judaism’s sacrificial offerings (see 9:9-10), which were ineffectual” (Reading, 157). Josephus 

106 
Heb 13:10 has no direct link with 13:9.345 Those serving the tabernacle346 (another 
negative reference to Levitical worship) do not have a right to partake of the altar that 
believers have.347 The author has shifted in mid-sentence from what “we” have to what 
“they” have—perhaps meaning, “We have an altar, a source of forgiveness, but the 
Levitical priests cannot even eat from their own altar.” Verse 11 uses  to introduce 
support from Scripture, which specifies that the bodies of sin offerings had to be burned 
outside the camp.348 
Verse 12 reports a conclusion: 
• 
The bodies of sin offerings were burned outside the camp (13:11). 
• 
Therefore () Jesus suffered outside the gate in order to () sanctify 
the people by his own blood (13:12). 
• 
Missing premise: {Jesus fulfilled the typology of the sin offerings.} 
 
The author has already argued that Jesus fulfilled the typology involved in the 
blood—just as the Levitical high priest brought animal blood into the earthly sanctuary, 
Jesus entered the heavenly sanctuary with his own blood (9:12). But as Gräßer points out, 
                                                                                                                                                 
speaks of “common suppers” in Antiquities 14.10.8. These could have continued after the temple was 
destroyed. Lane reports that Jukka Thurén has collected material showing “that eating, joy, and the praise 
of God at cultic meals, especially the fellowship meal, were associated with the thought of being supported 
by the grace of God” (Hebrews 9-13, 533, referring to Das Lobopfer der Hebräer: Studien zum Aufbau und 
Anliegen von Hebräerbrief 13 [Åbo: Åbo Akademi, 1973], 188-96). 
345 Ellingworth notes that the lack of connection here “is in contrast with the tightly knit series of logical 
connectives in the following verses” (Hebrews, 707, 709). If vv. 9 and 10 are linked, the altar that “we” 
have is the source of grace (cf. the throne of grace, 4:16). 
346 Montefiore observes the irony that the people are said to serve the tabernacle rather than God (Hebrews, 
244). Gordon observes the irony that “it is the adherents of temple and sacrifice who are now cultically 
debarred” (Hebrews, 167). deSilva notes that the author is “inverting the normal Jewish discourse about 
priests’ rights to eat at certain tables in the temple, from which nonpriests cannot eat” (Perseverance, 498).   
347 This would mean that priests were not allowed to believe in Jesus and participate in the new covenant, 
but that is probably more than the author intended to say. The book of Acts views belief in Christ and 
participation in temple rituals as compatible.  
348 The fact that Levitical sacrifices were burned outside the camp has no bearing on whether people can eat 
from an entirely different altar (13:10a). A search for logic in the wider context might produce this 
enthymeme: We have an altar because Jesus suffered outside the gate, {and he therefore fulfilled the 
symbolism of the sin offering}. But this seems to presuppose more than it proves. 
The logic suggests that the “altar” may be the cross. However, it could be argued that people “eat” 
from that altar by means of the Eucharist. But to be precise, the author does not say that believers eat at all. 
An altar is a place of sacrifice, and believers are to offer praise and good works (13:15-16). Just as the 
author uses “offer” as a metaphor, he also uses “eat” as a metaphor meaning “receive benefits.” 

107 
the analogy has problems.349 The animals were killed inside the camp, and were disposed 
of outside the camp. The author is saying that the symbolism of disposal was fulfilled by 
the location of Jesus’ death—and his death outside the gate sanctified the people, just as 
the blood brought inside the Levitical sanctuary pictured the atonement of sin.  
The author draws a parenetic conclusion in 13:13: 
• 
Jesus sanctified people by dying outside the gate (13:12). 
• 
Therefore () we should go to him outside the camp and accept the 
abuse that this might entail (13:13). 
• 
Missing premise: {We receive that sanctification (which has a value that 
far exceeds the “cost” involved in the abuse) only if we follow him.} 
 
The author has concluded that a person cannot be saved by Levitical rituals, and a 
person relying on involvement in those rituals is ipso facto not relying on the only 
effective atonement, the death of Jesus. He therefore exhorts the readers to put those 
rituals behind them350 and accept the consequences of allegiance to Jesus Christ. As he 
draws to a close, he includes one more analogy based on the coincidence that Jesus 
suffered outside the city of Jerusalem, and he is exhorting people to leave the religious 
system that is centered in Jerusalem. The logic of the analogy may not work well,351 but 
                                                 
349 “Es unseren Verf. allerdings nicht stört, daß die Entsprechung nur sehr unvollkommen ist: Die Tiere 
wurden ja in dem Lager geopfert und danach erst vor dem Lager verbrannt, Christus aber leidet und stirbt 
außerhalb des Tores (V 12).... Das Sterben ( $% ! dient unserem Verf. als Beleg dafür, daß Jesus 
toragemäß außerhalb des Lagers »verbrannt« wurde” (Gräßer, Hebräer, 3:383-84). Montefiore says that the 
argument here has “become slightly confused” (Hebrews, 245). Thompson suggests a different typology: 
“In the Old Testament the guilty [people] were brought outside the camp to be killed (Lev. 24:14; Num. 
15:35). Only through accepting the stigma of guilt could Jesus remove the guilt of others” (Hebrews, 180). 
350 Westcott says, “Hitherto he has shewn that the Christian can dispense with the consolations of the 
Jewish ritual: he now prepares to draw the conclusion that if he is a Christian he ought to give them up” 
(Hebrews, 437). Thompson says that the author encourages the readers “to take the risk of a total break 
with the synagogue. Jesus, in dying outside the camp, is the great example of one who renounced old 
loyalties and old securities for the sake of faith” (Hebrews, 181). 
351 Koester writes that this section is an “allusive passage that engages listeners more by images that 
stimulate the imagination than by a logical argument” (Hebrews, 575). Ellingworth observes, “Problems 
arise when attempts are made…to specify in greater detail the logical steps in the argument” (Hebrews, 
716).  
Many exegetes have even greater struggles with the implications about Judaism. However, the 
Levitical rituals that the author rejected as useless are not a part of Judaism as it is known today. Isaacs 
rightly notes that “the ‘camp’ here that our author exhorts his readers to abandon…is not therefore Judaism 
per se but the Mosaic cult and its shrine” (Reading, 159). As Ellingworth notes, the author views the people 
of the old covenant in continuity with those of the new covenant (Hebrews, 716)—but he views the 

108 
rhetorically it serves as a transition to the exhortation to leave. The logical connectors tie 
13:9-15 together, showing that the strange teachings are associated with the Levitical 
altar,352 and the author tells the readers that they cannot be involved in that system of 
worship.  
 
Verse 14 adds more support to the exhortation: 
• 
We should go to Jesus outside the camp, bearing the abuse (13:13). 
• 
Because () we do not have a permanent city here (on earth), but we are 
looking for a future (heavenly) city (as Abraham did—11:10, 16). 
• 
{The eternal value of the reward is worth whatever temporary difficulties 
it may entail.} 
 
Verse 15 draws a more general conclusion: 
• 
We have an eternal reward awaiting us (13:14).  
• 
Therefore () we should offer through Jesus a sacrifice of praise to God, 
which we do by confessing the name of Jesus353 (13:15).  
• 
Unstated premise: {We receive the reward only if we are faithful to 
Jesus.} 
 
Verse 16 has an imperative with a supporting reason: 
• 
People should continue to do good and share what they have. 
• 
Because	() such sacrifices are pleasing to God. 
• 
{God rewards people who please him (11:6).} 
 
Verse 17 returns to the subject of leaders, forming an inclusio with 13:7,354 and it 
has two enthymemes: 
                                                                                                                                                 
approaches to worship as dramatically different. He emphasizes that the old is obsolete and urges the 
readers to embrace the new. In short, he advocates the same people, but different worship. 
352 If the “strange teachings” involved Levitical rituals, in what way were they strange? If the readers were 
in the Diaspora, they could participate in Levitical sacrifices only vicariously, through synagogue meals, 
and that is alien to the Scriptures. This idea may have been a recent innovation, at least for the readers. Or it 
may simply be “strange” to the readers’ previous participation in the Christ community. 
353 The “confession” throughout Hebrews involves Jesus; God is not in question. In other words, we praise 
God by accepting the Savior he sent, doing good, and sharing. These actions please God (13:16), and God 
rewards those who please him (11:6). Doing good without confessing Christ would not be sufficient. Praise 
was not done in private, but in the communal meetings that should not be neglected. The primary reason 
given for the assemblies is mutual exhortation, rather than worship (10:25), but the worship functions of 
those meetings would have been taken for granted. 

109 
• 
You should obey and submit to your leaders. 
• 
For () they are keeping watch over your souls and will give an account.  
• 
{Since they will be judged on their leadership, and they want to be found 
faithful, their orders are good, and it is to your advantage to obey them.} 
 
• 
You should let them watch over you with joy, not sighing. 
• 
For () that would be harmful to you. 
• 
{They sigh only over things that would harm you.} 
 
Verse 18 has another imperative followed by a reason: 
• 
You should pray for us. 
• 
For () we are sure that we have a good conscience and are honorable. 
• 
{You should pray for all (leaders?) who have good behavior.}355 
 
Verse 19 offers an additional reason: 
• 
You should pray for us. 
• 
So that () I may be restored to you very soon. 
• 
{If you pray, I will be restored sooner—and you want me to come.} 
 
Verse 22 contains the last enthymeme: 
• 
You should bear with my word of exhortation. 
• 
For () I have written to you briefly. 
• 
{This is not a long and boring treatise, so read it attentively.}356 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
 
The survey of argumentation in Hebrews produced a large mass of observations. 
Now I want to highlight a few of them. The readers implied by the text 
                                                                                                                                                 
354 Verse 7 is about former leaders, v. 17 about current leaders. The author believes that they will agree 
with his epistle. The inclusio suggests that the intervening verses are conceptually connected. 
355 Ellingworth notes that “the force of  is difficult to determine” (Hebrews, 725); he suggests that the 
author’s clear conscience gave him “the necessary confidence to claim the readers’ support in prayer” 
(ibid.). However, the verse is really a request—please pray for us. The last part of the verse might be part of 
a conventional part of the request—at least the author makes no attempt to support his statement. 
356 It is odd to request tolerance at the end of the letter. The request is conventional, serving more as an 
apology than an exhortation. 

110 
1) view the Hebrew scriptures (which they know only in Greek translation) as 
authoritative for life and practice 
2) view those scriptures from the perspective that Jesus fulfilled various messianic 
prophecies and allusions, and ascended to heaven at the right hand of God357 
3) view those scriptures as authoritative revelation on how people should worship 
and be found acceptable by God 
4) face threats of persecution that are weakening their zeal for Christ 
5) have the old covenant cultus as the only relevant alternative that the author needs 
to address. 
The readers most likely to fit this profile are Jewish. They considered themselves 
in continuity with the synagogue, and may have attended the synagogue even while 
believing that Jesus is the Messiah. Although the readers were at first persecuted for this 
belief, they were eventually tolerated. But more recently, renewed pressure, even the 
threat of death, was being used to pry the readers away from the Christ community so 
that they would be loyal to the synagogue.  
The demand for conformity was not done by threat alone—it was also done 
through arguments based on the Jewish scriptures. The arguments centered not on 
whether Jesus is the Messiah, but on whether he is a means of atonement. The opponents 
were not attacking beliefs about a messiah, but about him being the means of salvation. 
The readers were being pressured to keep the laws of Moses for assurance of salvation 
rather than see salvation in Jesus. 
So the author responds to these recent arguments and threats by 1) addressing the 
doctrinal questions and 2) exhorting the readers to be steadfast in time of persecution. He 
begins with an uncontested point—that Jesus is exalted into the heavens. His exaltation 
already implies that he is greater than the angels and that his message is more important 
than the law of Moses. Since Jesus has arrived at the situation the readers desire for their 
eternal future, he is the pioneer of salvation, and his death as a human is to be seen as an 
appropriate and necessary part of his trailblazing role in the salvation of humans. The 
author urges the readers to be faithful and to see Jesus as the means by which they are 
                                                 
357 The argument in 7:1-10:18 is built on the assumption that the readers will accept Ps 110 as messianic, 
and that Jesus is the messiah; the question dominating this section of the epistle is whether he is sufficient 
for salvation. 

111 
accepted by God. So far he has built a positive case for Christ—that what he did was 
appropriate—without addressing competing views. He then prepares the readers for more 
difficult argumentation and warns them about the penalties of apostasy. 
The “difficult” topic is the priesthood of Christ, which is shown to be superior to 
the Levitical priesthood (judging by length of argument, this may be the part that is the 
most difficult for the readers to accept). The holy place of Christ, in heaven, is superior to 
the Levitical sanctuary, and the ministry that he performed is superior to the Levitical 
ministry. The author also argues that the covenant of Christ is superior to the Sinai 
covenant, which was the basis of the Levitical functions. Although Greek rhetoric 
normally gave praise through a comparison with other respected entities, without 
denigrating the point of comparison (it is poor praise to say that a person is better than a 
scoundrel, or an arrangement is better than one that never even worked), the author of 
Hebrews goes out of his way to denigrate the old covenant and its associated ministries, 
thus showing that this was the primary point of contention.358 He uses the word covenant 
because he is dealing with a worship system, not just priesthood, sacrifices, and 
sanctuary. In several places, the author uses strong words to say that the old covenant is 
obsolete. This seems to be the basis for his argument in 9:10b that the Levitical rituals 
were temporary, and therefore assumed to be ineffective.  
The author works harder to prove the ineffectiveness of the old, than he does to 
prove the effectiveness of the new. He acts as if the readers have only two alternatives: to 
approach God through the Levitical rituals, or to approach through Christ. If the old way 
is discredited, it is assumed that the new way will be accepted with little resistance. The 
readers faced only two choices: the old or the new—and since there is little rhetorical 
value in showing that Christ is superior to something already known to be ineffective and 
superseded, the argument implies that the readers were attracted to the old covenant as a 
means of atonement. Further, the readers’ primary questions had to do with the validity of 
the old covenant, not the content of the new. 
There are two ways of approaching God—two covenants—the old and the new. 
Although the author says several times that Christ has brought a better covenant, he does 
                                                 
358 In 7:11-19, the author moves from priesthood to law even though his conclusions about law do not 
become the basis of further arguments, suggesting that this subject is included because it is a need of the 
readers. He is using “the law” as a synonym for the old covenant (cf. 7:18, 22). 

112 
not describe the new covenant, at least not under the term “covenant.” He takes more 
space to argue that the old covenant is obsolete, than he does to describe what the new 
covenant actually is. This suggests that the readers valued the term covenant because of 
their attraction to the law of Moses, the author used the term they liked, and in Jer 31 he 
found a way to use it as a bridge toward Christ. In effect, he argues: Do you want to be in 
a covenant with God? Christ has a better covenant, one that is effective. Do you not 
know, from the old covenant itself, that transgressions necessitate death? Christ has 
provided a death that is so effective it does not need to be continually repeated. Do you 
not know that God promised to bring a better covenant, which is based on forgiveness? 
Christ has brought it, so choose Christ.  
The old approach is Levitical priests, sacrifices and laws; the new approach is 
Christ as the sacrifice and the priest (the author does not argue for “better laws”). Both 
ways can be called a covenant, but the author associates the old covenant with negative 
terms (law, transgression, and penalties); he associates the new covenant with positive 
terms (promises and blessings). But the word covenant is not an end in itself—it is a 
steppingstone toward the author’s real goal—exhorting allegiance to Christ and his 
community. He is calling for fidelity not just to beliefs about Christ, but to continued 
association with the community of believers. This is part of the package that he 
advocates, vis-à-vis the package offered by the synagogue.  
A crucial difference in these packages is the means of atonement, or cleansing, or 
the way in which a person can be made acceptable to God. The author argues that 
atonement is effected by Christ, not by old covenant rituals. He does not argue piecemeal, 
law by law, but comprehensively, using the word covenant. He argues that the old rituals 
were legally valid, but not effective, and Christ has achieved what they could only 
illustrate. Now that the reality has been done, the author argues, the ritual anticipations 
are obsolete. Due to the readers’ allegiance to the Scriptures, the author bases the 
argument on passages of Scripture, and Jer 31 provides a conclusive argument that the 
Scriptures themselves indicate the need for a new covenant, and thus that the old 
covenant was temporary. 
Once this doctrinal difference has been addressed, the author again calls the 
readers to see Jesus as the crucial link they need in their relationship with God, and he 

113 
again warns them of the dire results of apostasy. The inclusio structure, bracketing the 
center section with similar exhortations and warnings, draws attention to the importance 
of the center doctrinal section to the needs of the readers. The author reminds the readers 
of the value of being faithful in times of trial, and sketches the readers’ situation as a 
choice between an old covenant mountain and a new covenant heaven. After some 
miscellaneous exhortations, the author encourages the readers to leave elements 
associated with the old covenant (foods, animals, city, and camp) and embrace by faith 
the elements of the Christ community (mutual assistance and confessional loyalty) 
despite the persecutions that will likely come. 
The epistle carries a tone of urgency—some have already turned away from the 
community, and the author is afraid that others will follow them into irreversible 
apostasy. In this life-and-death situation, the author deals with subjects that are directly 
relevant to their waning allegiance, and he spends a large portion of his letter on the old 
and new covenants because that is a crucial component of the readers’ crisis.  
Throughout the epistle, the author takes various slogans or arguments that might 
have been used in favor of the synagogue, and turns them around and uses them to argue 
for the Christ covenant. The synagogue urges you to be faithful to the living God? So do 
we. They talk about how important the voice of God is? We have an even more important 
message in Christ. They urge you to look to God’s appointed representative, the high 
priest? So do we, but we have a better high priest. They urge you to enter a weekly rest? 
We urge you to enter an eternal rest. They urge obedience? So do we. They say that God 
will reject you if you go to the Christ community? We say that God will reject you if you 
leave. They offer rituals of cleansing and atonement? We offer the reality. They offer an 
impressive line of priests? We offer an impressive priest, one who has actually reached 
the salvation that we want. They offer a covenant relationship with God? We have one, 
too, only it is better and eternal. Whether the opponents actually argued these things 
cannot be proved, but such arguments are plausible for the situation, and the author 
addresses them. The Jews traditionally placed a high value on the covenant relationship 
with God; the author takes this traditional value and uses it for his own exhortation. 
By exhorting the readers to leave behind the old covenant system of worship and 
to embrace a worship pattern centered on Jesus, he is implying that the Christ-confession 

114 
is a religion distinct from and separate from second-temple Judaism.359 He is calling for a 
“parting of the ways.” In calling for separation, it is remarkable that he does not have to 
explain what the new covenant is, or argue that it has fulfilled the Jer 31 prophecy. It is 
sufficient for him to prove that the old covenant was temporary—and from that he 
assumes (and expects the readers to assume) that Jesus brought the new covenant. These 
are the only two religious systems under consideration, and a disproof of one is assumed 
to be a proof of the other. 
The author takes a considerable amount of space to argue that the death of Jesus 
was a self-sacrifice that atoned for the sins of all humanity. Throughout the epistle, he 
assumes the divine origin and validity of the old covenant rituals even as he argues that 
they were ineffective and superseded by Christ. But his argument also implies that the 
readers think the old covenant to be still valid (e.g., 8:4), and he assumes the new 
covenant to be like the old in penalties for transgression. 
Apparently the readers who trusted the Jewish Scriptures implicitly also valued 
the worship requirements found therein—and this became a key argument as the 
synagogue sought to regain their full allegiance. In response to this pressure, the author 
tries to strengthen the plausibility of the new religious system by showing that it fulfills 
key parts of the old.  
The main purpose of Hebrews is parenesis, and the doctrinal passages support the 
parenetic purpose. In what way does the central doctrinal section help support the 
parenesis that immediately follows it? To put it most baldly, why is the end of sin 
offerings (10:18) a reason for believers to meet together (v. 25)? It is because the author 
is discussing rival systems, not just sacrifices and meetings as separate topics. He can 
argue for meetings simply because they are part of a package that is the only possible 
rival to (and successor to) the package that includes animal offerings as a means of 
pleasing God.  
 
                                                 
359 The only form of Judaism ever addressed in the epistle is a religion in which sacrifices were central—
which implies that a post-Temple Judaism was not yet an option for the readers, which implies that the 
epistle was written before A.D. 70.   

