

This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reprinted material
is quoted with permission, and sources are indicated. A wide variety of references are listed. Reasonable
efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and the publisher cannot
assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or for the consequences of their use.
Neither this book nor any part may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic
or mechanical, including photocopying, microﬁlming, and recording, or by any information storage or
retrieval system, without prior permission in writing from the publisher.
The consent of CRC Press LLC does not extend to copying for general distribution, for promotion, for
creating new works, or for resale. Speciﬁc permission must be obtained in writing from CRC Press LLC
for such copying.
Direct all inquiries to CRC Press LLC, 2000 N.W. Corporate Blvd., Boca Raton, Florida 33431.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are
used only for identiﬁcation and explanation, without intent to infringe.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC
Lewis Publishers is an imprint of CRC Press LLC
No claim to original U.S. Government works
International Standard Book Number 1-56670-543-6
Library of Congress Card Number 00-044356
Printed in the United States of America   1  2  3  4  5   6  7  8  9  0
Printed on acid-free paper
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Pankratz, Tom M.
Environmental engineering dictionary and directory / Thomas M. Pankratz.
 
 
p. cm.
ISBN 1-56670-543-6 (alk. paper)
  1. Environmental engineering--Dictionaries. 2. Brand name products--Dictionaries. 3. 
   Trademarks--Dictionaries. 4. Environmental engineering--Directories. I. Title.
TD9 .P36 2000
628--dc21
00-044356
 

Preface
This book has been written to help professionals, students, and lay people identify
the increasing number of terms in the ﬁelds of environmental engineering and
science.
More than 8000 terms, acronyms, and abbreviations applying to wastewater,
potable water, industrial water treatment, seawater desalination, air pollution, incin-
eration, and hazardous waste remediation have been deﬁned.
The most unique feature of this book is the inclusion of more than 3000 trade-
marks and brand names. Many of these commercial terms for proprietary products
or processes are so common or descriptive that they have fallen into general use.
This confusion is compounded by the fact that many terms contain similar preﬁxes
(e.g., bio-, enviro-, hydra-, hydro-, etc.) and it is often difﬁcult to tell them apart.
This book originates from Screening Equipment Handbook, ﬁrst published in
1988, whose glossary contains a list of screening-related trademarks and brand
names along with their company afﬁliation. Even though that list was relatively
short, a surprisingly large number of companies had come and gone or changed their
names through mergers or acquisitions. This led to an expanded directory entitled,
The Dictionary of Water and Wastewater Treatment Trademarks and Brand Names,
published in 1991, and which contained 1200 commercial terms.
The Concise Dictionary of Environmental Engineering followed in 1996. In
addition to the 2200 commercial terms, it was further expanded to include 3000
generic environmental engineering terms. Shortly after it was published, the envi-
ronmental equipment manufacturing industry began a consolidation led by USFilter,
Waterlink, Baker Hughes, ITT, F.B. Leopold, and others that has resulted in changes
to 43% of the terms included in the 1996 edition.
During the research for this book, many other books, magazines, dictionaries,
glossaries, buyer’s guides, catalogs, brochures, and technical papers were reviewed
to locate new terms and their deﬁnitions. Although there are too many references
to list, I would like to acknowledge the help of these publications and their authors.
In addition to technically reviewing this book, John B. Tonner was especially
helpful with his suggestions, advice, research assistance, and computer wizardry.
Regardless of when I would call, John was always available to help. His www.world-
wide-water.com Web site also proved to be a valuable research tool.
I would like to acknowledge the libraries that were used in my research. They
include the M.D. Anderson Library at the University of Houston, the Helen Hall
Library in League City, Texas, the Houston Public Library Central Branch, and the
library at King Fahd University of Petroleum and Mining in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia.
I also recognize USFilter and Alfa-Laval for their support.
I’m grateful for the assistance of the many friends and colleagues who suggested
new terms and challenged old ones, helped with deﬁnitions, provided encouragement,
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

or assisted in the book’s production. Some of these people include Robert W. Brown,
Gordon Carter, Bill Copa, Chad Dannemann, Jim Force, Jack Gardiner, Duane
Germenis, Stacie Jones, John Meidl, Mack Moore, Chad Pankratz, Bill Perpich,
Barb Petroff, Jim Symons, Mark Wilson, and Joe Zuback.
Like the ﬁrst edition, published in 1996, much of my work on this book took
place while traveling; the rest was done in the evenings and weekends. I would never
have been able to ﬁnish without the continued patience and support of my wife,
Julie, and our children, Chad, Sarah, Mike, and Katie.
This book is dedicated to my wife, Julie Lynn Pankratz, and our grandson,
Gabriel R. Suarez, who was born the same day this book was completed.
Tom Pankratz
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Introduction
This dictionary contains terms used in the ﬁelds of environmental engineering and
environmental science, and the deﬁnitions provided relate to their use in an envi-
ronmental context only.
The commercial terms represent company brand names or trademarks, and have
been italicized to differentiate them from the technical terms in general usage.
Whenever appropriate, the use of ™ or ® has been included following the name of
the entry, although terms may be registered trademarks even though they do not
include either symbol. It is also possible that some of the entries listed as trademarks
may not be registered or properly used by the manufacturers listed in connection
with them.
Brand names and trademarks often evolve and take different forms. Variations
in the use of capitalization, hyphens, or symbols often occur over time. The repre-
sentation of the words included in this book reﬂects the latest version seen in use
and are assumed to be the preferred form.
Commercial acronyms are included if they are registered trademarks or com-
monly used abbreviations of company names. Nonregistered product model numbers
and trademarks that are the same as the name of a company are not always included.
Many deﬁnitions were extrapolated from stories, advertisements, or product bro-
chures and were not directly corroborated by the company listed as being responsible
for the term.
The company name included in the deﬁnition of a commercial term usually
represents the company that manufactures that particular product or process. In some
cases, the listed company may only market, distribute, or license the product.
In several instances, the same brand name has been listed more than once to
describe different products or processes from different companies. The author is
unaware of any dispute involving these cases and is simply reporting that the
companies identiﬁed have used the term for the product described. In some cases,
the term may be dormant, obsolete, or no longer available from the company listed.
Company addresses, phone numbers, and e-mail addresses listed in the Manu-
facturer’s Directory were conﬁrmed over a period of several years. Some contact
information may have changed, especially with the recent telephone area code
changes in many parts of the U.S. Readers are cautioned that an incorrect phone
number, address, or e-mail address does not mean that a company is no longer in
business.
There are a few cases where a company whose name is listed in a deﬁnition is
not included in the Manufacturer’s Directory. If current contact information for a
company could not be located, the out-of-date information was not included.
Terms have been arranged alphabetically using current word processing software.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

In general, terms related to plumbing, household products, computer programs,
or software have not been included.
All of the terms have been listed in good faith. A reasonable attempt has been
made to conﬁrm all deﬁnitions and, in the case of commercial terms, verify the
companies responsible for the listings. The author apologizes for any omissions or
errors.
If you are aware of any changes or additions that should be included in subse-
quent editions, please send them to Tom Pankratz, P.O. Box 75064, Houston, Texas
USA, 77234-5064.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Foreword
The areas of environmental engineering and sciences and their related business
activities have grown to the point that they overlap the professional and private lives
of almost everyone. As environmental issues become more complicated, so does the
vocabulary required to understand and discuss them. This Environmental Engineer-
ing Dictionary and Directory deﬁnes many terms that did not even exist a decade ago. 
My own ﬁeld of water reclamation and reuse is an example of a relatively new
area of environmental engineering that has fostered the introduction of many new
terms and technologies.
When considering advanced treatment of municipal and industrial wastewaters,
a repeated thesis has been that such a high quality efﬂuent should be put to beneﬁcial
use rather than simply wasted. Today, technically proven treatment and puriﬁcation
processes exist to provide treated water of almost any quality desired. This offers a
realistic framework for considering water reclamation and reuse in many parts of
the world that are experiencing water shortages. Nonpotable water reuse applications,
such as agricultural and landscape irrigation, toilet ﬂushing in large ofﬁce buildings,
and water for aesthetic and environmental purposes have become major options for
planned water reuse. 
Water reuse provides innovative and alternative options for agriculture, munic-
ipalities, and industries. However, water reuse is only one alternative in planning to
meet future water resource needs. Conservation, efﬁcient management and use of
existing water supplies, and the development of new water resources based on
watershed management or seawater desalination are examples of other alternatives.
As the ﬁeld of environmental engineering continues to develop, so will the
vocabulary required for its discussion and study. Our need to understand the envi-
ronment and to better appreciate our relationship with nature is greater now than at
any time in our history. Thus Tom’s book is particularly timely and relevant.
Takashi Asano, Ph.D., P.E.
Adjunct Professor
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
University of California at Davis
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

A
Å
See “Angstrom (Å).”
A&I
Alternative and Innovative.
A/O®
Wastewater treatment process for biological removal of nitrogen by USFil-
ter/Krüger.
A2/O®
Biological treatment process for phosphorus and nitrogen removal by USFil-
ter/Krüger.
A2C™
Biological wastewater treatment system by Baker Process — Municipal
Division.
A·I·R
Photocatalytic process to destroy VOCs by Trojan Technologies, Inc.
AA
See “atomic absorption spectrophotometry (AA).”
AAEE
American Academy of Environmental Engineers.
AAP
Asbestos Action Program.
AAPCO
American Association of Pesticide Control Ofﬁcials.
AAQS
Ambient air quality standards.
AARC
Alliance for Acid Rain Control.
AAS
American Association for the Advancement of Science.
ABA1000®
Alumina oxide for phosphate reduction by Selecto, Inc.
ABA2000®
Alumina oxide for lead and heavy metals removal by Selecto, Inc.
ABA8000®
Alumina oxide for ﬂuoride removal by Selecto, Inc.
abandoned well
A well whose use has been permanently discontinued or which
is in a state of such disrepair that it cannot be used for its intended purpose.
abatement
Reducing the degree or intensity of, or eliminating, pollution.
abattoir
A place where animals are slaughtered for their meat and meat byproducts.
ABC Filter™
Automatic backwashable cartridge ﬁlter by USFilter/Rockford.
Abcor®
Ultraﬁltration membrane product by Koch Membrane Systems, Inc.
ABF
Activated bio-ﬁltration wastewater treatment system by Inﬁlco Degremont,
Inc.
ABF
Traveling bridge type automatic backwashing gravity sand ﬁlter by Aqua-
Aerobic Systems, Inc.
abiocoen
All of the geologic, climatic, and other nonliving elements of an eco-
system.
abiotic
Nonliving elements in the environment.
ABJ™
ABJ product group of Sanitaire Corp.
ablation
The combined processes of glacial melting and evaporation which results
in a net loss of ice.
ablation zone
The lower part of a glacier where the net loss of ice exceeds the
net gain.
ABS
(1) Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene. A black plastic material, used in the man-
ufacture of pipes and other components. (2) Alkyl-benzene-sulfonate. A sur-
factant formerly used in synthetic detergents that resisted biological breakdown.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

absolute ﬁlter rating
A ﬁlter rating which indicates that 99.9% of the particles
larger than a speciﬁed size will be removed by the ﬁlter.
absolute humidity
The total amount of water vapor present in the air, measured
in grams per cubic meter.
absolute pressure
The total pressure in a system, equal to the sum of the gage
pressure and atmospheric pressure.
absolute purity water
Water with a speciﬁc resistance of 18.3 megohm-cm at
25°C.
absolute zero
The lowest temperature possible; 0° on the Kelvin scale or approx-
imately –273°C (– 459.7°F).
absorbate
A substance used to soak up another substance.
absorbed dose
The amount of a chemical that enters the body of an exposed
organism.
absorbent
Any substance that exhibits the properties of absorption.
absorption
The process of transferring molecules of gas, liquid, or a dissolved
substance to the surface of a solid where it is bound by chemical or physical
forces.
absorption ﬁeld
A trench or pit ﬁlled with gravel or loose rock designed to absorb
septic tank efﬂuent.
ABW®
Traveling bridge type gravity sand ﬁlter by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
abyssal zone
A zone of deep oceanic waters, generally deeper than 2000 meters
and between the hadal and bathyal zones where light does not penetrate.
AC
See “activated carbon.”
AC®
Industrial wastewater treatment unit by Colloid Environmental Technologies
Co.
ACA
American Conservation Association.
acaricide
A pesticide used to kill spiders, ticks, or mites.
ACBM
Asbestos-containing building material.
Accelapak®
Modular water treatment plant by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
Accelator®
Solids contact clariﬁer with primary and secondary mixing zones by
Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
Accelo Hi-Cap
Filter underdrain block formerly offered by Inﬁlco Degremont,
Inc.
Accelo-Biox®
Modular wastewater treatment plant by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
Accel-o-Fac™
Sewage treatment plant design by Lake Aid Systems.
acceptable risk
The level of risk associated with minimal adverse effects, usually
determined by a risk analysis.
Access Analytical
Former name of IDEXX Laboratories, Inc.
accessory species
Species found in less than half but more than one quarter of the
area covered by a plant community.
 
accident site
 
The location of an unexpected occurrence, failure or loss, either at
a plant or along a transportation route, resulting in a release of hazardous
materials.
 
acclimatization
 
The physiological and behavioral adjustments of an organism to
changes in its environment.
 
Accoﬂoc®
Ion exchange media by Colloid Environmental Technologies Co.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

accretion
The increase in size of an inorganic body by the addition or accumulation
of particles.
ACCU®
Air sampler by Rupprecht & Patashnick.
Accuguard™
Automated pH electrode cleaning and calibration module by BIF.
Accu-Mag
Electromagnetic ﬂow meter by USFilter/Wallace & Tiernan.
accumulation zone
The upper part of a glacier where net gain in ice exceeds the
net loss.
accumulator
A tank installed in a circulating water system to allow for ﬂuctuations
in ﬂow, temperature, pressure, or other variations in operation.
AccuPac®
Cross-corrugated surface media for biological wastewater treatment by
Brentwood Industries, Inc.
Accura-ﬂo®
Flumes for measuring ﬂows by Composite Structures.
Accu-Tab™
Tablet chlorination system by Hammonds and PPG Industries, Inc..
Accuvac
Chemical reagents in vacuum vials for chemical analysis of ﬂuids by
Hach Co.
ACE rule
See “Any Credible Evidence rule (ACE rule).”
acetaldehyde
An organic chemical formed during the disinfection of water, most
commonly associated with the use of ozone as disinfectant. Chemical formula
is CH3CHO.
acetic acid
A weak, organic acid contained in vinegar and used in the manufacture
of organic chemicals and plastics. Also called “ethanoic acid.” Chemical for-
mula is CH3COOH.
acetone
A colorless, volatile liquid used in organic synthesis and as a commercial
solvent. Chemical formula is CH3COCH3.
ACFM
Actual cubic feet per minute.
ACFTD
Air cleaner ﬁne test dust. Dust used to calibrate particle counters.
ACGIH
American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists.
ACH
(1) See “air changes per hour (ACH).” (2) See “aluminum chlorohydrate
(ACH).”
ACI
American Concrete Institute.
acid
(1) A substance that can react with a base to form a salt. (2) A substance that
can donate a hydrogen ion or proton.
acid deposition
See “acid rain.”
acid mine drainage
Drainage of water from areas that have been mined for coal
or other mineral ores, usually having a low pH due to contact with sulfur-
bearing material.
acid neutralizing capacity (ANC)
Measure of the ability of water or soil to resist
changes in pH.
acid rain
Precipitation having an unusually low pH, generally attributed to the
absorption of sulfur dioxide pollution in air. Also known as “acid deposition.”
acid shock
The biological disruption of an aquatic system that results from rapid
acidiﬁcation.
acid-forming bacteria
Microbes that can metabolize complex organic compounds
under anaerobic conditions, leading to the production of methane.
acidic
The condition of water or soil that contains a sufﬁcient amount of acid
substances to lower the pH below 7.0.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

acidity
The capacity of an aqueous solution to neutralize a base.
acidophil
(1) A cell or substance easily stained by acid dyes. (2) An organism that
has an afﬁnity for, and grows in, an acidic environment. Also spelled “acidophile.”
ACL
Alternate concentration limit.
ACM
Asbestos-containing material.
ACM®
Thin ﬁlm composite reverse osmosis membrane by TriSep Corp.
Acme
Former screening equipment manufacturer.
ACM-LP™
Low pressure thin ﬁlm composite reverse osmosis membrane by
TriSep Corp.
ACMS™
Seawater reverse osmosis membrane by TriSep Corp.
ACoE
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
Acousticair®
Low noise blowers by Tuthill Pneumatics Group.
ACP
Air Carcinogen Policy.
acre-foot
The volume of water that would cover a one acre area one foot deep.
Equivalent to approximately 1233.6 cubic meters or 325,900 gallons.
acrolein
An aldehyde compound used as a microbiocide in the manufacture of
organic chemicals.
Acro-Pac®
Packaged seawater reverse osmosis system by Aqua-Chem, Inc.
ACS-Plus
High purity chemicals for laboratory use by Hach Co.
ACT-100®
Double wall ﬁberglass laminated steel underground tank by Steel Tank
Institute.
ACT™
Combined aeration technologies by Aeration Industries, Inc.
Acticarbone®
Activated carbon by Elf Atochem North America, Inc.
Actiﬁl®
Packing media for biological reactors by Sanitaire Corp.
Actiﬂo®
High rate sedimentation process for water and wastewater treatment by
USFilter/Krüger.
Actiﬂoc™
Modular, high-rate water treatment plant by USFilter/General Filter.
Actinomycetes
A group of bacteria that share some features with fungi, and
recognized as a source of musty or earthy odors in drinking water.
activated alumina
A partially dehydrated form of aluminum oxide frequently
used as an adsorbent. Chemical formula is Al2O3.
Activated Bioﬁlm Method
Fixed ﬁlm wastewater treatment system by JDV Equip-
ment Corp.
activated bioﬁlter
A ﬁxed ﬁlm biological wastewater treatment process where a
portion of the secondary sludge is returned to the reactor inﬂuent.
activated carbon (AC)
A highly adsorbent form of carbon used to remove dis-
solved organic matter from water and wastewater or odors and toxic substances
from gaseous emissions.
activated charcoal
See “activated carbon.”
activated sludge
The biologically active solids in an activated sludge process
wastewater treatment plant.
activated sludge process
A biological wastewater treatment process where a mix-
ture of wastewater and biologically enriched sludge is mixed and aerated to
facilitate aerobic decomposition by microbes.
activation energy
The energy required to initiate a process or reaction.
Activator
Package wastewater treatment plant by Pollution Control, Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

activator
A chemical added to a pesticide to increase its activity.
Activator III
Oil recovery product by Sybron Chemicals, Inc.
active ingredient
In any pesticide product, the component that kills, or otherwise
controls, target pests.
active life
The period of operation of a facility that begins with initial receipt of
a solid waste and ends at completion of closure activities.
active portion
Any area of a facility where treatment, storage, or disposal opera-
tions continue to be conducted.
active solar heating
A heating system that derives heat from the sun’s rays and
incorporates active devices such as pumps or blowers to move heat from the
point of collection to the point of storage or use.
Activol™
Wastewater grease emulsiﬁer by Probiotic Solutions.
Acumem
Reverse osmosis product formerly offered by USFilter.
Acumer®
Water treatment polymers by Rohm and Haas, Co.
acute exposure
A single exposure to a toxic substance, usually lasting no longer
than a day, which results in severe biological harm or death.
acute toxicity
A poisonous effect produced by a single short-term exposure which
results in severe biological harm or death.
Acutec
Gas detection system by USFilter/Wallace & Tiernan.
ACWA
American Clean Water Association.
ACWM
(1) Asbestos-containing waste material. (2) See “asbestos-containing
waste materials (ACUM).”
AD
Dry blending and dilution system by Komax Systems, Inc.
ADA
American Desalting Association. Formerly “NWSIA.”
ADAM
Acryloyl ethyl dimethyl amine.
adaptation
Changes in an organism’s structure or habits which help it adjust to
its surroundings.
Adcat™
Oxidation catalyst systems for air pollution control by Goal Line Envi-
ronmental Technologies.
Addigest®
Package extended aeration wastewater treatment plant by Smith & Love-
less, Inc.
additive
A chemical substance incorporated into another substance to improve or
preserve its quality.
additive mortality
The total mortality caused by different factors affecting a pop-
ulation for a given period of time including predation, ﬁre, or catastrophes.
add-on control device
An air pollution control device such as carbon absorber or
incinerator that reduces the pollution in an exhaust gas.
adenosine diphosphate (ADP)
A compound involved in the mobilization of
energy in cellular metabolism. Energy is stored by adding a phosphate group
to ADP to produce ATP.
adenosine triphosphate (ATP)
A high-energy phosphate compound that serves
as the prime energy carrier in living organisms. Energy is released when ATP
is converted to ADP and phosphate.
adenovirus
A waterborne pathogen that causes upper respiratory infections and
gastroenteritis.
ADF
See “average daily ﬂow (ADF).”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

adhesion
The force of molecular attraction between unlike molecules.
ADI
Acceptable daily intake.
adiabatic lapse rate
The constant rate at which temperatures decrease as altitude
increases. In a dry atmosphere the dry adiabatic lapse rate (DALR) is approx-
imately –1.00°C/100 m rise.
adit
A horizontal passageway into a mine to provide access or drainage.
AdjustAir®
Adjustable coarse bubble air diffuser by USFilter/Diffused Air Prod-
ucts Group.
Adjust-O-Pitch
Mixing propellers with adjustable pitch blades by Walker Process
Equipment.
administrative order
An EPA-issued order directing an individual, business, or
other entity to take corrective action or refrain from an activity.
admixture
(1) A material or substance added in mixing. (2) A substance other
than cement, aggregate, or water that is mixed with concrete.
Ad-Ox
Polishing scrubber for odor abatement by Puraﬁl, Inc.
ADP
See “adenosine diphosphate (ADP).”
Adpec
Horizontal vacuum ﬁlter by Komline-Sanderson Engineering Corp.
ADR
(1) Accidental rectal discharge. (2) Alternative dispute resolution.
ADROWPU®
Water puriﬁcation unit by Zenon Environmental, Inc.
Adsep™
Chromatographic process for separating organic and inorganic com-
pounds by USFilter/Rockford.
Adsolv
Activated carbon VOC control system by CSM Worldwide/RaySolv.
adsorbable organic halides (AOX)
The gross measurement of all chlorinated
organic compounds in an efﬂuent.
adsorbate
A material adsorbed on the surface of another.
adsorbent
A material used to adsorb substances to its surface.
adsorption
The process of transferring a substance from a liquid to the surface of
a solid where it is bound by chemical or physical forces.
Adsorption Clariﬁer™
Upﬂow buoyant media ﬂocculator/clariﬁer by USFil-
ter/Microﬂoc.
adulterants
Chemical impurities or substances that by law do not belong in a food
or pesticide.
adulterated
(1) Any pesticide whose strength or purity falls below the quality stated
on its label. (2) A food, feed, or product that contains illegal pesticide residues.
Advance®
Chlorine gas feeder systems by Capital Controls Co.
Advanced Fluidized Composting™
A combined biological and chemical sludge
treatment process by USFilter/Industrial Wastewater Systems.
advanced oxidation process (AOP)
A process using a combination of disinfec-
tants such as ozone and hydrogen peroxide to oxidize toxic organic compounds
to nontoxic form.
advanced secondary treatment
Secondary wastewater treatment with enhanced
solids separation.
advanced treatment plant (ATP)
A treatment facility using processes that pro-
vide treatment to levels greater than that of a conventional plant.
advanced wastewater treatment (AWT)
Treatment processes designed to remove
pollutants such as phosphorus, nitrogen, and a high percentage of suspended
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

solids which are not adequately removed by conventional secondary treatment
processes.
advection
The transfer of heat by horizontal currents of air.
Advent®
Package water treatment plant by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
advisory
A nonregulatory document that communicates risk information to those
who may have to make risk management decisions.
AEM
Acoustic emission monitoring.
aeolian deposit
Soil deposited by the wind.
Aeralater®
Packaged iron and manganese removal system by USFilter/General
Filter.
aerated pile composting
A composting method where municipal wastewater sol-
ids are mixed with a bulking material and the mixture placed over a forced
air ventilation system.
aeration
The addition of air or oxygen to water or wastewater, usually by mechan-
ical means, to increase dissolved oxygen levels and maintain aerobic conditions.
Aeration Engineering Resources Corp.
Former name of Aercor product group of
Sanitaire Corp.
Aeration Panel™
Fine bubble membrane diffuser panel by Parkson Corp.
aerator
A device used to introduce air or oxygen into water or wastewater.
Aerators, Inc.
Former name of USFilter/Aerator Products.
Aercor
Aeration and packing products by Sanitaire Corp.
Aer-Degritter
Aerated grit removal system by USFilter/Headworks Products.
AerFlare
Air diffuser by Walker Process Equipment.
Aergrid™
Floor grid aeration system by Aeration Technologies, Inc.
Aermax®
Fine pore aeration diffuser by Aeration Technologies, Inc.
Aero-Accelator®
Circular, packaged activated sludge treatment plant by Inﬁlco
Degremont, Inc.
aeroallergen
An allergen transported by air.
aerobe
An organism that requires free oxygen for respiration.
aerobic
Condition characterized by the presence of free oxygen.
aerobic digestion
Sludge stabilization process involving direct oxidation of bio-
degradable matter and oxidation of microbial cellular material.
aerobic treatment
Process by which microbes decompose complex organic com-
pounds in the presence of oxygen and use the liberated energy for reproduction
and growth.
Aeroburn
Wastewater treatment plant by Walker Process Equipment.
Aerocleve
Former manufacturer whose product line is now offered by Chemineer,
Inc.
Aeroductor
Aerated grit removal system by Lakeside Equipment Corp.
Aero-Filter
Rotary distributor by Lakeside Equipment Corp.
Aer-O-Flo
Wastewater treatment equipment product line by Purestream, Inc.
aerogel
A substance formed by the suspension of small bubbles of gas in a liquid
or solid.
Aero-Max
Tubular membrane diffuser by Aeration Research Company.
Aero-Mod®
Wastewater treatment product line by Waterlink/Aero-Mod Systems.
Aeropure
Activated carbon vapor ﬁltration system by American Norit Company, Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

AeroScrub
Flue gas scrubber by Aeropulse, Inc.
Aerosep®
Multi-stage aerosol separation system by Kimre, Inc.
aerosols
A suspension of collodial particles in air or another gas.
Aero-Surf
Air driven rotating biological contactor by USFilter/Envirex.
Aero-Terra-Aqua
ATA Technologies, Inc.
Aerotherm
In-vessel composting system by Fairﬁeld Service Co.
AerResearch
Aeration diffuser product line by Aeration Research Company.
Aershear™
Coarse bubble diffuser by Aeration Technologies, Inc.
Aertec™
Air diffuser product line by Aeration Technologies, Inc.
Aertube™
Static tube aerators by Aeration Technologies, Inc.
Aethalometer™
An aerosol black carbon monitor for measuring agricultural burning,
diesel emissions and speciation of ﬁne particles by Andersen Instruments, Inc.
AF Series™
Backwashable ﬁlter and carbon treatment units by Asahi America.
AFC™
Advanced ﬂuidized composting process by USFilter/Industrial Wastewater
Systems.
AFD
Adjustable frequency drive.
affected public
The people who live and/or work near a hazardous waste site.
afﬂuent stream
A stream or river ﬂowing into a larger river or lake.
afforestation
The process of establishing a forest where one did not previously
exist.
AFO
Air fail open.
AFOs
Animal feeding operations.
AFPA
American Forest and Paper Association. Also called “AF&PA.”
AfterBlend
Output booster for chemical feed system by USFilter/Stranco.
afterburner
A device used to reduce air emissions by incinerating organic matter
in a gas stream.
aftercondenser
A condenser installed as the last stage of an evaporator venting
system to minimize atmospheric steam discharge.
aftergrowth
The increase of bacterial density in treated distribution water caused
by growth of bacteria released from pipewall bioﬁlm and sediments.
aftershock
Any seismic tremor following a main earthquake event and originating
at or near the same place.
AFX™
Ozone instrumentation products by IN USA, Inc.
agar
A gelatinous substance extracted from a red algae, commonly used as a
medium for laboratory cultivation of bacteria.
agar plate
A circular glass plate, containing agar or another nutrient-medium,
used to culture microorganisms.
AGC
Association of General Contractors of America.
age tank
A tank used to store a chemical solution of known concentration for feed
to a chemical feeder. Also called a day tank.
agent
Any substance, organism, or active force that produces an effect or change.
Agent Orange
A dioxin-containing toxic herbicide used as a defoliant during the
Vietnam War.
aggessive water
Water having corrosive qualities.
agglomerate
To gather ﬁne particles into a larger mass.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

aggrade
To build up the level or slope of a river bed or valley by the deposit of
sediment.
AGI
Acute gastrointestinal illnesses.
Agidisc®
Disc ﬁlter with integrated agitation system by Baker Process.
Agisac
Sock-type screening sack by Copa Group.
AGMA
American Gear Manufacturers Association.
agrichemical
Any inorganic, artiﬁcial, or manufactured chemical substances used
in agricultural processes, usually in the form of fertilizers, herbicides, and
pesticides.
agricultural pollution
Farming wastes, including runoff and leaching of pesti-
cides and fertilizers; erosion and dust from plowing; improper disposal of
animal manure and carcasses; crop residues; and debris.
agrochemical
A substance such as a fertilizer or insecticide used in agriculture.
agro-ecosystem
Land used for crops, pasture, and livestock; the adjacent uncul-
tivated land that supports other vegetation and wildlife; the associated atmo-
sphere; and the underlying soils, groundwater, and drainage networks.
agronomy
Branch of agriculture that deals with the raising of crops and the care
of the soil.
AHERA
Asbestos Hazard Emergency Response Act.
AhlFloat™
Dissolved air ﬂotation by USFilter/Industrial Wastewater Systems.
Ahlstrom Aquaﬂow
Former name of wastewater equipment product group
acquired by USFilter/Industrial Wastewater Systems.
AhlSurf™
Surface aerator by USFilter/Industrial Wastewater Systems.
A-horizon
Topsoil, or the uppermost layer of soil, containing the highest accu-
mulation of mineral and organic matter.
AHS
See “aquatic humic substances (AHS).”
AIChE
American Institute of Chemical Engineers.
AIDS (Acquired Immune Deﬁciency Syndrome)
A usually fatal disease in
which the human body can no longer defend itself against infections. AIDS is
caused by the HIV retrovirus which is transmitted by the exchange of body ﬂuids.
AIHA
American Industrial Hygiene Association.
air
The mixture of gases, primarily oxygen and nitrogen, that surrounds the earth
and forms its atmosphere.
air binding
(1) A condition where air enters ﬁlter media and harms both the
ﬁltration and backwash processes. (2) The obstruction of water ﬂow in a
pipeline or pump due to the entrapment of air.
air bound
See “air binding.”
air changes per hour (ACH)
The movement of a volume of air in a given period
of time; if a building has one air change per hour, it means that all of the air
in the building will be replaced in a one-hour period.
Air Comb®
Coarse bubble diffuser by Amwell, Inc.
air contaminant
Smoke, dust, fume, gas, odor, mist, radioactive substance vapor,
pollen, or any combination thereof.
air curtain
A vertical barrier of air bubbled upward through water to contain oil
spills or discourage ﬁsh from entering polluted water.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

air diffuser
A device designed to transfer atmospheric oxygen into a liquid.
air gap
An open vertical gap or empty space that separates drinking water supply
from another water system in a treatment plant or other location to protect it
from contamination by backﬂow or backsiphonage.
Air Grid™
Sand ﬁlter air scour system by Roberts Filter Group.
air lock
The condition that occurs when air accumlates in a high point of a
pipeline, reducing or blocking the ﬂow of water.
air mass
A large body of air that has uniform properties such as temperature and
humidity.
air padding
Pumping dry air into a container to assist with the withdrawal of
liquid or to force a liquiﬁed gas such as chlorine out of the container.
air pollutant
Airborne gases, liquids, or solids that may be hazardous to animal
or plant life.
air pollution
The presence in the atmosphere of any airborne gases, liquids, or
solids that may be hazardous to animal or plant life.
air pollution episode
A period of abnormally high concentration of air pollutants,
often due to low winds and temperature inversion, that can cause illness and
death.
air purifying respirator (APR)
A respirator that uses physical and/or chemical
means to ﬁlter air breathed by the user.
Air Quality Control Region
Federally designated area that is required to meet
and maintain federal ambient air quality standards.
air quality criteria
The levels of pollution and lengths of exposure above which
adverse health and welfare effects may occur.
air quality related value (AQRV)
A value referring to the reduction in visibility
that may be caused by a new air emission.
Air Quality Standards
The level of pollutants prescribed by regulations that may
not be exceeded during a given time in a deﬁned area.
air scour
The agitation of granular ﬁlter media with air during the ﬁlter backwash
cycle.
Air Seal
Coarse bubble diffuser by Jet, Inc.
Air Shuttle
Wastewater aeration system by Meurer Industries, Inc.
air stripping
The process of removing volatile and semivolatile contaminants
from liquid by passing air and liquid countercurrently through a packed tower.
air toxics
Any air pollutant for which a NAAQS does not exist that may reasonably
be anticipated to cause cancer, developmental effects, reproductive dysfunc-
tions, neurological disorders, heritable gene mutations, or other serious or
irreversible chronic or acute health effects in humans.
Airamic®
Air/gas diffuser by Ferro Corp.
AiRanger
Tank level measurement system by Milltronics, Inc.
Airbeam™
Aluminum aeration basin cover by Enviroquip, Inc.
Airbrush™
Rotor aerator by United Industries, Inc.
AirCirc™
Assembly used to maintain the vortex within a wastewater degritter by
Fluidyne Corp.
Airco
Former name of BOC Gases.
Aircushion
Flotation clariﬁer by Wilﬂey Weber, Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Aire-O2
®
Propeller aspirator aerator by Aeration Industries, Inc.
Air-Grit
Aerated grit removal system by Walker Process Equipment.
AirJection™
Aeration system by Mazzei Injector Corp.
AirLance™
In-vessel composting technology by CBI Walker, Inc. (licensee) and
American Bio Tech, Inc. (licensor).
airlift
A device for pumping liquid by injecting air near the bottom of a riser pipe
submerged in the liquid to be pumped, lowering the speciﬁc gravity of the
ﬂuid mixture, and allowing it to rise up the riser pump.
Airmaster
Floating aerator by Airmaster Aerator.
AirMASTER
Wet particulate scubber by Fen-Tech Environmental, Inc.
Air-Mix®
Pulsed bed ﬁlter surface cleaning process by USFilter/Zimpro.
Airmizer
Air diffuser by USFilter/Diffused Air Products Group.
Airoﬂo™
Rotor aerator by S&N Airoﬂo, Inc.
Air-O-Lator®
Floating aerator by Air-O-Lator Corp.
AiroPump
Air lift pump by Walker Process Equipment.
AirOXAL®
Pure oxygen process by Air Liquide America.
AirRaider™
MTBE pump and treat system by Product Level Control, Inc.
AirRide
Density contolling system for compost in-feed by the former Waste Solu-
tions.
Airsep
Aerated grit collector system by USFilter/Aerator Products.
AirSep®
Pressure swing adsorption oxygen systems by AirSep Corp.
AirTainer™
Tank cover by NuTech Environmental Corp.
air-to-cloth ratio
Bag house application criteria which is the ratio of the air ﬂow
line to net cloth area.
air-to-water ratio
Air stripping application criteria indicating the volume of air
required per volume of water to remove volatile contaminants.
Airvac®
Vacuum sewage collection system by Airvac, Inc.
AISC
American Institute of Steel Construction.
AISI
American Iron and Steel Institute.
AIWPS
Advanced Integrated Wastewater Pond System.
Akta Klor
Sodium chlorite solution by Vulcan Performance Chemicals.
Aktivox
Selective oxidant with speciﬁcity for sulﬁdes by Vulcan Performance
Chemicals.
AL
Acceptable level.
alabaster
A compact, ﬁne-grained gypsum material.
alachlor
A herbicide used mainly to control weeds in corn and soybean ﬁelds and
marketed under the trade name Lasso.
ALAPCO
Association of Local Air Pollution Control Ofﬁcers.
Alar
Trade name for a pesticide used primarily to make apples redder, ﬁrmer, and
less likely to fall off trees prematurely.
ALARA
As low as reasonably achievable.
Albrivap
High temperature additive for evaporators by Albright & Wilson Americas.
Alcoﬁx®
Inorganic coagulant by Ciba Specialty Chemicals.
alcohol
A class of compounds containing the hydroxyl group OH.
aldehyde
A class of organic compounds produced by the oxidation of alcohols
containing a CHO group including formaldehyde and acetylaldehyde.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

aldicarb
An insecticide made from ethyl isocyanate and sold under the trade name
Temik.
aldrin
An insecticide and suspected carcinogen which has been banned for agri-
cultural use by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
alga
The singular form of “algae.”
algae
Primitive, free-ﬂoating, plant-like aquatic organisms whose biological activ-
ity affect the pH and dissolved oxygen content in a water body.
Algae Sweep Automation
Automated clariﬁer algae sweep system by Ford Hall
Co., Inc.
AlgaeMonitor
On-line ﬂuorometer to monitor relative algae levels in a water
system by Turner Designs.
algal bloom
A rapidly reproducing ﬂoating colony of algae that may cover a
stream, lake, or reservoir, creating a nuisance condition.
AlgaSORB®
Ion exchange medium for heavy metal removal by Bio-Recovery
Systems, Inc.
algicide
Any substance used to kill algae. Also “algaecide.”
aliphatic compounds
Organic compounds with carbon atoms arranged in a
straight or branched chain, rather than a ring.
aliquot
The amount of a sample used for analysis.
Alizair®
Fixed growth biotreat system for removal of odorous compounds from
wastewater by USFilter/Krüger and OTV.
alkali
A substance with highly basic properties.
alkali metals
The elements lithium, sodium, potassium, rubidium, and cesium.
alkaline
Water containing sufﬁcient amounts of alkalinity to raise the pH above 7.0.
alkaline soil
Soil with a pH greater than 7.0.
alkalinity
The ability of a water to neutralize an acid due to the presence of
carbonate, bicarbonate, and hydroxide ions.
Alkalinity First™
Sodium bicarbonate by Church & Dwight Co. Inc.
alkaloid
Any of a group of organic compounds containing nitrogen and having
alkaline properties including caffeine, cocaine, morphine, nicotine, and
strychnine.
alkalosis
Abnormal condition in the body resulting from an excess alkalinity and
an increased blood and tissue pH, often caused by exposure to low-oxygen
air found at high altitudes.
Alka-Pro®
Process control system for biological wastewater treatment systems by
USFilter/Davco.
All Climate™
Field-erected package wastewater plant by USFilter/Davco.
allergen
A substance inducing an allergic state or reaction.
allergy
A hypersensitivity to a particular substance such as food, pollen, or dust
that causes the immune system to overreact to the substance.
Allied Colloids
Former name of Ciba Specialty Chemicals.
Allis-Chalmers
Former name of A-C Compressor Corp.
Allison
Internally fed rotating drum screen by KRC (Hewitt) Inc.
allotropy
The ability of an element to exist naturally in different forms in the same
solid, liquid, or gaseous state.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

alluvial soil
Soil formed of material that was carried by ﬂowing water before being
deposited.
alpha factor
The ratio of oxygen transfer coefﬁcients for water and wastewater
at the same temperature and pressure; used in the sizing of aeration equipment.
alpha particle
A positively charged atomic particle composed of two neutrons
and two protons released by some atoms undergoing radioactive decay.
alpha radiation
A stream of positively charged particles released from radioactive
isotopes.
alpha ray
A stream of particles emitting from the nucleus of a helium atom
undergoing disintegration.
alpine tundra
An ecosystem found at high altitudes, above the timberline, char-
acterized by mosses, lichens, and low-growing herbaceous plants.
ALR
Action leakage rate.
alternative energy
Energy obtained from sources other than traditional fossil fuels
or nuclear energy, and which are usually renewable and nonpolluting. Alter-
native energy sources include solar energy, wave power, wind power, geother-
mal power, and biomass fuels.
alum
Common name for aluminum sulfate, frequently used as a coagulant in water
and wastewater treatment. Chemical formula is Al2(SO4)3.
alum sludge
Sludge resulting from treatment process where alum is used as a
coagulant.
Alumadome
Self supporting aluminum covers for circular tanks by Conservatek
Industries, Inc.
Alumavault
Self supporting aluminum covers for rectangular tanks by Conser-
vatek Industries, Inc.
alumina
A form of aluminum oxide, also called “corundum” or “emery.” Chemical
formula is Al203.
aluminum
A lightweight, nonferrous metal with good corrosion resistance and
electrical and thermal conductivity. Chemical symbol is Al.
aluminum chlorohydrate (ACH)
Water treatment coagulant.
aluminum sulfate
See “alum.”
AlumStor
Modular liquid storage tank and feed system by ModuTank, Inc.
Alundum
Porous diffuser dome by Sanitaire Corp.
Alusil 70™
Custom-activated zeolites by Selecto, Inc.
amalgam
An alloy of mercury with one or more other metals. Silver amalgam is
used as a dental ﬁlling.
Amazon™
Pulse jet baghouse ﬁlter bags by W.L. Gore & Associates, Inc.
Amberjet®
Ion exchange resins by Rohm & Haas, Co.
Amberlite®
Ion exchange resins by Rohm & Haas, Co.
Amberpack™
Ion exchange resins by Rohm & Haas, Co.
Ambersomb®
Carbonaceous adsorbent for VOC removal by Rohm & Haas Co.
ambient air quality
A general term used to describe the condition of the outdoor
air.
amendment
Organic material or bulking agent such as wood chips or sawdust added
to municipal solids in a composting operation to promote uniform air ﬂow.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Amerﬂoc®
Polyelectrolyte used to enhance liquid/solid separation by Ashland
Chemical, Drew Industrial.
America Norit
Former name of Norit Americas Inc.
American Well Works
Former name of Amwell Inc.
Ameroid
Polyelectrolyte used to enhance liquid/solid separation by Ashland
Chemical, Drew Division.
Amersep®
Coagulants and metal precipitants used in water and wastewater treat-
ment by Ashland Chemical, Drew Industrial.
amines
A group of compounds that are derivatives of ammonia with a hydrocarbon
group replacing one or more of the hydrogen atoms.
amino acid
A group of organic acids containing an amino group (NH2) and a
carboxyl group (COOH) that link together to form the proteins necessary for
all life.
Aminodan™ Process
Process water treatment and recovery process by Biothane
Corp.
AmmonAsorb™
Activated carbon product by Waterlink/Barnebey Sutcliffe.
ammonia
A compound of hydrogen and nitrogen that occurs extensively in nature.
Chemical formula is NH3.
ammonia nitrogen
The quantity of elemental nitrogen present in the form of
ammonia and the ammonium ion.
ammoniator
A device used to feed gaseous ammonia.
ammoniﬁcation
Bacterial decomposition of organic nitrogen to ammonia.
ammonium ion
A form of ammonia found in solution, the ion NH4+.
ammonium nitrate
A cystalline salt used as a source of nitrogen in the manufac-
ture of some fertilizers and explosives. Chemical formula is NH4NO3.
amoeba
A single-celled protozoan microbe. Also spelled “ameba.”
amoebiasis
See “amoebic dysentery.” Also spelled “amebiases.”
amoebic dysentery
A form of dysentery caused by a protozoan parasite, usually
resulting from poor sanitary conditions and transmitted by contaminated food
or water. Also spelled “amebic dysentery.”
amoebicide
Any substance used to kill amoebas, either medicinally for treatment
of amoebic dysentery or to sterilize water. Also spelled “amebicide.”
amorphous
Non-crystalline, having no deﬁnite shape or form.
AMOS
Air Management Oversight System.
amperometric titrator
Titration device containing an internal indicator or elec-
trometric device to show when the reactions are complete.
amphibian
(1) A member of the Amphibia class of cold blooded, scaleless verte-
brates which includes frogs and salamanders. (2) A plant or animal that can
live both on land or in water.
Amphidrome™
Fixed-ﬁlm sequencing batch biological ﬁlter by Tetra Process
Technologies.
Ampho-Mag™
Magnesia compound to absorb and buffer chemical spills by Pre-
mier Chemicals.
amphoteric
Capable of reacting in water either as a weak acid or weak base.
AMSA
Association of Metropolitan Sewer(age) Agencies.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

anabatic wind
A localized wind that ﬂows up valley or mountainous slopes,
usually in the afternoon, caused by the replacement of cool valley air with the
warmer, heated air above it.
anabiosis
A temporary state of suspended animation undergone by some aquatic
organisms to survive periods of drought.
anabolism
The process in a plant or animal in which food is metabolized into
complex compounds such as protein and living tissue.
anaerobe
An organism that can thrive in the absence of free oxygen.
anaerobic
Condition characterized by the absence of free oxygen.
anaerobic digestion
Sludge stabilization process where the organic material in
biological sludges are converted to methane and carbon dioxide in an airtight
reactor.
Anaerobic Selector Process
Biological system for phosphorus and BOD removal
by USFilter/Davco.
Analite
Portable turbidimeters by Advanced Polymer Systems.
analyte
The chemical for which a sample is analyzed.
ANC
See “acid neutralizing capacity (ANC).”
An-CAT®
Polymer processing control unit by Norchem Industries.
ancillary equipment
Devices such as piping, ﬂanges, valves, and pumps which
are used in conjunction with treatment process or system.
Anco
Batch mixers by Enviropax, Inc.
anemometer
An instrument used to measure the force or velocity of wind.
aneroid barometer
An instrument used to measure atmospheric pressure which
operates on the movement of a thin metal plate rather than the rise and fall of
mercury.
angle of repose
The maximum angle the inclined surface of a loosely divided
material can make with the horizontal.
Angstrom (Å)
A unit of measure equivalent to one ten-thousandth of a micron.
anhydride
A chemical compound derived by the elimination of water.
anhydrite
See “calcium sulfate.”
anhydrous
A compound or substance that does not contain water.
animal unit (AU)
A unit for establishing grazing pressures from different kinds
of grazing animals which consume similar kinds of forage, where 1AU is
equivalent to the weight of 1 cow and 1 calf set at 454 kg.
anion
A negatively charged ion that migrates to the anode when an electrical
potential is applied to a solution.
anion exchange
An ion exchange process in which anions in solution are
exchanged for other anions bound to an ion exchange resin or medium.
anionic polymer
A polyelectrolyte with a net negative electrical charge.
Anitron
Biological ﬂuidized bed wastewater treatment system by USFilter/Krüger.
ANM™
Nanoﬁltration softening membrane by TriSep Corp.
annelid
A wormlike organism, including earthworms and leeches, which have
long, segmented bodies.
Annubar®
Mass ﬂow monitoring system by Dieterich Standard.
anode
The positive electrode where current leaves an electrolytic solution.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

anodic protection
Electrochemical corrosion protection achieved through the use
of an anode having a higher electrode potential than the metal to be protected.
anoxia
A condition in which the blood oxygen level is less than normal.
anoxic
Condition characterized by the absence of free oxygen.
ANOX-R
Advanced treatment industrial wastewater treatment system by USFil-
ter/Davco.
ANPRM
Advance Notice for Public Rulemaking. An EPA program for holding
public forums for potential changes to the federal Water Quality Standard
regulations.
ANSI
American National Standards Institute.
antagonism
Interference or inhibition of the effect of one chemical by the action
of another.
antarctic
Characteristic of the region, climate, or vegetation south of the Antarctic
Circle.
Antarctic Circle
An imaginary circle parallel to the equator at latitude 66°34′
south.
Anthozoa
A class of saltwater polyps including corals and sea anemones.
anthracite
A hard, black coal containing a high percentage of ﬁxed carbon, a low
percentage of volatile matter, and burns with little or no smoke.
anthracosis
A lung disease more commonly known as “black lung disease.”
Anthraﬁlt®
Filter anthracite by Uniﬁlt Corp.
anthropodust
Fugitive dust generated from human activities.
anthropogenic climate change
Human-induced global warming caused primarily
by carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide emissions from engine exhausts,
as well as respiration of humans and animals.
anthropogenic compounds
Compounds created by human beings, often relatively
resistant to biodegradation.
antichlors
Reagents such as sulfur dioxide, sodium bisulﬁte, and sodium thiosul-
fate which can be used to remove excess chlorine residuals from water by
conversion to an inert salt.
anti-degradation clause
See “prevention of signiﬁcant deterioration (PSD).”
antifoam agent
A surface active agent used to reduce or prevent foaming.
antifoulant
An additive or dispersant that prevents fouling and/or the formation
of scale.
antigen
A substance capable of stimulating an immune response.
antiknock additive
A compound, usually tetraethyl lead, added to gasoline to
minimize engine pre-ignition and its’ accompanying knocking or pinging.
Pollution from the release of these compounds in auto emissions led to the
introduction of nonleaded gasoline.
antioxidant
A substance that slows down or prevents oxidation of another substance.
antiscalant
An additive that prevents the formation of inorganic scale.
Any Credible Evidence rule (ACE rule)
Another name for EPA Clean Air Act
“Credible Evidence rule.”
AOB
Ammonia-oxidizing bacteria.
AOC
See “assimilable organic carbon (AOC).”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

AOPs
See “advanced oxidation processes (AOP).”
AOT
Advanced oxidation technologies.
AOX
See “adsorbable organic halides (AOX).”
APCA
Air Pollution Control Association.
APER
Air pollution emissions report.
APF
See “assigned protective factor (APF).”
APHA
American Public Health Association.
API
American Petroleum Institute.
API gravity
An index inversely related to speciﬁc gravity used to identify liquid
hydrocarbons.
API separator
Rectangular basin in which wastewater ﬂows horizontally while
free oil rises and is skimmed from the surface.
APOVAC®
Anti-pollution vacuum system for solvent recovery by Rosenmund, Inc.
apparent color
The color in water caused by the presence of suspended solids.
approach velocity
The average water velocity of ﬂuid in a channel upstream of
a screen or other obstruction.
APR
See “air purifying respirator (APR).”
APTI
Air Pollution Training Institute.
APWA
American Public Works Association.
AQCCT
Air-quality criteria and control techniques.
AQCP
Air Quality Control Program.
AQCR
Air Quality Control Region.
AQRV
See “air quality related value (AQRV).”
AQTX
Aquatic toxicity.
Aqua Bear
Medium density foam pipeline cleaners by Girard Industries, Inc.
Aqua Criss Cross
Medium density coated foam pipeline cleaners by Girard Indus-
tries, Inc.
Aqua Guard®
Self cleaning bar screen by Parkson Corp.
Aqua Pigs™
Polyurethane foam pipeline cleaners by Girard Industries, Inc.
Aqua Swab
Soft polyurethane pipeline cleaners by Girard Industries, Inc.
Aqua UV™
Ultraviolet water disinfection systems by Trojan Technologies, Inc.
Aqua-4™
Surface water treatment plant by Smith & Loveless, Inc.
AquaABF™
Traveling bridge type automatic backwash package ﬁlter by Aqua-
Aerobic Systems, Inc.
Aquabelt®
Gravity belt thickener by Ashbrook Corp. (U.S.) Simon-Hartley, Ltd.
(U.K.).
AquaCalc
Open channel ﬂow computer by JBS Instruments.
AquaCAM-D
Aerator/mixer/decanter for use in sequencing batch reactor by Aqua-
Aerobic Systems, Inc.
Aqua-Carb
Activated carbon by USFilter/Westates.
Aqua-Cat®
Sulﬁde conversion process to control odors by USFilter/Gas Technol-
ogies.
Aqua-Cell™
Package water treatment plant by WesTech Engineering Inc.
Aquaclaire™
Wastewater treatment systems by DAS International, Inc.
Aquacode
Membrane vessels by Spaulding Composites Co.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

aquaculture
The managed production of ﬁsh or shellﬁsh in a pond or lagoon.
AquaDDM®
Direct drive mixers by Aqua-Aerobics Systems, Inc.
AquaDecant®
Floating decanter by AquaTurbo Systems.
Aquadene™
Corrosion and scale control products by Stiles-Kem Division, Met
Pro Corp.
AquaDisk™
Woven cloth tertiary ﬁlter by Aqua-Aerobic Systems, Inc.
Aquafeed®
Reverse osmosis antiscalants by B.F. Goodrich Co.
Aqua-Fer™
Well water treatment plant designed for iron removal by Smith &
Loveless, Inc.
Aqua-Fix™
Dissolved ionic contaminant removal system by ATA Technologies
Corp.
Aquaﬂow
Former name of product group acquired by USFilter/Industrial Waste-
water Systems.
Aqua-Jet®
Direct drive aerators by Aqua-Aerobics Systems, Inc.
Aqua-Lator®
High speed ﬂoating aerator by USFilter/Aerator Products.
AquaLift®
Screw pump by Parkson Corp.
Aquamag®
Magnesium hydroxide by Premier Chemicals.
AquaMax™
Desalination evaporator antiscalant by BetzDearborn, Inc.
Aquamite®
Electrodialysis water treatment systems by Ionics, Inc.
AquaMJA™
Manifold jet aerator by Aqua-Aerobic Systems, Inc.
Aquaport®
Seawater desalination system by Ambient Technologies, Inc.
Aquaray®
Ultraviolet disinfection system by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
Aquaritrol®
Coagulant control system using a programmable controller by USFil-
ter/Microﬂoc.
Aquarius®
Modular water treatment plant by USFilter/Microﬂoc.
AquaSBR®
Sequencing batch reactor by Aqua-Aerobics Systems, Inc.
Aquascan
On-line VOC monitor by Sentex Systems, Inc.
Aqua-Scrub™
Powdered activated carbon adsorption system by USFilter/Westates.
AquaSEAL™
Sequencing extended aeration lagoon system by Aqua-Aerobics
Systems, Inc.
Aqua-Sensor
Control system for water softener regeneration by Culligan Interna-
tional Corp.
Aquashade®
Aquatic plant growth control by Applied Biochemists, Inc.
Aqua-Shear
Mixer by Flow Process Technologies, Inc.
Aquasorb®
Carbon adsorption treatment systems by Hadley Industries.
Aquasource®
Membrane system by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
Aquaspir®
Shaftless dewatering screw by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc.
Aquastore®
Storage tanks by A.O. Smith Engineered Storage Products.
Aquatair
Packaged biological wastewater treatment plant by BCA Industrial Con-
trols, Ltd.
Aquatec®
Solid media contact ﬁlter vessels by Colloid Environmental Technolo-
gies Co.
Aquatech Systems
Former name of Aqualytics, Inc.
aquatic humic substances (AHS)
Humic substances in true solution that exhibit
colloidal properties.
Aquatreat™
Sequencing batch reactor by EnviroSystems Supply.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Aqua-Trim™
Tray-type air stripper by Delta Cooling Towers, Inc.
AquaTurbo®
Surface aerator and mixer products by AquaTurbo Systems.
Aquavap
Vapor compression type evaporator by Licon, Inc.
Aqua-View
Particle measuring system by Particle Measuring Systems, Inc.
Aquaward®
Tablet feeder disinfection system by Exceltec International Corp.
Aquazur V®
Rapid sand gravity ﬁlter by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
aqueduct
A conduit for carrying running water.
aqueous
Something made up of, similar to, or containing water.
aqueous chlorine
Term used to describe chlorine or chlorine compounds dis-
solved in water, often mistakenly called “liquid chlorine.”
aqueous solution
A solution in which water is the solvent.
aquiclude
A low-permeability underground rock formation that absorbs water
slowly but will not allow its free passage.
aquifer
A subsurface geological formation containing a large quantity of water.
aquifuge
An underground layer of impermeable rock that will not allow the free
passage of groundwater.
Aquilair®
Oxidation process for removal of VOC compounds from wastewater by
USFilter/Krüger (North America) and OTV.
AQuit™
Sulﬁde control product by USFilter/Davis Process.
Aquox™
Potassium permanganate by Nalon Chemical, distributed by American
International Chemical, Inc.
arable
Land capable of being farmed.
ARAR
Applicable or relevant and appropriate requirements. Cleanup standards,
control standards and other substantive environmental protection requirements,
criteria, and limitations promulgated under federal, state, and local laws.
Arc Screen™
Self cleaning curved bar screen by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
ARCC
American Rivers Conservation Council.
Archimedes’ principle
The principle of buoyancy which states that the force on
a submerged body acts vertically upward through the center of gravity of the
displaced ﬂuid and is equal to the weight of the ﬂuid displaced.
Archimedes’ screw pump
See “screw pump.”
archipelago
A group or chain of many islands.
arctic
Characteristic of the region, climate, or vegetation north of the Arctic Circle.
Arctic Circle
An imaginary circle parallel to the equator at latitude 66°34′ north.
Arcticaer
High speed surface aerator with submersible motor by USFilter/Aerator
Products.
area source
Any small source of non-natural air pollution that is released over a
relatively small area but which cannot be classiﬁed as a point source, including
vehicles and other small engines, small businesses and household activities.
Argo Scientiﬁc
Former name of BetzDearborn-Argo District.
ARI
Sulfur recovery and odor control product line by USFilter/Gas Technologies.
ARI
See “average rainfall intensity (ARI).”
Aria™
Water treatment system by Pall Corp.
Aries™
Filtration air scour technology by Roberts Filter Group.
arithmetic mean
The sum of a set of observations divided by the number of
observations.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Arm & Hammer®
Sodium bicarbonate by Church & Dwight Co. Inc.
Armco
Former sluice gate manufacturer acquired by Hydro Gate Corp.
Arna®
Ultraviolet disinfection system by Arlat, Inc.
aromatics
A group of hydrocarbon compounds, including benzene, containing a
closed ring structure.
array
(1) A staged arrangement of membrane elements in a system. (2) A group
of solar collection devices arranged in a suitable pattern to efﬁciently collect
solar energy.
Arro-Care®
Reverse osmosis maintenance and support services by USFilter/Rock-
ford.
Arro-Cleaning®
Membrane care services by USFilter/Rockford.
Arrowhead®
Water treatment product line by USFilter/Rockford.
arroyo
A stream or watercourse that is often dry.
ARS™
Air regulated siphon by John Meunier, Inc.
arsenic
A naturally occurring element that is toxic to humans at very low levels.
Chemical formula is As.
arsenicals
Pesticides containing arsenic.
Artco
Applied Regenerative Technologies Co.
artesian water
Bottled water from a well that taps a conﬁned aquifer which is
located above the normal water table.
artesian well
A well with sufﬁcient pressure to produce water without pumping.
arthropod
Any of the largest phylum of invertebrate animals including insects
and crustaceans having segmented bodies, exoskeletons, and jointed legs
occurring in pairs.
Arus Andritz
Former name of Andritz-Ruthner, Inc.
ASA
Algae sweep automation system by Ford Hall Co., Inc.
ASB
Aerated stabilization basin.
asbestos
A mineral ﬁber, positively identiﬁed as a carcinogen, that does not con-
duct heat or electricity and formerly in wide use in the building industry for
thermal insulation, soundprooﬁng, rooﬁng, and electrical insulation.
asbestos cement pipe
Pipe manufactured of a mixture of asbestos ﬁber and Port-
land cement.
asbestos-containing material
Construction materials that contain more than one
percent asbestos.
asbestos-containing waste materials (ACWM)
Mill tailings or any waste that
contains commercial asbestos and is generated by a source covered by the
Clean Air Act Asbestos NESHAPS.
asbestosis
A chronic lung disease caused by exposure or inhalation of asbestos
ﬁbers.
as-built drawings
The original plans and speciﬁcations prepared for construction
and corrected to reﬂect how a facility was actually built or installed.
A-scale sound level (dBA)
A modiﬁcation of the decibel scale that approximates
the sensitivity of the human ear used to note the instensity or annoyance of
noise pollution.
ASCE
American Society of Civil Engineers.
Asdor
Former name of USFilter/Asdor.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ASDWA
Association of State Drinking Water Administrators.
aseptic
The state of being free of pathogenic organisms.
ash
The nonvolatile inorganic solids that remain after incineration.
Ashaire
Aerator product line by USFilter/Aerator Products.
Ashbrook-Simon-Hartley
Former name of Ashbrook Corp.
Ashﬁx™
A process to stabilize heavy metals in sludge and ash by Ashland Chem-
ical, Drew Industrial.
ASHRAE
American Society of Heating, Refrigeration, and Air Conditioning
Engineers.
Asiatic clam
A fresh water clam originally found in Southeast Asia and introduced
in the U.S. in 1938.
ASME
American Society of Mechanical Engineers.
Aspergillus fumigatus
Airborne fungi that may result from composting opera-
tions which may cause human ear, lung, and sinus infections.
asphalt-rubber
A mixture of ground rubber and bituminous concrete used as a
pavement interlayer to reduce stress and prevent cracking.
asphyxiant
A vapor or gas such as carbon monoxide that can cause unconscious-
ness or death by suffocation.
Aspi-Jet™
Aspirating aerator by Aqua-Aerobic Systems, Inc.
aspirating aerator
Aeration device using a motor driven propeller to draw atmo-
spheric air into the turbulence caused by the propeller to cause the formation
of small bubbles.
aspirator
A hydraulic device that creates a negative pressure by forcing liquid
through a restriction and increasing the velocity head.
ASQC
American Society for Quality Control.
ASR
See “atmosphere supplying respirator (ASR).”
assay
A test for a particular chemical or effect.
assigned protective factor (APF)
Respirator designation indicating how much
contaminant will be reduced with proper respiratory ﬁt and wear. An APF of
5 indicates that if a cubic meter of air contains 10 mg of contaminant, the
effective exposure would be 10/5 or 2 mg/cu m.
assimilable organic carbon (AOC)
The portion of dissolved organic carbon that
is easily used by microbes as a carbon source.
assimilation
The ability of a body of water to purify itself of pollutants.
assimilative capacity
The ability of a water body to receive wastewater and toxic
materials without deleterious effects on aquatic life or the humans who con-
sume the water.
AST
Aboveground storage tanks.
ASTM
American Society for Testing and Materials.
Astrasand®
Continuously cleaned sand ﬁlter by Astraco Water Engineering.
Astraseparator®
Inclined plate settler by Astraco Water Engineering.
asymmetric membrane
Membranes that are not reversible and can only desali-
nate efﬁciently in one direction.
Asymmetrix™
Membrane cartridge ﬁlter by USFilter/Filtration & Separation.
AT®
Ozone generator by Ozonia North America.
ATAD
See “autothermal thermophilic aerobic digestion (ATAD).”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Atara
Former manufacturer of digester gas mixing equipment whose product line
was acquired by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
ATD™
Autotherm aerobic sludge digestion system by CBI Walker, Inc.
Athos
Wet air oxidation process by USFilter/Krüger (North America) and OTV.
ATI
Analytical Technology, Inc.
ATL®
Aero Tec Laboratories, Inc.
Atlantes Chemical Systems
Former name of Hofﬂand Environmental, Inc.
ATLAS™
Advanced technology lagoon aeration system by Environmental
Dynamics Inc.
atm
See “atmosphere.”
atmometer
An instrument used to measure the evaporative capacity of the air.
atmosphere
(1) The gaseous region that surrounds the earth. (2) A unit of pressure
equal to 1.0333 kg/sq cm or 14.7 psi. Abbreviated “atm.”
atmosphere supplying respirator (ASR)
A respirator which supplies air or oxy-
gen to the user.
atmospheric corrosion
Corrosion resulting from exposure to the atmosphere.
atmospheric pressure
The force exerted by the weight of the atmosphere above
the point of measurement. At sea level, this pressure equals 101.3 kPa
(14.7 psi), 760 mm (29.9 inches) of mercury column, or 10.3 m (33.9 feet) of
water column.
Atochem
Former name of Elf Atochem North America, Inc.
atoll
A circular reef enclosing a shallow lagoon.
atom
The smallest unit of an element that retains the characteristics of that element.
Atomerator®
Pressure aerator for iron oxidation by USFilter/General Filter.
atomic absorption spectrophotometry (AA)
A highly sensitive instrumental
technique for measuring trace quantities of elements in water.
atomize
To divide a liquid into extremely ﬁne particles.
atomizer
An instrument through which a liquid is sprayed to produce a ﬁne mist.
ATP
(1) Average transmembrane pressure. (2) See “adenosine triphosphate
(ATP).” (3) See “advanced treatment plant (ATP).”
ATP™
Aerobic thermophilic process sludge treatment system by CBI Walker, Inc.
ATS™
Sorbent media product line by Engelhard Corp.
ATSDR
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry.
attached growth process
See “ﬁxed ﬁlm process.”
attainment area
A geographic area in which the levels of a criteria air pollutant
meet the health-based National Ambient Air Quality Standard for that pollutant.
attenuation
The process by which a compound is reduced in concentration over time,
through absorption, adsorption, degradation, dilution, and/or transformation.
attractant
A chemical or agent that lures insects or other pests by stimulating
their sense of smell.
AU
See “animal unit (AU).”
Auger Monster®
Modular screen/grinder/solids removal unit for wastewater head-
works system by JWC Environmental.
Aurora UV™
Ultraviolet disinfection system by Calgon Carbon Corp.
Austgen-Biojet
Former name of ABJ product group of Sanitaire Corp.
Auto5™
Stack sampling system by Andersen Instruments, Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

AutoBelt
Rotary vacuum ﬁlter formerly offered by Walker Process Equipment.
autochthonous
A rock formation, organic matter, or substance that is produced
or originates in the place where it is found.
autoclave
A device that sterilizes materials by exposure to pressurized steam.
Auto-Clean
Dissolved oxygen sensor by Analytical Technology, Inc.
Auto-Cleanse
Self-cleaning pump station with differential pressure activated ﬂush
valve by ITT Flygt Corp.
Autocon
Product group integrated within USFilter/Control Systems.
Auto-Dox
Controlled aeration weir by Purestream, Inc.
autogenous combustion
Burning that occurs when the heat of combustion of a
wet organic material or sludge is sufﬁcient to vaporize the water and maintain
combustion without auxiliary fuel.
autogenous temperature
Equilibrium temperature in sludge combustion where the
heat input from the fuel equals the heat losses, and combustion is self-supporting.
autoignition temperature
The minimum temperature at which a substance ignites
without application of a ﬂame or spark.
Auto-Jet®
Pressure leaf ﬁlter by USFilter/Whittier.
Autojust
Automatic feedwell gate controller for circular sludge collectors by
USFilter/Aerator Products.
automatic sampling
Collecting samples of prescribed volume over a deﬁned time
period by an apparatus designed to operate remotely without direct manual
control.
auto-oxidation
A self-induced oxidation process.
Autopress
High throughput automatic ﬁlter press by USFilter/Dewatering Systems.
Auto-Pulse™
Tubular backpulse ﬁlter by USFilter/Whittier.
Auto-Rake®
Reciprocating rake bar screen by Franklin Miller, Inc.
autoreactive
A compound that is reactive under normal conditions and does not
require heat, additional compounds, or a change in conditions.
Auto-Retreat
Automatic bar screen control system by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
AutoSDI™
Portable, computer-based silt density index instrument by King Lee
Technologies.
Auto-Shell™
Granular media ﬁlter by USFilter/Whittier.
Auto-Shok™
Tube-type vertical pressure leaf ﬁlter by USFilter/Whittier.
Auto-Skimmer™
Skimmer used to remove ﬂoating hydrocarbons from water wells
by Science Application International Corp.
AutoTherm™
Aerobic thermophilic digestion system by CBI Walker, Inc.
autothermal thermophilic aerobic digestion (ATAD)
A biological digestion sys-
tem that converts soluble organics to lower-energy forms through anaerobic,
fermentative, and aerobic processes at thermophilic temperatures.
autothermic combustion
See “autogenous combustion.”
Autotravel
Traveling bridge sludge collectors by Simon-Hartley, Ltd.
Autotrol
Rotating biological contactors product line by USFilter/Envirex.
autotroph
Organism that derives its cell carbon from carbon dioxide.
Auto-Vac®
Rotary drum ﬁlter by Alar Engineering Corp.
autoxidation
A spontaneous process in which a compound is oxidized, usually in
the presence of oxygen, but other compounds can act as electron acceptors.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

available chlorine
A measure of the amount of chlorine available in chlorinated
lime, hypochlorite compounds, and other materials used as a source of chlorine
when compared with that of liquid or gaseous chlorine.
average daily ﬂow (ADF)
The total ﬂow past a point over a period of time divided
by the number of days in that period.
average ﬂow
The arithmatic average of ﬂows measured at a given point.
average rainfall intensity (ARI)
A measurement of rainfall per unit of time.
Avery Filter
Recessed chamber ﬁlter press by Komline-Sanderson, Engineering
Corp.
AVGF®
Automatic valveless gravity ﬁlter by USFilter/Warren.
AWI
Anthratech Western, Inc.
AWS
American Welding Society.
AWT
See “advanced wastewater treatment (AWT).”
AWWA
American Water Works Association.
AWWARF
American Water Works Association Research Foundation.
axial ﬂow
The ﬂow of ﬂuid in the same direction as the axis of symmetry of a
tank or basin.
axial ﬂow pump
A type of centrifugal pump in which ﬂuid ﬂow remains parallel
to the ﬂow path and develops most of its head by the lifting action of the vanes.
Azenit
Biological wastewater treatment process technology by USFilter/Krüger
(North America) and OTV.
azeotropic
A liquid of two or more substances that behaves like a single substance
in that the vapor produced by partial evaporation has the same composition
as the liquid.
Aztec®
Chlorine/oxidant residual analyzer by Capital Controls Co.
B
B-10 life
The rated life deﬁning the number of revolutions that 90% of a group
of identical bearings will complete before ﬁrst evidence of failure develops.
Also known as “L-10 life.”
B2A™
Multi-media biological ﬁlter by USFilter/Krüger (North America) and OTV.
Babcock Water Engineering
Former name of CASS Water Engineering, Inc.
BAC
Biologically active carbon.
bacilli
Rod-shaped bacteria.
back pressure
Pressure due to a force operating in a direction opposite to that
required.
backﬁll
The material used to reﬁll a ditch or excavation, or the process of reﬁlling.
backﬂow
Flow reversal in a water distribution system that may result in contam-
ination due to a cross connection.
backﬂow prevention device
Device used to prevent cross connection, or backﬂow
of nonpotable water into potable water system.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

background concentration
The general level of air pollutants in a region with all
local sources of pollution ignored.
background contamination
Contamination introduced accidentally into dilution
waters, reagents, rinse water, or solvents which can be confused with constit-
uents in the sample being analyzed.
background level
The concentration of pollutants in a deﬁnite area during a ﬁxed
period of time prior to starting up a source of emission undercontrol.
background organic matter (BOM)
Natural organic matter in a mixture with
one or more speciﬁc organic chemicals.
background radiation
Nuclear radiation arising from within the human body and
normal surroundings.
background soil pH
The pH of the soil prior to the addition of substances that
alter the hydrogen ion concentration.
backsiphonage
A backﬂow of water of questionable quality that results from a
negative pressure within water distribution system.
backwash
A high-rate reversal of ﬂow for the purpose of cleaning or removing
solids from a ﬁlter bed or screening medium.
backwash rate
The ﬂow rate used during ﬁlter backwash when the direction of
ﬂow through the ﬁlter is reversed for cleaning.
BACM
Best available control measures.
BACT
Best available control technology.
bacteria
Microbes that decompose and stabilize organic matter in wastewater.
BADT
Best available demonstrated technology.
BAF
(1) See “biologically active ﬁlter.” (2) Biologically activated foam.
bafﬂe
An obstructing device or plate used to provide even distribution or to prevent
short-circuiting or vortexing of ﬂow entering a tank or vessel.
bafﬂe chamber
In incinerator design, a chamber designed to promote the settling
of ﬂy ash and coarse particulate matter by changing the direction and/or
reducing the velocity of the gases produced by the combustion of the refuse
or sludge.
Bafﬂeﬂow
Oil removal tank with permeable bafﬂes to prevent short circuiting by
Walker Process Equipment.
bagasse
The ﬁbrous residue from crushed sugar cane or sugar beet after the
extraction of sugar juice.
baghouse
An air emissions control device that uses a fabric or glass ﬁber ﬁlter to
remove airborne particulates from a gas stream.
bailer
A long pipe with a check valve at the lower end used to remove a slurry
or oil from the bottom or side of a well.
Bakﬂo
Barge mounted oil skimmer by Vikoma International Ltd.
baleﬁll
A land disposal site where solid waste material is compacted and baled
prior to disposal.
baler
A machine used to compress and bind solid recyclable materials such as
cardboard or paper.
ball valve
A valve utilizing a rotating ball with a hole through it that allows
straight-through ﬂow in the open position.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ballast water
Water used in a ship’s hold for stabilization often requiring treatment
as an oily wastewater.
Ballasted Floc Reactor™ (BFR)
Reactor-clariﬁer system by USFilter/General
Filter.
ballistic separator
A machine that sorts organic from inorganic matter for
composting.
Bamag
Former name of Lurgi Bamag GmbH.
banana-blade mixer
High ﬂow, low-shear mixer with rotating back-swept propeller.
band application
The spreading of pesticides, fertilizer, or other chemicals over,
or next to, each row of plants in a ﬁeld.
Bandit™
Raking machine by Brackett Geiger.
bandscreen
See “traveling water screen (TWS).”
bank sand
Sand excavated from a natural deposit, usually not suitable for use in
a ﬁlter processing or grading.
bar
A unit of pressure equal to 0.9869 atmospheres, 106 dynes per square centi-
meter, 100,000 pascals, and 14.5 pounds per square inch.
bar screen
A screening device using a parallel set of stationary bars typically
spaced at 25 mm (1 inch) to 50 mm (2 inches).
Bardenpho™
Biological wastewater treatment process for removal of nitrogen
and phosphorus by Baker Process.
Barminutor®
Combination bar screen and comminuting device by Yeomans Chi-
cago Corp.
barnacles
A marine crustacean with a calcareous shell that attaches itself to
submerged objects.
Barnebey & Sutcliffe
Former name of Waterlink/Barnebey Sutcliffe.
barometer
An instrument used to measure atmospheric pressure.
barometric condenser
A condenser in which vapor is condensed by direct contact
with water.
barometric damper
A pivoting plate used to regulate the amount of air entering
a duct or ﬂue to maintain a constant draft within an incinerator.
barometric leg
(1) A condensate discharge line submerged below the liquid level
of an atmospheric tank. (2) A gravity tailpipe from a vacuum barometric
condenser.
barometric pressure
Ambient or local pressure surrounding a gauge, evaporator
shell, vent pipe, etc.
barrel (bbl)
42 U.S. gallons.
barriered landscape water renovation system (BLWRS)
A wastewater treat-
ment and denitriﬁcation system where wastewater is applied to the top of a
mound of soil overlaying a water barrier and microbes oxidize soluble organics
as the water percolates through the soil.
barrier reef
A long ridge of coral built up from the sea ﬂoor that runs parallel to
the mainland but is separated from it by a deep lagoon.
Barry Rake
Trash rake by Cross Machine, Inc.
BART
Best available retroﬁt technology.
Bartlett-Snow™
Rotary calciner for soil reclamation by ABB Raymond.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

basal application
The application of pesticides on plant stems or tree trunks just
above the soil line.
base
(1) A substance that can accept a proton. (2) A substance that can react with
an acid to form a salt. (3) An alkaline substance.
baseline
A sample used as a comparative reference point when conducting further
tests or calculations.
basic water requirement (BWR)
The amount of water required by humans for
drinking, sanitation, bathing, and cooking needs to meet a minimum quality
of life, and generally considered to be 50 liters per day per person.
basicity factor
Factor used to determine neutralization capabilities of alkaline
reagents used to treat acidic wastes.
basket centrifuge
Batch-type centrifuge where sludge is introduced into a verti-
cally mounted spinning basket and separation occurs as centrifugal force drives
the solids to the wall of the basket.
basophil
A cell or substance easily stained by basic dyes. Also spelled “basophile.”
Basys Biolﬁlter
Modular air pollution control ﬁlter by Basys Technologies.
BAT
See “best available technology (BAT).”
Batch Master
Package wastewater treatment system by USFilter/Industrial Waste-
water Systems.
batch process
A noncontinuous treatment process in which a discrete quantity or
batch of liquid is treated or produced at one time.
batch reactor
A reactor where the contents are completely mixed and ﬂow is
neither entering nor leaving the reactor vessel.
Batch-Master
Bottom discharge basket centrifuge by Baker Process/Ketema.
Batch-Miser
Horizontal plate ﬁlter by Baker Process/Ketema.
Batch-O-Matic
Bottom discharge basket centrifuge by Baker Process/Ketema.
BATEA
Best available technology economically achievable and available.
bathyal zone
The ecological zone of the ocean above the abyssal zone, generally
between 200 and 3500 meters.
BATNEEC
Best available technology not entailing excessive cost.
battery limit
The boundary limits of equipment or a process unit that deﬁnes
interconnecting points for electrical piping or wiring.
Bauer®
Screening equipment product line acquired by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc.
Baumé
Designation of hydrometer scale used to indicate speciﬁc gravity.
bauxite
Ore containing alumina monohydrate or alumina trihydrate which is the
principal raw material for alumina production.
bbl
See “barrel (bbl).”
BCC
See “bioaccumulative chemicals of concern (BCC).”
BCF
(1) See “bioconcentration factor (BCF).” (2) Bead and crevice free.
BCL Screen
Back cleaned bar screen by Waste-Tech, Inc.
BCPCT
Best conventional pollutant control technology.
BCT
Best control technology.
BDAT
See “best demonstrated available technology (BDAT).”
BDCT
Best demonstrated control technology.
BDOC
See “biodegradable dissolved organic carbon (BDOC).”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

BDT
Best demonstrated technology.
beachwell
A shallow intake well making use of beach sand and structure as a ﬁlter
medium.
Bead Mover™
Ion exchange resin and ﬁlter media loading pump by IX Services
Co.
Bead Thief™
Ion exchange resin core sampler by IX Services Co.
Beaufort scale
A numerical scale of wind force where a Beaufort force 0 wind is
calm and a force 12 wind indicates hurricane force with winds in excess of
120 km/hr (75 mph).
bed depth
The depth of ﬁlter media or ion exchange resin contained in a vessel.
bed load
Sediment particles resting on or near the channel bottom that are pushed
or rolled along by the ﬂow of water.
bed volume (BV)
The volume occupied by ﬁlter media in a ﬁlter, or resin in an
ion exchange device.
bedrock
Solid rock encountered below the mantle of loose rock and soil which
occurs on the earth’s surface.
Beggiatoa
Filamentous microbe, commonly associated with sludge bulking, that
results from low dissolved oxygen levels and/or high sulﬁde levels.
BEI
See “biological exposure indexes (BEI).”
BEJ
Best engineering judgement.
Bekomat ®
Micro-processor-driven condensate trap by BEKO Condensate Sys-
tems Corp.
Bekosplit
Separation process for condensate emulsions by BEKO Condensate
Systems Corp.
Bekox
Former name of USFilter/Bekox.
Belclene®
Scale control additive by BioLab, Inc.
Belcor
Organic corrosion control by BioLab, Inc.
Belgard®
Antiscalant for seawater evaporators by BioLab, Inc.
Belite®
Antifoaming agent by BioLab, Inc.
Bellacide
Algaecide by BioLab, Inc.
BelloZon
Chlorine dioxide generator by ProMinent Fluid Controls, Inc.
Beloit-Passavant
Company acquired by USFilter/Zimpro.
Belspere®
Chemical dispersant by BioLab, Inc.
belt conveyor
A device used to transport material, consisting of an endless belt
that revolves around head and tail pulleys.
belt ﬁlter press
See “belt press.”
belt press
A dewatering device utilizing two fabric belts revolving over a series
of rollers to squeeze water from the sludge.
belt thickener
Mechanical sludge processing device that uses a revolving hori-
zontal ﬁlter belt to pre-thicken sludge prior to dewatering and/or disposal.
bench test
A small scale test or study used to determine whether a technology is
suitable for a particular application.
beneﬁcial organism
A pollinating insect, pest predator, parasite, pathogen, or
other biological control agent which functions naturally or as part of an
integrated pest management program to control another pest.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

benthal oxygen demand
The oxygen demand exerted by microbes and other
organisms living on, or in close association with, the organic mud and sludge
deposits on the bottom of a river or stream.
benthic
Relating to the bottom environment of a water body.
benthos
Microbes and other organisms living on or in close association with the
bottom of a water body.
BentoLiner™
Clay composite liner by SLT North America, Inc.
Bentomat™
Geotextile-bentonite liner by Colloid Environmental Technologies
Co.
bentonite
Colloidal clay-like mineral that can be used as a coagulant aid in water
treatment systems. Sometimes used as the earth component or soil amendment
for construction of a pond or landﬁll liner because of its low permeability.
benzene
A colorless, ﬂammable liquid with carcinogenic properties produced from
coal tar and used as a solvent. Benzene is an aromatic hydrocarbon charac-
terized by its six-sided ring structure with the chemical formula C6H6.
Bepex
Former name of Hosokawa Bepex Corp.
berm
A horizontal, earthen ridge or bank.
Bernoulli’s Equation
Energy equation commonly used to calculate head pressure,
and considers velocity head, static head, and elevation.
beryllium
An airborne metal hazardous to human health when inhaled that may
be discharged by machine shops, ceramic and propellant plants, and foundries.
best available technology (BAT)
The best technology, treatment techniques, or
other means available after considering ﬁeld, rather than solely laboratory
conditions.
best demonstrated available technology (BDAT)
A technology demonstrated in
full-scale commercial operation and shown to have statistically better perfor-
mance than other technologies.
best management practice (BMP)
The schedules of activities, methods, mea-
sures, and other accepted industry management practices to prevent pollution
of waters and facilitate compliance with applicable regulations.
Beta NOx 2000™
NOx oxidation/reduction unit by Duall Division, Met-Pro Corp.
beta particles
Electrons emitted by a radioactive nucleus.
beta radiation
A stream of beta particles released during radioactive decay.
Betz Laboratories
Former name of BetzDearborn, Inc.
BevMAX™
Reverse osmosis system for beverage industry applications by USFilter.
BFI®
Trademark of Browning-Ferris Industries, Inc.
BFR
See “Ballasted Floc Reactor™ (BFR).”
B-Gon™
Mist eliminator by Kimre Inc.
BGS2
Sludge dryer/pelletizer formerly offered by Wheelabrator Water Technolo-
gies, Inc.
BHN Probiotic
Lagoon sludge oxidation product line by Bio Huma Netics, Inc.
B-horizon
The intermediate soil layer, usually having a high clay content, where
minerals and other particles washed down from the A-horizon accumulate.
bhp
Brake horsepower. The power developed by an engine as measured by a
dynamometer applied to the shaft or ﬂywheel.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Bibbigard
Torque limitor by Brunel Corp.
Bibo
Dewatering and drainage pumps by ITT Flygt Corp.
bicarbonate
A chemical compound containing an HCO3 group.
bicarbonate alkalinity
Water alkalinity caused by bicarbonate ions.
bicarbonate hardness
Water hardness caused by calcium bicarbonate and mag-
nesium bicarbonate.
BI-CHEM
Surfactant degradation product by Sybron Chemicals, Biochemical
Division.
Bi-Chem®
Selectively adapted bacterial cultures for wastewater treatment by
Sybron Chemicals, Inc.
BIF
See “boilers and industrial furnaces (BIF).”
BIF®
Product group of BIF.
biﬂow ﬁlter
Granular media ﬁlter characterized by water ﬂow from both top and
bottom to a collector located in the center of the ﬁlter bed.
Big Dipper®
Grease removal unit by Thermaco, Inc.
bilharzia
Waterborne disease also known as “schistosomiasis.”
binary ﬁssion
Asexual reproduction in some microbes where the parent organism
splits into two independent organisms.
Bio Disk-10
Biological deodorizer by Neutraman, Inc.
Bio Dredge
A lagoon sludge oxidation process by Unisol.
Bio Genesis™
Microbial formulation to reduce wastewater odors by Bio Huma
Netics, Inc.
Bio Gro
Bio Gro Division of Wheelabrator Water Technologies, Inc.
Bio Jet-7
Organic solution of seven strains of live, non-toxic bacteria by Jet, Inc.
Bio Max™
Floating piping system by Environmental Dynamics Inc.
Bio*Fix®
Alkaline stabilization process for biosolids by Wheelabrator Water Tech-
nologies, Inc.
Bio*Lime®
Agricultural liming agent by Wheelabrator Water Technologies, Inc.
Bio/Scent™
Liquid odor neutralizer by Hinsilblon Laboratories.
BioAccelerator™
Groundwater treatment unit by Biotrol.
bioaccumulants
Substances that increase in concentration in living organisms as
they take in contaminated air, water, or food because the substances are very
slowly metabolized or excreted. See also “biological magniﬁcation.”
bioaccumulation
The process by which living organisms absorb and retain chem-
icals or elements from their environment, especially from their food.
bioaccumulative
A characteristic of a chemical whose rate of intake into a living
organism is greater than its rate of excretion or metabolism.
bioaccumulative chemicals of concern (BCC)
Chemicals including mercury,
dioxin, chlordane, DDT, and PCBs which accumulate in the environment and
represent potential risks to human health, aquatic life, and wildlife.
Bio-Activation
Combination activated sludge and trickling ﬁlter wastewater treat-
ment system by Amwell, Inc.
bioassay
An analytical method that uses living organisms to measure the effect
of a substance, factor, or condition on the environment.
bioaugmentation
A method of cleaning up pollution by inoculating a site with
speciﬁc contaminant-targeted microbes in high density.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Biobed
Wastewater treatment plant by Biothane Corp.
biobrick
A kiln-dried building brick with an organic component provided by
municipal wastewater solids.
BioCam
Wastewater treatment system utilizing conditioned anaerobic methano-
gens by Parkson Corp.
Biocarb™
Activated carbon by USFilter/Westates.
Biocarbone®
Biological wastewater treatment process using immersed ﬁxed bed
ﬁlter by USFilter/Krüger.
Biocel
Modular bioﬁltration system for VOC reduction by Envirogen.
biochemical oxidation
Oxidative reactions brought about by biological activity
which result in chemical combination of oxygen with organic matter.
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)
A standard measure of wastewater strength
that quantiﬁes the oxygen consumed in a stated period of time; usually 5 days
and at 20°C.
Biocidal™
Sodium hypochlorite system by Scienco/FAST Systems.
biocide
A chemical used to inhibit or control the population of troublesome microbes.
Bio-Clariﬁer
Secondary clariﬁer with rotating sludge scoop for use with package
rotating biological contactor by USFilter/Envirex.
Bioclean
Reverse osmosis membrane cleaner by BetzDearborn-Argo District.
Bioclere™
Packaged wastewater treatment plants by Ekoﬁnn Bioclere.
bioconcentration
The net increase in concentration of a substance in plants and
animals above what is found in the natural surroundings.
bioconcentration factor (BCF)
The accumulation of chemicals that live in con-
taminated environments equal to the quotient of the concentration of a sub-
stance in aquatic organisms divided by the concentration in the water during
the same time period.
Biocontact®
Biological aerated ﬁlter by Ekokan.
biocontactor
A unit process such as an aeration basin, trickling ﬁlter, RBC, or
digester where microbes degrade/transform organic matter.
bioconversion
The conversion of organic waste products into an energy resource
through the action of microbes.
biocriteria
Quantitative and narrative goals for the aquatic community used within
water programs.
Biocube™
Aerobic bioﬁlter for airborne odors and VOCs by AMETEK Rotron
Bioﬁltration.
Bio-D®
Bioremediation nutrients by Medina Products Bioremediation Division.
biodegradable
Term used to describe organic matter which can undergo biological
decomposition.
biodegradable dissolved organic carbon (BDOC)
The portion of TOC that is
easily degraded by microbes.
biodegradable organic matter (BOM)
The portion of organic matter in water
that can be degraded by microbes.
BIOdek®
Synthetic media for ﬁxed ﬁlm wastewater treatment reactors by Brent-
wood Industries, Inc.
BioDen™
Anaerobic biological nitrate removal process by Nitrate Removal Tech-
nologies, LLC.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

BioDenipho®
Biological phosphorus and nitrogen removal process by USFil-
ter/Krüger.
Biodenit®
Biological denitriﬁcation process using immersed ﬁxed bed ﬁlter by
USFilter/Krüger.
Bio-Denitro®
Biological nitrogen removal process by USFilter/Krüger.
biodiversity
An environment where multiple organisms coexist.
BioDoc®
Rotary distributor for trickling ﬁlters by WesTech Engineering Inc.
Bio-Drum
Rotating drum containing biological ﬁlter media for wastewater treat-
ment by JDV Equipment Corp.
Bio-Energizer
Lagoon sludge oxidation system by Probiotic Solutions.
biofeasibility
A bioremediation feasibility study done to determine the applica-
bility and potential success of a bioremediation technique or procedure for a
given site.
bioﬁlm
An accumulation of microbial growth.
BioﬁltAIR™
Biological air ﬁlter by Biorem Technologies, Inc.
bioﬁlter
See “biological ﬁlter.”
BioFlex®
Moving aeration chains for wastewater treatment systems by Parkson
Corp.
Bioﬂush
Trash rake by E. Beaudrey & Co.
Biofor™
Biological ﬁxed ﬁlm wastewater treatment system by Inﬁlco Degremont,
Inc.
biofoul
Presence and growth of organic matter in a water system.
BioFuser®
Oxygen transfer and mixing units for wastewater treatment systems by
Parkson Corp.
biogas
The gases produced by the anaerobic decomposition of organic matter.
biogenesis
The theory that living organisms arise only from other living organisms.
Bioglas
Rigid, open cell foam silica biological oxidation media by the former
Bioglas Corp.
Bioglas Alpha
Package ﬁxed ﬁlm wastewater treatment plant by the former Bio-
glas Corp.
Biograte
Floor grating by Brentwood Industries, Inc.
BioGuard ACS™
Biofouling inhibitor for reverse osmosis systems by Profes-
sional Water Technologies, Inc.
BioGuard®
Inﬂuent cleaning system by Parkson Corp.
BioGuide®
Process monitoring and control technology by BioChem Technology,
Inc.
Bioken
Former name of Filter Products.
biokinetics
The branch of science that pertains to the study of living organisms.
Biolac®
Extended aeration waste treatment process by Parkson Corp.
Biolift™
Waste activated sludge thickening system by Baker Process.
Biologic™
Nutrient supplement for wastewater treatment facilities by SciCorp
Systems, Inc.
biological exposure indexes (BEI)
Guidelines used for assessing the hazard
posed to healthy workers by chemical substances present in the body.
biological ﬁlter
A bed of sand, stone, or other media through which wastewater
ﬂows that depends on biological action for its effectiveness.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

biological magniﬁcation
Refers to the process whereby certain substances such
as pesticides or heavy metals move up the food chain, work their way into
rivers or lakes, and are eaten by aquatic organisms such as ﬁsh, which in turn
are eaten by large birds, animals, or humans.
biological process
The process by which the metabolic activities of bacteria and
other microorganisms break down complex organic materials into simple, more
stable substances.
biological treatment
A treatment technology that uses bacteria to consume
organic waste.
biologically active ﬁlter (BAF)
A granular media ﬁlter, usually employing acti-
vated carbon or anthracite which relies on the growth of a bioﬁlm to aid in
the degradation of organic matter and/or ammonia.
Bio-Lysis®
Sludge reduction process by Kady International.
biomass
The mass of biological material contained in a system.
biome
A biological community or ecosystem characterized by a speciﬁc habitat
and climate such as a tropical rain forest or a desert.
biomedical waste
Waste derived from the operation of hospital, laboratory, and
health care facilities.
Biomizer™
Continuously sequencing reactor process by Environmental Dynamics
Inc.
Bio-Module
Package wastewater treatment plant using rotating biological contac-
tors by USFilter/Envirex.
BioMonitor™
Automated on-line BOD analyzer by Anatel Corp.
biomonitoring
The use of living organisms to test water quality at a discharge
site or further downstream.
Bio-Net®
Rotating biological contactor by NSW Corp.
BIONOx™
Submersible aerator/mixer by ABS Pumps, Inc.
Bionutre
Nutrient removal process by USFilter/Envirex.
Bio-Nutri™
Nitrogen and phosphorus removal process by Smith & Loveless, Inc.
Bio-Ox™
Bioreactor for biological treatment of wastewater by SRE, Inc.
bio-oxidation
See “biochemical oxidation.”
Bio-Pac
Package trickling ﬁlter formerly offered by USFilter/Envirex.
Bio-Pac SF#30
Trickling ﬁlter media by NSW Corp.
Biopaq ®
Upﬂow anaerobic sludge blanket process used for treatment of high-
strength wastes by CBI Walker, Inc., (U.S. licensee), Biwater (U.K. licensee),
and Paques B.V. (licensor).
BioPasteur®
Biosolids pasteurization system by USFilter/Krüger.
biopile
A remediation technique that involves the mounding of contaminated soil
in a lined and covered pile with air and amendments circulating via pumping.
Bio-Pure
Water reclamation treatment plant by AquaClear Technologies Corp.
biopure water
Water that is sterile, pyrogen free and has a total solids content of
less than 1 mg/L.
Biopuric
Technology to remove hydrogen sulﬁde from anaerobic digester biogas
by Biothane Corp.
Bio-Reel™
Fixed ﬁlm wastewater treatment system using coiled, corrugated tub-
ing by Schreiber Corp.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

bioremediation
The use of the natural ability of microbes to use waste materials
in their metabolic processes and convert them into harmless endproducts.
Bio-S®
Bioremediation surfactant by Medina Products Bioremediation Division.
Bioscan 2
Monitoring technology for microbial activity by BetzDearborn, Inc.
Bioscrub™
Rotating biological contactor odor and VOC treatment system by CMS
Group, Inc.
Bioscrubbers™
Biological-based system for removal of odors by WRc Process
Engineering.
Biosep®
Membrane water/wastewater treatment process by USFilter/Krüger
(North America) and OTV.
Bio-Separator
Floating ﬂow diversion bafﬂe for lagoons by ThermaFab, Inc.
bioslurping
An in situ remediation technique that involves extraction of both vapor
and liquid from the subsurface, also known as “dual-phase extraction.”
Bio-Sock
Fabric sock used to introduce bacterial cultures into a ﬂow by Sybron
Chemicals, Inc.
Biosock™
Biological culture application system by Sybron Chemicals, Inc.
biosolids
Solid organic matter recovered from municipal wastewater treatment that
can be beneﬁcially used, especially as a fertilizer. “Biosolids” are solids that
have been stabilized within the treatment process, whereas “sludge” has not.
biosorption process
See “contact stabilization process.”
Bio-Source™
Biocide by Avista Technologies.
biosparging
A groundwater remediation technology where compressed air is
injected into a contaminated aquifer.
biosphere
The mass of living organisms found in a thin belt at the earth’s surface.
BioSpiral
Rotating biological contactor formerly offered by Walker Process
Equipment.
Biostart™
Liquid microbial concentrate by Advanced Microbial Systems, Inc.
biostat
A substance that inhibits biological growth without destroying the biomass.
biostimulation
A method of cleaning up pollution using indigenous microbes at
a contaminated site and providing only fertilizers, nutrients, or special chem-
ical compounds that speed the growth of the indigenous microbial population.
Biostyr®
Upﬂow mixed media reactor process for removal of nitrogen and sus-
pended solids by USFilter/Krüger (North America) and OTV.
Biostyrene®
Floating ﬁlter media by USFilter/Krüger (North America) and OTV.
Bio-Surf
Rotating biological contactor process by USFilter/Envirex.
biota
All living organisms within a system.
Biotac™
Bioremediation system that delivers bacteria to wet wells by USFil-
ter/Davis Process.
biotechnology
Techniques that use living organisms or parts of organisms to
produce a variety of products to improve plants or animals or to develop
microorganisms to remove toxics from bodies of water, or act as pesticides.
Biothane®
Anaerobic wastewater treatment process by Biothane Corp.
Bio-Tite®
Bioﬁltration odor control system by Thermacon Enviro Systems, Inc.
Bioton®
Biological VOC and odor control system by Monsanto Enviro-Chem
Systems, Inc.
biotower
See “biological ﬁlter.”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Biotox®
Regenerative thermal oxidation process by Biothermica International, Inc.
biotransformation
Conversion of a substance into other compounds by organ-
isms; includes biodegradation.
biotrickling ﬁlter
Odor treatment system where air is scrubbed with recirculating
liquid ﬂowing over high-porosity packing materials covered with a thin ﬁlm
of sulfur-oxidizing microbes.
bioturbation
The net effect of the activity of benthic organisms at wastewater
treatment plant discharges which may aid in the dispersion of contaminants
and increase the exchange of oxygen and nutrients between the sediment and
water.
bioventing
An in situ groundwater remediation technology where air is introduced
into unsaturated soil to facilitate biodegradation of organic contaminants.
BioWeb™
Synthetic media providing a growth site for wastewater biomass by
USFilter/Davco.
Biox™
Package water treatment plant by Bioscience, Inc.
Bioxide®
Sewage odor control product by USFilter/Davis Process.
Bioxide-AQ™
Odor and corrosion control product by USFilter/Davis Process.
BIPM
International Bureau of Weights and Measures.
bipolar membrane
A membrane composed of two distinct layers of oppositely
charged materials.
bipolar membrane electrodialysis
See “water splitting.”
Bird Machine
Sludge dewatering equipment product line of Baker Process.
Birm®
Granular ﬁlter media for removal of iron and manganese by Clack Corp.
bittern
The bitter liquid remaining after the crystallization of salt from a brine.
See also “mother liquor.”
Bitumastic®
Coal tar coating products by Carboline Co.
bituminous coal
A coal high in carbonaceous matter that yields a considerable
amount of volatile waste matter when burned.
Blace Filter
A precoat ﬁlter system by Blace Filtronics, Inc.
Black Clawson
Former name of Thermal Black Clawson.
black liquor
Strong organic waste generated during kraft pulping process.
black lung disease
Common name for the lung disease “anthracosis” caused by
prolonged inhalation of coal dust, which results in ﬁbrosis, or scarring of lung
tissue.
black sand
Discoloration of ﬁlter sand resulting from manganese deposits.
black water
(1) A condition in drinking water that results from the presence of
excess oxidized manganese. (2) Water that contains animal, human, or food
waste.
blank
A quality control sample representing a matrix and containing all the con-
stituents except the analyte.
blanketing gas
Nitrogen or other inert gas used in a “gas blanket.”
blast furnace
Furnace used in iron-making process in which hot blast air ﬂows
upward through the raw materials and exits at the furnace top.
Blastocystis
An intestinal protozoan parasite transmitted by contaminate food or
water.
Blaw-Knox
Former name of Buffalo Technologies, Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

bleach
An oxidizing compound usually containing chlorine combined with cal-
cium or sodium.
bleed
To draw accumulated liquid or gas from a line or container.
Blendmaster
Sludge mixer by McLanahan Corp.
Blendrex™
Motionless mixer by LCI Corp.
blind ﬂange
A ﬂanged plate or blind used to close the end of a pipeline.
blinding
The reduction or cessation of ﬂow through a ﬁlter resulting from solids
restricting the ﬁlter openings.
Blizzard Adsorption System
Polymeric adsorbent technology for VOC abatement
by On-Demand Environmental Systems, Inc.
BLM
U.S. Department of Interior’s Bureau of Land Management.
Block & Hong process
Biological phosphorus removal process by USFil-
ter/Krüger.
blood worm
The larval stage of the midge ﬂy.
bloodborne pathogen
Pathogenic microbes present in human blood and other
potentially infectious materials which can cause disease in humans.
bloom
See “algal bloom.”
blowback
Filtrate blown out through the ﬁlter medium on a rotary vacuum ﬁlter
by the air introduced to move the ﬁlter cake away from the cloth.
blowdown
A controlled discharge from a recirculating system designed to prevent
a buildup of some material.
blower
Air conveying equipment that generates pressures up to 103 kPa (15 psi)
commonly used for wastewater aeration systems.
BLS™
Sludge reduction process by Kady International.
blue baby syndrome
See “methemoglobinemia.”
blue vitriol
Common name for copper sulfate used to control algae.
blue-green algae
A group of aquatic organisms having a blue pigment in addition
to a green-colored colorophyll, and often the cause of nuisance conditions in
water bodies.
BLWRS
See “barriered landscape water renovation system (BLWRS).”
BMP
See “best management practice (BMP).”
BMR
Baseline monitoring report.
BNR
Biological nutrient removal.
Boa-Boom
Oil spill containment booms by Environetics, Inc.
Boat®
Boat-shaped intrachannel clariﬁer by United Industries, Inc.
BOD
See “biochemical oxygen demand (BOD).”
BOD5
Five-day carbonaceous or nitriﬁcation-inhibited BOD. See also “biochem-
ical oxygen demand (BOD).”
BOD-Seed™
Seed microbes for BOD testing by Sybron Chemicals, Inc.
BODu
See “ultimate BOD (BODU).”
body burden
The total radiation or toxic material present in the body at a point
in time.
body feed
Coating material added to the inﬂuent of precoat ﬁlters during ﬁltration
cycle.
bog
Poorly drained land ﬁlled with decayed organic matter that is wet and spongy
and unable to support an appreciable weight.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

BogenFilter™
Belt ﬁlter press by Klein America, Inc.
boil out
An evaporator cleaning process where wash water is boiled in an evapo-
rator to remove scale deposits.
boiler
A vessel in which water is continually vaporized into steam by the appli-
cation of heat.
boiler feedwater
Water which, in the best practice, is softened and/or demineral-
ized, heated to nearly boiler temperature, and deaerated before being pumped
into a steam boiler.
Boilermate®
Packed column deaerator by Cleaver-Brooks.
boilers and industrial furnaces (BIF)
A category of thermal treatment opera-
tions, also including cement and aggregate kilns, asphalt, and smelting fur-
naces, whose combustion processes and air emissions are regulated.
boiling point
The temperature at which a liquid’s vapor pressure equals the pres-
sure acting on the liquid.
boiling point elevation (BPE)
The difference between the boiling point of a solu-
tion and the boiling point of pure water at the same pressure.
BOM
See “biodegradable organic matter (BOM)” and “background organic matter
(BOM).”
bomb calorimeter
An instrument used to determine the heat content of sludge or
other material.
bone char
A carbon-based adsorbent made by carbonizing animal bones.
BonoZon
Ozone generator by ProMinent Fluid Controls, Inc.
BOO
Build, own, operate.
BOOM
Build-own-operate-maintain.
boom
A ﬂoating barrier used to contain oil on a body of water.
booster pump
A pump used to raise the pressure of the ﬂuid on its discharge side.
BOOT
Build-own-operate-transfer.
Boothwall™
Dust collector cartridge ﬁlters by Dustex Corp.
BoR
U.S. Bureau of Reclamation. Also called “BuRec.”
bore hole
A man-made hole in a geological formation.
Bosker™
Trash rack cleaner by Brackett Green.
BOT
Build, operate, transfer.
botanical pesticide
A pesticide whose active ingredient is a plant-produced chem-
ical such as nicotine or strychnine.
bottom ash
The noncombustible particles that fall to the bottom of a boiler furnace.
bottoming cycle
Cogeneration system where thermal heat is produced by the
process and by-product electricity is then generated.
botulism
A severe form of food poisoning usually associated with development
of a toxin produced by bacteria such as bacillus in improperly preserved or
prepared food.
bound water
Water held on the surface or interior of colloidal particles.
Bouyoucos
A laboratory test procedure employing hydrometers to determine the
ﬁne particle size distribution in a slurry.
Bowser-Briggs
Former manufacturer of oil/water separation equipment.
Boyle’s Law
The volume of a gas varies inversely with its pressure at constant
temperature.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Boythorp
Glass coated steel tanks by Klargestor.
BPE
See “boiling point elevation (BPE).”
BPEO
Best practical environmental option.
BPR
(1) Biological phosphorous removal. (2) Boiling point rise.
Brackett Green
Former name of Brackett Geiger.
brackish water
Water containing low concentration of soluble salts, usually
between 1000 and 10,000 mg/L.
branch sewer
A sewer that receives wastewater from a small area and discharges
into a main sewer serving more than one area.
Brandol®
Cylindrical ﬁne bubble diffusers by USFilter/Schumacher Filters.
brass
A copper alloy containing up to 40% zinc.
braze
To thermally bond metallic parts with a cuprous alloy.
break tank
A storage tank at atmospheric pressure from which feed water is drawn
prior to further treatment or use.
breakpoint chlorination
Addition of chlorine to a water or wastewater until the
chlorine demand has been satisﬁed. Further addition will result in a chlorine
residual so that disinfection can be assured.
breakthrough
That point in the granular media ﬁlter cycle when the ﬁltrate tur-
bidity begins to increase because the ﬁlter bed is full and no longer able to
retain solids.
breakwater
An offshore barrier, often connected to shore, which breaks the force
of waves and provides shelter from wave action.
Breeze™
Compact air stripping unit by Aeromix Systems, Inc.
BRI
See “building-related illness (BRI).”
brine
Water saturated with, or containing a high concentration of, salts, usually
in excess of 36,000 mg/L.
brine concentrator
Term used to describe a vertical tube falling ﬁlm evaporator
employing special scale control techniques to maximize concentration of dis-
solved solids.
brine heater
The heat input section of a multistage ﬂash evaporator where feed-
water is heated to the process’ top temperature.
brine mud
Waste material, often associated with well-drilling or mining, com-
posed of mineral salts or other inorganic compounds.
brine staging
See “reject staging.”
British Thermal Unit (Btu)
The quantity of heat required to raise the temperature
of one pound of water by 1°F.
Brix scale
A scale used in a hydrometer for measuring the concentration or density
of sugar in solution.
broadcast application
The spreading of pesticides over an entire area.
broad-crested weir
A weir having a substantial crest width in the direction par-
allel to the direction of water ﬂowing over it.
broke
Paper waste generated prior to completion of the papermaking process.
bromate
The highest oxidation state of the bromide ion which can be formed
during the ozonation of waters containing bromide.
BromiCide®
Microbiocide by BioLab Water Additives.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

bromide
An inorganic ion found in surface water and groundwater that, when
oxidized by chlorine or ozone, can result in the formation of bromide-substi-
tuted disinfection byproducts.
bromine
A halogen element used as a water disinfectant in combination with
chlorine as a chlorine-bromide mixture. Chemical symbol is Br.
bronze
A copper-tin alloy, or any other copper alloy, that does not contain zinc
or nickel as the principal alloying element.
brown coal
A common term for lignite.
brownﬁeld
An inactive site or property being put back into productive economic
use after the relevant environmental agencies agree contaminants present at the
property no longer pose an unacceptable risk to human health or the environment.
Brownian motion
Erratic movement of colloidal particles that results from the
impact of molecules and ions dissolved in the solution.
Brownie Buster
Organic solids agitator/separator by Enviro-Care Co.
Bruner
Product line by Culligan International.
Bruner-Matic®
Water treatment control center by Culligan International Corp.
brush aerator
Mechanical aeration device most frequently used in oxidation ditch
wastewater treatment plants, consisting of a horizontal shaft with protruding
paddles, that is rapidly rotated at the water surface. Also called a “rotor.”
BS&W
Bottom sediments and water.
BTEX
Benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylene.
Btu
See “British Thermal Unit (Btu).”
BTU-Plus®
Filter media that incinerates to inert ash by Alar Engineering Corp.
BTX
Benzene, toluene, and xylene.
bubble point
The pressure at which air ﬁrst passes through a wet membrane; the
path being the channel of greatest pore size.
bubbler system
Common terminology for pneumatic-type differential level
controller.
bubonic plague
An acute infectious disease usually transmitted from infected
animals to humans by the bite of a rat ﬂea.
buchner funnel
A laboratory funnel with a perforated bottom that utilizes a dis-
posable ﬁlter paper to evaluate wastewater and sludge dewaterability.
bucket elevator
A conveying device consisting of a head and foot assembly that
supports and drives an endless chain or belt to which buckets are attached.
Budd
Nonmetallic chain product line by Polychem Corp.
buffer
A substance that stabilizes the pH value of solutions.
buffer strips
Strips of grass or other erosion-resisting vegetation between or below
cultivated strips or ﬁelds.
buffered
The ability to resist changes in pH.
buffering capacity
The capacity of a solution to resist a change in composition,
especially changes in pH.
Buﬂovak®
Evaporator and crystallizer product line by Buffalo Technologies, Inc.
building-related illness (BRI)
Condition in which at least 20% of a building’s
occupants display symptoms of illness for more than 2 weeks and the cause
of the illness can be traced to a speciﬁc building source.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

bulk density
The density/volume ratio for a solid including the voids contained
in the bulk material.
bulkhead
A partition of wood, rock, concrete, or steel used for protection from
water, or to segregate sections of tanks or vessels.
bulking sludge
A poorly settling activated sludge that results from the predomi-
nance of ﬁlamentous organisms.
bulky waste
Large items of waste materials, such as appliances, furniture, large
auto parts, trees, stumps.
Bullseye™
Wastewater nutrient removal process by United Industries, Inc.
buoyancy
The tendency of a body to rise or ﬂoat in a liquid.
BuRec
U.S. Bureau of Reclamation. Also called “BoR.”
burette
A glass tube with ﬁne gradations and bottom stopcock used to accurately
measure and dispense ﬂuids.
burning agents
Additives that improve the combustibility of the materials to
which they are applied.
burning rate
The rate at which solid waste is incinerated or heat is released during
incineration.
burnishing
A surface ﬁnishing process in which surface irregularities are dis-
placed rather than removed.
bushing
(1) A short threaded tube which screws into a pipe ﬁtting to reduce its
size. (2) The bearing surface for pin rotation when a chain revolves around a
sprocket.
butterﬂy valve
A valve equipped with a stem-operated disk that is rotated parallel
to the liquid ﬂow when opened and perpendicular to the ﬂow when closed.
BV
See “bed volume (BV).”
BVF®
Anaerobic wastewater treatment system by ADI Systems, Inc.
BWI
British Drinking Water Inspectorate.
BWR
See “basic water requirement (BWR).”
BWRO
Brackish water reverse osmosis.
bypass
A channel or pipe arranged to divert ﬂow around a tank, treatment process,
or control device.
byproduct
A material or substance that is not a primary product of a process and
is not separately produced.
C
C
See “Celsius (C).”
C. parvum
See “Cryptosporidium.”
C × T
The product of the “residual disinfection concentration” (C) in mg/L deter-
mined before or at the ﬁrst customer, and the corresponding “disinfectant
contact time” (T) in minutes. Also called “CT value.”
C × T99.9
The CT value required for 99.9% inactivation of Giardia lamblia cysts.
c/c
Center-to-center.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

CA
See “cellulose acetate (CA).”
CA membrane
Cellulose acetate membrane.
CA•RE™
Spent cartridge ﬁlter recovery program by USFilter Corp.
CAA
See “Clean Air Act (CAA).”
CAAA
See “Clean Air Act Amendments (CAAA).”
CableTorq
Circular thickener with automatic torque load response system by
GL&V/Dorr-Oliver, Inc.
CaCO3
See “calcium carbonate.”
CAD
Computer-aided design.
cadmium (Cd)
A heavy metal element that accumulates in the environment.
CADRE®
VOC destruction process by Vara International.
CAF®
Cavitation air ﬂotation units by HydroCal, Inc.
CAFE
See “Corporate Average Fuel Economy Standard (CAFE).”
CAFOs
Concentrated animal feeding operations.
Cairox®
Potassium permanganate by Carus Chemical Co., Inc.
Cairox ZM®
Zebra mussel control technology by Carus Chemical Co., Inc.
caisson
Watertight structure used for underwater work.
cake
Dewatered sludge with a solids concentration sufﬁcient to allow handling as
a solid material.
cake ﬁltration
Filtration classiﬁcation for ﬁlters where solids are removed on the
entering face of the granular media.
CakePress
Modular high pressure section of dewatering press by Parkson Corp.
Cal
Large calorie. See “calorie.”
cal
Small calorie. See “calorie.”
calandria
The heating element in an evaporator consisting of vertical tubes which
act as the heating surface.
calcareous
Composed of, or containing, calcium compounds, particularly calcium
carbonate.
calcify
To become stone-like or chalky due to deposition of calcium salts.
calcine
Ore, carbonate, mineral, or concentrate that has been roasted in an oxidiz-
ing atmosphere to remove sulfur or carbon dioxide.
calcined lime
See “quicklime.”
calciner
A device in which the moisture and organic matter in phosphate rock is
reduced in a combustion chamber.
calcining
Exposure of an inorganic compound to a high temperature to alter its
form and drive off a substance that was originally part of the compound.
Calciquest
Liquid polyphosphate by Calciquest, Inc.
calcium carbonate
A white, chalky substance which is the principal hardness and
scale-causing compound in water. Chemical formula is CaCO3.
calcium carbonate equivalent (mg/L as CaCO3)
A convenient unit of exchange
for expressing all ions in water by comparing them to calcium carbonate which
has a molecular weight of 100 and an equivalent weight of 50; signiﬁes that
the concentration of a dissolved mineral is chemically equivalent to the stated
concentration of calcium carbonate.
calcium hardness
The portion of the total hardness attributed to calcium compounds.
calcium hydroxide
See “hydrated lime.”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

calcium hypochlorite
A chlorine compound frequently used as a water or waste-
water disinfectant. Chemical formula is Ca(OCl).
calcium sulfate
A white solid known as the mineral “anhydrite” with the chemical
formula CaSO4, and gypsum with the formula CaSO4·2H2O.
calibration
The determination, checking, or rectifying of the gradation of any
instrument giving quantitative measurements.
Callaway Chemical
Company acquired by Vulcan Performance Chemicals.
calorie
The amount of heat required to raise the temperature of one gram of water
1°C, also known as a “small calorie.” A “large calorie” or “kilocalorie” is the
amount of heat required to raise the temperature of a kilogram of water by 1°C.
Calver
Chemicals for use in the analysis of calcium in water by Hach Company.
Calvert
Manufacturer acquired by Monsanto Enviro-Chem Systems, Inc.
CAM
Carbon adsorption method.
CAM rule
See “Compliance Assurance Monitoring rule (CAM rule).”
CAMP
Continuous air monitoring program.
Camp Nozzle
Plastic strainer-type nozzle for ﬁlter underdrain by Walker Process
Equipment.
Campylobacter enteritis
A waterborne gastrointestinal disorder.
cancer
A class of diseases characterized by the uncontrolled growth of cells.
Cannon™
Positive displacement digester mixer by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
Cannonball2
Portable multiple gas detector by Biosystems, Inc.
Cansorb
Activated carbon adsorber by TIGG Corp.
cap
A layer of clay or other impermeable material installed over the top of a closed
landﬁll to prevent entry of rainwater and minimize leachate.
CAPA®
Caprolactone product by Solvay America.
capacitive deionization
An electrically regenerated electrosorption process capa-
ble of desalinating saline water.
capillarity
The ability of a soil to retain a ﬁlm of water around soil particles and
in pores through the action of surface tension.
capillary
(1) A slender hair-like structure or a very ﬁne, small bore tube. (2) A
blood vessel with very ﬁne openings that joins the smallest arteries with the
smallest veins.
capillary action
The movement or action of a liquid through interstices, capillary
tubes, or other very ﬁne openings due to the molecular attraction between
molecules of the liquid for each and a solid surface.
capillary fringe
The zone of porous material above the zone of saturation con-
taining water held by capillary action.
Capitox
Modular wastewater treatment plant by Simon-Hartley, Ltd.
Capozone®
Ozone generation system by Capital Controls Co.
Capsular®
Wet well mounted pump station by Smith & Loveless, Inc.
Captivated Sludge Process
Fixed ﬁlm biological waste treatment system by the
former Waste Solutions.
Captor®
Fixed ﬁlm biological waste treatment system by the former Waste Solutions.
capture efﬁciency
The fraction of organic vapors generated by a process that are
directed to an abatement or recovery device.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

CAR™
Aerobic wastewater treatment system with covered reactor by ADI Sys-
tems, Inc.
Carball
Carbon dioxide generator formerly offered by Walker Process Equipment.
carbamates
A class of pesticides, herbacides, and fungicides developed as less-
hazardous replacements for chlorinated hydrocarbons.
Carbo Dur™
Granular activated carbon by USFilter/Warren.
Carbo-Cor™
Crossﬂow membrane used for puriﬁcation of water-based surface
cleaners by Koch Membrane Systems Inc.
Carboﬁlt
Anthracite ﬁlter media by International Filter Media.
Carbolux®
Decontaminate system to remove crystallized contaminants from elec-
troplating solutions by USFilter/Dewatering Systems.
carbon
An element present in many inorganic and all organic compounds.
carbon adsorption
The use of powdered or granular-activated carbon to remove
refractory and other organic matter from water.
carbon black
An additive that prevents degradation of thermoplastics by ultravi-
olet light.
carbon chloroform extract (CCE)
The residue from a carbon chloroform extrac-
tion test.
carbon chloroform extraction
Test to determine organic matter in water where
organics adsorbed on an activated carbon cartridge are extracted from the
carbon by chloroform and weighed or analyzed.
carbon cycle
A graphical presentation of the movement of carbon among living
and nonliving matter.
carbon dioxide
A noncombustible gas formed in animal respiration and the com-
bustion and decomposition of organic matter. Chemical formula is CO2.
carbon ﬁxation
A process occurring in photosynthesis where atmospheric carbon
dioxide gas is combined with hydrogen obtained from water molecules.
carbon monoxide
Colorless, odorless gas produced by incomplete combustion of
organic fuels lethal to humans at concentrations exceeding 5000 mg/L. Chem-
ical formula is CO.
carbon steel
A general purpose steel whose major properties depend on its 0.1 to
2% carbon content without substantial amounts of other alloying elements.
carbon-14
A naturally occurring radioactive isotope of carbon that emits beta
particles when it undergoes radioactive decay.
carbonaceous
Of, pertaining to, or yielding carbon.
carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand (CBOD)
The portion of biochemi-
cal oxygen demand where oxygen consumption is due to oxidation of carbon,
usually measured after a sample has been incubated for 5 days. Also called
“ﬁrst-stage BOD.”
carbonate
A compound containing the anion radical of carbonic acid CO3.
carbonate alkalinity
Alkalinity resulting from the presence of carbonate ions.
carbonate hardness
The hardness in water caused by bicarbonates and the car-
bonates of calcium and magnesium.
carbonation
The diffusion of carbon dioxide gas through a liquid.
carbonator
A device used to carbonate or recarbonate water.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Carbonite
Anthracite ﬁlter media by Carbonite Filter Corp.
Carborundum
Former manufacturer of wastewater treatment equipment.
carboxylic
The functional group COOH found in all carboxylic acids.
carboxylic acid
Organic acids such as acetic, lactic, and citric acids which contain
one or more COOH groups.
carboy
A large container used to store or transport liquid chemicals or water samples.
carcinogen
A cancer or tumor-causing agent.
cardinal points
The four principal points of a compass: north, south, east, and west.
Carrobic
Aerobic digester/thickener used with oxidation ditch wastewater treat-
ment system by Baker Process.
Carrousel®
Biological oxidation/wastewater treatment system by DHV Water BV,
licensed to Baker Process.
Carter
Product line of JDV Equipment Corp.
Cartermix
Anaerobic sludge digester mixing system by JDV Equipment Corp.
cartridge ﬁlter
A ﬁlter unit with cylindrical replaceable elements or cartridges.
Carulite®
Catalysts for VOC destruction by Carus Chemical Co.
Carver-Greenﬁeld process
Multiple effect evaporation process to extract water
from sludge.
CASAC
EPA’s Clean Air Scientiﬁc Advisory Committee.
Cascade
The combined use of a gravity belt thickener followed by a belt ﬁlter
press to dewater sludge by Gebr. Bellmer GmbH.
Cascade™
Biological ﬁltering system using synthetic media by USFilter/General
Filter.
cascade aeration
An aeration method using a series of steps to promote oxygen
uptake in a ﬂowing stream.
casing
A pipe or tube placed in a bore hole to support the sides of the hole and
to prevent other ﬂuids from entering or leaving the hole.
cask
A thick-walled container, usually lead, used to transport radioactive material.
CASS™
Cyclic activated sludge system for wastewater treatment system by CASS
Water Engineering, Inc.
cast iron
A general description for a group of iron-carbon-silicon metallic prod-
ucts obtained by reducing iron ore with carbon at temperatures high enough
to render the metal ﬂuid and cast it in a mold.
CastKleen
Cast-in-place ﬁlter underdrain by Baker Process.
Cat Floc®
Cationic polymer to enhance solids/liquid separation by Calgon Corp.
catalyst
A substance that modiﬁes or increases the rate of a chemical reaction
without being consumed in the process.
catalytic converter
A device installed in the exhaust system of an internal com-
bustion engine which utilizes catalytic action to oxidize hydrocarbon and
carbon monoxide emissions to carbon dioxide.
catalytic cracking
The use of a catalyst during a cracking process.
catch basin
An open basin that serves as a collection point for stormwater runoff.
catchment
A barrel, cistern, or other container used to catch water.
catchment area
The area of land bounded by watersheds draining into a river,
lake, or reservoir.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

categorical exclusion
A class of actions which either individually or cumulatively
would not have a signiﬁcant effect on the human environment and therefore
would not require preparation of an environmental assessment or environmen-
tal impact statement.
categorical pretreatment standard
A technology-based efﬂuent limitation for an
industrial facility discharging into a municipal sewer system.
category I contaminant
U.S. EPA contaminant category indicating sufﬁcient evi-
dence of carcinogenicity via ingestion in humans or animals exists to warrant
classiﬁcation as “known or probable human carcinogens via ingestion.”
category II contaminant
U.S. EPA contaminant category for which limited evi-
dence of carcinogenicity via ingestion exists to warrant classiﬁcation as “pos-
sible human carcinogens via ingestion.”
category III contaminant
U.S. EPA contaminant category of substances for
which insufﬁcient or no evidence of carcinogenicity via ingestion exists.
catenary bar screen
Mechanical screening device using revolving chain-mounted
rakes to clean a stationary bar rack.
cathode
The negative electrode where the current leaves an electrolytic solution.
cathodic protection
Electrochemical corrosion protection achieved by imposing
an electrical potential to counteract the galvanic potential between dissimilar
metals which would lead to corrosion.
cation
A positively charged ion that migrates to the cathode when an electrical
potential is applied to a solution.
cation exchange
The ion exchange process in which cations in solution are
exchanged for other cations bound to an ion exchange resin or medium.
cation load factor y
The sum of calcium, magnesium, sodium, and potassium
expressed as calcium carbonate equivalents.
cationic polymer
A polyelectrolyte with a net positive electrical charge.
Cat-Ox™
Catalytic oxidation system by Catalytic Combustion Corp.
caustic
Alkaline or basic.
caustic scrubbing
An air pollution control process using a solution of sodium
hydroxide to remove sulfur dioxide from ﬂue gases.
caustic soda
Common term for sodium hydroxide. Chemical formula is NaOH.
cavitation
(1) A selective corrosion that results from the collapse of air or vapor
bubbles with sufﬁcient force to cause metal loss or pitting. (2) The action of
a pump attempting to discharge more water than suction can provide.
CBG
Clean burning gasoline.
CBOD
See “carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand (CBOD).”
cc
See “cubic centimeter (cc).”
CCB
Coal combustion by-products.
CCC
Streaming current coagulation control center by Milton Roy Co.
CCC
Compromised container caps.
CCE
See “carbon chloroform extract (CCE).”
CCOHS
Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety.
CCPP
Calcium carbonate precipitation potential.
CCS2000™
Clariﬁer control system by Drexelbrook Engineering Co.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

CD
See “corona discharge method (CD).”
CD ozone generation
Ozone discharge technology most frequently used in the
potable water industry.
CDC
See “Centers for Disease Control (CDC).”
CDI®
Continuous deionization process which regenerates resins with electricity
by USFilter/Lowell.
CDT
Capacitive deionization technology.
CE rule
See “Credible Evidence rule (CE rule).”
CE-Bauer
Former screening equipment supplier acquired by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc.
Cecarbon®
Granular activated carbon by Elf Atochem North America, Inc.
Cecasorb®
Adsorbent canisters containing activated carbon by Elf Atochem North
America, Inc.
CEDI
Continuous electrodeionization.
Celatom®
Diatomite ﬁlter aid by Eagle-Picher Minerals, Inc.
CELdek
Synthetic media for evaporative cooling systems by Munters.
Celgard®
Microporous, ﬂat sheet, and hollow ﬁber membranes by Celgard LLC.
cells
(1) In solid waste disposal, holes where waste is dumped, compacted, and
covered with layers of dirt on a daily basis. (2) The smallest structural part of
living matter capable of functioning as an independent unit.
cellulose acetate (CA)
A plastic material used to make the cellulosic-type semi-
permeable reverse osmosis membranes.
Celsius (C)
The SI temperature scale on which 0° is the freezing point and 100°
is the boiling point of water. Often referred to as the “centigrade” scale.
CEM
See “continuous emissions monitoring (CEM).”
CEMA
Conveyor Equipment Manufacturers Association.
CEMcat™
Continuous emissions monitor by Advanced Sensor Devices, Inc.
cement
A powder that when mixed with water binds a stone and sand mixture
into strong concrete when dry.
cement kiln dust
Alkaline material produced during the manufacture of cement
that may be used to stabilize sludge.
cementing
The process of pumping a cement slurry into a drilled hole and/or
forced behind the casing.
CEMS
Continuous emissions monitoring systems.
Censys™
Water and wastewater treatment products by USFilter/Lowell.
Centaur®
Activated carbon by Calgon Carbon Corp.
Centers for Disease Control (CDC)
A U.S. Department of Health agency respon-
sible for surveillance of disease patterns, developing disease control and pre-
vention procedures, and public health education.
Center-Slung
Basket centrifuge by Baker Process/Ketema.
centigrade
Colloquial term for the Celsius scale of temperature measurement.
centipose
A unit of the dynamic viscosity of a liquid. The dynamic viscosity of
water at 20°C is 1 centipose.
Centrac
Metering pump by Milton Roy Co.
Centra-ﬂo™
Continuously backwashed gravity sand ﬁlter by Applied Process
Technology, Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

centrate
The liquid remaining after solids have been removed in a centrifuge.
Centri-Cleaner®
Liquid cyclone by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc.
Centrico
Sludge dewatering decanter centrifuge by Westfalia Separator, Inc.
Centridry®
Biosolids dewatering and drying process by Baker Process.
CentriField®
Wet scrubber by Entoleter, Inc.
centrifugal collector
A mechanical system using centrifugal force to remove aero-
sols from a gas stream or to dewater sludge.
centrifugal pump
A pump with a high speed impeller that relies on centrifugal
force to throw incoming liquid to the periphery of the impeller housing where
velocity is converted to head pressure.
centrifugation
The use of centrifugal force to separate solids from liquids based
on density differences.
centrifuge
A dewatering device relying on centrifugal force to separate particles
of varying density such as water and solids.
Centripress®
Solid bowl centrifuge by Baker Process.
CenTROL®
Gravity cluster sand ﬁlter by USFilter/General Filter.
Centrox®
Aspirating aerators by Hazleton Environmental, Inc.
CEQ
Council on Environmental Quality.
Cerabar
Pressure transmitter by Endress+Hauser.
Ceraﬂo®
Ceramic membrane ﬁlters by USFilter/General Filter.
CeramicÅ
Ceramic ﬁlter tube by Coors Ceramics Co.
CERCLA
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability
Act. Also known as Superfund.
CERMS
Continuous emissions rate monitoring system.
cesspool
A covered tank with open joints constructed in permeable soil to receive
raw domestic wastewater and allow partially treated efﬂuent to seep into the
surrounding soil while solids are contained and undergo digestion.
CETCO
Colloid Environmental Technologies Co.
CETCOﬂoc™
Specialty water treatment chemicals by Colloid Environmental
Technologies Co.
CF200™
Fine band screen by Brackett Geiger.
CFB
Circulating ﬂuidized bed.
CFC
See “chloroﬂuorocarbon (CFC).”
CFR
Code of Federal Regulations.
cfs
Cubic feet per second.
CFSTR
Continuous ﬂow, stirred-tank reactor.
CFU
See “colony forming units (CFU).”
CGMP
Current good manufacturing practice.
Chabelco
Chain products marketed by USFilter/Envirex.
chain and ﬂight collector
A sludge collector mechanism utilized in rectangular
sedimentation basins or clariﬁers.
chain of custody
The documentation maintained regarding all personnel involved
in the handling, storage, and analysis of hazardous waste samples from the
point where samples are prepared though the point of ﬁnal disposal.
Chainbelt
Former name of USFilter/Envirex parent company.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Chainsaver Rim
Sludge collector sprockets with wear rim by Jeffrey Chain Corp.
chamber
A compartment or space enclosed by walls; often preﬁxed by a descrip-
tive word indicating its function, such as grit chamber, screen chamber, dis-
charge chamber, or ﬂushing chamber.
channel
(1) A perceptible natural or artiﬁcial waterway that contains moving water
or forms a connecting link between two bodies of water. (2) The deep portion
of a river or waterway where the main current ﬂows. (3) The part of a body
of water deep enough to be used for navigation through an area otherwise too
shallow for navigation.
Channel Flow
Sewage disintegrator by C&H Waste Processing.
Channel Master®
Fine screen by Hans Huber GmbH.
Channel Mitt™
Shaftless spiral screening and dewatering device by WesTech
Engineering Inc.
Channel Monster®
In-channel solids reduction unit by JWC Environmental.
Channel Piranha
Sewage shredder by ZMI/Portec Chemical Processing.
ChannelAire™
Submersible aerator/mixer by ABS Pumps, Inc.
channeling
A condition that occurs in a ﬁlter or other packed bed when water
ﬁnds furrows or channels through which it can ﬂow without effective contact
with the bed.
char
To reduce to charcoal by burning.
characteristic hazardous waste
A waste material declared hazardous because it
exhibits ignitable, corrosive, reactive, or toxic characteristics.
charge density
In a polyelectrolyte, the charge density is the mole ratio of the
charged monomers to noncharged monomers.
Chargepac®
Coagulant used in water and wastewater treatment by Ashland Chem-
ical, Drew Industrial.
Charles’ Law
The volume of gas at constant pressure varies in direct proportion
to the absolute temperature.
check valve
A valve that opens in the direction of normal ﬂow and closes with
ﬂow reversal.
Check Well
Well level measuring device by Drexelbrook Engineering Company.
chelating agent
A compound that is soluble in water and combines with metal
ions to keep them in solution. See also “sequestering agent.”
chelation
A chemical complexing of metallic cations with organic compounds to
prevent precipitation of the metals. See also “sequestration.”
Chem-Clean®
Grease and oil removal system for tertiary ﬁltration by USFil-
ter/Zimpro.
Chem-Feed®
Chemical metering injection pump by Blue-White Industries.
Chem-Fine™
Pleated ﬁlter cartridge by USFilter/Filtration & Separation.
Chem-Flex®
Portable holding tank by Aero Tec Laboratories, Inc.
Chem-Gard®
Direct and magnetically driven centrifugal pumps by Vanton Pump &
Equipment Corp.
chemical feeder
A device used to dispense chemicals at a predetermined rate.
chemical ﬁxation
The transformation of a chemical compound to a new, nontoxic
form.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

chemical oxidation
The oxidation of compounds in water or wastewater by chemical
means. Typical oxidants include ozone, chlorine, or potassium permanganate.
chemical oxygen demand (COD)
A measurement of biodegradable and nonbio-
degradable (refractory) organic matter, widely used as a means of measuring
the strength of domestic and industrial wastewaters.
chemical sludge
Sludge resulting from chemical treatment processes of inorganic
wastes which are not biologically active.
chemical treatment
Any water or wastewater treatment process involving the
addition of chemicals to obtain a desired result such as precipitation, coagu-
lation, ﬂocculation, sludge conditioning, disinfection, or odor control.
chemically emulsiﬁed oil particles
These are usually less than 1 micron in size
and will not separate or rise to the surface no matter how much time is allowed.
Chemidisk™
Rotating biological contactor by CMS Group, Inc.
Cheminjector-D®
Diaphragm-metering pump by PennProcess Technologies, Inc.
chemisorption
The formation of an irreversible chemical bond between the sor-
bate molecule and the surface of the adsorbent.
Chemix
Dry polymer mixing and feeding unit by Semblex, Inc.
chemnet
Mutual aid network of chemical shippers and contractors who assign a
contracted emergency response company to provide technical support if a
representative of the ﬁrm whose chemicals are involved in an incident is not
readily available.
chemocline
A zone of a lake or reservoir in which the concentration of dissolved
substances changes rapidly with depth.
Chemomat
Electrochemical membrane cell separation system by Ionics, Inc.
chemostat
An apparatus designed to grow bacteria cultures at controlled rates.
chemosterilant
A chemical that controls pests by preventing reproduction.
chemotrophs
Organisms that extract energy from organic and inorganic oxida-
tion/reduction reactions.
Chem-Scale™
Weighing scale for vertical chemical tanks by Force Flow Equipment.
ChemScan
Process analyzers by Applied Spectometry.
ChemSensor®
VOC monitor by Osmonics, Inc.
ChemSpec®
Air sampler by Rupprecht & Patashnick Inc.
Chemterc
The industry-sponsored Chemical Transportation Emergency Center which
provides information and/or emergency assistance to emergency responders.
Chem-Tower®
Bulk chemical feeding unit by Smith & Loveless, Inc.
Chemtrac®
Streaming current monitoring systems by Chemtrac Systems, Inc.
Chemtube®
Diaphragm-metering pump by USFilter/Wallace & Tiernan.
Chernobyl
Ukrainian town that was the site of a 1986 nuclear power plant accident
where radiation to the environment was released.
Chevron™
Clariﬁer tube settlers by USFilter/Warren.
Chicago Pump
Product group of Yeomans Chicago Corp.
chicane
A plow or other obstacle used on a belt thickener or belt press to mix or
turn sludge to facilitate sludge dewatering.
chimney effect
The tendency of air or gas in a vertical passage to rise when it is
heated because its density is lower than the surrounding air or gas.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Chi-X®
Odor control product by NuTech Environmental Corp.
chloramines
Disinfecting compounds containing nitrogen, chlorine, and hydrogen
formed by the reaction between hypochlorous acid, ammonia, and/or organic
amines in water. Also called “combined available chlorine.”
Chlor-A-Vac™
Gas induction systems by Capital Controls Co.
Chlorgen+™
Chlorine gas generator by Inchen USA, Inc.
chloride
(1) The ionic form of the element chlorine where the atom has gained
one electron, whose chemical symbol is Cl–. (2) Any salt containing the Cl–
anion.
chlorinated
(1) The condition of water or wastewater that has been treated with
chlorine. (2) A description of an organic compound to which chlorine atoms
have been added.
chlorination
The addition of chlorine to a water or wastewater, usually for the
purpose of disinfection.
chlorinator
A metering device used to add chlorine gas or solutions to water or
wastewater.
chlorine
An oxidant commonly used as a disinfectant in water and wastewater
treatment. Chemical formula is Cl2.
chlorine contact chamber
A detention chamber to diffuse chlorine through water
or wastewater while providing adequate contact time for disinfection.
chlorine demand
The difference in the amount of chlorine added to a water or
wastewater and the amount of residual chlorine remaining after a speciﬁc
contact duration, usually 15 minutes.
chlorine dose
The amount of chlorine applied to a liquid, usually expressed in
milligrams per liter (mg/L) or pounds per million gallons (lb/mil gal).
chlorine residual
The amount of chlorine remaining in water after application at
some prior time; the difference between the total chlorine added and that
consumed by oxidizable matter. See “free chlorine residual.”
chlorine tablets
Common term for pellets of solidiﬁed chlorine compounds such
as calcium hypochlorite used for water disinfection.
chlorine toxicity
The detrimental effects on biota caused by the inherent proper-
ties of chlorine.
chlorite
Any salt of chlorous acid containing the monovalent radical ClO2.
ChlorMaster™
Sodium hypochlorite generation system by Pepcon Systems, Inc.
Chloro-Cat™
Catalytic oxidizer by Global Technologies.
chloroﬂuorocarbon (CFC)
Ozone-depleting compounds containing carbon and
one or more halogens, usually ﬂuorine, chlorine, or bromine which have been
used as commercial refrigerants and propellants in aerosol sprays.
chloroform
A trihalomethane formed by the reaction of chlorine and organic
material in water. Chemical formula is CHCl3.
Chloromatic
Electrolytic chlorine generator by Brinecell, Inc.
Chloropac®
Hypochlorite generation system by USFilter/Electrocatalytic.
chlorophenoxy
A class of herbicides that may be found in domestic water supplies
and may cause adverse health effects.
chlorosis
Discoloration of normally green plant parts caused by disease, lack of
nutrients, or various air pollutants.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Chlor-Scale™
Weighing device for chlorine ton containers by Force Flow Equipment.
Chlortrol
Residual chlorine analyzer by Bailey-Fischer & Porter.
cholera
An acute, highly infectious disease of the gastrointestinal tract caused by
the waterborne bacterium Vibrio cholerae.
cholinesterase
An enzyme necessary to control the proper transmission of nerve
impulses within the body, and whose inhibition is characteristic of the toxicity
of some classes of pesticides, e.g., organophosphates.
chopper pump
Pump that chops solids between the impeller and ﬁxed cutter bar.
C-horizon
The unaltered soil layer underlying the B-horizon containing a mini-
mum of soil fauna and ﬂora.
chromatography
The separation of a mixture into its component compounds
according to their relative afﬁnity for a solvent system or column media.
Chromaver
Chemical reagents used to determine presence of chromates in solu-
tions by Hach Company.
chromium
See “heavy metals.”
chronic effect
An adverse effect on a human or animal in which symptoms recur
frequently or develop slowly over a long period of time.
chronic toxicity test
Test method used to determine the concentration of a sub-
stance that produces an adverse effect on a test organism over an extended
period of time.
Ci
See “curie (Ci).”
CICA
Confederation of International Contractors Association.
Cide-Trak™
Biocide monitoring system by Azur Environmental.
CIP
See “clean-in-place (CIP).”
Cipolletti weir
A weir having a trapezoidal-shaped notch.
circle of inﬂuence
The circular outer edge of a depression produced in the water
table by the pumping of water from a well. See also “cone of inﬂuence” and
“cone of depression.”
Circox®
High-rate aerobic reactor by CBI Walker, Inc.
CirculAire™
Aspirating aerator by Aeration Industries, Inc.
Circuline
Circular sludge collector product line by USFilter/Envirex.
Circumfed
Dissolved air ﬂotation unit by Tenco Hydro, Inc.
cistern
A small covered tank for storing water, usually placed underground.
CITES
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species.
citric acid
A crystalline acid present in citrus fruits. Chemical formula is
C6H8O7·H20.
CIWEM
The Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management.
Also known as “IWEM.”
CIX™
Ion exchange wastewater treatment/metals recovery system by Kinetico
Engineered Systems, Inc.
Cl2
See “chlorine.”
CLAM®
Cleansimatic liquid analysis meter by Monitek Technologies, Inc.
Clar+Ion®
Cationic coagulants and ﬂocculants by General Chemical Corp.
Claraetor
Circular clariﬁer with aeration compartment formerly offered by
GL&V/Dorr-Oliver, Inc.
ClarAtor®
Clariﬁer technology by Waterlink/Aero-Mod Systems.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Claribloc®
Compact physical/chemical water treatment plant by USFilter/Krüger
(North America) and OTV.
ClariCone™
Solids contact clariﬁer by CBI Walker, Inc.
clariﬁcation
Any process or combination of processes whose primary purpose is
to reduce the concentration of suspended matter in a liquid.
clariﬁer
A quiescent tank used to remove suspended solids by gravity settling.
Also called sedimentation or settling basins, they are usually equipped with a
motor driven chain and ﬂight or rake mechanism to collect settled sludge and
move it to a ﬁnal removal point.
Clariﬂo®
Water and wastewater treatment process technology by USFilter/Krüger
(North America) and OTV.
Clari-Float®
Package wastewater treatment plant including dissolved air ﬂotation
by Tenco Hydro, Inc.
ClariFloc®
Polyelectrolyte used to enhance liquid/solid separation by Polydyne,
Inc.
Clariﬂocculator
Combination clariﬁer and ﬂocculator by GL&V/Dorr-Oliver, Inc.
ClariFlow
Upﬂow clariﬁer products by Walker Process Equipment.
Clarigester
Two-story tank combining clariﬁcation and digestion by GL&V/Dorr-
Oliver, Inc.
Clarion®
Absorption media by Colloid Environmental Technologies Co.
Claripak
Upﬂow, inclined plate clariﬁer by USFilter/Aerator Products.
Clarisep™
Oily wastewater ultraﬁltration system by Pall Corp.
ClariShear™
Floating sludge collector by Techniﬂo Systems.
ClariThickener™
Combination clariﬁer and thickener by Baker Process.
Clari-Trac®
Track-mounted siphon sludge removal system for rectangular clariﬁ-
ers by F.B. Leopold Co., Inc.
Clari-Vac®
Floating bridge type siphon sludge removal unit for rectangular clari-
ﬁers by F.B. Leopold Co., Inc.
Clar-i-vator®
Solids contact clariﬁer by Smith & Loveless, Inc.
Clar-O-Floc™
Hopper-bottom clariﬁer by Alar Engineering Corp.
Clar-Vac
Induced and dissolved air ﬂotation systems by Dontech, Inc.
classiﬁer
A device used to separate constituents according to relative sizes or
densities.
clathrate
A compound formed by the inclusion of molecules in cavities formed
by crystal lattices.
clay
A ﬁne-grained earthy material that is plastic when wet, rigid when dried, and
vitriﬁed when ﬁred to high temperatures.
clay liner
A layer of low permeability soil added to the bottom and sides of an
earthen basin for use as a disposal site or pond to limit inﬁltration to the
underlying rock and soil strata.
ClaySorb
Granular, organically modiﬁed clay ﬁltration medium for removing
emulsiﬁed oil and grease by TurnKey Solutions, Inc.
Clean Air Act (CAA)
U.S. Federal law requiring the EPA to set air pollutant
emission standards.
Clean Air Act Amendments (CAAA)
Amendments issued in 1990 to expand the
EPA’s enforcement powers and place restrictions on air emissions.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Clean Chemicals
High purity chemicals for laboratory use only by Hach Company.
clean fuels
Blends or substitutes for gasoline fuels, including compressed natural
gas, methanol, ethanol, liqueﬁed petroleum gas, and others.
Clean Shot
Pneumatic solids delivery system by USFilter/CPC.
Clean Squeeze™
Screenings washer and compactor by Schreiber Corp.
Clean Water Act (CWA)
1972 U.S. federal law regulating surface water dis-
charges; updated in 1987.
Clean-A-Matic
Self-cleaning basket strainer by GA Industries, Inc.
clean-in-place (CIP)
A method of cleaning a ﬁlter medium or membrane to
restore its performance without removing it from the system.
Cleantec
Grit recycling system by Brackett Geiger.
clear cutting
The practice of completely felling a stand of trees, usually followed
by the replanting of a single species.
Clear View™
Continuous emissions monitoring system by Goal Line Environ-
mental Technologies.
Clearcon
Circular clariﬁer product line by Vulcan Industries, Inc.
Clearﬂo
Cylindrical clariﬁer by Roberts Filter Group.
Clear-Flow™
Solids contact clariﬁer by Hi-Tech Environmental, Inc.
Clearigate
Algaecide by Applied Biochemists, Inc.
clearwell
A tank or reservoir of ﬁltered water used to backwash a ﬁlter.
Climber®
Reciprocating rake bar screen by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc. (USA) and
Brackett Geiger (Europe).
ClimbeRack™
Bar screen gear rack that eliminates need for lubrication by Inﬁlco
Degremont, Inc.
clinker
A fused byproduct of the combustion of coal or other solid fuels.
clino
See “clinoptilolite.”
clinoptilolite
A naturally-occurring clay that can be used in an ion exchange
process for ammonia removal.
Cloromat®
Sodium hypochlorite generator by Ionics, Inc.
ClorTec®
Hypochlorite-generating systems by ClorTec.
close-coupled pump
A pump coupled directly to a motor without gearing or
belting.
closed cycle cooling system
A cooling water system in which heat is transferred
by recirculating water contained within the system, producing a relatively
small blowdown stream of concentrated solids.
Clostridium botulinum
Anaerobic microbe that causes botulism.
closure plan
Written plan to decommission and secure a hazardous waste man-
agement facility.
cloud
A mass of small water droplets in the atmosphere which is not of sufﬁcient
size to fall to the earth.
Cloud Chamber Scrubber™
Wet scrubber technology by Tri-Mer Corp.
cloud seeding
The artiﬁcial introduction of chemicals such as silver iodide or dry
ice into clouds to induce rain.
CLP
Contract laboratory program.
CLR Process
Closed loop reactor oxidation ditch process by Lakeside Equipment
Corp.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Cluster Rules
An industry-speciﬁc, integrated regulation that controls the release
of both air and water pollutants.
CMA
Chemical Manufacturers Association.
CMF
Continuous microﬁltration process.
CMF-S
Continuous microﬁltration system by USFilter/Memcor.
CMP
Chemical mechanical polishing.
CO
Carbon monoxide.
CO2
See “carbon dioxide.”
Coagblender
Turbine type in-line and open channel mixers by USFilter/Aerator
Products.
coagulant
A chemical added to initially destabilize, aggregate, and bind together
colloids and emulsions to improve settleability, ﬁlterability, or drainability.
coagulant aid
A material that improves the effectiveness of a coagulant by form-
ing larger or heavier particles, speeds the reactions, or permits reduced coag-
ulant dosage. Often referred to as a “ﬂocculant.”
coagulation
The destabilization and initial aggregation of ﬁnely divided suspended
solids by the addition of a polyelectrolyte or a biological process.
coal gasiﬁcation
The conversion of solid coal to a gas mixture to be used as fuel.
coal pile runoff
Rainfall runoff from or through a coal storage pile.
coalesce
The merging of two droplets to form a single, larger droplet.
Coanda effect
The tendency of a liquid coming out of a nozzle or oriﬁce to travel
close to the wall contour even if the wall curves away from the jet’s axis.
Coanda Tulip®
Clariﬁer inlet distributor by Hans Huber GmbH.
coarse bubble aeration
An aeration system that utilizes submerged diffusers
which release relatively large bubbles.
coarse sand
Sand particles, usually larger than 0.5 mm.
coarse screen
A screening device, usually having openings greater than 6 mm
(0.25″).
coastal reclamation
Reclaiming land from shallow coastal areas of the sea by
dumping rubble and refuse or constructing breakwaters, sea walls, and drain-
age of the enclosed area.
Coastal Zone Management Act (CZMA)
Act requiring all federal agencies and
permittees who conduct activities affecting a state’s coastal zone to comply
with an approved state coastal zone management program.
COC
See “cycles of concentration (COC).”
cocci
Sphere-shaped bacteria.
COD
See “chemical oxygen demand (COD).”
CODcr
Notation used for “chemical oxygen demand” as determined using potas-
sium dichromate and sulfuric acid.
CodeLine™
Membrane pressure vessel housing by Advanced Structures, Inc.
codisposal
A method of sludge disposal where the sludge is mixed with sludges
from different processes or with sorted refuse and incinerated, composted, or
treated by pyrolysis prior to ﬁnal disposal.
CODmn
Notation used for “chemical oxygen demand” as determined using per-
manganate.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

coefﬁcient
A numerical quantity, determined by experimental or analytical meth-
ods, interposed in a formula that expresses the relationship between two or
more variables to include the effect of special conditions or to correct a
theoretical relationship to one found by experiment or actual practice.
coefﬁcient of haze (COH)
A measure of air visibility determined by the darkness
of the stain remaining on white paper after it has been used to ﬁlter air.
Coex Seal™
Containment liner by National Seal Co.
cofferdam
A temporary dam, usually of sheet piling built to provide access to an
area that is normally submerged.
Co-ﬁre
Burning of two fuels in the same combustion unit, e.g., coal and natural
gas or oil and coal.
Cog Rake
Reciprocating rake bar screen by USFilter/Headworks Products.
CogBridge
Traveling bridge sludge collector by Walker Process Equipment.
cogen
See “cogeneration.”
cogeneration
A power system that simultaneously produces both electrical and
thermal energy from the same source.
COH
See “coefﬁcient of haze (COH).”
cohort
People assembled on the basis of a common characteristic and followed
or traced over a period of time.
cohort study
An epidemiological study where population subgroups with a com-
mon exposure to a suspected disease-causing agent are studied over time to
determine the risk of developing disease.
Coilﬁlter
Rotary vacuum belt ﬁlter by Komline-Sanderson Engineering Corp.
coke
The solid carbon residue resulting from the distillation of coal or petroleum.
coke oven
An industrial process which converts coal into coke, one of the basic
materials used in blast furnaces for the conversion of iron ore into iron.
coke tray aerator
An aerator where water is sprayed or ﬂows over coke-ﬁlled
trays.
cold lime-soda softening
Lime-soda softening process of water treatment at ambi-
ent temperatures.
coliform bacteria
A group of rod-shaped bacteria living in the intestines of
humans and other warm-blooded animals and shed in their fecal material, and
whose presence in water indicates that the water has received contamination
of an intestinal origin.
coliform index
A rating of the purity of water based on a count of fecal bacteria.
Colilert®
Reagent used to detect and identify coliforms and E. coli by IDEXX
Laboratories, Inc.
coliphage
A bacterial virus that uses E. coli as its host cell.
ColiSure
Coliform presence/absence test medium by Millipore Corp.
Collectaire
Airlift activated sludge removal system formerly offered by USFil-
ter/Envirex.
collection main
The public sewer to which a building service or individual system
is connected.
collection system
In wastewater, a system of conduits, generally underground
pipes, that receives and conveys sanitary wastewater and/or storm water. In
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

water supply, a system of conduits or canals used to capture a water supply
and convey it to a common point.
collector chain
Chain used to convey the scraper in a rectangular sludge collector.
Collision Scrubber™
Air pollution control scrubber by Monsanto Enviro-Chem
Systems, Inc.
colloid
Suspended solid with a diameter less than one micron that can not be
removed by sedimentation alone.
Colloidair Separator™
Open basin DAF by USFilterCorp.
colloidal
Resembling or made up of colloids.
colmatage
The reversible portion of ﬂux decline in a membrane separation system.
colony forming units (CFU)
The number of bacteria present in a sample as deter-
mined in a laboratory plate count test where the number of visible bacteria
colony units present are counted.
color
Water condition resulting from presence of colloidal material (see “apparent
color”) or organic matter (see “true color”) measured by visual comparison
with lab prepared standards.
color throw
The discharge of color to the efﬂuent of a ﬁlter or ion exchange system.
color units (CU)
The unit used to report the color of water.
colorimeter
A photoelectric instrument used to measure the amount of light of a
speciﬁc wavelength absorbed by a solution.
Color-Katch™
Flocculant/coagulant by Kem-Tron.
ColOX™
Fixed ﬁlm aerobic bioreactor system by Tetra Process Technologies.
Combi®
Self-contained, prefabricated headworks system by Waterlink Separations,
Inc.
Combi-Guard
Packaged screening unit by Andritz Sprout-Bauer S.A.
combination chain
Chain used in conveyor applications having cast block links
with steel pins and connecting bars.
combined available chlorine
The concentration of chlorine combined with
ammonia as chloramine, and still available to oxidize organic matter.
combined cycle generation
A gas turbine generator system where heat from tur-
bine generator exhaust gases are recovered by a steam generating unit whose
steam is used to drive a steam turbine generator.
combined sewer
A sewer used to receive sanitary wastewater, storm water, and
surface water.
combined sewer overﬂow (CSO)
Flow from a combined sewer that exceeds the
capacity of the sewer system and is discharged directly to a receiving water
during certain rainfall conditions.
Combu-Changer®
Regenerative oxidizer to control VOC emissions by ABB Air
Preheater, Inc.
combustible liquid
Any liquid having a ﬂash point at or above 38°C (100°F) and
below 93°C (200°F).
combustibles
Materials that can be ignited at a speciﬁc temperature in the presence
of air to release heat.
combustion gases
The mixture of gases and vapors produced by burning.
combustion product
Substance produced during the burning or oxidation of a
material.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Combustrol®
Fly ash conditioning treatment technology marketed by Wheelabra-
tor Air Pollution Control, Inc.
Comet
Electrically driven rotary distributor for ﬁxed ﬁlm reactor by Simon-Hart-
ley, Ltd.
commercial waste
Solid waste from non-manufacturing establishments such as
ofﬁce buildings, markets, restaurants, and stores.
commercial waste management facility
A treatment, storage, disposal, or trans-
fer facility which accepts waste from a variety of sources, as compared to a
private facility which normally manages a limited waste stream generated by
its own operations.
commercial water use
Potable water use in commercial enterprise providing sal-
able goods or services.
commingled recyclables
Mixed recyclables that are collected together.
comminute
To crush, grind, or pulverize something into minute particles.
comminutor
A circular screen with cutters that grinds large sewage solids into
smaller particles.
Common Sense Initiative (CSI)
A U.S. EPA program that encourages industry-
speciﬁc, rather than pollution-speciﬁc, environmental protection measures.
common wall construction
A construction technique where adjacent concrete
basins share a common wall to reduce construction costs.
community water system (CWS)
A public water system serving at least 25 year-
round residents or having 15 or more connections used by year-round residents.
Compact CDI®
Continuous deionization product by USFilter/Lowell.
Compact RO
Reverse osmosis product by USFilter/Lowell.
compaction
(1) The reduction of the bulk of solid waste by rolling and tamping.
(2) The reduction in thickness of a ﬁlter medium or membrane as a result of
pressure.
Compaplate®
Wide-gap welded heat exchanger for high fouling service by Alfa-
Laval Separation, Inc.
compensated hardness
A calculated value based on total hardness, magnesium-
to-calcium ratio, and sodium concentration used to correct for reductions in
hardness removal capacity in zeolite exchange water softeners.
competitive inhibition
The situation that occurs when two compounds compete
for the same enzyme, leading to interference in metabolism of one by the
other.
Completaire
Package waste treatment plant with complete mix activated sludge
formerly offered by USFilter/Envirex.
complete treatment
A method of treating water that consists of the addition of
coagulant chemicals, ﬂash mixing, coagulation-ﬂocculation, sedimentation,
and ﬁltration. Also called conventional ﬁltration.
completed test
The third and last step in the analysis of water and wastewater for
the presence of fecal bacteria. Positive cultures from previous tests are inoc-
ulated and a gram stain is performed on isolated colonies.
CompleTreator
Package trickling ﬁlter waste treatment plant formerly offered by
GL&V/Dorr-Oliver, Inc.
complexing
The formation of a complex compound.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Compliance Assurance Monitoring rule (CAM rule)
The EPA Clear Air Act
rule that lets a regulated industry select the means to demonstrate that its
operation is within permit conditions.
compliance coal
Any coal that emits less than 1.2 pounds of sulfur dioxide per
million Btu when burned. Also known as “low sulfur coal.”
compliance cycle
The 9-year calendar cycle, beginning January 1, 1993, during
which public water systems must monitor. Each cycle consists of three 3-year
compliance periods.
Compliance Master™
Oil/water separator by Mercer International Inc.
compliance schedule
A negotiated agreement between a pollution source and a
government agency that speciﬁes dates and procedures by which a source will
reduce emissions and, thereby, comply with a regulation.
Compmaster™
Composting computer process control system by USFilter/CPC.
Component Clariﬁer
Standard group of clariﬁer components and options that can
be matched with an application’s requirements by Baker Process.
composite sample
A combination of individual samples of water or wastewater
taken at preselected intervals to minimize the effect of variability of individual
samples.
compost
The end product of composting.
Compost-A-Matic
Sludge composting system by Farmer Automatic of America, Inc.
composting
Stabilization process relying on the aerobic decomposition of organic
matter in sludge by bacteria and fungi.
compound
A substance consisting of two or more independent elements that can
only be separated by chemical reactions.
Compound 146
Polyurethane material used for sprocket tooth insert by USFil-
ter/Rex & Link-Belt Products.
compression settling
Phenomenon referring to sedimentation of particles in a
concentrated suspension where further settling can occur only by compression
of the existing structure of settled particles. Also called “type IV settling.”
compressor
A mechanical device used to increase the pressure of a gas or vapor.
concentration
(1) The amount of a substance dissolved or suspended in a unit
volume of solution. (2) The process of increasing the amount of a substance
per unit volume of solution.
concentration factor
A number indicating the number of times a solution may
be concentrated.
concentration polarization
A phenomenon in which solutes form a dense, polar-
ized layer next to a membrane surface which eventually restricts ﬂow through
the membrane.
concentration ratio
The ratio of the concentration of solids in a water system to
those of the dilute makeup water added to the system.
Concord™
Catalytic incinerators by Catalytic Products International.
concrete
A mixture of water, sand, stone, and a binder that hardens to a stone-
like mass.
condensate
Water obtained by evaporation and subsequent condensation.
condensate polishing
Treatment of condensate water to achieve required purity.
condensation
The change in state from vapor to liquid; the opposite of evaporation.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Condense-A-Hood
Air/odor collecting hoods by Bedminster Bioconversion Corp.
condenser
A heat transfer device used to cool steam and convert it from the vapor
to liquid phase.
Conden-Sorb™
VOC abatement system by M&W Industries, Inc.
conditioning
Pretreatment of a wastewater or sludge, usually be means of chem-
icals, to facilitate removal of water in a subsequent thickening or dewatering
process.
conductance
(1) A measure of a solution’s electrical conductivity that is equal to
the reciprocal of the electrical resistance. (2) A rapid method of estimating
the dissolved-solids content of a water sample by determining the capacity of
a water sample to carry an electrical current.
conduction
The transfer of heat from one body to another by direct contact.
conductivity
The ability of a substance to conduct electricity; directly related to
the mineral content of water.
cone of depression
A depression in the water table that develops around a pumped
well.
cone of inﬂuence
The depression, roughly conical in shape, produced in the water
table by the pumping of water from a well.
Cone Screen
Internally fed rotary ﬁne screen by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc. (Western
Hemisphere) and USFilter/Contra-Shear.
Conesep™
External regeneration technology for ion exchange systems by Glegg
Water Conditioning Co.
conﬁdence interval
A computed interval with a speciﬁed probability that contains
the estimated value of a parameter.
Conﬁgurator®
Computerized process design and equipment selection tool by
USFilter/Rockford.
conﬁned aquifer
An aquifer in which groundwater is conﬁned under pressure
which is signiﬁcantly greater than atmospheric pressure.
conﬁned space
A potentially hazardous space which has limited openings for
entry and exit, unfavorable natural ventilation, and/or is not designed for
continuous worker occupancy.
conﬁrmed test
The second of three steps in the analysis of water and wastewater
for the presence of fecal bacteria. Positive cultures from the ﬁrst, “presumptive
test,” are inoculated and examined for fermentation after incubation. If fer-
mentation is present, a third stage, the “completed test,” is performed.
conﬂuence
The point where the ﬂow of streams or rivers meet.
conﬂuent growth
A continuous bacterial growth covering the ﬁltration area of a
membrane ﬁlter, in which bacterial colonies are not discrete.
congeal
To thicken, jell, or solidify, usually by cooling or freezing.
congenital
Existing at or before birth, usually referring to an abnormal trait or
disorder.
conjunctive use
The combined management of surface and groundwater supplies
to provide a greater yield and/or more stable cost structure than operating two
independent supplies.
connate water
Water trapped in sedimentary rocks during their formation, also
known as “fossil water.”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Conoscreen
Rotating disc microscreen by Nuove Energie.
consent decree
A binding agreement by two parties in a lawsuit which settles all
questions raised in the case and does not require additional judicial action.
conservation
The careful and organized management and use of natural resources.
Conservation Reserve Enhancement Program (CREP)
The U.S. Department
of Agriculture program which gives farmers ﬁnancial incentives for instituting
conservation practices on their land.
Consolidated Electric
Product group integrated within USFilter/Control Systems.
constant-rate ﬁltration
Filter operation where ﬂow through the ﬁlter is main-
tained at a constant rate by an adjustable efﬂuent control valve.
constructed conveyance
Artiﬁcial waterways including ditches, culverts, ﬂumes,
canals, or natural waterbodies that are altered by humans.
consumptive waste
Water that returns to the atmosphere without beneﬁcial use.
ContaClariﬁer™
Upﬂow buoyant media clariﬁer by Roberts Filter Group.
Contac-Pac
Circular steel contact aeration package waste treatment plant formerly
offered by USFilter/Envirex.
contact condenser
A device in which steam is condensed through direct contact
with a cooling liquid.
contact ﬂocculation
A water treatment process in which coagulated water passes
through a coarse media to enhance ﬂoc formation prior to ﬁltration or sedi-
mentation.
contact pesticide
A chemical that kills pests when it touches them instead of when
it is ingested.
contact process
Wastewater treatment process where diffused air is bubbled over
ﬁxed media surfaces.
contact stabilization process
Modiﬁcation of the activated sludge process where
raw wastewater is aerated with activated sludge for a short time prior to solids
removal and continued aeration in a stabilization tank. Also called “biosorption
process.”
contact time
The time in which a chemical is in contact with another reacting
chemical or constituent.
Container Filter
Sedimentation basin by Flo Trend Systems, Inc.
contaminant
Any foreign component present in another substance.
contamination
The degradation of natural water, air, or soil quality resulting from
human activity.
Cont-Flo™
Back cleaned reciprocating rake bar screen by John Meunier, Inc.
continental divide
A watershed boundary separating rivers ﬂowing in one direc-
tion from those ﬂowing in an opposite direction.
continental drift
A theory that continents shift their positions as a result of cur-
rents in the molten rocks of the earth’s mantle.
Continental®
Water treatment products and systems by USFilter/Lowell.
contingency plan
A document setting out an organized, planned, and coordinated
course of action to be followed in case of ﬁre, explosion, or release of hazardous
waste constituents which could threaten human health or the environment.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

contingent valuation survey (CVS)
A survey technique for assigning value to
injured natural resources based on respondents willingness to support various
resources in monetary terms.
continuous discharge
A routine release to the environment that occurs without
interruption, except for infrequent shutdowns for maintenance and process
changes.
continuous emissions monitoring
The continuous measurement of pollutants
emitted into the atmosphere from combustion or industrial processes.
continuous sample
A ﬂow of water from a particular place in a plant to the
location where samples are collected for testing; may be used to obtain grab
or composite samples.
Continuous-Flo
Traveling bridge ﬁlter by USFilter/Zimpro.
contract labs
Laboratories under contract to the EPA that analyze samples taken
from waste, soil, air, and water or carry out research projects.
contract operations
Private operation of municipal facilities such as water and
wastewater treatment plants.
contracted weir
A rectangular notched weir having a crest width narrower than
the channel within which it is installed.
Contraﬂo®
Solids contact reactor clariﬁer by USFilter/General Filter.
Contraﬂux®
Countercurrent-activated carbon adsorption unit by Graver Co.
contrail
A visible trail of cloud-like condensed water vapor often forming in the
wake of an airplane ﬂying in clear skies. Also called a “vapor trail.”
Contra-Shear®
Screening equipment product line by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc. (West-
ern Hemisphere) and USFilter/Contra-Shear.
Contreat®
Aerobic wastewater treatment package plant by EnviroSystems Supply.
control technique guidelines (CTG)
EPA documents issued to assist state and
local pollution control authorities to achieve and maintain air quality standards
for certain sources through reasonably available control technologies.
controlled reaction
A chemical reaction under temperature and pressure condi-
tions maintained within safe limits to produce a desired product or process.
convection
The transfer of heat by a moving ﬂuid such as air or water.
conventional systems
Systems that have been traditionally used to collect munic-
ipal wastewater in gravity sewers and convey it to a central primary or sec-
ondary treatment plant prior to discharge to surface waters.
conversion
See “recovery.”
Convertofuser®
Wide band coarse bubble diffuser with ﬁne sheath by USFil-
ter/Diffused Air Products Group.
conveyance loss
Water loss in pipes, channels, conduits, or ditches by leakage or
evaporation.
cooling pond
A pond where water is cooled by contact with air prior to reuse or
discharge.
cooling tower
An open water recirculating device that uses fans or natural draft
to draw or force ambient air through the device to cool warm water by direct
contact.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

cooling tower blowdown
A sidestream of water discharged from a cooling tower
recirculation system to prevent scaling or precipitation of saturated salts or
minerals.
cooling water
Water used, usually in a condenser, to reduce the temperature of
liquids or gases.
COP™
Clariﬁer optimization program by WesTech Engineering, Inc.
Copa CSO Screen
CSO screen by Waste-Tech, Inc.
Copa Screen
Packaged screening and dewatering unit by Longwood Engineering
Co, Ltd.
CopaClariﬁer
Secondary clariﬁers with ﬁlter brushes by Copa Group.
Copa-NILL
Tipping bucket CSO tank ﬂush system by Waste-Tech, Inc. (U.S.) and
Copa Group (U.K.).
Copasacs
Fine screening sack by NSW Corp. (U.S.) and Copa Group (U.K.).
Copasocks
Sock-type screening sack by Copa Group.
Copatrawl
Sock-type screening sack by NSW Corp. (U.S.) and Copa Group
(U.K.).
Copawash
Rotating boom wash system for stormwater tanks by Waste-Tech, Inc.
(U.S.) and Copa Group (U.K.).
CopaWets
Chemical coagulation and ﬂocculation process for wastewater treatment
by Copa Group.
coping
The top or covering of an exterior masonry wall.
Coplastix®
Synthetic composite sluice gates and stop logs by Ashbrook Corp.
(U.S.) and Simon-Hartley, Ltd. (U.K.).
copper sulfate
Chemical used for algae control, also called “blue vitriol.” Chem-
ical formula is CuSO4.
copperas
Common name for ferrous sulfate heptahydrate, a common coagulant.
Chemical formula is FeSO4-7H2O.
copper-nickel
A copper alloy containing 10 to 30% nickel to increase resistance
to corrosion and stress corrosion cracking.
coral
Calcium carbonate skeletal structures of the Anthozoa class of marine polyps
often deposited in large masses forming reefs and atolls in tropical seas.
coral reef
A ridge composed primarily of coral lying at or near the surface of a
tropical sea.
Core Separator
Particulate control device for gaseous emissions by LSR Technol-
ogies, Inc.
corner sweep
Scraper used to remove sludge from the corner of a square clariﬁer.
corona
(1) The layer of ionized gas surrounding the sun. (2) A sometimes visible
electric discharge resulting from a partial electric breakdown in a gas.
corona discharge method (CD)
A method of producing ozone where air or oxygen
is passed between two electodes and the subsequent application of a high voltage
results in a corona discharge, producing ozone as a result of power dissipation.
Corosex®
Processed magnesia used in ﬁlters to neutralize acidity by Clack Corp.
Cor-Pak®
Catalytic oxidizer system by ABB Air Preheater, Inc.
corporate average fuel economy standard (CAFE)
A 1978 standard that
enhanced the national fuel conservation effort, imposing a miles-per-gallon
ﬂoor for motor vehicles.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

corrosion
Attack on material through chemical or electrochemical reaction with
surrounding medium.
corrosive
The characteristic of a chemical agent that reacts with the surface of a
material causing it to deteriorate or wear away.
corrugated plate interceptor (CPI)
Oil separation device utilizing inclined cor-
rugated plates to separate free nonemulsiﬁed oil and water based on their
density difference.
Corten
High strength, low alloy steel with enhanced atmospheric corrosion resis-
tance by US Steel Corp.
corundum
See “alumina.”
Cosmos®
Suspended solids monitoring system by GLI International.
cost recovery
A legal process by which potentially responsible parties who contrib-
uted to contamination at a Superfund site can be required to reimburse the trust
fund for money spent during any cleanup actions by the federal government.
Costar
Product line of by Corning, Inc.
Counter Current®
Aeration process using rotating diffusers suspended from a
rotating bridge by Schreiber Corp.
coupon test
A method of determining the rate of corrosion or scale formation by
placing metal strips, or coupons, of a known weight in a tank or pipe.
cover material
Soil or other suitable material used to cover solid wastes in a
sanitary or secure landﬁll.
Covertite
Clear span wastewater treatment tank cover by Thermacon Enviro Sys-
tems, Inc.
CPC
Chemical protective clothing.
CPC Engineering
Former name of USFilter/CPC.
CPI
(1) See “corrugated plate interceptor (CPI).” (2) Chemical process industry.
CPM
Critical path method.
CPSC
Consumer Products Safety Commission.
CPVC
Chlorinated polyvinyl chloride. A chlorinated form of PVC that provides
increased heat resistance.
cracking
A thermal process in which petroleum distillates or residues are broken
down into products having lower boiling points and of altered chemical con-
stitutions.
cradle-to-grave
Hazardous waste management concept that attempts to track haz-
ardous waste from its generation point (cradle) to its ultimate disposal point
(grave).
Crane®
Water treatment product line by Cochrane Inc.
Crawler
Bar screen by Vulcan Industries, Inc.
Credible Evidence rule (CE Rule)
The EPA Clear Air Act rule allowing industry,
regulatory agencies, or the public to use any credible evidence or information
to show compliance or non-compliance with emissions standards and limitations.
creek
(1) A stream, usually ﬂowing into a river, or serving as a natural drainage
course for a basin. (2) A narrow tidal inlet through a coastal marsh.
Crenothrix polyspora
A genus of ﬁlamentous bacteria that utilize iron in their
metabolism and cause staining, plugging, and taste and odor problems in water
systems. See also “iron bacteria.”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

CREP
See “Conservation Reserve Enhancement Program.”
crest gate
A gate installed on the crest of a spillway or dam used to vary the discharge.
crevice corrosion
Localized corrosion in narrow crevices ﬁlled with liquid.
Crisafulli
Former name of SRS Crisafulli, Inc.
criteria pollutants
The major air pollutants, including carbon monoxide, hydro-
carbons, lead, nitrogen dioxide, sulfur dioxide, ozone, and suspended partic-
ulates, for which the U.S. EPA has established ambient air quality standards.
critical ﬂow
The rate of ﬂow of a ﬂuid equal to the speed of sound in that ﬂuid.
critical pitting temperature
A value used to compare a material’s resistance to
pitting corrosion.
critical point
The combination of pressure and temperature at which point a gas
and liquid become indistinguishable.
critical pressure
The minimum pressure necessary to liquefy a gas that is at
critical temperature.
critical temperature
The temperature above which a gas cannot be liqueﬁed
solely by an increase in pressure.
Cromaglass
Batch treatment wastewater system by Cromaglass Corp.
cross collector
A mechanical sludge collector mechanism extending the width of
one or more longitudinal sedimentation basins, and used to consolidate and
convey accumulated sludge to a ﬁnal removal point.
cross connection
A physical connection in a plumbing system through which a
potable water supply could be contaminated.
Cross/Counteﬂo
Inclined plate clariﬁer by USFilter/Zimpro.
Cross-Flo®
Inclined static screen by Kason Corp.
crossﬂow ﬁltration
Method of ﬁltration where the feed stream ﬂows parallel to the
surface of the ﬁlter medium and only a portion of the feed passes through the ﬁlter.
Crossﬂow Fouling Index™
Membrane fouling test index by BetzDearborn-Argo
District.
crosslinkage
The degree of bonding of a monomer or set of monomers to form
an insoluble, three-dimensional resin matrix.
Crouzat™
Water treatment products and systems by USFilter Corp.
Crown®
Self-priming sewage pump product line by Crane Pumps & Systems.
Crown Press™
Sludge dewatering test device by Phipps & Bird.
CRP®
Continuous recirculation sludge mixing process for anaerobic digesters by
USFilter/Envirex.
CRT
Cell residence time.
crude oil
Unreﬁned petroleum as produced from underground formations.
crumb rubber
Ground or shredded rubber produced by shredding used in auto-
mobile tires that can be recycled in asphalt-rubber or other products.
crypto
See “Cryptosporidium.”
cryptosporidiosis
Gastrointestinal disease caused by the ingestion of waterborne
Cryptosporidium parvum, often resulting from drinking water contaminated
by runoff from pastures or farmland.
Cryptosporidium
A protozoan parasite that can live in the intestines of humans
and animals.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Cryptosporidium parvum
A species of Cryptosporidium known to infect humans.
crystal
A homogenous chemical substance that has a deﬁnite geometric shape
with ﬁxed angles between its faces, having distinct edges or faces.
Crystalactor
A device which softens water, removes phosphates, and recovers
heavy metals from wastewater by DHV Water BV.
crystalline
Having a regular molecular structure evidenced by crystals.
crystallization
The process of forming crystals.
crystallizer
Common term for a forced circulation evaporator.
CSA
Canadian Standards Association.
CSF
Coagulation, sedimentation, ﬁltration.
CSI
See “Common Sense Initiative (CSI).”
CSO
Combined sewer overﬂow.
CSP
Concrete surface proﬁle.
CSPE
Chlorosulphonated polyethylene.
CSS™
Wet scrubber technology by Tri-Mer Corp.
CSTR
Completely stirred tank reactor.
CT value
See “C × T.”
CU
See “color units (CU).”
cubic centimeter (cc)
A volume measurement equal in capacity to one milliliter
(ml). One quart is approximately 946 cubic centimeters.
cubic meter (m3)
A volume measurement equal to 1000 liters or 264.2 gallons.
One cubic meter of water weighs approximately 1 metric ton.
Cullar®
Activated carbon ﬁlter by Culligan International Corp.
cullet
Crushed glass.
Cullex
Softening resin by Culligan International Corp.
Cullsorb
Greensand ﬁlter by Culligan International Corp.
culm
Coal dust or anthracite tailings.
cultural eutrophication
Increasing rate at which water bodies “die” by pollution
from human activities.
culture
A microbial growth developed by furnishing sufﬁcient nutrients in a suit-
able environment.
culvert
An enclosed channel serving as a continuation of an open stream where
a stream meets a roadway or other barrier.
cumulative exposure
The summation of exposures of an organism to a chemical
over a period of time.
cup screen
A single entry, double exit drum screen.
cupric
Of, or containing copper.
cupric sulfate
Copper sulfate.
cupro-nickel
An alloy of copper containing up to 40% nickel.
curb stop
A water service shutoff valve located in a water service pipe near the
curb and between the water main and the building.
curie (Ci)
A unit of radioactivity equal to 3.7 × 1010 disintegrations per second;
1 gram of radium has 1 Ci of radioactivity.
Currie Clariﬁer
Circular clariﬁer with aeration compartment formerly offered by
GL&V/Dorr-Oliver, Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

curtain wall
An external wall that is not load bearing, usually refering to a wall
that extends down below the surface of the water to prevent ﬂoating objects
from entering a screen forebay.
cutaneous
Relating to the skin.
Cutrine®-Plus
Algaecide/herbicide by Applied Biochemists, Inc.
Cuver
Chemical used in detect waterborne copper by Hach Company.
CVOC
Chlorinated volatile organic compound.
CVS
See “contingent valuation survey (CVS).”
CWA
See “Clean Water Act (CWA).”
CWAs
Chemical warfare agents.
CWS
See “community water system (CWS).”
CW-SRF
Clean Water State Revolving Fund.
cwt
Hundredweight.
Cyanamer®
Scale inhibitors and dispersants by Cytec Industries, Inc.
cyanazine
A common and potentially carcinogenic herbicide sometimes found in
drinking water.
cyanide
A compound containing a CN group, usually extremely poisonous, often
used in electroplating and other chemical processes.
Cybreak™
Emulsion breaker by Cytec Industries, Inc.
Cycle-Let®
Wastewater treatment and recycling system by Zenon Environmental,
Inc.
cycles of concentration (COC)
The ratio of the total dissolved solids concentra-
tion in a recirculating water system to the total dissolved solids concentration
of the makeup water.
Cyclesorb®
Granular activated carbon adsorption system by Calgon Carbon Corp.
Cyclo®
Speed reducer and gearmotor product line by Sumitomo Machinery Corp.
Cyclo Blower
Air blower by Gardner Denver Blower Division.
Cyclo Grit Washer
Inclined screw type grit washer and dewatering unit by Baker
Process.
Cyclo/Phram®
Rotary plunger metering pump by BIF.
CycloClean™
Hydrocyclone separator by Krebs Engineers.
Cycloﬂoc
Method for increasing clariﬁer rise rates by USFilter/Krüger.
Cy-Clo-Grit
Prefabricated cyclonic grit collector by Waste-Tech, Inc.
Cyclo-Hearth
Multiple hearth furnace by USFilter/Zimpro.
Cyclo-Jet™
Floating self-aspirating aerator by Waterlink Biological Systems.
Cyclone™
Coarse bubble diffuser by Aeromix Systems, Inc.
Cyclospora
A family of protozoan organisms that are thought to cause waterborne
disease.
CycloSpray®
Fixed media ﬁlter by Lighthouse Separation Systems, Inc.
Cyclotherm
Sludge heat exchanger by USFilter/Envirex.
Cyclo-Treat™
Cyclone separator by USFilter/Envirex.
Cygnet
Rotary distributor for ﬁxed ﬁlm reactor by Simon-Hartley, Ltd.
cyst
A resting stage formed by some bacteria and protozoa in which the whole
cell is surrounded by a protective layer.
cytotoxin
Any material toxic to cells.
CZMA
See “Coastal Zone Management Act (CZMA).”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

D
D Tech™
Environmental ﬁeld test kits by Strategic Diagnostics, Inc.
D/DBP
Disinfectant/disinfection by product.
D/DBP Rule (D/DBPR)
Proposed U.S. EPA rule to limit the maximum contam-
inant level of trihalomethanes.
D/T level
The dilution-to-threshold level of a water sample which indicates the
number of dilutions of clean, odor-free air necessary to reduce an odor to a
level that most people cannot detect.
D-20
Filter underdrain nozzle by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
Dac Floc
Polyelectrolyte used to enhance liquid/solid separation by Dacar Chem-
ical Co.
DAF
See “dissolved air ﬂotation (DAF).”
DAFT
Dissolved air ﬂoatation thickener.
daily cover
Cover material spread and compacted on the top and side slopes of
compacted solid waste at the end of each day to control ﬁre, moisture, and
erosion and to assure an aesthetic appearance.
Dakota
Belt ﬁlter press by HydroCal, Inc.
DALR
Dry adiabatic lapse rate. See “adiabatic lapse rate.”
dalton
A nominal unit of weight equal to that of a single hydrogen atom; 1 × 10–24
grams.
Dalton’s Law of Partial Pressure
In a mixture of gases, each gas exerts pressure
independently of the others and the pressure of each gas is proportional to the
amount of that gas in the mixture.
Dangler
Fine bubble aeration system by MixAir Technologies, Inc.
darcy
A unit of measure used to indicate permeability, standardized by the Amer-
ican Petroleum Institute.
DataGator™
Sewer ﬂow metering system by TN Technologies, Inc.
DataRAM™
Continuous measurement airborne particulates monitor by MIE, Inc.
Davco
Former name of USFilter/Davco.
Davis Process
Former name of USFilter/Davis Process.
Davis Water & Waste
Former name of USFilter/Davco.
Davis-D2™
Coarse bubble diffuser by USFilter/Davco.
Davis-OM™
Oval membrane air diffuser by USFilter/Davco.
Davy Bamag
Former name of Lurgi Bamag GmbH.
day tank
Tank used to store chemicals or diluted polymer solution for 24 hours or
less.
dB
See “decibel (dB).”
dBA
See “A-scale sound level (dBA).”
DBC Plus®
Bacterial culture for wastewater treatment by Enviroﬂow Inc.
DBO
Design-build-operate. A method of project implementation where a contrac-
tor is responsible for a facility’s design, construction, and long-term operation.
DBOO
Design-build-own-operate. A method of project implementation where a con-
tractor is responsible for a facility’s design, construction, ownership, and operation.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

DBP
See “disinfection byproduct (DBP).”
DBP0
Instantaneous disinfection byproduct concentration.
DBPFP
See “disinfection byproduct formation potential (DBPFP).”
DBPP
See “disinfection byproduct precursor (DBPP).”
DBS™
Clariﬁer and thickener drive units by DBS Manufacturing, Inc.
DC
Direct current.
D-Chlor™
Dechlorination system using sodium sulﬁte tablets by Exceltec Inter-
national Corp.
DCI System Six™
Open channel UV system by Bailey-Fischer & Porter.
DCP
Dissolved concentration potential.
DCS
See “distributed control system (DCS).”
DDT
Dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane. A chlorinated hydrocarbon insecticide
banned in many countries because of its persistence in the environment and
accumulation in the food chain.
DDW
Distilled deionized water.
DE
See “diatomaceous earth (DE).”
dead storage
The stored reservoir water remaining at a level below the reservoir’s
lowest discharge level, and therefore unavailable for use.
deadleg
The part of a pipeline in which ﬂuid does not ﬂow and may stagnate.
deaerator
Device used to remove dissolved gases from solution.
dealkalization
Any process that removes or reduces alkalinity of water.
dealkalizer
Ion exchange unit with strong anion bed used to reduce bicarbonate
alkalinity.
DeAmine™
Odor control product by NuTech Environmental Corp.
deashing
See “demineralizing.”
decant
Separation of a liquid from settled solids by pouring or drawing off the
upper layer of liquid after the solids have settled.
decanter centrifuge
See “solid bowl centrifuge.”
decarbonator
A device used to remove alkalinity from solution by conversion to
CO2 prior to air stripping.
decat water
Water that has had the hardness minerals removed by a water softener.
decay products
Degraded radioactive materials, often referred to as “daughters”
or “progeny.”
DeCelerating Flo
Gravity sand ﬁlter by CBI Walker, Inc.
dechlorination
The partial or complete reduction of residual chlorine by any
chemical or physical process.
decibel (dB)
The unit for measuring sound pressure levels. It is the logarithm of
the ratio of the sound’s intensity to the intensity of the weakest audible sound.
declining-rate ﬁltration
Filter operation where the rate of ﬂow through the ﬁlter
declines and the level of the liquid above the ﬁlter bed rises throughout the
length of the ﬁlter run.
decontamination
The process of reducing or eliminating the presence of harmful
substances, such as infectious agents, so as to reduce the likelihood of disease
transmission from those substances.
Dee Fo®
Foam control additive by Ultra Additives, Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

deep bed ﬁlter
Granular media ﬁlter with a sand or anthracite ﬁlter bed that is deeper
than a conventional ﬁlter, i.e., 0.9m (3 feet), and often up to 1.8m (6 feet) deep.
Deep Bubble™
Corrosion control aeration system by Lowry Aeration Systems, Inc.
Deep Draw
Airlift diffuser for lagoons by Wilﬂey Weber, Inc.
deep well injection
Technique where raw or treated wastes are discharged through
a properly designed well into a geological stratum.
DeepAer
Aeration system with rectangular eductor tubes by Walker Process Equip-
ment.
DeepBed
Granular media ﬁlter bed used as ﬁxed ﬁlm reactor by Tetra Process
Technologies.
Deﬁned Substrate Technology™
Reagent system designed to promote growth of
target microbe by Environetics, Inc.
Deﬂectofuser®
Coarse bubble air diffuser by USFilter/Diffused Air Products
Group.
deﬂocculating agent
A material added to a suspension to prevent settling.
defoliant
A chemical applied to plants which causes them to lose their leaves.
deforestation
The permanent clearing of forest land and its conversion to nonforest
uses.
degasiﬁer
Device used to remove dissolved gases from solution, usually by means
of an air-stripping column.
degradation
The biological breakdown of organic substances.
dehydrate
The physical or chemical process where water in combination with
other matter is removed.
DeHydro®
Vacuum assisted sludge drying bed by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
deinking
The process of removing ink from secondary ﬁbers.
deionization (DI)
The process of removing ions from water, most commonly
through an ion exchange process.
dekSPRAY
Cooling tower nozzles by Brentwood Industries, Inc.
Delaval Filter
Precoat condensate polishing ﬁlter by Idreco USA, Ltd.
deliquescent
The ability of a dry solid to absorb water from the air and soften or
dissolve as a result.
delist
The use of a petition process to have a facility’s toxic designation rescinded.
DelPAC
Polyaluminum coagulants by Delta Chemical Corp.
Delrin
High molecular weight acetal resin polymer material by E.I. Dupont De
Nemours, Inc.
Delt™
Traveling water screen chain by USFilter/Rex & Link-Belt Products.
Delta™
Mixing technology by Calgon Carbon Corp.
delta
The ﬂat alluvial area at the mouth of some rivers where an accumulation of
river sediment is deposited in a sea or lake.
Delta G®
Parallel plate separator by Smith & Loveless, Inc.
delta P
Differential pressure.
delta T
Differential temperature.
DeltaFlow™
Water puriﬁcation plant by Ecolochem, Inc.
Delta-Pak®
Mass transfer packing media by Delta Cooling Towers, Inc.
Deltapilot
Hydrostatic level measurement device by Endress+Hauser.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Delta-Stak®
Inclined plate clariﬁer by Baker Process.
Delumper®
Solids disintegrator and crusher products by Franklin Miller, Inc.
demin
Common abbreviation for “demineralizer.”
demineralizing
The process of removing minerals from water, most commonly
through an ion exchange process.
Demister®
Mist eliminator by Koch-Otto York.
dendrimer
Hyperbranch macromolecule to control inorganic water constituents
to prevent crystal formation.
Denite®
Denitriﬁcation process using a granular media ﬁxed ﬁlm reactor bed by
Tetra Process Technologies.
denitIR®
Biological denitriﬁcation system by Baker Process.
denitriﬁcation
Biological process in which nitrates are converted to nitrogen.
Denitri-Filt™
Biological denitriﬁcation ﬁlter by USFilter/Davco.
Densadeg®
Thickener-clariﬁer unit with lamella zone and sludge recirculation by
Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
Densator®
High density solids contact clariﬁer with primary and secondary mixing
zones by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
dense, nonaqueous phase liquid (DNAPL)
A liquid that is immiscible in and
denser than water.
density
The ratio of the mass of an object to its volume.
density current
A ﬂow of water through a larger body of water which retains its
unmixed identity due to a difference in density.
Densludge
Digestion system with primary thickening unit by GL&V/Dorr-Oliver,
Inc.
Dentrol
Sludge density controller by Walker Process Equipment.
Deox/2000®
Dechlorination analyzer by USFilter/Wallace & Tiernan.
Deox®
Oxygen and dissolved gas removal technology by Ecolochem, Inc.
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
The macromolecule that contains the hereditary
material vital to reproduction.
De-Pac™
Disposal dewatering ﬁlter by PacTec, Inc.
Department of Energy (DOE)
U.S. federal agency responsible for research and
development of energy technology.
Department of Transportation (DOT)
U.S. federal agency responsible for reg-
ulating transport of hazardous and nonhazardous materials.
depletion curve
In hydraulics, a graphical representation of water depletion from
storage-stream channels, surface soil, and groundwater.
Deplution
Wastewater treatment products by JDV Equipment Corp.
Depolox®
Chlorine, pH, and ﬂuoride analyzer USFilter/Wallace & Tiernan.
depth ﬁltration
Filtration classiﬁcation for ﬁlters where solids are removed within
a granular media bed.
Depurator
Induced air ﬂotation unit by Baker Hughes Process Systems.
dermal
Used or applied to the skin.
dermal exposure
Contact between a chemical and the skin.
dermal toxicity
The ability of a pesticide or toxic chemical to poison people or
animals by contact with the skin. See “contact pesticide.”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

DES
A synthetic estrogen, diethylstilbestrol is used as a growth stimulant in food
animals. Residues in meat are thought to be carcinogenic.
Desal™
Desalination equipment and systems product line by Osmonics Desal.
Desalator™
Reverse osmosis product line by USFilter/Bekox.
desalination
The process of removing dissolved salts from water.
Desalination Systems
Former name of Osmonics Desal.
desalinization
See “desalination.”
desalting
See “desalination.”
DeSander®
Hydrocyclone separator by Krebs Engineers.
desert
A region characterized by a climatic pattern where evaporation exceeds
precipitation.
desertiﬁcation
The process where the biological productivity of land is reduced,
resulting in desert-like conditions.
desiccant
A substance capable of absorbing moisture, used as a drying agent.
design criteria
(1) Engineering guidelines specifying construction details and
materials. (2) Objectives, results, or limits that must be met by a facility,
structure, or process in performance of its intended functions.
design storm
The magnitude of a storm upon which the design of a storm water
facility is based, usually expressed in terms of the probability of the occurrence
over a period of years.
designated pollutant
Air pollutants including acid mist, total reduced sulfur, and
ﬂuorides which are neither criteria nor hazardous pollutants, as described in
the Clean Air Act, but for which new source performance standards exist.
designated uses
Those water uses, including cold water ﬁsheries, public water
supply, and irrigation, identiﬁed in state water quality standards that must be
achieved and maintained as required under the Clean Water Act.
designer bugs
Common term for microbes developed through biotechnology that
can degrade speciﬁc toxic chemicals at their source in toxic waste dumps or
in groundwater.
desilting basin
A settling basin used for sedimentation of silt, usually for storm-
water ﬂows.
desorption
The release of an adsorbed solute from an adsorbent.
destination facility
The facility to which regulated medical waste is shipped for
treatment and destruction, incineration, and/or disposal.
destratiﬁcation
Vertical mixing within a lake or reservoir to totally or partially
eliminate separate layers of temperature, plant, or animal life.
destroyed medical waste
Regulated medical waste that has been ruined, torn
apart, or mutilated through thermal treatment, melting, shredding, grinding,
tearing, or breaking so that it is no longer generally recognized as medical
waste, but has not yet been treated.
destruction and removal efﬁciency (DRE)
An expression of hazardous waste
incinerator efﬁciency stated as the percentage of incoming principal organic
hazardous components destroyed during incineration.
Destrux®
Heavy duty rotary knife cutter to granulate scrap material by Franklin
Miller, Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

desulfurization
Removal of sulfur from fossil fuels to reduce pollution.
detectable leak rate
The smallest leak from a storage tank expressed in terms of
gallons-or liters-per-hour that a test can reliably discern with a certain prob-
ability of detection or false alarm.
detention time
The theoretical time required to displace the contents of a tank or
unit at a given rate of discharge.
detergent
Synthetic washing agent that helps to remove dirt and oil and may
contain compounds which kill useful bacteria and encourage algae growth
when present in wastewater that reaches receiving waters.
detoxiﬁcation
Treatment to remove a toxic material.
Detritor
Grit removal unit with reciprocating raking mechanism by GL&V/Dorr-
Oliver, Inc.
detritus
(1) Decaying organic matter such as root hairs, stems, and leaves usually
found on the bottom of a water body. (2) Grit or fragments of rock or minerals.
detritus tank
Square tank grit chamber incorporating a revolving rake to scrape
settled grit to a sump for removal.
Developure
Depth ﬁlter by Osmonics, Inc.
dew
Water droplets that form on cool surfaces following condensation of atmo-
spheric water vapor.
dew point
The temperature to which air with a given concentration of water vapor
must be cooled to result in condensation of the vapor.
Dewa
Water and wastewater treatment systems by DWT-Engineering Oy.
dewater
(1) To extract a portion of the water present in a sludge or slurry. (2) To
drain or remove water from an enclosure.
dewatered sludge
The solids remaining after the free water has been removed
from a wet sludge.
dewatering lagoon
A lagoon constructed with a sand and underdrain bottom.
dewatering table
See “belt thickener.”
Dewplan
Former name of USFilter/Dewplan.
DF
Dilution factor.
DFR
Dynamic ﬁxed ﬁlm reactor by Schreiber Corp.
DFT
See “dry ﬁlm thickness (DFT).”
DFT Classic®
Wound ﬁber ﬁlter cartridge by USFilter/Filtration & Separation.
DGF
Dissolved gas ﬂotation. See “dissolved air ﬂotation (DAF).”
DHC
See “dirt holding capacity (DHC).”
DHHS
Department of Health and Human Services.
DI
See “deionization.”
dialysis
The separation of substances from solution on the basis of molecular size
by diffusion through a semipermeable membrane.
Diamite Series™
Membrane-cleaning liquids for removal of organic and inorganic
foulants by King Lee Technologies.
Diamond Gate
Screenings press by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc. (Western Hemisphere)
and USFilter/Contra-Shear.
Diamond Seal™
Metering gate by Tetra Process Technologies.
diarrhea
Frequent and excessive discharging of the bowels, producing abnormally
thin, watery feces, usually a symptom of gastrointestinal upset or infection.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

diatom
A unicellular algae with a yellowish brown color and siliceous shell.
diatomaceous earth (DE)
Skeletal deposits of diatoms used as ﬁlter aids and a
ﬁlter medium.
diatomaceous earth ﬁlter
Water treatment ﬁlter that uses a layer of diatomaceous
earth as the ﬁlter medium.
diatomite
See “diatomaceous earth.”
diazinon
A common organophosphate insecticide.
dibenzofurans
A group of highly toxic organic compounds.
DIC
Dissolved inorganic carbon.
dieldrin
A chlorinated hydrocarbon pesticide formerly used for moth-prooﬁng and
agricultural insect control, now banned in the U.S.
dielectric heater
A solid waste treatment heating system where an alternating
electric ﬁeld of high frequency is used to generate heat in nonconductive or
dielectric materials.
Diemme
Membrane type ﬁlter press by Olds Filtration Engineering, Inc.
Diffusadome®
Coarse bubble air diffuser by Amwell, Inc.
Diffusair
Carbon dioxide diffuser system by Walker Process Equipment.
diffused aeration
The introduction of compressed air into water by means of
submerged diffusers or nozzles.
diffuser
A porous plate or tube through which air, or another gas, is forced and
divided into bubbles for diffusion in liquids.
Diffuserator
Carbon dioxide diffusion system by Walker Process Equipment.
diffusion
The movement of suspended or dissolved particles from a more concen-
trated to a less concentrated area.
diffusion dialysis
An ion exchange membrane process that separates ionic, non-
ionic or colloidal species from solution based on differing diffusion rates,
using concentration differentials across the membrane as the driving force.
diffusive air test
A high resolution test for detecting membrane integrity that
measures the amount of air diffused through a wetted membrane.
Digesdahl
Digestion apparatus for lab sample preparation for crude protein and
mineral analysis by Hach Co.
digester
A tank or vessel used for sludge digestion.
digestion
The biological oxidation of organic matter in sludge resulting in stabi-
lization.
Digichem
Programmable titration analyzer by Ionics, Inc.
Digi-Flo®
Flow rate meter and totalizer by Blue-White Industries.
Dijbo
Hydraulically operated trash rake by Landustrie Sneek BV.
dike
An embankment or ridge of materials used to prevent the movement of liquid
or sludges.
dilatant
Property of a liquid whose viscosity increases as agitation is increased.
diluent
Any liquid, solid, or gaseous material used for diluting or dissolving.
dilution
(1) Lowering the concentration of a solution by adding more solvent.
(2) The engineered mixing of discharged water with receiving water to lessen
its immediate aesthetic and/or biochemical impact.
dilution factor
See “dilution ratio.”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

dilution ratio
(1) The volumetric ratio of solvent to solute. (2) The ratio of the water
volume in a stream to the waste volume introduced into the stream. The dilution
ratio gives an indication of the capacity of a water body to assimilate a waste.
dimitic
Lakes and reservoirs that freeze over and normally go through two strat-
iﬁcation and mixing cycles a year.
Dimminutor®
Open channel comminutor by Franklin Miller, Inc.
DIN
Deutsche Industrie Normal.
dinocap
A fungicide used primarily by apple growers to control summer diseases.
dinoseb
A herbicide, also used as a fungicide and insecticide, that was banned by
the EPA because it posed the risk of birth defects and sterility.
dioxin
An aromatic halogenated hydrocarbon that is one of the most toxic com-
pounds known.
Dioxytrol
Centrifugal oxygenation system by Hazleton Environmental, Inc.
DIP®
Dynamic inclined plane industrial skimmer by JBF Environmental Technology.
Dipair™
Static tube aerator by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
Diphonix™
Ion exchange resins by Eichrom Industries, Inc.
Di-Prime™
Automatic trash pump by Goodwin Pumps of America.
direct discharger
A municipal or industrial facility which introduces pollution
through a deﬁned conveyance or system such as outlet pipes; a point source.
direct ﬁltration
Filtration process that does not include ﬂocculation or sedimen-
tation pretreatment.
direct reuse
The beneﬁcial use of reclaimed water with transfer from a reclama-
tion plant to the reuse site.
Director™
Floating ﬂow diversion bafﬂe by Environetics, Inc.
DirecTube
Eductor tube anaerobic gas mixing unit by Walker Process Equipment.
dirt holding capacity (DHC)
The amount of contaminant fed to a ﬁlter on a
weight basis that attains the ﬁlter’s terminal differential pressure.
disc screen
A screening device consisting of a circular disc ﬁtted with wire mesh
which rotates on a horizontal axis.
Discfuser®
Coarse bubble air diffuser by USFilter/Diffused Air Products Group.
discharge
The release of any pollutant, by any means, to the environment.
Discor
Disc dryer by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc.
Discostrainer
Fine screening device by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
Discotherm
Thermal sludge processor by LIST, Inc.
Disc-Pak
Cartridge ﬁlter by Alsop Engineering Co.
Discreen®
Rotating disc screening device by Monoﬂo.
discrete particle settling
Phenomenon referring to sedimentation of particles in
a suspension of low solids concentration. Also called “type I settling.”
Disc-Tube™
Membrane ﬁltration system by Rochem Environmental, Inc.
Di-sep®
Filtration systems by Smith & Loveless, Inc.
disinfectant
A substance used for disinfection and in which disinfection has been
accomplished.
disinfectant contact time
The travel time, in minutes, for water to move from the
point of disinfectant application to a point where the “residual disinfectant
concentration” is measured. See also “C × T.”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

disinfection
The selective destruction of disease-causing microbes through the
application of chemicals or energy.
disinfection byproduct (DBP)
A byproduct which occurs or is anticipated to
occur from the addition of commonly used water treatment disinfectants
including chlorine, chloramine, chlorine dioxide, and ozone.
disinfection byproduct formation potential (DBPFP)
An indirect measure of
the amount of disinfection byproduct precursors in a sample.
disinfection byproduct precursor (DBPP)
A substance that can be converted
into a disinfection byproduct during disinfection.
dispersant
An additive that prevents agglomeration of particulates or is used to
break up concentrations of organic matter, such as oil spills.
dispersed suspended solids (DSS)
The suspended solids remaining in a sample’s
supernatant 30 minutes after settling.
dispersion model
A mathematical representation of the transport and diffusion
processes that occur in the atmosphere.
dispersion rate
A diffusion parameter of gas plumes or stack efﬂuents.
Disposable Waste Systems
Former name of JWC Environmental.
Dispos-A-Filter™
Metals testing ﬁlter capsule by Geotech/ORS Environmental
Systems.
disposal
The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing
of any liquid or solid waste on land or water so that it may enter the environ-
ment or be emitted into the air.
Disposorbs
Self-contained disposable adsorption systems by Calgon Carbon Corp.
dissociate
The process of ionization of an electrolyte or salt when dissolved in
water, forming cations and anions.
dissolved air ﬂotation (DAF)
The clariﬁcation of ﬂocculated material by contact
with minute bubbles causing the air/ﬂoc mass to be buoyed to the surface,
leaving behind a clariﬁed water. Use of a gas other than air is referred to as
“dissolved gas ﬂotation” or “DGF.”
dissolved nitrogen ﬂotation (DNF)
A variation of the DAF process where nitro-
gen, rather than air, is used to assist in the removal of suspended solids.
dissolved organic carbon (DOC)
The fraction of TOC that is dissolved in a water
sample.
dissolved organic matter (DOM)
The fraction of organic matter in water that
passes through a 0.45 micron ﬁlter.
dissolved oxygen (DO)
The oxygen dissolved in a liquid.
dissolved solids
Solids in solution that cannot be removed by ﬁltration with a
0.45 micron ﬁlter. See “total dissolved solids (TDS).”
distill
See “distillation.”
distillate
A liquid product condensed from vapor during distillation.
distillation
The process of boiling a liquid solution followed by condensation of
the vapor for the purpose of separating the solute from the solution.
distributed control system (DCS)
A collection of modules, each having a spe-
ciﬁc function, interconnected to carry out an integrated data acquisition and
control operation.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

distributor
See “rotary distributor.”
diurnal
(1) Occurring during a 24 hour period. (2) Happening during the day time,
rather than the night time.
diurnal ﬂuccation
A daily ﬂuctuation in ﬂow or compostion that is of a similar
pattern from one 24 hour period to another.
diversion chamber
A chamber used to divert all or part of a ﬂow to various outlets.
diversion dam
A dam constructed to divert part of all of the water from a stream
away from its main course.
diversity index
A mathematical expression that depicts the diversity of a species
in quantitative terms.
DLO™
Dynamic light obscuration technique used in a particle monitor by
Chemtrac Systems, Inc.
DNA
See “deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA).”
DNAPL
See “dense, nonaqueous phase liquid (DNAPL).”
DNF
See “dissolved nitrogen ﬂotation (DNF).”
DNR
Department of Natural Resources.
DO
See “dissolved oxygen (DO).”
DOAS
Differential Optical Absorption Spectrometry.
DOC
See “dissolved organic carbon (DOC).”
doctor blade
A scraping device used to remove or regulate the amount of material
on a belt, roller, or other moving or rotating surface.
DOE
See “Department of Energy (DOE).”
DOI
U.S. Department of Interior.
Dokwed
Back cleaned bar screen by USFilter/Hubert.
dolomite
A natural mineral consisting of calcium carbonate and magnesium car-
bonate. Chemical formula is CaMg(CO3)2.
dolomitic lime
Lime containing 30 to 50% magnesium oxide and 50 to 70%
calcium oxide.
DOM
See “dissolved organic matter (DOM).”
domestic wastewater
Wastewater originating from sanitary conveniences in res-
idential dwellings, ofﬁce buildings and institutions. Also called “sanitary
wastewater” and “domestic sewage.”
domestic water use
Water use within private homes.
Don-Press
Screw-type solids/screenings press by Dontech, Inc.
DorrClone
Grit classiﬁer unit by GL&V/Dorr-Oliver, Inc.
Dorrco
Brand name of GL&V/Dorr-Oliver, Inc. products.
dosage
A speciﬁc quantity of a substance applied to a unit quantity of liquid to
obtain a desired effect.
dose equivalent
A measure of effective radiation dose that considers differences in
biological effectiveness due to the radiation type and its distribution in the body.
dose-response relationship
The relationship between the dose of a pollutant and
its effect on a biological system.
dosfolat®
A folic acid micronutrient solution to improve wastewater settling mar-
keted by Bioprime, Ltd.
dosimeter
An instrument used for measuring radiation exposure.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

dosing siphon
A siphon that automatically discharges liquid onto a trickling ﬁlter
bed or other wastewater treatment device.
dosing tank
A tank into which raw or partly treated wastewater is accumulated
and held for subsequent discharge and treatment at a constant rate.
DOT
See “Department of Transportation (DOT).”
Double Dish
Pressure ﬁlter underdrain by USFilter/Warren.
Double Ditch
Oxidation ditch wastewater treatment process by USFilter/Krüger.
double salt
Any salt containing two different cations or anions in a crystalline matrix.
DoubleGuard™
Bar screen bar rack with two sets of offset bars by USFilter/Head-
works Products.
double-suction pump
A centrifugal pump with suction pipes connected to the
casing from both sides.
Dowex®
Ion exchange resin by Dow Chemical Co.
downcomer
A pipe directed downward.
downgradient
The direction that groundwater ﬂows; similar to “downstream” for
surface water.
downstream
Toward the mouth of a stream or river in the direction of ﬂow.
dowsing
The scientiﬁcally unproven practice of locating groundwater or buried
objects by walking above the area while holding a branch, wooden stick, or
metal rods and noting where it appears to be drawn downward to a particular
spot. Also called “witching.”
DOX
Dissolved organic halogen.
DP
Differential pressure.
d-part®
Waste conditioner by Medina Products Bioremediation Division.
DPD
N,N-diethyl-p-phenylenediamine. An indicator which produces red grada-
tions in the presence of chlorine residuals.
DPD-FAS
DPD-ferrous ammonium sulfate method of measuring all species of
chlorine residuals in a water or wastewater.
dracunculiasis
A waterborne, parasitic disease caused by the Dracunculus medin-
ensis worm, and the only known disease solely associated with unhealthy
drinking water. Also called “guinea worm disease.”
draft tube
A centrally located vertical tube used to promote mixing in a sludge
digester or aeration basin.
Draft Tube Channel
Oxidation ditch process formerly offered by Lightnin.
drag tank
A rectangular sedimentation basin that uses a chain and ﬂight collector
mechanism to remove dense solids.
Drag-Star™
Rectangular clariﬁer sludge removal device utilizing a cable drive
and scraper carriage by Smith & Loveless, Inc.
Draimad™
Solids dewatering system by Waterlink/Aero-Mod Systems.
drain tile
Short lengths of pipes laid in underground trenches to collect and carry
away excess groundwater or to discharge wastewater into the ground.
drainage basin
The area of land that drains water, sediment, and dissolved mate-
rials to a common outlet at some point along a stream channel.
drainage water
Ground, surface, or stormwater collected by a drainage system
and discharged into a natural waterway.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

drainage well
A well drilled to carry excess water off agricultural ﬁelds. Because
they act as a funnel from the surface to the groundwater below, drainage wells
can contribute to groundwater contamination.
Drain-Dri®
Wet pit pump by Yeomans Chicago Corp.
Drainpac™
Storm drain ﬁltration system by PacTec, Inc.
drawback
The reverse ﬂow of water from the permeate side of a membrane to
the feedwater or concentrate side as a result of osmosis.
drawdown
(1) The drop in the water table or level of water in the ground when
water is being pumped from a well. (2) The amount of water used from a tank
or reservoir. (3) The drop in the water level of a tank or reservoir.
DRE
See “destruction and removal efﬁciency.”
dredge
To remove sediment or sludge from rivers or estuaries to maintain navi-
gation channels.
dregs
Small solid particles in a liquid that settle to the bottom of a container.
Dresser/Jeffrey
Screening equipment product line acquired by Waste-Tech, Inc.
Drewcor®
Corrosion inhibitor chemical additive by Ashland Chemical, Drew
Industrial.
Drewgard
Corrosion inhibitor by Ashland Chemical, Drew Division.
Drewpac®
Coagulant used in water and wastewater treatment by Ashland Chem-
ical, Drew Industrial.
Drexelbrook
Former name of AMETEK Drexelbrook.
drift
(1) Water lost from a cooling tower as mist or droplets entrain in the circu-
lating air. (2) Pollutants entrained in a plant’s stack discharge.
drift barrier
An artiﬁcial barrier designed to catch driftwood or other ﬂoating
material.
drift test
A part of an emissions certiﬁcation process where the CEM must operate
unattended for some period of time without the analyzers drifting out of
calibration.
Driftor™
Drift eliminator by Kimre Inc.
drilling mud
A ﬂuid, often containing bentonite, used to cool and lubricate a
drilling bit and remove cuttings from the bit and carry them to the well’s surface.
drinking water
Water safe for human consumption or which may be used in the
preparation of food or beverages, or for cleaning articles used in the preparation
of food or beverages.
Drinking Water Contaminant Candidate List (DWCCL)
A list of any chemi-
cal or microbial contaminant that is known or anticipated to occur in public
water systems and which may be regulated in the future under the SDWA.
The DWCCL replaces the Drinking Water Priorities List.
drinking water equivalent level (DWEL)
The lifetime exposure level at which
adverse health effects are not anticipated to occur, assuming 100% exposure
from drinking water.
Drinking Water Priority List (DWPL)
A 1988 list of drinking water contaminants
which has been replaced by the “Drinking Water Contaminant Candidate List.”
drip irrigation
A micro-irrigation water management technique used primarily
for landscaping, where drips of water are emitted near the base of the plant.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

drip proof
Designation for motor enclosure with ventilating openings so that
drops of liquids or solids falling on the motor will not enter the unit directly
or by running along an inwardly inclined surface.
drought
An extended period of dry weather which, as a minimum, can result in
a partial crop failure or an inability to meet normal water demands.
drowned weir
See “submerged weir.”
drum pulverizer
A rotating cylinder used to shred solid waste by the intermin-
gling action of internal bafﬂes acting on the wetted solid waste.
drum screen
A cylindrical screening device used to remove ﬂoatable and sus-
pended solids from water or wastewater.
Drumm-Scale™
Drum weighing scale by Force Flow Equipment.
Drumshear
Rotating ﬁne screen by Aer-O-Flo Environmental, Inc.
Drumstik
Feed tube for drum mounted chemical feed system by USFilter/Stranco.
dry bulb temperature
The air temperature measured by a conventional thermom-
eter.
dry cleaning wastes
Wastewater from laundry cleaning operations that use non-
aqueous chemical solvents to clean fabrics.
dry ﬁlm thickness (DFT)
Thickness of a dried paint or coating usually expressed
in mils.
dry ice
Solidiﬁed carbon dioxide frequently used as a refrigerant that vaporizes
without passing through a liquid state.
dry weather ﬂow (DWF)
The ﬂow of wastewater in a sanitary sewer during dry
weather. The sum of wastewater and dry weather inﬁltration.
dry well
(1) A dry compartment in a pumping station where pumps are located.
(2) A well that produces no water.
Dry-All
Vacuum belt press by Baler Equipment Co.
DryCal®
Primary ﬂow calibration instrument by BIOS International Corp.
drying bed
See “sludge drying bed.”
DSS
See “dispersed suspended solids (DSS).”
DST™
Deﬁned substrate technology. Reagent system designed to promote growth
of target microbes by Environetics, Inc.
dual ﬂow screen
A traveling water screen arranged in a channel so that water
enters through both the ascending and descending wire mesh panels and exits
through the center of the screen.
dual media ﬁlter
Granular media ﬁlter utilizing two types of ﬁlter media, usually
silica sand and anthracite.
Dualator®
Gravity sand ﬁlter by Tonka Equipment Co.
dual-phase extraction
See “bioslurping.”
Dubl-Safe
Measuring system for brine regeneration of softening unit by Culligan
International Corp.
Duckbill®
Wastewater sampler by Markland Specialty Engineering Ltd.
duckweed
See “Lemnaceae.”
duct
A tube or channel for gas or ﬂuid ﬂow.
dump
A site used to dispose of solid waste without environmental controls.
Dunkers
Flow balancing system by Munters.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Duo-Clariﬁer
Wastewater treatment clariﬁer formerly offered by GL&V/Dorr-
Oliver, Inc.
Duo-Deck
Floating cover for anaerobic digester tank by USFilter/Envirex.
Duo-Filter
Two-stage trickling ﬁlter formerly offered by GL&V/Dorr-Oliver, Inc.
Duo-Fine®
Pleated media ﬁlter cartridge by USFilter/Filtration & Separation.
Duo-Flo
Traveling mesh belt screen by Dontech, Inc.
Duo-Pilot®
Coagulant control system using pilot ﬁlters by USFilter/Microﬂoc.
DuoReel
Power cable reel system for clariﬁers by Walker Process Equipment.
DuoSparj
Coarse bubble diffuser by Walker Process Equipment.
DuoTherm®
Biosolids production process by USFilter/Envirex.
Duo-Vac
Inclined screen unit by the former Bowser-Briggs Filtration Co.
DuoVAL
Automatically backwashed gravity sand ﬁlter by General Filter Co.
duplex pump
A reciprocating pump having two side-by-side cylinders and con-
nected to the same suction and discharge lines.
duplex stainless steel
A high strength stainless steel containing two forms of iron,
typically austenite and ferrite.
Duplex™
Air scrubber with two modules by USFilter/Davis Process.
Dupont®
Brand name of E.I. DuPont De Nemours, Inc.
Dura-Disc
Fine bubble membrane diffuser by Wilﬂey Weber, Inc.
Dura-Fuser™
Aeration piping system by USFilter/Davco.
Dura-Mix
Mixer for aeration applications by Wilﬂey Weber, Inc.
Dura-Pac
PVC sheet media by NSW Corp.
Dura-Pleat™
Fabric dust collector ﬁlters by Farr Co.
Durasan™
Reverse osmosis protective sleeve by Osmonics Desal.
Duratherm™
Reverse osmosis membranes for hot water sanitizing by Osmonics
Desal.
Dura-Trac™
Sensor for streaming current transmitter by Chemtrac Systems, Inc.
Durco
Filtration equipment by Aqua Care Systems.
Durex®
Traveling water screen chain material by USFilter/Rex & Link-Belt Products.
Duriron
Former name of Aqua Care Systems.
DuroFlow®
Air blower by Gardner Denver Blower Division.
Durotex®
Dewatering belts by Industrial Fabrics Corp.
Duroy
Nonlubricated, metallic traveling water screen chain by USFilter/Rex &
Link-Belt Products.
dust
Fine-grained particles light enough to be suspended in air.
dust mask
Face mask designed to provide relief from irritation of the nose, mouth,
and throat caused by nontoxic dusts; not designed to be used when dust
concentrations are greater than the PEL. Also called “nuisance mask.”
dustfall jar
An open container used to collect large particles from the air for
measurement and analysis.
Dustube®
Fabric ﬁlter by Wheelabrator Air Pollution Control, Inc.
DVB
Divinylbenzene, the common crosslinking agent for making resin beads.
DVGW
German Association for Gas and Water Plants.
DWCCL
See “Drinking Water Contaminant Candidate List (DWCCL).”
DWEL
See “drinking water equivalent level (DWEL).”
DWF
See “dry weather ﬂow (DWF).”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

DWI
Drinking Water Inspectorate. Agency whose role is to enforce water qual-
ity/supply regulations for potable water which meets in England and Wales.
DWPL
See “Drinking Water Priority List (DWPL).”
DWS
Manufacturer of sewage grinders for JWC Environmental.
Dynabeads®
Anti-Cyrptosporidium by Dynal, Inc.
DynaBlend™
Polymer blending and feeding system by Fluid Dynamics, Inc.
DynaClear®
Packaged water treatment system incorporating contact ﬁltration by
Parkson Corp.
DynaCycle®
Regenerative catalytic oxidizer by Monsanto Enviro-Chem Systems, Inc.
DynaFloc Feedwell
Clariﬁer feedwell design to promote mixing of ﬂocculants by
GL&V/Dorr-Oliver, Inc.
Dyna-Grind
Screenings and sewage grinder formerly offered by USFilter/Head-
works Products.
Dynalloy®
Filter cartridge with metal ﬁber media by USFilter/Filtration & Separation.
dynamic head
See “total dynamic head.”
dynamic membrane
A transient membrane formed on the surface of an estab-
lished membrane by solids ﬁltered from the feed stream.
Dynamic Probe™
Filter control system by Roberts Filter Group.
Dynamic Systems
Product group integrated within USFilter/Control Systems.
DynaSand®
Continuously backwashed moving bed sand ﬁlter by Parkson Corp.
Dynasieve™
Self-cleaning rotary ﬁne screen by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc.
Dynatherm
In-vessel composting system by Fairﬁeld Service Co.
Dynatrol®
Measurement level switches and liquid measurement devices by Auto-
mation Products, Inc.
DynaWave®
Wet scrubbing system by Monsanto Enviro-Chem Systems, Inc.
DynaZyme™
Odor control bioﬁlter system by Monsanto Enviro-Chem Systems, Inc.
dyne
A unit of measurement equal to the force that imparts an acceleration of
1 cm/s2 to a 1 gram mass.
Dyneco
Former bar screen manufacturer acquired by Parkson Corp.
dysentery
A disease of the gastrointestinal tract usually resulting from poor san-
itary conditions and transmitted by contaminated food or water.
Dystor
Gas holder system for anaerobic digesters by USFilter/Envirex.
dystrophic lakes
Acidic, shallow bodies of water that contain humus and/or other
organic matter; contain many plants but few ﬁsh.
dystrophy
A disorder caused by defective nutrition or metabolism.
E
E. coli
See “Escherichia coli (E. coli).”
E.A. Aerotor
Packaged wastewater treatment plant by Lakeside Equipment Corp.
E/ONE Sewer™
Pressurized sewer system by Environment One Corp.
EA
Endangerment assessment; enforcement agreement; environmental action;
environmental assessment; environmental audit.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

EAD
Electro-acoustical dewatering.
EAF
Electric arc furnace.
EAFD
See “electric arc furnace dust (EAFD).”
EAG
Exposure assessment group.
EAP
Environmental action plan.
earthen dam
A dam made primarily of soil, sand, silt, and clay.
earthen reservoir
A reservoir constructed in earth using excavated materials to
form embankments.
Earthtec®
Liquid copper water treatment product used as algicide/bactericide by
Earth Science Laboratories, Inc.
easement
A legal right to the use of land owned by others.
EaseOut
Pivoting air header and drop pipe arrangement by Walker Process Equip-
ment.
Eastern Econoline
Mixer product line by EMI, Inc.
EasyLogger
Stormwater data logger by Wescor, Inc.
EB
Emissions balancing.
ebb
(1) The ﬂowing back of water brought in by the tide. (2) To recede from a
ﬂooded state.
ebb tide
Tide occurring at the ebb period of tidal ﬂow.
EBCT
See “empty bed contact time (EBCT).”
e-beam
See “electron beam irradiation.”
EBOD
See “effective BOD (EBOD).”
EC
Environment Canada; effective concentration.
E-Cell™
Modular electrodeionization process by E-Cell Corp.
ecesis
The successful establishment of a plant or animal in a new locality.
ECF
Elemental chlorine free.
Echo-Lock
Automatic compensating device for ﬂow/level meters by Marsh-
McBirney, Inc.
EchomaX®
Ultrasonic measurement transducer by Milltronics, Inc.
ECI
Environmental Conditioners, Inc., a former manufacturer of packaged waste-
water treatment plants.
ECL
Electrochemiluminescence. A technology used for analyzing molecular and
genetic material.
ECL
Environmental chemical laboratory.
Eclipse®
Dispersion polymers by Calgon Corp.
EcoCare™
Odor eliminator by Nature Plus, Inc.
Ecochoice
Catalytic oxidation system for dissolved organics by Eco Puriﬁcation
Systems USA, Inc.
Ecodenit
Biological nitrate removal process using ion exchange technology by
USFilter/Krüger.
EcoDry
Sludge drying system by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc.
Ecodyne
Former name of Transunion product group now known as Graver Co.
ecoefﬁciency
Economically efﬁcient use of resources by businesses.
Ecolo-Chief
Packaged wastewater treatment plants by Chief Industries, Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Eco-Logic™
Combination aeration and ultraviolet/ozonation system by Atlantic
Ultraviolet Corp.
ecological indicator
A characteristic of the environment that, when measured,
quantiﬁes magnitude of stress, habitat characteristics, degree of exposure to
stress, or ecological response to exposure.
ecology
The relationship of living things to one another and their environment.
Ecomachine
Belt ﬁlter press by WesTech Engineering, Inc.
Econ-Abator®
Catalytic oxidation system by Huntington Environmental Systems,
Inc.
Econex
Counterﬂow regeneration ion exchange by Ionics, Inc.
Econ-NOx™
Selective catalytic reduction system by Huntington Environmental
Systems, Inc.
Econo Silo™
Enclosed composting system by USFilter/Davis Process.
EconoBAY™
Composting system by USFilter/Davis Process.
Economixer
Solid bowl decanter centrifuge by Centrisys Corp.
economizer
A heat exchanger in a furnace stack that transfers heat from the stack
gas to the boiler feedwater.
economy
In thermal desalination, the ratio of kilograms of distilled water produced
per 2326 kJ of energy input.
economy-of-scale
The reduction of unit capital cost as the size of the unit
increases.
Econopure
Reverse osmosis system by Osmonics, Inc.
EconoSep
Oil/water separator by Hydro-Flo Technologies, Inc.
Econ-O-Star®
Batch wastewater treatment system by Alar Engineering Corp.
Econotreat
Package wastewater treatment plant by USFilter/Industrial Wastewater
Systems.
Econ-O-Vap
Wastewater evaporation system by Fen-Tech Environmental, Inc.
Ecopure
VOC and particulate emission control product line by Dürr Environmen-
tal, Inc.
ecorock
A hard, dense rock produced from the ash of incinerated sludge and
municipal solid waste suitable for use as a road aggregate.
Ecosorb®
Odor control neutralizer by Odor Management, Inc.
ecosystem
The total community of living organisms together with their physical
and chemical environment.
EcoVap™
VOC control system by AMCEC, Inc.
ECRA
(1) Economic Cleanup Responsibility Act. (2) Environmental Cleanup
Responsibilities Act.
ectotherm
An organism that cannot regulate its internal body temperature, and
whose body temperature reﬂects the temperature of the environment. Fish and
reptiles are ectotherms.
ED
(1) See “electrodialysis (ED).” (2) Effective dose.
EDAT
Environmental data acquisition telemetry.
EDB
See “ethylene dibromide (EDB).”
EDC
Endocrine-disruptive chemical.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

eddy
A vortex-like motion of a ﬂuid running contrary to a main current.
Eddyﬂow
High rate upﬂow clariﬁer by Gravity Flow Systems, Inc.
EDF
Environmental Defense Fund.
EDGE II™
Graded-cell catalyst by Alzeta Corp.
EDGE Plus™
VOC concentrator by Alzeta Corp.
EDGE QR™
Flameless VOC oxidizer by Alzeta Corp.
EDGE SB™
Thermal oxidizer by Alzeta Corp.
Edge Track
Drum ﬁlter cloth alignment mechanism by Baker Process.
EDI
Environmental Dynamics, Inc.
EDI
See “electrodeionization (EDI).”
EDL
Estimated detection limit.
EDR
See “electrodialysis reversal (EDR).”
EDS
European Desalination Society.
EDSTAC
Endocrine Distruptor Screening and Testing Advisory Committee.
EDTA
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid. A chelating agent.
Eductogrit
Aerated grit chamber by USFilter/Aerator Products.
Edur
Centrifugal pump for dissolved air ﬂotation by Stanley Pump & Equipment
Inc.
Edward & Jones
Filter press products marketed by USFilter/Asdor.
EDZ
Emission density zoning.
EEA
Energy and environmental analysis.
EECs
Estimated environmental concentrations.
EER
Excess emission report.
EERU
Environmental emergency response unit.
EESI
Environment and Energy Study Institute.
EESL
Environmental ecological and support laboratory.
EF
Emission factor.
effect
One of several units of an evaporator, each of which operates at successively
lower pressures.
effective BOD (EBOD)
A measurement of wastewater strength which has been
adjusted for elevated temperatures by increasing the standard BOD by 7% for
each degree C rise above a temperature of 20°C.
effective rainfall
A rainfall that produces surface runoff.
effective size (ES)
A method of characterizing ﬁlter sand where the effective size is
equal to the sieve size, in millimeters, which will pass 10%, by weight of the sand.
effective stack height
The sum of the plume rise and physical stack height at which
particulates in a stack emission begin to settle to the ground after discharge.
Efﬁzon®
Ozone production technology by PCI-Wedeco Environmental Technolo-
gies, Inc.
efﬂuent
Partially or completely treated water or wastewater ﬂowing out of a basin
or treatment plant.
efﬂuvium
Byproducts of food and chemical processes, usually in the form of wastes.
EFTC
European Fluorocarbon Technical Committee.
EG&G Bioﬁltration
Former name of AMETEK Rotron Bioﬁltration.
egestion
The act of discharging undigested or indigestible waste material from the
body.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

egg-shaped digester
Anaerobic digester characterized by an oval or egg shape
which has been reported to promote efﬁcient mixing.
EGL
See “energy grade line (EGL).”
EH
An expression of redox potential.
EHAP
Extremely hazardous air pollutant.
EHS
(1) Extremely hazardous substance. (2) Environmental health and safety.
EI
Emissions inventory.
EIA
Environmental impact assessment.
EIC
European International Contractors.
EIL
Environmental impairment liability.
Eimco®
Water and wastewater treatment product line by Baker Process.
EimcoBelt®
Continuous belt vacuum ﬁlter by Baker Process.
EimcoMet
Molded polypropylene components by Baker Process.
EIMIX®
Digester mixer by Baker Process.
EIR
Environmental impact report.
EIS
Environmental impact statement.
EIS/AS
Emissions inventory system/area source.
EIS/PS
Emissions inventory system/point source.
EJ
See “environmental justice (EJ).”
ejector
A device that uses steam, air, or water under pressure to move another
ﬂuid by developing suction through the use of a venturi. Sometimes referred
to as an “eductor” or “jet pump.”
EKA
See “electrokinetic analysis (EKA).”
Ekman water bottle
A tubular device used to sample water at selected depths.
EL
Exposure level.
El Niño
A climatic cycle resulting in warm, stormy weather in the Paciﬁc caused
by the warming of surface waters in the eastern Paciﬁc Ocean.
El Niño/Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
The complete term for the “El Niño” cli-
matic cycle which is thought to result from a “Southern Oscillation” circulation
pattern in the atmosphere.
El Tor
A biotype of the Vibrio cholerae bacterium which takes its name from the
El Tor quarantine camp in Sinai, Egypt where it was ﬁrst isolated in 1906.
Elados®
Electronically controlled, electric motor-driven diaphragm pumps by
PennProcess Technologies, Inc.
Elasti-Liner®
Containment liner material by KCC Corrosion Control Co.
elastomer
Synthetic material which is elastic or resilient and similar in structure,
texture, and appearance to natural rubber.
Elastox®
Membrane air diffuser by Baker Process.
Elbac
Wastewater bioaugmentation product by Exceltec International Corp.
Elbow Rake
Hydraulically operated trash rake by the former Acme Engineering
Co., Inc.
Elcat
Disinfection system product line by USFilter/Electrocatalytic.
Electraﬂote
Sludge thickener using electrolysis-generated bubbles formerly
offered by Ashbrook Corp.
electric arc furnace dust (EAFD)
A byproduct of the production of steel using
electric arc furnaces, usually containing heavy metals.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Electrocatalytic, Inc.
Former name of USFilter/Electrocatalytic.
electrochemical corrosion
Corrosion brought about by electrode reactions.
electrocoagulation
A wastewater treatment process where a direct current is used
to precipitate heavy metals with ferrous hydroxides as metal hydroxides.
electrodeionization (EDI)
A water treatment process combining an electrodialy-
sis membrane process with an ion exchange resin process to produce high
purity, demineralized water.
electrodialysis (ED)
The separation of a solution’s ionic components through the
use of semipermeable, ion-selective membranes operating in a DC electric
ﬁeld.
electrodialysis reversal (EDR)
A variation of the electrodialysis process using
electrode polarity reversal to automatically clean membrane surfaces.
electrokinetic analysis (EKA)
Method of measuring zeta potential at surface-
liquid interfaces.
electrolysis
The passage of electric current through an electrolyte resulting in
chemical changes caused by migration of positive ions toward the cathode and
negative ions toward the anode.
electrolyte
A substance that dissociates into two or more ions when it dissolves
in water.
Electromat
Electrodialysis equipment by Ionics, Inc.
Electromedia®
Processed mineral ﬁlter media by Filtronics, Inc.
electrometric titration
An acid or base titration where a pH meter is used for
measuring end points.
electron beam irradiation
An oxidation process where compounds present in an
aqueous solution are irradiated with high energy electrons produced by an
electron accelerator to form water, carbon dioxide, and inorganic salts as end
products. Also called an “e-beam.”
electron microscope
A microscope that utilizes electromagnets as lenses and elec-
trons instead of light rays to achieve a very high magniﬁcation.
electronic-grade water
Water used in the production of microelectronic devices
which meets ASTM D-19 standards for resistivity, silica concentration, particle
count, and other criteria.
electrophoresis
The movement of charged particles in a solution or suspension
when an electric ﬁeld is applied to them.
electrostatic precipitator (ESP)
Air cleaning system that imparts an electrical
charge to airborne particles so that they can be removed by attraction to
elements of opposite polarity.
electrotechnologies
Electrically-driven technologies used in waste source reduc-
tion, resource recovery, and end-of-pipe waste management and treatment.
elevated storage tank
A water storage reservoir supported by a column or tower.
Elf Atochem
Former name of Atochem North America, Inc.
Elf/Anvar
Oil/condensate coalescer-type oil/water separator by Graver Co.
ELI
Environmental Law Institute.
EloxMonitor™
On-line COD monitor by Anatel Corp.
Eltech
Former name of Exceltec International Corp.
eluant
A liquid used to extract one material from another.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

elutriation
The process of washing sludge with water to remove organic and
inorganic components to reduce chemical dosages required for additional
treatment.
elutriator
An extension in an evaporator vapor body to thicken the solids slurry
to minimize the loss of liquor.
EM
See “Enhanced Monitoring (EM).”
EMAS
Enforcement management and accountability system. Ecomanagement and
auditing scheme.
EMC
Emission reduction credits.
emery
See “alumina.”
Emery-Trailigaz
Ozone equipment supplier acquired by Praxair-Trailigaz Ozone
Co.
Emerzone®
Ozone-generating systems by Praxair-Trailigaz Ozone Co.
EMI
Electromagnetic interference.
emission
Gas-borne particles or pollutants released into the atmosphere.
emission cap
A limit designed to prevent projected growth in emissions from
existing and future stationary sources from eroding any mandated reduction.
emissions trading
U.S. EPA policy allowing a company to decrease pollution
emissions from a facility while increasing levels at another as long as the total
results are equal to, or less than the previous limits.
EMP
Electromagnetic pulse.
emphysema
A chronic, irreversible disorder of the lungs characterized by destruc-
tion of the alveoli and resulting in shortness of breath.
empty bed contact time (EBCT)
A measure of time that a water is in contact
with the treatment medium calculated by dividing the empty volume in a
contactor by the ﬂow rate.
EMR
Environmental management report.
EMR™
Electrolytic metal recovery system by Kinetico Engineered Systems, Inc.
EMS
Environmental management system.
Emscher fountain
Another term for the “Imhoff tank,” reﬂecting the part of Ger-
many where this sewage treatment device was developed.
EMSL
Environmental monitoring support laboratory.
EMTS
(1) Environmental monitoring testing site. (2) Exposure monitoring test
site.
emulsifying agent
An agent that aids in creating and maintaining an emulsion by
altering the surface charge of droplets to prevent their coalescence.
emulsion
A heterogeneous mixture of two or more mutually insoluble liquids that
would normally stratify according to their speciﬁc gravities.
emulsion breaker
A demulsiﬁng agent that breaks an emulsion by neutralizing
the surface charge of the emulsiﬁed droplets to allow their coalescence.
emulsion breaking
The use of heat, acids, oxidizing agents, or other chemicals
to break an oil/water emulsion.
emulsion polymer
Dispersions of polymer particles in a hydrocarbon oil or light
mineral oil used for conditioning sludge.
encapsulation
The complete enclosure of a waste in another material to isolate it
from the external effects of air and water.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Encore®
Mechanical diaphragm metering pump by USFilter/Wallace & Tiernan.
encrustation
A covering, crust, or crust-like material on the surface of an object.
end point
The ﬁnal state after a chemical or biological reaction is complete.
endangered species
Animals, birds, ﬁsh, plants, or other living organisms threat-
ened with extinction by manmade or natural changes in their environment.
endemic
Restricted to a particular area or locality.
endocrine
Describing any gland that secretes hormones directly into the blood-
stream rather than through a duct or directly into an organ.
endocrine disruptor
An external chemical substance or mixture that alters the
structure or function of the endocrine system and causes adverse effects.
endogenous respiration
Bacterial growth phase where microbes metabolize their
own protoplasm without replacement due to low concentrations of available food.
endospore
A bacterial spore formed within a cell and extremely resistant to heat
and other harmful agents.
endotherm
An organism with the ability to maintain a constant body temperature.
Mammals are endotherms.
endothermic
A process or reaction that takes place with absorption of heat.
endotoxin
A toxin, or poisonous substance, present in bacteria that is released
during cell lysis.
endrin
a pesticide toxic to freshwater and marine aquatic life that produces adverse
health effects in domestic water supplies.
Endura™
Wastewater treatment products by Aqua-Aerobic Systems Inc.
Endurance™
Conductivity and resistivity sensor by Rosemount Analytical, Inc.
Endurex
Coarse bubble diffuser by Parkson Corp.
Enelco
Former Environmental Elements Co. water treatment product line acquired
by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
energy grade line (EGL)
The line joining the elevations of the energy heads.
Energy Mix
Rapid mix unit by Walker Process Equipment.
energy recovery
The retrieval of waste energy for some beneﬁcial use.
energy recovery turbine (ERT)
A device used to recover pressure energy from
reverse osmosis brine streams.
Engler
A scale for indicating viscosity.
enhanced coagulation
A modiﬁed coagulation process relying on the addition of
excess coagulants to achieve increased removals of natural organic matter.
Enhanced Monitoring (EM)
Clean Air Act Amendment requirement for facilities
to monitor emissions to certify compliance with permitted levels.
Enhanced Surface Water Treatment Rule (ESWTR)
An EPA drinking water
regulation under development to include Cryptosporidium within the scope of
the Surface Water Treatment Rule.
Enning ESD
Egg-shaped anaerobic digesters by CBI Walker, Inc. (U.S. licensee),
Enning (German licensor).
enrichment
The addition of nutrients such as nitrogen, phosphorus, or carbon
compounds from sewage efﬂuent or agricultural runoff to surface water, which
greatly increases the growth potential for algae and other aquatic plants.
ENRO™
Membrane elements by by Osmosis Technology, Inc.
ENSO
See “El Niño/Southern Oscillation.”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

EnSys
Immunoassay product line by Strategic Diagnostics, Inc.
enteric
Intestinal, or of intestinal, origin.
enteric bacteria
Bacteria that inhabit the gastrointestinal tract of warm-blooded
animals.
Enterolert™
Reagent for enterococci detection by IDEXX Laboratories, Inc.
enterotoxin
A toxin or microbe that causes dysfunction in the human gastrointes-
tinal tract.
enterovirus
A group of viruses including polio and hepatitis A viruses that repli-
cates initially in the cells of the enteric tract.
Enterprise
Floating aspirating aerator by Air-O-Lator Corp.
Enterprise™
Regenerative thermal oxidizer by Megtec Systems, Inc.
enthalpy
The total heat content of a liquid, vapor, or body.
entrainment
(1) The incorporation of small organisms, including the eggs and
larvae of ﬁsh and shellﬁsh, into an intake system. (2) The carryover of droplets
of water with vapor produced during evaporation.
entrainment separator
See “mist eliminator.”
entropy
A measure of unavailable energy of an isolated thermodynamic system.
EnVessel Pasteurization™
Lime stabilization and pasteurization sludge treatment
process to further reduce pathogens by RDP Technologies, Inc.
Enviro-Blend®
Specialty chemicals for heavy metal waste treatment by American
Minerals, Inc.
EnviroDisc
Rotating biological contactor by Walker Process Equipment.
Envirofab
Former manufacturer of wastewater treatment equipment.
ENVIROFirst™
Sodium carbonate peroxyhydrate granules by Solvay America.
EnviroGard™
Chemical screening test kit by Strategic Diagnostics, Inc.
Enviromat
Wastewater treatment systems by Ionics, Inc.
environment
Water, air, and land and the interrelationship that exists among and
between water, air, and land and all living things.
environmental audit
An independent assessment of the current status of a party’s
compliance with applicable environmental requirements or a party’s environ-
mental compliance policies, practices, and controls.
Environmental Elements
Equipment manufacturer whose Water Treatment Divi-
sion product line was acquired by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
environmental impact assessment (EIA)
A method of analysis that attempts to
predict probable repercussions of a proposed development on the social and
physical environment of the surrounding area.
environmental impact statement
A detailed written report which identiﬁes and
analyzes the environmental impact of a proposed action.
environmental indicator
A measurement, statistic, or value that provides a prox-
imate gauge or evidence of the effects of environmental management programs
or the state or condition of the environment.
environmental justice (EJ)
The fair treatment and meaningful involvement of all
people with respect to the development, implementation, and enforcement of
environmental laws, regulations, and policies.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
A U.S. agency with primary respon-
sibility for enforcing federal environmental laws.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

environmental racism
A belief that racism, whether intentional or unintentional,
underlies variation in the distribution of environmental pollution.
Enviropac
Rotating biological contactor by Walker Process Equipment.
Enviropax
Tube settlers by Enviropax, Inc.
EnviroQuip International
Former name of USFilter/Diffused Air Products Group.
Enviro-Seal™
Valve packing system to prevent fugitive air emissions by Fisher
Controls International, Inc.
Envirovalve
Telescopic valve by USFilter/Diffused Air Products Group.
enzyme
Organic catalysts that convert a substrate or nutrient to a form which can
be transported into a cell.
EOP
End-of-pipe.
EOS
Predecessor company of USFilter/Operating Services.
EP
(1) Environmental proﬁle. (2) European Pharmacopoeia.
EPA
See “Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).”
EPA200
The EPA 200 series of methods for chemical analysis (inorganic) of water
and wastes.
EPA500
The EPA 500 series of methods for organic compounds in drinking water.
EPA600
The EPA 600 series of methods for analysis of pollutants under the Clean
Water Act.
EPAA
Environmental Programs Assistance Act.
EPC
Engineer, procure, and construct.
EPCO™
Rotating biological contactors by USFilter Corp.
EPCRA
Emergency Planning and Community Right to Know Act.
ephemeral
Short-lived.
ephemeral streams
Streams in which no ﬂow is common that only ﬂow in
response to precipitation.
EPI
Environmental Policy Institute.
EPIC™
Enhanced polymer control system by Norchem Industries.
epidemic
An outbreak of disease affecting many people at one time.
epidemiology
The study of the incidence, distribution, and control of disease in
a population.
epilimnion
The upper layer in a stratiﬁed lake that results from varying water
densities.
epm
See “equivalents per million (epm).”
EPNL
Effective perceived noise level.
EPRI
Electric Power Research Institute.
EPS
Eco Puriﬁcation Systems USA, Inc.
Epsom salt
Hydrated magnesium sulfate having cathartic properties; also used in
leather tanning and textile dyeing. Chemical formula is MgSO4•7H2O.
EPTC
Extraction procedure toxicity characteristic.
EQ
See “equalization (EQ).”
EQL
See “estimated quantitation limit (EQL).”
equalization (EQ)
The process of dampening hydraulic or organic ﬂow variations
so that nearly constant conditions can be achieved.
equalization basin
A basin or tank used for ﬂow equalization.
Equalizer®
Blower by Tuthill Pneumatics Group.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

equator
An imaginary circle around the earth that divides the earth’s surface into
the Northern and Southern Hemispheres and is equally distant at all points
from the North and South Poles.
equivalent weight
The weight of a compound that contains 1 gram atom of avail-
able hydrogen or its chemical equivalent, determined by dividing the molecular
weight of a solute by the number of hydrogen or hydroxyl ions in the undis-
solved compound.
equivalents per million (epm)
Ionic concentration determined by dividing an
ion’s concentration in ppm by its equivalent weight.
ER
Energy recovery.
ERAMS
Environmental radiation ambient monitoring system.
ERC
(1) Emissions reduction credit. (2) Environmental Research Center.
ERDA
Energy Research and Development Administration.
erg
A unit of work or energy where 1 erg is equal to 10,000,000 joule.
ERL
Environmental research laboratory.
Erlenmeyer ﬂask
A bell-shaped container used in laboratories to heat and mix
chemicals.
ERNS
Emergency response notiﬁcation system.
erosion
Wearing away of land by running water, waves, wind, or glacial activity.
erosion corrosion
An attack on a material consisting of simultaneous erosion and
corrosion through the effect of a rapidly ﬂowing ﬂuid.
ERT
See “energy recovery turbine (ERT).”
ES
See “effective size (ES).”
ES™
Electric straight-through thermal oxidizer by Thermatrix, Inc.
ESA
Endangered Species Act.
escarpment
A line of steep slopes or cliffs caused by erosion or faulting.
Escherichia coli (E. coli)
Coliform bacteria of fecal origin used as an indicator
organism in the determination of wastewater pollution.
ESD™
Egg-shaped anaerobic digesters by CBI Walker, Inc. (U.S. licensee),
Enning (German licensor).
ESH
Environmental safety and health.
ESP
See “electrostatic precipitator (ESP).”
ESP®
Sludge drying and pelletization system by Wheelabrator Water Technolo-
gies, Inc.
ESPA™
Low pressure polyamide membrane products by Hydranautics.
ESSD™
Engineered stainless steel design ﬁlter washtroughs by USFilter/General
Filter.
ESSI
EnviroSystems Supply.
esters
Organic compounds produced by the reaction of an acid with an alcohol.
Esters are often used in synthetic fragrances, industrial solvents, and the
synthesis of plastics. Animal fats and vegetable oils are also esters.
estimated quantitation limit (EQL)
The lowest concentration that can be reli-
ably achieved within speciﬁed limits of precision and accuracy during routine
laboratory operating conditions.
estuary
A semi-enclosed coastal water body at the mouth of a river in which the
river’s current meets the ocean’s tide, mixing fresh and salt water.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ESWTR
See “Enhanced Surface Water Treatment Rule (ESWTR).”
ESZ
Electrical sensing zone technology used in some particle counter sensors.
ET
(1) See “evapotranspiration (ET).” (2) Emissions trading.
ethanoic acid
See “acetic acid.”
ethanol
An inﬂammable organic compound formed during the fermentation of
sugars. Chemical formula is C2H5OH.
ethene
See “ethylene.”
ethylene
A colorless, ﬂammable, gas used in the manufacture of organic chemicals
and plastics, and as a plant hormone to hasten the ripening of fruits. Chemical
formula is H2C:CH2.
ethylene dibromide (EDB)
A toxic, carcinogenic chemical used as an agricultural
fumigant and in certain industrial processes.
ethylene glycol
A colorless liquid used as an antifreeze and solvent. Chemical
formula is HOCH2CH2OH.
etiologic agent
A viable microorganism, or its toxin, that causes, or may cause,
human disease.
ETS
Environmental tobacco smoke.
E-Tube®
Wet electrostatic precipitator by Geoenergy International Corp.
ETV Program
Environmental Technology Veriﬁcation Program by the U.S. EPA
to identify promising, commercially ready pollution prevention technologies.
EU
Endotoxin units.
EUP
End-use product.
euphotic zone
The upper layer of water in a natural waterbody through which
sunlight can penetrate.
Euroform
Mist eliminators by Munters.
eutectic
Easily melted.
eutrophic lake
A lake with an abundant supply of nutrients, excessive growth of
ﬂoating algae, and an anaerobic hypolimnion.
eutrophication
Nutrient enrichment of water, causing excessive growth of aquatic
plants and eventual deoxygenation of the water body.
Ev*ne/Scent™
Waterless vapor odor control system by Hinsilblon Laboratories.
Eva
Back-raked bar screen by Brackett Geiger.
Evap-O-Dry
Wastewater evaporation system by Fen-Tech Environmental, Inc.
evaporation
The process in which water is converted to a vapor that can be
condensed.
evaporation pond
A natural or artiﬁcial pond used to convert solar energy to heat
to accomplish evaporation.
evaporation rate
The mass quantity of water evaporated from a speciﬁed water
surface per unit of time.
evaporator
A device used to heat water to create a phase change from the liquid
to the vapor phase.
evaporimeter
A meteorological instrument used to measure natural rates of evap-
oration.
evaporite
A mineral produced as a result of evaporation.
evapotranspiration (ET)
Water withdrawn from the soil by evaporation and plant
transpiration.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

evapotranspiration treatment system
A wastewater treatment system utilizing
surface evaporation and plant transpiration.
Evita®
Dissolved oxygen meter by Danfoss/Instrumark.
EVT
Belt ﬁlter press by Baker Process.
Eweson®
Compartmentalized rotary digester by Bedminster Bioconversion Corp.
EWPCA
European Water Pollution Control Association.
ex situ
Treatment or disposal methods that require movement of contaminated
material.
Excel®
Cartridge ﬁltration product line by Eden Equipment Co.
Excel®
High charge cationic ﬂocculant by Cytec Industries, Inc.
excess lime-soda softening
The process of feeding excess lime and soda ash in
addition to that required for lime-soda softening to further reduce hardness.
Also called “railway softening.”
exchange capacity
An ion exchanger unit’s limited capacity for storage of ions.
excrement
Waste material from the bowels; feces.
excreta
Waste material excreted from the body.
excrete
To separate waste material from tissue or blood and eliminate it from the
body.
excretion
The act or process of expelling waste material from the body in urine,
feces, perspiration, or expired air.
excyst
To emerge from a cyst.
ExEx
Expected exceedance.
exﬁltration
The wastewater leaking from breaks and cracks in a sewer line or
manhole.
exhaustion
The condition that results when activated carbon, ion exchange resin,
or other absorbents have depleted their capacity by using all available sites.
exothermic
A process or reaction which is accompanied by the evolution of heat.
Exotox®
Multi-gas detector by Neotronics of North America.
expanded metal
An open metal network produced by stamping or perforating
sheet metal.
expansion joint
A joint installed in a structure to allow for thermal expansion or
contraction.
explosion proof (XP)
Designation for a motor or electrical enclosure designed to
withstand a gas or vapor explosion within the unit, and to prevent ignition of
gas or vapor surrounding the unit by sparks, ﬂashes, or explosions within the unit.
explosive limits
The amounts of vapor in the air that form explosive mixtures;
limits are expressed as lower and upper and give the range of vapor concen-
trations in the air that will explode if an ignition source is present.
exposure
The amount of radiation or pollutant present in a given environment that
represents a potential health threat to living organisms.
exposure assessment
Identifying the pathways by which toxicants may reach
individuals, estimating how much of a chemical an individual is likely to be
exposed to and the number likely to be exposed.
exposure indicator
A characteristic of the environment measured to provide evi-
dence of the occurrence or magnitude of a response indicator’s exposure to a
chemical or biological stress.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ExpressClean™
Reverse osmosis cleaning service by Coster Engineering.
Expressor
Belt ﬁlter press by Baker Process.
extended aeration process
A variation of the activated sludge process with an
increased detention time to allow endogenous respiration to occur.
Extendor
Detention tank for polymer mixing systems by Semblex, Inc.
extraction steam
Steam removed from a turbine at a pressure higher than the
lowest pressure achieved in the turbine.
Extractor®
Horizontal belt press by Baker Process.
Extractoveyor
Composted sludge conveyor system by Fairﬁeld Service Co.
Extreme Duty™
Mechanical digester sludge mixer by WesTech Engineering Inc.
extremely hazardous substances
Any of 406 chemicals identiﬁed by the EPA as
toxic, and listed under SARA Title III. The list is subject to periodic revision.
Exxﬂow™
Crossﬂow microﬁltration system by WesTech Engineering Inc.
E-Z™
Batch type centrifuge by Western States Machine Co.
E-Z Tray®
Air stripper by QED Environmental Systems, Inc.
EZ-BOD™
Sludge stability indicator by Bioscience, Inc.
F
F
See “Fahrenheit (F).”
F wastes
A class of hazardous wastes categorized from nonspeciﬁc sources as
established by the EPA and identiﬁed in 40 CFR 261.31.
F.E.M.S.®
Relational database fugitive emissions management system by Enviro-
Metrics.
F/M
See “food-to-microorganism ratio (F/M or F:M).”
fabric ﬁlter
A cloth device that catches dust particles from industrial emissions.
FAC
See “free available chlorine (FAC).”
face velocity
The linear velocity of air through a ﬁlter.
facultative bacteria
Microbes with the ability to survive with or without the
presence of oxygen.
facultative lagoon
A lagoon or pond in which stabilization of wastewater occurs
as a result of aerobic, anaerobic, and facultative bacteria.
facultative ponds
See “facultative lagoon.”
Fahrenheit (F)
A temperature scale on which water’s freezing point is 32° and
boiling point is 212°.
Fairﬁeld
In-vessel composting system by Fairﬁeld Service Co.
falaj
System of surface or subsurface channeling of water fed by wells or springs
to provide a community water supply (Arabic).
Falco
Catalytic oxidizer by Falmouth Products.
fall
A sudden change in the water surface elevation.
falling ﬁlm evaporator
An evaporator with vertical heat transfer surfaces where
liquor falling down the surfaces is heated by steam condensing on the other
side of the surface.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

fallout
Radioactive debris that settles to earth after a nuclear explosion.
Fallova™
Sewage shredder by ZMI/Portec Chemical Processing.
false positive
An erroneous test result indicating that something has a certain
property when that property is not present.
famine
An acute food shortage in an area that leads to malnutrition and starvation.
Fan/Separator®
Fume scrubber by Tri-Mer Corp.
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization.
Faraday’s Law
A law stating that the amount of chemical change in an electrol-
ysis process is proportional to the electrical charge passed.
Farm Gas
Former equipment manufacturer now part of Rosewater Engineering Ltd.
Fasﬂo
Floating oil skimmer by Vikoma International Ltd.
FAST®
Fixed activated sludge wastewater treatment plant by Scienco/FAST Systems.
Fast Flow®
Rotary strainer by Alar Engineering Corp.
Fastek™
Thin layer composite reverse osmosis membrane by Osmonics.
fathom
A marine unit of length equal to 6 feet (1.8 m).
fats
Triglyceride esters of fatty acids that are usually solid at room temperature.
fatty acid
Any of a class of lipids consisting of organic acids having the general
formula R.COOH.
fauna
The animal life of an area or region.
Favair®
Dissolved air ﬂotation product by USFilter/Warren.
FB®
Sodium percarbonate by Solvay America.
FBC
Fluidized bed combustion.
FBR
Fluid bed reactor.
FBS
Fine bar screen by Waste-Tech, Inc.
FBX
Fixed bed reactor.
FC
See “fecal coliform (FC).”
FC/FS
Ratio of fecal coliform to fecal streptococci that indicates if wastewater
contamination results from animal or human wastes.
FDA
Food and Drug Administration.
FE
Fugitive emissions.
Fe3®
Liquid ferric sulfate by FE3, Inc.
fecal
Relating to feces.
fecal coliform (FC)
Coliforms present in the feces of warm-blooded animals, and
considered indicators of fecal contamination of water.
Fecascrew
Screenings screw press by Hydropress Wallender & Co., AB.
Fecawash
Screenings washing and conveying unit by Hydropress Wallender &
Co., AB.
feces
The excrement of humans and animals.
Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodentcide Act (FIFRA)
1972 federal law
requiring toxicity testing and registration of pesticides.
Federal Register
U.S. government daily publication detailing federal business
including proposed and ﬁnal rules and laws.
Federal Water Pollution Control Act (FWPCA)
The U.S. water control legisla-
tion of 1972 amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977.
feedlot wastes
Solid and liquid wastes from a facility where cattle or other animals
are grown for market.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Feedpac
Coagulant feed system by Nalco Chemical Co.
feedwater heater
Heat exchangers in which boiler feedwater is preheated by
steam extracted from a turbine.
feedwell
A circular, partitioned section within a clariﬁer or thickener that receives
the feedwater and uniformly distributes it to the basin for sedimentation.
FEMA
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
fen
A wetland covered by shallow, stagnant, and usually alkaline water originating
from groundwater sources.
fence-line concentration
Modeled or measured concentrations of air pollutants
found at the boundaries of a property on which the pollution source is located.
Fenton’s reagent
A mixture of iron and hydrogen peroxide used in oxidation,
coagulation, or metal complexation reactions.
Feripac
Iron and manganese removal treatment plant by Vulcan Industries, Inc.
fermentation
The conversion of organic matter to carbon dioxide, methane, and
other low molecular weight compounds.
Ferret™
Oil/water separating pump by QED Environmental Systems, Inc.
ferric
Relating to or containing iron in which the iron is trivalent or in a higher
state of oxidation.
ferric chloride
An iron salt commonly used as a coagulant. The chemical formula
is FeCl3.
ferric sulfate
An iron salt commonly used as a coagulant. The chemical formula
is Fe2SO4.
FerriClear®
Ferric sulfate product by Eaglebrook, Inc.
Ferri-Floc
Ferric sulfate by Boliden Intertrade, Inc.
Ferrosand®
Granular ﬁlter media used for removal of iron and manganese by
Hungerford & Terry, Inc.
ferrous
Relating to or containing iron in which the iron is divalent or in a lower
state of oxidation.
ferrous sulfate
An iron salt commonly used as a coagulant. The chemical formula
is FeSO4.
Ferrover
Reagent chemicals primarily used for iron analysis by Hach Co.
Ferrozine
Spectrophotometric reagents for iron and iron compounds by Hach Co.
Ferr-X
Iron removal process by Aquatrol Ferr-X Corp.
fertilizer
Materials usually containing nitrogen and phosphorous that are added
to soil to provide essential nutrients for plant growth.
fetch
The distance traveled by a wind-generated wave before it reaches the coast-
line.
fetus
An animal embryo in the later stages of development; in humans from the
beginning of the third month until birth.
FFFSG
Fossil-fuel-ﬁred steam generator.
FGD
See “ﬂue gas desulfurization (FGD).”
FGH
See “ﬂue gas humidiﬁcation (FGH).”
Fibercone Press
Cone-type dewatering press by Thermal Black Clawson.
FiberFlo™
Cartridge ﬁlters by Minntech Fibercor.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Fibrotex®
Backwashable depth ﬁlter with steam pasteurization cycle by Smith &
Loveless, Inc.
FID
Flame ionization detector.
FIDIC
Federation International des Ingenieurs-Conseils.
FIFRA
See “Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodentcide Act (FIFRA).”
ﬁlamentous growth
Hair-like biological growth of some species of bacteria, algae,
and fungi that results in poor sludge settling.
ﬁlamentous sludge
Sludge characterized by excessive growth of ﬁlamentous bac-
teria that results in poor settling.
Filawound®
Pressure vessel for reverse osmosis membranes by Spaulding Com-
posites Co.
ﬁll-and-draw
Treatment process where a vessel is ﬁlled, the reaction occurs, and
the contents are withdrawn. Typical of “sequencing batch reactors.”
FilmShear
Coarse and ﬁne bubble diffusers by USFilter/Aerator Products.
Filmtec®
Reverse osmosis membranes by Dow Chemical Co.
Filox®
Iron, hydrogen sulﬁde, and manganese removal media by Matt-Son, Inc.
FiltaBand
Continuous self-cleaning ﬁne screen by Longwood Engineering Co., Ltd.
ﬁlter
A device utilizing a granular material, woven cloth, or other medium to
remove suspended solids from water, wastewater, or air.
Filter AG®
Granular ﬁlter media used to adsorb tastes and odors by Clack Corp.
ﬁlter aid
A polymer or other material added to improve the effectiveness of the
ﬁltration process.
ﬁlter area
The effective area of a ﬁlter through which liquid passes, usually
expressed in square meters (square feet).
ﬁlter backwash rate
The volume of water per unit of time per unit of area required
to ﬂow backwards through a ﬁlter for cleaning.
ﬁlter bottom
See “underdrain.”
ﬁlter cake
The layer of solids that is retained on the surface or upstream side of
a ﬁlter.
Filter Cel®
Diatomaceous earth ﬁlter media by Celite Corp.
ﬁlter cloth
Cloth used as the ﬁlter media on a vacuum ﬁlter.
ﬁlter cycle
The ﬁlter operating time between backwashes. Also called “ﬁlter run.”
ﬁlter ﬂy
See “Psychoda ﬂies.”
ﬁlter gallery
A passageway to provide access for installation and maintenance of
underground ﬁlter pipes and valves.
ﬁlter loading, hydraulic
The volume of liquid applied per unit area of the ﬁlter
bed per unit of time.
ﬁlter loading, organic
The pounds of BOD applied per unit area of the ﬁlter bed
per unit of time.
ﬁlter press
A dewatering device where water is forced from the sludge under high
pressure.
ﬁlter ripening
The gradual improvement in ﬁlter performance at the start of a
ﬁlter run as solids deposition begins and serves to enhance ﬁltration.
ﬁlter run
See “ﬁlter cycle.”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ﬁlter strip
Strip or area of vegetation used for removing sediment, organic matter,
and other pollutants from runoff and wastewater.
Filterite®
Cartridge ﬁlter product line by USFilter/Filtration & Separation.
Filtermate
Filtration coagulant by BetzDearborn-Argo District.
FilterNet™
Net fabric composite by SLT North America, Inc.
Filterpak™
Plastic biological ﬁlter media by USFilter/General Filter.
Filter-Pak™
Gravity sand ﬁlter by Graver Co.
FilterSil®
Filtration sands by Unimin Corp.
ﬁlter-to-waste
An operational procedure in ﬁltration where the ﬁltrate is produced
immediately after backwash is wasted.
Filterworx™
Automated ﬁlter control system by F.B. Leopold Co., Inc.
Filtomat®
Self-cleaning cooling water ﬁlters by Orival, Inc.
Filtra-Matic™
Pressure leaf ﬁlter by USFilter/Whittier.
FiltraPak
Packaged waste treatment and liquid-solids separation unit by Diagenex,
Inc.
Filtrasorb®
Granular-activated carbon adsorption manufactured by Calgon Carbon
Corp.
ﬁltrate
Liquid remaining after removal of solids through ﬁltration.
ﬁltration rate
A measurement of the volume of water applied to a ﬁlter per unit
of surface area in a stated period of time.
Filtroba®
Helical pressure ﬁlter element by Baker Process/Ketema.
Filtros®
Fine bubbles diffusers by Ferro Corp.
FIM
Friable insulation material.
Fimat
Electronic pulse control ﬁsh repelling system by Brackett Geiger.
ﬁnal clariﬁer
See “secondary clariﬁer.”
ﬁnal closure
The closure of all hazardous waste management units at a facility in
accordance with all applicable requirements.
ﬁnal cover
Cover material that is applied upon closure of a landﬁll and is perma-
nently exposed to the surface.
ﬁnal efﬂuent
The efﬂuent from the ﬁnal unit treatment process at a wastewater
treatment plant.
ﬁne bubble aeration
Method of diffused aeration using ﬁne bubbles to take
advantage of their high surface areas to increase oxygen transfer rates.
ﬁne sand
Sand particles with diameters that usually range from 0.3 to 0.6 mm.
ﬁne screen
A screening device usually having openings less than 6 mm.
FineAir
Ceramic ﬁne bubble diffuser by Parkson Corp.
ﬁnes
Particles at the lower end of a range of particle sizes.
ﬁnished water
Water that has passed through a treatment plant in which all treat-
ment processes are completed or “ﬁnished” and the water is ready to be
delivered to consumers.
Fipro
Electronic pulse control ﬁsh repelling system by Brackett Geiger.
ﬁretube boiler
Boiler in which the ﬂame and hot gases are conﬁned within tubes
arranged in a bundle within a water drum.
ﬁrst draw
The water that comes out when a tap is ﬁrst opened, likely to have the
highest level of lead contamination from plumbing materials.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ﬁrst ﬂush
Surface runoff at the beginning of a storm that often contains much of
the pollution/solid matter washed from the streets and other surfaces.
ﬁrst order reaction
A reaction in which the rate of change is directly proportional
to the ﬁrst power of the concentration of the reactant.
ﬁrst-stage BOD
See “carbonaceous biochemical oxygen demand (CBOD).”
ﬁrth
A river estuary or wide inlet to the sea (Scottish).
Fischer & Porter
Former name of Bailey-Fischer & Porter.
ﬁsh ladder
A structure that permits ﬁsh to bypass a dam using a series of bafﬂed
chambers installed at progressively lower elevations to provide a velocity
against which ﬁsh can more easily swim.
ﬁsh screen
(1) A screen at the head of an intake channel to prevent ﬁsh from
entering. (2) A traveling water screen modiﬁed to remove impinged ﬁsh and
return them to the water body.
ﬁsheyes
A condition resulting from the improper mixing of dry polymer and water
which results in the formation of lumps of undispersed polymer that resemble
ﬁsheyes.
ﬁssion
(1) The splitting of the nucleus of an atom into two or more nuclei with a
concurrent release of energy. (2) A form of asexual reproduction where the
parent organism splits into two independent organisms.
Fitch Feedwell
Clariﬁer feedwell with three horizontal chambers by GL&V/Dorr-
Oliver, Inc.
FIX™
Heavy metals treatment system by ATA Technologies Corp.
ﬁx, sample
A sample is “ﬁxed” in the ﬁeld by adding chemicals that prevent water
quality indicators of interest in the sample from changing before laboratory
measurements are made.
ﬁxation
The stabilization or solidiﬁcation of a waste material by involving it in
the formation of a stable solid derivative.
ﬁxed cover
Stationary anaerobic digester cover that allows a constant digester tank
volume to be maintained.
ﬁxed ﬁlm process
Biological wastewater treatment process where the microbes
responsible for conversion of the organic matter in wastewater are attached to
an inert medium such as rock or plastic materials. Also called “attached growth
process.”
ﬁxed matter
See “ﬁxed suspended solids.”
ﬁxed solids
Inorganic content of suspended and dissolved solids in a water or
wastewater sample, determined after heating the sample to 600°C.
ﬁxed suspended solids
Inorganic content of suspended solids in a water or waste-
water sample, determined after heating the sample to 600°C.
ﬁxed-bed porosity
The ratio of void volume to total bed volume of a granular
media ﬁlter.
fjord
A narrow inlet of the sea bordered by cliffs or highlands. Also called a
“ﬁord.”
ﬂagellates
Microorganisms that move by the whipping action of a tail-like pro-
jection called a ﬂagella.
ﬂammable
Easily set on ﬁre.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ﬂammable liquid
Any liquid having a ﬂash point below 38°C (100°F).
ﬂange
A projecting rim or edge used for attachment with another object.
ﬂap valve
A valve that is hinged on one edge and opens in the direction of normal
ﬂow and closes with ﬂow reversal.
ﬂare
A control device that burns hazardous materials to prevent their release into
the environment; may operate continuously or intermittently, usually on top
of a stack.
ﬂash
The portion of a ﬂuid converted to vapor when its pressure is reduced below
the saturation pressure.
ﬂash distillation
See “multistage ﬂash evaporation (MSF).”
ﬂash dryer
Sludge drying process that involves pulverizing sludge in a cage mill
or by an atomized suspension technique in the presence of hot gases.
ﬂash evaporator
A distillation device where saline water is vaporized in a vessel
under vacuum through pressure reduction. See also “multistage ﬂash evapo-
ration.”
ﬂash mixing
Motor-driven stirring devices designed to disperse coagulants or
other chemicals instantly, prior to ﬂocculation.
ﬂash point
The temperature at which a substance ignites.
ﬂashing
The process of vaporizing a ﬂuid by pressure reduction rather than tem-
perature elevation.
Flashvap
Flash evaporator by Licon, Inc.
ﬂashy
Characterization of rapidly changing conditions.
ﬂavor proﬁle analysis
An analysis proﬁling the matrix of odors in a water sample.
Fletcher
Filtration division of Edwards & Jones, Inc.
FlexAir™
Fine pore membrane diffuser by Environmental Dynamics Inc.
Flex-A-Tube®
Fine bubble aeration diffuser by Parkson Corp.
FlexDisc
Fine bubble membrane diffuser by USFilter/Diffused Air Products
Group.
FlexDome
Fine bubble membrane diffuser by USFilter/Diffused Air Products
Group.
Flexi Jet
Air sparging power mixer by USFilter/Aerator Products.
Flexi-Fabric
Filter press ﬁlter fabric by Baker Process.
Flexiﬂo
High speed surface aerator by USFilter/Aerator Products.
Flexi-Jet
Spray nozzles for sand ﬁlter rotary surface skimmer by F.B. Leopold
Co., Inc.
Flex-i-liner®
Sealless self-priming rotary pumps by Vanton Pump & Equipment
Corp.
Fleximix
High speed surface aerator by USFilter/Aerator Products.
Flexipak®
Submerged bioﬁlm sewage treatment system by Gyulavari Consulting
Kft.
Flexishaft™
Progressing cavity pump by MGI Pumps, Inc.
FlexKlear®
Inclined plate settler by Baker Process.
FlexKleen™
Filter underdrain nozzles by Baker Process.
FlexLine™
Nonbuoyant tubular diffuser by USFilter/Diffused Air Products
Group.
Flexmate®
Skid-mounted water puriﬁcation vessel by USFilter/Rockford.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Flexofuser®
Fine bubble diffuser with tube body and ﬁne sheath by USFilter/Dif-
fused Air Products Group.
Flexoplate™
Membrane type medium bubble diffuser by USFilter/Diffused Air
Products Group.
Flex-O-Star®
Batch wastewater treatment and ﬁltration system by Alar Engineer-
ing Corp.
FlexRO®
Skid-mounted reverse osmosis system by USFilter/Rockford.
FlexRO Mobile®
Mobile, skid-mounted reverse osmosis systems by USFil-
ter/Rockford.
Flexscour®
Stainless steel ﬁlter underdrain for air-water backwash by Baker Pro-
cess and Anthratech Western, Inc.
ﬂight
(1) The horizontal scraper on a rectangular sludge collector. (2) The helical
blade on a screw pump.
Flight Guide
Nonmetallic wear shoes for sludge collector ﬂights by Trusty Cook,
Inc.
Flint Rim
Cast sprocket with hardened chill rim by USFilter/Envirex.
FLM
Federal land manager.
ﬂoat
The concentrated solids at the surface of a dissolved air ﬂotation unit.
ﬂoat switch
An electrical or pneumatic switch operated by a ﬂoat in response to
changing liquid levels.
ﬂoatables
See “ﬂotables.”
FloatAll
Dissolved air ﬂotation system by Walker Process Equipment.
ﬂoating cover
Anaerobic digester tank cover free to move up or down to change
the total internal capacity of the tank in response to sludge additions or
withdrawals.
ﬂoating gas holder
Anaerobic digester tank cover that ﬂoats on a cushion of gas
and moves up or down to change the total internal capacity of the tank in
response to changes in gas volume.
Floating Plate®
Ozone generation technology by Paciﬁc Ozone Technology, Inc.
Float-Treat®
Dissolved air ﬂotation system by USFilter/Envirex.
Flo-Buster™
Organic solids agitator/separator by Enviro-Care Co.
ﬂoc
Small, gelatinous masses formed in water by adding a coagulant or in waste-
water through biological activity.
Floc Barrier®
Inclined settling tubes for clariﬁers by Graver Co.
Floc Tunnel®
Deep bed ﬁlter by Hazleton Environmental, Inc.
ﬂocculant
An organic polyelectrolyte used alone or with metal salts to enhance
ﬂoc formation and increase the strength of the ﬂoc structure.
ﬂocculant settling
Phenomenon referring to sedimentation of particles in a dilute
suspension as they coalesce or ﬂocculate during sedimentation. Also called
“type II settling.”
ﬂocculated suspended solids (FSS)
The suspended solids remaining in a sam-
ple’s supernatant after 30 minutes of settling with ﬂocculation.
ﬂocculation
Gentle stirring or agitation to accelerate the agglomeration of particles
to enhance sedimentation or ﬂotation.
ﬂocculator
A device used to enhance the formation of ﬂoc through gentle stirring
or mixing.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Flocide®
Sanitizer additive by BioLab Inc.
Floclean
Membrane cleaning product by BioLab Inc.
Floclear
Solids contact clariﬁer by USFilter/Aerator Products.
Flocon®
Reverse osmosis feedwater additive by BioLab Inc.
Flo-Conveyor™
Screenings conveyor by Enviro-Care Co.
Flocor
Crossﬂow random ﬁll media by the USFilter/Smogless.
Floc-Pac™
Compact ﬂocculant packages by American Cyanamid Co.
Flocpress
Belt ﬁlter press formerly offered by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
Flocsettler
Combination ﬂocculator/clariﬁer by Amwell, Inc.
Flocsillator
Horizontal oscillating ﬂocculator by Baker Process.
FlocTreator
Coagulation and ﬂocculation unit by the former PWT Americas.
Floctrol
Multiple stage, horizontal shaft, paddle ﬂocculators by USFilter/Envirex.
Flo-Dar™
Noncontact area/velocity ﬂowmeter by Marsh-McBirney, Inc.
Flodry®
Closed loop sludge drying process by USFilter/Smogless.
Floﬁlter™
Water treatment system combining ﬂotation and ﬁltration by Waterlink
Separations, Inc.
FloGard™
Stormwater catch basin screen by KriStar Enterprises.
Flo-Lift™
Vertical screenings lift device by Enviro-Care Co.
Flo-Line
Fine mesh screening machine by Derrick Corp.
FloMag®
Magnesium-based granular, powder, and slurry water treatment products
by Martin Marietta Specialties, Inc.
FloMaker™
Submersible mixer by ITT Flygt Corp.
Flo-Mate
Portable ﬂow meter by Marsh-McBirney, Inc.
ﬂood plain
The lowland area adjoining inland and coastal waters subject to a 1%
or greater chance of ﬂooding in a given year.
ﬂoor sweep
Capture of heavier-than-air gases that collect at ﬂoor level.
Flo-Poke
Portable ﬂow rate instrument by Isco, Inc.
ﬂora
Plants and plant life of a particular region or period.
Flo-Screen™
Reciprocating rake bar screen by Enviro-Care Co.
ﬂotables
The ﬂoating material in a water or wastewater which must be removed
prior to treatment or discharge.
ﬂotation
A treatment process where gas bubbles are introduced to a water and
attach to solid particles creating bubble-solid agglomerates that ﬂoat to the
surface where they are removed.
ﬂotation thickening
Sludge thickening by means of dissolved air ﬂotation.
Flotator™
Dissolved air ﬂotation system by Baker Process.
Flotherm®
Sludge incineration process by USFilter/Smogless.
Flo-Tote
Computerized open-channel ﬂow meter by Marsh-McBirney, Inc.
ﬂotsam
Floating debris resulting from human activity.
Flottweg
Centrifuge product line by Krauss Maffei Corp.
ﬂow control valve
A device that controls the rate of ﬂuid ﬂow.
ﬂow equalization
Transient storage of wastewater for release to a sewer system
or treatment process at a controlled rate to provide a reasonably uniform ﬂow.
Flow Logger
Flow measuring device by Isco, Inc.
ﬂow rate
The volume or mass of a gas, liquid, or solid material that passes some
point in a stated period of time.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ﬂow splitter
A chamber that divides incoming ﬂow into two or more streams.
Flo-Ware
Data logging ﬂow meter software by Marsh-McBirney, Inc.
FlowMAX™
Reverse osmosis system by USFilter.
Flowminutor™
Horizontal shaft comminutor by Enviro-Care Co.
FlowSorb™
Granular-activated carbon canisters by Calgon Carbon Corp.
Flowtrex
Pleated cartridge ﬁlter by Osmonics, Inc.
FLP
Flash point.
FLPMA
Federal Land Policy and Management Act.
ﬂue
Any passage designed to carry combustion gases and entrained particulates.
ﬂue gas
The gases and smoke released from an incinerator’s chimney.
ﬂue gas desulfurization (FGD)
The process of removing sulfur dioxide from
exhaust gas, usually by means of a wet scrubbing process.
ﬂue gas humidiﬁcation (FGH)
A process to control SO2 emissions by spraying
a water/air mixture into ﬂue gas.
FluePac™
Powdered activated carbon by Calgon Carbon Corp.
ﬂuid
Any material or substance which ﬂows or moves whether in a semisolid,
liquid, sludge, or gaseous form or state.
Fluid Dynamics®
Engineered ﬁlter system by USFilter/Filtration & Separation.
Fluid Systems
Membrane products group of Koch Membrane Systems, Inc.
Fluidactor
Fluid bed sludge incinerator formerly offered by Walker Process Equip-
ment.
ﬂuidization
The upward ﬂow of a gas or ﬂuid through a granular bed at sufﬁcient
velocity to suspend the grains.
ﬂuidized bed combustion
A method of burning particulate fuel, such as powdered
coal, where the fuel is burned after injection into a rapidly moving gas stream.
ﬂuidized bed furnace
An incinerator or furnace used to incinerate sludge by
passing heated air upward through a ﬂuidized sand bed.
Fluidizer-Minor
Flash dryer by Niro, Inc.
ﬂume
A channel used to carry water.
Flump
Floating lagoon pump units by SRS Crisafulli, Inc.
Fluoretrack
Liquid water tracing dye by Formulabs, Inc.
ﬂuoridation
The addition of ﬂuoride to drinking water to aid in the prevention of
tooth decay.
ﬂuorimeter
An instrument used to measure the amount of ﬂuorescent materials,
dyes, or aromatic hydrocarbons in water.
ﬂuorocarbons (FCs)
Any of a number of organic compounds analogous to hydro-
carbons in which one or more hydrogen atoms are replaced by ﬂuorine. FCs
containing chlorine are called chloroﬂuorocarbons (CFCs).
ﬂuorosis
A demineralization of tooth enamel caused by excessive ingestion of
ﬂuoride by children during the years of tooth calciﬁcation which is character-
ized by brown staining or mottling of the teeth.
ﬂuorspar
Common source of commercially available ﬂuoride compounds which
may be used as a direct source of ﬂuoride for water ﬂuoridation.
Fluosolids
Fluid bed reactor for sludge disposal by GL&V/Dorr-Oliver, Inc.
ﬂush tank
A tank in which water is stored for rapid release.
ﬂush valve
A valve used to expel water and sediment from a pipeline.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Flush-Kleen®
Nonclogging sewage ejector pump by Yeomans Chicago Corp.
ﬂuvial
Produced by or found in a river or stream.
ﬂuvial deposit
Sediment deposited by the actions of a river or stream.
ﬂux
(1) Flowrate per unit area. (2) Heat transfer rate per unit area.
ﬂy ash
The noncombustible particles in ﬂue gas.
Flygt
Pump and mixer products by ITT Flygt Corp.
Flying Pig
Screenings compacting, dewatering, and conveying unit by Meurer
Industries, Inc.
Flymitec®
Submersible mixing concept by ITT Flygt Corp.
FMA
Free mineral acidity. See “mineral acidity.”
FMC Process Additives
Former name of BioLab Inc.
FMC-MHS
Equipment product line acquired by USFilter/Envirex.
FmHA
Farmers Home Administration.
FML
Flexible membrane liner.
Foam Ban™
Foam control additive by Ultra Additives, Inc.
Foam-Abator
Foam abatement product by USFilter/Jet Tech.
Foamtex™
Foam control additive by Ultra Additives, Inc.
Foamtrol™
Foam control additive by Ultra Additives, Inc.
fodder crop
A crop grown principally for animal food.
FOG
Fats, oils, and grease.
fogging
The application of a pesticide by rapidly heating the liquid chemical so
that it forms very ﬁne droplets that resemble smoke or fog.
Folded Flow™
Enhanced ﬂow scheme used in high rate water/wastewater treat-
ment processes by USFilter/Envirex.
fomite
Objects that have been contaminated by pathogens from a diseased person
and may serve in their transmission.
FONSI
Finding of no signiﬁcant impact.
Font’n Aire®
Floating decorative aerator/fountain by Air-O-Lator Corp.
food chain
A feeding hierarchy where food energy is passed from primary pro-
ducers (plants) to primary consumers (herbivores) to secondary consumers
(carnivores).
food chain crops
Crops grown for human consumption and for feed for animals
whose products are used for human consumption.
food crop
Crops grown primarily for human consumption.
food poisoning
A gastrointestinal disorder caused by bacteria or their toxic prod-
ucts, occurring after consumption of contaminated food.
food waste
Organic residues generated by the handling, storage, preparation,
cooking, and serving of food.
food web
The complex interconnected network of food chains in a community.
food-to-microorganism ratio (F/M or F:M)
The ratio of the inﬂuent BOD or
COD to the volatile-suspended solids concentration in a wastewater treatment
aeration tank.
foot-pound
Unit of measure of work performed by a force of 1 pound acting
through a distance of 1 foot.
forage crop
Crops that can be used as feed by domestic animals by being grazed
or cut for hay.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Forager™
Sponge containing a bonded polymer used to selectively remove heavy
metals from water by Dynaphore, Inc.
force main
The pipeline through which ﬂow is transported from a point of higher
pressure to a point of lower pressure.
forced circulation evaporator
An evaporator in which circulation is maintained
by pumping liquid through the heating element with relatively low evaporation
per pass.
forced draft deaerator
Device to remove dissolved gases from solution by blowing
an air stream through a packed column countercurrent to downﬂowing water.
forebay
A reservoir at the end of a pipeline or channel.
formaldehyde
A colorless, pungent, and irritating gas, CH2O, used chieﬂy as a
disinfectant and preservative and in synthesizing other compounds like resins.
formalin
A clear, aqueous solution of 37% formaldehyde and a small amount of
methanol used as a sanitant.
FormAsorb™
Activated carbon product by Waterlink/Barnebey Sutcliffe.
formazin turbidity unit (FTU)
Unit of measure used in turbidity measurement
based on a known chemical reaction that produces insoluble particulates of
uniform size.
Fossil Filter™
Stormwater runoff ﬁlter by KriStar Enterprises.
fossil fuel
Natural gas, petroleum, coal, and any form of solid liquid or gaseous
fuel derived from such materials for the purpose of creating useful heat.
fossil water
See “connate water.”
Fotovap
Evaporator to treat photo processing lab wastewater by Licon, Inc.
fouling
Condition caused when bacterial growth, colloidal material, or scale forms
a deposit on a ﬁlter, membrane, or heat transfer surface.
fouling factor
A design criteria used to allow for some variation of equipment
performance due to fouling.
4-Beam™
Turbidity and suspended-solids measuring instrument by BTG, Inc.
4-log removal
The removal of 99.99% of a constituent.
four 9s DRE
Common term for an incinerator destruction and removal efﬁciency
of 99.99%.
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometry (FTIR)
Continuous emissions mon-
itoring system used to identify organic and inorganic compounds in liquids,
solids, and gases.
Fox-Pac
Sanitation system for marine applications by Red Fox Environmental, Inc.
FP
Fine particulate.
FPA
(1) Federal Pesticide Act (FPA). (2) See “ﬂavor proﬁle analysis.”
FPEIS
Fine Particulate Emissions Information System.
fpm
Feet per minute.
FPPA
Federal Pollution Prevention Act.
fps
Feet per second.
FQPA
Food Quality Protection Act.
FR
Federal Register.
fractionation
A distillation method used to separate a mixture of several volatile
components of different boiling points in successive stages with each stage
removing some proportion of one component.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Framco International
Product group of ABS Pumps, Inc.
frazil ice
Granular or spike-shaped ice crystals that form in supercooled water
which is too turbulent to permit coagulation into sheet ice.
free available chlorine (FAC)
The amount of chlorine available as dissolved gas,
hypochlorous acid, and hypochlorite ion that is not combined with ammonia
or other compounds in the water.
free available chlorine residual
The concentration of residual chlorine remaining
at the end of a speciﬁc contact time which is available as dissolved gas,
hypochlorous acid, or hypochlorite ion, not combined with ammonia or in
another less readily available form.
free carbon dioxide
The concentration of gaseous carbon dioxide present in water
that is not combined in carbonates or bicarbonates.
free chlorine
See “free available chlorine residual.”
free chlorine residual
See “free available chlorine residual.”
free liquids
Liquids which readily separate from the solid portion of a waste under
ambient temperature and conditions.
free mineral acidity (FMA)
See “mineral acidity.”
free oil
Nonemulsiﬁed oil that separates from water, usually in 5 minutes or less.
free product
A regulated substance present as liquid not dissolved in water.
free radical
A chemical having an unpaired electron that makes it very reactive.
free settling
The settling of discrete, nonﬂocculant particles in a dilute suspension.
free water knockout (FWKO)
Gravity separation vessel used in an oil ﬁeld to
separate produced water from oil.
freeboard
The vertical distance between the normal maximum liquid level in a
basin and the top of the basin that is provided so that waves and other liquid
movements will not overﬂow the basin.
Free-Flow™
Ceramic diffuser plates for ﬁne bubble aeration by USFilter/Davco.
Free-Slide
Wire mesh basket conﬁguration for traveling water screens by USFil-
ter/Rex & Link-Belt Products.
freeze concentration
A process involving the removal of heat from an aqueous
mixture until one or more of the components crystallize.
freeze distillation
Production of distillate by freezing a saline solution and wash-
ing salts from the pure water crystals prior to melting.
Fre-Flo
Extruded cement underdrain for gravity ﬁlter by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
Freon®
Refrigerant compound by E.I. Dupont De Nemours Inc.
fresh water
Water that usually contains less than 1000 mg/L of dissolved solids.
freshet
A stream or current of fresh water that ﬂows into the sea.
freshwater lens
An occurrence of fresh water found above salt water, usually
found in coastal areas.
Freundlich isotherm
Graphical representation of data related to the removal of
colloidal matter from water as a result of adsorption.
FREX
Freon extractable oil and grease.
friable
Material that may be easily crumbled, pulverized, or reduced to powder.
friction factor
A measure of the resistance to liquid ﬂow that results from the
wall roughness of a pipe or channel.
FrictionFlex®
Containment liner texturing process by SLT North America, Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Fridgevap®
Package distillation/concentration system by Licon, Inc.
Frontloader
Reciprocating rake bar screen by Schreiber Corp.
Frontrunner
Reciprocating rake bar screen by Waste-Tech, Inc.
froth
A mass of bubbles in or on the surface of a liquid.
frothing
The formation of a thick layer of froth on an aeration basin.
FRP
Fiberglass reinforced plastic.
FRS
Formal reporting system.
fry
Juvenile ﬁsh.
FS
Feasibility study.
FSA
Food Security Act.
FSI®
Filter Specialists, Inc.
FSS
See “ﬂocculated suspended solids (FSS).”
FTIR
See “Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometry (FTIR).”
FTO
Flameless thermal oxidation.
FTU
See “formazin turbidity unit (FTU).”
Fuchs ATAD
Autothermal aerobic digestion system by USFilter/Krüger.
fuel economy standard
See “corporate average fuel economy standard (CAFE).”
fuel efﬁciency
The proportion of the energy released on combustion of a fuel that
is converted into useful energy.
fugitive emission
Air pollutants emitted to the atmosphere other than those from
chimneys, stacks, or vents.
fugitive source
Any source of emissions not controlled by an air pollution control
device.
fuller’s earth
A ﬁne, clay-like substance also called “diatomaceous earth.”
Full-Fit™
Membrane separator by Osmonics, Inc.
fulvic acid
Byproduct of decomposing organic matter that colors water and is a
precursor of disinfection byproducts.
fume
Finely divided solids trapped in vapor in a gas stream.
fumigant
A pesticide vaporized to kill pests, commonly used in buildings and
greenhouses.
fungi
Small, multicellular nonphotosynthetic organisms that feed on organic matter.
fungicide
A substance used to kill or inhibit the growth of fungi or molds.
furans
A family of toxic, chlorinated organic compounds present in minute
amounts in the air emissions from hazardous waste incinerators.
FURS
Federal underground injection control reporting system.
fusion
An energy-producing nuclear reaction that results from combining nuclei
of small atoms to form larger atoms.
Futura-Thane®
Potable water tank linings by Futura Coatings Inc.
future liability
Refers to potentially responsible parties’ obligations to pay for
additional response activities beyond those speciﬁed in the Record of Decision
or Consent Decree.
Fuzzy Filter®
Upﬂow ﬁlter system by Schreiber Corp.
fuzzy logic
A process control system intended to replace a skilled human operator
by using multi-level logic to adjust process operation based on a set of approx-
imate, rather than exact, rules.
FWCA
Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

FWER
Final water effect ratio. The test procedure where a Water Effect Ratio
test is repeated three times under different stream ﬂow conditions. See also
“water effect ratio (WER).”
FWKO
See “free water knockout (FWKO).”
FWPCA
See “Federal Water Pollution Control Act (FWPCA).”
FXB
Fixed bed reactor.
FY
Fiscal year.
G
g
See “gram (g).”
G value
See “velocity gradient (G value).”
G.T.M.™
Gas transfer membrane separation technology by Ecolochem, Inc.
GAAP
Generally accepted accounting principles.
gabion
A wire mesh container ﬁlled with rocks used to prevent soil erosion.
GAC
Granular-activated carbon.
GAC10
Granular-activated carbon with an empty bed contact time of 10 minutes
and a carbon reactivation frequency of no more than 6 months.
GACT
Granular-activated carbon treatment.
gain output ratio (GOR)
A measure of evaporator performance which represents
the ratio of mass ﬂow of distillate to steam input.
gallon (U.S.)
A unit of volume for liquid substances equal to 231 cubic inches
and approximately equivalent to 3.785 liters.
gallon, Imperial
A unit of volume for liquid substances approximately equal to
1.2 gallons (U.S.) or 4.546 liters.
gallons per ﬂush
The number of gallons used to ﬂush a toilet.
galvanic corrosion
Corrosion that occurs when two dissimilar metals are con-
nected electrically and immersed in a conductive liquid.
galvanic series
The ranking of the relative nobility of different conducting mate-
rials in a certain environment.
galvanize
An electrolytic or hot dipping process to coat steel products with zinc
to increase corrosion resistance.
gamma ray
A short wavelength, high energy form of electromagnetic radiation.
garbage
Solid wastes generated by the handling, storage, preparation, cooking,
and serving of food.
GARD
Gravity-activated rotary trickling ﬁlter distributor by USFilter/General Filter.
Gardiner Equipment
Chemical induction system product line by USFilter/Stranco.
Gar-Dur
Ultra high molecular weight plastic products for chain and ﬂight sludge
collectors by Garland Manufacturing Co.
garnet
A dense mineral often used as media in a granular media ﬁlter.
Garra
Membrane bioreactor by USFilter/Memcor.
gas
One of the three states of matter having no ﬁxed shape or volume and capable
of expanding indeﬁnitely.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

gas blanket
The use of an inert gas in an enclosed tank’s vapor space to minimize
vapor formation or keep out unwanted air and moisture.
gas chlorination
The application of chlorine gas to water.
gas chromatography (GC)
An analytical technique used to determine the molec-
ular composition and concentrations of various chemicals in water and soil
samples.
gas tight
Operating with no detectable emissions.
gaseous emission
Volatile or uncondensed compounds discharged into the atmo-
sphere.
gasiﬁcation
See “coal gasiﬁcation.”
GasLifter
Anaerobic digester circulation and mixing system by Walker Process
Equipment.
gasohol
A motor vehicle fuel containing 80-90% unleaded gasoline and 10-20%
ethanol.
gasoline oxygenate
Combustible liquids containing oxygen that are added to gas-
oline to reduce atmospheric pollutants.
gastroenteritis
An inﬂammation of the stomach and intestinal tract that is usually
accompanied by symptoms that include diarrhea, fever, and vomiting.
gastrointestinal
Related to the stomach or intestines.
gate valve
A valve with a disk-shaped closing element that slides over the opening
through which water ﬂows.
GBT
See “gravity belt thickener (GBT).”
GC
See “gas chromatography (GC).”
GC/MS
Gas chromatography/mass spectrometry.
GCL
See “geosynthetic clay liner.”
GDT
Gas dissolution technology.
GDT Process™
Gas-degas treatment process for VOC removal by GDT Corp.
gear pump
A positive displacement pump where cavities created between the gear
teeth of two meshing gears move from the suction to discharge side of the pump.
GEHO®
Piston-type pump for heavy sludges by Envirotech Pumpsystems.
Geiger counter
An instrument used to detect radiation.
gel polymer
High molecular weight monomers produced with gamma radiation.
gel zeolite
A synthetic sodium alumiosilicate ion exchanger.
Gelex
Standards used to standardize turbidimeters by Hach Co.
GelGester™
Bacterial additive for grease and odor applications by NuTech Envi-
ronmental Corp.
Gemco
Spent liquor ﬁlter by Gauld Equipment Sales Co.
Gemini
Self-cleaning basket strainer by S.P. Kinney Engineers, Inc.
Gemini™
Granular-activated carbon contactors by Roberts Filter Group.
Gemini Polymaster
Emulsion and solution polymer blending equipment by Nep-
tune Chemical Pump Co.
GEMS
Global environmental monitoring system.
Gen2®
Chemical feed system formerly offered by USFilter/Stranco.
General Filter
Former name of USFilter/General Filter.
generator
(1) Any person, group, or organization whose activities produce haz-
ardous waste. (2) A rotating device used to produce electrical power.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Generon®
On-site gaseous nitrogen generator by MG Generon.
Generox®
On-site gaseous chlorine dioxide generator by MG Generon.
Genesis
Package gravity ﬁlter system by Roberts Filter Group.
Genesis
Sewage shredder by ZMI/Portec Chemical Processing.
genome
All the genetic material in an organism.
genotoxic
The ability of a chemical to cause adverse effects in the genetic material
of a living organism.
Gen-Ozi
Ozone generator by Matheson Gas Products.
GeoCarb 6
Engineered granular carbon media by Geoenergy International Corp.
GeoCat™
Recuperative catalytic oxidizer by Geoenergy International Corp.
geodetic head
The total head without deducting velocity head or other losses.
geographic information system (GIS)
A computer system designed for storing,
manipulating, analyzing, and displaying data in a geographic context.
Geoguard®
Groundwater sampling product by American Sigma, Inc.
geosmin
A trace organic chemical produced by certain algae which may impart
an earthy/musty odor in surface waters. Chemical formula is C12H22O.
geosynthetic clay liner (GCL)
A landﬁll liner manufactured of bentonite clay
supported by geotexiles.
Geothane®
Wastewater containment lining by Futura Coatings, Inc.
GeoTherm™
Regenerative thermal oxidizer by Geoenergy International Corp.
geothermal
Energy produced by the transfer of heat from the earth’s interior and
conducted to the surface by hot water or steam.
GEP
Good engineering practice.
germ
A disease-producing microbe.
germ cell
A reproductive cell; in humans, sperm or eggs.
germicide
Any compound that kills disease-causing microorganisms.
Gewe
Inclined plate settler by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
GFC
USFilter/General Filter.
GFF
Glass ﬁber ﬁlter.
GFS
Gravity Flow Systems, Inc.
ghanat
See “falaj.”
GHG
See “greenhouse gases (GHG).”
Giardia lamblia
A protozoan parasite responsible for giardiasis.
giardiasis
A gastrointestinal disease caused by the ingestion of waterborne Giardia
lamblia, often resulting from the activity of beavers, muskrats, or other warm-
blooded animals in surface water used as a potable water source.
gill net
A vertical net used to capture ﬁsh of a certain size by allowing their heads
to pass through the openings while catching their gills in the mesh.
Girasieve®
Externally fed rotating drum screen by Andritz Sprout-Bauer S.A.
GIS
See “geographic information system (GIS).”
glacial water
Bottled water originating from a glacier.
glacier
A large mass of accumulating ice and compacted snow that slowly moves
down mountain valleys.
Gladiator
Groundwater remediation pump by Ejector Systems, Inc.
GLASdek
Synthetic media for evaporative cooling systems by Munters.
Glauber’s salt
Sodium sulfate with ten waters of hydration.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

GLC
Gas liquid chromatography.
GLERL
Great Lakes Environmental Research Laboratory.
GLI
See “Great Lakes Initiative (GLI).”
global warming
A theory that predicts the warming of the atmosphere as a result
of an accumulation of atmospheric carbon dioxide.
globe valve
A valve where closure is accomplished by a spherical plug lowered
onto a matching seat in the center of the valve.
GLP
Good laboratory practices.
GLWQA
Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement.
Glydaseal
Sluice gate by Rodney Hunt Co.
GM foods
Genetically modiﬁed foods made from plants that have been genetically
altered.
GMCC
Global monitoring for climatic change.
Golfwater®
Aeration system for golf course ponds by Aeration Industries, Inc.
Gooch crucible
A heat resistant container ﬁtted with a ﬁlter mat used for deter-
mination of suspended and total solids.
Goodﬁl
Rotary drum thickener by Gootech ASA.
GOP
General operating procedures.
GOR
See “gain output ratio (GOR).”
Gore-Tex®
Microporous membrane material by W.L. Gore & Associates, Inc.
Gould clariﬁer
A rectangular, secondary clariﬁer with dual chain and ﬂight sludge
collector mechanisms traveling toward a single sludge hopper at or near the
middle of the tank.
GOX
Gaseous oxygen.
gpd
Gallons per day.
gpf
Gallons per ﬂush.
gpg
See “grains per gallon (gpg).”
gpg imp
Grains per imperial gallon.
gpm
Gallons per minute.
GPS
Groundwater protection strategy.
gr
See “grain (gr).”
GR™
Gas recuperative thermal oxidizer by Thermatrix, Inc.
grab sample
A single water or wastewater sample taken at a time and place
representative of total discharge.
Grabber
Tramp metal and heavy object catcher by Franklin Miller, Inc.
Grabber®
Reciprocating rake bar screen by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
Grace TEC
Former name of Megtec Systems, Inc.
grade
(1) The ﬁnished surface of a civil structure. (2) The inclination or slope of
a surface or structure. (3) To rate according to a standard or size.
gradient
The rate of change of an elevation, velocity, pressure, temperature, or
other parameter.
graduated cylinder
A glass cylinder with ﬁne gradations used in a laboratory to
measure liquid contents.
GrahamTek™
Filtration and desalination water treatment systems by MWD Tech-
nologies Ltd.
grain (gr)
A unit of mass equal to 0.0648 gram.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

grains per gallon (gpg)
A unit of measure where 1 gpg (U.S.) = 17.1 mg/L and
1 gpg (Imp) = 14.3 mg/L, frequently used in water hardness calculations.
gram (g)
A unit of mass equal to the weight of 1 cubic centimeter (1 milliliter)
of water or 0.03527 ounces.
Gram stain
A staining procedure used to differentiate and categorize bacteria as
either Gram negative or Gram positive.
granular activated carbon (GAC)
A granular form of activated carbon used in
ﬁlter beds or contactor vessels to absorb organic compounds.
granular media
Grains of sand or other granular material used for ﬁltering water
or wastewater.
granular media ﬁltration
A tank or vessel ﬁlled with sand or other granular
media to remove suspended solids and colloids from a water or wastewater
that ﬂows through it.
GRAS
Generally regarded as safe.
Gravabelt
Gravity belt thickener by Komline-Sanderson Engineering Corp.
gravel
Rock fragments measuring 2 mm to 70 mm, often used as support material
in granular media ﬁlters.
Gravex
Zeolite softener by Graver Co.
Gravilectric
Sludge wasting system using load cells to determine excess sludge
accumulations by Patterson Candy International, Ltd.
Gravi-Merik™
Gravimetric belt feeder by Merrick Industries Inc.
gravimetric
Pertaining to the measurement of the weight of samples or materials.
gravimetric feeder
Dry chemical feeder that supplies a constant weight of chem-
ical over a preset time period.
Gravipak
Crossﬂow inclined plate clariﬁer by USFilter/Aerator Products.
Gravi-Pak
Oil/water separator by the former Bowser-Briggs Filtration Co.
Gravisand™
Traveling bridge ﬁlter components by USFilter/Davco.
gravitational acceleration
The acceleration of a free-falling body caused by the
force of the earth’s gravity, equal to 9.8 meters (32 feet) per second.
Gravitator™
Clariﬁer/thickener by DAS International, Inc.
gravity belt thickener (GBT)
A sludge dewatering device utilizing a porous ﬁlter
belt to promote gravity drainage of water.
gravity ﬁlter
Granular media ﬁlter that operates at atmospheric pressure.
gravity spring
See “seepage spring.”
gravity system
A hydraulic system that relies on gravity ﬂow and does not require
pumping.
gravity thickening
A sedimentation basin designed to operate at high solids load-
ing rates, usually with vertical pickets mounted to the revolving sludge scrapers
to assist in releasing entrained water.
gray (Gy)
An international standard dose unit of radiation equal to an absorption
of 1 joule per kilogram; 1 Gy = 100 rads.
Gray Engineering
Former equipment manufacturer.
gray water
All nontoilet household water including the water from sinks, baths,
and showers.
GRCDA
Government Refuse Collection and Disposal Association.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

grease
Common term used to include fats, oils, waxes, and related constituents
found in wastewater.
Grease Grabber
Grease and oil skimmer by Abanaki Corp.
grease trap
A receptacle used to collect grease and separate it from a wastewater ﬂow.
GreaseBurn
Grease and skimmings incinerator by Walker Process Equipment.
Great Lakes Environmental®
Equipment product line by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
Great Lakes Initiative (GLI)
Proposed guidelines to develop uniform water
quality requirements for the U.S. Great Lake’s basin.
Great Lakes Instruments
Former name of GLI International.
green belt
An undeveloped area immediately surrounding a town or development
for the purpose of restricting indiscriminate outward expansion.
green liquor
The liquor resulting from dissolving molten smelt from the kraft
recovery furnace in water.
greenhouse effect
The effect of CO2 and other gases on the earth’s atmosphere
that is analogous to greenhouse glass as it restricts the outﬂow of radiative
energy which results in the warming of the lower atmosphere.
greenhouse gases (GHG)
Gases including carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide,
and CFCs which have been recognized to contribute to the greenhouse effect.
Greenleaf Filter Control
Multiple cell rapid sand gravity ﬁlter using a central
control and backwashing system by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
greensand
A ﬁlter sand containing glauconite with ion exchange properties, often
used to remove iron or manganese from water.
GRGL
Groundwater residue guidance level.
Griductor®
Comminutor by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
Grifﬁn Generator
Ozone generator by Ozonia North America.
Grifter®
Packaged pumping/grinding station by Ingersoll-Dresser Pump (U.S.) and
H2O Waste-Tec (U.K.).
Grind Hog™
Mechanical shredding products by G.E.T. Industries, Inc.
grit
Sand, gravel, cinders, and other heavy solid matter that have settling velocities
substantially higher than those of organic putrescible solids in wastewater.
grit chamber
A settling chamber used to remove grit from organic solids through
sedimentation or an air-induced spiral agitation.
grit classiﬁer
Mechanical device utilizing an inclined screw or reciprocating rake
to wash putrescible organics from grit.
Grit King™
Grit removal unit by H.I.L. Technology, Inc.
grit removal
A preliminary wastewater treatment process to remove grit from
organic solids.
Grit Snail™
Fine grit removal system by Eutek Systems, Inc.
grit washer
A device used to wash organic matter from grit.
GritLift
Air lift pump for grit removal by Walker Process Equipment.
Gritmeister™
Grit separator/screw conveyor by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
Gritreat
Aerated grit chamber by USFilter/Headworks Products.
Gritreator™
Grit treatment unit by Baker Process.
Gritt Mitt™
Grit removal and conveyor unit by WesTech Engineering Inc.
grizzly
A coarse screen used to prevent debris from entering a water intake.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Grizzly™
Grinder pump by F.E. Myers Co.
ground cover
Plants grown to keep soil from eroding.
groundwater
Subsurface water found in porous rock strata and soil.
groundwater inﬁltration (GWI)
The seepage of groundwater into shafts and
tunnels.
groundwater recharge
The replenishment of a groundwater source, often by
injection of tertiary treated wastewater.
grout
Fluid, or semi-ﬂuid, cement slurry for pouring into joints of brickwork or
masonry.
GRP
Glassﬁber reinforced plastic.
grubbing
The process of removing tree stumps or roots.
GTO
Gas turbine oxidizer.
Guardian™
Strainer product line by Tate Andale, Inc.
guide vane
A device used to direct or guide the ﬂow of a liquid or vapor.
guinea worm disease
See “dracunculiasis.”
gunbarrel
A vertical settling tank used to separate free oil from water in the
production of crude oil.
Gundline®
Containment liner by Gundle Lining Systems, Inc.
Gundnet
Drainage net by Gundle Lining Systems, Inc.
Gundseal
Geocomposite liner by Gundle Lining Systems, Inc.
Gutling
Former name of USFilter/Gutling.
GW
Groundwater.
GWDR
Ground Water Disinfection Rule.
GWI
Groundwater inﬁltration.
GWM
Groundwater monitoring.
GWUI
Groundwater under the direct inﬂuence of surface water.
gypsum
The mineral consisting primarily of fully hydrated calcium sulfate. Chem-
ical formula is CaSO4-2H20.
Gyrazur™
Softening clariﬁer by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
H
H. pylori
See “Heliobacter pylori.”
H2O
See “water.”
H2O2
See “hydrogen peroxide.”
H2S
See “hydrogen sulﬁde.”
HA
Health advisory.
ha
See “hectare (ha).”
HAA
See “haloacetic acid (HAA).”
HAA5
The sum of the concentration of ﬁve haloacetic acid compounds which
include mono-, di-, and trichloroacetic acids and mono- and dibromoacetic
acids.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

HAA6
The sum of the concentration of six haloacetic acid compounds which
include mono-, di-, and trichloroacetic acids, mono- and dibromoacetic acids,
and bromochloroacetic acid.
HAAFP
Haloacetic acid formation potential.
habitat
The place where a human, animal, plant, or microorganism population
lives, and its surroundings, both living and nonliving.
Hach One
pH Electrode by Hach Co.
hadal zone
The ecological zone of the ocean ﬂoor that lies in a deep trench below
the abyssal zone, generally deeper than 6000 meters.
Halberg
Digester draft tube sludge mixer by Sterling Fluid Systems (USA).
half life
The time required for half of the atoms of a particular radioactive sub-
stance to transform or decay to another nuclear form.
half life, chemical
The time required for the concentration of a chemical being
tested to be reduced to one half of its initial value.
halides
A compound containing a halogen.
haloacetic acid (HAA)
A type of disinfection byproduct formed during the chlo-
rination of water containing natural organic matter.
halocline
A well-deﬁned salinity gradient in an ocean.
halogen
One of the chemical elements of the group containing ﬂuorine, chlorine,
bromine, iodine, and astatine.
halogenated organic compounds (HOC)
Compounds having a halogen-carbon
bond.
halon
Bromine-containing compounds with long atmospheric lifetimes whose
breakdown in the stratosphere causes depletion of ozone.
halophyte
Plants capable of living in salt water or salty soil.
Hamburg Rotor
Surface aerator by Brackett Geiger.
HammerHead™
Groundwater pump by QED Environmental Systems, Inc.
hammermill
A device with hammer-like arms used to shred or grind solids to
facilitate further treatment or disposal.
handler
A facility that accumulates and generates universal wastes or receives
and/or sends universal wastes to a destination facility.
HAP
Hazardous air pollutant.
HAPEMS
Hazardous Air Pollutant Enforcement Management System.
HAPPS
Hazardous Air Pollutant Prioritization System.
Harbor Bosun
Dye tablets by Formulabs, Inc.
Harborlite®
Perlite material by Celite Corp.
hard water
Alkaline water containing dissolved salts that interfere with some
industrial processes and prevent soap from sudsing.
HaRDE®
Electrostatic precipitator by Wheelabrator Air Pollution Control, Inc.
Hardinge
Manufacturer of traveling bridge ﬁlter whose product line was acquired
by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
hardness
The total concentration of calcium and magnesium ions in water
expressed as calcium carbonate.
hardpan
A compacted, impermeable layer of soil at or near the surface.
Hastelloy®
Corrosion resistant, nickel-based alloy by Haynes International, Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

HATREMS
Hazardous and Trace Emissions System.
HAV
Hepatitis A virus.
Hawker Siddeley Brackett
Former parent company of Brackett Geiger.
Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments (HSWA)
The 1984 amendments to
RCRA regulating underground tank storage and land disposal of certain haz-
ardous wastes.
hazardous area, class 1
Locations where ﬂammable gases or vapors may be
present in the air in sufﬁcient quantities to produce explosive or ignitable
mixtures.
hazardous material
A solid, liquid, or gaseous material that is detrimental to
human health.
Hazardous Ranking System (HRS)
The method used to evaluate the relative
potential of hazardous substance releases to cause health or safety problems
or ecological or environmental damage.
hazardous waste
Any waste or combination of wastes which pose a substantial
present or potential hazard to human health or living organisms because they
are nondegradable, persistent in nature, or may otherwise cause detrimental
cumulative effects.
Hazen-Williams coefﬁcient
A roughness coefﬁcient related to the inﬂuence of
pipe material on the velocity characteristics of a ﬂuid.
HAZMAT
Hazardous materials.
HAZOP
Hazard and operability study.
HAZWOPER
Hazardous Waste Operations and Emergency Response.
HBV
Hepatitis B virus.
HC
(1) Hydrocarbon. (2) Hazardous constituents.
HCFCs
See “hydrochloroﬂuorocarbons (HCFCs).”
HCV
Hepatitis C virus.
HDPE
See “high density polyethylene (HDPE).”
HDT
(1) Hydraulic detention time. (2) Highest dose tested in a study.
HDXLPE
High density crosslinked polyethylene.
head
(1) A measure of the pressure exerted by a ﬂuid expressed as the height of
an enclosed column of the ﬂuid which could be balanced by the pressure in
the system. (2) The source or upper end of a system, e.g., headwater.
header
A pipe manifold ﬁtted with several smaller lateral outlet pipes.
headloss
The difference in water level between the upstream and downstream sides
of a treatment process attributed to friction losses. Sometimes called “pressure
drop.”
headwater
The source or upper reaches of a stream.
headworks
The initial structure and devices located at the receiving end of a water
or wastewater treatment plant.
HEAL
Human exposure assessment location.
health advisory level
A nonregulatory health-based reference level of chemical
traces in drinking water at which there are no adverse health risks when
ingested over various periods of time.
health assessment
An evaluation of available data on existing or potential risks
to human health posed by a Superfund site.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

hearth
The bottom of a furnace upon which waste materials are exposed to the
ﬂame.
heartwood
The oldest, dense wood in the center of a tree which often contains
an accumlation of resins and oils.
heat balance
An accounting of the distribution of a system’s heat loss and heat
gain.
heat exchanger
A device used to transfer heat from one substance to another. See
also “shell-and-tube heat exchanger.”
heat island
An urban phenomenon where air pollutants and the heat from a com-
bination of tall buildings, concrete pavement, and other materials combine to
create a localized haze dome that traps rising hot air resulting in higher
temperatures and air pollution.
heat of condensation
The amount of heat released when a vapor changes state to
a liquid.
heat of sublimation
The amount of energy required to convert ice directly to a
vapor.
heat of vaporization
The amount of heat required to change a volume of liquid
to a vapor.
heat pump
A device for transferring heat from a cooler reservoir to a hotter one
by mechanical means involving the compression and expansion of a ﬂuid.
heat recovery
The capture and use of heat that would otherwise be lost as waste
heat.
heat sink
Any material that is used to absorb heat.
Heat Systems
Former name of Misonix, Inc.
heat tracing
The electrical or steam heating of piping and equipment to prevent
freezing.
heat transfer
The transfer of heat from one body to another by means of radiation,
conductance, or convection.
heat value
The quantity of heat that can be released from a sludge per unit mass
of the sludge solids.
Heatamix
Heating and recirculation system for anaerobic sludge digesters by
Simon-Hartley, Ltd.
heater treater
Oil ﬁeld produced water treatment unit used to break water-in-oil
emulsions with heat and chemicals.
HeatX
Anaerobic digester gas heating unit by Walker Process Equipment.
heavy metals
Metals that can be precipitated by hydrogen sulﬁde in an acid
solution and which may be toxic to humans above certain concentrations.
heavy water
Water with a hydrogen isotope having an atomic weight of 2.
hectare (ha)
A unit of area equal to 10,000 square meters. One hectare is equal
to 2.471 acres.
HEEB
High-energy electron beam irradiation.
HEI
Health Effects Institute.
Hela-Flow
Plastic laterals for water and wastewater treatment by Liquid-Solids
Separation Corp.
Helaskim
Helical surface skimmer by Walker Process Equipment.
HeliCarb
Carbon dioxide contactor by CBI Walker, Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Heliclean®
Open channel spiral screen with screenings washer by Waterlink Sep-
arations, Inc.
Helico
Screw type screenings press by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
Heliﬂow®
Spiral tube bundle heat exchangers by Graham Manufacturing Co.
helio-
A preﬁx referring to the sun or sunlight.
Heliobacter pylori
A bacterium that causes stomach ulcers and has been identiﬁed
as an emerging waterborne health threat. Also known as H. pylori.
Heli-Press
Screenings compactor by Vulcan Industries, Inc.
Helisieve Plus™
Septage receiving station by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
Helisieve®
Open channel spiral screen by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
HeliSkim
Helical surface skimmer by Walker Process Equipment.
HeliThickener
Interrupted ﬂight screw conveyor for sludge collectors by Walker
Process Equipment.
Helixpress
Screenings dewatering press/conveyor by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
Hellmut Geiger
Former name of Brackett Geiger.
helminth
A parasitic worm.
HEM
Human exposure modeling.
hemi-hydrate
A crystalline compound having one molecule of water of crystal-
lization per two molecules of compound.
Henry’s Law
The weight of any gas that will dissolve in a given volume of a
liquid at constant temperature is directly proportional to the pressure that the
gas exerts above the liquid.
HEPA ﬁlter
See “high efﬁciency particulate air ﬁlter (HEPA).”
hepatitis
An acute viral disease which results in liver inﬂammation and may be
transmitted by direct contamination of a water supply by sewage.
heptachlor
An insecticide banned for use on food products and seed treatment.
herb
A seed plant whose stem is not woody and whose leaves, stems, or roots are
often used for seasoning, medicine, or fragrance.
herbicide
A synthetic organic compound used to control plant growth.
Hercules
Screening equipment product line of Moyno Industrial Products.
Hercules®
Pressure leaf ﬁlters by Liquid-Solids Separation Corp.
HES
Huntington Environmental Systems, Inc.
heterotrophic bacteria
Bacteria that derives it’s cell carbon from organic carbon;
most pathogenic bacteria are heterotrophic bacteria.
heterotrophic plate count (HPC)
A laboratory method of determining the level of
heterotrophic bacteria in a sample. Formerly known as “standard plate count.”
Hevi-Duty
Traveling water screen replacement parts products by USFilter/Rex &
Link-Belt Products.
hexavalent chrome
A toxic form of chrome used in plating operations, usually
reduced to the trivalent form and precipitated as a hydroxide.
HFCs
See “hydroﬂuorocarbons (HFCs).”
HGL
Hydraulic grade line.
HHC
Highly hazardous chemical.
HHE
Human health and the environment.
HHW
Household hazardous waste.
Hi-Cap®
High rate thickener by Baker Process.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Hidrostal
Screw/centrifugal impeller pump by Envirotech Pumpsystems.
Hi-Flo®
Depth ﬁlter and water softener products by Culligan International Corp.
HiFlo™
Thickener by WesTech Engineering, Inc.
Hi-GARD®
Rotary trickling ﬁlter by USFilter/General Filter.
high density polyethylene (HDPE)
A synthetic organic material often used as
landﬁll liner because of its low permeability.
high efﬁciency particulate air ﬁlter (HEPA)
A ﬁltering system capable of trap-
ping and retaining at least 99.97% of all monodispersed particles 0.3 micro-
meter in diameter or larger.
High Flux Series™
Membrane cleaning products for restoring membrane ﬂux by
King Lee Technologies.
high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)
Instrumental technique for
measuring trace levels of organics by means of UV adsorption.
High Resolution Redox®
Disinfection and dechlorination control technology by
USFilter/Stranco.
high velocity air ﬁlter (HVAF)
An air pollution control ﬁltration device for the
removal of sticky, oily, or liquid aerosol particulate matter from exhaust gas
streams.
High-Flux TF™
Oil control chemical for use in membrane treatment system by
King Lee Technologies.
high-level radioactive waste (HLW)
The highly radioactive waste material
resulting from the reprocessing of spent fuel, the spent fuel itself, and much
of the waste generated from nuclear weapons production, with activities mea-
sured in curies per liter.
high-test calcium hypochlorite
Calcium hypochlorite product containing at least
70% available chlorine.
high-to-low dose extrapolation
The process of prediction of low exposure risk
to humans from the measured high exposure-high risk data involving rodents.
Hi-Iron
Closed pressure contact-aeration iron removal process by Aquatrol Ferr-X
Corp.
Hi-Lift
Reciprocating rake bar screen by Longwood Engineering Co., Ltd.
Hi-Lucid
High rate coagulation and sedimentation process by Hitachi Metals
America, Ltd.
hindered settling
Phenomenon referring to sedimentation of particles in a sus-
pension of intermediate concentration where interparticle forces hinder the
settling of neighboring particles. Also called “type III settling.”
HIOPs
Heated iron oxide particles.
HiOx™
Aeration system by Parkson Corp.
HIP
High intensity belt press by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc.
Hi-Pass
In-line motionless mixer by Komax Systems, Inc.
Hiperﬁlter
Media ﬁlter by Axsia Serck Baker, Inc.
Hi-Rate Thickener
Circular gravity sludge thickening system with ancillary
equipment by GL&V/Dorr-Oliver, Inc.
Hi-Tork
Portable mixer by Philadelphia Mixers.
HIV
Human immunodeﬁciency virus. See “AIDS (Acquired Immune Deﬁciency
Syndrome).”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Hi-V®
Depth ﬁlter cartridge by USFilter/Filtration & Separation.
HLL
High liquid level.
HLW
See “high-level radioactive waste (HLW).”
HMIP
Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Pollution (U.K.).
HMIS
Hazardous Materials Information System.
HMR
Hazardous materials regulations.
HMTA
Hazardous Materials Transportation Act.
HMTR
Hazardous Materials Transportation Regulations.
HOA
Hand-off-automatic.
HOBr
See “hypobromous acid (HOBr).”
HOC
See “halogenated organic compounds (HOC).”
HOG™
Halogenated organic gas destruction process formerly offered by Quantum
Technologies, Inc.
hogging ejector
A steam jet ejector which produces a vacuum in a vessel by
evacuating the contents in a single stage to the atmosphere.
holding tank
A tank used to receive and store wastewater prior to its ultimate
disposal.
Hollosave
Reverse osmosis system by Toyobo Co., Ltd.
Hollosep
Hollow ﬁber conﬁguration reverse osmosis module by Toyobo Co., Ltd.
hollow ﬁber membrane
Type of reverse osmosis and ultraﬁltration membranes
formed into small diameter tubes.
homeowner water system
Any water system which supplies piped water to a
single residence.
Homomix
Propeller type rapid mixer by Amwell, Inc.
HON
Hazardous organic NESHAP. A rule regulating emissions of listed organic
chemicals from new and existing manufacturing sources.
honey wagon
Common term for vacuum truck used to remove accumulated septic
tank solids.
hood capture efﬁciency
Ratio of the emissions captured by a hood and directed
into a control or disposal device, expressed as a percent of all emissions.
hormone
A substance such as adrenaline or insulin which is formed in an organ
of the body and which controls other organs or metabolic activities.
Hose pump
A peristaltic pump used for metering or ﬂuid transfer.
host
Any plant or animal on, or in which, another lives for nourishment, develop-
ment, or protection.
Hot Bottom®
Steam-powered evaporator by Lakeview Engineered Products, Inc.
Hot Box
Wastewater evaporator by Landa, Inc.
hot lime softening
Lime softening process conducted at temperatures of 104 to
125°C.
Hot Shot®
Electric powered evaporator by Lakeview Engineered Products, Inc.
Hot Tube®
Evaporator by Lakeview Engineered Products, Inc.
hot zone
The area immediately surrounding a hazardous materials accident site.
HOV
High-occupancy vehicle.
hp
Horsepower. A standard unit of power equal to 745.7 watts.
HPC
See “heterotrophic plate count (HPC).”
HPD
Former name of USFilter/HPD.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

HP-Hybrid
Automatic ﬁlter press by Heinkel Filtering Systems, Inc.
HPI/CPI
Hydrocarbon processing industry/chemical processing industry.
HPLC
See “high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC).”
HPV
High priority violator.
HRB®
Solid waste baler by Harris Waste Management Group, Inc.
HRC™
Hydrogen release compound for bioremediation by Regenesis.
HRGC
High resolution gas chromatography.
HRMS
High resolution mass spectrometry.
HRS
See “Hazardous Ranking System (HRS).”
HRSG
Heat recovery steam generator.
HRT
See “hydraulic residence time (HRT).”
HRUP
High-risk urban problem.
HSC™
High pressure centrifugal pump for reverse osmosis by Pump Engineering,
Inc.
HSDB
Hazardous Substance Database.
HSL
Hazardous substance list.
HSWA
See “Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments (HSWA).”
HTA
High temperature additive.
HTC
Heat transfer coefﬁcient.
HTC™
Hydraulic turbocharger for reverse osmosis pump system by David Brown
Union Pumps Co.
HTH
High-test calcium hypochlorite product by Arch Chemicals.
HTO®
Regenerative thermal oxidizer by Dürr Environmental, Inc.
HTP
Heat-treated peat. A polymer spill encapsulation and cleanup product by
American Products.
HTP
High temperature and pressure.
HTW
Hazardous toxic wastes.
Hubair®
Surface aerator by USFilter/Hubert.
Hubert
Former name of USFilter/Hubert.
Huisman
Oxidation ditch wastewater treatment system by USFilter/Envirex.
human equivalent dose
A dose that when administered to humans produces an
effect equal to that produced by a dose in animals.
human exposure evaluation
Describing the nature and size of the population
exposed to a substance and the magnitude and duration of their exposure. The
evaluation could concern past, current, or anticipated exposures.
human health risk
The likelihood that a given exposure or series of exposures
may damage the health of individuals.
Humboldt Decanter
Sludge dewatering equipment product line of Baker Process.
humic acid
Organic acids that are byproducts of decomposing organic matter
which colors water.
humidity
The amount of water vapor within the atmosphere.
humidity ratio
The ratio of the mass of water vapor to the mass of dry air in the
atmosphere.
humiﬁcation
The decomposition of organic matter from plants and animals into
soil.
Hummix™
Polymer blending system by Hinsilblon Laboratories.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

humus
Dark or black decomposing organic matter in soil.
Hurox™
Spent caustic oxidation system by Huron Tech Corp.
Hurricane
Mixer by Franklin Miller, Inc.
Hurricane
Submersible aspirating aerator by Aeromix Systems, Inc.
Hurricane®
Combination centrifuge and cartridge ﬁltration system by Harmsco
Filtration Products.
HVAC
Heating, ventilating, and air conditioning.
HVAC/R
Heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and refrigeration.
HVAF
See “high velocity air ﬁlter (HVAF).”
HVIO
High volume industrial organics.
HVLC
High volume, low concentration.
HW
Hazardous waste.
HWCL
Hazardous Waste Control Law.
HWDMS
Hazardous Waste Data Management System.
HWF
Hazardous waste-derived fuel.
HWGTF
Hazardous Waste Groundwater Task Force.
HWIR
Hazardous Waste Identiﬁcation Rule.
HWIS
Hazardous Waste Information System.
HWL
High water level.
HWLT
Hazardous Waste Land Treatment
HWM
Hazardous waste management.
HWTC
Hazardous Waste Treatment Council.
HX
(1) Heat exchanger. (2) Hydrogen halide.
Hy Flo Super-Cel®
Diatomaceous earth ﬁlter media by Celite Corp.
hyacinth
Floating aquatic plants whose roots provide a habitat for a diverse culture
of aquatic organisms who metabolize organics in wastewater.
hybrid system
A system incorporating multiple processes or technologies.
Hycor®
Product line of Waterlink Separations, Inc.
Hydecat™
Hypochlorite destruction product by Synetix.
HYDRA
Sludge removal system by Hazleton Environmental, Inc.
Hydracap™
Ultraﬁltration system by Hydranautics.
Hydradenser
Inclined screw thickener by Thermal Black Clawson.
Hydra-Mix®
Hydraulic mixer by Air-O-Lator Corp.
Hydrapaint
Ultraﬁltration spiral membrane by Hydranautics.
Hydra-Press™
Hydraulic screenings compactor by Vulcan Industries, Inc.
Hydrasand®
Continuous cleaned moving bed sand ﬁlter by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc.
Hydrasep®
Oil/water separator by GNESYS, Inc.
Hydrasieve®
Static ﬁne screen by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc. (Western Hemisphere) and
Andritz Sprout-Bauer S.A. (Eastern Hemisphere).
hydrate
A compound formed by the union of water with another substance.
hydrated lime
The calcium hydroxide product that results from mixing quicklime
with water. Chemical formula is CaOH2.
hydration
The process of combining or uniting water with another substance.
Hydratower™
Static ﬁne screen by Brandt Co.
Hydra-Tracker™
Self-tracking oil, grease, and sludge removal device by Dontech,
Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Hydraucone
Diffuser plate used with down ﬂow mechanical aerator by Amwell,
Inc.
hydraulic classiﬁcation
A process of grading particles of the same speciﬁc gravity
according to size by ﬂuidization or backwashing.
hydraulic gradient
The slope of the hydraulic grade line which indicates the
change in pressure head per unit of distance.
hydraulic jump
The sudden rise in water surface level which may occur when
water ﬂowing through an open channel at a high velocity is retarded.
hydraulic loading
Total volume of liquid applied per unit of time to a tank or
treatment process.
hydraulic radius
The ratio of the area of a conduit in which water is ﬂowing to
its wetted perimeter.
hydraulic residence time (HRT)
Vessel volume (L) divided by the liquid
removed (L/d).
hydraulics
The branch of science and engineering that deals with the mechanics
of ﬂuids.
hydrazine
A chemical compound used as an oxygen scavenger. Chemical formula
is H2NNH2.
Hydro Grid™
Fine screening device by Schreiber Corp.
Hydro Group
Former name of Layne Christensen, Ranney Division.
Hydro Scour
Pulsed bed ﬁlter backwashing system by USFilter/Zimpro.
Hydro-Aerobics
Wastewater treatment equipment product line by Ashbrook Corp.
Hydrobend®
Water level control device by Grande, Novac & Associates, Inc.
hydroblast
The use of high pressure water jets to clean or remove debris.
Hydroburst™
Passive screen air backwash system by USFilter/Johnson Screens.
hydrocarbons
Organic compounds consisting predominantly of carbon and
hydrogen.
HydroCeal
Mixed bubble diffuser by Ashbrook Corp.
Hydrocell®
Induced air ﬂotation separators by USFilter/Whittier.
Hydro-Chek
Coarse bubble diffuser by Pollution Control Systems, Inc.
hydrochloric acid
An aqueous form of hydrogen chloride that is a strong corrosive
agent. Chemical formula is HCl.
hydrochloroﬂuorocarbons (HCFCs)
Substances used as temporary alternatives
to CFCs.
Hydro-Circ®
Nonmechanical sludge recirculation system by Graver Co.
Hydroclean®
Fine screening of combined sewer overﬂows by Grande, Novac &
Associates, Inc.
Hydrocleaner
Dissolved air ﬂotation aeration system by Baker Hughes Process
Systems.
Hydro-Clear®
Pulsed bed gravity sand ﬁlter by USFilter/Zimpro.
HydroClor-Q™
Organic chlorine test kit by Dexsil Corp.
Hydro-Cone
Underdrain for sand ﬁlter by BIF.
hydrocyclone
A device used to separate grit and other solids from a liquid using
centrifugal force.
Hydrodarco®
Activated carbon by Norit Americas Inc.
HydroDri™
Screenings press by Serpentix Conveyor Corp.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Hydroﬁlt™
Anthracite ﬁlter media by Lang Filter Media Co.
Hydroﬂo®
Metering pump product line by PennProcess Technologies, Inc.
HydroFlo™
Disposable in-line ﬁlter for groundwater monitoring by Schlicher &
Schuell.
HydroFloat
Dissolved air ﬂotation system by Hydro-Flo Technologies, Inc.
Hydro-Float
Flotation system for removal of fat, grease, and suspended solids by
HydroCal, Inc.
Hydroﬂoc
Polyelectrolyte used to enhance liquid/solid separation by Aqua Ben
Corp.
HydroFloc™
Rotating screen thickener by Klein America, Inc.
Hydroﬂuor Combo
Cryptosporidium and Giardia detection reagents by Meridian
Diagnostics, Inc.
hydroﬂuoric acid
An aqueous form of hydrogen ﬂuoride. Chemical formula is HF.
hydroﬂuorocarbons (HFCs)
Replacements for CFCs and HCFCs which contain
no chlorine and have no ozone-depletion potential.
hydroﬂuosilicic acid
An acidic liquid used to ﬂuoridate drinking water. Chemical
formula is H2SiF6.
Hydroﬂush
Cable operated bar screen by Beaudrey Corp.
HydroForce™
Motorless polymer mixing system by USFilter/Stranco.
hydrogen ion concentration
See “pH.”
hydrogen peroxide
An oxidizing agent used for odor control and disinfection.
Chemical formula is H2O2.
hydrogen sulﬁde
A toxic gas formed by the anaerobic decomposition of organic
matter containing sulfur. Chemical formula is H2S.
hydrogenate
To combine hydrogen with a compound in a chemical reaction.
hydrograph
A graphical representation of a stream discharge at a single location.
Hydro-Grit™
Vortex degritter by Fluidyne Corp.
Hydrogritter
Grit washing system by Envirotech Pumpsystems.
Hydro-Jet
Self-cleansing screen by H.I.L. Technology, Inc.
Hydro-Lance™
Wet dust collector by Duall Division, Met-Pro Corp.
Hydro-Lift
Pre-fabricated steel lift stations by Ashbrook Corp.
Hydro-lite
Biological ﬁlter media by Ashbrook Corp.
hydrologic cycle
The natural cycle of continuous evaporation and condensation.
hydrology
The science dealing with the properties, distribution, and circulation
of water.
hydrolysis
A chemical change or decomposition of matter produced by the com-
bination with water.
Hydromation
Deep bed ﬁlter with walnut shell media by Filtra-Systems Hydro-
mation.
hydrometer
An instrument used to measure the speciﬁc gravity of liquids.
Hydron®
Dissolved air ﬂotation technology by Colloid Environmental Technolo-
gies Co.
hydronium ion
The hydrated hydrogen ion, H3O+.
Hydroperm®
Crossﬂow microﬁltration system formerly offered by USFil-
ter/Microﬂoc.
hydrophilic
Having an afﬁnity for water.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

hydrophobic
Having an aversion to water.
hydrophyte
A plant that grows in water or saturated soils.
Hydropillar™
Elevated water storage tank by Pitt-Des Moines, Inc.
hydropneumatic water system
A water system, usually small, in which a water
pump is automatically controlled by the air pressure in a compressed air tank.
hydroponics
The science of growing plants in nutrient-rich solutions or moist inert
material instead of soil.
Hydropress
Belt ﬁlter press by the former Clow Corp.
Hydro-Press
Belt ﬁlter press by HydroCal, Inc.
HydroPunch®
Groundwater sampler by QED Environmental Systems.
Hydrorake
Trash rake by Atlas Polar Co., Hydrorake Division.
HydroRanger
Ultrasonic level measuring system by Milltronics, Inc.
Hydro-Rotor
Brush type aerator by Amwell, Inc.
Hydro-SAFe
Biological aerated ﬁlter by Ashbrook Corp.
Hydroscreen
Static ﬁne screen by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
HydroSeal®
Anaerobic digestion gasholder cover by Baker Process.
Hydroself®
Sewer and retention tank ﬂushing device by Grande, Novac & Asso-
ciates, Inc.
Hydrosep
Shallow basin, nonaerated grit removal system by USFilter/Aerator
Products.
Hydroseparator
Industrial wastewater gravity thickener by GL&V/Dorr-Oliver,
Inc.
Hydroshear
Aeration tank for low ﬂow package treatment plant formerly offered
by USFilter/Envirex.
Hydro-Shear
Internally fed rotary ﬁne screen by Dontech, Inc.
Hydrosil
Static screen with brush/water jet cleaning device by Spirac.
Hydroslide®
Constant ﬂow regulating device by Grande, Novac & Associates, Inc.
Hydro-Sock
Upﬂow cartridge ﬁltration system by Ashbrook Corp.
hydrosphere
The aqueous environment of the earth including rivers, lakes, oceans,
and glaciers.
hydrostatic pressure
The pressure exerted by water due to depth alone.
hydrostatic test
A test procedure in which a vessel or system is subjected to water
pressure and examined for leaks, distortion, and/or mechanical failure.
hydrotest
The testing of piping, tubing, or vessels by the ﬁlling of water and the
pressurization to test for integrity.
Hydrovex®
Flow control product line by John Meunier, Inc.
Hydrowash
Down ﬂow recycling pump/aerator for grit removal by Amwell, Inc.
hydroxide alkalinity
Alkalinity caused by hydroxyl ions.
hydroxide ion
A negatively charged ion consisting of a hydrogen atom and an
oxygen atom. Chemical formula is OH.
hydroxyl
A chemical group consisting of one hydrogen and one oxygen atom.
Hydro-Zap®
Ultra-violet wastewater disinfection systems by Ashbrook Corp.
Hydrozon®
Ozone system by Carus Chemical Co.
Hydrymax
Sludge dryer by D.R. Sperry & Co.
hyetograph
(1) A graphic representation of a rainfall that plots time vs. rainfall.
(2) A rain recording gage.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

HyFlo™
Continuous self-cleaning screenings belt by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
Hygene
Bacteriostatic ﬁlter media by Ionics, Inc.
hygrometer
An instrument for measuring the relative amount of moisture in the
air.
hygroscopic
Readily absorbing moisture from the atmosphere.
hygroscopic water
Water in soil that is in equilibrium with the atmospheric water
vapor and cannot be lost to evaporation or drain freely by gravity.
Hymergible®
Hydraulically driven submersible pump by Crane Pumps & Systems.
Hyper+Ion®
Cationic coagulants and ﬂocculants by General Chemical Corp.
hyperﬁltration
Filtration using a dense membrane that is often used synony-
mously with “reverse osmosis.”
HyperFlex®
HDPE containment liner by SLT North America, Inc.
Hyperﬂoc®
Polyelectrolyte used to enhance liquid/solid separation by Hychem,
Inc.
HyperNet™
Net fabric composite by SLT North America, Inc.
Hyperpress™
Combination belt ﬁlter/plate and frame press by Klein.
Hypersperse
Antiscalant for use in reverse osmosis systems by BetzDearborn-
Argo District.
hypobromous acid (HOBr)
An effective biocide.
hypochlorite
Chlorine anion commonly used as an alternative to chlorine gas for
disinfection. Chemical formula is OCl3
–.
Hypo-Gen®
Sodium hypochlorite generation systems by Capital Controls Co.
hypolimnetic aeration
Aeration of water at the bottom of a lake.
hypolimnion
The lower layer of a stratiﬁed lake that results from varying water
densities.
hypoxia
The condition that exists when a body of water has a very low dissolved
oxygen level, usually less than 2 mg/L.
Hypress
Screenings dewatering press by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
Hy-Q
Flush bottom sluice gate closure by Rodney Hunt Co.
Hysep®
Decanter centrifuge by Westfalia Separator, Inc.
Hy-Speed®
Mixer by Alsop Engineering Co.
Hytrex®
Cartridge preﬁlters and preﬁlter housings by Osmonics, Inc.
Hyveyor
Troughing conveyor by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
I
I&C
Instrumentation and control.
I&M
Inspection and maintenance.
I/A
Innovative and alternative.
I/I
See “inﬂow/inﬁltration (I/I).”
I/O
Input/output.
IAF
See “induced air ﬂotation (IAF).”
IAP
Indoor air pollution.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

IAQ
Indoor air quality.
IAS™
Induced air scour system for sand ﬁlters by USFilter/Davco.
IATDB
Interim air toxics data base.
IBT
Industrial biotest laboratory.
IBWA
International Bottled Water Association.
IC
See “ion chromatography (IC).”
ICBN
International Commission on the Biological Effects of Noise.
ICE
(1) Institute of Civil Engineers. (2) Internal combustion engine.
ice
The solid, crystalline form of water.
ice apron
A wedge-shaped structure for protecting a pier or intake from ﬂoating ice.
ice fog
An atmospheric suspension of reﬂective ice crystals which affects visibility.
ICEAS®
Intermittent cycle extended aeration system for wastewater treatment by
ABJ product group of Sanitaire Corp.
Ice-Away®
Ice melter by Air-O-Lator Corp.
ICOLD
International Commission on Large Dams.
ICR
See “Information Collection Rule (ICR).”
ICRE
Ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity, and extraction.
ICRP
International Commission on Radiological Protection.
ICS
Intermittent control strategies.
ID
Inside diameter.
ID50
See “infectious dose 50 (ID50).”
IDA
International Desalination Association.
IDI®
Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
IDL
See “instrument detection limit (IDL).”
IDLH
See “immediately dangerous to life or health (IDLH).”
IDP
Ingersoll Dresser Pump Co.
Idrex
Pressure leaf ﬁlter by USFilter/Zimpro.
IDS Drumshear
Rotating ﬁne screen by Aer-O-Flo Environmental, Inc.
IE
See “ion exchange (IX or IE).”
IEC
International Electrotechnical Commission.
IEEE
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
IESWTR
Interim Enhanced Surface Water Treatment Rule.
IFA
Immunoﬂuorescence assay.
IGCC
Integrated coal gasiﬁcation combined cycle.
IGF
Induced gas ﬂotation. See “induced air ﬂotation (IAF).”
igneous rock
A type of rock formed from cooled magma.
ignitability
The characteristic of having a ﬂash point less than 60°C.
ignition temperature
The lowest temperature at which combustion of a material
becomes self-sustaining.
IIA
Incinerator Institute of America.
II-PLP®
Double-pass reverse osmosis system with interstage chemical feeds for
pH adjustment by USFilter/Rockford.
ilmenite
A dense mineral often used as ﬁlter media in a granular media ﬁlter.
IMAC™
Ion exchange resins by Rohm & Haas, Co.
imbibition
The absorption or adsorption of water by a solid or colloid that results
in swelling.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

IMF Protector™
Drinking water treatment system by Smith & Loveless, Inc.
Imhoff cone
Cone-shaped container used to determine the volume of settleable
solids in a speciﬁc volume of water.
Imhoff tank
A two-story wastewater treatment tank developed by Karl Imhoff in
which sedimentation occurs in the upper compartment and anaerobic digestion
occurs in the lower compartment. Also called an “Emscher fountain.”
immediately dangerous to life or health (IDLH)
The maximum environmental
concentration of a substance from which one could escape from a 30 minute
exposure without irreversible adverse health effects.
immiscible
Incapable of being mixed.
immunoassay
The identiﬁcation of a substance based on its capacity to act as an
antigen.
immunodeﬁciency
A lack of one or more immune functions.
Impac™
Packing media for air stripping towers by Lantec Products, Inc.
Impact™
Ion exchange resins by Sybron Chemicals, Inc.
impact fee
Fee assessed new connections to a water or sewer system intended to
recover a portion of the capital cost of the system.
impeller
The rotating set of vanes in a turbine, blower, or centrifugal pump
designed to cause rotation of a ﬂuid mass.
Imperial gallon
See “gallon, Imperial.”
impermeable strata
Layers of clay or dense stone in the earth through which
water cannot penetrate in measurable quantities.
impervious
Not allowing the passage of water at ordinary hydrostatic pressure.
impingement
(1) The entrapment of ﬁsh and other marine life on the surface of
an intake screen when a high water velocity prevents escape. (2) The striking
of a surface by a moving ﬂuid.
impoundment
A pond, lake, or reservoir created through the use of a structural
barrier such as a dam, levee, or dike.
impressed voltage cathodic protection
The use of an impressed current to pre-
vent or reduce the rate of corrosion of a metal in an electrolyte by making the
metal the cathode for the impressed current.
Impulse®
Counter-current water softeners by USFilter/Lowell.
impulse turbine
An energy recovery device used to recover pressure energy from
reverse osmosis brine streams.
impurity
A chemical substance which is unintentionally present with another
chemical substance or mixture.
IMR
Infant mortality rate.
IMS
See “Ion Mobility Spectrometry (IMS).”
IMS®
Filter media support cap for sand ﬁlters by F.B. Leopold Co., Inc.
in situ
Treatment or disposal methods that do not require movement of contami-
nated material.
in vitro study
A laboratory study conducted in glassware.
in vivo study
A study conducted in a living organism.
in-channel storage
The water storage volume in a channel or canal above the
minimum water level required for conveyance.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

incidence of illness
The rate of occurrence of new cases of disease in a deﬁned
population over a speciﬁed period of time.
incidental recharge
Groundwater recharge occurring as a result of human activ-
ities such as irrigation which are unrelated to a recharge project.
incineration
The process of reducing the volume of a solid by burning of organic
matter.
incinerator
A furnace or device for incineration.
inclined plate separator
A series of parallel inclined plates that can be used to
increase the efﬁciency of clariﬁers and gravity thickeners.
incompatible waste
A hazardous waste that may cause corrosion or decay of
containment materials or is unsuitable for comingling with another waste under
uncontrolled conditions because of the hazardous reactions that may result.
incrustant
Solids formed as a crust on the inside wall of a pipe.
incubate
To maintain optimum environmental conditions for growth and repro-
duction of viable microbes.
Incutrol
Biochemical oxidation measuring and temperature control apparatus for
BOD incubation by Hach Co.
index organism
See “indicator organism.”
indicator organism
Microbes that indicate the absence or presence of a speciﬁc
pollutant.
indirect discharger
Water treatment plants that discharge pollutants to publicly
owned treatment works.
indirect reuse
The beneﬁcial use of reclaimed water after releasing it for storage
or dilution into natural surface waters or groundwater.
indirect source
Any facility, building, property, road, or parking facility that
attracts motor vehicle trafﬁc and, indirectly, causes pollution.
induced air ﬂotation (IAF)
The clariﬁcation of suspended material using dis-
persed air bubbles that attach to hydrophobic surfaces causing materials to
collect as a froth on the surface.
induced draft cooling tower
A cooling tower in which the air ﬂow through the
tower is induced by means of an electrically operated fan.
industrial waste
Waste generated by manufacturing or industrial practices that is
not a hazardous waste regulated under Subtitle C of RCRA.
industrial wastewater
Liquid wastes resulting from industrial practices or
processes.
inert
Lacking active properties and unable to react with other substances.
inertial separator
A device that uses centrifugal force to separate waste particles.
infectious agent
Any organism that is capable of being communicated in body
tissues and causing disease or adverse health impacts in humans.
infectious dose 50 (ID50)
The microbe dose that will infect 50% of a population
to which it is applied.
infectious waste
Equipment, instruments, pathological specimens, or other dis-
posable wastes that may be contaminated from persons who are suspected to
have a communicable disease or have been diagnosed with a communicable
disease.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

inﬁltration
(1) Water entering a sewer system through broken or defective sewer
pipes, service connections, or manhole walls. (2) Wind-induced air movement
into a building through openings in walls, doors, or windows.
inﬁltration gallery
A horizontal underground conduit of screens, perforated pipes,
or porous material which collects percolating water, often under a river bed.
Inﬁnity™
Continuous later ﬁlter underdrain by Roberts Filter Group.
inﬂammable
Easily set on ﬁre.
inﬂow
Surface and subsurface water or stormwater discharged into a sewer system.
inﬂow/inﬁltration (I/I)
The total quantity of water from inﬂow and inﬁltration
without distinguishing the source.
inﬂuent
Water or wastewater ﬂowing into a basin or treatment plant.
Information Collection Rule (ICR)
An EPA rule requiring water utilities serving
more than 10,000 customers to conduct monitoring which will aid in the
gathering of data for use in developing the D/DPB Rule and ESWTR.
infrared furnace
A furnace using infrared radiant heat emitted from silicon car-
bide resistance heating elements to rapidly heat organic wastes to combustion
temperatures.
infrared radiation
Low energy radiation with wavelengths longer than visible
light and shorter than radio waves.
infrastructure
The fundamental network of facilities, installations, and utility
systems serving a community.
infuse
(1) To pour a liquid into or upon. (2) To steep in water or liquid without
boiling so as to extract soluble constituents.
inhalable diameter
The diameter of a particle considered to be less than 15 micro-
meters for humans which are capable of being inhaled and deposited anywhere
within the respiratory tract.
inhalation LC50
The concentration of a substance expressed as milligrams per
liter of air which is lethal for 50% of the test population.
inhibitor
A chemical that interferes with a chemical reaction.
Inipol™
Oil slick dispersant by Elf Atochem North America, Inc.
initiator
A chemical that can cause the initial step in the carcinogenesis process.
injection well
A hole drilled below the ground surface into which wastewater or
treated efﬂuent is discharged.
inlet
(1) A surface connection to a drain pipe. (2) A structure at the diversion end
of a conduit. (3) The upstream end of any structure through which water may
ﬂow. (4) A form of connection between the surface of the ground and a drain
or sewer for the admission of surface or storm water. (5) An intake.
innovative technology
A process or technique which has not been fully proven
under the circumstances of its contemplated use and which represents an
advancement over the state of the art.
inoculum
(1) Bacterium placed in compost to start biological action. (2) A medium
containing organisms that is introduced into cultures or living organisms.
inorganic carbon
The carbon present in an inorganic compound such as carbon
dioxide or calcium carbonate.
inorganic compound
Compounds that contain no carbon or contain only carbon
bound to elements other than hydrogen.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

inorganic contaminant (IOC)
An inorganic substance regulated by the EPA for
compliance with drinking water requirements.
inorganic matter
Substances of mineral origin that do not contain hydrocarbons
and are not subject to decay.
insecticide
A pesticide compound speciﬁcally used to kill or prevent the growth
of insects.
In-Situ Oxygenator™
Mechanical ﬂoating aerator by Praxair, Inc.
insoluble
A compound that has very low solubility.
InSpectra™
UV analyzer by Azur Enviromental.
Instant Ocean®
Mineral concentrate used to simulate seawater salinity by Aquar-
ium Systems.
InstoMix
In-line and in-channel mixers by Walker Process Equipment.
instrument detection limit (IDL)
Lowest concentration of a chemical that can
be detected by an instrument without correction for the effects of a sample
matrix or method-speciﬁc parameters.
instrumentation
Use of technology to control, monitor, or analyze physical,
chemical, or biological parameters.
intake
(1) The works or structures at the head of a conduit into which water is
diverted. (2) The process or operation by which water is absorbed into the
ground and added to the saturation zone. (3) The ﬂow or rate of ﬂow into a
canal, conduit, pump, stack, tank, or treatment process before treatment.
Integra®
Bladder pumps by Solinst Canada Ltd.
integrated exposure assessment
Cumulative summation (over time) of the mag-
nitude of exposure to a toxic chemical in all media.
Intellisieve
Rotary ﬁne screen ﬁlter by Smith & Loveless, Inc.
IntensAer
Radial surface aerator formerly offered by Walker Process Equipment.
inter-
Preﬁx meaning between or among.
interceptor sewer
A sewer that receives ﬂow from a number of other sewers or
outlets for disposal or conveyance to a treatment plant.
intercondenser
A condenser used between stages to reduce steam consumption
in the steam jet vacuum system in an evaporator system.
interconnecting piping
Piping, usually ﬁeld-installed, that connects equipment
skids or unit processes to one another.
interface
The common boundary between two substances such as water and a
solid and water and a gas, or between two liquids such as water and oil.
interfacial tension
The tension that occurs at the interface between two ﬂuids or
a liquid and a solid.
intergranular corrosion
Corrosion at or near the grain boundaries.
Inter-Mix®
Slow speed mixer by Air-O-Lator Corp.
Internalift®
Enclosed screw pump by USFilter/CPC.
International Process System
Former supplier acquired by USFilter/CPC.
International Shredder
Sewage shredder by ZMI/Portec Chemical Processing.
Interox America
Former name of Solvay America.
Inter-Sep™
Rotary screen by Dontech, Inc.
interstate waters
Waters that ﬂow across or form part of state or international
boundaries, or coastal waters.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

interstice
An open space in granular material that is not occupied by solid material.
interstitial monitoring
The continuous surveillance of the space between the
walls of an underground storage tank.
interstitial water
(1) Water contained in the interstices of rocks. (2) Extracellular
water between cells.
intra-
Preﬁx meaning within or inside.
Intracid®
Water tracing dye by Crompton & Knowles Colors, Inc.
inverse solubility
The characteristic attributed to a substance that becomes less
soluble with increasing temperature.
inversion
The abnormal atmospheric condition that occurs when the air tempera-
ture increases with elevation.
invert
The lowest point of the internal surface of a drain, sewer, or channel at any
cross section.
inverted siphon
A u-shaped pipe used to convey ﬂow under a river, road, or other
obstruction. Also called a “sag line.”
in-vessel composting
Composting system with integral material handling and in-
vessel mixing and aeration.
IOC
(1) See “inorganic contaminant (IOC).” (2) Inorganic chemicals.
iodinator
A mechanical device used to introduce iodine into water for sanitization
purposes.
iodine
A nonmetallic element in the halogen group sometimes used as a disinfectant.
iodine number
A surrogate value indicating an activated carbon’s ability to adsorb
low molecular weight organics.
iodometric titration
See “Winkler titration.”
ion
An electrically charged atom, molecule or radical.
ion chromatography (IC)
A technique for separating and measuring the quanti-
ties of different ions present in a sample based on their afﬁnity for an adsorption
medium.
ion exchange (IX or IE)
A chemical process involving the reversible exchange
of ions between a liquid and a solid.
Ion Grabber
Electrolytic puriﬁcation unit by Hofﬂand Environmental Inc.
Ion Mobility Spectrometry (IMS)
Continuous emissions analyzer used to mea-
sure pollutants in gases.
Ion Stick®
Electrostatic water treater for prevention of scale and fouling by York
Energy Conservation.
Ionac®
Ion exchange resins by Sybron Chemicals, Inc.
ionic strength
A measure of solution strength based on both the concentrations
and valences of the ions present.
ionization
The process by which an atom or molecule acquires a positive or
negative electrical charge through the loss or gain of electrons.
ionization chamber
A device that measures the intensity of ionizing radiation.
ionizing radiation
Radiation that can strip electrons from atoms.
ionosphere
The upper level of the earth’s atmosphere beginning at an altitude of
approximately 80 km.
Ionpure®
High purity water treatment products and services by USFilter/Lowell.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Iopor
Low pressure ultraﬁltration system formerly offered by GL&V/Dorr-Oliver,
Inc.
IP
Inhalable particulates.
IPA
Isopropyl alcohol.
IPCC
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
IPLP®
Double-pass reverse osmosis system by USFilter Corp.
IPP
Independent power producer.
IPS Composting System
In-vessel composting system by USFilter/CPC.
IQS/3™
Programmable controller used to operate and monitor water treatment
systems by Culligan International, Corp.
iron
A common naturally occurring metallic element found in dissolved form in
most water supplies. Chemical formula is Fe.
iron bacteria
Bacteria capable of metabolizing ferrous iron often from water or
steel pipes. See also “crenothrix polyspora.”
Iron Humate®
An iron source for agricultural soils and turf grasses produced from
water treatment plant sludges by Kemiron.
Iron Remover
Contact bed type iron removal system by Walker Process Equipment.
iron salt
An iron-based coagulant used in water and wastewater treatment.
irradiated food
Food subject to brief radioactivity, usually gamma rays, to kill
insects, bacteria, and mold, and to permit storage without refrigeration.
irradiation
Exposure to radiation of wavelengths shorter than those of visible light
for medical purposes, to sterilize foodstuffs, or to induce polymerization of
monomers or vulcanization of rubber.
irreversible effect
An effect characterized by the inability of the body to partially
or fully repair injury caused by a toxic agent.
irrigation
The artiﬁcial application of water to meet the requirements of growing
plants or grass that are not met by rainfall alone.
irrigation efﬁciency
The amount of water stored in the crop root zone compared
to the amount of irrigation water applied.
irritant
A substance that can cause irritation of the skin, eyes, or respiratory
system. Effects may be acute from a single high level of exposure or chronic
from repeated low-level exposures to such compounds as chlorine, nitrogen
dioxide, and nitric acid.
ISA
Instrument Society of America.
ISCO
In-situ chemical oxidation.
ISEP®
Ion exchange systems by Advanced Separation Technologies.
ISF™
Induced air ﬂotation unit by Baker Hughes Process Systems.
ISO
International Organization for Standardization.
ISO 9000
Certiﬁcation conferred to a manufacturer that has demonstrated the capa-
bility of running an integrated business from initial design through manufacture.
ISO 14000
A series of guidance standards to provide businesses with a structure
for managing varied environmental concerns.
ISO 14001
Environmental management system standards for manufacturing and
service industries.
isobar
A line on a weather map that joins all points of equal barometric pressure.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

isobath
A line on a map connecting all points of equal depth above the surface
of a water-bearing formation or aquifer.
isochrone
A line on a map connecting all points having the same time of travel
for contaminants to move through the saturated zone and reach a well.
isohaline
A line on a map connecting points having equal amounts of salinity.
isohyet
A line on a map connecting points that receive equal average amounts of
precipitation.
isomer
A chemical compound that has the same molecular formula but different
molecular structure, as another compound.
isopleth
A line on a map connecting points at which a certain variable has the
same value.
isotherm
A line on a weather map connecting points that have the same temperature.
isothiazalon
A high molecular weight non-oxidizing biocide used to control mem-
brane biofouling.
isotopes
Atoms with the same atomic number but different atomic weights.
isthmus
A narrow strip of land bounded by water on both sides and connecting
two large land masses.
ITT Marlow
Former name of ITT A-C Pump.
IU
Industrial user.
IWEM
See “CIWEM.”
IWPF
Industrial wastewater pretreatment facility.
IWS
USFilter/Industrial Wastewater Systems.
IWT®
Illinois Water Treatment product line of USFilter/Rockford.
IX
See “ion exchange (IX or IE).”
IXPER®
Calcium peroxide by Solvay America.
J
J
See “joule (J).”
J&A
Jones and Attwood product division of Waste-Tech, Inc.
JAC Oxyditch
Oxidation ditch treatment system formerly offered by Chemineer,
Inc.
Jackbolt™
Aluminum clariﬁer cover by Enviroquip, Inc.
jacking
A method of installing pipe by forcing it into a horizontal opening with
horizontal jacks.
JackKnife
Pivoting air header and drop pipe arrangement by Walker Process
Equipment.
Jackson turbidity unit (JTU)
An obsolete unit of measure used to quantify the
water turbidity by observing the outline of a candle ﬂame viewed through a
water sample. Replaced by “NTU.”
Jacquelyn™
Corrosion and zebra mussel resistant coating by Cook Screen Tech-
nologies, Inc.
JAPCA
Journal of Air Pollution Control Association.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

jar test
A test procedure using laboratory glassware for evaluating coagulation,
ﬂocculation, and sedimentation in a series of parallel comparisons.
Jayﬂoc
Polyelectrolyte used to enhance liquid/solid separation by Vulcan Perfor-
mance Chemicals.
J-Belt
Belt ﬁlter press by USFilter/Dewatering Systems.
Jeffrey
Screening equipment product line offered by Jones & Attwood, Inc.
Jeffrey®
Chain, sprocket, and related component products by Jeffrey Chain Corp.
JelClear™
Granular ﬁltration media having a coagulant bonded directly to the
media grains by BetzDearborn-Argo District.
jet
A stream of pressurized liquid or vapor from a nozzle or oriﬁce.
jet aeration
Wastewater aeration system using ﬂoor-mounted nozzle aerators that
combine liquid pumping with air diffusion.
Jet Breaker™
Screenings washer/compactor by Headworks, Inc.
Jet Plant
Package wastewater treatment plant by Jet, Inc.
Jet Shear
Continuous mixing system using jet nozzles by Flo Trend Systems, Inc.
jet stream
A strong, thermally driven, high altitude wind.
Jet Tech
Former name of USFilter/Jet Tech.
Jet Tray
Deaerator by Cochrane Inc.
Jet VIP™
Pulsed fabric ﬁlter by Wheelabrator Air Pollution Control, Inc.
JETA
Vortex type grit collector by Waste-Tech, Inc.
Jeta-Matic
Spray jet pressure leaf ﬁlter cleaning system by USFilter/Whittier.
Jet-Chlor®
Tablet chlorine disinfection system by Jet, Inc.
JETIII®
Fabric ﬁlter by Wheelabrator Air Pollution Control, Inc.
JetMix™
Vortex mixing system for sludge storage basins by Liquid Dynamics
Corp.
jetsam
Floating jettisoned material.
Jet-Tex
Leach bed ﬁlter fabric by Jet, Inc.
jetty
A structure that extends into an open body of water to inﬂuence currents or
tides or protect a harbor.
Jet-Wet™
Dry polymer feeding system by Fluid Dynamics, Inc. and Ciba Specialty
Chemicals.
J-Flow
Gravity belt thickener by USFilter/Dewatering Systems.
JH™
Series of air scrubbers for odor control by USFilter/Davis Process.
Jigrit
Screw-type grit washer by Jeffrey Chain Corp.
J-Mate®
Sludge volume reduction system by USFilter/Dewatering Systems.
Johnson Filter
Former name of USFilter/Johnson Screens.
Johnson Screen
Wedgewire screen media by USFilter/Johnson Screens.
Jones and Attwood
Environmental product division of Waste-Tech, Inc.
joule (J)
An SI unit of energy or work equal to the work done by the application
of 1 newton acting through a distance of 1 meter.
Joule™
Electrochemical ﬂocculation system by Ecoloquip Inc.
journal bearing
A cylindrical bearing that supports a rotating shaft.
J-Press®
Plate and frame ﬁlter press by USFilter/Dewatering Systems.
J-Spin
Centrifuge by USFilter/Dewatering Systems.
J-Track™
Nonmetallic return track for chain and ﬂight sludge collectors by USFil-
ter/Envirex.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

JTU
See “Jackson turbidity unit.”
JUD
Belt tracking system for belt ﬁlter press by Klein America, Inc.
junction box
An enclosure within which electrical cables are connected and/or
terminated.
J-Vap™
Mechanical sludge dewatering and drying system by USFilter/Dewatering
Systems.
JWI
Dewatering equipment product line by USFilter/Dewatering Systems.
K
K soil horizon
A soil horizon in which the grains are cemented with CaCO3 to
form a hardpan layer.
K wastes
A class of hazardous wastes categorized from speciﬁc sources as estab-
lished by the EPA and identiﬁed in 40 CFR 261.32.
K2 Modular™
Volumetric screw feeder by K-Tron North America.
Kaldnes System
Biological wastewater treatment system by Waterlink Biological
Systems.
kame
A ridge or hill of stratiﬁed drift deposited by glacial meltwater.
KAMET
Municipal efﬂuent treatment system by Krofta Engineering Corp.
Kan-Floc™
Wastewater ﬂocculant/coagulant by Kem-Tron.
kaolin
A type of ﬁne white clay material.
karst
A geologic formation of irregular limestone deposits with sinks, under-
ground streams, and caverns.
katabatic wind
A localized wind that ﬂows down valley or mountainous slopes —
usually at night — caused by the descent of cold air as the valley slopes
undergo rapid nocturnal cooling.
Katec®
Thermal oxidizer by Megtec Systems, Inc.
Kat-Floc™
Wastewater ﬂocculant/coagulant by Kem-Tron.
Katox
Catalytic oxidizer by Adwest Technologies, Inc.
KD-HF™
Deionization system by Kinetico Engineered Systems, Inc.
Kebab™
Disc-type oil skimmer by Vikoma International Ltd.
Keene
Former equipment manufacturer acquired by Amwell, Inc.
Kenics®
Static mixer product line by Chemineer, Inc.
Kenite®
Diatomite material by Celite Corp.
Ketema
Product group of Baker Process/Ketema.
Key-Pac
Package water/wastewater treatment plants by Paciﬁc Keystone Technol-
ogies.
Keystone
Former name of Paciﬁc Keystone Technologies.
K-Floc™
Wastewater ﬂocculant/coagulant by Kem-Tron.
K-Floor
Suspended monolithic ﬁlter ﬂoor by the former PWT Americas.
kg
See “kilogram (kg).”
kiln
A heated enclosure for processing a substance by drying or burning.
kiln dust
See “cement kiln dust.”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

kilocalorie
See “calorie.”
kilogram (kg)
A unit of mass equivalent to 1000 grams or approximately 2.205
pounds.
kilopascal (kPa)
A unit of pressure equal to 1000 pascals, 0.3346 feet of hydraulic
head, or 0.145 psi.
kilowatt (kW)
A measure of power equal to 1000 watts; 1 hp equals 0.746 kilowatts.
kilowatt-hour (kWh)
A unit of energy equal to that expended by 1 kilowatt in 1 hour.
kinematic viscosity
A ﬂuid’s absolute viscosity divided by its mass density.
kinesis
An organism’s involuntary movement or reaction to an environmental
stimulus.
kinetic energy
Energy that is possessed by a body of matter as a result of its
motion.
kinetic head
The theoretical vertical height that a liquid may reach due to its
kinetic energy.
KIWA
Netherlands Waterworks Testing and Research Institute.
Kiwi
Centrifuge conveyor by Alfa Laval Separation, Inc.
Kjeldahl nitrogen
The sum of the organic plus ammonia nitrogen in a water sample.
KL Series™
Cleaning powders for removal of membrane foulants by King Lee
Technologies.
Klampress®
Belt ﬁlter press by Ashbrook Corp. (U.S.) and Simon-Hartley, Ltd.
(U.K.).
Kleer Flow
Spiral wound reverse osmosis membranes by Great Lakes Interna-
tional, Inc.
Klenphos-300
Zinc phosphate corrosion inhibitor by Klenzoid, Inc.
Klensorb
Oil and grease absorbent by Calgon Carbon Corp.
Knight-Botec
Auger compost mixer by Knight Manufacturing Corp.
knot
A unit of speed equal to one nautical mile per hour (approximately 1.15 mph)
used to describe the speed of winds or ships.
Koagulator
Solids contact clariﬁer by USFilter/Zimpro.
Koch Corrosion Control
Former name of KCC Corrosion Control Co.
KochKleen®
Reverse osmosis cleaning chemicals by Koch Membrane Systems,
Inc.
KochTreat®
Antiscalants, stabilizers, and anti-microbial chemicals by Koch Mem-
brane Systems, Inc.
Koﬂo®
In-line static mixers by Koﬂo Corp.
Komara™
Floating oil skimmer by Vikoma International Ltd.
Kompakt
Tubular block media by NSW Corp.
Kompress®
Belt ﬁlter press by Komline-Sanderson, Engineering Corp.
Komprimat
Fish/screenings separation system by Brackett Geiger.
Konsolidator
Wet scrubber solids ﬁlter by CMI-Schneible Co.
Kopcke
Former name of REKO Industrial Equipment B.V.
Koppers
Former manufacturer of traveling bridge ﬁlters whose product line was
acquired by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
Koro-Z
PVC biological ﬁlter media formerly offered by B.F. Goodrich Co.
kPa
See “kilopascal (kPa).”
kraft
An alkaline chemical pulping process using salt cake as makeup.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Kraus-Fall
Peripheral feed clariﬁer by Smith & Loveless, Inc.
krill
A small, shrimp-like marine crustacean that is a major food source for whales,
seals, and squid.
Krüger
Former name of USFilter/Krüger.
Kruger/Fuchs
Autothermal thermophilic aerobic digestion system by USFil-
ter/Krüger.
KUBE3
Belt ﬁlter press by Klein America, Inc.
kW
See “kilowatt (kW).”
K-W Products
Former equipment manufacturer acquired by Smith & Loveless, Inc.
kWh
See “kilowatt-hour (kWh).”
Kyoto Protocol
A global agreement among 150 nations who met in Kyoto, Japan
in 1997 to discuss a comprehensive plan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
in hopes of improving climatic conditions.
L
L*ARO
Reverse osmosis system by the former L*A Water Treatment Corp.
L/d
Liters per day.
L/d ratio
A simple parameter used to aid in sizing granular media ﬁlters based
on the bed depth and effective size of media.
L-10 life
See “B-10 life.”
La Niña
A climatic cycle that results in what climatologists believe is the most
normal wind, pressure, and current patterns in the tropics.
LADD
Lowest acceptable daily dose.
LAER
Lowest achievable emission rate.
Lagco
Parshall ﬂume by F.B. Leopold Co., Inc.
lagoon
An excavated basin or natural depression that contains water, wastewater,
or sludge.
Lagoonerator™
Submerged, ﬁne bubble aeration diffusion device by USFil-
ter/Envirex.
laid length
The total length of a pipe or pipeline after it has been placed in position.
lake
A large, inland body of water, usually more than 200,000 square meters.
Lake Aid Systems
Former name of LAS International.
Lakos IPC
Self-cleaning pump intake screen by Claude Laval Corp.
LAL test
See “Limulus Amebocyte Lystate test (LAL test).”
lamel
A thin plate.
Lamella®
Gravity settler/thickener using inclined plates by Parkson Corp.
LamGard
Automated oxygen control system by Gardner Denver Blower Division.
laminar ﬂow
A ﬂow situation in which ﬂuid moves in smooth parallel layers with
essentially no mixing or turbulence, usually with a Reynolds number less than
2000.
LAMP
Lake Acidiﬁcation Mitigation Project.
Lam-Pak®
Package treatment plant by Graver Co.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Lamson®
Centrifugal blower products by Gardner Denver Blower Division.
Lanco Environmental™
Equipment product line of Waterlink Separations, Inc.
Lancom™
Flue gas monitoring system by Land Combustion.
Lancy™
Wastewater treatment product line offered by USFilter/Industrial Waste-
water Systems.
land application
The disposal of wastewater or municipal solids onto land under
controlled conditions.
land ban
RCRA provisions prohibiting land disposal of speciﬁc toxic materials
unless they meet applicable treatment standards.
land disposal
Application of municipal wastewater solids to the soil without pro-
duction of usable agricultural products.
Land Disposal Restrictions (LDR)
EPA-promulgated rules implementing the
land ban.
landfarming
Application of organic waste onto surface soil for the purpose of
controlled biodegradation.
landﬁll (LF)
A land disposal site that employs an engineering method of solid
waste disposal to minimize environmental hazards and protect the quality of
surface and subsurface waters.
Landox™
Aeration system by WesTech Engineering Inc. (North America) and
Landustrie Sneek BV.
landscaping
The enhancement of the appearance of land by changing its contours
and planting decorative vegetation.
Landy™
Surface aerator product line by WesTech Engineering Inc. (North Amer-
ica) and Landustrie Sneek BV.
Langelier Saturation Index (LSI)
A measure of the degree of saturation of cal-
cium carbonate in water based on pH, alkalinity, and hardness. A positive LSI
indicates that calcium carbonate may precipitate from solution to form scale.
Lanpac®
Packing media for air stripping towers by Lantec Products, Inc.
lapse rate
The rate at which temperature decreases as altitude increases.
Laran®
An anaerobic wastewater pretreatment process by Lotepro Corp (Western
Hemisphere) and Linde-KCA-Dresden GmbH.
large calorie (Cal)
See “calorie.”
large dam
Criteria established by ICOLD to categorize dams whose height
15 meters or more; or whose height is between 10-15 meters with a crest length
of at least 500 meters with a reservoir volume of at least 1 million cubic meters.
large quantity generator
Person or facility generating more than 1000 kilos (2200
pounds) of hazardous waste per month and subject to all RCRA requirements.
large water system
A water system that serves more than 50,000 persons.
large-quantity handlers (LQHs)
Universal waste handlers who accumulate more
than 5000 kilograms of wastes.
LAS
See “linear alkyl sulfonate (LAS).”
Lasaire®
Lagoon aeration system by A.B. Marketech, Inc.
latency period
The time elapsing from the ﬁrst exposure of a chemical until the
appearance of a toxic effect.
latent heat
The heat required to cause a change of state at constant temperature,
such as the vaporization of water or the melting of ice.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

lateral
A secondary pipe that extends from a main water pipe or header.
Lateral Flow Sludge Thickener™
Gravity sludge thickener by Gravity Flow Sys-
tems, Inc.
lateral sewer
A sewer which connects the collection main to the interceptor sewer.
launder
A trough used to transport water.
laundering weir
A v-notched overﬂow weir used to promote uniform ﬂow rates.
laundry wastes
Wastewater from industrial laundries that may be characterized
by the presence of lint, ﬁbers, oils, and greases.
Lavasol™
Liquid reverse osmosis membrane cleaners by Professional Water Tech-
nologies, Inc.
LC
(1) Lethal concentration. (2) Liquid chromatography.
LC50
See “lethal concentration.”
LCL
Lower control limit.
LCR
Lead and Copper Rule.
LCRS
Leachate collection and removal system.
LD
See “lethal dose.”
LD50
See “lethal dose (LD).”
LDC
London Dumping Convention.
LDCRS
Leachate detection, collection, and removal system.
LDR
See “Land Disposal Restrictions (LDR).”
LDS
Leak detection system.
leach ﬁeld
The area of land into which a septic tank drains or wastewater is
discharged.
leachate
Fluid which percolates through solid materials or wastes and contains
suspended or dissolved materials or products of the solids.
leachate collection system
A system that gathers leachate and pumps it to the
surface for treatment.
leaching
The process by which soluble materials are washed out of soil, ore, or
buried waste, and into a water source.
lead
A trace element and cumulative poison that may be inhaled or ingested in
food or water. Chemical formula is Pb.
Leadtrak
Test kits used to determine lead content of water by Hach Co.
leaf ﬁlter
A precoat ﬁlter with ﬂat elements or leaves.
leakage
(1) The presence of an ionic species in an ion exchanger efﬂuent that
usually indicates bed exhaustion. (2) The uncontrolled loss of water from a
tank or aquifer.
Leakwise®
Oil on water monitoring systems by Agar Corp.
L’eau Claire®
Upﬂow ﬁlter products by USFilter/Whittier.
Lectra/San
Marine sanitation system by Exceltec International Corp.
left bank
The left hand bank of a river or stream when facing downstream.
Legionella
A genus of bacteria, some species of which have caused a type of
pneumonia called Legionnaires Disease.
LEL
See “lower explosive limit (LEL).”
Lemna®
Biological wastewater treatment system utilizing aquatic duckweed by
Lemna Corp.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Lemnaceae
Floating aquatic plants that provide a habitat for aquatic organisms
capable of metabolizing wastewater organics. Also known as “duckweed.”
LemTec™
Biological wastewater treatment system and products by Lemna Corp.
lentic water
Standing or stagnant pond, swamp, or marsh water.
Leo-Lite
Fiberglass efﬂuent and scum trough by F.B. Leopold Co., Inc.
Leopold®
Water and wastewater treatment products by F.B. Leopold Co., Inc.
LeoVision
PC-driven graphics display of treatment plant operating conditions by
F.B. Leopold Co., Inc.
LEPA
The designation for a low-energy, precision application irrigation sprinkler.
lethal
Causing, or being able to cause, death.
lethal concentration
The concentration of a substance which is fatal to a speciﬁed
percentage of the population, usually expressed at the 50% level as LC50.
lethal dose (LD)
The quantity of a substance which is fatal to a speciﬁed percent-
age of the population, usually expressed at the 50% level as LD50.
LEV
Low emissions vehicle.
levee
A dike or embankment along a river built to prevent ﬂooding of the sur-
rounding land.
Level Bed Agitator
Agitator used in composting system by USFilter/CPC.
Level Mate™
Level measurement instrument by Ametek, PMT Products.
Level of Concern (LOC)
The concentration in air of an extremely hazardous
substance above which there may be serious immediate health effects to anyone
exposed for short periods.
levigation
The separation of ﬁne particles from coarser ones by suspending them
in a liquid.
Lewatit®
Ion exchange resin by Bayer Corp.
LF
See “landﬁll (LF).”
LFG
Landﬁll gas.
LFL
Lower ﬂammability limit.
LHW
Liquid hazardous waste.
LI
See “Langelier Saturation Index (LSI).”
lichen
A sponge-like plant growing on wood, stone, or soil which is formed by
an association of a fungus and alga, and often used as an air pollution indicator
species.
life cycle cost
A method of comparing costs of various alternatives which consid-
ers capital, operations, and maintenance costs.
Lifeserver™
Built-in-place wastewater treatment plants by USFilter/Davco.
lifetime exposure
Total amount of exposure to a substance which a human would
receive in a lifetime, usually assumed to be 70 years.
Lift Screen
Reciprocating rake bar screen by USFilter/Headworks Products.
lift station
A chamber that contains pumps, valves, and electrical equipment nec-
essary to pump water or wastewater.
ligand
An atom, ion, or molecule bound to a central atom of a molecule to form
a complex.
Lightspeed
Digital ﬁber optic ﬂowmeter by Newport Electronics.
lignin
An organic substance that forms the chief part of wood tissue.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

lignite
A type of coal with a low energy content; also called “brown coal.”
LIMB
Limestone-injection multistage burner.
Limberﬂo
Precast ﬁlter bottom system by USFilter/Aerator Products.
lime
The term generally used to describe ground limestone (calcium carbonate),
hydrated lime (calcium hydroxide), or burned lime (calcium oxide).
lime kiln
A unit used to calcine lime.
lime recalcining
Recovery of lime from water or wastewater sludge, usually with
a multiple hearth furnace.
lime scale
Scale formed by hard water containing a high percentage of calcium
carbonate.
lime slaker
A device used to hydrate quicklime.
lime softening
The addition of sufﬁcient lime to raw water to achieve a reduction
of carbonate hardness.
lime stabilization
The addition of lime to untreated sludge to raise the pH to 12
for a minimum of 2 hours to chemically inactivate microorganisms.
lime-and-settle
Common term for treatment technologies that utilize chemical
precipitation and sedimentation processes.
lime-soda softening
The addition of sufﬁcient lime and soda ash to raw water to
achieve a reduction of carbonate and noncarbonate hardness.
limestone
A sedimentary rock composed primarily of calcium carbonate.
limestone scrubbing
Use of a limestone and water solution to remove gaseous
stack-pipe sulfur before it reaches the atmosphere.
limit of detection (LOD)
The minimum concentration that can be detected by an
analytical method. Generally the same as “instrument detection limit.”
limnology
The study of fresh water lakes and their ﬂora and fauna.
LIMS
Laboratory information management system.
Limulus Amebocyte Lystate test (LAL test)
A test used to determine presence
of endotoxins in treated water, commonly used on water to be used for phar-
maceutical purposes.
lindane
A pesticide that causes adverse health effects in domestic water supplies
and is toxic to freshwater ﬁsh and aquatic life.
Lindox®
A pure oxygen, activated sludge wastewater treatment process by Lotepro
Corp. (Western Hemisphere) and Linde-KCA-Dresden GmbH.
linear alkyl sulfonate (LAS)
A family of chemical compounds widely used as
detergents, sometimes called “soft detergents” because they are readily
degraded to simpler substances by biological action.
liner
(1) A barrier of plastic, clay, or other impermeable material which prevents
leachate from contacting surface or subsurface water. (2) A protective, corro-
sion resistant layer attached or bonded to the inside of a tank.
Link-Belt®
Environmental equipment product line by USFilter/Envirex.
Linpor®
An activated sludge wastewater treatment process by Lotepro Corp.
(Western Hemisphere) and Linde-KCA-Dresden GmbH.
LinX™
A spool valve used in reverse osmosis energy recovery devices by Desal
Co. Ltd.
lipids
A group of organic compounds including fats that are water insoluble and
important in the structure of cell walls and membranes.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

lipophilic
Having an afﬁnity for oil.
Liquaclone®
Hydrocyclonic solids separation unit for removal of granular solids
from liquid discharges by Sanborn Environmental Systems.
Liquapac™
Solids removal unit for spent coolant/oil clariﬁcation applications by
Sanborn Environmental Systems.
liquefaction
The process of making or converting a solid or gas to a liquid.
Liqui/Jector®
Liquid/gas coalescer by Osmonics, Inc.
Liqui-Cel®
Membrane contactors by Celgard LLC.
liquid
The state of matter between the solid and gaseous states in which matter
possesses a deﬁnite volume and ﬂows freely but has no deﬁnite shape.
Liquid A™
Sludge stabilization process by RDP Technologies, Inc.
Liquid Carbonic
Product line acquired by Praxair, Inc.
liquid chlorine
Chlorine compound that contains no water and results from gas-
eous chlorine under high pressure and which is stored in steel drums and
cylinders.
liquid sludge
Sludge which contains sufﬁcient water ﬂow by gravity or permit
pumping.
liquid-liquid extraction (LLE)
See “solvent extraction.”
Liquid-Miser
Activated carbon odor absorbers by Westport Environmental Systems.
Liquidow®
Calcium chloride products by Dow Chemical Co.
LiquidPure
Small, low-cost activated carbon drum adsorber by American Norit
Company, Inc.
Liqui-Fuge™
Internally fed rotary ﬁne screen by Vulcan Industries, Inc.
LiQuilaz®
In-line sensor for particle measurement by Particle Measuring Systems,
Inc.
Liquiphant
Liquid level indicator by Endress+Hauser.
Liqui-pHase®
Carbon-dioxide neutralization system by Praxair, Inc.
LiquiPro™
Metering pumps by Liquid Metronics, Inc.
Liquipure
Company acquired by USFilter/Lowell.
Liqui-Strainer
Externally fed rotating drum screen by Vulcan Industries, Inc.
Liquitron®
pH/ORP controllers by Liquid Metronics, Inc.
liquor
A aqueous solution of one or more chemical compounds.
listed hazardous waste
The designation for a waste material that appears on an
EPA list of speciﬁc hazardous wastes or hazardous waste categories.
liter (L)
A unit of volume equal to 1000 cubic centimeters or 1.057 quarts. One
liter of water weighs 1000 grams. Also called “litre.”
lithology
The character or description of rocks in terms of their physical and
chemical characteristics.
lithosphere
The solid portion of earth composed of rocks and soil.
Litmustik®
Pocket pH tester by Omega Engineering, Inc.
litre
See “liter (L).”
litter
Solid waste or garbage from human activity deposited indiscriminately.
Little Fox
Modular wastewater treatment plant for marine applications by Red Fox
Environmental, Inc.
littoral zone
The area of the shore line between high and low tides where rooted
water plants can grow.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

live bottom bin
A storage bin in which controlled bottom discharge is facilitated
by a vibrating device or other mechanical mechanism.
LLD
Lower limit of detection. Generally the same as “instrument detection limit.”
LLE
Liquid-liquid extraction. See “solvent extraction.”
LLL
Low liquid level.
LLQ
Lower limit of quantitation. Generally the same as “estimated quantitation
limit.”
LLW
See “low-level radioactive waste (LLW).”
LME®
Inclined plate separator by USFilter/Zimpro.
LMI
Liquid Metronics, Inc.
LNG
Liqueﬁed natural gas.
Lo/Pro™
Packaged odor control system by USFilter/RJ Environmental.
Load Limitor
Automatic chain tensioning system for traveling water screens by
USFilter/Rex & Link-Belt Products.
loading rate
The ﬂow rate per unit area of treatment process through which water
ﬂows.
LOAEL
See “lowest-observed-adverse-effect level (LOAEL).”
loam soil
A rich soil consisting of organic material, sand, silt, and clay.
Lobe-Aire®
Rotary lobe blower by Spencer Turbine Co.
Lobeﬂo™
Rotary lobe pump by MGI Pumps, Inc.
Lobestar®
Mixing eductor by Vortex Ventures.
LOC
See “Level of Concern (LOC).”
local ventilation
The drawing off and replacement of contaminated air directly
from its source.
localized corrosion
Corrosion taking place at a relatively high speed in limited
sections of the area exposed to the corrosive medium.
Lo-Cat®
Hydrogen sulﬁde oxidation process for anaerobic bio-gas systems by
USFilter/Gas Technologies.
loch
A lake or narrow body of water surrounded by land and stretching to the sea
(Scottish).
lock
A short section of a canal equipped with gates at both ends so that the water
level can be changed to raise or lower boats from one level to another.
LOD
See “limit of detection (LOD).”
LOEL
Lowest-observed-effect concentration.
log boom
A ﬂoating structure of logs or timber used to protect an intake, dam, or
other structure by deﬂecting ﬂoating material.
log reduction
See “log removal.”
log removal
A means of indicating the level of log10 removal, inactivation, or kill
of pathogenic organisms through physical-chemical treatment of water. For
example, 1-log removal equals a 90% reduction of the speciﬁed organism; a
2-log reduction equals a 99% reduction; and a 3-log reduction equals a 99.9%
reduction.
log-death phase
Bacterial growth phase where the microbe death rate exceeds the
production of new cells.
LogEasy™
Particle counter by Hach Co.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

log-growth phase
Bacterial growth phase where cells divide at a rate determined
by their generation time and their ability to process food.
Lo-Head™
Traveling bridge ﬁlter by Agency Environmental, Inc.
Lo-Hi™
Low pressure, high intensity ultraviolet lamps by PCI-Wedeco Environ-
mental Technologies, Inc.
LOI
Loss on ignition.
long ton
A unit of weight equal to 2240 pound.
Longopac
Screenings bagging system by Spirac.
LoNox™
Combustion burner by John Zink Co.
LOOP
Package wastewater treatment process using oxidation ditch process by
Smith & Loveless, Inc.
Loop Chain
Nonmetallic, ﬁlament wound sludge collector chain by USFil-
ter/Envirex.
Lo-Pro™
Air stripper by Geotech/ORS Environmental Systems.
LOQ
Limit of quantitation. Generally the same as “estimated quantitation limit.”
loss of head
A decrease in head energy that results from a bend, obstruction, or
expansion in a channel or pipeline.
lotic water
Rapidly ﬂowing water of a river or stream.
Love Canal
An industrial chemical waste site in Niagara Falls, NY which con-
taminated a residential area and contributed to public furor resulting in the
1980 enactment of Superfund.
low NOx burners
One of several combustion technologies used to reduce emis-
sions of nitrogen oxides.
low sodium water
Bottled water containing 140 mg or less of sodium per serving.
low sulfur coal
See “compliance coal.”
lower explosive limit (LEL)
The concentration of a compound in air below which
the mixture will not catch on ﬁre.
lowest-observed-adverse-effect level (LOAEL)
The lowest dose of a substance
to cause an increase in the frequency or severity of an adverse effect in an
exposed population.
low-ﬂow toilet
A toilet that uses no more than 1.6 gallons of water per ﬂush.
low-level radioactive waste (LLW)
Wastes less hazardous than most of those
associated with nuclear reactor, usually generated by hospitals, research lab-
oratories, and certain industries.
LOX
Liquid oxygen.
LP Block™
Low proﬁle ﬁlter underdrain by Tetra Process Technologies.
lpf
Liters per ﬂush.
LPG
Liqueﬁed petroleum gas.
LQG
Large quantity generator.
LQHs
See “large-quantity handlers (LQHs).”
LSC™
Package spray-type deaerating heater by Graver Co.
LSI
See “Langelier Saturation Index (LSI).”
LSTK
Lump sum turnkey.
LTA
Low temperature additive.
LTESWTR
Long-Term Enhanced Surface Water Treatment Rule.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

LUFT
Leaking underground fuel tank.
lumen
(1) The bore or axial hole through the center of a hollow ﬁber membrane
or tubular structure. (2) A unit of light measurement equal to the light given
off in a unit solid angle from a uniform point source of one candela.
LUST
Leaking underground storage tank.
LVHC
Low volume, high concentration.
LWL
Low water level.
LWT®
Liquid Waste Technology, Inc.
LX
Leachability index.
Lyco™
Wastewater treatment equipment product line by USFilter/Industrial
Wastewater Systems.
Lynx®
Chain driven bar screen by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
lyse
To undergo lysis.
lysimeter
A device used to measure or obtain samples of water draining through
soil.
lysis
The rupture of a cell that results in loss of its contents.
M
m3
See “cubic meter (m3).”
mA
Milliampere.
MacerAcer™
Screenings conditioning equipment by Brackett Geiger.
macerate
To chop or tear.
Macho Monster®
In-channel sewage grinder by JWC Environmental.
MacPac
Chemical feed package by Milton Roy Co.
Macro-Cat
Ion exchange resin by Sybron Chemicals, Inc.
macroencapsulation
Isolation of waste by embedding or surrounding it with a
material that acts as a barrier between the waste and air, water, or other
materials.
macroﬂoc
Destabilized ﬂoc particle that is too large to penetrate a granular media
ﬁlter bed.
macrofouling
The biological fouling of a water system with macroorganisms
including clams, barnacles, and mussels.
Macrolite®
Ceramic ﬁlter media by Kinetico Engineered Systems, Inc.
macroorganisms
All organisms larger than microscopic and visible to the unaided
eye.
macrophyte
A type of macroscopic plant life.
macroporous resin
An ion exchange resin with a high resistance to oxidation and
organic fouling used primarily in applications with high molecular weight
organic matter.
macroreticular resin
An ion exchange resin having a pore structure even after
drying.
macroscopic
Capable of being seen with the naked eye.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

MACT
See “maximum achievable control technology (MACT).”
MACTherm®
Regenerative oxidizer by Applied Regenerative Technologies Co.
MADAM
Methacryloyl ethyl dimethyl amine.
MAF
Million acre feet.
Magicblock™
Fluid control system by Osmonics, Inc.
Magna
Rotor aerator by Lakeside Equipment Corp.
Magna Cleaner™
Liquid cyclone by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc.
Magnaﬂoc®
Coagulant aid by Ciba Specialty Chemicals
Magnasol®
Inorganic and organic coagulant products by Ciba Specialty Chemicals
MagneClear®
Magnesium hydroxide water treatment products by Martin Marietta
Specialties, Inc.
magnetite
A black, iron oxide mineral also known as “lodestone.”
Magniﬂoc®
Polyelectrolyte used to enhance liquid/solid separation by Cytec
Industries, Inc.
Magnum
Ultraviolet disinfection equipment by Atlantic Ultraviolet Corp.
Magnum®
Belt ﬁlter press by Parkson Corp.
Magnum™
Catalytic oxidizer by Megtec Systems, Inc.
Magox®
Magnesium oxide by Premier Chemicals.
Mahr™
Mechanically cleaned bar screen by Headworks, Inc.
makeup water
Fluid introduced in a recirculating stream to maintain an equilib-
rium of temperature, solids concentration, or other parameter(s).
malathion
A common organophosphate insecticide.
M-alkalinity
See “methyl orange alkalinity.”
Mallard
Bridge-mounted clariﬁer scum removal system by NSW Corp. (U.S.) and
Copa Group (U.K.).
malodor
An odor which causes annoyance or discomfort to the public and which
has been determined to be objectionable.
Mammoth®
Brush aerator by USFilter/Zimpro.
mandatory recycling
Programs which by law require consumers to separate trash
so that some or all recyclable materials are recovered for recycling rather than
going to landﬁlls.
manganese greensand
See “greensand.”
Manganex Process
Manganese greensand ﬁltration process by Roberts Filter
Group.
Manhattan Process
High rate ﬁltration process by Roberts Filter Group.
manhole
See “personnel access opening.”
manifest
A form used to identify the origin, quantity, and composition of a haz-
ardous waste during its transportation from the point of generation to the point
of ﬁnal treatment or disposal.
manifest system
Tracking of hazardous waste from generation through disposal
with accompanying documents known as manifests.
mannich polymer
Sludge conditioning polymer produced by using a formalde-
hyde catalyst to promote a chemical reaction to create the organic compound.
Manning’s formula
Formula used to measure ﬂow in an open channel based on
the cross-sectional area of the ﬂowing stream and the hydraulic radius, slope,
and roughness of the channel.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

manometer
A u-tube device ﬁlled with a liquid used to measure pressure differ-
entials in liquids or gases.
Manor®
Filter press by Simon-Hartley, Ltd.
Manu-Matic
Manual pressure leaf ﬁlter cleaning system by USFilter Corp.
Manver
Chemical composition used in analysis of water hardness by Hach Co.
Manville Filtration
Former name of Celite Corp.
manway
See “personnel access opening.”
MARD™
Motor-actuated rotary distributor for trickling ﬁlters by USFilter/Gen-
eral Filter.
marine sanitation device
Any equipment or process installed on board a vessel
to receive, retain, treat, or discharge sewage.
Marox
Pure oxygen wastewater treatment system by USFilter/Zimpro.
MARS
Membrane-controlled biological wastewater treatment technology by
USFilter/Krüger.
marsh gas
Methane gas produced by the anaerobic decomposition of organic
matter in wetland areas. Also called “swamp gas.”
marshland
An area of soft wet land vegetated by reeds and grasses.
masking
The blocking out or covering of a sound or smell with another.
Maspac®
Plastic packing media by Clarkson Controls & Equipment Co.
mass balance
An analysis that delineates changes that take place in a reactor or system
by quantifying system inputs and outputs. Also known as “material balance.”
mass burn
Solid waste incineration of garbage with a minimum of pretreatment
or sorting.
mass loading
The total amount of mass of a constituent ﬂowing into a system.
mass spectrometer
An instrument used for the analysis of organic materials in envi-
ronmental samples by sorting ions according to their masses and electrical charges.
Master-Flo
Bladder pump by American Sigma, Inc.
material balance
See “mass balance.”
Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS)
Data sheet containing descriptive informa-
tion required by OSHA for hazardous materials.
materials recovery facilities (MRFs)
A central facility where recycled materials
are prepared and sorted.
maturation pond
An aerobic waste stabilization pond used for polishing treated
wastewater efﬂuent.
MAX™
Reverse osmosis system product line by USFilter.
MaxAir™
Wide band coarse bubble diffuser by Environmental Dynamics Inc.
Maxﬂo™
Mixer by S&N Airoﬂo, Inc.
Maxi-Flo®
Pressurized sand ﬁlter product line by USFilter Corp.
Maxim®
Seawater conversion evaporator by Beaird Industries, Inc.
Maximizer
Dewatering sludge press by Goodnature Products, Inc.
MaxiMizer®
Solid bowl centrifuge by Alfa Laval Separation, Inc.
maximum achievable control technology (MACT)
The level of air pollution
control technology required by Clean Air Act.
maximum contaminant level (MCL)
The maximum permissible level of a con-
taminant in water delivered to the free ﬂowing outlet of the ultimate user of
a public water system.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

maximum contaminant level goal (MCLG)
The maximum level of a contami-
nant, including an adequate safety margin, at which no known or anticipated
adverse effect on human health would occur.
maximum residual disinfectant level (MRDL)
The maximum level of disinfec-
tant added for treatment that may not be exceeded at a consumer’s tap without
the possibility of adverse health effects.
Maxipress
Former name of J-Belt belt ﬁlter press by USFilter/Dewatering Systems.
Maxi-Rotor
Rotary brush aerator by USFilter/Krüger.
MaxiSep
Oil/water separator by Hydro-Flo Technologies, Inc.
Maxi-Strip®
Hydraulic venturi stripper for VOC removal by Hazleton Environ-
mental, Inc.
Maxi-Tank™
Tank sump by Hazleton Environmental, Inc.
Maxi-Yield™
Polymer blending system by USFilter/Wallace & Tiernan.
Max-Load™
Cartridge ﬁlter by Ronningen-Petter.
Max-Pak™
Plastic packing media by Jaeger Products, Inc.
Maz-O-Rator
Solids grinder by Robbins & Myers, Inc.
MBAS
See “methylene blue active substance (MBAS).”
MBBR™
Moving bed bioﬁlm reactor by Waterlink Biological Systems.
MBR
See “membrane bioreactor (MBR).”
MBS®
Molecular bonding system to stabilize heavy metals by Solucorp Industries
Corp.
Mc®
Propeller ﬂowmeter by McCrometer, Inc.
MCC
Motor control center.
McGinnes-Royce
Manufacturer of screening equipment whose product line was
acquired by USFilter/Rex & Link-Belt Products.
MCL
See “maximum contaminant level (MCL).”
MCLG
See “maximum contaminant level goal (MCLG).”
m-ColiBlue24™
Laboratory coliform test broth by Hach Co.
MCRT
See “mean cell residence time (MCRT).”
MDI
Metered dose inhaler.
MDL
See “method detection limit.”
MDTOC
Minimum detectable threshold odor concentration.
ME
Multiple effect. See “multiple effect distillation.”
me
See “milliequivalent (me).”
mean cell residence time (MCRT)
The average time that a microbial cell
remains in an activated sludge system. It is equal to the mass of cells divided
by the rate of cell wasting from the system.
mean ﬂow
The arithmetic average ﬂow at a given point for a speciﬁed period of
time.
mean sea level (MSL)
The average sea level for all stages of the tide.
mean velocity
The average velocity of a ﬂuid ﬂowing in a channel, pipe, or duct,
determined by dividing the discharge by the cross sectional area of the ﬂow.
meander
One of a naturally occurring series of bends or curves in a river, usually
formed on a ﬂoodplain composed of unconsolidated alluvium.
meander belt
The outermost limits of a ﬂoodplain along which a stream meanders.
MEB
Multiple effect boiling. See “multiple effect distillation.”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

mechanical aeration
The mechanical agitation of water to promote mixing with
atmospheric air.
mechanical coupling
A pipe coupling that does not require threading.
mechanical draft cooling tower
A cooling tower that depends on fans for intro-
duction and circulation of its air supply.
mechanically emulsiﬁed oil
A classiﬁcation of a free oil and water mixture sub-
jected to severe turbulence where the oil droplets are in a range of 10 to 40
microns in size.
MECO®
Mechanical Equipment Co., Inc.
Mectan™
Grit chamber by John Meunier, Inc.
MED
See “multiple effect distillation (MED).”
media
Granular ﬁltration or absorption material or ion exchange resin products
used to form barriers to the passage of certain solids or molecules that are
suspended or dissolved in water or wastewater. “Media” is the plural form of
“medium.”
medical waste
Any solid waste generated in the diagnosis, treatment, or immuni-
zation of humans or animals.
Medina®
Bioremediation products by Medina Products Bioremediation Division.
medium
The material used in a ﬁlter to form a barrier to the passage of certain
suspended solids or dissolved molecules.
medium-size water system
A water system that serves 3300 to 50,000 persons.
Megacell™
Rectangular dissolved air ﬂotation system by Krofta Engineering Corp.
megaliter (ML)
A unit of volume equal to 1 million liter.
Megatron™
Ultraviolet water puriﬁcation system by Atlantic Ultraviolet Corp.
Megos®
Ozone generation system by Capital Controls Co.
MEK
Methyl ethyl ketone.
Mekor®
Corrosion inhibitor chemical additive by Ashland Chemical, Drew Industrial.
Mellaﬁer
Inclined plate clariﬁer by Industrial Filter & Pump Mfg. Co.
melt water
Water derived from the melting of ice and snow.
meltdown
A defect in a nuclear reactor cooling system which results in an over-
heating of the reactor core and eventual melting of fuel rods.
melting point
The temperature at which a solid changes to a liquid.
Mem*Recon™
Reverse osmosis membrane reconditioning product by King Lee
Technologies.
Membio®
Aerobic biological digester by USFilter/Memcor.
Membralox®
Ceramic membrane ﬁlters by USFilter/Rockford.
Membrana™
Cartridge ﬁlter housing by Osmonics.
membrane
A thin barrier that permits passage of particles of a certain size or of
a particular physical or chemical property.
membrane bioreactor (MBR)
A modiﬁcation of the activated sludge wastewater
treatment process employing membrane ﬁltration in place of conventional
secondary clariﬁers.
membrane contactor
A device that permits mass transfer between a gaseous
phase and liquid phase of a material without dispersing one phase into another.
membrane diffuser
Fine bubble aeration diffuser with perforated ﬂexible plastic
membranes.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

membrane ﬁlter
(1) A paper-like ﬁlter with small pore sizes that is capable of
retaining bacteria for use in the laboratory examination of water. (2) A pres-
sure-driven microﬁltration or ultraﬁltration membrane ﬁlter.
membrane processes
Processes including reverse osmosis, electrodialysis, and
ultraﬁltration that use membranes to remove dissolved material or ﬁne solids.
membrane softening
A water softening process that utilizes semi-permeable
nanoﬁltration or reverse osmosis membranes to remove hardness constituents
such as calcium and magnesium from water.
MembraPro®
Ceramic membrane microﬁltration system by USFilter Corp.
Membrastill™
Pharmaceutical water system by USFilter/Rockford.
Memclean®
Chemical solution used to clean microﬁltration membranes and sys-
tems by USFilter/Memcor.
Memcor®
Continuous microﬁltration systems by USFilter/Memcor.
Memexx™
Membrane ﬁltration system by WesTech Engineering Inc.
Memloy
Microﬁltration membrane product by USFilter/Memcor.
Memory-Flex™
Check valve by Val-Matic Valve & Manufacturing Corp.
Memstor
Membrane storage agent by King Lee Technologies.
Memtec
Microﬁltration product line by USFilter/Memcor.
Memtek®
Microﬁltration membrane products by USFilter/Industrial Wastewater
Systems.
Memtrex™
Pleated ﬁlters by Osmonics, Inc.
Memtrol
Microﬁltration control system by USFilter/Memcor.
meniscus
The curved upper surface of a column of liquid.
Mensch™
Reciprocating rake bar screen by Vulcan Industries, Inc.
MeOH
Common abbreviation for “methanol.”
MEP
See “multiple extraction procedure (MEP).”
meq/L
See “milliequivalents per liter.”
mercaptans
Organic compounds, or thioalcohols (thiols), containing sulfur and
noted for their disagreeable odor.
Merco®
Centrifuge by Alfa Laval Separation, Inc.
mercury
A heavy metal element that when absorbed or ingested by humans is
excreted from the body very slowly and can be lethal in very low concentrations.
Merlin®
Progressing cavity pump by MGI Pumps, Inc.
Mer-Made
Filter leaves for vacuum diatomite ﬁlters by Mer-Made Filter, Inc.
Mesa-Line®
Portable submersible pump by Crane Pumps & Systems.
mesh
The number of openings per lineal inch, measured from the center of 1 wire
or bar to a point 1″ (25.4 mm) distant.
mesocosm
A physically conﬁned, self-maintaining, multitrophic experiment for
discerning processes involved in the fate and transformation of nutrients into
organic matter.
mesophiles
Bacteria that grow best at temperatures between 25 and 40°C.
mesophilic digestion
Anaerobic sludge digestion within a mesophilic range of
approximately 25 to 40°C.
mesophyte
A plant that grows under typical or moderate amounts of atmospheric
water supply.
mesosphere
The level of the earth’s atmosphere that exists above the stratosphere.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

mesothelioma
A fatal form of cancer caused by exposure to asbestos.
mesotrophic lake
A lake between the oligotrophic and eutrophic stages that
remains aerobic, although a substantial depletion of oxygen has occurred in
the hypolimnion.
metabolism
The chemical and physical processes of living organisms which
include the biological conversion of organic matter to cellular matter and
gaseous byproducts.
metabolites
Any substances produced by biological processes, such as those from
pesticides.
MetaGuard™
Powdered antiscalant and stabilizer for reverse osmosis systems by
Professional Water Technologies, Inc.
metal
In general those elements that easily lose electrons to form positive ions.
metal ﬁnishing wastes
Wastewater from electroplating, galvanizing, and other
metal ﬁnishing operations that may be characterized by the presence of acids,
caustics, and metal contaminants.
metal salt coagulants
Salts of alum and iron commonly used as water treatment
coagulants.
Metal-Drop™
Flocculant/coagulant by Kem-Tron.
metalimnion
The middle layer of a thermally stratiﬁed lake or reservoir.
MetalWeave®
Stainless steel fabric tank bafﬂes by Baker Process.
metastasis
The spreading of disease from one part of the body to another.
meter
The basic SI unit of length equivalent to approximately 39.37 inches, or
the distance traveled by light in a vacuum in 1/299,792,458 seconds. Also
called “metre.”
metering pump
A pump used to provide controlled injection of a chemical addi-
tive into a ﬂuid ﬂow.
metes and bounds
A description of the measurements and boundaries of a tract
of land beginning at a given point in the boundary of the tract to be described,
then the recitation of the courses (directions) and distances from point to point
entirely around the tract.
Metex®
An anaerobic process for the removal of heavy metals by Lotepro Corp.
(Western Hemisphere) and Linde-KCA-Dresden GmbH.
methane
A colorless, odorless combustible gas that is the principle byproduct of
anaerobic decomposition of organic matter in wastewater. Chemical formula
is CH4.
methane formers
See “methanogens.”
methanogens
Group of anaerobic bacteria responsible for conversion of organic
acids to methane gas and carbon dioxide. Also known as “methane formers.”
methanol
A solvent often used as a supplemental carbon source during denitriﬁ-
cation. Chemical formula is CH3OH.
methemoglobinemia
Disease occurring primarily in infants who ingest water high
in nitrates. Also called “blue baby syndrome.”
Method 18
An EPA test method which uses gas chromatographic techniques to
measure the concentration of volatile organic compounds in a gas stream.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Method 24
An EPA reference method to determine density, water content, and
total volatile content of coatings.
Method 25
An EPA reference method to determine the VOC concentration in a
gas stream.
method detection limit (MDL)
The constituent concentration that when pro-
cessed through the complete method produces a sample with a 99% probability
that it is different from the blank.
methoxychlor
Pesticide that causes adverse health effects in domestic water sup-
plies and is toxic to freshwater and marine aquatic life.
methyl
The monovalent hydrocarbon radical CH3, usually existing only in com-
bination with other atoms.
methyl orange
A color indicator used in acid and base titrations.
methyl orange alkalinity
A measure of the total alkalinity of an aqueous solution
determined through titration with a methyl orange color indicator.
methylate
To replace one or more hydrogen atoms in a molecule with a methyl group.
methylene blue active substance (MBAS)
Anionic surfactants which react with
methylene blue to form a chloroform-soluble complex.
Metito Arabia
Former name of USFilter/Metito.
metre
See “meter.”
metric ton
A unit of mass equal to 1000 kilogram or approximately 2204 pounds.
Also called “tonne.”
Metrol™
Seawater injection product line by Baker Hughes Process Systems.
MEVA
Product line of Waterlink Inc.
MF
See “microﬁltration (µF).”
MFS
Minimum functional speciﬁcation.
MFT
Membrane ﬁlter technique.
mg
See “milligram (mg).”
mg/L
See “milligrams per liter.”
mg/L as CaCO3
See “calcium carbonate equivalent (mg/L as CaCo3).”
mgd
Million gallons per day.
mgid
Million gallons (Imperial) per day.
mho
Unit of measurement for conductivity equal to the reciprocal of resistivity (ohm).
MHSA
Mine Health Safety Administration.
MHT®
Magnesium hydroxide by Dow Chemical Co.
miasma
Vapor rising from marshes, polluted water, or decaying organic matter
which was once mistakenly thought to poison and infect the air causing malaria
and other diseases.
MIB
Abbreviation for the trace organic 2-methylisoborneol which produces an
earthy/musty odor in surface waters. Chemical formula is C11H20O.
MIC®
Mazzei Injector Corp.
Micrasieve™
Pressure-fed ﬁne static screen by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc.
Micro Fine
Ultraﬁltration system by USFilter/Memcor.
Micro/2000®
Residual chlorine, chlorine dioxide, and potassium permanganate
analyzer by USFilter/Wallace & Tiernan.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

microbe
An organism observable only through a microscope. Also called “micro-
organism.”
microbial pesticide
A microorganism that is used to control a pest, but of mini-
mum toxicity to man.
Microbics
Former name of Azur Environmental.
microbiocide
See “biocide.”
MicroBiotic™
Carbon bioﬁltration system by Geoenergy International Corp.
Microbloc
Carbon bed VOC control system by USFilter/Westates.
Micro-Carbon®
Filter cartridge with wound carbon batt by USFilter/Filtration &
Separation.
Microcat®
Microbial additive for use in biological wastewater treatment by Bio-
science, Inc.
Microchem™
Tablet chlorinator by Mooers Products, Inc.
microclimate
The localized climate conditions within an urban area or neighbor-
hood.
MicroDAF
Dissolved air ﬂotation by the former Princeton Clearwater.
microelectronic water
See “electronic-grade water.”
microencapsulation
Isolation of a waste material by mixing it with a material
which then cures or converts to a solid, nonleaching barrier.
Microenfractionator™
Soil mixing technology by H&H Eco Systems, Inc.
microfauna
Animals not visible to the naked eye.
MicroFIBR
Skid-mounted bioﬁltration system by AMETEK Rotron Bioﬁltration.
MicroFID™
Portable FID by PerkinElmer Instruments.
microﬁltration (MF)
A low pressure (100-400 kPa, 15-60 psi) membrane ﬁltra-
tion process which removes suspended solids and colloids generally larger
than 0.1 micron diameter.
Microﬂoat®
Dispersed air ﬂotation system by Aeration Industries, Inc.
microﬂoc
Destabilized ﬂoc particle that permits in-depth penetration of a granular
media ﬁlter bed to optimize the ﬁlter’s solid retention capacity.
Microﬂoc®
Water treatment product line of USFilter/Microﬂoc.
microfouling
The biological fouling of a water system with microorganisms
including algae, fungi, and bacteria.
Microgap™
Ozonation equipment by Osmonics, Inc.
microgram (µg)
A unit of mass equal to one-millionth of a gram.
micrograms per cubic meter (µg/m3)
A measure of the concentration of partic-
ulate or gaseous matter in air, commonly used in reporting air pollution data.
micro-irrigation
A water management irrigation technique using a micro-sprin-
kler or drip irrigation system to minimize water runoff.
Micro-Klean™
Wastewater treatment equipment product by Alar Engineering
Corp.
MicroMass
Dissolved air ﬂotation unit by Komline-Sanderson Engineering Corp.
Micro-Matic®
Rotating microscreen by USFilter/Industrial Wastewater Systems.
MicroMAX®
Physical separation system by Micronair LLC.
Micromesh Strainer
Microscreen by Lakeside Equipment Corp.
micrometer (µm)
See “micron (µ).”
micromho
A unit measure of conductivity equal to one millionth of a mho.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

micron (µ)
A unit of length equal to one-millionth of a meter. Also called
“micrometer.”
micron rating
The term applied to a ﬁlter medium to indicate the particle size
above which all suspended solids will be removed throughout the rated capacity.
Micronizer™
Fine bubble dissolved air ﬂotation device by the former Microlift
Systems, Inc.
microorganism
An organism observable only through a microscope. Also called
“microbe.”
Micro-Pi®
Pressure fed rotary screen by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc. (Western Hemi-
sphere) and USFilter/Contra-Shear.
Micro-Polatrol®
Cathodic protection power units by Corrpro Waterworks, Inc.
MicroPore
Aeration mixing systems by Environmental Dynamics Inc.
MicroPurge®
Low-ﬂow sampling by QED Environmental Systems, Inc.
microscope
An instrument used for visual magniﬁcation of small objects.
microscreen
A surface ﬁltration device consisting of a rotating drum with a ﬁne
mesh screen ﬁxed to its periphery. As water ﬂows through the interior of the
drum, solids are retained by the mesh for removal by a high pressure spray wash.
Microsep®
Ballasted Floc Reactor by USFilter/General Filter.
Micro-Sieve
Microscreen formerly offered by Passavant.
microsporidia
Spore-forming protazoan parasites recognized as pathogens of
insects, ﬁsh, birds, and mammals.
microstrainer
See “microscreen.”
Micro-T
Turbidimeter with remote station monitoring by HF Scientiﬁc, Inc.
Microtox®
Acute toxicity test by Azur Environmental.
Microtuff™
Microporous, vibrating diffuser by Clear-Flo International.
Microza™
Hollow ﬁber membrane ﬁltration systems by Pall Corp.
midge ﬂy
An insect that may infest a water system and whose larvae, known as
“blood worms,” feed on algae, protozoans, and decaying vegetation.
Midi-Rotor
Rotary brush aerator by USFilter/Krüger.
midnight dumping
The deliberate and illegal disposal of sludge or other waste
materials at an unauthorized, nonpermitted location.
MightyPure™
Ultraviolet water puriﬁcation system by Atlantic Ultraviolet Corp.
mil
A unit of measure equal to one-thousandth of an inch.
MIL
Military Speciﬁcation.
milk of lime
A lime slurry formed by mixing water with calcium hydroxide.
mill
To grind or crush.
mill scale
An oxide coating formed on steel when heated in connection with hot
working or heat treatment.
Millennium™
Regenerative thermal oxidizer system by Megtec Systems, Inc.
milliequivalent (me)
One-one thousandth of an equivalent weight.
milliequivalents per liter (meq/L)
An expression indicating the concentration of
a solute which is calculated by dividing the concentration in milligrams per
liter by the equivalent weight of the solute.
milligram (mg)
A unit of mass equal to one-thousandth of a gram.
milligrams per liter (mg/L)
A common unit of measurement of the concentration
of a material in solution.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

milliliter (mL)
A unit of volume equal to one cubic centimeter.
Milliscreen™
Internally fed rotary ﬁne screen by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc. (Western
Hemisphere) and USFilter/Contra-Shear.
mineral
A naturally occurring inorganic material having a deﬁnite chemical com-
position and structure.
mineral acidity
Acidity caused by the presence of hydrochloric, sulfuric, nitric,
and other inorganic mineral acids.
mineral acids
Inorganic acids including hydrochloric, nitric, and sulfuric acid.
mineral water
Water containing a minimum of 250 mg/L of total dissolved solids
and which come from a source tapped at one or more boreholes or springs
originating from a geologically and physically protected underground source.
mineralization
The conversion of an organic material to an inorganic form by
microbial decomposition.
Mini Monster®
Low wastewater ﬂow solids reduction unit by JWC Environmental.
Mini Osec
Electrolytic chlorination system by USFilter/Wallace & Tiernan.
MiniBUS™
Ultraﬁltration membrane cartridge by Cuno Separations Systems
Division.
MiniChamp
Chemical induction unit by USFilter/Stranco.
MiniDisk™
Cloth media wastewater ﬁlter by Aqua-Aerobic Systems, Inc.
Minigas®
Multi-gas detector by Neotronics of North America.
Mini-Ject®
Pneumatic ejector lift station by Smith & Loveless, Inc.
Mini-Magna
Rotor aerator by Lakeside Equipment Corp.
Minimax
Dewatering pressure ﬁlter by Larox Inc.
Mini-Maxi
Dissolved air ﬂotation unit by Tenco Hydro, Inc.
Mini-Milli™
Internally fed rotary ﬁne screen by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc. (Western
Hemisphere) and USFilter/Contra-Shear.
Mini-Miser™
Multiple feed dewatering system by Recra Environmental.
Minipure™
Ultraviolet water puriﬁcation system by Atlantic Ultraviolet Corp.
Mini-Ring
Random packing media by USFilter/General Filter.
Mini-San
Tablet feeder disinfection system by Exceltec International Corp.
Miniseries™
Packaged desalination plant by Matrix Desalination, Inc.
minors
Publicly owned treatment works with ﬂows less than 1 million gallons per
day.
Minotaur™
Activated carbon product by Calgon Carbon Corp.
Miox®
Oxidant product line by Miox Corp.
miscible
Capable of being mixed.
MIST
Fine bubble diffuser by Aeromix Systems, Inc.
mist eliminator
A device used to remove entrained droplets of water from a vapor
stream produced during evaporation.
Mist Pro™
Odor control system by NuTech Environmental Corp.
MistGard™
Oil mist collector by Monsanto Enviro-Chem Systems, Inc.
Mist-Master®
Mesh pad mist eliminators by ACS Industries, Inc.
mitigation
Measures taken to reduce adverse impacts on the environment.
mitochondria
Subcellular structures that contain genetic material and enzymes
which produce ATP to provide energy for cell metabolism.
Mixaerator
Static mixing aerators by JDV Equipment Corp.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

MixAirTech
MixAir Technologies, Inc.
Mixco
Batch mixer by Lightnin.
mixed bed demineralizer
Ion exchange demineralizer containing strong-acid and
strong-base resins in a single vessel.
mixed liquor
The mixture of wastewater and activated sludge undergoing aeration
in the aeration basin.
mixed liquor suspended solids (MLSS)
Suspended solids in the mixture of
wastewater and activated sludge undergoing aeration in the aeration basin.
mixed liquor volatile suspended solids (MLVSS)
The volatile fraction of the
mixed liquor suspended solids.
mixed low-level radioactive waste (MLLW)
Low-level radioactive waste that
also contains hazardous constituents.
mixed media ﬁlter
Granular media ﬁlter utilizing two or more types of ﬁlter
media of different sizes and speciﬁc gravities, usually silica sand, anthracite
and ilmenite, or garnet.
Mixﬂo™
Aeration injection and dissolution system by Praxair, Inc.
mixing zone
Limited area where initial dilution of a discharge takes place, water
quality changes may occur, and certain water quality standards may be
exceeded.
Mix-Mate®
Multistage polymer mixing system by Neptune Chemical Pump Co.
mixotroph
Bacteria that do not grow in either anaerobic or highly oxygenated water.
ML
See “megaliter (mL).”
mL
See “milliliter (mL).”
MLLW
See “mixed low-level radioactive waste (MLLW).”
MLM™
Heat recovery media for regenerative thermal oxidation systems by Lan-
tec Products, Inc.
MLSS
See “mixed liquor suspended solids (MLSS).”
MLTSS
Mixed liquor total suspended solids. See “mixed liquor suspended solids
(MLSS).”
MLVSS
See “mixed liquor volatile suspended solids (MLVSS).”
mobile source
Any nonstationary source of air pollution such as cars, trucks,
motorcycles, buses, airplanes, locomotives.
MobileFlow®
Mobile water treatment system by Ecolochem, Inc.
MobileRO
Trailer mounted reverse osmosis system by Ecolochem, Inc.
Mobius
Fine mesh belt screen by Pro-Ent, Inc.
modeling
A quantitative or mathematical simulation which attempts to predict or
describe the behavior or relationships that result from a physical event.
MoDo-Chemetics
Former name of Kvaerner Chemetics.
Mod-U-Flo
Round bottom clariﬁer by Osmonics, Inc.
Moduﬂow
Concrete gravity sand ﬁlter by Smith & Loveless, Inc.
Modulab®
High purity water systems by USFilter Corp.
Modular Aquarius®
Modular water treatment plant by USFilter/Microﬂoc.
Modulozone
Skid-mounted ozone generator by Praxair-Trailigaz Ozone Co.
Modu-Plex
Wet well pump station by Smith & Loveless, Inc.
ModuStor™
Bolted steel tank by ModuTank, Inc.
MOE
Margin of exposure.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

molality
The number of moles of solute per kilogram of solvent.
molarity
The number of moles of solute per liter of solution.
mole
(1) The molecular weight of a substance containing an Avogadro’s number
of atoms or molecules. (2) A massive harborwork, breakwater, or jetty.
molecular weight
The weight of a molecule that may be calculated as the sum of
the atomic weights of its constituent atoms.
molecular weight cutoff (MWCO)
The smallest compounds that are generally
rejected in a membrane ﬁltration process.
molecule
The smallest division of a compound that still retains or exhibits all the
properties of the substance.
mollusk
A group of invertebrate animals with a soft, unsegmented body protected
by a shell.
Molpure®
Hollow ﬁber ﬁltration membranes by Celgard LLC.
Molsep®
Hollow ﬁber ﬁltration membranes by Celgard LLC and Daicen Mem-
brane Systems Ltd.
molten salt reactor
A thermal treatment unit that rapidly heats waste in a heat-
conducting ﬂuid bath of carbonate salt.
Molyver
Reagent chemicals used to determine molybdenum concentration in water
by Hach Co.
MOM
Management, operating, and maintenance.
monel
A nickel alloy containing approximately 30% copper and having good
mechanical and corrosion-resistant properties.
monitoring well
A well used to obtain samples for analysis or to measure ground-
water levels.
Monkey Screen
Reciprocating rake bar screen by Brackett Geiger.
Mono®
Pump products by Monoﬂo.
Monobelt®
Filter press by Waterlink/Aero-Mod Systems.
Monoblock
Carbon bed VOC control system by USFilter/Westates.
Monocluster
Package water treatment plant by Graver Co.
Monod equation
A mathematical equation that describes the relationship between
biomass production and the concentration of growth-limiting substrate.
Mono-Ferm
Iron and manganese removal gravity ﬁlter by Graver Co.
monoﬁlament
A single synthetic ﬁber of continuous length used in woven mesh
or cloth.
monoﬁll
A solid waste disposal facility containing only one type or class of waste.
Monoﬂo
Progressing cavity pump by MGI Pumps, Inc.
Monoﬂo®
Screenings grinder by Monoﬂo.
Mono-Floc®
Gravity sand ﬁlter with coagulant feed system by Graver Co.
Monoﬂor®
Cast-in-place ﬁlter underdrain by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
Monolift®
Vertical, progressing cavity groundwater pump by Monoﬂo.
monolithic underdrain
A concrete ﬁlter underdrain whose piers and ﬂoor are
poured in place at one time.
monomedia ﬁlter
A granular media ﬁlter utilizing a single size and type of ﬁlter
media.
monomer
The basic molecule of a synthetic resin or plastic.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

monomictic
Relatively deep lakes and reservoirs which do not freeze over during
the winter months and undergo a single stratiﬁcation and mixing cycle during
the year.
Mono-Pak
Concrete gravity ﬁlter by Graver Co.
Mono-Pilot®
Coagulant control center using a pilot ﬁlter column by USFil-
ter/Microﬂoc.
Monorake
Traveling bridge raking mechanism for rectangular clariﬁers by
GL&V/Dorr-Oliver, Inc.
Monoscour®
High solids gravity sand ﬁlter by Graver Co.
MonoSparj
Coarse bubble diffuser by Walker Process Equipment.
Monosphere™
Ion exchange resin by Dow Chemical Co.
Monovalve® Filter
Gravity sand ﬁlter by Graver Co.
Monozone®
Ozone generation system by Capital Controls Co.
Montreal Protocol
A 1987 international agreement to phase out CFCs and replace
them with HFCs. The full agreement name is the “Montreal Protocol on
Substances That Deplete the Ozone Layer.”
moraine
A mass of stone and earth carried by a glacier and deposited on land
after a glacier recedes.
morbidity
Rate of disease incidence.
mortality rate
The number of deaths per 100,000 people in a population.
MOS
Margin of safety.
most probable number (MPN)
Statistical analysis technique based on the num-
ber of positive and negative results when testing multiple portions of equal
volume.
mother liquor
The concentrated solution that remains after evaporation or crys-
tallization. See also “bittern.”
motive steam
High pressure steam used to operate a steam-jet ejector or thermo-
compressor.
MotoDip
Motorized slotted skimmer pipe by Walker Process Equipment.
mouth feel
A series of sensations such as aftertaste, astringent, burning, chalky,
metallic, and ﬂat which are usually easier to taste than to smell but cannot be
strictly described as “tastes.”
moving bed ﬁlter
A granular media ﬁlter that continuously cleans and recycles
ﬁlter media while the ﬁlter continues to operate.
Moyno®
Pump product line by Moyno Industrial Products.
MP
Melting point.
MPA
Microscopic particulate analysis.
MPN
See “most probable number (MPN).”
MPRox Process
Organic destruction process for spent caustic wastewaters by
MPR Services, Inc.
MPVT™
Multi-purpose vertical turbine pump by Patterson Pump Co.
MQL
Method quantitation limit. Generally the same as “estimated quantitation
limit.”
MRDL
See “maximum residual disinfectant level (MRDL).”
MRDLG
Maximum residual disinfectant level goal.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

MRF Press
Belt ﬁlter press by Idreco USA, Ltd.
MRFs
See “materials recovery facilities (MRFs).”
MRL
Maximum residue limit.
M-roy
Metering pump products by Milton Roy Co.
MS Diffuser
Medium bubble diffuser by Enviroquip, Inc.
MSBR
Modiﬁed sequencing batch reactor.
MSD
Musculoskeletal disorder.
MSDS
See “Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS).”
MSF
See “multistage ﬂash evaporation (MSF).”
MSF-BR
Multistage ﬂash evaporation, brine recirculation.
MSF-OT
Multistage ﬂash evaporation, once-through.
MSL
Mean sea level.
MSW
Municipal solid waste.
MSWLF
Municipal solid waste landﬁll.
MT®
Reverse osmosis membrane cleaners by B.F. Goodrich Co.
MTBE
Methyl-tertiary-butyl-ether.
MTBF
Mean time between failures.
MTD
Maximum tolerated dose.
MTP
Maximum trihalomethane potential.
MTS
Wastewater treatment equipment product link of Waterlink Biological Systems.
MTS®
Trailer-mounted mobile treatment system for industrial wastewater treat-
ment applications by Graver Co.
MTTR
Mean time to repair/replace.
MTZ
Mass transfer zone.
MUC
Maximum use concentration.
muck soils
Earth made from decaying plant materials.
MUD
Municipal Utility District.
mud balls
Agglomerations of ﬂoc, solids, and ﬁlter media in a ﬁlter bed which
may grow into a larger mass and reduce ﬁltration efﬁciency.
mud ﬂat
A muddy, ﬂat low-lying tidal area.
mud valve
A valve used to drain sediment from the bottom of a sedimentation
basin.
Mufﬁn Monster®
Wastewater solids reduction unit by JWC Environmental.
mufﬂer
A device used to reduce or deaden noise.
mulch
A protective ground covering of compost, wood chips, sawdust, or other
organic matter.
Multdigestion
Two-stage digestion system formerly offered by Dorr-Oliver, Inc.
Multicell®
Multiple cell gravity ﬁlter by USFilter/General Filter.
Multi-Chem®
NOx destruction system by Tri-Mer Corp.
multiclone
A set of individual cyclone separators arranged in parallel to remove
particulate matter from air emissions.
Multicoil
Indirect sludge drying system by Kvaerner Eureka USA.
Multicone
Aluminum induction cascade aerator used to strip gases or aerate water
supply by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
Multicrete®
Monolithic ﬁlter underdrain system by USFilter/General Filter.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

MultiDraw
Circular clariﬁer with pumped suction sludge removal system using
multiple nozzles by Walker Process Equipment.
Multiﬂo
Flow distribution nozzle for rotary distributors by Amwell, Inc.
Multiﬂo®
Pump column used with jet aeration system by USFilter/Jet Tech.
MultiFlow
Skid mounted water treatment system by Ecolochem, Inc.
Multi-Flow
PVC biological ﬁlter media formerly offered by B.F. Goodrich Co.
Multi-Jet™
Submersible self-aspirating aerator by Waterlink Biological Systems.
Multilogger
Water instrumentation device for measuring multiple parameters by
Stevens Water Monitoring Systems.
Multi-Mag™
Electromagnetic ﬂowmeter by Marsh-McBirney, Inc.
multimedia ﬁlter
Granular media ﬁlter utilizing two or more types of ﬁlter media
of different sizes and speciﬁc gravities, usually silica sand, anthracite and
ilmenite, or garnet.
Multi-Pack™
Oil/water coalescers by Mercer International, Inc.
Multipass®
Sludge dryer by USFilter/Envirex.
Multiple Barrier Filtration
Filtration system by USFilter/General Filter.
multiple effect distillation (MED)
A thin ﬁlm evaporation process where the
vapor formed in a chamber, or effect, condenses in the next, providing a heat
source for further evaporation.
multiple extraction procedure (MEP)
Procedure used to simulate the leaching
a waste will undergo from repetitive precipitation of acid rain on a material.
multiple hearth furnace
A furnace or incinerator consisting of numerous hearths
which is used to incinerate organic sludges or recalcinate lime.
multiple stage ﬂash evaporation
See “multistage ﬂash evaporation (MSF).”
Multi-Point
Level controller by Drexelbrook Engineering Co.
Multiport Valve™
Valve used to manipulate ﬁlter backwashing and rinsing by
USFilter/Rockford.
MultiRanger
Level and volume measurement device by Milltronics, Inc.
multistage ﬂash evaporation (MSF)
A desalination process where a stream of
brine ﬂows through the bottom of chambers, or stages, each operating at a
successively lower pressure, and a proportion of it ﬂashes into steam and is
then condensed.
Multi-Tech®
Chemical feed, contact ﬂocculation, and ﬁltration process by USFil-
ter/General Filter.
Multi-Turi®
Wet scrubber with high energy venturi by CMI-Schneible Co.
Multiwash®
Sand ﬁltration process using combined air/water backwash by USFil-
ter/General Filter.
Multi-Wash®
Wet scrubber by CMI-Schneible Co.
Multi-Zone
Anaerobic digestion system by USFilter/Zimpro.
Muncher®
Sewage grinder products by Monoﬂo.
Munchpump®
Packaged pump/grinder assembly by Monoﬂo.
municipal waste
The combined solid and liquid waste from residential, commer-
cial, and industrial sources.
municipal wastewater treatment plant
Treatment works designed to treat
municipal wastewater.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Muniﬂo
Positive displacement rotary lobe sludge pump by Envirotech Pumpsystems.
Munox
Bacterial innoculant for wastewater treatment, soil, and groundwater reme-
diation by Osprey Biotechnics.
Münster
Trash rake cleaning mechanism by Landustrie Sneek BV.
muntz metal
A brass containing approximately 60% copper and 40% zinc.
muriatic acid
Chemical formula is HCl, also known as “hydrochloric acid.”
MUS
Minimum ultimate strength.
Mushroom Ventilator
Cast iron air diffuser by the former Knowles Mushroom
Ventilator Co.
mutagen
A material that causes genetic change when interacting with a living
organism.
mutagenic
A chemical or agent with properties that cause mutation or disﬁguring.
Mutrator®
Packaged pumping/grinding station by Monoﬂo.
MVC
Mechanical vapor compression. See “vapor compression evaporation (VC).”
MVR
Mechanical vapor recompression. See “vapor compression evaporation
(VC).”
MW
Megawatt.
MWCO
See “molecular weight cutoff (MWCO).”
Mx®
Magmeter by McCrometer, Inc.
Mycelx®
Chemical coating with an afﬁnity for organic compounds by Mother
Environmental Systems, Inc.
mycotoxin
A toxin produced naturally by molds or fungus.
Mystaire®
Air scrubber systems by Misonix, Inc.
N
NAAQS
See “National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS).”
NACE
National Association of Corrosion Engineers.
Nadir®
Cross ﬂow ﬁltration membranes by Celgard LLC.
NAE
National Academy of Engineering.
NAFCO®
Fibrous precoat ﬁlter aid by Liquid-Solids Separation Corp.
NaHMP
See “sodium hexametaphosphate.”
Nalclear®
Anionic/nonionic polymer for sedimentation and sludge conditioning
by Nalco Chemical Co.
Nalmet®
Solution polymer for reducing soluble metal concentrations to low levels
by Nalco Chemical Co.
nanoﬁltration (NF)
A specialty membrane ﬁltration process which rejects solutes
larger than approximately 1 nanometer (10 angstroms) in size.
nanometer
A unit of length equal to one billionth (10–9) of a meter.
NAPAP
National Acid Precipitation Assessment Program.
NAPC
National Air Pollution Control Association.
NAPL
See “nonaqueous phase liquid (NAPL).”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

nappe
(1) A sheet of water ﬂowing over a weir or dam. (2) An arch-shaped sheet
of rock forced over underlying rocks by internal stresses.
napthalene
A synthetic organic chemical used as a moth repellent and fungicide.
Chemical formula is C10H8.
Nara
Paddle dryer/processor by Komline-Sanderson Engineering Corp.
NAS
National Academy of Sciences.
Nasty Gas™
Regenerative blowers to move noxious or other exotic gases by
AMETEK Rotron Bioﬁltration.
natality
Birthrate.
natality rate
The number of births per thousand in a speciﬁc population.
national ambient air quality standards (NAAQS)
U.S. standards established
under the Clean Air Act to set limits on criteria pollutant levels in ambient
(outdoor) air.
National Contingency Plan (NCP)
U.S. federal regulations promulgated to
implement CERCLA and CWA.
National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants (NESHAP)
U.S.
standards established under CAA to set limits on pollutants which may pose
an immediate hazard to human health.
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA)
A 1969 U.S. public law declaring
a national policy that encourages productive and enjoyable harmony between
people and their environment to enrich their understanding of ecological sys-
tems and natural resources.
National Hydro
Former equipment manufacturer acquired by Amwell, Inc.
National Oil and Hazardous Substances Contingency Plan (NOHSCP)
The
federal regulation that guides determination of the sites to be corrected under
both the Superfund program and the program to prevent or control spills into
surface waters or elsewhere.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
A U.S. program
to issue, monitor, and enforce pretreatment requirements and discharge permits
under the Clean Water Act.
National Priorities List (NPL)
A U.S. federal list of hazardous waste sites
addressed by CERCLA.
National Water Quality Standards (NWQS)
These set minimum requirements
for water quality and require states to set standards to achieve CWA’s water
quality goals.
natural attenuation
Naturally occurring processes in the environment that reduce
the mass, toxicity, mobility, volume, or concentration of contaminants in soils
or groundwater.
natural draft cooling tower
A cooling tower in which the air ﬂow through the
tower occurs naturally, rather than mechanically, as a result of tower design.
natural gas
A naturally occurring mixture of hydrocarbon gases found in geologic
formations beneath the earth’s surface whose principal constituent is methane.
natural organic matter (NOM)
Term used to described the organic matter
present in natural waters.
natural resource
An area, material, or organism useful to man.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Nautilus®
Traveling bridge siphon sludge collection system by USFilter/Microﬂoc.
navigable waters
Traditionally, waters sufﬁciently deep and wide for navigation
by all or speciﬁed vessels and which are protected by certain provisions of
the Clean Water Act.
NAWQA
National Water Quality Assessment.
NBOD
See “nitrogenous oxygen demand (NOD).”
NBS
National Bureau of Standards.
NCASI
National Council of the Paper Industry for Air and Stream Improvement.
NCCLS
National Committee for Clinical Laboratory Standards.
NCG
See “noncondensable gas (NCG).”
NCH
See “noncarbonate hardness (NCH).”
NCP
See “National Contingency Plan (NCP).”
NCS
Northwest Cascade, Inc.
NCWS
See “noncommunity water system.”
ND
None (not) detected.
NDO
Natural draft opening.
NDP
See “net driving pressure (NDP).”
NDT
Nondestructive testing.
NDWC
National Drinking Water Clearinghouse.
neat solution
Full strength, undiluted solution.
NEC
National Electrical Code.
needle valve
A valve that controls ﬂow by means of a tapered needle which
extends through a circular outlet.
NEETF
National Environmental Education and Training Foundation.
negative head
Filter operating condition that occurs when the pressure in the ﬁlter
bed is below atmospheric pressure during a ﬁlter cycle.
negative pressure
A gauge pressure less than the atmospheric pressure.
NELAP
National Environmental Laboratory Accreditation Program.
NEMA
National Electrical Manufacturers Association.
nematocide
A chemical agent which is destructive to nematodes.
nematode
A long, unsegmented and often parasitic worm.
Nemo®
Progressive cavity pump and macerator product line by Netzsch, Inc.
neoprene
A synthetic elastomer that is chemically, physically, and structurally
similar to natural rubber.
Neosepta®
Electrodialysis membrane stack supplied by Graver Co.
Neozone™
Ozone generator by North East Environmental Products, Inc.
NEPA
See “National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA).”
nephelometer
See “turbidimeter.”
nephelometric turbidity unit (NTU)
Unit of measure used in the measurement
of turbidity by instrumentation.
Neptune Microﬂoc
Former name of Microﬂoc Products group of USFilter/Micro-
ﬂoc.
NESHAP
See “National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants (NES-
HAP).”
Nessler tubes
Color comparison tubes used in making colorimetric measurements.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

net driving pressure (NDP)
The net feed pressure of a reverse osmosis system
plus the osmotic pressure of the permeate, minus the permeate line pressure
and osmotic pressure of the feedwater.
net head
The head available for production of energy in a hydroelectric plant after
deduction of all frictional losses.
net positive suction head (NPSH)
The difference between the total pressure head
and the vapor pressure of the liquid being pumped.
NETA
National Environmental Training Association.
Net-Waste
Screw press by Olds Filtration Engineering.
Neutral Process™
Heavy metals treatment system by Geo-Chem Technologies, Inc.
Neutralite
Filter media used to neutralize acidic waters by USFilter/Warren.
neutralization
The chemical process that produces a solution that is neither acidic
nor alkaline.
Neutralizer Plus™
Media for pH adjustment by Matt-Son, Inc.
Neva-Clog®
Filter media of perforated metallic sheets by Liquid-Solids Separation
Corp.
New Source Performance Standards (NSPS)
Standards established under the
Clean Air Act to impose federal technology-based control requirements on
emissions from new stationary sources of pollution.
new water
Water from any discrete source such as a river, creek, lake, or well
which is deliberately brought into a plant site.
Newtonian ﬂow
The ﬂow of a ﬂuid in which the viscosity is independent of the
shear rate.
NF
See “nanoﬁltration (NF).”
NFPA
National Fire Protection Association.
NFR
See “nonﬁlterable residue (NFR).”
NFRAP
No further remedial action planned.
ng/L
Nanograms per liter.
Nibbler™
Wastewater pretreatment system by Northwest Cascade, Inc.
Nichols
Former furnace manufacturer acquired by Hankin Environmental Systems,
Inc.
night soil
Human fecal wastes spread on ﬁelds as fertilizer.
NIH
National Institute of Health.
NIMBY
“Not in my backyard.” A common expression that indicates a preference
for waste disposal or treatment to occur at some distant location.
NIOSH
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health.
Niro
Decanter product line by Centrico, Inc.
Nirosta®
Stainless steel product by Krupp Thyssen Nirosta GmbH.
NIST
National Institute of Standards and Technology.
Nitox®
Activated carbon adsorbers by TIGG Corp.
Nitra-Select™
Selective nitrate removal media by Matt-Son, Inc.
nitrate
A stable, oxidized form of nitrogen having the formula NO3
–.
nitrate formers
See “Nitrobacter.”
Nitraver
Reagent chemicals used to determine nitrite concentration of solutions
by Hach Company.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Nitrazyme™
Nitrate solution for controlling wastewater odors by Vulcan Perfor-
mance Chemicals.
nitric acid
A strong mineral acid having the chemical formula HNO3.
nitric oxide (NO)
A gas formed by combustion under high temperature and high
pressure in an internal combustion engine, which changes into nitrogen dioxide
in the ambient air and contributes to photochemical smog.
nitriﬁcation
Biological process in which ammonia is converted ﬁrst to nitrite and
then to nitrate.
nitrite
An unstable, easily oxidized form of nitrogen with the chemical formula
NO2
–.
nitrite formers
See “Nitrosomonas.”
Nitrobacter
Nitrifying bacteria that convert nitrites to nitrates, also called “nitrate
formers.”
nitrogen
A colorless, odorless, gaseous element that makes up 78% of the earth’s
atmosphere and occurs as a constituent of all living tissues in combined form.
Chemical formula is N.
nitrogen cycle
A graphical presentation of nitrogen’s natural cycle from living
animal matter through dead organic matter and back to living matter.
nitrogen dioxide
A reddish brown gas, one of the primary air pollutants, that
usually results from a combustion process and which causes respiratory irri-
tation and illness in relatively low concentrations. Chemical formula is NO2.
nitrogen ﬁxation
The conversion of atmospheric nitrogen into nitrogen com-
pounds through biological activity.
nitrogen, nitrate
See “nitrate.”
nitrogen, nitrite
See “nitrite.”
nitrogen oxides (NOx)
Compounds formed and released primarily by the burning
of fossil fuels.
nitrogenous biochemical oxygen demand (NBOD)
The portion of biochemical
oxygen demand where oxygen consumption is due to the oxidation of nitrog-
enous material, measured after the carbonaceous oxygen demand has been
satisﬁed. Also called “second-stage biochemical oxygen demand.”
nitrogenous BOD
See “nitrogenous oxygen demand.”
nitrogenous oxygen demand (NOD)
That portion of the oxygen demand associ-
ated with the oxidation of nitrogenous material, usually measured after the
carbonaceous oxygen demand has been satisﬁed.
nitrophenols
Synthetic organopesticides containing carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen,
and oxygen.
Nitroseed
Nitrifying toxicity screening test by Polybac Corp.
Nitrosomonas
Nitrifying bacteria that convert ammonia to nitrites under aerobic
conditions and derive their energy from the oxidation. Also called “nitrite
formers.”
Nitrox™
Nutrient removal process by United Industries, Inc.
NMFS
National Marine Fisheries Service.
NMO
Nonmethane organic compound.
NMR
See “nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR).”
NNI
See “noise and number index (NNI).”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

no detectable emissions
An atmospheric discharge with a concentration less than
500 parts per million by volume as measured by an appropriate detection
instrument.
no effect level
See “no observed adverse effect level (NOAEL).”
no observed adverse effect level (NOAEL)
The maximum dose of a substance
which produces no observed adverse effects.
NOAA
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
NOAEL
See “no observed adverse effect level (NOAEL).”
Nocardia
Bacteria that can accumulate to create a nuisance foam in aeration basins
and secondary clariﬁers.
No-Cling
Traveling water screen media insert by Norair Engineering Corp.
NOD
See “nitrogenous oxygen demand (NOD).”
nodulizing kiln
See “calciner.”
NOEC
No observed effect concentration.
NOEL
See “no observed adverse effect level (NOAEL).”
Nogcoﬂot
Flotation treatment system by Noggerath GmbH.
NOHSCP
See “National Oil and Hazardous Substances Contingency Plan
(NOHSCP).”
noise
Any unwanted sound, independent of volume.
noise and number index (NNI)
An index for assessing air trafﬁc noise based on
the average perceived decibel level of air trafﬁc and the number of aircraft
heard.
noise-induced hearing loss
A hearing loss, or permanent threshold shift, resulting
from noise exposure rather than the normal loss attributed to age.
NOM
See “natural organic matter (NOM).”
nonaqueous phase liquid (NAPL)
A liquid mixed with water but having distinct
boundaries and properties different from water. In an oil/water mixture, oil is
the nonaqueous phase liquid.
noncarbonate hardness (NCH)
The hardness in water caused by chlorides, sul-
fates, and nitrates of calcium and magnesium.
noncombustible refuse
Solid wastes that will not burn in a conventional inciner-
ator.
noncommunity water system (NCWS)
A public water system that serves a non-
resident population such as a campground, school, or factory.
noncondensable gas (NCG)
Gaseous material not liqueﬁed when associated
water vapor is condensed in the same environment.
noncontact cooling water system
A once-through cooling water system which
does not come into contact with hydrocarbons or other wastewater and is not
recirculated through a cooling tower.
nonﬁlterable residue (NFR)
See “suspended solids.”
nonionic polymer
A polyelectrolyte with no net electrical charge.
nonmetal
Elements that hold electrons ﬁrmly and tend to gain electrons to form
negative ions.
nonpoint source (NPS)
A source, other than a point source, associated with wide-
spread activities such as agriculture, atmospheric deposition, erosion, or runoff
that discharges pollutants into the air or water.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

nonpotable reuse
The beneﬁcial use of reclaimed water other than potable water
supply augmentation.
nonpurgeable organic carbon (NPOC)
The fraction of total organic carbon
removed after purging a sample with an inert gas.
nonputrescible
Material that cannot be decomposed by biological methods.
nonrenewable resource
A naturally occurring ﬁnite resource that cannot be
renewed once it has been used.
nonsettleable solids
Suspended solids that remain in suspension, usually for more
than one hour.
Nopol®
Disc diffuser system by WesTech Engineering Inc. and Nopon Oy.
Nopon®
Aeration system offered by WesTech Engineering Inc. and Nopon Oy.
Noramer®
Water treatment polymers by Rohm & Haas Co.
Nordic Water™
Product of Waterlink Separations, Inc.
Norit Roz
Steam-activated, peat-based carbon product by Norit Americas Inc.
NORM
Naturally occurring radioactive materials.
normal solution
A solution that contains one equivalent weight of a substance
per liter of solution.
normality
A solution’s relation to the “normal solution.”
Nor-Pac®
Tower packing by NSW Corp.
Nortex
Side and boot seals for traveling water screens by Norair Engineering Corp.
North™
Internally fed rotating drum screen products by Voith Sulzer.
North Filter
Rotary ﬁne screen by Voith Sulzer.
North-American Hercules®
Pressure leaf ﬁlter product line by Liquid-Solids Sep-
aration Corp.
Norton
Biological reactor packing media by Sanitaire Corp.
Norwalk-type virus
A waterborne pathogen that is the most common viral cause
of gastroenteritis in adults.
Notim™
Organic iron and tannin removal media by Matt-Son, Inc.
Novex TLS
Inclined plate separator module by Gyulavari Consulting Kft.
Novus®
Emulsion polymers by BetzDearborn, Inc.
No-Wear™
Traveling bridge ﬁlter backwash shoe by USFilter/Davco.
No-Well
Pier-mounted traveling water screen design that does not require channel
type intake by USFilter/Rex & Link-Belt Products.
NOx
See “nitrogen oxides (NOx).”
Noxidizer™
Incineration system by John Zink Co.
Noxon®
Decanter centrifuge product line by Waterlink Inc.
NOxOut
Nitrogen oxide reduction system by Nalco Chemical Co.
NOxOUT®
Noncatalytic reduction process to reduce nitrogen oxide emission lev-
els by Wheelabrator Air Pollution Control, Inc.
Nozzle Air
Dissolved air ﬂotation aeration system by Baker Hughes Process Sys-
tems.
NPCA
National Precast Concrete Association.
NPDES
See “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).”
NPDWR
National primary drinking water regulation.
NPE
Nonyl phenol ethoxylates.
NPHAP
National Pesticide Hazard Assessment Program.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

NPL
See “National Priorities List (NRL).”
NPOC
See “nonpurgeable organic carbon (NPOC).”
NPS
See “nonpoint source (NPS).”
NPSH
See “net positive suction head (NPSH).”
NPSHA
Net positive suction head available.
NPSHR
Net positive suction head required.
NPT
National pipe thread.
NRA
National Rivers Authority.
NREP
National Registry of Environmental Professionals.
NRWA
National Rural Water Association.
NSDWRs
National Secondary Drinking Water Regulations.
NSF®
NSF International.
NSPS
See “New Source Performance Standards (NSPS).”
NSSC
Neutral sulﬁte semichemical pulping process.
NTA
Nitrilotriacetic acid. An organic chelating agent.
NTIS
National Technical Information Service.
NTNCWS
Nontransient noncommunity water system.
NTP
National Toxicology Program.
NTR
National Toxics Rule.
N-Trak
Test kit to determine nitrogen content of water by Hach Co.
NTU
See “nephelometric turbidity unit (NTU).”
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
An analytical technique used to detect and
distinguish between nuclear particles in a sample using magnetic ﬁelds.
nuclear winter
Prediction by some scientists that smoke and debris rising from
massive ﬁres of a nuclear war could block sunlight for weeks or months,
cooling the earth’s surface and producing climate changes that could, for
example, negatively affect world agriculture.
Nuclepore®
Membrane cartridge ﬁlter by Corning, Inc.
nuclide
A species of atom characterized by the number of protons, neutrons, and
energy in the nucleus.
NUG
Nonutility generator.
nuisance mask
See “dust mask.”
Nu-Notch Mushroom
Cast iron air diffuser by the former Knowles Mushroom
Ventilator Co.
Nupac®
Random packing media by Lantec Products, Inc.
NuTralite®
Odor control product for neutralizing disulﬁde and other odors by
NuTech Environmental Corp.
Nu-Treat
Flocculator/clariﬁer by USFilter/Envirex.
nutrient
Any substance that is assimilated by organisms to promote or facilitate
their growth.
Nutrigest®
Clariﬁer by Smith & Loveless, Inc.
nutshell ﬁlter
A ﬁltration device that uses ground walnut or pecan shells as gran-
ular ﬁlter media to remove hydrocarbons and other suspended solids from water.
NVCU™
Vapor control unit by NAO Inc.
N-Viro
Pasteurization and chemical ﬁxation process to disinfect and stabilize
sludge by N-Viro International Corp.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

NVOC
Nonvolatile organic carbon.
NWPA
Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982.
NWQS
See “National Water Quality Standards (NWQS).”
NWSIA
National Water Supply Improvement Association. Former name of
“American Desalting Association.”
nylon
Plastic compound that offers excellent load-bearing capability, low frictional
properties, and good chemical resistance.
O
O&M
Operation and maintenance.
O/W
Oil-in-water emulsion.
O2 Minimizer®
Process controller used to control oxygenation of mixed liquor by
Schreiber Corp.
OASES®
Oxygen-activated sludge wastewater process by USFilter/Krüger.
oasis
A fertile or green vegetated area in a desert or wasteland that is supplied
with water.
OB/OD
Open pit burning/open detonation.
obligate aerobes
Bacteria that can survive only in the presence of dissolved oxygen.
obligate anaerobes
Bacteria that can survive only in the absence of dissolved
oxygen.
obligate pathogen
A pathogen that is unable to live outside a living host.
OBS®
Turbidity sensors by D&A Instrument Co.
OCA 19™
Odor neutralizer by Hinsilblon Laboratories.
OCC
Old corrugated containers.
occlusion
An absorption process where one solid material adheres to another,
sometimes resulting in coprecipitation.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
A U.S. agency
responsible for overseeing workplace health and safety.
ocean
The volume of salt water that covers approximately 71% of the earth’s
surface and is divided into ﬁve principal geographic regions: the Antarctic,
Arctic, Atlantic, Indian, and Paciﬁc.
ocean disposal
The discharge or disposal of wastes or sludges in ocean water.
ocean dumping
Disposal of wastes in the ocean or seas.
Ocean Dumping Act (ODA)
Authorizes regulation of intentional ocean disposal of
materials, as well as related research and the establishment of marine sanctuaries.
Ocean Dumping Ban Act
A U.S. law making it unlawful to discharge sewage
sludge into the Ocean after 1991.
ocean incineration
The burning of wastes on ocean-going vessels in waters
remote from land.
ocean thermal energy conversion (OTEC)
Electrical generation process which
relies on the temperature differential between the upper and lower layers of
the ocean to vaporize a ﬂuid and power a turbine generator.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

OCPSF
Organic chemicals, plastics, and synthetic ﬁbers.
OD
Outside diameter.
ODA
See “Ocean Dumping Act (ODA).”
Odin
Packaged water treatment plant by USFilter/Davis Process.
Odophos®
Hydrogen sulﬁde and phosphorus removal product by USFilter/Davis
Process.
Odor Buster®
Aeration system used to reduce odors at pump stations and plant
headworks by United Industries, Inc.
odor threshold
See “threshold odor number (TON).”
odor unit
See “threshold odor number (TON).”
OdorGard™
Enhanced packed tower scrubbing process by Monsanto Enviro-
Chem Systems, Inc.
OdorLok™
Hydrogen sulﬁde corrosion and odor control system by Eaglebrook,
Inc.
OdorMaster™
Electrolytic gas scrubber type odor control system by Pepcon Sys-
tems, Inc.
Odor-Miser
Vapor phase, activated carbon odor absorbers by Westport Environ-
mental Systems.
Odor-Ox
Multistage dry chemical air scrubber by Puraﬁl, Inc.
ODP
See “open drip proof (ODP).”
ODS
Ozone depleting substances.
OEM
Original equipment manufacturer.
offal
Trimmings and viscera of butchered animals.
off-gas
The gaseous emissions from a process or equipment.
offset
The requirement for a proposed air pollutant generator to reduce emissions
or obtain emission reductions from other facilities to compensate for new
emissions.
off-site facility
A hazardous waste treatment, storage, or disposal facility located
away from the generating site.
off spec water (OSP)
Product water that does not meet purity speciﬁcations.
OFR
See “overﬂow rate (OFR).”
OGWDW
The U.S. Ofﬁce of Groundwater and Drinking Water.
OHL
Overhung load.
ohm
Unit of electrical resistance where a potential difference of one volt produces
a current of one ampere.
Ohmicron
Immunoassay product line by Strategic Diagnostics, Inc.
oil
(1) Any of various greasy, combustible substances obtained from animal, veg-
etable, and mineral sources. (2) Any of various liquids extracted from petro-
leum. (3) A naturally occurring hydrocarbon in liquid form.
oil ﬁngerprinting
A method of identifying sources of oil, allowing spills to be
traced to their source.
Oil Grabber®
Oil skimming system by Abanaki Corp.
Oil Pollution Act (OPA)
A 1990 U.S. federal law that places liability on tank
owners or operators for removal costs and damages if oil or other hazardous
materials are spilled or discharged.
oil skimmer
A device used to remove oil from a water’s surface.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

oil spill
An unintentional discharge of oil into the environment, especially into a
waterbody.
OilMaster
Oil/water separator by National Fluid Separators, Inc.
Oil-Minder
Submersible pump unit by Stancor Pump, Inc.
oils and grease
Common term used to include fats, oils, waxes, and related con-
stituents found in wastewater.
Oilspin II
Hydrocyclone by Axsia Serck Baker, Inc.
oily wastewater
An oil-in-water emulsion in which oil is dispersed in the water
phase.
OKI™
Submerged aerator mixer by WesTech Engineering Inc. and Nopon Oy.
old growth forest
A forest with a large percentage of old trees which have never
been cut or have not been cut for many years.
Oleoﬁlter™
Filter for removal of hydrocarbons from water by Aprotek, Inc.
oleophilic
A characteristic describing a strong afﬁnity for oils.
olfactometer
Device used to measure odors.
oligohaline
A term describing water with a salinity of 0.5 to 5%.
oligotroph
Bacteria that grow in a medium containing <1.0 mg/L organic carbon.
oligotrophic lake
A deep lake deﬁcient in organic materials whose waters contain
a high degree of dissolved oxygen and low BOD.
OM&M
Operation, maintenance, and management.
Omega
Horizontal rotor aerator by Purestream, Inc.
Omega®
Lime slaker and feeder package by PennProcess Technologies, Inc.
Omnichlor
Sodium hypochlorite generator for marine applications by Exceltec
International Corp.
Omniﬂo®
Sequencing batch reactor wastewater treatment system by USFilter/Jet
Tech.
Omnipac®
Sequencing batch reactor wastewater treatment package plant by USFil-
ter/Jet Tech.
Omnipure
Marine sewage treatment plant product line by Exceltec International
Corp.
oncogenic
A chemical or agent with tumor-causing properties.
one-hundred-year ﬂood plain
Land adjoining inland and coastal waters which,
on the average, is likely to ﬂood once every 100 years.
Onguard®
Instrumentation and control products by Ashland Chemical, Drew
Industrial.
oocyst
An outer shell that protects an organism in the environment. Pronounced
“oh-oh-cist.”
OPA
See “Oil Pollution Act (OPA).”
opacity
The degree to which emissions reduce the transmission of a beam of light,
expressed as a percent of the light which fails to penetrate a plume of smoke.
open burning
The combustion of solid waste without containment of combustion
reaction in an enclosed device, control of the emission of the combustion prod-
ucts, or controlling combustion air to maintain temperature for efﬁcient burning.
open channel
A natural or artiﬁcial channel in which ﬂuid ﬂows with a free surface
open to the atmosphere.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

open cycle cooling system
A cooling water system where cooling water is dis-
charged to a receiving body of water without being recycled.
open drip proof (ODP)
Designation for electrical motor enclosure in which the
ventilating openings are so constructed that successful operation is not inter-
fered with when drops of liquid or solid particles strike or enter the enclosure
at any angle from 0° to 15° downward from vertical.
open dump
A land disposal site where solids are disposed of in a manner that
does not protect the environment and is susceptible to open burning and
exposure to the elements, insects, and scavengers.
OPIM
See “other potentially infectious material (OPIM).”
opportunistic pathogen
A microbe that can cause disease in ill, very young, or
elderly persons, but usually not in healthy individuals.
OptiClean™
Powdered reverse osmosis membrane cleaners by Professional Water
Technologies, Inc.
Opti-Core
PVC biological ﬁlter media formerly offered by B.F. Goodrich Co.
Optimem™
Reverse osmosis product formerly offered by USFilter.
Optimer®
Cationic polymer for sedimentation and sludge conditioning by Nalco
Chemical Co.
Optimum
Direct ﬁltration water treatment plant by BCA Industrial Controls.
oral toxicity
Ability of a pesticide to cause adverse effects when ingested by
mouth.
Orbal™
Oxidation ditch wastewater treatment system by USFilter/Envirex.
ORC®
Oxygen release compound to enhance natural attenuation by Regenesis.
ORE
Orbital rod evaporation.
Orec™
Ozone-generating systems by Osmonics, Inc.
Organagro®
Agricultural compost by Bedminster Bioconversion Corp.
organic
Relating to, or derived from, a living thing. A description of a substance
that contains carbon atoms linked together by carbon-carbon bonds.
organic loading
The amount of organic matter applied to a treatment process.
organic matter
Substances containing carbon compounds, usually of animal or
vegetable origin.
organic nitrogen
Nitrogen bound to carbon-containing compounds.
organic phosphorus
Phosphorus that is bound to carbon-containing compounds.
organoclay
Chemically modiﬁed bentonite clay used as an ion exchange media
or absorbent.
OrganoGuard™
Organic fouling control additive for reverse osmosis systems by
Professional Water Technologies, Inc.
organophosphates
Commonly used phosphorous-based organic pesticides which
are relatively nonpersistent in the environment.
organotins
Chemical compounds used in anti-foulant paints to protect the hulls of
boats and ships, buoys, and pilings from marine organisms such as barnacles.
Ori-Cast
Cast elastomer material used in nonmetallic rectangular clariﬁer products
by Oritex Corp.
oriﬁce plate
(1) Flow measurement device that indicates ﬂow as a function of
differential pressure across a ﬂow-restricting oriﬁce. (2) Flow-limiting device.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Ori-Plastic
Plastic material used in nonmetallic rectangular clariﬁer products by
Oritex Corp.
ORM
See “other regulated material (ORM).”
ORNL
Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
ORP
See “oxidation-reduction potential (ORP).”
OSEC®
Electrolytic chlorination system by USFilter/Wallace & Tiernan.
OSHA
See “Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA).”
Osmo®
Water puriﬁcation systems by Osmonics, Inc.
osmoconformers
Organisms that rely on osmotic pressures to maintain internal
ionic balance.
osmosis
Movement of water from a dilute solution to a more concentrated solution
through a permeable membrane separating the two solutions.
Osmostill
Distillation unit by Osmonics, Inc.
osmotic pressure
Excess pressure that must be applied to a concentrated solution
to produce equilibrium and prevent the movement of a more dilute solution
through a semipermeable membrane into the more concentrated solution.
Osmotik®
Reverse osmosis membrane elements by Osmosis Technology, Inc.
OSP
See “Off spec water (OSP).”
OST
Ofﬁce of Science and Technology. A U.S. EPA ofﬁce.
OSW
Ofﬁce of Saline Water.
OTA® Aerator
Rotor aerator by Scoti-Zahner, Inc.
OTC
Odor threshold concentration. See “threshold odor number (TON).”
OTE
Orbital tube evaporation.
OTEC
See “ocean thermal energy conversion (OTEC).”
other potentially infectious material (OPIM)
Body ﬂuids or unﬁxed tissues and
organs visibly contaminated with blood, other body ﬂuids, HIV, or HBV.
other regulated material (ORM)
The U.S. Department of Transportation’s haz-
ard classiﬁcation of a particular hazardous material to label it for transport.
OUR
Oxygen uptake rate.
outfall
The location where a storm or sanitary sewer or efﬂuent is discharged into
a receiving water body.
outhouse
See “privy.”
outsourcing
The use of an outside vendor to provide operating, maintenance, or
other services for a facility.
ova
Plural of “ovum.”
overburden
The soil and rock overlying a mineral deposit that must be removed
prior to the start of strip mining.
overdraft
The pumping of water from a groundwater basin or aquifer in excess
of the supply ﬂowing into the basin.
overﬂow rate (OFR)
An expression used to indicate the upward water velocity
in a sedimentation tank expressed as ﬂow per day per unit of basin surface
area. Also called “surface loading rate.”
overﬂow weir
A weir over which excess water or wastewater is allowed to ﬂow.
overland ﬂow
A land application technique that cleanses wastewater by allowing
it to ﬂow over a sloped surface where contaminants are absorbed and the water
is collected at the bottom of the slope for reuse.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ovum
A mature egg ready to undergo fertilization. The singular form is “ova.”
Owamat®
Oil/water separator by BEKO Condensate Systems Corp.
oxbow lake
A lake that forms in the abandoned channel or a cutoff meander on
a river’s ﬂoodplain.
oxic
A biological environment that contains molecular oxygen.
Oxidair™
Thermal oxidizer for soil remediation and off-gas treatment by EPG
Companies, Inc.
oxidant
A chemical substance, such as chlorine or ozone, capable of promoting
oxidation.
oxidation
(1) A chemical reaction in which an element or ion loses electrons.
(2) The biological or chemical conversion of organic matter into simpler, more
stable forms.
oxidation ditch
An extended aeration waste treatment process that occurs in an
oval-shaped channel or ditch (also called a “race track”) with aeration provided
by a mechanical brush-aerator.
oxidation pond
An earthen wastewater basin in which biological oxidation of
organic matter occurs naturally or with the assistance of mechanical oxygen
transfer equipment.
oxidation-reduction potential (ORP)
The potential required to transfer electrons
from an oxidant to a reductant which indicates the relative strength potential
of an oxidation-reduction reaction.
Oxidator
Combination aeration, ﬂocculation, and sedimentation unit by Baker
Process.
oxide
A compound of an element with oxygen alone.
oxidize
To bring about oxidation.
oxidizing agent
Any substance that can contribute electrons to a reaction.
Oxifree®
Ultraviolet disinfection system by Capital Controls Co.
Oxigest®
Cylindrical package extended aeration waste treatment plant by Smith &
Loveless, Inc.
Oxigritter
Primary sewage treatment unit by Baker Process.
Oxitech®
Resin conditioning process for TOC reduction by USFilter/Rockford.
OxiTop
System to measure BOD by WTW Measurement Systems, Inc.
Oxitrace™
Oxidant analyzer and monitor by Capital Controls Co.
Oxitron™
Fixed ﬁlm wastewater treatment plant by USFilter/Krüger.
Oxy Flo
Mechanical aerator by Aqua-Aerobic Systems, Inc.
Oxy stream™
Oxidation ditch wastewater treatment system by WesTech Engi-
neering Inc.
Oxycap
Device to improve energy efﬁciency and reduce noise and aerosol emis-
sions from surface aerators by DHV Water BV.
Oxycat
Air pollution abatement catalyst by Met-Pro Corp.
OxyCharger
Static aerator by Parkson Corp.
Oxychlor
Chlorine dioxide generator by International Dioxide, Inc.
Oxyditch
Oxidation ditch treatment system formerly offered by Chemineer, Inc.
Oxy-Gard
Aeration control system that monitors dissolved oxygen level to control
blower operation by Gardner Denver Blower Division.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

oxygen
A chemical element that comprises approximately 20% of the earth’s
atmosphere and is essential for biological oxidation.
oxygen deﬁciency
The additional amount of oxygen required to satisfy the oxygen
requirement of wastewater.
oxygen sag
The temporary decrease in the dissolved oxygen level in a stream or
river which occurs downstream from a point source of pollution.
oxygen scavenger
A chemical used to supplement mechanical deaeration.
oxygen transfer
The exchange of oxygen between a gaseous and a liquid phase.
oxygen transfer rate
The mass of oxygen transferred per unit time.
oxygen uptake
The amount of oxygen used during biochemical oxidation.
oxygenases
Enzymes that catalyze the insertion of one or both atoms of an oxygen
molecule into an organic compound, resulting in a chemical transformation.
Oxygun™
Sub-surface self-aspirating aerator by ABS Pumps, Inc.
Oxyrapid
Air diffusion and recycling system for activated sludge system by Inﬁlco
Degremont, Inc.
Oxytrace®
Dissolved oxygen measurement instrument by Industrial Analytics,
Corp.
Oxytrace™
Chlorine residual analyzer by Capital Controls Co.
Oxytrap™
Wastewater aerator by DAS International, Inc.
OZ
Ozone generation equipment by Ozone Pure Water, Inc.
Ozat®
Compact ozone generator by Ozonia North America.
Ozoﬂoat®
Ozone ﬂotation process for water/wastewater treatment by USFil-
ter/Krüger (North America) and OTV.
ozonation
The process of using ozone in water or wastewater treatment for oxi-
dation, disinfection, or odor control.
ozonator
An ozone generator.
ozone
An unstable, gaseous oxidizing agent with disinfection properties similar
to chlorine, also used in odor control and sludge processing. Chemical formula
is O3.
ozone byproducts
Compounds such as aldehydes and aldoacids formed when
ozone is used to disinfect water.
ozone contactor
A device used to promote the efﬁcient transfer of ozone to water
or wastewater.
ozone destruct unit
An ozone destruction system used to guarantee removal of
any unused ozone before the reactor off-gas is discharged to the atmosphere.
ozone generator
Device used to produce ozone by passing air/oxygen through an
electric ﬁeld.
ozone layer
The portion of the stratosphere, extending from an altitude of approx-
imately 20 to 50 km, in which naturally occurring ozone protects life on earth
by ﬁltering out harmful ultraviolet radiation from the sun.
Ozone Research & Equipment Corp.
Equipment manufacturer acquired by
Osmonics, Inc.
Ozonmat®
Ozone analyzer by Zellweger Analytics, Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

P
P&ID
Piping and instrumentation diagram.
P&Ps
Practices and procedures.
P2
Pollution prevention.
P2Rx
Pollution Prevention Resource Exchange; a coordinated effort of nine
regional pollution prevention resource centers funded by the U.S. EPA.
PAC
Valve positioner and controller by F.B. Leopold Co., Inc.
PAC
See “powdered activated carbon (PAC).”
Pace®
Oil/water separator by Scienco/FAST Systems.
Pacer II™
Package water treatment plant by Roberts Filter Group.
Pacesetter
Liquid/liquid gravity separator by Baker Hughes Process Systems.
Paciﬁc Decadal Oscillation (PDO)
A warming/cooling pattern occurring in the
Paciﬁc Ocean which affects world weather patterns.
Paciﬁc Flush Tank
Former digestion equipment manufacturer acquired by USFil-
ter/Envirex.
package plant
Factory-assembled treatment plant generally incorporated in a sin-
gle tank, or at most, several tanks.
packed bed scrubber
An air pollution control device in which emissions pass
through alkaline water to neutralize hydrogen chloride gas.
packed column
A vertical vessel ﬁlled with packing material usually used to strip
gases or degasify liquids.
packing
The ﬁll material in a ﬁxed ﬁlm reactor or stripping vessel that provides
a large surface area per unit volume.
PACl
Polyaluminum chloride.
Pacpuri®
Sodium hypochlorite generation system by USFilter/Electrocatalytic.
PACT®
Powdered-activated carbon wastewater treatment process by USFilter/Zimpro.
Pactank™
Portable spill containment system by PacTec, Inc.
Paddle Dryer
Sludge dryer by Komline-Sanderson Engineering Corp.
paddle ﬂocculator
A ﬂocculation device utilizing rotating bafﬂes to accomplish
mixing.
PADRE®
Moving bed resin adsorption system for VOC removal/recovery by Ther-
matrix, Inc.
PAH
See “polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH).”
paint ﬁlter test
Test to determine free water content of sludge sample.
PakTOR
Multi-cell packed bed reactor by USFilter/General Filter.
palatable water
Water at a desirable temperature that is free from objectionable
tastes, odors, colors, and turbidity.
P-alkalinity
See “phenolphthalein alkalinity.”
PallSep™
Vibrating membrane ﬁltration by Pall Corp.
Palmer-Bowlus Flume
A portable, venturi-type ﬂume used to measure water or
wastewater ﬂow.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

PAN
See “peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN).”
pandemic
A worldwide epidemic.
PAPR
Powered air-purifying respirator.
Para Cone
Internally fed rotary ﬁne screen by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc. (Western
Hemisphere) and USFilter/Contra-Shear.
Paraﬂash
Forced circulation evaporator by APV Crepaco, Inc.
Paraﬂow
Plate heat exchanger by APV Crepaco, Inc.
Paramax
Speed reducer product line by Sumitomo Machinery Corp.
paraquat
A herbicide resistant to microbial degradation that has been used to
control marijuana and whose exposure can result in serious health effects or
death.
parasite
An organism that lives either on or inside a larger host organism and
where the presence of the parasite is usually harmful to the host organism.
parasitic bacteria
Bacteria that require a living host organism.
Para-Stat
Static screen by Dontech, Inc.
Paravap
High solids evaporator by APV Crepaco, Inc.
parenteral solution
A solution introduced into the body by a vein, muscle, or
pathway other than the mouth.
Parkwood
Sewage treatment equipment product line by Longwood Engineering
Co., Ltd.
Parshall ﬂume
A ﬁxed, venturi-type ﬂume used to measure water or wastewater
ﬂow.
parthenogenic
Capable of reproduction by means of an unfertilized egg.
partial closure
The closure of a hazardous waste management unit at a facility
that contains other active hazardous waste management units.
partial pressure
The pressure exerted by each gas in a mixture proportional to
the amount of that gas in the mixture.
particle counter
Instrument used to measure the size and count the number of
particles in water.
particle counting
A quantitative measurement of the number and size of individ-
ual particles in a water or wastewater sample.
particle size analysis
Determination of the amounts of different particle sizes in
a sample.
particulate
Usually considered to be a solid particle larger than one micron or
large enough to be removed by ﬁltration.
particulate organic carbon (POC)
The portion of organic matter that can be
removed by ﬁltration through a 0.45 micron ﬁlter.
particulate organic matter (POM)
Material of plant or animal origin suspended
in water and usually capable of being removed by ﬁltration.
Partisol®
Air sampler by Rupprecht & Patashnick Co. Inc.
parts per million (ppm)
A common unit of measure used to express the number
of parts of a substance contained within a million parts of a liquid, solid, or
gas. Generally interchangeable with “milligrams per liter” in dilute solutions
and water treatment calculations.
parts per thousand (ppt)
A unit of measure used to express the number of parts
of a substance contained within a thousand parts of a liquid, solid, or gas.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Generally used to specify a water’s salinity and commonly indicated by the
symbol “0/00.”
PASS®
Poly-aluminum-silicate-sulfate coagulant by Eaglebrook, Inc.
Passavant
Wastewater treatment equipment product line by USFilter/Zimpro.
PASS-C®
Poly-aluminum-chloride coagulant by Eaglebrook, Inc.
passivation
The changing of a chemically active surface of a metal to a much less
reactive state. Usually done to stainless steel by immersion in an acid bath.
passive screen
Intake screening device that does not employ mechanical cleaning.
passive solar heating
A heating system that provides heat directly from the sun’s
rays and does not employ pumps, blowers, or water-ﬁlled pipes to transfer heat.
Pastel UV®
Former name of InSpectra UV analyzer by Azur Enviromental.
pasteurization
A process for killing pathogenic organisms by applying heat for
a speciﬁc period of time.
pathogen
Highly infectious disease-producing microbes commonly found in san-
itary wastewater.
Pathwinder®
Screenings conveyor by Serpentix Conveyor Corp.
Patriot
Fluid recovery treatment system for spent coolant and oils by Waterlink
Biological Systems.
PATS
Pesticide action tracking system.
Paygro
In-vessel composting system by Fairﬁeld Service Co.
PC
See “physical-chemical treatment (PC).”
PCB
See “polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB).”
PCC
Process Combustion Corp.
PCE
See “perchloroethylene (PCE, also PERC).”
PCI
Patterson Candy International, Ltd.
pCi
See “picocurie (pCi).”
PCM
Phase contrast microscopy.
PCP
Progressing cavity pump.
PCV
See “positive crankcase ventilation (PCV).”
PD
Positive displacement.
PD Plus®
Heavy duty blower by Tuthill Pneumatics Group.
PDC™
Polymer dosage control system by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc.
PDM®
Water storage tank product line by Pitt-Des Moines, Inc.
PDO
See “Paciﬁc Decadal Oscillation (PDO).”
PE
(1) Professional engineer. (2) See “population equivalent (PE).”
Peabody Floway
Former name of Floway Pumps, Inc.
Peabody TecTank
Bolted steel storage tank by A.O. Smith Engineered Storage
Products.
 
Peabody Welles
 
Former manufacturer whose product lines were acquired by
USFilter/Aerator Products.
 
peak ﬂow
 
Excessive ﬂows experienced during hours of high demand, usually
determined to be the highest 2-hour ﬂow expected to be encountered under
any operational conditions.
 
peaking factor
 
The ratio of peak to average ﬂow.
 
Pearlcomb®
Fine bubble diffuser by USFilter/Diffused Air Products Group.
Pearth
Anaerobic digester gas mixing system by USFilter/Envirex.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

peat
Material formed by partial decay of marsh vegetation with a moisture content
greater than 75%.
pebble lime
See “quicklime.”
PEF
See “primary efﬂuent ﬁltration (PEF).”
PEL
See “permissible exposure limit (PEL).”
pelagic
Referring to the open sea at all depths.
Pelican
Wall-mounted clariﬁer scum removal system by NSW Corp. and Copa
Group (U.K.).
Pelldry
Liquid-absorbing pellet by the former Sheldahl Industrial Absorbents.
Pelletech®
Indirect sludge dryer and pelletizing unit by Wheelabrator Water Tech-
nologies, Inc.
Pelton wheel
An impulse hydraulic turbine that may be used as an energy recovery
device in high head applications such as seawater reverse osmosis.
PEMS
Predictive emissions monitoring systems. This monitors critical operational
parameters of the source and relates the results to the emissions level.
Penberthy
Former manufacturer whose product line is now offered by Chemineer,
Inc.
Penﬁeld®
Water treatment product line by USFilter/Rockford.
Penro
Reverse osmosis systems by Penﬁeld Liquid Treatment Systems.
penstock
A pipe which transports water to a turbine for the production of hydro-
electric energy.
PentaPure®
Disinfecting resin by WTC Industries, Inc.
Pentech
Former manufacturer whose product line is now offered by Chemineer, Inc.
per capita
Per person.
PERC
See “perchloroethylene (PCE, also PERC).”
perc test
See “percolation test.”
perched aquifer
An unconﬁned aquifer separated from the underlying water table
by an impermeable layer or unsaturated zone.
perched water
Zone of unpressurized water held above the water table by imper-
meable rock or sediment.
perchlorate
A rocket fuel ingredient emerging as an environmental threat partic-
ularly to some drinking water supplies. Chemical formula ClO4
–.
perchloroethylene (PCE, also PERC)
A chlorinated hydrocarbon used as an
industrial cleaner or solvent, often used to dry cleaning clothing. Also called
“tetrachloroethylene.”
Percol®
Polyelectrolyte used to enhance liquid/solid separation by Ciba Specialty
Chemicals.
percolating ﬁlter
See “trickling ﬁlter.”
percolation
The ﬂow or trickling of a liquid downward through a contact or
ﬁltering medium.
percolation test
Test used to determine the water-absorbing capacity of soil where
the drop in water level in a test hole is measured over a ﬁxed time period.
Also called “perc test.”
Perc-Rite®
Filtration system by Waste Water Systems, Inc.
perfected water right
A permitted water right indicating that anticipated uses
were of beneﬁcial use.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

perfection
The process of meeting terms and conditions of a water right permitting
process which results in a perfected water right.
performance ratio
A unit of measurement used to characterize evaporator per-
formance expressed as the mass of distillate produced per unit of energy
consumed.
peripheral feed clariﬁer
A circular sedimentation basin in which the inﬂuent
ﬂows from the perimeter toward the center of the unit.
periphyton
Microscopic underwater plants and animals that are ﬁrmly attached
to solid surfaces such as rocks, logs, pilings, and other structures.
peristaltic pump
A type of positive displacement pump where the ﬂuid is
squeezed through a ﬂow tube by external rollers.
Perma-buoy
Foam-ﬁlled ﬁberglass ﬂight for chain and ﬂight sludge collector by
Jeffrey Chain Corp.
Permachem
Packages containing chemical compositions and reagents by Hach Co.
permafrost
Permanently frozen subsurface soil layer in the polar regions.
Permaglas®
Storage tank coating system by A.O. Smith Engineered Storage Products.
Permaklip
Belt seam for ﬁlter press belt by Sefar America, Inc.
Permalife
Chain and ﬂight sludge collector components by Jeffrey Chain Corp.
permanent hardness
Hardness associated with sulfates, chlorides, and nitrates of
calcium and magnesium which remain after boiling.
permanent threshold shift (PTS)
A permanent hearing loss for a certain sound
frequency.
Permasep®
Reverse osmosis products by E.I. Dupont De Nemours, Inc.
permeability
The property of a ﬁlter medium to permit a ﬂuid to pass through it
under the inﬂuence of pressure.
permeate
The liquid that passes through a membrane.
permeator
A pressure vessel containing semi-permeable membranes.
PermeOx®
Solid peroxygen by FMC Corp., Hydrogen Peroxide Division.
permissible dose
The dose of a chemical that may be received by an individual
without the expectation of a signiﬁcantly harmful result.
permissible exposure limit (PEL)
OSHA-established workplace exposure limit
for 600 industrial chemicals.
Permoﬁlter
Horizontal multiple cell pressure ﬁlter by USFilter/Warren.
Permujet®
Clariﬁer by USFilter/Warren.
Permupak
Package water treatment plant by USFilter/Warren.
PermuRO
Reverse osmosis system by USFilter/Warren.
Permutit®
Water treatment product line by USFilter/Warren.
peroxone
A blend of ozone and hydrogen peroxide used for disinfection and odor
control.
Perox-Pure®
UV-catalyzed hydrogen peroxide system by Calgon Carbon Corp.
Perox-serv™
Odor control services by Vulcan Performance Chemicals.
Perox-stor™
Hydrogen peroxide user service by Vulcan Performance Chemicals.
peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN)
A secondary pollutant and major component of pho-
tochemical smog formed when reactive hydrocarbons and oxides of nitrogen
combine in the presence of sunlight.
Perpac
Surface water treatment plant by Vulcan Industries, Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Perrin
Dewatering equipment product line by USFilter/Dewatering Systems.
personal protective equipment (PPE)
Devices or clothing worn to help insulate
a person from direct exposure to hazardous materials.
personnel access opening
An opening in a vessel or sewer to permit human entry.
Also called a “manhole” or “manway.”
PERT
Program evaluation review technique.
pervaporation (PV)
A process in which membranes are used to remove volatile
organic compounds from an aqueous stream.
pesticides
A chemical used to kill undesired insects or animals.
PET
Polyethylene terephthalate. A resin used to make plastic bottles.
PET™
Demineralizer system by USFilter Corp.
petri dish
A covered dish containing an agar media used in the laboratory to
cultivate bacteria.
petrochemicals
Products or compounds produced by the processing of petroleum
and natural gas hydrocarbons.
Petro-Flex®
Portable holding tank by Aero Tec Laboratories, Inc.
petroleum
The crude oil removed from the earth and the oils derived from tar
sands, shale, and coal.
Petrolux
Ceramic membrane ﬁlter by USFilter Corp.
Petro-Pak
Coalescing media for oil removal system by McTighe Industries, Inc.
Petro-Screen™
Oil coalescer screen by Highland Tank & Manufacturing.
Petro-Xtractor™
Water well oil skimmer by Abanaki Corp.
pezodialysis
Membrane process to remove salt from solution where salt, rather
than water, passes through the membrane.
PFBC
Pressurized ﬂuidized bed combustion.
PFCs
Perﬂuorinated compounds.
PFD
Process ﬂow diagram.
Pﬁesteria piscicida
A waterborne organism toxic to ﬁsh.
PFO
Power fail open.
PFR
See “plug ﬂow reactor (PFR).”
PFRP
Process to further reduce pathogens.
PFT
Former equipment manufacturer acquired by USFilter/Envirex.
PFU
See “plaque-forming units (PFU).”
pH
The reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration in gram
moles per liter. On the 0 to 14 pH scale, a value of 7 at 25°C (77°F) represents
a neutral condition. Decreasing values indicate increasing hydrogen ion con-
centration (acidity) and increasing values indicate decreasing hydrogen ion
concentration (alkalinity). Full form is “potential of hydrogen.”
phagotroph
An organism that obtains nutrients through the ingestion of solid
particles of food.
Phantom® 4
Odor-ﬁghting product by NuTech Environmental Corp.
pharmaceutical-grade water
See “USP-puriﬁed water.”
pharmakinetics
The dynamic behavior of chemicals inside biological systems,
including uptake, distribution, metabolism, and excretion.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

PharmMAX™
Reverse osmosis system pharmaceutical and biotech applications
by USFilter.
phase
The state of a substance; solid, liquid, or vapor.
phased reversal
A technique employed in EDR systems to improve product recov-
ery by staging electrical polarity reversal.
PHC
Principal hazardous constituent.
PHD
Peak hourly demand.
PhD2
Portable multiple gas detector by Biosystems, Inc.
phenolphthalein
A color indicator that changes from colorless to pink/red, used
to measure alkalinity.
phenolphthalein alkalinity
Alkalinity determined by titration with sulfuric acid
to pH 8.3, indicated by a color change of phenolphthalein and expressed as
mg/L of calcium carbonate. Also called “P-alkalinity.”
phenols
Organic pollutant also known as carbolic acid occurring in industrial
wastes from petroleum processing and coal-coking operations.
pheromone
A substance secreted by an organism that inﬂuences the behavior or
developmental response of other members of the same species.
Phoenix®
Odor control system by Calgon Carbon Corp.
Phoenix Press
Belt ﬁlter press by Phoenix Process Equipment Co.
Phoenix System
Filter air scour and underdrain systems by AWI.
phosphate
A salt or ester of phosphoric acid.
phosphoric acid
An acid produced from mined phosphate rock used in fertilizers
and detergents. Chemical formula is H3PO4.
phosphorous
(1) A nonmetallic chemical element with the chemical symbol P.
(2) A nutrient essential to all life forms whose overabundance can contribute
to the eutrophication of a water body.
Phostrip
Biological system for phosphorus and BOD removal by Tetra Process
Technologies.
Phosver
Reagent chemical used to determine phosphate concentration in water by
Hach Co.
photic zone
The upper level of a waterbody into which light penetrates.
photocatalytic oxidation
A process where organic and inorganic contaminants
are oxidized by free radicals generated from the interaction of UV radiation
with a chemical or metal oxide catalyst.
photochemical smog
A form of air pollution which results in an atmospheric haze
and is caused by the reaction of sunlight with VOCs, nitrogen oxides, and
other pollutants produced by combustion processes.
photooxidation
The use of ultraviolet light to induce or supplement an oxidation
reaction.
photosynthesis
The process of converting carbon dioxide and water to carbohy-
drates, activated by sunlight in the presence of chlorophyll.
phototrophs
Organisms that rely on the sun for energy.
Photovac™
Portable VOC monitor by PerkinElmer Instruments.
photovoltaic cell
A device that utilizes crystalline materials to convert light from
solar radiation directly into electricity.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

phreatic
Of, or relating to, groundwater.
phreatic surface
The free surface of groundwater at atmospheric pressure.
phreatophyte
Any long-rooted plant that is able to obtain its water from the water
table. Excessive growths of phreatophytes are undesirable in some areas since
they may consume large quantities of scarce water.
pHREEdom™
Cooling water treatment chemicals by Calgon Corp.
PHSA
Public Health Service Act.
phys-chem
See “physical-chemical treatment.”
physical treatment
A water or wastewater treatment process that utilizes only
physical methods such as ﬁltration or sedimentation.
physical-chemical treatment (PC)
Treatment processes that are nonbiological in
nature. Also known as “phys-chem.”
phytoplankton
Algae that exist ﬂoating or suspended freely in a body of water.
phytoremediation
A remediation technique where specialized plants are used to
take up speciﬁc soil contaminants into their roots or foliage prior to harvesting
and treatment.
phytotoxic
Harmful to plants.
PIC
See “products of incomplete combustion (PIC).”
Picabiol®
Activated carbon puriﬁcation process for potable water by Pica USA, Inc.
pickets
Vertical paddles used in a gravity thickener.
pickle liquor
Waste acid from steel pickling process.
pickling
A chemical or electrochemical method of removing mill scale and rust
from steel by washing or immersing in an acid or salt solution.
picocurie (pCi)
A unit of radioactivity equal to 3.7 × 10–12 curie.
Pielkenrood
Former name of USFilter/Rossmark.
piezometer
An instrument consisting of a small pipe and manometer ﬁtted to the
wall of pipe or container to measure pressure head.
piezometric head
The elevation plus pressure head.
pig
A water-propelled internal pipe cleaner.
pigging
A pipeline cleaning procedure using water-propelled pigs to scour solids
from the interior walls of a pipe.
Pilgrim
Former equipment manufacturer acquired by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc.
piling
Timbers, concrete posts, or other structural elements embedded into the
ground to support a load.
pilot plant
A water or wastewater treatment plant smaller than full scale and used
to test and evaluate a treatment process.
pilot tests
Testing a treatment technology under actual site conditions to identify
potential problems prior to fullscale implementation.
PIMA
Photonic ionization, manipulation, and augmentation. A desalination tech-
nology that achieves molecular modiﬁcation of seawater through the use of
lasers and photonics.
PIN
Pesticide information network.
pin ﬂoc
Small ﬂoc particle.
Pinch Press
High pressure ﬁltration and dewatering device by Waste-Tech, Inc.
pinch valve
A valve where sealing is achieved by one or more ﬂexible elements
that can be pinched to stop ﬂow.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

pink water
The process of wastewater stream resulting from the manufacture of
explosives.
pintle chain
Chain extensively used for elevating and conveying consisting of one-
piece links cast with two offset sidebars and coupled with steel pins.
pipe gallery
A passageway to provide access for installation and maintenance of
underground pipes and valves.
pipe spool
A prefabricated section of pipe.
Pipeliner
In-line grinder/cutter device by Robbins Myers, Inc.
pipette
A calibrated glass tube used to deliver prescribed volumes of liquids,
usually less than 10 mL.
Pista®
Vortex type grit removal system by Smith & Loveless, Inc.
piston pump
A reciprocating pump whose piston normally incorporates a sliding
seal with the cylinder wall.
Pit Hog®
Sludge pumping system by Liquid Waste Technology, Inc.
pitch
(1) The length of one link of chain measured from pin centerline to pin
centerline. (2) The distance between the centers of adjacent tubes.
pitot tube
Flow measurement device that measures the velocity head of a liquid
stream as the difference between the static head and the total head. Also called
a “pitot gauge.”
Pittchlor
High-test calcium hypochlorite product by PPG Industries, Inc.
pitting
Localized corrosion-causing attacks over small surface areas which may
reach considerable depths.
PIV
Positive inﬁnitely variable.
pK
The reciprocal of the logarithm of the ionization constant of a chemical
compound.
Planet
Rotary distributor for ﬁxed ﬁlm reactor by Simon-Hartley, Ltd.
plankton
Small, passively ﬂoating or weakly swimming animal and plant life of
a body of water.
plaque-forming units (PFU)
A measurement of viral particles where one PFU is
equivalent to approximately 20 to 300 viral particles.
PLASdek
Cooling tower ﬁll by Munters.
plasma
A high temperature, partially ionized gas which is electrically conductive.
plasma arc furnace
A high temperature furnace utilizing a plasma arc heater, or
torch, for the destruction of hazardous gaseous, liquid, and solid wastes.
plate count
The number of microbe colonies that develop on a laboratory test dish
after a ﬁxed incubation period.
plate settler
Clariﬁer with enhanced sedimentation through the use of steeply
inclined plates.
plate tectonics
The scientiﬁc theory that the earth’s surface consists of large slabs,
or plates, whose constant motion explains continental drift, the formation of
mountains, and other geological changes.
plate tower scrubber
An air pollution control device that neutralizes hydrogen
chloride gas by bubbling alkaline water through holes in a series of metal
plates.
plate-and-frame press
A batch process dewatering device in which sludge is
pumped through a series of parallel plates ﬁtted with ﬁlter cloth.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Plate-Pak®
Vane mist eliminators by ACS Industries, Inc.
Platetube
Porous diffuser plates by Walker Process Equipment.
PLC
Programmable logic controller.
PLIRRA
Pollution Liability Insurance and Risk Retention Act.
PLM
Polarized light microscopy.
plug ﬂow
Flow conditions where ﬂuid and ﬂuid particles pass through a tank and
are discharged in the same sequence that they enter.
plug ﬂow reactor (PFR)
A reactor in which the residence time for a given input,
or plug, is equal to the theoretical hydraulic retention time.
plugging factor
See “silt density index (SDI).”
plume
The measurable or visible impact of a discharge into the air or a body of water.
plunger pump
A reciprocating pump whose plunger does not contact the cylinder
walls but enters and withdraws from it through packing glands.
Plus 5
Air diffuser by USFilter/Diffused Air Products Group.
Plus 150™
Laboratory water system by USFilter Corp.
plutonium
A radioactive metallic element chemically similar to uranium.
pluvial
Of, or having to do with, rain.
pluvial lake
A lake formed during a period of abundant rainfall.
pluviometer
A rain gauge.
PM
(1) Particulate matter. (2) Preventative maintenance.
PM2.5
Airborne particulate matter having a diameter equal or smaller than 2.5
microns.
PM10
Airborne particulate matter having a diameter equal to or smaller than 10
microns.
PM15
Airborne particulate matter having a diameter equal or smaller than 15 microns.
PM-100®
Clay ﬁltration media by Colloid Environmental Technologies Co.
PMD™
Pipe mounted diffuser by Environmental Dynamics Inc.
PMR
Pollutant mass rate.
PNA
Polynuclear aromatics.
pneumoconiosis
Lung disease that results from chronic exposure to dusts.
PO*WW*ER™
Wastewater treatment process to reduce residual solids by USFil-
ter/Gas Technologies.
POC
(1) Particles of complete combustion. (2) See “particulate organic carbon
(POC).”
Pocket Pal
Portable pH tester by Hach Co.
pocosin
A low, ﬂat swamp on the coastal plain of the Southeastern U.S.
PODR
Point of diminishing returns.
POE
See “point-of-entry (POE).”
pogonip
Native American term for a dense winter fog containing frozen ice par-
ticles, occurring in deep mountain valleys of the western U.S., particularly in
the Sierra Nevada mountains.
pOH
The negative logarithm of the hydroxyl ion concentration approximated by
the relationship: 14 minus pH = pOH.
POHC
See “principal organic hazardous constituent (POHC).”
point source discharge (PS)
A pipe, ditch, channel, or other container from
which pollutants may be discharged.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

point-of-entry (POE)
Location of a water treatment or water quality device at the
point drinking water enters a house or building for the purpose of reducing
the contaminants in the drinking water distributed throughout the house or
building.
point-of-use (POU)
Location of a water treatment or water quality device at a
faucet in an individual household.
polar zone
The high altitude regions of the earth located from latitude 66°34′
north and 66°34′ south to the poles.
polder
An area of dry, low-lying land that has been reclaimed from a body of
water and is maintained through the use of dikes. In the Netherlands, polders
are created for agricultural land.
Pol-E-Z®
Emulsion polymer to enhance solids/liquid separation by Calgon Corp.
pollutant
A substance, organism, or energy form present in amounts that impair
or threaten an ecosystem to the extent that its current or future uses are
precluded.
Pollutant Standard Index (PSI)
Measure of adverse health effects of air pollu-
tion levels in major cities.
pollution
The presence of a pollutant in the environment.
Pollutrol
Former equipment manufacturer.
Polly Pig
Internal pipeline cleaner by Knapp Polly Pig, Inc.
Polyad™
Fluidized bed VOC emission control system by Weatherly.
Poly-Alum
Polymerized inorganic coagulant by Rochester Midland.
polyamide
A molecular chain polymer made of amide linkages used in the con-
struction of thin ﬁlm composite reverse osmosis membranes.
PolyBlend®
Polymer mixing/feeding products by USFilter/Stranco.
PolyBoss™
Instrument to check settling velocity in clariﬁer feedwell by WesTech
Engineering Inc.
Polybrake
Cleaning product for removal of polymers by AquaPro, Inc.
polychaete worm
A small worm common in seas and estuaries often chosen for
bioassays of coastal regions.
polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB)
Class of hazardous organic compounds consid-
ered probable carcinogens formerly used in the manufacture of electrical
insulation and heating and cooling equipment.
polyelectrolyte
A compound consisting of a chain of organic molecules used as
coagulants or coagulant aids. See also “polymer.”
polyethylene
An inexpensive plastic with a low coefﬁcient of friction and excellent
abrasion, impact, and chemical resistance.
Poly-Filter
Plate and frame ﬁlter press by the former Clow Corp.
Poly-Fine
Absolute rated cartridge ﬁlters by USFilter/Filtration & Separation.
polyhaline
A term used to characterize water with a salinity of 18,000 to 30,000
mg/L due to ocean salts.
Polyjet
Flow control valve by Bailey Polyjet.
PolyKleen®
ABS ﬁlter underdrain by Baker Process.
Poly-Links
Nonmetallic sludge collector chain by NRG, Inc.
Polymair
Package polymer processing system by Acrison, Inc.
polymaleic acid
A high performance scale control additive.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Polymaster®
Polymer mixing/feeding system by Neptune Chemical Pump Co.
PolyMate®
Liquid polymer blending/feeding system by Neptune Chemical Pump Co.
PolyMax
Polymer mixing/feeding products by Semblex, Inc.
polymer
(1) High molecular weight compounds derived by the recurring addition
of similar molecules. (2) Common term for “polyelectrolyte.”
polymer activity
The percent of a polymer’s molecular weight available to react
with and ﬂocculate solids particles.
Polymer Piping & Materials
Former equipment manufacturer whose products are
now offered by Jaeger Products, Inc.
polymerization
A chemical reaction in which simple molecules combine to form
larger, more complex molecules.
Polymetrics
Membrane products company acquired by USFilter.
Polymetron™
Water analyzer product line by Zellweger Analytics, Inc.
PolyMixer
Polymer mixing/feeding system by Hofﬂand Environmental Inc.
PolyMizer®
Centrifuge by Alfa Laval Separation, Inc.
polyna
An expanse of water surrounded by ice.
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
See “polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons.”
polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH)
A group of aromatic compounds,
many of which are carcinogenic, formed by industrial processes and during
the burning of gasoline, coal, and other substances.
Polypak
Polymer feeding system by BIF.
polypeptide
A compound consisting of multiple linked amino acids.
polyphosphates
Phosphate compounds used as sequestration agents to prevent
formation of iron, manganese, and calcium carbonate deposits.
Poly-Pleat™
Filter cartridges by Harmsco Filtration Products.
PolyPress
Plate and frame ﬁlter press by Star Systems, Inc.
PolyPro
Dry polymer feed system by AquaPro, Inc.
Polypure
Water treatment chemical group of Polydyne, Inc.
PolyRex
Polymer feed system by Bran+Luebbe.
polysaline
A term used to characterize water with a salinity of 18,000 to 30,000
mg/L due to land-derived salts.
Polyseed®
Bacterial culture for BOD seeding by Polybac Corp.
Poly-Stage™
Modular air scrubber system by USFilter/Davis Process.
polysulfone
A synthetic thermoplastic polymer used in the manufacture of ultra-
ﬁltration membranes and in thin ﬁlm composite and charged polysulfone
reverse osmosis membranes.
PolyThickener
Waste-activated sludge thickener by Walker Process Equipment.
Polytox™
Biological toxicity test kit by Polybac Corp.
PolyTube
Tubular air diffuser formerly offered by Walker Process Equipment.
polyurethane
An elastomer with tensile strength and abrasion resistance greater
than that of natural rubber and capable of being formulated for injection
molding or casting.
polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
A thermoplastic with excellent corrosion resistance
that is widely used to manufacture pipe and biological ﬁlter media.
POM
See “particulate organic matter (POM).”
pond
A body of water smaller than a lake, often formed artiﬁcially.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

pond scum
A mass of ﬁlamentous algae that forms a green scum on the surface
of ponds.
ponding
See “pooling.”
Pond-X®
Odor control product by NuTech Environmental Corp.
Pontoon
Floating cover for anaerobic digesters formerly offered by USFil-
ter/Envirex.
pooling
The formation of pools of liquid on the surface of a clogged ﬁlter.
population
(1) A group of interbreeding organisms occupying a particular space.
(2) The number of humans or other living creatures in a designated area.
population at risk
A population subgroup that is more likely to be exposed to a
chemical, or is more sensitive to the chemical, than the general population.
population equivalent (PE)
The daily wastewater typically produced by one per-
son expressed in terms of BOD; i.e., 60g of BOD per population equivalent.
Porcupine
Indirect contact sludge dryer by Bethlehem Corp.
PORI
Former name of USFilter Recovery Services.
Poro-Carbon
Automatic liquid ﬁlter system by R.P. Adams Co., Inc.
Poro-Edge
Automatic water strainer by R.P. Adams Co., Inc.
porosity
The ratio of void volume to total bulk volume.
Poro-Stone
Automatic liquid ﬁlter system by R.P. Adams Co., Inc.
porous disk diffuser
A circular, ﬁne bubble aeration device of porous plastic or
ceramic construction.
Porta Dike™
Portable spill containment system by Environetics, Inc.
Port-A-Berm™
Portable secondary containment system by Aero Tec Laboratories,
Inc.
Portacel®
Gas chlorination system by F.B. Leopold Co., Inc.
Porta-Cleanse
Submersible mixer for wet well pump station by Flygt.
Porta-Feed®
Chemical handling system by Nalco Chemical Co.
Porta-Pac™
Powdered-activated carbon wet injection system by Norit Americas
Inc.
PortaPump®
Portable, submersible pump by Warren Rupp, Inc.
Porta-Tank
Liquid storage system by Environetics, Inc.
Portland cement
Cement made by heating a slurry of crushed chalk or limestone
and clay to clinker in a kiln before grinding and adding gypsum.
Posi-Clean
Wedgewire straining element by Tate Andale, Inc.
Posirake
Reciprocating rake bar screen formerly offered by USFilter/Zimpro.
positive crankcase ventilation (PCV)
A method of reducing automobile engine
emissions by directing crankcase emissions into the cylinders for combustion.
positive displacement pump
A pump where liquid is drawn into a cavity and its
pressure is increased, forcing the liquid through an outlet port into the dis-
charge line.
Positive Seal
Rotary distributor for trickling ﬁlter by Walker Process Equipment.
post chlorination
Addition of chlorine after completion of other treatment pro-
cesses.
post treatment
Treatment of ﬁnished water or wastewater to further enhance its
quality.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

post-closure
The time period following the shutdown of a waste management or
manufacturing facility, which, for monitoring purposes, is often considered to
be 30 years.
potable reuse
The beneﬁcial use of highly treated reclaimed water toward aug-
mentation of potable water supply.
potable water
See “drinking water.”
potassium permanganate
A crystalline salt of potassium and manganese used
for taste, odor control, and iron/manganese oxidation. Chemical formula is
KMnO4, also called “purple salt.”
potential of hydrogen
See “pH.”
potentially responsible party (PRP)
An individual or company identiﬁed as
potentially liable for cleanup or payment for cost of cleanup of a hazardous
waste site.
potentiation
The effect of one chemical to increase the effect of another chemical.
potentiometric surface
The level to which water will rise in cased wells or other
cased excavations into aquifers.
POTW
See “publicly owned treatment works (POTW).”
POU
See “point-of-use (POU).”
POU/POE
Point-of-use/point-of-entry.
pounds per square inch, absolute (psia)
The total pressure in a system which is
the sum of the gage pressure and atmospheric pressure and is expressed in
terms of the pounds of force exerted per square inch.
pounds per square inch, gage (psig)
The pressure measured by a gage and
expressed in terms of the pounds of force exerted per square inch.
pour point
The lowest temperature at which a liquid will pour.
Powder Pop®
Chlorine test dispenser by HF Scientiﬁc, Inc.
powdered activated carbon (PAC)
A powdered form of activated carbon fed as
a slurry to water to absorb organics, particularly taste and odor-causing con-
stituents.
Powdex®
Combination ion exchange and ﬁltration unit by Graver Co.
Power Backwash™
Concurrent air and water ﬁlter backwash system by Tetra
Process Technologies.
Power Brush™
Internal pipeline cleaner by Pipeline Pigging Products, Inc.
Power Mizer™
Multi-stage centrifugal blower by Spencer Turbine Co.
Power Units™
Magnetic pipe treatment unit by Aqua Magnetics International, Inc.
PoweRake
Reciprocating rake bar screen by the former EnviroFab, Inc.
Powerhouse®
Alkaline cleaner/degreaser by Pro Products, Corp.
Powermatic
Reciprocating rake bar screen by Brackett Geiger.
Powerpak™
Filter press by Flo Trend Systems, Inc.
PowerSewer™
Low pressure sewer by Interon Corp.
PoweRupp®
Electrically driven diaphragm pump by Warren Rupp, Inc.
Powrclean
Front cleaned multiple rake bar screen by USFilter/Aerator Products.
Powr-Trols
Custom engineered pump station motor control panel by Healy-Ruff
Co.
Poz-O-Lite®
A lightweight aggregate by Conversion Systems, Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Poz-O-Tec®
Scrubber sludge and stabilizing additive mixture that produces a sta-
ble, nonleaching, monolithic mass of low permeability by Conversion Systems,
Inc.
pozzolonic
Finely divided materials such as ﬂy ash that aid in forming compounds
possessing cementitious properties.
ppb
Parts per billion.
PPE
See “personal protective equipment (PPE).”
ppm
See “parts per million (ppm).”
ppmv
Parts per million by volume.
ppmw
Parts per million by weight.
PPP
Public-private partnership.
ppt
Parts per thousand.
PQ®
Sodium silicate corrosion inhibitor by PQ Corp.
PQL
Practical quantitation limit. Generally the same as “estimated quantitation
limit.”
Praestol®
Polymer products by Stockhausen, Inc.
preaeration
A preliminary treatment process in which wastewater is aerated to
remove gases, add oxygen, promote ﬂotation of grease, and/or aid coagulation.
prechlorination
The application of chlorine before other treatment processes.
precipitate
A solid that separates from a solution.
precipitation
The phenomenon that occurs when a substance held in solution
passes out of solution into a solid form.
Precipitator™
Package treatment plants by USFilter/Warren.
Precision
Fine bubble tube diffuser by USFilter/Diffused Air Products Group.
precoat ﬁlter
Filter using a thin layer of very ﬁne material, such as diatomaceous
earth, to coat the ﬁlter surface before ﬁltration cycles.
precursor
A substance or compound from which another substance or compound
is formed. Usually refers to an organic compound capable of being formed
into a trihalomethane.
preﬁlter
A ﬁltration device located upstream of the main ﬁltration process.
PreFLEX®
Skid-mounted pretreatment system for reverse osmosis and deminer-
alizer systems by USFilter/Rockford.
preliminary assessment
The process of collecting and reviewing available infor-
mation about a known or suspected waste site or release.
preliminary treatment
Treatment steps including comminution, screening, grit
removal, preaeration, and/or ﬂow equalization which prepare wastewater inﬂu-
ent for further treatment.
Prerostal
System of adjusting pumping volume to inﬂow rate by Envirotech Pump-
systems.
prescriptive
Water rights which are acquired by diverting water and putting it to
use in accordance with speciﬁed procedures.
presedimentation
A pretreatment process used to remove sand, gravel, or other
gritty material before subsequent treatment.
Preservol™
Reverse osmosis membrane preservative by Professional Water Tech-
nologies, Inc.
pressate
The liquid waste stream from a ﬁlter press.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Pressﬂex
Dewatering screen fabric by Geschmay GmbH.
PressMaster™
Hydraulic sludge dewatering unit by Baker Process.
pressure drop
See “headloss.”
Pressure Exchanger
Energy recovery device for seawater reverse osmosis unit by
Energy Recovery, Inc.
pressure ﬁlter
Filter unit enclosed in a vessel which may be operated under
pressure.
pressure ﬁltration
The process of removing solids from a liquid using external
pressure to force the liquid through a ﬁlter media.
pressure head
The amount of energy in water due to water pressure.
pressure sewers
A system of pipes in which water, wastewater, or other liquid is
pumped to a higher elevation.
pressure-swing adsorption (PSA)
A process using an adsorbent to separate com-
ponents of a gas mixture, sometimes used to separate oxygen from air to form
pure oxygen.
Pressveyor
Hydraulic screenings press/conveyor by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
Prestex
Filter belt for belt ﬁlter press by Sefar America, Inc.
Presto-Tek
Flowmeter product line of Newport Electronics.
presumptive test
The ﬁrst of three steps in the analysis of water and wastewater
for the presence of fecal bacteria. After a sample is inoculated and incubated,
the presence of acid and gas is an indication of a positive test and the water
is presumed to be contaminated. This test is followed by a conﬁrmed test and
a completed test.
Pretreat Plus™
Antiscalant/dispersant by King Lee Technologies.
Pretreat SDP™
Antiscalant for small capacity RO systems by King Lee Technolo-
gies.
pretreatment
(1) The initial water or wastewater treatment process that precedes
primary treatment processes. (2) The treatment of industrial wastes to reduce
or alter the characteristics of the pollutants prior to discharge to a POTW.
prevalent levels
Levels of airborne contaminant occurring under normal conditions.
prevention of signiﬁcant deterioration (PSD)
A provision of the Clean Air Act
that establishes a minimum air quality baseline for particular pollutants in
speciﬁc areas.
primary clariﬁer
Sedimentation basin that precedes secondary wastewater treatment.
primary contaminant
A drinking water contaminant with health-related effects.
primary efﬂuent ﬁltration (PEF)
The use of granular media or synthetic material
ﬁltration to remove contaminants from primary efﬂuent prior to discharge.
primary industry categories
The 34 types of industrial facilities that require the
best available technology for toxic water pollutants under the Clean Water Act.
primary MCL
EPA-mandated maximum contaminant level in drinking water
based on health effects.
primary pollutant
A pollutant that exists in the environment in the same form as
when it was released.
primary sedimentation
Principal form of primary wastewater treatment utilizing
clariﬁers to reduce the solids loading on subsequent treatment processes.
primary sludge
Sludge produced in a primary waste treatment unit.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

primary standards
National ambient air quality standards designed to protect
human health with an adequate margin for safety.
primary treatment
Treatment steps including sedimentation and/or ﬁne screening
to produce an efﬂuent suitable for biological treatment.
Prima-Sep®
Specialty clariﬁer with tray separator by Graver Co.
Prime Aire
Trash pump by Gorman-Rupp Co.
Primox®
Oxygen injection system for primary sewage by BOC Gases.
Princeton Clearwater
Former equipment manufacturer.
principal organic hazardous constituent (POHC)
Hazardous organic compounds
that may form products of incomplete combustion when incinerated.
prior appropriation
A doctrine of water law that allocates the rights to use water
on a ﬁrst-come ﬁrst-serve basis.
priority pollutants
A list of approximately 126 chemicals identiﬁed as toxic pol-
lutants by the Clean Water Act.
privately owned treatment works
A treatment works that is not owned or oper-
ated by a state or municipality. Not a “POTW.”
privatization
The involvement of nonpublic and entrepreneurial interests in
project development, ownership, and/or operation of municipal facilities such
as water and wastewater treatment systems.
privy
A pit toilet, also called an “outhouse.”
PRO*ECOLITH
Monolithic regenerative catalytic oxidation product for VOC
abatement by Süd-Chemie Prototech Inc.
PRO*HHC
Halogenated hydrocarbon catalyst by Süd-Chemie Prototech Inc.
PRO*PEL
Bead-type air pollution control catalysts by Süd-Chemie Prototech Inc.
PRO*RCO
Metal coated regenerative catalytic oxidation product for VOC abate-
ment by Süd-Chemie Prototech Inc.
PRO*VOC
Ceramic and metal monolithic catalyst products for VOC abatement
by Süd-Chemie Prototech Inc.
Probiotics™
Lagoon sludge oxidation products by Bio Huma Netics, Inc.
ProBlend
Liquid polymer feed system by AquaPro, Inc.
process wastewater
Wastewater generated during manufacture or production pro-
cesses.
process water
Water that is used for, or comes in contact with, an end product or
the materials used in an end product.
Prochem®
Agitator and mixer products by Chemics, Inc.
produced water
All waters produced during the production of crude oil and gas.
product staging
Reverse osmosis process conﬁguration where the product from one
stage is used as feedwater on a subsequent stage to improve product water quality.
product water
Water produced as a result of treatment or desalination processes.
products of incomplete combustion (PIC)
Carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons,
and other organic matter generated when organic materials are burned.
Professional Services Group
Former group merged into USFilter/Operating
Services.
proﬁle wire
Term used to describe specially shaped wire that is generally trian-
gular or trapezoidal in cross section. Also called “wedgewire.”
Proﬁler
Sludge blanket level and suspended solids monitor by Mt. Fury Co., Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

progressing cavity pump (PCP)
Pump used for viscous ﬂuids, including sludge,
that consists of a single-threaded shaft rotor rotating in a double-threaded
rubber stator.
progressive cavity pump
See “progressing cavity pump (PCP).”
ProGuard
Backwashable cartridge ﬁlters by ProGuard Filtration Systems.
Promal
Pearlitic malleable iron chain material by USFilter/Envirex.
ProMix™
Polymer wetting and blending unit by BlenTech Inc.
ProPack
Random trickling ﬁlter media by the former Gray Engineering Co.
ProPak™
Sampling system by Isco, Inc.
propellant
Liquid in a self-pressurized pesticide product that expels the active
ingredient from its container.
prophylaxis
The observance of procedures necessary to prevent disease.
proportional weir
A weir whose discharge is directly proportional to the head.
Proportioneer
Mixer by Lightnin.
Propulsair
Aspirating aerator by Baker Process.
ProScreen®
Trommel screen by Knight Manufacturing Corp.
ProSep
Membrane treatment system for industrial wastes by PTI Advanced
Filtration.
Prosonic™
Ultrasonic level control system by Endress+Hauser.
Prosser/Enpro
Pump product line by Crane Pumps & Systems.
ProTec RO™
Powder antifoulant by King Lee Technologies.
ProTechtor™
Headworks grease and grit removal system by Hi-Tech Environ-
mental, Inc.
Protect
Portable carbon absorber by Waterlink/Barnebey Sutcliffe.
protein
Any of a large class of complex nitrogenous compounds that contains one
or more polypetide molecules and occur in all animal and vegetable matter
and are essential to life.
Protista
The class of living organisms that includes algae, bacteria, and protozoa.
Protoc
Total organic carbon analyzers by Tytronics, Inc.
protoplast
The living substance of a plant or cell, excluding the cell wall.
Prototech
Former name of Süd-Chemie Prototech Inc.
protozoa
A group of microorganisms including amoebas, ﬂagellates, and ciliates
that feed on bacteria and other protists and reproduce by binary ﬁssion.
ProTwin®
Sludge spreader by Knight Manufacturing Corp.
PRP
See “potentially responsible party (PRP).”
PS
See “point source discharge (PS).”
PSA
See “pressure-swing adsorption (PSA).”
PSD
See “prevention of signiﬁcant deterioration (PSD).”
PSES
Pretreatment Standards for Existing Sources.
PSEU
Pollutant Speciﬁc Emissions Unit.
pseudo-hardness
The action exhibited by sea, brackish, and other waters contain-
ing high concentrations of sodium that interferes with the normal behavior of
soap.
pseudomonas
A common rod-shaped aerobic bacteria.
PSG
Professional Services Group, now a part of USFilter/Operating Services.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

psi
Pounds per square inch.
PSI
See “Pollutant Standard Index (PSI).”
psia
See “pounds per square inch, absolute (psia).”
psig
See “pounds per square inch, gage (psig).”
PSM
(1) Point source monitoring. (2) Process safety management.
PSNS
Pretreatment Standards for New Sources.
PSRP
Process to signiﬁcantly reduce pathogens.
PSU
Primary sampling unit.
Psychoda ﬂies
A small, dark-colored ﬂy that creates a nuisance by breeding in
trickling ﬁlter beds. Commonly known as “ﬁlter ﬂies.”
psychrometer
An instrument used to determine the relative humidity and vapor
tension of the atmosphere.
psychrophiles
Bacteria that grow best at temperatures below 20°C.
PTE
(1) Potential to emit. (2) Permanent total enclosure.
ptomaine
Any of a class of alkaloid substances formed in decaying animal or
vegetable matter by bacterial action on proteins.
ptomaine poisoning
Food poisoning caused by bacteria, erroneously thought to
be caused by ptomaines.
PTS
See “permanent threshold shift (PTS).”
public utility
A private business organization subject to government regulation
that provides an essential product or service such as water, electricity, trans-
portation, or communication to the public.
public water system (PWS)
A system that pipes water for human consumption
to at least 25 people or has 15 or more surface connections.
publicly owned treatment works (POTW)
Treatment works owned by a state or
municipality, including sewers, pipes, or other conveyances used to convey
wastewater.
PUC
Public Utilities Commission.
pug mill
A grinder used to reduce the size of solid waste or sludge to facilitate
further treatment or disposal.
Pullman Power Products
Chimney and storage silo product line by Wheelabrator
Air Pollution Control, Inc.
PullUp
Removable aeration header and drop pipe assembly by USFilter/Aerator
Products.
Pulsapak®
Potable water treatment plant by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
pulsation dampener
A device using air or other compressible gas to absorb pres-
sure irregularities and induce uniform ﬂow in pump suction or discharge lines.
Pulsator®
Solids contact clariﬁer by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
PULSAtrol®
Microprocessor based system controller by Pulsafeeder, Inc.
Pulsatron®
Electronic metering pump by Pulsafeeder, Inc.
Pulsemate™
Metering pumps and controls by USFilter/Wallace & Tiernan.
Pulse-Mix®
Short-term backwashing process to regenerate sand ﬁlter media by
USFilter/Zimpro.
pump
A mechanical device used to apply pressure to a ﬂuid to cause its ﬂow.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

pump curves
A set of graphical pump characteristics that represent pump perfor-
mance by comparing total discharge head, net positive suction head, and
efﬁciency relative to capacity.
pump stage
The number of impellers in a centrifugal pump.
pump station
A chamber that contains pumps, valves, and electrical equipment
necessary to pump water or wastewater.
Pumpak
Standard pump control systems by Healy-Ruff Co.
Purac
Product line of Waterlink Separations, Inc.
Puraﬁlter™
Air ﬁlters by Puraﬁl, Inc.
Puratex™
Cartridge ﬁlter by Osmonics, Inc.
PurCycle™
VOC removal system by Purus Corp.
pure oxygen process
Variation of the activated sludge process using pure molec-
ular oxygen for microbial respiration rather than atmospheric oxygen.
Purelab Plus™
Laboratory water puriﬁcation system by USFilter Corp.
Pureone®
Laboratory water system by USFilter Corp.
Puresep®
Resin separation process by USFilter/Warren.
Purgamix
Sludge mixing and heating system by Waste-Tech, Inc.
Purge Saver™
Groundwater analyzer by QED Environmental Systems, Inc.
Purifax®
System using wet oxidation process for sludge stabilization by BIF.
puriﬁed water
Bottled water that has undergone signiﬁcant treatment prior to
bottling. See also “USP-puriﬁed water.”
Puritan
Fluid recovery treatment system for spent coolant and oils by Waterlink
Biological Systems.
purl
To ﬂow in ripples with a murmuring sound.
Puroﬁne™
Ion exchange resin by Purolite Co.
PURPA
Public Utilities Regulatory Policies Act.
purple salt
See “potassium permanganate.”
Purspring
Bioﬁltration system by Bioway America.
Pusher™
Dewatering screw press by USFilter/Dewatering Systems.
putrefaction
The decomposition of organic matter by bacteria, fungi, and oxidation
which results in the formation of noxious products and/or foul-smelling gases.
putrescible
Organic matter that is likely to result in a rotten, foul-smelling product
as it undergoes decay or decomposition.
Putzmeister
Sludge cake pump marketed by USFilter/Asdor.
PV
See “pervaporation (PV).”
PVC
See “polyvinyl chloride (PVC).”
PVDF
Polyvinylidene ﬂuoride.
PWMP®
Pure water management program for outsourced water services by USFil-
ter Corp.
PWS
See “public water system (PWS).”
PWSS
Public water supply system.
PWT
Professional Water Technologies, Inc.
Pyramed™
Direct retention ﬁlter underdrain system by WesTech Engineering Inc.
pyrite
A mineral containing sulfur and iron, frequently found in coal.
Pyroﬂuid®
Fluidized bed incinerator by USFilter/Krüger (North America) and OTV.
pyrogen
Cell material from bacteria that produces fevers in mammals.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Pyrolox™
Granular media for removal of iron, manganese, and hydrogen sulﬁde
by Clack Corp.
pyrolysis
The chemical decomposition of a material by heating in oxygen-deﬁcient
conditions.
Pyrospout
Fluid bed combustor/incinerator by Process Combustion Corp.
Python Press
High pressure ﬁltration and dewatering device by Waste-Tech, Inc.
Q
Q·E·D plus™
Mixer by Chemineer, Inc.
QA
See “quality assurance (QA).”
QC
See “quality control (QC).”
QL-1™
Ultraviolet disinfection system by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
QLS
Quick-lock sprocket by Budd Co.
Q-Pac™
Random plastic media by Lantec Products, Inc.
Q-Tracker™
Sewer collection ﬂow monitor by Badger Meter, Inc.
Quadra Press
Plate and frame ﬁlter press by Aqua Care Systems.
Quadra-Clean™
Vertical basket batch type centrifuge by Western States Machine
Co.
Quadra-Kleen
Sand ﬁlter backwash system by Culligan International Corp.
Quadramatic III®
Automatic batch type centrifuge by Western States Machine Co.
Quadrant™
Thermal oxidizer by Catalytic Products International.
Quadrasep
Integrated wastewater treatment system by Blace Filtronics, Inc.
Quadricell®
Mechanical gas induction ﬂotation separator by USFilter/Whittier.
Quadruﬁl
Gravity ﬁlter system by Vulcan Industries, Inc.
quagga mussel
Freshwater mollusk that can foul water intake screens and piping
by attaching itself to a solid structure, eventually restricting ﬂow.
quaking bog
A wholly or partially ﬂoating bog of peat that shakes when walked
upon.
qualitative
The general description of a substance without specifying its exact
amount or concentration.
quality assurance (QA)
A deﬁnitive plan for operation that speciﬁes the measures
used to produce products or data of known precision and bias.
quality control (QC)
Set of measurements within an analysis methodology to
assure that the process is in control.
Quanti-Cult™
Quality control test organisms by IDEXX Laboratories, Inc.
quantitative
Description of a substance in exact terms.
Quanti-Tray™
Water sample test kit by IDEXX Laboratories, Inc.
Quantum®
Floating aerator by Air-O-Lator Corp.
quart
A liquid and dry unit of measure equal to a quarter of a U.S. gallon or 2 pints.
quaternary ammonium
A basic chemical group [N(CH3)3
+] which provides the
site of activity of certain anion exchange resins.
quench
To cool suddenly by immersion in water or oil.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

quench tank
A water-ﬁlled tank used to cool incinerator residues or hot materials
during industrial processes.
quicklime
A calcium oxide material produced by calcining limestone to liberate
carbon dioxide, also called “calcined lime” or “pebble lime,” commonly used
for pH adjustment. Chemical formula is CaO.
Quick-Purge®
Soil and groundwater remediation technology by Integrated Envi-
ronmental Solutions, Inc.
quicksand
A loose, wet, unstable sand deposit caused by the upward pressure of
sand, and which may engulf an object.
Quickwipe™
Quartz lamp cleaning technology used in UV disinfection systems
by Calgon Carbon Corp.
Quik-Clamp
Clamp-on spray nozzle by USFilter/Rex & Link-Belt Products.
Quik-Solid®
Granulated absorbent polymer by Colloid Environmental Technolo-
gies Co.
R
R&B Filtration
Sludge dewatering equipment product line of Baker Process.
R&D
Research and development.
RA
(1) Reasonable alternative. (2) Regulatory alternatives. (3) Regulatory analy-
sis. (4) Remedial action. (5) Resource allocation. (6) Risk analysis. (7) Risk
assessment.
rabble arms
Rotating rake arms used to scrape sludge in a multiple hearth furnace.
RAC
Radiation Advisory Committee.
race track
See “oxidation ditch.”
RACM
(1) See “reasonably available control measures (RACM).” (2) See “regu-
lated asbestos-containing material (RACM).”
Racod™
Biological sensor to provide a rapid indication of BOD by USFilter/Wal-
lace & Tiernan.
RACT
See “reasonably available control technology (RACT).”
rad
Radiation absorbed dose. A measure of the absorbed dose of radiation.
Radial Filter
Tertiary ﬁltration system by Waterlink/Aero-Mod Systems.
radial ﬂow
Direction of ﬂow from either the center to the periphery or the periph-
ery to center.
Radial Plate Dryer
Sludge drying system by B-H Process Systems.
radial well
A well system where one or more cylindrical screens are driven hor-
izontally into a water-bearing stratum, radiating from a central sump.
radiation
The transfer of energy by means of electromagnetic waves or high-speed
particles.
radiation sickness
A sickness that results from overexposure to radiation whose
symptoms may include nausea, bleeding, hair loss, and death.
radiation standards
Regulations that set maximum exposure limits for protection
of the public from radioactive materials.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

radical
A combination of atoms in a molecule that remains unchanged throughout
most chemical reactions.
Radicator
Solid waste incinerator by Hitachi Metals America, Ltd.
radioactive
A description of an unstable atom that undergoes spontaneous disin-
tegration and gives off radiant energy in the form of particles or rays.
radioactive material
A material that spontaneously emits ionizing radiation hav-
ing a speciﬁc activity greater than 0.002 microcuries per gram.
radioactivity
The spontaneous decay or disintegration of an atomic nucleus that
is accompanied by radiation.
radioisotopes
Chemical variants of an element with potentially oncogenic, terato-
genic, and mutagenic effects on the human body.
radionuclide
An atom that spontaneously undergoes radioactive decay.
radius of vulnerability zone
The maximum distance from the point of release of
a hazardous substance in which the airborne concentration could reach the
level of concern under speciﬁed weather conditions.
radon
A radioactive gas produced from the decay of radium which may be inhaled
when the gas is released from groundwater, often during showering, bathing,
or cooking.
radon daughters
Short-lived radioactive compounds produced during the decay
of radon that decay into longer-lived lead isotopes. Also called radon progeny
or radon decay products.
RADS
See “reactive airways dysfunction syndrome (RADS).”
radwaste
Radioactive waste.
rafﬁnate
The extracted waste stream containing contaminants in a solvent extrac-
tion process.
railway softening
See “excess lime-soda softening.”
rain forest
See “tropical rain forest.”
Rainlogger
Stormwater sampling unit by American Sigma, Inc.
Rake-O-Matic
Hydraulically operated, reciprocating rake bar screen formerly
offered by BIF.
Ram®
Waste compactor by S&G Enterprises, Inc.
RAMP
Rural Abandoned Mine Program.
Rampactor
Compaction device by SRS Industrial Engineering.
Ram-Rod
Dewatering screw press by Ketema, Inc.
RAMS
Regional Air Monitoring System.
Ramtube®
Reverse pulse self-cleaning baghouse by Farr Co.
Ranney®
Well screen and caisson intake products by Layne Christensen, Ranney
Division.
Ranney Intake
Surface water intake system utilizing a passive screen/caisson
arrangement by Layne Christensen, Ranney Division.
RAP
Remedial action plan.
RaPID Assay™
Reagent kit for ﬁeld soil analysis by Strategic Diagnostics, Inc.
Rapid Decanter®
Solid bowl centrifuge by Krauss Maffei Corp.
Rapid Gravity Dewatering™
Inclined gravity ﬁlter for sludge dewatering by Wil-
Flow, Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

rapid mix
A physical water treatment process that involves rapid and complete
mixing of coagulants or conditioning chemicals.
rapid sand ﬁlter
Granular media ﬁlter in which water ﬂows downward through
a sand ﬁlter bed at rates typically ranging from 80 to 320 L/min/m2 (2 to
8 gpm/sq ft) of surface area.
Rapidor
Pressure leaf ﬁlter by Liquid-Solids Separation Corp.
RAPS
Regional Air Pollution Study.
RAS
See “return activated sludge (RAS).”
rasp
A machine that grinds waste into a manageable size and controls odors.
RATA
See “relative accuracy test audit (RATA).”
rated capacity
The basis for calculating the period of time or volume of treated
product delivered by a water softener, demineralizer, or ﬁlter between regen-
erations, backwashing, or servicing.
RatedAeration®
Circular steel-activated sludge wastewater treatment plant for-
merly offered by USFilter/Envirex.
rate-of-ﬂow controller
A device that automatically controls the rate of ﬂow of a
ﬂuid.
Ratio
Turbidimeter by Hach Co.
RatioFlo™
Flow-to-polymer ratio valve by USFilter/Stranco.
raw sewage
Untreated wastewater and its contents.
raw sludge
Undigested sludge recently removed from a sedimentation basin.
raw water
Untreated surface or groundwater.
Raymond
Sludge incinerator formerly offered by GL&V/Dorr-Oliver, Inc.
Raymond Process
An aquifer bioremediation technology where groundwater is
recovered from the aquifer, treated, amended with nutrients and oxygen, and
reinjected.
RaySolv
Product group of CSM Worldwide/RaySolv.
Raysorb
Activated carbon VOC control system by CSM Worldwide/RaySolv.
RBC
See “rotating biological contactor (RBC).”
RBCA
See “Risk Based Corrective Action (RBCA).”
RCC
Resource Conservation Co.
RCO
See “regenerative catalytic oxidizer (RCO).”
RCP
Reinforced concrete pipe.
RCRA
See “Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA).”
RCRIS
Resource Conservation and Recovery Information System
RDF
See “refuse derived fuel (RDF).”
rDNA
Recombinant DNA.
RDV
Reference dose values.
Reacher
Reciprocating rake bar screen by Schloss Engineered Equipment.
reactant
Any substance taking part in a chemical reaction.
reaction rate
The rate at which a chemical reaction occurs.
reactivation
The process of removing adsorbed organics and restoring the adsorp-
tive characteristics of an adsorbent, usually by thermal or chemical means.
Reactivator®
Solids contact clariﬁer by Graver Co.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

reactive airways dysfunction syndrome (RADS)
An asthma-like condition
resulting in hyper-responsiveness to inhaled materials that may develop after
long-term exposure to hydrogen sulﬁde.
reactive wall
A permeable vertical wall constructed of a reactive mixture and
installed below grade to treat groundwater that ﬂows through it.
reactive waste
A solid waste that is normally unstable and readily undergoes
violent change, generates toxic gases or fumes, or is capable of detonation or
explosion.
reactivity
The tendency for a chemical substance to combine with other elements
and compounds.
reactor
The container or tank in which a chemical or biological reaction is carried
out.
Reactor-Thickener
Sludge-thickening device using mixers and dewatering screens
by JDV Equipment Corp.
React-pH™
pH-stable-activated carbon by Calgon Carbon Corp.
reaeration
The absorption of oxygen into water under conditions of oxygen
deﬁciency.
reagent
A chemical added to a system to bring about a chemical reaction.
reagent grade water
High purity water suitable for use in making reagents for
use in analytical procedures.
reasonable maximum exposure
The maximum exposure reasonably expected to
occur in a population.
reasonably available control measures (RACM)
A broadly deﬁned term refer-
ring to technological and other measures for pollution control.
reasonably available control technology (RACT)
Control technology that is
reasonably available, technologically and economically feasible, and usually
applied to existing sources in nonattainment areas; in most cases it is less
stringent than new source performance standards.
reboiler
An evaporator-condenser unit which produces secondary steam after con-
densation of primary steam. Used to isolate steam systems and avoid cross
contamination of boiler chemicals.
recalcining
Recovery of lime from water or wastewater sludge, usually with a
multiple hearth furnace.
recarbonation
The reintroduction of carbon dioxide into water, usually during or
after lime-soda softening.
receiving water
Surface water body that receives efﬂuent discharge from a waste-
water treatment plant.
receptor
A molecule that can selectively bind to another substance in the initial
stages of a toxic response.
receptor cell
A nerve ending or group of nerve endings specialized for the recep-
tion of stimuli.
recharge
The natural or artiﬁcial process of replenishing an aquifer.
recharge area
A land area in which water reaches the zone of saturation from
surface inﬁltration.
recharge rate
The quantity of water per unit of time that replenishes or reﬁlls an
aquifer.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

reciprocating rake bar screen
An automatic bar screen with a single rake that is
raised and lowered to clean a stationary bar rack.
reclaimed water
Wastewater that has been treated to a level that allows for its
reuse for a beneﬁcial purpose.
Recla-Mate®
Modular physical chemical treatment plant by USFilter/Microﬂoc.
reclamation
The process of improving or restoring the condition of land or other
material to a better or more useful state.
Recla-Pac
Package biological treatment plant by USFilter/Microﬂoc.
RECOjet
Gas scrubber by USFilter/Gutling.
recombinant bacteria
A microorganism whose genetic makeup has been altered
by deliberate introduction of new genetic elements, and whose offspring also
contain these new genetic elements.
recombinant DNA
The new DNA formed by combining pieces of DNA from
different organisms or cells.
recommended maximum contaminant level (RMCL)
The maximum level of a
contaminant in drinking water at which no known or anticipated adverse effect
on human health would occur, including an adequate margin of safety. Rec-
ommended levels are nonenforceable health goals. See also “maximum con-
taminant level (MCL).”
reconstructed source
Facility in which components are replaced to such an extent
that the ﬁxed capital cost of the new components exceed 50% of the capital
cost of constructing a comparable brand new facility. New-source performance
standards may be applied to sources
record of decision (ROD)
A public document that explains which cleanup alter-
native(s) will be used at National Priorities List sites.
recovery
In reverse osmosis processes, recovery indicates the amount/percentage
of product water recovered from the feed stream.
recovery rate
Percentage of usable recycled materials that have been removed
from the total amount of municipal solid waste generated in a speciﬁc area or
by a speciﬁc business.
recreational waters
Any waterbody used for recreational activities such as swim-
ming, boating, or ﬁshing.
Rectangulaire
Package wastewater treatment unit formerly offered by USFil-
ter/Envirex.
recycle ratio
The recycled ﬂow rate divided by the inﬂuent ﬂow rate in an activated
sludge wastewater treatment system or other process system.
recycling
The process by which recovered materials are transformed into new
products. See also “water recycling.”
red bag waste
Medical or infectious wastes.
Red Fox
Sewage treatment systems for marine applications by Red Fox Environ-
mental, Inc.
Red List
A list of 23 dangerous substances, designated by the U.K., whose dis-
charge to the water should be minimized.
Red Rubber™
Bar screen toothed rake segments of cast urethane by Rubber
Millers, Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

red tide
A reddish discoloration of water caused by an excessive growth of certain
microbes, whose toxins can cause massive ﬁsh kills.
red water
Water whose reddish color usually results from the precipitation of iron
salts or the presence of microbes that depend on iron or manganese.
Red-B-Gone®
Rust and iron stain remover by Pro Products, Corp.
redox potential
See “oxidation-reduction potential (ORP).”
reducing agent
Any substance that can give up electrons in a reaction.
reduction
A chemical reaction where an element or compound gains electrons
causing a decrease in valence.
Redux™
Dissolved air ﬂotation system by ABS Pumps, Inc.
REECO®
Product line of Dürr Environmental, Inc.
reed
Any of a variety of tall, slender grasses grown in wet areas.
reed bed
Tertiary wastewater treatment system where organics remaining in sec-
ondary efﬂuent are used as nutrients in the growth of reeds. Also used for
biosolids volume reduction.
REEF®
Fine pore ﬂoor mounted diffuser by Environmental Dynamics Inc.
Reel Auggie®
Sludge and compost mixer by Knight Manufacturing Corp.
ReelAer
Horizontal cage surface aerator formerly offered by Walker Process
Equipment.
reentry interval
The period of time immediately following the application of a
pesticide during which unprotected workers should not enter a ﬁeld.
reference dose (RfD)
The exposure level of a carcinogenic contaminant thought
to be without signiﬁcant risk to humans when ingested daily over a speciﬁed
time period.
reformulated gasoline (RFG)
Gasoline whose composition has been changed
from conventional gasoline sold in 1990 to reduce air pollutants released from
evaporation and exhaust emissions.
Refotex
Fine bubble diffuser by Refractron Technologies Corp.
Refractite
Ceramic ﬁlter membrane by Refractron Technologies Corp.
refractory
A highly heat resistant material used as a liner in a furnace or incinerator.
refractory organics
Organic substances that are difﬁcult or unable to be metab-
olized in a biological system.
refrigerant
A substance which, by undergoing a phase change, lowers the tem-
perature of its environment. Commercial refrigerants, which include CFCs and
HFCs, are liquids whose latent heat of vaporization results in cooling.
refueling emissions
Emissions released during vehicle refueling.
refuse
All solid waste material discarded as useless.
refuse derived fuel (RDF)
Fuel produced from municipal solid waste through
shredding, pyrolysis, or other methods.
refuse reclamation
Conversion of solid waste into useful products, e.g., compost-
ing organic wastes to make soil conditioners and separating aluminum and
other metals for recycling.
Regal®
Gas chlorinator by Chlorinators, Inc.
Regenair®
Regenerative air blower by Gast Manufacturing, Inc.
regenerant
A chemical solution used to restore the exchange capacity of ion
exchange resin.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

regenerate
The process of restoring exchange capacity of an ion exchange material.
regenerative catalytic oxidizer (RCO)
An emissions control device that utilizes
a catalyst to accomplish VOC oxidation.
Regenerative Environmental Equipment Company
Product line acquired by
Dürr Environmental, Inc.
regenerative thermal oxidizer
(RTO) An emissions control device that utilizes
heat to accomplish VOC oxidation.
Re-Gensorb™
VOC and HAP removal system by M&W Industries, Inc.
Regional Administrator
The administrative head of each of the ten regions orga-
nized by the U.S. EPA.
Reg-U-Flo®
Vortex valve ﬂow control device by H.I.L. Technology, Inc.
regulated asbestos-containing material (RACM)
Friable asbestos material or
nonfriable ACM that will be or has been subjected to sanding, grinding, cutting,
or abrading or has crumbled, been pulverized, or reduced to powder in the
course of demolition or renovation operations.
regulated medical waste
Any solid waste generated in the diagnosis, treatment,
immunization, or research of human beings or animals, or in the production
or testing of related biological products.
Rehydro-Floc™
Aluminum chlorohydrate ﬂocculant solution by Reheis, Inc.
reject
The waste stream containing impurities rejected in a treatment process, most
commonly applied to reverse osmosis, electrodialysis, and ultraﬁltration systems.
reject staging
Reverse osmosis process conﬁguration where the reject from one
stage is used as feedwater on a subsequent stage to increase water recovery.
Also called “brine staging.”
rejection
In reverse osmosis, the percentage of dissolved solids removed from the
feedwater as it passes through the semipermeable membrane. Also called “salt
rejection.”
relative accuracy test audit (RATA)
A comparison between an emissions stack
tester’s readings and readings obtained from a CEM.
relative humidity
The total amount of water vapor present in the air, expressed
as a percentage of the maximum amount that the air could hold at a given
temperature.
release
Any occurrence where a regulated substance discharges, spills, pumps,
pours, emits, injects, dumps, disposes, or escapes into the air, soil, or water.
Reliant™
Conventional package and modular ﬁltration product line by Roberts
Filter Group.
REM
Registered Environmental Manager.
rem
Roentgen equivalent man. A measure of the effective radiation dose absorbed
by human tissue.
remedial action
The actual construction or implementation phase of a Superfund
site cleanup that follows remedial design.
remedial investigation and feasibility study (RI/FS)
An evaluation of the risks
associated with a hazardous waste site that includes the process of selection
of an appropriate remedy.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

remedial response
Long-term action that stops or substantially reduces a release
or threat of a release of hazardous substances that is serious but not an
immediate threat to public health.
remediation
The treatment of waste to make it less toxic and/or less mobile, or
to contain a site to minimize further release.
Remedi-Cat™
Catalytic oxidizer by Global Technologies.
REMS
RCRA Enforcement Management System.
rendering plant
A plant that converts grease and livestock carcasses into fats,
oils, and other products.
renewable resource
A resource that theoretically cannot be totally consumed due
to its ability to reproduce or regenerate.
Renneburg
Sludge dryer manufacturing division of Heyl & Patterson, Inc.
RenovAir™
Bioﬁltration system for VOC reduction by Envirogen.
Reo-Pure
Reverse osmosis system by Great Lakes International, Inc.
reportable quantity (RQ)
Quantity of a hazardous substance that triggers reports
under CERCLA. If a substance exceeds its RQ, the release must be reported
to the National Response Center, the SERC, and community emergency coor-
dinators for areas likely to be affected.
Reporter™
Multiprobe for measuring water conditions by Hydrolab Corp.
repowering
Rebuilding and replacing major components of a power plant instead
of building a new one.
representative sample
A portion of material or water that is as nearly identical
in content and consistency as possible to that in the larger body of material
or water being sampled.
reserve capacity
Extra treatment capacity built into solid waste and wastewater
treatment plants and interceptor sewers to accommodate ﬂow increases due to
future population growth.
reservoir
An artiﬁcial or natural pond, lake, basin, or tank which is used to store
or control water.
residence time
The period of time that a volume of liquid remains in a tank or system.
residual
Amount of a pollutant remaining in the environment after a natural or
technological process has taken place, including the sludge remaining after
initial wastewater treatment and the particulates remaining in air after it passes
through a scrubbing or other treatment process.
residual chlorine
See “chlorine residual.”
residual disinfectant concentration
The concentration of a disinfectant after a
stated contact time. See also “C × T.”
residual risk
The extent of health risk from air pollutants remaining after appli-
cation of the Maximum Achievable Control Technology (MACT).
residue
Solid or semisolid material remaining after processing, evaporation, or
incineration.
resin
A material having ion exchange properties used in ion exchange systems.
resin beads
Spherical beads with ion exchange properties used in ion exchange
systems.
Resinator®
Ion exchange system by Aqualogic Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

resistance
(1) In water conditioning, the opposition offered by water to the ﬂow
of electricity through which it may be used to estimate the mineral content;
the reciprocal of electrical conductance. (2) For plants and animals, the inborn
or acquired ability to withstand poor environmental conditions or attacks by
chemicals or disease.
resistivity
A measure of resistance to the ﬂow of electricity, used as an accurate
measure of a water’s ionic purity.
Resi-Tech
Division of Waterlink/Aero-Mod Systems.
Resolv-R2®
Solvent recovery and waste disposal system by PBR Industries.
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA)
A 1976 U.S. law, amended
in 1984, to regulate management and disposal of solid and hazardous wastes.
resource recovery
The process of obtaining matter or energy from materials for-
merly discarded.
respiration
Intake of oxygen and discharge of carbon dioxide as a result of
biological oxidation.
respirator
Personal respiratory protection device certiﬁed to meet minimum gov-
ernment performance standards.
respirometer
An instrument used to study the character and extent of respiration.
restoration
Measures taken to return a site to pre-violation conditions.
Retec®
Heavy metal recovery systems offered by USFilter/Industrial Wastewater
Systems.
retentate
The portion of the feed solution rejected by the membrane in a pressure-
driven membrane process.
retention pond
A basin used for wastewater treatment and/or storage.
retention time
The length of time water or wastewater will be retained in a unit
treatment process or facility.
Re-Therm®
Thermal VOC oxidation unit by Dürr Environmental, Inc.
Retox™
Regenerative thermal oxidizer by Adwest Technologies, Inc.
retroﬁt
Addition of a pollution control device on an existing facility without
making major changes to the generating plant.
Retroliner
Forms for ﬁlter underdrain rehabilitation by Roberts Filter Group.
return activated sludge (RAS)
Settled activated sludge that is returned to mix
with raw or primary settled wastewater.
return sludge
See “return activated sludge (RAS).”
reuse
Using a product or component of municipal solid waste in its original form
more than once.
reverse deionization
A deionization system having an anion exchange resin ahead
of a cation exchange resin.
reverse osmosis (RO)
A method of separating water from dissolved salts by pass-
ing feedwater through a semipermeable membrane at a pressure greater than
the osmotic pressure caused by the dissolved salts.
reversible effect
An effect which is not permanent; especially adverse effects
which diminish when exposure to a toxic chemical is ceased.
Revolver™
Rotary adsorption system for VOC abatement and solvent recovery by
Vara International.
Rex
Water/wastewater equipment product line offered by USFilter/Envirex.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Rex Chainbelt
Former name of USFilter/Envirex.
Reynolds number
A nondimensional number that measures the state of turbu-
lence in a ﬂuid system. It is calculated as the ratio of inertia effects to viscous
effect.
RF/AS
Roughing ﬁlter/activated sludge.
RfD
See “reference dose (RFD).”
RFG
See “reformulated gasoline (RFG).”
RFP
Request for proposal.
RFQ
Request for quotation.
RHA
Rivers and Harbors Act.
rheology
The study of the deformation and ﬂow of substances.
rhizosphere
The zone of intermingled roots and soil.
RHRS
Revised Hazard Ranking System
RI/FS
See “remedial investigation and feasibility study (RI/FS).”
RibbonFlow™
Bafﬂed clearwell by CBI Walker, Inc.
ribonucleic acid (RNA)
One of two types of long-chain molecules containing
hereditary material vital to reproduction.
Rich Tech
Equipment product line by USFilter/Aerator Products.
Richards of Rockford
Former equipment manufacturer acquired by Aqua-Aerobic
Systems, Inc.
RIFS
Remedial investigation and feasibility study.
rift
A shallow, rapidly ﬂowing and usually rocky area of water in a stream.
RIGA
Former equipment manufacturer.
Riga-Sorb™
Activated carbon adsorbers by Farr Co.
right of free capture
The concept that groundwater belongs to the person who
owns the land above it and that he is free to capture and use as much as desired.
rill
A small channel eroded into the soil surface by runoff which can be easily
smoothed or obliterated by normal tillage.
Rim-Flo
Peripheral feed, circular clariﬁer by USFilter/Envirex.
Ringelman test
A method of quantifying the opacity of an air pollution emission
by comparing it to a set of standard disks having increasing degrees of dis-
coloration from light grey (number 1) through black (number 5).
Ringlace®
Attached growth biomedia by Ringlace Products, Inc.
RingSparjer
Air injection diffuser by Walker Process Equipment.
rinse
The portion of an ion exchange regeneration cycle in which fresh water is
used to remove spent and excess regenerant from the resin column.
Rio Linda®
Chlorine dioxide generator by Vulcan Performance Chemicals.
rip rap
Broken stone or rocks placed compactly or irregularly on dams, levees,
dikes, or similar embankments for protection against the action of waves or
currents.
riparian habitat
Areas adjacent to rivers and streams with a high density, diver-
sity, and productivity of plant and animal species relative to nearby uplands.
riparian rights
A landowner’s rights to the water on or bordering his property,
including the right to prevent diversion or misuse upstream.
Rippl diagram
A graph which plots cumulative ﬂow versus time, and is used to
design storage reservoirs and equalization basins.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

rise rate
See “overﬂow rate (OFR).”
rising ﬁlm evaporator
An evaporator using vertical heat transfer surfaces where
liquor on one side of the surface is boiled by steam condensing on the other
side, causing vapors to rise carrying the liquid upward as a ﬁlm.
risk
A measure of the probability that damage to life, health, property, and/or the
environment will occur as a result of a given hazard.
risk assessment
Qualitative and quantitative evaluation of the risk posed to human
health and/or the environment by the actual or potential presence and/or use
of speciﬁc pollutants.
Risk Based Corrective Action (RBCA)
A process using the principles of expo-
sure assessment, toxicity, and mobility to make cost-effective corrective
actions on sites while protecting human health and the environment.
risk based targeting
The direction of resources to those areas identiﬁed as having
the highest potential or actual adverse effects on human health and/or the
environment.
risk factor
Characteristic (e.g., race, sex, age, obesity) or variable (e.g., smoking,
occupational exposure level) associated with increased probability of a toxic
effect.
risk management
The process of evaluating and selecting alternative regulatory
and nonregulatory responses to risk which requires the consideration of legal,
economic, and behavioral factors.
risk speciﬁc dose
The dose associated with a speciﬁed risk level.
river basin
The land area drained by a river and its tributaries.
RJ Environmental
Former name of USFilter/RJ Environmental.
RKL®
Pinch valve by Moyno Industrial Products.
RLL
Rapid and large leakage
RM-10®
Clay-based ﬂocculating agent for wastewater by Colloid Environmental
Technologies Co.
R-MAP
Regional Management Assessment Program.
RMCL
Recommended maximum contaminant level. This term is being discon-
tinued in favor of “MCLG.”
RMP
“Roberts Manhattan Process.”
RMP
Risk management plan.
RMPR
Risk Management Program Rule.
RMS™
Rinsewater maintenance system by USFilter/Industrial Wastewater Systems.
RNA
See “ribonucleic acid (RNA).”
RO
See “reverse osmosis (RO).”
Robo™
Bar screen by Vulcan Industries, Inc.
Robo Rover™
Traversing bar screen by Vulcan Industries, Inc.
Robo Stat™
Stationary bar screen by Vulcan Industries, Inc.
RoClean™
Membrane cleaners by Avista Technologies.
rodding
A method of cleaning tubes or sewers using long rods which are able to
remove or dislodge debris.
rodenticide
A chemical or agent used to destroy rats or other rodent pests, or to
prevent them from damaging food or crops.
RODTOX
Rapid oxygen and toxicity tester by SAMI.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Roebelt
Belt ﬁlter press by Roediger Pittsburgh, Inc.
Roedos
Mixing system for dry and liquid polymers by Roediger Pittsburgh, Inc.
Roeﬁlt
Sieve drum concentrator by Roediger Pittsburgh, Inc.
Roeﬂex
Fine bubble diaphragm diffuser by Roediger Pittsburgh, Inc.
Roemix
Lime post treatment mixing system for dewatered sludge by Roediger
Pittsburgh, Inc.
roentgen
Unit of exposure dose of X-ray or gamma radiation.
Roepress
Belt ﬁlter press by Roediger Pittsburgh, Inc.
Roevac
Vacuum sewage system by Roediger Pittsburgh, Inc.
Ro-Flo®
Sliding vane compressor by A-C Compressor Corp.
ROG
Reactive organic gas.
Rogun
Reverse osmosis membrane cleaning solution by BetzDearborn-Argo District.
RollAer
Aerobic digestion aeration equipment by Walker Process Equipment.
Roll-Dry
Internally fed rotary ﬁne screen by Schlueter Co.
Rolling Grit
Aerated tank grit washing and removal unit by Walker Process Equip-
ment.
Romembra
Reverse osmosis membrane elements by Toray Industries, Inc. and
Ropur AG (Europe).
Romicon®
Hollow ﬁber membrane ﬁltration products by Koch Membrane Sys-
tems, Inc.
Romi-Kon™
Oil/water emulsion separator by Koch Membrane Systems, Inc.
RomiPure™
Hollow ﬁber ultraﬁltration products by Koch Membrane Systems,
Inc.
Roots
Centrifugal compressor and blower product line by Dresser Industries/Roots
Division.
Roplex
Live bottom feeder for solids and storage piles by Hindon Corp.
Roptic®
Filter cake sensor by Rosenmund.
RoQuest™
Reverse osmosis coagulants and ﬂocculants by Avista Technologies.
Rosep™
Reverse osmosis systems by Graver Co.
Rossmark
Former name of USFilter/Rossmark.
Rotadisc®
Sludge dryer by Atlas-Stord, Inc.
Rotaﬁlt®
Wastewater fabric ﬁlter by Hans Huber GmbH.
Rotaﬁne
Rotary ﬁne screen by Waste-Tech, Inc.
Rotamat®
Screening equipment product line by Lakeside Equipment Corp. (U.S.)
and Hans Huber GmbH (Europe).
rotameter
A variable area liquid ﬂow meter.
Rotamix
Digester mixing system combining chopper pumps and mixing nozzles
by Vaughan Co., Inc.
Rotapak
Screw type screenings compactor by Longwood Engineering Co., Ltd.
Rota-Rake
Circular sludge collector by Graver Co.
Rotarc
Arc-type bar screen by John Meunier, Inc.
rotary collector
Rotating mechanisms used in circular clariﬁers to collect and
remove settled solids.
rotary distributor
Rotating pipe that evenly distributes wastewater on the surface
of a trickling ﬁlter.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

rotary drum screen
Cylindrical screen used to remove ﬂoatable and suspended
solids.
rotary drum thickener
Rotating cylindrical screen used to thicken sludge.
rotary kiln incinerator
An incinerator consisting of a slowly rotating, long hor-
izontal cylinder in which material is fed at one end and tumbled by the kiln
to promote drying as it is conveyed to the other end.
Rotasieve
Externally fed rotary ﬁne screen by Waste-Tech, Inc.
rotating biological contactor (RBC)
A ﬁxed ﬁlm biological treatment device
where biological organisms are grown on circular discs and mounted on a
horizontal shaft that slowly rotates through wastewater.
rotavirus
An enteric virus commonly found in domestic wastewater which causes
diarrhea.
Rotex
Rotating grit removal system by Simon-Hartley, Ltd.
Rotho®
Hose pump by USFilter/Wallace & Tiernan.
rotifer
A very small aerobic, multicellular animal that feeds on organic matter in
wastewater.
Rotoair Disc
Submerged rotating biological contactor by Pro-Equipment, Inc.
Rotobelt
In-channel ﬁne screen by Dontech, Inc.
Roto-Brush
Rotary screen brush cleaning device by Dontech, Inc.
Roto-Channel
Combination bar screen and compacting conveyor by Dontech, Inc.
RotoClean
Screenings washer by Parkson Corp.
RotoClear
Microscreen formerly offered by Walker Process Equipment.
Rotoco®
Continuous duty granular media ﬁlter by Baker Process.
RotoDip
Manually controlled slotted pipe skimmer by Walker Process Equipment.
Rotodip®
Volumetric feeder for liquids or slurries by BIF.
Rotodisintegrator
Debris grinder by USFilter/Zimpro.
Roto-Drum
Internally fed rotary ﬁne screen and thickener by Dontech, Inc.
Roto-Guard®
Horizontal drum screen/thickener by Parkson Corp.
Roto-Kone®
Gravity belt thickener drainage elements by Komline-Sanderson
Engineering Corp.
Rotoline
Rotary distributor for trickling ﬁlter formerly offered by USFil-
ter/Envirex.
Rotomite
Sludge handling dredger by SRS Crisafulli, Inc.
Rotopac®
Screw type screenings compactor by John Meunier, Inc.
Rotopass
Externally fed rotary ﬁne screen by Passavant-Roediger GmbH.
Roto-Press
Combination rotary ﬁne screen and dewatering press by Dontech, Inc.
Roto-Press
Screenings compactor by Roto-Sieve AB.
RotoPress®
Screenings compactor by Parkson Corp.
Rotopress®
Shaftless screw compactor by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc.
rotor
See “brush aerator.”
Rotordisk®
Rotating biological contactor by CMS Group, Inc.
Rotorobic
Package rotating biological contactor system by Waterlink Separations,
Inc.
Rotoscoop®
Self-cleaning volumetric feeder by Wyssmont Co., Inc.
Roto-Scour
Sand ﬁlter underdrain system by Graver Co.
Rotoscreen
In-channel bar screen by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

RotoSeal
Rotary distributor for trickling ﬁlters by Walker Process Equipment.
Roto-Sep™
Primary wastewater treatment system by Dontech, Inc.
Rotoshear
Internally fed rotary ﬁne screen by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
Roto-Sieve®
Internally fed rotary ﬁne screen by Roto-Sieve AB.
Roto-Skim
Rotary pipe skimmer by USFilter/Envirex.
Rotosludge®
Drum-type rotary sludge thickener by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
RotoSorb
VOC/HAP concentrator by Waterlink/Barnebey Sutcliffe.
Rotospir®
Shaftless screw conveyor by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc.
Rotostep
In-channel bar screen by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
Rotostrainer
Externally fed rotary ﬁne screen by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
Rotosweep
Filter media surface agitator by Roberts Filter Group.
Rototherm®
Agitated thin ﬁlm evaporator by Artisan Industries, Inc.
Roto-Thickener™
Rotary drum sludge thickener by Dontech, Inc.
Roto-Trak
Sludge plows or chicanes used with gravity sludge dewatering by
Komline-Sanderson Engineering Corp.
Roto-Trols
Pressure operated pump controller by Healy-Ruff Co.
Rotox
Submersible aeration and mixing system by USFilter/Davis Process.
rough ﬁsh
Fish not prized for eating, such as gar and suckers, which are usually
more tolerant of changing environmental conditions than game species.
roughing ﬁlter
A high-rate ﬁlter designed to receive high hydraulic or organic
loading rates as a ﬁrst, or intermediate, treatment step.
route of exposure
The avenue by which a chemical comes into contact with an
organism, and which may include inhalation, ingestion, dermal contact, or
injection.
ROV
Remotely operated vehicle.
Rover
Rust removing compounds by Hach Co.
ROWPU
Reverse osmosis water puriﬁcation unit.
Roxidizer®
VOC and air toxics control system by Tellkamp Systems, Inc.
Royce Equipment
Screening and equipment manufacturer acquired by USFil-
ter/Rex & Link-Belt Products.
ROZ3
Catalyst-impregnated activated carbon by Norit Americas Inc.
rpm
Revolutions per minute.
RQ
See “reportable quantity (RQ).”
RSD
Risk-speciﬁc dose.
RSDS
Vacuum-assisted rapid sludge dewatering system by the U.S. Environmental
Products, Inc.
RSI
See “Ryznar Stability Index (RSI).”
RSPA
Research and Special Programs Administration of U.S. Department of
Transportation.
RTECS
Registry of Toxic Effects of Chemical Substances.
RTI Evaporator
Wastewater evaporator product line acquired by USFilter/Dewa-
tering Systems.
RTO
See “regenerative thermal oxidizer (RTO).”
RTR
Reinforced thermosetting resin.
rubbish
Combustible and noncombustible solid waste from residential and com-
mercial sources.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

run
The time period or continuous course during which a unit operates or a test
occurs.
rundown screen
See “static screen.”
running losses
Evaporation of motor vehicle fuels from a fuel tank while a vehicle
is in use.
runoff
Rainwater, leachate, or other liquid that drains over land and reaches a
drain, sewer, or body of water.
RUP
Restricted use pesticide.
rupture disk
A diaphragm designed to burst at a predetermined pressure differential.
RWH
Restricted hazardous waste.
Ryznar Stability Index (RSI)
A scale used to evaluate the corrosion or scaling
potential of water.
S
S&A
Sampling and analysis.
S&L
Smith & Loveless, Inc.
SAB
See “Science Advisory Board (SAB).”
SAB Reactor
Package wastewater treatment plant by Biosab, Inc.
SAC
Starved air combustion.
SAC™
Sludge age control system by United Industries, Inc.
sacriﬁcial anode
A sacriﬁcial piece of metal, usually zinc or magnesium, electri-
cally connected to a more noble metal in an electrolyte. The anode goes into
solution at an accelerated rate to protect the more noble metal from corrosion.
SAE
Society of Automotive Engineers.
safe
Condition of exposure under which there is a practical certainty that no harm
will result to exposed individuals.
Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA)
A U.S. Act assuring that public water supplies
are free of contaminants which may cause health risks; it prevents endanger-
ment of underground sources of drinking water.
safe water
Water that does not contain harmful bacteria, toxic materials, or chem-
icals and is considered safe for drinking even though it may have taste, odor,
color, and certain mineral problems.
safe yield
The annual amount of water that can be taken from a source or supply
over a period of years without depleting that source beyond its ability to be
replenished naturally in “wet years.”
Safgard
Rotary ﬁne screen products by Schlueter Co.
sag line
See “inverted siphon.”
salination
See “salinization.”
saline
Containing or resembling sodium chloride or similar salts.
saline water
See “salt water.”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

salinity
(1) The concentration of dissolved salts in water. (2) The total dissolved
solids in water after all carbonates and organic matter have been oxidized.
salinization
The accumulation of salts in a soil to the extent that plant growth is
inhibited, usually occurring as a result of excessive irrigation in an arid area.
Also spelled “salination.”
Salmonella
An aerobic bacteria that is pathogenic in humans and chieﬂy associ-
ated with food poisoning.
Salmonellosis
A common type of food poisoning characterized by a sudden onset
of gastroenteritis caused by eating food contaminated with Salmonella bacteria.
salt
A class of ionic compounds formed by the combination of an acid and a base,
of which sodium chloride is one of the most common examples.
salt ﬂux
The amount of dissolved substances that are able to pass through a reverse
osmosis membrane.
salt marsh
A coastal marsh periodically ﬂooded with salt water.
salt pan
An accumulation or layer of salts in the soil that may be toxic to agri-
cultural crops.
salt rejection
In reverse osmosis, the ratio of salts removed to the original salt
concentration.
salt splitting
The conversion of salts to their corresponding acids or bases, usually
by means of an ion exchange system.
salt water
Water containing a dissolved salt concentration greater than 10,000 mg/L.
salt water intrusion
The intrusion of salt water into a body of fresh surface water
or groundwater.
salting out
A procedure in which salt is added to a solution to cause an organic
compound to precipitate so that it can be physically removed.
Salt-Master
Water softener brine reclamation system by Culligan International
Corp.
salvage
The utilization of waste materials.
SAM™
Status alert modem to monitor disinfectant dosing system by Strantrol, Inc.
SAM™
Surge-anoxic mix wastewater treatment technology by Fluidyne Corp.
sampler
A device used with or without ﬂow measurement to obtain a portion of
water or waste for analytical purposes.
sampling well
See “monitoring well.”
Sanborn Technologies
Product line of Waterlink Biological Systems.
sanctions
Actions taken by the federal government for failure to plan or implement
a State Improvement Plan (SIP), and which may include withholding of high-
way funds and a ban on construction of new sources of potential pollution.
sand
Any rock fragment between 1/16 mm and 2 mm in diameter.
Sand Dollar
Sludge harvesting machine for sludge drying beds by Cherrington
Corp.
sand drying bed
See “sludge drying bed.”
sand ﬁlter
See “granular media ﬁltration.”
Sandﬂoat
Combination dissolved air ﬂoatation and sand ﬁlter treatment system
by Krofta Engineering Corp.
SandPIPER®
Diaphragm pump by Warren Rupp, Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Sandsep®
Screw-type grit classiﬁer by Spirac.
Sandwash
Hydrocyclone by Axsia Serck Baker, Inc.
SANE
Sulfur and nitrogen emissions.
Sanilec®
Sodium hypochlorite generating systems by Exceltec International Corp.
Sanilo™
Water treatment product line by USFilter Corp.
Sani-Sieve
Gravity fed static screen by Dontech, Inc.
sanitary connection
A single family residential connection or single commercial
or industrial connection to a public water supply system.
sanitary landﬁll
See “landﬁll (LF).”
sanitary sewer
Collection system of underground piping used to remove sanitary
wastewater.
sanitary sewer overﬂow (SSO)
Overloaded operating condition of a sanitary
sewer that results from inﬂow/inﬁltration.
sanitary wastewater
Domestic wastewater without storm and surface runoff that
originates from sanitary conveniences.
San-I-Tech™
Grease interceptor by Scienco/FAST Systems.
Sanitron™
Ultraviolet water puriﬁer by Atlantic Ultraviolet Corp.
SanTech
Product line of Waterlink Biological Systems.
Sanuril®
Hypochlorite tablet disinfection system by Exceltec International Corp.
SAP
Scientiﬁc Advisory Panel.
Saphyr®
A sludge treatment process by USFilter.
saponify
The conversion of a fat or grease into a soap by reaction with an alkali.
saprophytic bacteria
Bacteria that feed on dead or nonliving organic matter.
SAR
(1) See “sodium absorption ratio (SAR).” (2) See “supplied air respirator
(SAR).”
SARA
See “Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act.”
SASS
Source assessment sampling system.
Satellite
Electrically driven rotary distributor for ﬁxed ﬁlm reactor by Simon-
Hartley, Ltd.
Sation®
Water treatment product line by USFilter Corp.
saturated steam
Vapor in equilibrium with water at the boiling temperature and
containing no liquid.
saturated zone
See “zone of saturation.”
saturation
The maximum concentration of a phase or material that can be con-
tained within another phase or another material.
Saturation Index
See “Langelier Saturation Index (LSI).”
SAV
Submerged aquatic vegetation.
SAV715
Stainless steel sludge collector chain by Hitachi Maxco, Ltd.
SavagePlate™
Molded ﬁlter underdrain by Tetra Process Technologies.
savanna
A tropical or subtropical grassland characterized by scattered trees. Also
spelled “savannah.”
Save-All
Clariﬁer designed for paper mill ﬁber recovery by Walker Process Equip-
ment.
save-all
Separation device used in a paper mill to reclaim ﬁbers and ﬁllers from
white water.
SBA
Strong-base anion exchanger.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

SBC
Submerged biological contactor.
SBOD
Soluble BOD. See “biochemical oxygen demand (BOD).”
SBR
See “sequencing batch reactor (SBR).”
SBS
See “Sick Building Syndrome (SBS).”
SC™
Package spray-type deaerating heater by Graver Co.
SCADA
Supervisory control and data acquisition. The hardware and software
systems that gather and control data from a remote site.
SCADA-Flo™
Open channel transmitter by Marsh-McBirney, Inc.
scale
A mineral deposit or precipitate that forms on the interior surface of con-
tainers or water lines as a result of a heating or other physical or chemical
change.
Scalper™
Inclined conveyor screening belt by Derrick Corp.
scanning electron microscope (SEM)
A microscope with a magniﬁcation range
from 20X to 200,000X at a resolution of 100 Å, where illumination is provided
by a beam of electrons which scan the specimen surface.
ScanRDI™
Microbial detection system by Chemunex, Inc.
scarp
A steep, almost perpendicular slope.
Scavenger
Robotic scrubber and vacuum sludge removal system by Aqua Prod-
ucts, Inc.
scavenging
(1) The unauthorized and/or uncontrolled removal of materials at any
point in a solid waste management system. (2) The removal of a substance by
converting it to another form or adsorbing it onto another compound.
SCBA
Self-contained breathing apparatus.
SCC
Source classiﬁcation code.
SCD
See “streaming current detector (SCD).”
Scentoscreen
Portable gas chromatograph for VOC analysis by Sentex Systems, Inc.
SCFM
Standard cubic feet per minute.
Schistosoma
A ﬂatworm or blood ﬂuke that is highly parasitic to snails during
one phase of its life and to humans during another.
schistosomiasis
A waterborne disease of tropical and subtropical regions trans-
mitted to humans who wade or bathe in water infested by Schistosoma, with
freshwater snails acting as intermediate hosts.
schmutzdecke
A biologically active layer that forms on the top of slow sand ﬁlters
to aid in the removal of suspended solids.
Schoop Process
Process for coating steel that uses a blast of air to spray a mist
of molten metal onto the surface to be protected.
SchreiberFlex®
Fine bubble diffuser by Schreiber Corp.
Schumacher Filters
Former name of USFilter/Schumacher.
Science Advisory Board (SAB)
A group of external scientists who advise the
EPA on science and policy.
scientiﬁc method
An orderly method of obtaining, organizing, and applying new
knowledge.
Scion®
Short cycle ion exchange system by USFilter/Rockford.
Scoop-A-Fish
Traveling water screen ﬁsh collection trough by Norair Engineering
Corp.
ScorGuard®
Organic cooling tower water treatment additive by Ecolab Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Scorpion®
Ultraviolet light disinfection system by Capital Controls Co.
scouring velocity
The minimum velocity required to carry away material accu-
mulations in a conduit or pipeline.
Scour-Pak®
Granular media gravity depth ﬁlter by Graver Co.
SCOVOx™
Catalyst/adsorber technology for VOC emissions destruction by Goal
Line Environmental Technologies.
SCR
(1) See “selective catalytic reduction (SCR).” (2) Silicon controlled rectiﬁer.
scrap
Materials discarded from manufacturing operations that may be suitable for
reprocessing.
screening
(1) A treatment process using a device with uniform openings to retain
coarse solids. (2) A preliminary test method used to separate according to
common characteristics.
screenings
The material removed by a screening device.
screenings press
A mechanical press used to compact and/or dewater material
removed from mechanical screening equipment.
Screenings Washer Monster™
Washer/grinder for wastewater screenings by JWC
Environmental.
Screezer
Combination screening and dewatering device by Waste-Tech, Inc.
screw conveyor
A conveyor utilizing a helical screw rotating within a trough to
convey material.
screw pump
A low lift, high capacity pump that raises water by means of a slowly
rotating inclined shaft ﬁtted with a helical blade which revolves in a trough
or pipe. Also known as “Archimedes’ screw pump.”
Screwpeller™
Centrifugal screw impeller used in a surface aerator by Aeration
Industries, Inc.
scroll centrifuge
See “solid bowl centrifuge.”
scrubber
A device used to removal particulates or pollutant gases from combustion
or chemical process exhaust streams.
scrubbing
The removal of impurities from an air or gas stream by entraining the
pollutants in a water spray.
ScruPac™
Screw-typed screenings compactor by Vulcan Industries, Inc.
Scru-Peller®
Sludge pump by Yeomans Chicago Corp.
SCSA
Soil Conservation Society of America.
SCUBA™
Filter underdrain by USFilter/General Filter.
SCUBA™
Self-contained gate and valve actuator by Rodney Hunt Co.
scum
Floatable materials found on the surface of primary and secondary settling
tanks consisting of food wastes, grease, fats, paper, foam, and similar matter.
scum breaker
A device installed in a sludge digester to break up scum.
scum collector
A mechanical device for removing scum from the surface of a
settling tank.
Scum Sucker™
Telescopic pipe for scum removal by United Industries, Inc.
scum trough
A trough used in a primary sedimentation basin to remove scum and
convey it from the basin.
Scumbuster™
Pump used to chop solids in a digester scum blanket by Vaughan
Co., Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

SCWO
See “supercritical water oxidation (SCWO).”
SDI
Strategic Diagnostics, Inc.
SDI
See “Silt Density Index (SDI).”
SDWA
See “Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA).”
sea
A large body of salt water that is wholly or partly enclosed by land.
Sea Cell
In-situ sodium hypochlorite generator by Baker Hughes Process Systems.
Sea Devil
Floating oil skimmer by Vikoma International Ltd.
sea lettuce
Common seaweed that can grow in nuisance concentrations in the
presence of excess nutrients.
sea level
The average surface level of the sea, uninﬂuenced by tidal movement or
waves, used as a reference for elevation.
Sea Screen
Seawater ﬁltration system by Baker Hughes Process Systems.
Sealtrode
Sealed pump controller by Yeomans Chicago Corp.
Seaskimmer
Floating oil skimmer by Vikoma International Ltd.
seawall
A wall built to protect a coastline from erosion, and caused by wave action.
seawater
General term for sea or ocean water, with a typical total dissolved solids
concentration of 35,000 mg/L.
Secchi disk
A small disk, divided into black and white quadrants, that is lowered
into water to visually observe water clarity and estimate the depth of the
euphotic zone.
Secchi disk depth
The water depth at which a Secchi disk is no longer visible.
In a lake, this depth is approximately equal to the euphotic zone.
Secodyne
Product group of Polydyne, Inc.
second order reaction
A reaction in which the rate of change is proportional to
the square of the concentration of one of the reactants or to the product of the
concentrations of two different reactants.
second stage biochemical oxygen demand
See “nitrogenous oxygen demand
(NOD).”
secondary clariﬁer
A clariﬁer following a secondary treatment process designed
for gravity removal of suspended matter.
secondary contaminant
A contaminant that affects drinking water taste, odor, or
aesthetics.
secondary drinking water regulations
Nonenforceable regulations applying to
public water systems and specifying the maximum contamination levels that,
in the judgment of the EPA, are required to protect the public welfare, and
which apply to any contaminants that may adversely affect the odor o.
secondary efﬂuent
Treated wastewater leaving a secondary treatment facility, usu-
ally having a BOD5 and suspended solids of less than 30 mg/L.
secondary emissions
Emissions that occur as a result of the construction or oper-
ation of a facility but do not come from the facility.
secondary materials
Materials that have been manufactured and used at least once
and are to be used again.
secondary maximum contaminant levels (SMCLs)
Guidelines that address taste,
odor, color, and other aesthetic aspects of drinking water but do not present
health risks.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

secondary pollutant
A pollutant formed in the environment as the result of a
chemical reaction of two or more primary pollutants or naturally occurring
elements.
secondary sludge
The sludge from the secondary clariﬁer in a wastewater treat-
ment plant.
secondary standards
National ambient air quality standards designed to protect
welfare, including effects on soils, water, crops, vegetation, manmade mate-
rials, animals, wildlife, weather, visibility, and climate.
secondary treatment
The treatment of wastewater through biological oxidation
after primary treatment.
second-stage BOD
See “nitrogenous biochemical oxygen demand (NBOD).”
secure landﬁll
Landﬁll which segregates and isolates hazardous materials from
contacting each other, the groundwater, or the atmosphere.
secure maximum contaminant level
Maximum permissible level of a contami-
nant in water delivered to the free ﬂowing outlet of the ultimate user, or of
contamination resulting from corrosion of piping and plumbing caused by
water quality.
Sediﬂoat
Water and wastewater treatment unit by Krofta Engineering Corp.
Sediﬂotor®
Dissolved air ﬂotation unit by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
sediment
The solid material that settles from a liquid.
sediment yield
The quantity of sediment arriving at a speciﬁc location.
sedimentation
The removal of settleable suspended solids from water or waste-
water by gravity in a quiescent basin or clariﬁer.
sedimentation basin
A quiescent tank used to remove suspended solids by gravity
settling. Also called clariﬁers or settling tanks, they are usually equipped with
a motor driven rake mechanism to collect settled sludge and move it to a
central discharge point.
SEE
Schloss Engineered Equipment.
seed
(1) Crystalline particles added to a supersaturated solution to induce precip-
itation. (2) Well-digested sludge used to seed a sludge digester.
seepage
Percolation of water through the soil from unlined canals, ditches, laterals,
watercourses, or water storage facilities.
seepage pit
A covered excavation that receives septic tank efﬂuent and permits its
efﬂuent to seep through the bottom and sides of the excavation.
seepage spring
A spring occurring where the water table breaks the ground sur-
face. Also called a “gravity spring.”
Seghers Pelletech®
Indirect sludge dryer and pelletizing unit by Wheelabrator
Water Technologies, Inc.
Seghodryer
Indirect contact sludge dryer by Seghers Better Technology USA.
selective catalytic reduction (SCR)
Flue gas treatment process for the removal
of NOX by reduction with ammonia to form elemental nitrogen and water.
selective pesticide
A chemical designed to affect only certain types of pests,
leaving other plants and animals unharmed.
Selectoﬁlter
Revolving drum screen strainer by USFilter/Diffused Air Products
Group.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Selector Plug Flow™
Biological wastewater treatment process by USFilter/Indus-
trial Wastewater Systems.
Selectostrainer
In-line strainer formerly offered by USFilter/Headworks Products.
Selex®
Graded density cartridge ﬁlters by Osmonics, Inc.
self-sustaining
The point at which a process provides sufﬁcient energy to operate
without the need for supplementary fuel.
SelRO®
Membrane ﬁltration systems by LCI Corp.
SEM
See “scanning electron microscope (SEM).”
semi-conﬁned aquifer
An aquifer partially conﬁned by soil layers of low perme-
ability through which recharge and discharge can still occur.
semipermeable
A membrane that does not have measurable pores, but through
which smaller molecules can pass.
senescence
The aging process sometimes used to describe lakes or other bodies
of water in advanced stages of eutrophication.
senescent lake
A very old lake, practically full of sediment and rooted water
plants, which will eventually become a marsh.
sensible heat
Heat measurable by temperature alone.
Sension™
Water analyzer meter by Hach Co.
sensitivity
The ability of a unit or instrument to respond to a small difference in
values.
Sentinel™
Filter backwash control system by Roberts Filter Group.
Sentre-Fier
Rotary ﬁne screen by Dontech, Inc.
Sentry
Groundwater gasoline recovery system by Douglas Engineering.
Sentry-II®
VOC sampler by BIOS International Corp.
SEPA®
Reverse osmosis membranes by Osmonics, Inc.
Separator-Plus™
Parallel plate separator by USFilter/Davco.
SepraEight®
Deep bed condensate polisher by Graver Co.
sepralators
Membrane elements.
septage
The settled solids produced in individual on-site wastewater treatment
systems including septic tanks and cesspools.
septic
Condition characterized by bacterial decomposition under anaerobic con-
ditions.
septic system
An onsite system designed to treat and dispose of domestic waste-
water typically consisting of a tank that receives waste from a residence or
business and a system of tile lines or a pit for disposal of the sludge that
remains after decomposition of the soluble organic matter.
septic tank
A domestic wastewater treatment device principally used for individ-
ual residences that combines sedimentation, sludge digestion, and sludge stor-
age in a single or dual compartmented tank. See also “septic system.”
septicity
The condition that results from biological degradation of organic matter
in wastewater under anaerobic conditions, usually producing hydrogen sulﬁde
or other odorous compounds.
Septra™
Pleated backwash ﬁlters by Pall Corp.
septum
A permeable material used to support ﬁlter medium.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

sequencing batch reactor (SBR)
Treatment process characterized by the inter-
ruption of ﬂow to the reactor during the sedimentation and decanting phase
of treatment.
Sequest-All
Sequestering agent used to control iron scaling and corrosion by Sper
Chemical Corp.
sequestering agent
A chemical compound such as EDTA that binds with other
compounds or ions so they cannot be involved in chemical reactions. See also
“chelating agent.”
sequestration
The formation of a stable, water soluble complex with an ion in
solution to prevent precipitation or scaling. See also “chelation.”
Sequox™
Biological wastewater treatment process for nutrient removal by Water-
link/Aero-Mod Systems.
Seral®
Laboratory water treatment product line by USFilter/Lowell.
Serck Baker
Former name of Axsia Serck Baker, Inc.
Ser-Ductor®
Air-free agitation system by Serﬁlco, Ltd.
Serﬁlco®
Wastewater treatment equipment products by Serﬁlco, Ltd.
seroepidemiology
The measuring of serum antibodies to speciﬁc pathogens in a
population.
serogroup
A group of closely related organisms having one or more common
antigens.
Serpentix®
Convoluted, self-cleaning belt conveyor by Serpentix Conveyor Corp.
service connector
The pipe that carries tap water from a public water main to a
building.
service factor (SF)
A multiplier that when applied to the rated power indicates the
permissible power loading that may be carried under the conditions speciﬁed.
service line sample
A one-liter sample of water collected according to federal
regulations that has been standing for at least 6 hours in a service pipeline.
service pipe
The pipeline extending from the water main to the building served
or to the consumer’s system.
SES
Secondary emissions standard.
Sessil®
Polyethylene strip media for trickling ﬁlters by NSW Corp.
SETLdek
Clariﬁer tube settlers by Brentwood Industries, Inc.
setpoint
An input value to be maintained by a control device.
settleability
The tendency of suspended solids to settle.
settleable solids
That portion of suspended solids which are of a sufﬁcient size
and weight to settle to the bottom of an Imhoff cone in 1 hour.
settled sludge volume (SSV)
Volume of settled sludge measured at predeter-
mined time increments for use in process control calculations.
settling chamber
A series of screens placed in the way of ﬂue gases to slow the
stream of air, thus helping gravity to pull particles into a collection device.
settling tank
A quiescent tank used to remove suspended solids by gravity settling.
Also called clariﬁers or sedimentation basins, they are usually equipped with
a motor driven rake mechanism to collect settled sludge and move it to a
central discharge point.
settling tubes
See “tube settlers.”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

settling velocity
The rate at which a particle settles through air or water.
7Q10
An abbreviation for a design stream ﬂow rate describing the lowest stream
ﬂow for 7 consecutive days that would be expected to occur once in 10 years.
See also “xQy.”
sewage
See “wastewater.”
sewage fungus
Common term for ﬁlamentous mass of fungi and bacteria resulting
from high organic loadings that can clog or reduce efﬁciency of waste treat-
ment equipment.
sewer
Collection system of underground piping used to remove wastewater.
Sewer Chewer™
Comminuter/sludge grinder by Yeomans Chicago Corp.
sewer gas
A gas mixture produced by anaerobic decomposition of organic matter
usually containing high percentages of methane and hydrogen sulﬁde.
sewerage
The entire system of wastewater collection, treatment, and disposal.
sewershed
Land area that drains into a sewer.
SF
See “service factor (SF).”
SFA
Spectral ﬂame analyzer.
SFT™
Sediment ﬂushing tank by John Meunier, Inc.
ShallowTray
Aeration system for removal of volatile organics by Northeast Envi-
ronmental Products, Inc.
Shann-No-Corr
Zinc metaphosphate corrosion inhibitor and sequestering agent
by Shannon Chemical Corp.
Sharples®
Division of Alfa Laval Separation, Inc.
sharps
Hypodermic needles, pipettes, scalpel blades, blood vials, needles with
attached tubing, broken or unbroken glass, and culture dishes used in animal
or human patient care or treatment, or in medical, research, or industrial
laboratories.
Sharpshooter
Polymer feed and control system by Norchem Industries.
Shartles
Product line by Thermal Black Clawson.
Shearfuser
Cast iron diffuser for anaerobic digestion by USFilter/Diffused Air
Products Group.
sheet ﬂow
Overland stormwater ﬂow in a thin sheet of uniform thickness.
shell-and-tube heat exchanger
A tubular heat exchanger housed within the shell
of a pressure vessel.
sherardizing
A process for protecting iron from corrosion by means of a corrosion
resistant layer of zinc on the iron surface.
Shigella
A bacterium associated with dysentery that is transmitted through con-
sumption of water or food contaminated with fecal matter.
shigellosis
A gastrointestinal disorder usually caused by food or waterborne organ-
isms of the genus Shigella.
shock load
A sudden hydraulic or organic load to a treatment plant.
shore
(1) The land bordering a body of water. (2) To brace or give support.
short circuiting
Uneven ﬂow through a vessel that results from density currents
or inadequate mixing which allows some currents to leave the vessel more
quickly than others.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

short term exposure limit (STEL)
The maximal allowable level of a material in
workplace air, usually measured over a 15-minute period.
short ton
See “ton.”
Shriver®
Plate and frame ﬁlter press by Baker Process.
shute
The horizontal wire in woven wire mesh, also called the “weft” wire.
SHWL
Seasonal high water level.
SI unit
The international system of units (Système International) largely based on
the metric system used for measuring length, mass, volume, and radiation.
SIC
See “Standard Industrial Classiﬁcation (SIC).”
sick building syndrome (SBS)
Condition in which at least 20% of a building’s
occupants display symptoms of illness for more than 2 weeks and the source
of the illness cannot be positively identiﬁed.
side hill screen
See “static screen.”
side water depth (SWD)
The depth of water measured along a vertical interior
wall of a basin or tank.
Side Winder
Environmental screens by Cook Screen Technologies, Inc.
SideCar™
RBC aeration system by Jones MacCrea, Inc.
siderite
A mineral of ferrous carbonate.
sidewall
The wall at the side of a structure.
Sidewall Separator
In-channel clariﬁer for an oxidation ditch by Lakeside Equip-
ment Corp.
sieve analysis
A size distribution analysis of a ﬁlter sand sample using a series of
standard sieve screens.
sieve size
The standard sieve size through which a sample of sand will pass.
sievert
Unit of radiation equal to the amount that produces the same damage to
humans as 1 roentgen of high voltage X-rays.
SightWell
Circular clariﬁer with hydraulic suction type sludge removal system by
Walker Process Equipment.
Sigma
Low speed surface aerator by Purestream, Inc.
Sigma Flight
Fiberglass sludge collector ﬂight by USFilter/Envirex.
signal words
The words used on a pesticide label — “Danger, Warning, Caution” —
to indicate level of toxicity.
signiﬁcant deterioration
Pollution resulting from a new source in previously
“clean” areas. See “prevention of signiﬁcant deterioration (PSD).”
signiﬁcant municipal facilities
Those publicly owned sewage treatment plants
that discharge a million gallons per day or more and are therefore considered
by states to have the potential to substantially affect the quality of receiving
waters.
signiﬁcant violations
Violations by point source dischargers of sufﬁcient magni-
tude or duration to be a regulatory priority.
SIHI Pumps
Former name of Sterling Fluid Systems (USA).
SIHI-Halberg
Digester draft tube sludge mixer by SIHI Pumps, Inc.
Silent Pump
Portable sewage pumping station by Gorman-Rupp Co.
silica
A mineral composed of silicon and oxygen.
silicate
Any compound containing silicon, oxygen, and one or more metallic
compounds.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

siliceous
Composed of or containing silica or a silicate compound.
siliceous gel zeolite
A synthetic hydrated sodium aluminosilicate with ion
exchange properties, once widely used in ion exchange water softeners. See
also “gel zeolite.”
silicosis
A lung disease caused by prolonged inhalation of silica dust which results
in ﬁbrosis or scarring of lung tissue.
Sil-Kleer®
Filter aid by Silbrico Corp.
silo
A tall, cylindrical storage vessel for dry solids.
Silo Pac
Chemical feed system by USFilter/Wallace & Tiernan.
Siloda™
High rate sludge composting process by USFilter/Krüger (North Amer-
ica) and OTV.
silt
Individual mineral particles ranging in size between ﬁne sand and clay.
silt density index (SDI)
A measure of the fouling tendency of water based on the
timed ﬂow of a liquid through a membrane ﬁlter at a constant pressure.
silting
The deposition of silt or sediment in a waterbody.
silvaculture
Forest management for the cultivation and harvest of timber.
Silver Band
Granular media pressure ﬁlter by Baker Hughes Process Systems.
Silver Series™
Membrane diffuser by Sanitaire Corp.
Silverback™
Aqueous cleaner recovery system using ceramic membrane ﬁlters
by USFilter/Industrial Wastewater Systems.
silviculture
Management of forest land for timber.
Simcar®
Turbine aerator by United Industries, Inc.
Simplex
Low speed surface mechanical aerators by USFilter/Asdor.
Simplex™
Single module air scrubber by USFilter/Davis Process.
Sim-Pre™
Biological nutrient removal process for wastewater treatment by USFil-
ter/Envirex.
Simrake
Rotary bar screen by Simon-Hartley, Ltd.
Simspray
Rectangular distributor for ﬁxed ﬁlm reactor by Simon-Hartley, Ltd.
Simultech™
Biological nutrient removal system by Schreiber Corp.
Simul-Wash™
Simultaneous air/water ﬁlter backwash system by Tonka Equip-
ment Co.
Sinclair
Internally fed rotary ﬁne screen by Bielomatik London, Ltd.
sink
Place in the environment where a compound or material collects.
sinking
Controlling oil spills by using an agent to trap the oil and sink it to the
bottom of the body of water where the agent and the oil are biodegraded.
sinter
To bond and partly fuse masses of metal particles together through the use
of heat below the melting point, without actually liquefying.
SIP
See “State Implementation Plan (SIP).”
siphon
A closed conduit, a portion of which lies above the hydraulic grade line,
resulting in a pressure less than atmospheric and requiring a vacuum within
the conduit to start ﬂow.
SITE
See “Superfund Innovative Technology Evaluation (SITE).”
site assessment program
A means of evaluating hazardous waste sites through
preliminary assessments and site inspections to develop a Hazard Ranking
System score.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Sitepro™
Remediation site control system by Geotech ORS Environmental Equip-
ment.
siting
The process of choosing a location for a facility.
SIU
Signiﬁcant industrial user.
Siverseries™
Packaged desalination system by Matrix Desalination, Inc.
SK®
Variable area ﬂowmeter by McCrometer, Inc.
skid mounted
Equipment or equipment packages mounted on a horizontal struc-
ture or platform to facilitate handling and/or installation.
Skim-Kleen®
Oil removal belt skimmer by Tenco Hydro, Inc.
skimming
The process of removing or diverting water and/or ﬂoating matter from
the surface of a liquid.
Skim-Pak™
Floating, self-adjusting weir skimmer by Douglas Engineering.
Skim-Pak™
Floating skimmer by ABS Pumps, Inc.
skip
Bar screen cleaning rake.
SKRAM
Acoustic ﬁsh behavioral control device by USFilter/Rex & Link-Belt
Products.
SL™
Granular media ﬁlter underdrain by F.B. Leopold Co., Inc.
slag
Waste residues produced by metal smelting and coal gasiﬁcation.
slake
The process of mixing lime with water to accomplish a chemical combination.
slaked lime
See “hydrated lime.”
slash and burn
An agricultural practice where vegetation is cut, allowed to dry,
and burned prior to soil cultivation and planting.
Slide Gate
Screenings press by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc. (Western Hemisphere) and
USFilter/Contra-Shear.
slime
(1) Substances of a viscous organic nature, usually formed from a microbi-
ological growth, which attach themselves to other objects, forming a coating.
(2) The coating of biomass that accumulates in trickling ﬁlters or sand ﬁlters
and periodically sloughs away to be collected in clariﬁers.
Slinger®
Sludge spreader by Knight Manufacturing Corp.
Slo-Mixer
Axial ﬂow paddle ﬂocculators by USFilter/Envirex.
slop oil
Separator skimmings and tramp oil generated during reﬁnery startup,
shutdown, or abnormal operation.
slough
A swamp, bog, or marsh, especially if part of an inlet or backwater.
sloughing
The disattachment of accumulated biological solids from trickling ﬁlter
media.
slow sand ﬁlter
Sand ﬁlter characterized by low ﬂow rates relying on the forma-
tion of a layer of solids on the top of the sand bed to accomplish most of the
ﬁltration.
sludge
Accumulated and concentrated solids generated within the wastewater
treatment process that have not undergone a stabilization process.
sludge age
The average time microbial cell remains in an activated sludge system.
It is equal to the mass of cells divided by the rate of cell wasting from the
system.
Sludge Age Controller™
Sludge age control system by United Industries, Inc.
sludge blanket
The accumulated sludge hydrodynamically suspended in a clariﬁer
or other enclosed body of water.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

sludge bulking
A phenomenon that occurs in activated sludge plants where a
sludge does not readily settle or concentrate.
sludge cake
Dewatered residue from a ﬁlter press, centrifuge, or other sludge
dewatering device.
sludge collector
Mechanisms used in clariﬁers to collect and remove settled solids
from the tank bottom.
sludge conditioning
See “conditioning.”
Sludge Detention Optimizer™
Sludge thickening/conditioning process by Don-
tech, Inc.
sludge dewatering
The removal of a portion of the water contained in sludge by
means of a ﬁlter press, centrifuge, or other mechanism.
sludge digestion
See “digestion.”
sludge dryer
A device utilizing heat for the removal of a large portion of water
within sludge.
sludge drying bed
A partitioned area consisting of sand or other porous material
upon which sludge is dewatered by drainage and evaporation. Also known as
“drying bed” or “sand drying bed.”
Sludge Expert
Automatic belt press control and management system by Alpine
Technology, Inc.
Sludge Gun®
Sludge level detector by Markland Specialty Engineering, Ltd.
Sludge Guzzler
Hydraulically driven sludge pump by Guzzler Manufacturing, Inc.
Sludge Mate™
Container ﬁlter by Flo Trend Systems, Inc.
sludge stabilization
A treatment process to convert sludge to a stable product for
ultimate disposal or use and reduce pathogens to produce a less odorous
product.
Sludge Sucker™
Clariﬁer sludge removal device by USFilter/General Filter.
sludge volume index (SVI)
The volume in milliliters occupied by 1 gram of
settled sludge after settling for 30 minutes in a graduated cylinder.
Sludgebuster™
Sewage shredder by ZMI/Portec Chemical Processing.
SludgeCleaner®
Sludge and scum screen and compactor by Parkson Corp.
SludgeMaster®
Sludge dryer by USFilter/Davis Process.
SludgeMaster®
Submersible air-powered pump by Warren Rupp, Inc.
SludgeMIZER
Sludge dryer by Fen-Tech Environmental, Inc.
Sludgepactor
Sludge screen and compactor by Waste-Tech, Inc.
SludgePress™
Biosolids dewatering products by Enviroquip, Inc.
Sludgiﬁer
Lagoon dredge by VMI Inc.
Sludglite®
Sludge blanket level detector by Ecolotech Corp.
slug load
A sudden hydraulic or organic load to a treatment unit.
sluice gate
Manual or power-operated gate used to isolate a channel from ﬂow.
slurry
A suspension of a relatively insoluble chemical in water, usually having a
suspended solids concentration of 5000 mg/L or more.
Slurrycup™
Grit removal system by Eutek Systems, Inc.
Slurrystore®
Slurry storage system by A.O. Smith Engineered Storage Products.
small calorie (cal)
See “calorie.”
small quantity generator (SQG)
A generator of between 100 and 1000 kg/month
of hazardous wastes. Sometimes called a “squeegee.”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

small-quantity handlers (SQHs)
Universal waste handlers who accumulate up
to 5000 kilograms of wastes.
Smart Skimmer
Oil removal system by Douglas Engineering.
SmartFilter™
Traveling bridge ﬁlter by Agency Environmental, Inc.
SmartRO™
Reverse osmosis system by Water and Power Technologies.
SMBS
Sodium metabisulﬁte.
SMCL
Secondary maximum contaminant level.
SMCLs
EPA-mandated maximum contaminant level in drinking water based on
taste, odor, or aesthetics.
SMCRA
See “Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA).”
smelter
A facility that melts or fuses ore, often with an accompanying chemical
change, to separate its metal content.
SMOA
Superfund Memorandum of Agreement.
smog
A type of air pollution characterized by reduced visibility due to atmospheric
particulates and elevated levels of photochemical oxidants.
Smogless™
Wastewater treatment and sludge drying and incineration plants by
USFilter/Smogless.
smoke
The suspended matter in an exhaust emission which obscures the transmis-
sion of light.
smoke number (SN)
A dimensionless term quantifying smoke emissions.
Smooth-tex
Rectangular woven mesh for screening equipment by USFilter/Rex &
Link-Belt Products.
SMSA
Standard metropolitan statistical area.
SMX
Belt ﬁlter press by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc.
SN
See “smoke number (SN).”
SNAAQS
Secondary National Ambient Air Quality Standards.
Snail
Grit dewatering system by Eutek Systems, Inc.
SNARL
Suggested no adverse response level.
SNC
Signiﬁcant noncompliers.
Snowﬂake Packing
Plastic packing media for air stripping applications by Norton
Co.
SO2
Sulfur dioxide.
SOC
See “synthetic organic chemicals (SOC).”
SOCMA
Synthetic Organic Chemical Manufacturers Association.
SOCMI
Synthetic organic chemical manufacturing industry.
SOD
Sediment oxygen demand.
soda ash
See “sodium carbonate.”
sodium absorption ratio (SAR)
An expression describing the relative activity of
sodium ions in exchange reactions with soil.
sodium aluminate
An auxiliary coagulant used in water treatment. Chemical for-
mula is Na2Al2O4.
sodium bisulﬁte
A liquid dechlorinating agent. Chemical formula is NaHSO3.
sodium carbonate
A compound often used in water softening operations, also
called “soda ash.” Chemical formula is Na2CO3.
sodium chloride
The chemical name for common salt. Chemical formula is NaCl.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

sodium cycle exchange
Ion exchange water softening process in which sodium
on the ion exchange resin is exchanged for hardness and other ions in water.
Sodium chloride is commonly used as the regenerant.
sodium hexametaphosphate (NaHMP)
An alkaline metallic element which is
water soluble and commonly used as a sequestering or dispersing agent.
sodium hydroxide
Caustic soda. Chemical formula is NaOH.
sodium hypochlorite
A liquid chlorine solution frequently used as a water or
wastewater disinfectant. Chemical formula is Na(OCl)2.
sodium metabisulﬁte
A crystalline form of sulfur dioxide used to remove chlo-
rine. Chemical formula is Na2S2O5.
sodium sulﬁte
An oxygen scavenger used in boiler and cooling water systems.
Chemical formula is Na2SO3.
sodium-free water
Bottled water containing less than 5 milligrams of sodium per
serving.
soft detergents
Cleaning agents that break down in nature. See also “linear alkyl
sulfonate (LAS).”
soft water
Any water containing less than 17.1 mg/L (1 gpg) of calcium or mag-
nesium expressed as calcium carbonate.
softening
Treatment process that involves the removal of calcium and magnesium
ions from water.
SOG
Stripper off-gas.
soil
The combination of mineral and organic matter that supports plant life on the
surface of the earth.
soil adsorption ﬁeld
A sub-surface area containing a trench or bed with clean
stones and a system of piping through which treated sewage may seep into
the surrounding soil for further treatment and disposal.
soil conditioner
An organic material like humus or compost that helps soil absorb
water, build a bacterial community, and take up mineral nutrients.
soil erodibility
A measure of the soil’s susceptibility to raindrop impact, runoff,
and other erosional processes.
soil ﬂushing
In-situ remediation technique where large volumes of water or other
solutions are injected into the soil or groundwater to ﬂush hazardous contam-
inants to a recovery point.
soil gas
Gaseous elements and compounds in the small spaces between particles
of the earth and soil. Such gases can be moved or driven out under pressure.
soil horizon
A zone or layer within a soil made distinctive by its color, texture,
or mineral content.
soil sterilant
A chemical that temporarily or permanently prevents the growth of
all plants and animals depending on the chemical.
soil vapor extraction (SVE)
Technique to remove VOCs and promote bioreme-
diation of compounds in unsaturated soils.
Sokalan®
Antiscalant for desalination of seawater by BASF.
sol
Colloidal dispersion of solids in liquid.
solar constant
The rate that the sun’s radiant energy is received per unit area on
a horizontal surface at the top of the earth’s atmosphere.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

solar pond
Pond used to accomplish evaporation via direct solar heating.
solar still
A distillation device that utilizes solar energy.
solder
Metallic compound used to seal joints between pipes, and until recently,
usually contained 50% lead. Use of lead solder containing more than 0.2%
lead is now prohibited for pipes carrying drinking water.
sole-source aquifer
An aquifer that supplies 50% or more of the drinking water
of an area.
solid bowl centrifuge
Continuous operation centrifuge consisting of a cylindrical,
tapered bowl and an internal helical scroll, both revolving at slightly different
speeds to separate solids from water by means of a centrifugal force. Also
called “scroll centrifuge” or “decanter.”
solid waste
Garbage, refuse, sludge, and other discarded material resulting from
community activities or commercial or industrial operations.
solid waste disposal
The ﬁnal placement of refuse that is not salvaged or recycled.
solid waste management
Supervised handling of waste materials from their
source through recovery processes to disposal.
Solidex
Screw press system by Hosokawa Bepex Corp.
solidiﬁcation
A process where materials are added to waste to produce a solid.
solidiﬁcation and stabilization
Removal of wastewater from a waste or the chem-
ical change that makes it less permeable and susceptible to transport by water.
solids balance
A mathematical representation of a treatment system that deﬁnes
the amount of solids entering and exiting each unit treatment process.
solids contact clariﬁer
A clariﬁer in which liquid passes upward though a solids
blanket and discharges at or near the surface.
solids retention time (SRT)
The mass of solids in a vessel (kg) divided by the
solids removed (L/d).
Solidur
UHMW polyethylene components for chain and ﬂight sludge collectors
by Solidur Plastics Co.
Soliquator
Clariﬁcation unit by Orival, Inc.
Solo™
Controllerless downwell cleanup pumps by QED Environmental Systems,
Inc.
Solu Comp®
Water measurement instrument by Rosemount Analytical, Inc.
solubility
The amount of a substance that can dissolve in a solution under a given
set of conditions.
solubility product
The equilibrium constant that describes the reaction by which
a precipitate dissolves in pure water to form its constituent ions.
soluble
Capable of being dissolved in a ﬂuid.
solum
The upper layers of soil including the top soil (A-horizon) and intermediate
soil (B-horizon).
solute
A substance dissolved in a ﬂuid.
solution
A liquid that contains dissolved solute.
Solvay Interox
Product group of Solvay America.
Solvay Minerals
Product group of Solvay America.
solvent
Liquid capable of dissolving or dispersing one or more substances.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

solvent extraction
The process of selectively extracting a liquid constituent from
a wastewater using an organic solvent. Also called “liquid-liquid extraction
(LLE).”
Solvo-Salvager®
Vacuum assisted distillation equipment by Westport Environmen-
tal Systems.
Som-A-System®
Sludge thickening process by Somat Corp.
sone
A subjectively determined unit of the loudness of a sound.
Sonix 100
Tank-mounted chlorinator by USFilter/Wallace & Tiernan.
Sonozaire™
Electronic odor control device by Howe-Baker Engineers, Inc.
soot
Carbon dust formed by incomplete combustion.
sorbent
A solid material used to concentrate dissolved solids.
Sorb-N-C™
Packaged stack gas sorbent by Church & Dwight Co. Inc.
Sorbond®
Sludge stabilizer by Colloid Environmental Technologies Co.
sorption
The concentration of dissolved solids through absorption or adsorption
on a solid.
SOS
Stormwater overﬂow screens by John Meunier, Inc.
SOTE
Standard oxygen transfer efﬁciency.
sough
A ditch used to drain mine water.
SOUR
See “speciﬁc oxygen uptake rate (SOUR).”
sour environment
Environment containing signiﬁcant amounts of hydrogen sulﬁde.
sour gas
Natural gas containing impurities such as hydrogen sulﬁde which give
the gas an acrid odor.
sour water
Water containing hydrogen sulﬁde or other malodorous compounds.
source
The point of origin or part of a facility that generates or releases an excess
of a substance.
Southern Oscillation
A circulation pattern in the atmosphere that brings low
pressure to the eastern Paciﬁc and high pressure to the Indian Ocean. See also
“El Niño/Southern Oscillation (ENSO).”
SOx
See “sulfur oxides (SOX).”
Soxhlet Extraction Method
An extraction process using trichloroﬂuoroethane to
determine the oil and grease content in a liquid.
SoyGold®
Biodegradable, nontoxic solvent by Ag Environmental Products LLC.
sparingly soluble compounds
Term used to describe compounds with solubility
ranges from near zero to a few thousand milligrams per liter.
Sparjair
Package wastewater treatment plant by Walker Process Equipment.
Sparjer
Aeration products by Walker Process Equipment.
SparjLift
One- or two-level air injection pump by Walker Process Equipment.
sparkling water
Carbonated water for which the carbon dioxide content comes
from the same source as the water.
SPCC
(1) Spill prevention control and countermeasures. (2) Spill prevention,
containment, and countermeasure.
SPCCP
See “Spill Prevention Control and Countermeasures Plan (SPCCP).”
SPE
Secondary particulate emissions.
special waste
Items such as household hazardous waste, bulky wastes including
refrigerators and pieces of furniture, and tires or used oil.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

species
A population of similar organisms that interbreed among themselves.
speciﬁc conductance
The measure of electrical conductance of water or a water
solution and the reciprocal of speciﬁc resistance. Usually stated in micromhos
per cm.
speciﬁc gravity
The ratio of the density of a substance to the density of water.
speciﬁc oxygen uptake rate (SOUR)
An indicator of a sludge’s odor-causing
potential by aerating a sludge sample and measuring the rate of oxygen
depletion.
speciﬁc resistance
A measure of total ionized solids concentration determined by
the resistance of a 1 cm cube of water to the passage of electricity under
standard conditions.
speciﬁc ultraviolet absorbance (SUVA)
The amount of ultraviolet light that can
be absorbed per unit of total organic carbon which may indicate DBP formation
potential.
SpectraGuard™
Liquid antiscalant and stabilizer for reverse osmosis systems by
Professional Water Technologies, Inc.
spectrophotometer
An instrument for measuring the amount of electromagnetic
radiation absorbed by a sample as a function of wavelength.
Spectrum™
Aeration-mixing systems by Environmental Dynamics Inc.
Speedi-Berm™
Secondary containment system by Aero Tec Laboratories, Inc.
Spektrotherm®
Low pressure, high intensity ultraviolet lamps by PCI-Wedeco
Environmental Technologies, Inc.
spent caustic
Waste product formed when petrochemicals and reﬁned hydrocar-
bons are treated with caustic soda solutions to remove impurities.
spent regenerant
Wastes from the regeneration of an ion exchange system.
Sphaerotilus
A ﬁlamentous bacteria which commonly causes sludge bulking in
activated sludge wastewater treatment plants.
Spher-Flo
Single stage sewage pumps by Aurora Pump.
sphericity
A measure of roundness and wholeness of ﬁlter media and ion exchange
resin beads.
Spill Prevention Control and Countermeasures Plan (SPCCP)
Plan covering
the release of hazardous substances as deﬁned in the Clean Water Act.
spill water
Water released from an impoundment.
spillway
The channel designed to direct overﬂowing water at the top of a dam.
Spira-Cel®
Spiral wound, cross ﬂow ﬁltration membranes by Celgard LLC.
Spiracone®
Conical tank upﬂow clariﬁer by USFilter/General Filter.
Spiractor®
Lime softener by USFilter/Warren.
Spiraﬂo
Peripheral feed clariﬁer by Lakeside Equipment Corp.
Spiraﬂoc
Peripheral feed clariﬁer with ﬂocculation zone in outer raceway by
Lakeside Equipment Corp.
Spiragester
Combination digester and clariﬁer by Lakeside Equipment Corp.
Spiragrit
Grit removal system by Lakeside Equipment Corp.
Spiral Flow®
Water/solids separator by Alar Engineering Corp.
spiral heat exchanger
A type of heat exchanger used in heavy fouling applications.
Spiral Scoop
Dissolved air ﬂotation skimming device by Krofta Engineering Corp.
Spiralﬂow
Dewatering screen fabric by Geschmay GmbH.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Spiralift™
Screw pump by USFilter/Zimpro.
Spiralklean®
Screenings washer by Parkson Corp.
Spiraltek™
Dry sump ﬁlters by Osmonics, Inc.
Spira-Pac
Package digester clariﬁer combination by Lakeside Equipment Corp.
Spiratex™
Point-of-use ﬁltration system by Osmonics, Inc.
Spirathickener
Peripheral feed gravity thickener by Lakeside Equipment Corp.
Spiratrex
Ultraﬁltration membrane by Osmonics, Inc.
Spira-Twin Spiragester
Clariﬁer/digester unit for primary and secondary sedimen-
tation of trickling ﬁlter efﬂuents by Lakeside Equipment Corp.
Spiravac
Peripheral feed clariﬁer with vacuum assisted sludge removal by Lake-
side Equipment Corp.
Spirolift®
Screw-type vertical conveyor by Spirac.
Spiropac®
Screw-type compactor by Spirac.
Spiropress®
Screw-type solids dewatering press by Spirac.
Spirosand®
Shaftless grit classiﬁer by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc.
Spirovortex
Activated sludge treatment system including tertiary ﬁltration by
GL&V/Dorr-Oliver, Inc.
Split-ClarAtor™
Secondary clariﬁer by Waterlink/Aero-Mod Systems.
splitter box
A chamber that equally divides incoming ﬂow into two or more
streams.
spoil
Dirt or rock removed from its original location by strip-mining, dredging,
or construction.
sponge ball cleaning
The use of ﬂexible sponge balls added to a recirculating
liquid to scour scale or other deposits that form on the inside of condenser or
heat exchanger tubes.
spore
A reproductive cell or seed of a microbe, often dormant or environmentally
resistant.
sprawl
Unplanned development of open land.
spray dryer
Sludge-drying device utilizing centrifugal force to atomize sludge
into ﬁne particles and spray them into the top of a drying chamber.
spray irrigation
The spreading of treated wastewater on agricultural land by
spraying.
spray tower scrubber
A device that sprays alkaline water into a chamber where
acid gases present to aid in the neutralizing of the gas.
Spray-Film®
Vapor compression distillation unit by Aqua-Chem, Inc.
Spraymaster®
Low-headroom packaged deaerator by Cleaver-Brooks.
spring
A natural ﬂow of water from the ground.
spring turnover
See “turnover.”
spring water
Bottled water collected from an underground formation from which
the water ﬂows naturally from the surface, or a bore hole that taps the spring
and is located near where the spring emerges.
Sprint™
Submersible pump product line by Crane Pumps & Systems.
Sprout-Bauer
Former name of Andritz-Ruthner, Inc. screening equipment product
line.
Spyder™
Fixed-grid sludge withdrawal system by Roberts Filter Group.
SQBE
Small quantity burner exemption.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

SQG
See “small quantity generator.”
SQHs
See “small-quantity handlers.”
Squarex
Circular sludge collector mechanism with pivoted corner extensions for
square basins by GL&V/Dorr-Oliver, Inc.
squeegee
See “small quantity generator (SQG).”
SR-7™
Ion exchange resins by Sybron Chemicals, Inc.
SRC
Solvent-reﬁned coal.
SRF
See “State Revolving Fund (SRF).”
SRM
Standard reference method.
SRT
See “solids retention time (SRT).”
SS
See “suspended solids (SS).”
SSA
Sole source aquifer.
SSAC
Soil site assimilated capacity.
SSI
Screening Systems International.
SSMS
Spark source mass spectrometry.
SSO
See “sanitary sewer overﬂow (SSO).”
SSPC
Society for Protective Coatings. Formerly “Steel Structures Painting Council.”
SSPMA
Sump and Sewage Pump Manufacturers Association.
SST
See “stainless steel (SST).”
SSV
See “settled sludge volume (SSV).”
Stabilaire
Package contact stabilization treatment plant formerly offered by USFil-
ter/Envirex.
stability index
See “Langelier Saturation Index (LSI).”
stabilization pond
A large shallow basin used for wastewater treatment by natural
processes involving the use of algae and bacteria to accomplish biological
oxidation of organic matter.
StablCal™
Formazin turbidity standards by Hach Co.
stable air
A motionless mass of air that holds instead of dispersing pollutants.
stack
(1) A vertical conveyance method for the elevated discharge and dispersion
of pollutants. (2) Common term for the key element of an electrodialysis unit
consisting of multiple membrane cells with electrodes on both ends.
stack effect
Air, as in a chimney, that moves upward because it is warmer than
the ambient atmosphere.
stack gas
See “ﬂue gas.”
StackMasterIMS™
Continuous emissions monitor by Molecular Analytics LLC.
stage
One of several units of a ﬂash evaporator, each of which operates at a
successively lower pressure.
stagnant
Motionless, not ﬂowing in a current or stream.
Stahlermatic®
Rotating biological contacter wastewater treatment system by
Stahler GmbH.
stainless steel (SST)
Corrosion resistant steel containing a minimum of 12% chro-
mium as the principal alloying element.
stakeholder
Any organization, governmental entity, or individual that has a stake
in or may be impacted by a given approach to environmental regulation,
pollution prevention, energy conservation, etc.
STAKﬁlter
High volume vertical pressure screen ﬁlter by Everﬁlt Corp.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Stak-Tracker™
Continuous emissions monitoring system by GE Reuter-Stokes.
Standard Industrial Classiﬁcation (SIC)
A U.S. government numbering system
used to categorize industrial facilities.
Standard Methods
Common abbreviation for the reference book Standard Meth-
ods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, widely used in water and
wastewater testing and analysis, and published jointly by APHA, AWWA, and
WEF.
standard plate count
See “heterotrophic plate count (HPC).”
standard seawater
A widely accepted “standard” total dissolved solids concentra-
tion of approximately 36,000 mg/L, considered to be typical of most seawaters.
standard solution
A solution whose strength or reacting value per unit volume is
known.
standpipe
A vertical, cylindrical water storage tank of uniform diameter with a
height greater than its diameter.
Stanley Compo-Cast
Former manufacturer of nonmetallic sludge collector wear
shoes now made by Trusty Cook, Inc.
stapling
The entanglement of stringy or ﬁbrous debris on a mesh or bar rack.
Star Filter®
Filter press by Star Systems, Inc.
STAR®
Anaerobic package plants by ADI Systems, Inc.
StarScreen
In-channel ﬁne screen by Sernagiotto Technologies.
Sta-Sieve
Static ﬁne screen by SWECO Engineering Corp.
Stata-Tube Mixer™
Motionless mixer by TAH Industries, Inc.
State Implementation Plan (SIP)
Plans to implement air quality standards
required of each state under the Clean Air Act.
State Revolving Fund (SRF)
A U.S. EPA program awarding grants to states for
use in community projects which comply with public health protection needs,
with an emphasis on small drinking water systems.
static head
The vertical distance between a ﬂuid’s supply surface level and free
discharge level.
Static Mixaerator™
Static mixing aerators by JDV Equipment Corp.
static mixer
Motionless device consisting of ﬁxed bafﬂes incorporated into chan-
nels or pipelines to create turbulence and mix additives added upstream.
static pile composting
A composting method where piles of municipal wastewa-
ter solids are aerated to eliminate the need for remixing.
static screen
Fine screen using a stationary, inclined screen deck that acts as a
sieve to remove solids from liquids. Also known as a “rundown screen” or
“sidehill screen” or “static screen.”
static tube diffuser
A coarse bubble diffuser consisting of a vertically oriented
cylinder with internal bafﬂes to promote air/water mixing.
stationary source
A ﬁxed-site producer of pollution, mainly power plants and
other facilities using industrial combustion processes.
stator
The stationary member of an electric motor or generator.
Stato-Screen
Static screen by Vulcan Industries, Inc.
Stauffer Chemical
Former name of Rhone-Poulenc Basic Chemical Co.
steady state
An equilibrium condition that exists in a system.
Steady Stream
Turbidimeter by GLI International.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

steam chest
The steam chamber adjacent to a heat exchanger tubesheet.
steam stripper
The process of removing volatile and semi-volatile contaminants
from liquid where steam and liquid are passed countercurrently through a
packed tower.
STEL
See “short term exposure limit (STEL).”
STEM
Scanning transmission-electron microscope.
Stengel Bafﬂe
Inlet bafﬂe for rectangular sludge collector by USFilter/Zimpro.
stenothermophiles
Bacteria that grow best at temperatures above 60°C.
step aeration
Variation of the activated sludge process where settled wastewater
is introduced at several points in the aeration tank to equalize the F/M ratio.
Step Screen®
In-channel ﬁne screen by Hans Huber GmbH.
Stepaire
Circular package step aeration wastewater treatment plant formerly
offered by USFilter/Envirex.
sterile
Free from bacteria or other microorganisms.
sterilization
The destruction or removal of all living organisms within a system.
Ster-L-Ray™
Germicidal ultraviolet lamps by Atlantic Ultraviolet Corp.
SternPAC™
Polyaluminum coagulant by Sternson Ltd.
Stiff & Davis Index
Index used to determine the saturation point of calcium car-
bonate in seawater or other highly saline water.
STIG
Steam injected gas turbine.
still
Apparatus used in distillation.
stilling well
A tube or chamber used to dampen waves or surges in a large body
of water usually used for purposes of water level measurement.
Sti-P3®
Steel tank standard for double wall underground tank with cathodic pro-
tection by Steel Tank Institute.
stock solution
A concentrated chemical solution, often used as a reagent.
stoichiometric
The ratio of chemical substances reacting in water that corresponds
to their combining weights in the theoretical chemical reaction.
stoker
A mechanical device that feeds solid fuel to a furnace.
Stokes’ Law
Law that deﬁnes the settling velocity of a particle based on its density
and size.
stop log
A removable wooden, steel, or concrete bulkhead which ﬁts into vertical
grooves in a channel to stop water ﬂow.
storage lagoon
A lagoon constructed with a sealed bottom used to store and collect
solids.
Stord
Former name of Atlas-Stord, Inc.
Storm King™
Vortex-type separation system by H.I.L. Technology, Inc.
storm sewer
Collection system of underground piping used to remove water
resulting from precipitation runoff.
Stormceptor®
Stormwater treatment device by Stormceptor Corp.
StormFilter™
Stormwater ﬁltration and management system by Stormwater
Management.
StormGate™
High ﬂow bypass by Stormwater Management.
StormTreat™
Stormwater collection and treatment system by StormTreat Sys-
tems, Inc.
stormwater
Water resulting from precipitation runoff.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

STP
(1) Sewage treatment plant. Equivalent to “WWTP.” (2) Standard temperature
and pressure.
Straightline®
Group of wastewater treatment products by USFilter/Envirex.
strainer
A device that retains solids but allows liquids to ﬂow through.
Strain-O-Matic
Self-cleaning strainer by Hayward Industrial Products, Inc.
StrainPress®
Screenings and trash removal compactor by Parkson Corp.
Stranco
Former name of USFilter/Stranco.
Strantrol
Chemical controller for disinfection systems by USFilter/Stranco.
Strata Clear
Water ﬂotation separator by Smith & Loveless, Inc.
StrataMix
Fine bubble diffuser by Wilﬂey Weber, Inc.
Strata-Sand™
Continuously backwashed gravity sand ﬁlter by F.B. Leopold Com-
pany, Inc. (U.S.) and Simon-Hartley, Ltd. (U.K.).
Stratavap
Evaporator system by Licon, Inc.
stratosphere
The level of the atmosphere containing most of the earth’s ozone
that lies between the troposphere and the mesosphere.
stray current corrosion
Electrochemical corrosion caused by stray currents leak-
ing from an electrical installation.
Stream Saver™
Automated spill control system by ILC Dover, Inc.
streaming current
The net ionic and colloidal surface charges of suspended solid
particles in solution.
streaming current detector (SCD)
Measuring device used to detect and monitor
the net electrical charge of particles in solution after coagulants have been added.
Streamline
Flow proportional sampler by American Sigma, Inc.
Streamline
Rectangular chain and ﬂight collector by Purestream, Inc.
streptococcus
A genus of bacteria that includes some of the most common human
pathogens.
stress corrosion cracking
Formation of cracks caused by the action of a corrosive
medium in combination with tensile stress.
stress relieving
Heat treatment carried out to reduce internal stresses in steel.
Stress-Key
Pre-cast concrete packaged sewage treatment plants by Marolf, Inc.
strip cropping
Growing crops in a systematic arrangement of strips or bands that
serve as barriers to wind and water erosion.
strip mining
A method of mining where surface soil and strata are removed to
gain access to the mineral deposits.
stripper
Device used to remove volatile and semi-volatile contaminants from water.
Stripper®
Multistaged diffused-bubble aeration system by Lowry Aeration Sys-
tems, Inc.
Stripperator
Treatment unit for hydrocarbon-contaminated water by Ejector Sys-
tems, Inc.
strong acid
An acid that approaches 100% ionization in dilute solutions.
strong acid cation exchanger
A cation exchange resin with an exchange site
capable of splitting neutral salts to form their corresponding free acids.
strong acid ion exchanger
Ion exchange using a cationic resin that contains
exchangeable functional groups derived from a strong acid.
strong base anion exchanger
An anion exchange resin with an exchange site
capable of splitting neutral salts to form their corresponding free bases.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

strong base ion exchange
Ion exchange using an anionic resin that contains
exchangeable functional groups.
strong base load factor z
The sum of alkalinity, sulfate, chloride, silica, and car-
bon dioxide expressed as calcium carbonate equivalents.
Stuart-Carter
Walking beam ﬂocculator by JDV Equipment Corp.
SU
Standard unit.
subchronic
Of intermediate duration, usually used to describe studies or levels of
exposure between 5 and 90 days.
subdrainage
The control and removal of excess groundwater, usually by means
of pipe drains that intercept seepage and/or lower the water table.
subituminous coal
A grade of coal with a heat content higher than that of lignite
but lower than bituminous.
sublimation
The process of changing a gas to a solid, or a solid to a gas, without
going through the liquid phase.
submerged aquatic vegetation
Vegetation such as sea grasses that cannot with-
stand excessive drying and therefore live with their leaves at or below the
water surface.
submerged MBR
An MBR conﬁguration in which the membranes are immersed
directly within the activated sludge reactor.
submerged tube evaporator
An evaporator where steam enters a tube bundle
submerged in the ﬂuid to be boiled.
submerged weir
A weir which when in use has a water level on the downstream
side at an elevation equal to, or higher than, the weir crest. Also called a
“drowned weir.”
subnatant
Liquid remaining beneath the surface of ﬂoating solids.
Suboscreen®
In-channel rotary ﬁne screen by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc. (Western
Hemisphere) and USFilter/Contra-Shear.
Subrotor
Progressing cavity pump by Monoﬂo.
subsidence
The lowering of the natural land surface due to a reduction of the ﬂuid
pressure, removal of underlying supporting material, compaction due to wet-
ting, or added loads on the land surface.
subsonic ﬂow
Liquid ﬂow at a speed that is less than the speed of sound in the ﬂuid.
substrate
The organic matter or nutrients used as food substances during biolog-
ical wastewater treatment.
subtropics
The regions bordering the tropical zone.
Sucoﬂow®
Aeration diffuser by Huber+Suhner AG.
suction head
The head between the centerline of a pump and the water level on
the pump’s suction side.
Sulf Control®
Sulﬁde inhibitor for prevention of hydrogen sulﬁde formation by
NuTech Environmental Corp.
sulfamic acid
Acid often used as a cleaning agent. Chemical formula is HSO3NH2.
sulfate
The divalent, negative SO4 anion or an ester containing the anion.
sulfate-reducing bacteria
Bacteria capable of reducing sulfate or other forms of
oxidized sulfur to hydrogen sulﬁde gas.
SulfaTreat®-OC
Hydrogen sulﬁde removal process by SulfaTreat Co.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Sulfaver
Reagent chemical used to determine phosphates concentration in water
by Hach Co.
Sulfex®
Sulﬁde precipitation process for heavy metal removal by USFilter/Indus-
trial Wastewater Systems.
sulﬁde
The divalent, negative S anion or a salt containing the anion.
sulfonator
Device used to inject and meter sulfur dioxide to dechlorinate water.
sulfonic acid
An organic acid used to provide some cation exchange resin with
its ion exchange capability. Chemical formula is SO3H.
SulfOx™
Biological oxidant for elimination of odors and toxicity from wastewater
and sludges by Sybron Chemicals, Inc.
Sulftech®
Reducing agent by General Chemical Corp.
sulfur
A ﬂammable, nonmetallic element with many commercial uses. Chemical
symbol is S.
sulfur oxides (SOX)
Air contaminants resulting from the combustion of fuels
containing sulfur in the presence of oxygen.
sulfuric acid
A toxic corrosive acid capable of dissolving most metals. Chemical
formula is H2SO4.
Sulfur-Rite™
A hydrogen sulﬁde and light mercapton scavenger system by USFil-
ter/Gas Technologies.
sullage
Wastewater that drains from a home, farmyard, refuse heap, or street.
Sulzer
Screenings grinder by GL&V/Dorr-Oliver, Inc.
Sumigate®
Rubber dam for combined sewer overﬂow applications by Rodney Hunt
Co.
sump
A pit or reservoir that serves to collect water or wastewater for subsequent
removal from the system.
sump pump
A pump used to remove water or wastewater from a sump or wet well.
Sumpaire™
Self-aspirating jet aerator by ABS Pumps, Inc.
Sump-Gard®
Vertical centrifugal pump by Vanton Pump & Equipment Corp.
Suparator®
Oil/water separator by Lemacon Techniek B.V.
super austenitic stainless steel
Stainless steel alloyed with more than 4% molyb-
denum.
Super Blend™
Cellulose acetate reverse osmosis membranes by TriSep Corp.
Super Detox™
Encapsulation process to chemically stabilize furnace dust and
other heavy metal residues by Conversion Systems, Inc.
Super Dome™
Ceramic dome diffuser by Ferro Corp.
Super Shredder®
In-line macerator by Franklin Miller, Inc.
Super Sieve Screen
Sieve screen by Sizetec, Inc.
Superblock II®
Filter underdrain with water and air/water backwash capabilities
by F.B. Leopold Co., Inc.
Super-Cel®
Diatomaceous earth ﬁlter media by Celite Corp.
Supercell
Dissolved air ﬂotation unit by Krofta Engineering Corp.
Superceptor®
Pump station for oily and greasy wastewater by Thermaco, Inc.
superchlorination
Chlorination with excess dosages which insures disinfection
with short contact times and which produces free or combined residuals so
large as to require dechlorination.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

supercool
To cool a substance in its liquid state at a temperature below its freezing
point.
supercritical water oxidation (SCWO)
High temperature/pressure wastewater
treatment process where organic material is oxidized at temperatures above a
ﬂuid’s critical point.
Super-D-Canter®
Solid bowl decanter centrifuge by Alfa Laval Separation, Inc.
Superdraw
Supernatant withdrawal unit by Walker Process Equipment.
Superﬂoc®
High charge cationic ﬂocculant by Cytec Industries, Inc.
Superfund
A U.S. federal law authorizing identiﬁcation and remediation of unsu-
pervised hazardous waste sites. See “CERCLA.”
Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act
A 1986 U.S. law passed to
reauthorize and expand CERCLA and require public disclosure of chemical
release information and development of an emergency response plan.
Superfund Innovative Technology Evaluation (SITE)
EPA-supported research,
development, and demonstration projects designed to develop new remediation
technologies.
Superfuser
Fine bubble diffuser by USF/Envirex.
superheat
The sensible heat in a gas above the amount needed to maintain the
gas phase.
superheated steam
Steam with additional heat added after vaporization, increas-
ing its temperature and energy.
Supermal
Pearlitic malleable iron chain material by Jeffrey Chain Corp.
supernatant
Liquid above the settled sludge layer in a sedimentation basin.
Superpulsator®
Solids contact clariﬁer utilizing inclined plates and intermittent
pulsing to expand the sludge blanket by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
SuperSand™
Continuous sand ﬁlter by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
supersaturation
A solution containing more of a dissolved substance than is
usually possible at equilibrium.
SuperScraper™
Bottom sludge scraper by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
SuperSettler™
Inclined plate clariﬁer by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
SuperSkimmer™
Surface scum skimmer by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
Superslant™
Inclined plates for clariﬁcation by Filtronics, Inc.
Supersorbon
Solvent recovery plant by Dedert Corp.
Superstill
Former name of VaPure vapor compression still by Paul Mueller Co.
Superthickener
Large diameter center pier gravity thickener by GL&V/Dorr-
Oliver, Inc.
Super-Trasher
Vertical sludge pump by Vanton Pump & Equipment Corp.
supplied air respirator (SAR)
Respirator using an airline or tank to provide air
to the facepiece.
support gravel
Layers of graded gravel between underdrain openings and ﬁlter
media to prevent media from leaking into the underdrain.
Supracell
Dissolved air ﬂotation unit by Krofta Engineering Corp.
Suprex™
Mixed bed-type condensate polisher by Graver Co.
surcharge
(1) The height of wastewater in a sewer manhole above the crown of
the sewer when the sewer is ﬂowing completely full. (2) Loads on a system
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

beyond those normally anticipated. (3) An extra monetary charge imposed —
especially on ﬂows into a wastewater collection system — when set quantity
or quality limits are exceeded.
SURF®
Two-stage contact clariﬁer/ﬁlter by USFilter/General Filter.
surface aerator
Mechanical aeration device consisting of a partially submerged
impeller attached to a motor and mounted on ﬂoats or a ﬁxed structure.
surface condenser
A condenser, usually of the shell-and-tube design, that pro-
vides a suitable heat transfer surface area for condensing to occur where
cooling water and process ﬂuid remain separated.
surface impoundment
A natural topographic depression, man-made excavation,
or diked area formed primarily of earthen materials to hold an accumulation
of liquid wastes or waste-containing free liquids.
surface loading rate
A criteria used for design of sedimentation tanks expressed
as ﬂow per day per unit of basin surface area. Also called “overﬂow rate.”
surface mining
See “strip mining.”
Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act (SMCRA)
A 1977 U.S. law that
set performance standards for environmental protection to be met at most
surface mining operations for coal.
surface runoff
Precipitation, snow melt, or irrigation in excess of what can inﬁl-
trate the soil surface and be stored in small surface depressions.
Surface Scatter
On-line turbidimeter by Hach Co.
surface tension
The force acting on a liquid surface that results in a minimum
liquid surface area. Produced by the unbalanced inward pull exerted on the
layer of surface molecules by molecules below the liquid surface.
surface wash
An auxiliary high pressure water spray system used to agitate and
wash the surface of granular media ﬁlters.
surface water
Water from sources open to the atmosphere including lakes, reser-
voirs, rivers, and streams.
Surface Water Treatment Rule
A 1989 EPA regulation that set maximum con-
taminant level goals for constituents including Giardia lamblia and viruses
for public water systems using surface water sources or groundwater under
the direct inﬂuence of surface water.
surface-active agent
See “surfactant.”
Surfact
Process to upgrade activated sludge system with air driven rotating bio-
logical contactors by USFilter/Envirex.
surfactant
A surface-active agent such as a detergent which, when mixed with
water, generally increases its cleaning ability, solubility, and penetration, while
reducing its surface tension.
Surfaer
Slow speed surface aerator by USFilter/Aerator Products.
Surfpac™
Vertical-type PVC trickling ﬁlter media by the former American Surf-
pac Corp.
surge-ﬂow irrigation
A surface irrigation technique that involves intermittent
application of irrigation water to a ﬁeld for 50% of an irrigation cycle and
diversion to another area for the remainder of the cycle.
suspect material
Building material suspected of containing asbestos.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

suspended growth process
Biological wastewater treatment process where the
microbes and substrate are maintained in suspension within the liquid.
suspended loads
Sediment particles maintained in the water column by turbulence
and carried with the ﬂow of water.
suspended solids (SS)
Solids captured by ﬁltration through a glass wool mat or
0.45 micron ﬁlter membrane.
suspension
A system in which very small particles are uniformly dispersed in a
liquid or gaseous medium.
suspensoid
Colloidal dispersion of solids in liquid.
sustainable development
Growth that does not result in ecological damage.
Sutorbilt®
Air blower by Gardner Denver Blower Division.
SUVA
See “speciﬁc ultraviolet absorbance (SUVA).”
SVE
See “soil vapor extraction (SVE).”
SVI
See “sludge volume index (SVI).”
SVOC
Semi-volatile organic compound.
SVP-Pure™
Single vessel process for chlorine dioxide technology by EKA Chem-
icals.
SW846
Test methods for evaluating solid waste.
swamp
A type of wetland dominated by woody vegetation but without appreciable
peat deposits. See also “wetlands.”
swamp gas
See “marsh gas.”
Swan®
Analytical instruments by Industrial Analytics, Corp.
SWD
See “side water depth (SWD).”
SWDA
Solid Waste Disposal Act.
sweep ﬂocculation
Coagulation/ﬂocculation process using relatively large
amounts of iron or metal salts to form voluminous ﬂoc particles used to trap
smaller particles.
sweet environment
Environment containing no, or negligible amounts of, hydro-
gen sulﬁde.
sweet water
Brackish water that may be used for drinking even though it may not
meet potable water standards.
sweeten
To remove sulfur contaminants from petroleum products.
swelling
Condition that exists as a result of intrusion of water into a particle.
Swing-Flex™
Check valve by Val-Matic Valve & Manufacturing Corp.
Swingfuser®
Removable aeration header and drop pipe assembly by USFilter/Dif-
fused Air Products Group.
Swingtherm®
Regenerative catalytic oxidizer by Kvaerner Chemetics.
SwingUp
Removable aeration header and drop pipe assembly by USFilter/Aerator
Products.
Swingwirl
Vortex ﬂow meter by Endress+Hauser.
Swirl-Flo™
Solids/liquid separation process by H.I.L. Technology, Inc.
SwirlMix
Complete mix package wastewater treatment plant by Walker Process
Equipment.
Swiss Combi System
Sludge drying and pelletization system by Wheelabrator
Water Technologies, Inc.
SWRO
Seawater reverse osmosis.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

SWTR
See “Surface Water Treatment Rule.”
SybrSorb™
Oil and oleophiphilic compound absorbent by Sybron Chemicals,
Biochemical Division.
SymBio™
Wastewater nitriﬁcation/denitriﬁcation treatment process by Enviro-
quip, Inc.
symbiotic
A relationship between organisms of different species that beneﬁts both
members of the relationship such that neither could carry out certain activities
alone.
syndet
Commonly used contraction for “synthetic detergent.”
synergy
The combined action of two agents that results in a reaction greater than
the sum of the individual agents acting alone.
synfuels
Liquid or gaseous fuels produced from coal, lignite, or other solid carbon
sources.
synthetic detergent
Cleaning agents such as linear alkyl sulfonate that react with
water hardness but whose products are soluble.
synthetic organic chemicals (SOC)
Manmade organic chemicals, some of which
are volatile while others tend to stay dissolved in water instead of evaporating.
Syphonid
Recovery device for sinker contaminates by Science Application Inter-
national Corp.
System-3
Oily water treatment system by Megator Corp.
systemic toxicity
Adverse effects caused by a substance that affects a body in a
general rather than local manner.
T
T&O
Taste and odor.
T-2000®
Dry sorbent for use in baghouses by Solvay America.
tailings
Residue from the separation of useful values from ore.
tailpipe standards
Emissions limitations applicable to engine exhausts from
mobile sources.
tailwater
The runoff of irrigation water from the lower end of an irrigated ﬁeld.
Tait-Andritz
Former name of Andritz-Ruthner, Inc.
TAK®
Ultraviolet systems by PCI-Wedeco Environmental Technologies, Inc.
TAMS
Toxic air monitoring system.
tangential screen
See “static screen.”
tank blanketing
See “gas blanket.”
Tankleenor
Petroleum tank cleaner by Gorman-Rupp Co.
tannin
Colored compounds that form when plant matter degrades in water.
tapered aeration
Variation of the activated sludge process where the amount of
air supplied in an aeration basin is tapered to match the demand exerted by
the microbes.
tapered ﬂocculation
A ﬂocculation process utilizing multiple compartments and
a gradually increasing velocity gradient.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

tapeworm
A parasitic ﬂatworm that can live in the digestive tract or liver of
vertebrates.
TAPPI
Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry.
tardigrade
Minute water animals with segmented bodies and four pairs of unseg-
mented legs.
tare
The empty weight of a vessel or container determined by deducting the weight
of the contents from the total weight of the full load.
Targa
Vapor compression water desalination unit by Mechanical Equipment Co.,
Inc.
Taskmaster®
Screenings grinder by Franklin Miller, Inc.
taste and odors
Two important characteristics of drinking water which are the
targets of minimization or elimination in a water treatment plant.
Taulman/Weiss
In-vessel composting system by USFilter/Davis Process.
taxis
The involuntary movement of a free-moving cell or organism toward or away
from an external stimulus such as light.
TBF
See “traveling bridge ﬁlter (TBF).”
TBT
See “top brine temperature.”
TC
See “total carbon (TC).”
TCA
Trichloroethane.
TCD
Thermo-compression distillation.
TCDD
Tetrachlorodibenzoparadioxin. A dioxin byproduct.
TCDF
Tetrachlorodibenzofuran.
TCE
See “trichloroethylene (TCE).”
TCF
Totally chlorine free.
TCF®
Horizontal tube cartridge ﬁlter by Ropur AG.
TCLP
See “toxicity characteristic leaching procedure (TCLP).”
TCR
See “Total Coliform Rule (TCR).”
TCRI
Toxic Chemical Release Inventory.
TD
Toxic dose.
TDH
See “total dynamic head (TDH).”
T-Disc™
Disc-type oil skimmer by Vikoma International Ltd.
TDS
See “total dissolved solids (TDS).”
Teacup™
Grit removal system by Eutek Systems, Inc.
TEC
Tonka Equipment Co.
Technasand™
Continuous backwashing sand ﬁlter by WesTech Engineering Inc.
technology-based limitations
Industry-speciﬁc efﬂuent limitations applied to a
discharge when it will not cause a violation of water quality standards at low
stream ﬂows.
TechXtract™
Chemical decontamination process by EET, Inc.
TecTank
Bolted steel storage tank by A.O. Smith Engineered Storage Products.
tectonic
Relating to changes in the structure and forces produced in the earth’s
crust.
Tecweigh®
Volumetric feeder by Tecnetics Industries, Inc.
TEFC
See “totally enclosed fan cooled (TEFC).”
TEG
Tetraethylene glycol.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Tekkem
Lime slaker by RDP Technologies, Inc.
Tekleen™
Filter screen by Automatic Filters, Inc.
TEL
See “tetraethyl lead (TEL).”
telemetry
The process of transmitting measured data by radio to a distant station.
TeleTote™
Open channel electromagnetic ﬂow meter by Marsh-McBirney, Inc.
TEM
See “transmission electron microscope (TEM).”
TEMA
Tubular Equipment Manufacturers Association.
temperate zone
The middle latitude regions of the earth, located between latitude
23°26′ and 66°33′ north or south, which have moderate climates and distinct
summer and winter seasons.
temperature inversion
See “inversion.”
temporary hardness
Hardness associated with bicarbonates of calcium and mag-
nesium which precipitate upon boiling.
temporary threshold shift (TTS)
A temporary reduction in hearing ability result-
ing from noise overexposure.
Ten States Standards
Common name for “Recommended Standards for Waste-
water Facilities,” a report of the Wastewater Committee of the Great Lakes-
Upper Mississippi River Board of State Public Health and Environmental
Engineers.
Tenkay®
Cartridge air ﬁlter by Farr Co.
tensile strength
The maximum tensile load per square unit of cross section that
a material is able to withstand.
Tenten
Continuously backwashed gravity sand ﬁlter by F.B. Leopold Company,
Inc. (U.S.) and Simon-Hartley, Ltd. (U.K.).
TEOM®
Ambient air particulate sampler by Rupprecht & Patashnick Co., Inc.
teratogenic
A chemical or agent with properties which cause disﬁguring by affect-
ing the genetic characteristics of an organism.
terminal headloss
The headloss at the end of a ﬁlter run cycle signifying that the
ﬁlter bed is ﬁlled with solids.
terminal settling velocity
The maximum sedimentation rate of an unhindered
suspended particle.
terracing
Dikes built along the contour of sloping farm land which hold runoff
and sediment to reduce erosion.
Terra-Gator®
Pressurized waste sludge injection system by Ag-Chem Equipment
Co.
TerraStor™
Temporary containment system by ModuTank, Inc.
tertiary efﬂuent
The efﬂuent discharged from a tertiary treatment process.
tertiary ﬁltration
The use of a granular media ﬁlter to improve secondary waste-
water efﬂuent quality.
tertiary treatment
The use of physical, chemical, or biological means to improve
secondary wastewater efﬂuent quality.
TES Filter
Package, dual media gravity ﬁlter by USFilter/Davco.
tetrachloroethylene (PCE)
See “perchloroethylene (PCE, also PERC).”
tetraethyl lead (TEL)
An antiknock additive used in gasoline. The U.S. phased
out its use in 1989 due to concerns over lead emissions.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Tetratex®
Microporous PTFE membrane for ﬁltration by Tetratec.
tetratogenesis
The introduction of nonhereditary birth defects in a developing
fetus by exogenous factors such as physical or chemical agents acting in the
womb to interfere with normal embryonic development.
Texas Star
Circular membrane diffuser by Aeration Research Co.
TF/AS
See “trickling ﬁlter-activated sludge (TF/AS).”
TF/SC
Trickling ﬁlter-solids contact.
TFC®
Reverse osmosis membrane by Koch Membrane Systems, Inc.
TFCL®
Thin ﬁlm composite reverse osmosis membrane by Koch Membrane Sys-
tems, Inc.
TFCS™
Reverse osmosis elements by Koch Membrane Systems, Inc.
TFM®
Reverse osmosis membrane by Osmonics Desal.
TGNMO
Total gaseous nonmethane organics.
thalweg
The line of maximum depth in a river or stream.
THC
Total hydrocarbons.
theoretical oxygen demand (ThOD)
Determination of organic matter in a water
or wastewater calculated on the basis of the chemical formula of the constituents.
therapeutic index
The ratio of the dose required to produce toxic or lethal effects
to dose required to produce nonadverse or therapeutic response.
ThermaGrid™
Regenerative thermal oxidizer by McGill Airclean Corp.
thermal oxidizer
An emissions control device that utilizes heat to accomplish
VOC oxidation.
thermal pollution
The discharge of heated efﬂuent into the environment resulting
in an undesired increase in ambient temperature, above that resulting from
natural solar radiation.
thermal treatment
Processes such as incineration or pyrolysis which use elevated
temperatures to treat hazardous waste.
thermal value
See “heat value.”
ThermoBlender™
Sludge and quicklime blending unit by RDP Technologies, Inc.
thermocline
The middle layer in a stratiﬁed lake that results from varying water
densities.
thermocompressor
A steam ejector that uses high pressure steam to increase the
pressure of a lower pressure steam.
ThermoFeeder™
Chemical feed unit by RDP Technologies, Inc.
ThermoFlo
Spray coolers by Aqua-Aerobic Systems, Inc.
thermophiles
Bacteria that grow best at temperatures between 45° and 60°C.
thermophilic digestion
Sludge digestion within a thermophilic range of approx-
imately 45° to 60°C.
Thermo-Sludge Dewatering™
Float-type sludge thickening process by Dontech,
Inc.
Thermox®
Flue gas analyzer by Ametek Inc., Process & Analytical Division.
thickener
A tank, vessel, or apparatus used to reduce the proportion of water in
a slurry or sludge.
thickening
A procedure used to increase the solids content of sludge by removing
a portion of the liquid.
ThickTech™
Rotary drum thickener by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

thin ﬁlm evaporator
Evaporator where liquid ﬂows or is sprayed over heat trans-
fer surfaces, usually tubes, in a thin, turbulent ﬁlm.
Thioguard®
Odor and corrosion control product by Premier Chemicals.
thiols
See “mercaptans.”
Thio-Red
Dissolved metal precipitant by Etus, Inc.
thixotrope
A colloid whose properties are affected by mechanical treatment.
thixotropy
The time-dependent property of some emulsions and sludges to change
rheological and physical characteristics when left at rest.
THM
See “trihalomethane (THM).”
THMFP
See “trihalomethane formation potential (THMFP).”
ThOD
See “theoretical oxygen demand (ThOD).”
Thomas Conveyor
Former name of USFilter/Thomas Conveyor
3DP™
Three-belt dewatering ﬁlter by Baker Process.
threshold dose
The minimum dose of a substance to produce an effect.
threshold level
Time-weighted average pollutant concentration values, exposure
beyond which is likely to adversely affect human health.
threshold limit value (TLV)
The maximal allowable workplace air level for a
chemical.
threshold odor number (TON)
The number of dilutions of odor-free water
required to eliminate the odor in a water sample.
Thru Clean
Back cleaned mechanical bar screen by USFilter/Headworks Products.
TIC
See “total inorganic carbon (TIC).”
tidal marsh
Low, ﬂat marshlands traversed by channels and tidal hollows and
subject to tidal inundation. Normally the only vegetation present is salt tolerant
bushes and grasses.
tide
The periodic rising and falling of the sea that results from the gravitational
attraction of the moon.
tide gate
A swinging gate in a sewer pipe that prevents seawater from entering
the system during high tides.
Tideﬂex™
Air diffuser and ﬂexible check valve by Red Valve Co., Inc.
TIE
Toxicity identiﬁcation evaluation.
Tile
Ceramic tile ﬁlter underdrain by Roberts Filter Group.
tile ﬁeld
A system used for subsurface discharge of treated wastewater efﬂuent
using open-jointed tile placed on gravel ﬁll.
tilted plate separator
Oil separation device utilizing inclined plates to separate
free nonemulsiﬁed oil and water based on their density difference.
time-lag
The time interval between the beginning of an event and the response
that occurs as a result of the event.
time-weighted average (TWA)
In air sampling, the average air concentration of
contaminants during a given period.
TIN
Total inorganic nitrogen.
tinajero
A home water ﬁltration device where water is collected in a clay pot after
ﬁltration through a porous stone.
tines
The teeth or prongs of a bar screen cleaning rake.
tipping
The dumping of the contents of a waste truck at a waste disposal facility.
tipping fee
The fee charged to dispose of solid waste at a sanitary landﬁll.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Tipping Scum Weir
Pivoting scum weir by F.B. Leopold Co., Inc.
TISE
Take it somewhere else. See also “NIMBY.”
Titan ASD 200™
Reverse osmosis antiscalant/dispersant by Professional Water
Technologies, Inc.
Titan-90™
Multi-media automatic backwashing system by Serﬁlco, Ltd.
titer
The concentration of a substance in solution as determined by titration.
Titeseal®
Copolymer ﬂuid control gate by Plasti-Fab, Inc.
titration
A method of determining the concentration of a dissolved substance in
terms of the smallest amount of a reagent required to bring about a given effect
in reaction with a known volume of test solution.
Titraver
Chemicals used in analysis of water hardness by Hach Co.
TKN
See “total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN).”
TLC™
Thin layer composite reverse osmosis membrane by Osmonics, Inc.
TLV
See “threshold limit value (TLV).”
TLV-C
TLV-Ceiling.
TLV-STEL
TLV-Short term exposure limit.
TLV-TWA
TLV-time weighted average.
TMDL
Total maximum daily load. An estimate of the capacity of a speciﬁc
waterbody to assimilate pollution and still achieve designated uses.
TMP
See “transmembrane pressure (TMP).”
TMRC
Theoretical maximum residue contribution.
TMU
Multiple-tank unit cars used to carry chlorine ton cylinders.
TMX®
Thermatrix, Inc.
TNCWS
See “transient, noncommunity water system (TNCWS).”
TNT
Trinitrotoluene.
TOA
Trace organic analysis.
TOC
See “total organic carbon (TOC).”
TOD
See “total oxygen demand (TOD).”
toilet
A small room with a bowl-shaped ﬁxture for urination and defecation. Also
can refer speciﬁcally to the ﬁxture.
Tolhurst
Laboratory basket centrifuge by Baker Process/Ketema.
ton
A unit of weight equal to 2000 pounds or 907.2 kilograms. Also called “short
ton.”
TON
See “threshold odor number (TON).”
ton container
A 1-ton chlorine storage container.
TonkaFlo
Pumps for RO/UF/DI applications by Osmonics, Inc.
tonnage
The amount of waste that a landﬁll accepts, usually expressed in tons per
month.
tonne
See “metric ton.”
Tonozone
Ozone generator by Praxair-Trailigaz Ozone Co.
top brine temperature
The maximum temperature of the ﬂuid being evaporated
in an evaporator system.
topography
The physical features of a surface area including relative elevations
and the position of natural and manmade features.
topping cycle
Cogeneration system where electricity is produced by the combus-
tion process, and then byproduct heat is scavenged for thermal processes.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Tornado®
Aspirating type surface aerator by Aeromix Systems, Inc.
Torpedo™
Clariﬁer foam and grease removal unit by United Industries, Inc.
Torpedo Filter
Floating microﬁlter by BTG, Inc.
Torpedo Pump
Reverse osmosis pump by Pumps Unlimited.
Torque-Flow
Grit handling vortex slurry pump by Envirotech Pumpsystems.
TorusDisc
Sludge dryer/cooler by Hosokawa Bepex Corp.
Torvex®
Catalytic oxidation system by Süd-Chemie Prototech Inc.
total carbon (TC)
A quantitative measure of both total inorganic and total organic
carbon in water and wastewater, determined instrumentally by chemical oxida-
tion to carbon dioxide and subsequent infrared detection in a carbon analyzer.
Total Coliform Rule (TCR)
An EPA rule regulating known pathogens in drink-
ing water.
total dissolved solids (TDS)
The weight per unit volume of all volatile and non-
volatile solids dissolved in a water or wastewater after a sample has been
ﬁltered to remove colloidal and suspended solids.
total dynamic head (TDH)
The total energy a pump must impart to water to move
it from one point to another, measured as the difference in height between the
free water surface level on the discharge and suction sides of a pump.
total inorganic carbon (TIC)
The sum of all inorganic carbon species in a water
or wastewater.
total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN)
The sum of the organic plus ammonia nitrogen
in a water sample which is determined by digesting and distilling the sample
and then measuring the ammonia concentration in the distillate.
total organic carbon (TOC)
Measurement of organic matter in a water or waste-
water that can be oxidized in a high temperature furnace.
total oxygen demand (TOD)
Measurement of organic matter in a water or waste-
water that can be converted to stable end products in a platinum-catalyzed
combustion chamber.
total solids (TS)
The sum of dissolved and suspended solids in a water or waste-
water. Matter remaining as residue upon evaporation at 103 to 105°C.
total suspended particulates (TSP)
The concentration of all airborne particulate
matter usually expressed as micrograms of particulate per cubic meter of
sampled air.
total suspended solids (TSS)
The measure of particulate matter suspended in a
sample of water or wastewater. After ﬁltering a sample of a known volume,
the ﬁlter is dried and weighed to determine the residue retained.
total toxic organics (TTO)
The sum of the concentrations of all toxic organic
compounds found in a sample.
total trihalomethane (TTHM)
The sum of the concentration of trihalomethane
compounds rounded to two signiﬁcant ﬁgures.
totally enclosed fan cooled (TEFC)
Designation for motor enclosure that is not
airtight but doesn’t allow free exchange of air between the inside and outside
of the motor case. Exterior cooling is provided by an integral external fan.
totally enclosed nonventilated (TENV)
Designation for motor enclosure that is
not airtight, but constructed so as to prevent free exchange of air between the
inside and outside of the motor case.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

TotalSep
Oil/water separator by Hydro-Flo Technologies, Inc.
TotalTreat
Package wastewater treatment system by USFilter/Industrial Wastewa-
ter Systems.
TotlSep
Oil/water separator by Hydro Flo Technologies.
Toveko®
Continuously operating sand ﬁlter by USFilter/Krüger.
Tow-Bro®
Suction-type sludge removal system for circular clariﬁers by USFil-
ter/Envirex.
Tower Press
Belt ﬁlter press by Roediger Pittsburgh, Inc.
Towerbrom®
Bromine-based biocide by Calgon Corp.
Towermaster
Pressurized sand ﬁlter for cooling tower applications by Axsia Serck
Baker, Inc.
TOX
(1) Total organic halogen. (2) Tetradichloroxylene.
ToxAlarm™
On-line toxicity monitor by Anatel Corp.
TOXFP
Total organic halogen formation potential.
toxic
Capable of causing an adverse effect on biological tissue following physical
contact or absorption.
toxic chemical
Any chemical listed in the EPA rules as “Toxic Chemicals Subject
to Section 313 of the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know
Act of 1986.”
toxic cloud
Airborne plume of gases, vapors, fumes, or aerosols containing toxic
materials.
Toxic Release Inventory (TRI)
Database of toxic releases in the U.S. compiled
from SARA Title III section 313 reports.
toxic substance
Any chemical or material that may present an unreasonable risk
of injury to one’s health or the environment.
Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA)
A 1976 U.S. law authorizing the EPA to
collect information on chemical risks.
toxic waste
A waste that can produce injury upon contact with or by accumulation
in or on the body of a living organism.
toxicant
A substance that is toxic to another organism.
toxicity
The property of being poisonous or causing an adverse effect on a living
organism.
toxicity characteristic leaching procedure (TCLP)
Method used to determine
the amount of a hazardous substance which will leach from a solid when the
solid is subjected to water.
toxicology
The study of adverse effects of chemical on living organisms.
Toxilog
Portable single gas detector by Biosystems, Inc.
toxin
A poisonous material that can cause damage to biological tissue following
physical contact or absorption.
TPAD
Temperature-phased anaerobic digestion, which combines thermophilic and
mesophilic anaerobic digestion.
TPC®
Potassium permanganate by Carus Chemical Co., Inc.
TPH
Total petroleum hydrocarbons.
TPY
Tons per year.
TQM
Total Quality Management.
Trac Pump
Sludge-dredging system by E.S.G. Manufacturing, LLC.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

trace elements
(1) Any elements in a water or wastewater that are present in very
low concentrations. (2) Elements present in minor amounts in the earth’s crust.
trace organics
Organic matter present in water supplies in very low concentrations
which originates from natural sources and the synthetic chemical industry.
Tractor Drive
Circular clariﬁer drive unit by Walker Process Equipment.
Trac-Vac®
Suction sludge removal mechanism by Baker Process.
TracWare™
Particle counting system by Chemtrac Systems, Inc.
TrailigazConcept™
Ozone generator by Praxair-Trailigaz Ozone Co.
transboundary pollutants
Air pollution that travels from one jurisdiction to
another, often crossing state or international boundaries.
transducer
A device that receives energy from one system and retransmits it, often
in another form, to another system.
Trans-Flo™
Rectangular tank secondary clariﬁer by USFilter/Envirex.
transient, noncommunity water system (TNCWS)
A noncommunity water sys-
tem that does not serve 25 of the same nonresidents per day for more than
6 months per year.
transient water system (TWS)
A public water system that serves a nonresident
population.
Transmax®
Medium/coarse bubble air diffuser by Enviroquip, Inc.
transmembrane pressure (TMP)
The average pressure across a membrane, mea-
sured as the hydraulic pressure differential from the feed side to the permeate
side.
transmission electron microscope (TEM)
A microscope with a magniﬁcation
range of 220X to 1,000,000X at a resolution of 2 Å, where illumination is
provided by a beam of electrons which pass through the electron transparent
specimen.
transmission lines
Pipelines that transport raw water from its source to a water
treatment, and then to the distribution grid system.
transmissivity
The rate that water ﬂows though an aquifer under a hydraulic
gradient.
transmutation
Changing one element into another by changing the number of
protons in the atom nucleus.
Trans-Pak®
Solid waste compacting/baling unit by Harris Waste Management
Group, Inc.
transpiration
The loss of water from the leaves and stems of plants.
transpiration ratio
The ratio of the weight of water lost to atmosphere through
transpiration and the weight of dry plant material produced.
transuranic wastes
Radioactive wastes containing isotopes above uranium in the
periodic table which are byproducts of fuel assembly, weapons fabrication,
and reprocessing.
Transvap
Mobile wastewater reduction/recovery system by Licon, Inc.
Trasar®
Control and diagnostic technology by Nalco Chemical Co.
trash
Combustible waste including up to 10% plastic or rubber scraps from com-
mercial and industrial sources.
Trash Hog®
Self-priming, solids handling pumps by ITT A-C Pump.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

trash rack
A coarse screening device using a parallel set of stationary bars typi-
cally spaced at 38 mm (1.5 inch) to 150 mm (6 inches).
trash rake
A mechanical screening device used to remove rough or debris or trash
from a trash rack.
trash-to-energy
Burning trash to produce energy.
Travalift™
Traversing sludge collecting and pumping mechanism formerly
offered by USFilter/Envirex.
Travcyl™
Precision metering pump by EncyNova International, Inc.
traveling band screen
See “traveling water screen (TWS).”
traveling bridge clariﬁer
A rectangular clariﬁer with the sludge removal mech-
anism supported by a traversing bridge.
traveling bridge ﬁlter (TBF)
A granular media ﬁlter with multiple compartments
which can be individually cleaned by a moveable, bridge-mounted backwash-
ing device without taking the entire ﬁlter out of service.
traveling screen
See “traveling water screen (TWS).”
traveling water screen (TWS)
Automatically cleaned screening devices employ-
ing chain-mounted wire mesh panels to remove ﬂoating or suspended solids
from a channel of water.
Traypak™
Deaerator trays by Graver Co.
TRC
Total residual chlorine.
TRE
Toxicity reduction evaluation.
treatability study
A study in which a waste is subjected to a treatment process
to determine whether it is amenable to treatment and/or to determine the
treatment efﬁciency or optimal process conditions for treatment.
treated wastewater
Wastewater that has been subjected to one or more physical,
chemical, and biological processes to reduce its pollution of health hazards.
treatment, storage, and disposal (TSD)
A description of a facility where haz-
ardous waste is treated, stored, and/or disposed.
Trebler
Automatic sampler by Lakeside Equipment Corp.
Trey Deaerator™
Three-stage deaerator by USFilter/Rockford.
TRI
See “Toxic Release Inventory (TRI).”
trial burn
An incinerator test to demonstrate compliance of the unit with RCRA
operating standards.
Triangle Brand®
Copper sulfate product by Phelps Dodge Reﬁning Co.
Triboﬂow
Continuous particulate emissions monitor by Auburn Systems LLC.
Tricanter®
Centrifuge by Krauss Maffei Corp.
Tricellorator
Three compartment dissolved air ﬂotation unit by Pollution Control
Systems, Inc.
Tricep™
Granular resin ﬁltration process for the removal of iron and copper oxides
with oil by Graver Co.
trichloramine
A compound formed by the chlorination of water containing ammo-
nia which may be the source of taste and odors.
trichloroethylene (TCE)
A chlorinated hydrocarbon used as an industrial cleaner
or solvent which may cause organ damage or tumors in humans.
trickle irrigation
Method in which water drips to the soil from perforated tubes
or emitters.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

trickling ﬁlter
An aerobic, ﬁxed ﬁlm wastewater treatment process where organic
matter present in a wastewater is degraded as it is distributed over a biological
ﬁlter bed.
trickling ﬁlter-activated sludge (TF/AS)
Process combining trickling ﬁlter
wastewater treatment followed by an activated sludge process to satisfy some
unique treatment requirement.
Tricon
Concrete water treatment plant with buoyant media ﬂocculator/clariﬁer by
USFilter/Microﬂoc.
Tridair
Dissolved air ﬂotation unit by Engineering Specialties, Inc.
Trident®
Modular water treatment plant with buoyant media ﬂocculator/clariﬁer
by USFilter/CPC.
trihalomethane (THM)
Disinfectant byproducts formed when chlorine reacts
with organic compounds in water. These halogenated organics are named as
derivatives of methane and include suspected carcinogens.
trihalomethane formation potential (THMFP)
An indirect measure of triha-
lomethanes determined by a laboratory test procedure that measures the
amount of trihalomethane precusors in a sample.
Trimite™
Package water treatment plant with buoyant media ﬂocculator/clariﬁer
USFilter/Microﬂoc.
Tri-NOx®
NOx removal process by Tri-Mer Corp.
Triogen
UV disinfection systems by Ozonia North America.
Tri-Packs®
Plastic packing media by Jaeger Products, Inc.
triple point
The condition at which the solid, liquid, and gaseous states of a
substance coexist simultaneously in equilibrium.
Triplex™
Three-stage air scrubber by USFilter/Davis Process.
Trisep™
Oil/solids/water separation ﬁlters by Graver Co.
Triton®
Surface mounted aerator/mixer by Aeration Industries, Inc.
Triton®
Wedgewire screen lateral underdrain system USFilter/Microﬂoc.
Tritor
Front cleaned bar screen and grit removal device by USFilter/Headworks
Products.
Triturator
Screenings grinder by USFilter/Envirex.
TriZone™
Packaged water treatment/ozonation system by USFilter/Microﬂoc.
Troll
Submersible water and temperature level probe by In-Situ, Inc.
Tromax™
Trommel screen by Norkot Mfg. Co.
tromeling
The removal of small diameter solids using a trommel screen.
trommel screen
A cylindrical, rotating screen used to separate solid waste mate-
rial according to size and density.
trophic level
Any of the distinct feeding levels in a food chain.
tropical
Term used to describe the region, climate, or vegetation characteristic of
the tropical zone.
tropical rain forest
The densely forested equatorial regions of the world that
experience very high annual rainfall.
tropical zone
The region of the earth located between the Tropic of Cancer at
latitude 23°26′ north and the Tropic of Capricorn at latitude 23°26′ south,
which has a warm/hot year-round climate.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

troposphere
The lowest level of the atmosphere that extends to a height of between
9 and 16 km above the earth’s surface.
TroubleShooter™
Portable containment unit for hazardous waste spills by Ther-
maFab, Inc.
TRPH
Total recoverable petroleum hydrocarbons.
true color
The color in water caused by the presence of humic or fulvic acids
which result from the decomposition of organic matter.
Tru-Grit
Grit washing and separation system by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
Tru-Gritter
Grit removal system by Vulcan Industries, Inc.
trunnion
A pivot or pin mounted on bearings used to rotate or tilt something.
Tru-Test
Automatic liquid sampler formerly offered by USFilter/Headworks
Products.
TS
See “total solids (TS).”
TSCA
See “Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA).”
TSD
See “treatment, storage, and disposal (TSD).”
TSDF
Treatment, storage, and disposal facility.
TSE
Treated sewage efﬂuent.
TSP
See “total suspended particulates (TSP).”
TSS
See “total suspended solids (TSS).”
TSV
Telescoping sludge valve.
TTHM
See “total trihalomethane (TTHM).”
TTHM>0
Instantaneous total trihalomethane concentration.
TTHMFP
Total trihalomethane formation potential.
TTO
See “total toxic organics (TTO).”
TTS
See “temporary threshold shift (TTS).”
TU
Turbidity unit. See “nephelometric turbidity unit (NTU).”
Tub Scrubber
Single stage dry chemical air scrubber by Puraﬁl, Inc.
tube settlers
A series of parallel inclined tubes used to increase the settling efﬁ-
ciency of sedimentation basins.
tubercles
Knob-like mounds of corrosion on pipe surfaces.
tuberculation
Development or formation of small mounds of corrosion products
on the inside of iron pipe which roughen the pipe and increase its resistance
to water ﬂow.
tubesheet
Flat plate used to secure the ends of tubes in an evaporator, heat
exchanger, or boiler.
TUc
Chronic toxicity unit.
Tuff-Span
Modular tank covers by Enduro Composite Systems.
Tulsion®
High temperature ion exchange resin by Thermax, Ltd.
tundra
An ecosystem dominated by lichens, mosses, grasses, and woody plants
found at high latitudes (arctic tundra) and high altitudes (alpine tundra). Arctic
tundra is underlain by permafrost and is usually saturated.
Tunnel Reactor®
In-vessel composting system by the former Waste Solutions.
turbid
Cloudy or opaque condition of water caused by unsettled particles or
sediment.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

turbidimeter
Instrument used to measure water turbidity by detecting the intensity
of light scattered at angles from a beam of light projected through a water
sample.
turbidity
A qualitative measurement of water clarity resulting from suspended
matter that scatters or otherwise interferes with the passage of light through
the water.
Turbo®
Mechanical surface aerator by Aeration Industries, Inc.
Turbo™
Reverse osmosis booster pump by Pump Engineering, Inc.
TurboBlade™
Low speed mixer with variable pitch impeller blades by Baker
Process.
TurboClean™
Spiral wound membrane element by TriSep Corp.
Turbodrain
Gravity belt thickener by Gebr. Bellmer GmbH.
TURBO-Dryer®
Sludge dryer by Wyssmont Co., Inc.
Turboﬁll™
Random packed air stripper media by Diversiﬁed Remediation Con-
trols, Inc.
TurboFlow™
Soil remediation exhausters and blowers by Invincible AirFlow
Systems.
Turbo-Scour
Continuously cleaned package sand ﬁlters by Smith & Loveless, Inc.
Turboshredder
Cutter assembly for grinder pump by Homa Pump Technology.
TurboStripper™
Air stripping technology by Diversiﬁed Remediation Controls,
Inc.
Turbotron®
Rotary lobe blower by Gardner Denver Blower Division.
Turbo-Vac®
Central vacuum system for dust and airborne particulates by PBR
Industries.
Turbozone®
Catalytic odor oxidizer by RGF O3 Systems, Inc.
Turbulator
Rapid mixing unit by Walker Process Equipment.
turbulence
(1) The ﬂuid property characterized by irregular variation in the speed
and direction of movement of individual particles or elements of the ﬂow.
(2) A state of ﬂow of water in which the water is agitated by cross currents
and eddies, as opposed to laminar, streamlined, or laminar ﬂow.
turbulent ﬂow
A ﬂow situation in which the ﬂuid moves in a random manner
with a Reynolds number usually greater than 4000.
turgid
Swollen or distended by a buildup of ﬂuid.
turndown
A ratio expressing the maximum-to-minimum capacity of a process or
device.
turnover
Seasonal (spring and fall) change that occurs in a lake’s thermal gradi-
ents, resulting in the circulation of biological and chemical materials.
TVA
Tennessee Valley Authority.
TVC
Thermal vapor compression. See “vapor compression evaporation (VC).”
TVR
Thermal vapor recompression. See “vapor compression evaporation (VC).”
TWA
See “time-weighted average.”
Twister
Fine bubble diffuser by MixAir Technologies, Inc.
Twister
Low speed surface aerator by Aeromix Systems, Inc.
TWL
Top water level.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

two-tray clariﬁer
Space-saving wastewater clariﬁer arrangement where one lon-
gitudinal clariﬁer basin is located above another and both are operated in
parallel or series.
TWPS
Tactical water puriﬁcation system.
TWS
(1) See “traveling water screen (TWS).” (2) See “Transient water system.”
TxPro™
Solids transmitter by BTG, Inc.
TxPro-2™
Suspended solids/turbidity transmitter by Zellweger Analytics, Inc.
Tync Aeration
Former name of Aeration Research Company.
type I settling
See “discrete particle settling.”
type II settling
See “ﬂocculant settling.”
type III settling
See “hindered settling.”
type IV settling
See “compression settling.”
typhoid
Highly infectious disease of the gastrointestinal tract caused by water-
borne bacteria.
Typhoon
High speed surface aerator by Aeromix Systems, Inc.
Tysul
Hydrogen peroxide oxidant by E.I. DuPont De Nemours, Inc.
TZ
Treatment zone.
U
U.S. Filter
Former name of USFilter Corp.
UAQI
Uniform Air Quality Index.
UARG
Utility Air Regulatory Group
UBC
Uniform Building Code.
UBlock™
Air/water ﬁlter underdrain by Tetra Process Technologies.
UCC
See “ultra clean coal (UCC).”
UCCI
Urea-formaldehyde foam insulation.
UCL
Upper control limit.
UDMH
Unsymmetrical dimethyl hydrazine.
UEL
Upper explosive limit.
UF
See “ultraﬁltration (UF).”
UFL
Upper ﬂammability limit.
UFRV
See “unit ﬁlter run volume (UFRV).”
UFW
See “unaccounted-for water (UFW).”
UHMW
Ultrahigh-molecular-weight.
UHR Filter
Dual media sand ﬁlter by Idreco USA, Ltd.
UIC
See “Underground Injection Control (UIC).”
UL®
Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.
ullage
The amount that a container or tank lacks of being full.
Ultima
Nonmetallic sludge collector ﬂight by Budd Co.
ultimate BOD (BODu)
The amount of oxygen required to completely satisfy the
carbonaceous and nitrogenous biochemical oxygen demand.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ultimate strength
The stress calculated on the maximum value of the force and
the original area of the cross section which causes fracture of the material.
Ultimer®
Acrylamide polymer for sedimentation and sludge conditioning by Nalco
Chemical Co.
Ultipleat®
High ﬂow ﬁltration element by Pall Corp.
Ultipor III®
Coreless ﬁlter elements by Pall Corp.
ultra clean coal (UCC)
Coal that is washed, ground into ﬁne particles, and chem-
ically treated to remove sulfur, ash, silicone, and other substances.
Ultrabar™
Ultraﬁltration barrier process by F.B. Leopold Co., Inc.
Ultracept®
Oil water separators by Jay R. Smith Mfg. Co.
UltraChem™
Membrane for oily waste applications by Membrex, Inc.
Ultradome®
Domed, aluminum tank cover by Ultraﬂote Corp.
ultraﬁltration (UF)
A low pressure (200-700 kPa, 20-100 psi) membrane ﬁltration
process which separates solutes in the 20 to 1000 angstrom (up to 0.1 micron)
size range.
UltraFlex®
LPDE containment liner by SLT North America, Inc.
Ultraﬂow
Programmable open-channel ﬂow measurement device by Monitek
Technologies, Inc.
Ultra-Guard
Ultraviolet disinfection system by UV Systems Technology, Inc.
Ultramix™
High efﬁciency mixer motor by Lightnin.
ultrapure water
Water with a speciﬁc resistance higher than 1 megohm-cm.
UltraScrub
Wet scrubber by Tri-Mer Corp.
Ultrasep
Ion exchange membrane for pressure driven processes by Ionics, Inc.
ultrasonic
Acoustic waves with frequencies above 20 kHz, not audible to the
human ear.
ultrasonic ﬂowmeter
A measurement device that transmits and receives sound
waves through the ﬂow to determine liquid ﬂow rate.
UltraStrip
Air stripper by GeoPure Continental.
Ultra-Sweep™
Spiral blade clariﬁer by Hi-Tech Environmental, Inc.
Ultratest
Polyelectrolyte used to enhance liquid/solid separation by Ashland
Chemical, Drew Industrial.
Ultra-Urban™
Stormwater runoff ﬁlter screen by AbTech Industries.
ultraviolet light (UV)
Light rays beyond the violet region in the visible spectrum,
invisible to the human eye.
Ultrex
Tubular membrane diffuser by Aeration Research Company.
Ultrion SVC®
Low molecular weight organic coagulant by Nalco Chemical Co.
Ultrox®
Organic destruction process using ultraviolet light and oxidants by USFil-
ter/Industrial Wastewater Systems.
unaccounted-for water (UFW)
The fraction of water fed into a water distribution
system which is not registered by the customers’ meters.
unburned lime
Another term for “calcium carbonate.”
unconﬁned aquifer
An aquifer containing water that is not under pressure.
underdrain
Flow collection and backwash water distribution system used to sup-
port the ﬁlter bed in most granular media ﬁlters. Also called “ﬁlter bottom.”
underﬂow
The concentrated solids removed from the bottom of a tank or basin.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Underground Injection Control (UIC)
The program under the Safe Drinking
Water Act that regulates the use of wells to pump ﬂuids into the ground.
underground storage tank (UST)
A tank used to contain accumulations of reg-
ulated substances with 10% or more of its volume underground.
UNEP
United Nations Environment Program.
Uni-Dose™
Electronic metering pump by Liquid Metronics, Inc.
Uniﬂap
Cast urethane ﬂap valve by Ashbrook Corp.
Uniﬂow
Sloped bottom settling tanks equipped with chain and ﬂight sludge col-
lector by USFilter/Envirex.
uniformity coefﬁcient
Method of characterizing ﬁlter sand where the uniformity
coefﬁcient is equal to the sieve size in millimeters that will pass 60% of the
sand divided by that size passing 10%.
UniMag™
Closed pipe ﬂow meter by Isco, Inc.
UniMix
Vertical or horizontal ﬂocculation unit by Walker Process Equipment.
Uni-Pac
Water treatment equipment products by Cochrane Inc.
Unipak™
Induced gas ﬂotation system by Unicel, Inc.
UniPro™
Reverse osmosis pump system by David Brown Union Pump Co.
Unipure
Heavy metals package waste removal system by Unipure Corp.
Uni-Scour
Dual media ﬁlter with self-contained backwash storage by Smith &
Loveless, Inc.
Unisweep™
Filter surface wash system by Roberts Filter Group.
Unisystem®
Activated sludge wastewater treatment system by Aeration Industries,
Inc.
unit ﬁlter run volume (UFRV)
The amount of liquid ﬁltered between back-
washes expressed as the product of the ﬁlter run length and the ﬁltration rate.
Unitank®
Continuous ﬂow wastewater treatment system by Seghers Better Tech-
nology USA.
Unitech
Evaporator and crystallizer product line by Graver Co.
United States Filter
USFilter.
Unitherm™
Thermal VOC oxidation unit by Dürr Environmental, Inc.
Unitube
Suction-type sludge removal system for circular clariﬁers by USFil-
ter/Envirex.
Uni-Vayor
Sludge removal conveyor by the former Bowser-Briggs Filtration Co.
Univer
Chemicals used to determine water hardness by Hach Co.
Universal®
Sand ﬁlter underdrain by F.B. Leopold Co., Inc.
Universal RAI®
Rotary positive blowers by Dresser Industries/Roots Division.
Universal Screen
Reciprocating rake bar screen by Meurer Industries, Inc.
universal treatment standards (UTS)
Rule addressing sampling methods of
metal constituents in hazardous wastes for compliance with treatment standards.
Universal Venturi Tube™
Flow measurement device by BIF.
universal wastes
Wastes that include used, nonlead acid batteries, recalled pesti-
cides, and mecury-containing thermostats.
UniversaLevel
Continuous liquid level transmitter by Ametek Drexelbrook Engi-
neering Co.
Unizone
Ozone generators by Praxair-Trailigaz Ozone Co.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

unleaded gasoline
Gasoline containing very little or no “tetraethyl lead” anti-
knock additives.
Unox®
A pure oxygen, activated sludge wastewater treatment process by Lotepro
Corp (Western Hemisphere) and Linde-KCA-Dresden GmbH.
unreasonable risk
Under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act,
that is any unreasonable risk to man or the environment, taking into account
the medical, economic, social, and environmental costs and beneﬁts of any
pesticide.
unsaturated zone
The area above the water table where soil pores are not fully
saturated, although some water may be present.
unstable
Condition describing an element or compound that reacts spontaneously
to form other elements or compounds.
Upcore™
Upﬂow countercurrent regeneration process and resins by Dow Chem-
ical Co.
UPE®
Universal Process Equipment Co.
upﬂow clariﬁer
Clariﬁer where ﬂocculated water ﬂows upward through a sludge
blanket to obtain ﬂoc removal by contact with ﬂocculated solids in the blanket.
upﬂow ﬁlter
Granular media ﬁlter characterized by an upward ﬂow of liquid
through the ﬁlter bed.
UPS
Uninterruptible power supply.
upset
An unexpected disturbance of a process or operation.
uptake
The absorption or ingestion of an element or compound in an organism
or substance.
UPW
Ultrapure water.
urban runoff
Stormwater from city streets and adjacent domestic or commercial
properties which carries pollutants of various kinds into the sewer systems
and receiving waters.
urea
A soluble nitrogen compound that is a component of mammalian urine.
urease
An enzyme that converts urea in urine into ammonia.
USAID
U.S. Agency for International Development.
USC
Uniﬁed soil classiﬁcation.
USCM
U.S. Conference of Mayors.
USDA
U.S. Department of Agriculture.
USDW
Underground sources of drinking water.
USEPA
See “Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).”
user fee
Fee collected from only those persons who use a particular service, as
compared to one collected from the public in general.
USF
USFilter.
USFS
United States Forest Service.
USGS
U.S. Geological Survey.
USP
U.S. Pharmacopeia.
USPHS
U.S. Public Health Service.
USP-puriﬁed water
Water meeting USP-quality requirements that has been puriﬁed
by distillation, ion exchange, or other suitable processes from water complying
with the U.S. EPA’s drinking water regulations and contains no added substances.
UST
See “underground storage tank (UST).”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

UTS
See “universal treatment standards (UTS).”
U-tube manometer
See “manometer.”
UV
See “ultraviolet light (UV).”
UV254
A measure of water’s ultraviolet absorption at a 254 nanometer wavelength
which is considered representative of the humic content of natural organic
matter and a surrogate for disinfection byproduct precursors.
UV3000™
Package ultraviolet water and wastewater disinfection system by Trojan
Technologies, Inc.
UV4000™
Ultraviolet wastewater disinfection system by Trojan Technologies, Inc.
UV8000™
Medium and low pressure ultraviolet water disinfection system by
Trojan Technologies, Inc.
Uvaster®
UV disinfection system by USFilter.
UVOX
Ultraviolet oxidation.
UVT™
Universal venturi tube ﬂow measurement by BIF.
V
V*Sep®
Membrane ﬁltration process using vibration to prevent fouling by New
Logic International.
V. cholerae
See “Vibrio cholerae.”
Vacﬂush®
Aeration cleaning system by USFilter/Jet Tech.
Vacpac™
Specialized waste container by PacTec, Inc.
Vacuator
Vacuum-operated system for removal of ﬂoating solids and scum by
GL&V/Dorr-Oliver, Inc.
VacuLift™
Vacuum sludge removal system by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
Vacu-Treat
Rotary vacuum ﬁlter by USFilter/Envirex.
vacuum
A space from which air and gas have been removed and the pressure is
less than normal atmospheric pressure.
vacuum breaker
A backﬂow prevention device that automatically vents a water
line to the atmosphere when subjected to partial vacuum.
vacuum deaerator
Device operating under vacuum to remove dissolved gases
from a liquid.
vacuum ﬁlter
A dewatering device utilizing a cloth-covered cylindrical drum
slowly rotating in a tank of sludge while subject to an internal vacuum. Sludge
is drawn to the ﬁlter cloth while water passes through the sludge cake.
vacuum truck
A tank truck used to remove wastewater or other liquid wastes in
which the air inside the tank is pumped out and the liquid to be removed
rushes in to ﬁll the empty space.
vadose zone
Designation of the layer of the ground below the surface but above
the water table.
value engineering
The process of subjecting an engineering design to a peer
review by a group of experts who challenge the design concepts in an attempt
to optimize the initial design and project cost.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

ValueMAX™
Reverse osmosis system by USFilter.
valve
A device used to regulate ﬂow of ﬂuids through a piping system.
Valve PAC™
Valve positioning controller by F.B. Leopold Co., Inc.
van der Waals’ Force
An attractive force apparent in colloidal particles.
Vanguard®
Air stripper by Delta Cooling Towers, Inc.
Vanguard®
Self-cleaning bar screen by Nuove Energie s.r.l.
VAPCCIs
See “Vatavuk Air Pollution Control Indexes (VAPCCI).”
vapor
The gaseous phase of a material in the solid or liquid state at standard
temperature and pressure.
Vapor Combustor™
Vapor extraction unit by QED Environmental Systems, Inc.
vapor compression evaporation (VC)
Evaporative system where vapor boiled
off in the evaporator is mechanically compressed and reused as the heating
medium.
Vapor Guard™
Fabric membrane odor control tank cover by ILC Dover, Inc.
Vapor Pacs
Replaceable carbon canister systems for VOC emission control by
Calgon Carbon Corp.
vapor plumes
Flue gases visible because they contain water droplets.
vapor pressure
The pressure at which equilibrium is established between the
liquid and gas phases of a substance.
vapor recovery system
A system to gather all vapors and gases discharged from
a storage tank and process them to prevent their emission to the atmosphere.
vapor trail
See “contrail.”
vaporization
The process where a substance changes from a liquid or solid to the
gaseous state.
VaporMate™
Volatile organic carbon treatment system by North East Environ-
mental Products, Inc.
VaPure®
Vapor compression still by Paul Mueller Co.
VAR
Vector attraction reduction.
variable declining-rate ﬁltration
Filter operation where the rate of ﬂow through
the ﬁlter declines and the level of liquid above the ﬁlter rises throughout the
ﬁlter run.
Variair
Diffuser by USFilter/Diffused Air Products Group.
variance
Government permission for a delay or exception in the application of a
given law, ordinance, or regulation.
Vari-Ator
Variable energy controller for ﬂoating aerator by USFilter/Aerator
Products.
Vari-Cant™
Jet aeration system by USFilter/Jet Tech.
Variﬂo®
Wastewater distributor nozzle for high rate trickling ﬁlter by USFil-
ter/Microﬂoc.
Vari-Pond®
Centrifuge pond control system by Wesfalia Separator, Inc.
VariPort™
Anaerobic digester gas mixing system by USFilter/Envirex.
VariSieve™
Solids classiﬁer by Krebs Engineers.
VariTank™
Bolted steel tank by ModuTank, Inc.
Varivoid™
High rate granular media ﬁlter by Graver Co.
Vatavuk Air Pollution Control Indexes (VAPCCI)
Set of U.S. EPA indexes
used to escalate air pollution equipment control costs.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

VATIP
Voluntary Advanced Technology Incentives Program. An EPA program
intended to encourage environmental performance beyond what is required by
the Cluster Rule.
vault
An above- or below-ground-reinforced concrete structure for storing radio-
active or other hazardous waste materials.
vault privy
A holding tank with a seat or seats to provide for excretion of human
wastes directly into the tank.
V-Auto™
In-line strainer by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc. (Western Hemisphere) and
Andritz Sprout-Bauer S.A. (Eastern Hemisphere).
VC
See “vapor compression evaporation (VC).”
VCE
Vapor compression evaporation.
VCM
Vinyl chloride monomer.
V-Cone®
Differential pressure ﬂow design ﬂow meter by McCrometer, Inc.
VDB
Vacuum drying bed by U.S. Environmental Products, Inc.
VDS
Vertical drum screen by Waste-Tech, Inc.
VE
Visual emissions.
vector
An insect or other carrier capable of transmitting a pathogen from one
organism to another.
vector-borne transmission
The transmission of an infectious agent from an insect
or other vector to a human.
Vee-wire®
Wedge-shaped wire by USFilter/Johnson Screens.
vegetative controls
Nonpoint source pollution control practices that involve veg-
etative cover to reduce erosion and minimize loss of pollutants.
vehicle miles travelled (VMT)
A measure of the extent of motor vehicle opera-
tion; the total number of vehicle miles travelled within a speciﬁc geographic
area over a given period of time.
Vekton
Nylon sludge collector sprockets by Norton Performance Plastics.
Vektor™
Mixer by Lightnin.
veliger
A free-swimming, larval mollusk.
VeliGON®
Molluscicide used to kill zebra mussels by Calgon Corp.
velocity cap
The horizontal cap on a vertical, offshore water intake which results
in a horizontal inﬂow, thus reducing ﬁsh entrainment.
velocity gradient (G value)
A measurement of the degree of mixing imparted to
water or wastewater during ﬂocculation.
velocity head
The kinetic energy in a hydraulic system.
velometer
A device used to measure air velocity.
ventilation
The act of admitting fresh air into a space in order to replace stale or
contaminated air; achieved by blowing air into the space.
VentOXAL®
Oxygenator system by Air Liquide America.
Vent-Scrub™
Powder-activated carbon adsorption unit by USFilter/Westates.
VentSorb
Disposable granular activated carbon ﬁlters by Calgon Carbon Corp.
Ventura™
VOC oxidizer by Megtec Systems, Inc.
venturi effect
An increase in the velocity of a ﬂuid as it passes through a con-
striction in a pipe or channel.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

venturi meter
A meter used to measure ﬂows in closed conduits by registering
the difference in velocity heads between the entrance and outlet of a contracted
throat.
venturi scrubber
A wet scrubber used to remove particulates from gaseous
emissions.
VEO
Visible emission observation.
VerderFlex
Hosepump by Verder, Inc.
vermiculture
A stabilization and conversion process using earthworms to con-
sume organic matter in sludge.
Versipad
Oil absorption device for light to medium oils by Mother Environmental
Systems, Inc.
VerTech™
Wet oxidation process by Air Products & Chemicals, Inc.
VertiCel™
Biological wastewater treatment process by USFilter/Envirex.
Verti-Flo
Vertical ﬂow, rectangular tank clariﬁer by USFilter/Envirex.
Verti-Jet™
Vertical pressure leaf ﬁlter by USFilter Corp.
Vertimatic
Upﬂow sand ﬁlter by USFilter Corp.
Vertimill™
Lime slaker by Svedala Industries, Inc.
Verti-Press
High pressure ﬁlter press by Filtra-Systems Hydromation.
Verti-Press
Inclined screw-type solids/screenings press by Dontech, Inc.
Vertiscreen
Vertical stationary screen by Thermal Black Clawson.
very low sodium water
Bottled water containing 35 mg or less of sodium per
serving.
Vestrip™
Vacuum extraction system by Ejector Systems, Inc.
VFD
Variable frequency drive.
Vibra-Matic™
Vibrating pressure leaf ﬁlter cleaning system by USFilter Corp.
Vibra-Screen
Vibrating ﬁne screen by Triton Technologies.
Vibrasieve®
Vibrating ﬁne screen by Andritz-Ruthner, Inc.
vibrating screen
A mechanical screening device whose screening surface is
shaken or vibrated to enhance solid/liquid separation. A variation of this screen
is used as a solids classiﬁer.
Vibrio cholerae
The bacterium responsible for causing cholera. Also called
“V. cholerae.”
Viggers Valve
Automatic sludge blow-off valve by Walker Process Equipment.
VIGR™
Electostatic precipitator by Wheelabrator Air Pollution Control, Inc.
Vincent Press
Horizontal dewatering screw press by Vincent Corp.
Vinyl Core
PVC biological ﬁlter media formerly offered by B.F. Goodrich Co.
viral
Pertaining to or caused by a virus.
VIRALT
A mathematical model used to calculate the concentration of viruses at
the water table and well after water has been transported through a subsurface
media.
Virchem®
Corrosion control product by Carus Chemical Co., Inc.
virtual water
Water embedded in water-intensive commodities such as cereals.
virulent
Extremely infectious or damaging to organisms.
virus
Smallest biological structure capable of reproduction which infect their host,
producing disease.
viscera
The internal organs of an animal.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Viscomatic
Lime slaker by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
viscosity
The property of a ﬂuid that offers resistance to ﬂow due to the existence
of internal friction.
Vistex
Grit removal system by Vulcan Industries, Inc.
Vitec™
Antiscalants and dispersants by Avista Technologies.
Vitox®
Oxygen injection system for wastewater treatment plants by BOC Gases.
vitriﬁed clay
A kiln-ﬁred clay product used to make pipe and brick.
VLA
Very large array. See “array.”
VMT
See “vehicle miles travelled (VMT).”
V-notch weir
A weir with a triangular, v-shaped notch.
VO Nozzle
Variable oriﬁce spray nozzle by USFilter/Rex & Link-Belt Products.
VOC
See “volatile organic compounds (VOC).”
VOC Wagon™
Self-contained thermal oxidizer by NAO Inc.
VOCarb
Activated carbon by USFilter/Westates.
void volume
The volume of the spaces between granular material such as ﬁlter
media or ion exchange resin, expressed as a percentage of the total volume
occupied by the material.
volatile
A substance that evaporates or vaporizes at a relatively low temperature.
volatile liquids
Liquids which easily vaporize or evaporate at room temperature.
volatile organic compounds (VOC)
Highly evaporative organic compounds
often found in paints, solvents, and similar products.
volatile suspended solids (VSS)
Organic content of suspended solids in a water
or wastewater. Determined after heating a sample to 600°C.
Volcano™
Continuous downﬂow sandﬁlter by Lighthouse Separation Systems,
Inc.
Volclay®
Sodium bentonite soil sealant liner systems by Colloid Environmental
Technologies Co.
Vollmar
Stormwater holding tank tipping bucket by Waterlink Separations, Inc.
Voluette
Ampules of standard reagents solutions for analytical laboratory use by
Hach Co.
volume reduction
Processing waste materials to decrease the amount of space
they occupy, usually by compacting or shredding, incineration, or composting.
Volumeter™
Flow monitoring instrument by Marsh-McBirney, Inc.
volumetric feeder
Dry chemical feeder that supplies a constant preset or propor-
tional chemical delivery by volume and will not recognize a change in material
density.
volumetric tank test
A test to determine the physical integrity of a storage tank
where the volume of ﬂuid in the tank is measured directly or calculated from
product-level changes, and a marked drop in volume indicates a leak.
Vortair®
Low speed surface aerator by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
Vortechs™
Stormwater treatment system by Vortechnics, Inc.
vortex
A ﬂow with a whirling, rotary motion forming a cavity in the center toward
which particles are drawn.
Vortex™
Circular tank grit removal system with a turbine type rotor by Inﬁlco
Degremont, Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

vortex ﬂow regulator
A funnel-shaped ﬂow control device used to generate a
uniform ﬂow rate from a storage basin, tank, or cistern.
vortex grit removal
Grit removal system relying on a mechanically induced vor-
tex to capture grit solids in the center hopper of a circular tank.
Vorti-Mix®
Submerged turbine aerator by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
Vostrip™
Air stripping tower by EnviroSystems Supply.
Voyager™
Portable GC by PerkinElmer Instruments.
VPS™
Vapor phase odor control system by NuTech Environmental Corp.
VRTO
Valveless regenerative thermal oxidizer. See “regenerative thermal oxidizer
(RTO).”
VSD
Virtually safe dose.
VSR
Volatile solids reduction.
VSS
See “volatile suspended solids (VSS).”
VTC™
Vertical tube coalescing oil/water separator by AFL Industries, Inc.
VTE
Vertical tube evaporator.
VTSH®
Vertical turbine solids handling pump by Fairbanks Morse Pump Corp.
VTX
Vertical vortex pump by Yeomans Chicago Corp.
vulnerability analysis
Assessment of elements in the community susceptible to
damage should a release of hazardous materials occur.
vulnerable zone
An area over which the airborne concentration of a chemical
accidentally released could reach the level of concern.
VVC
Vacuum vapor compression.
W
W&T
USFilter/Wallace & Tiernan.
W/O
Water-in-oil emulsion.
WAC
Weak-acid cation exchanger.
WAC®
Polyaluminum chloride ﬂocculant by Water Treatment Solutions division
of Elf Atochem North America, Inc.
wadi
A dry stream or river bed which carries ﬂash ﬂood water.
Wagner
Sand ﬁlter underdrains by Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
Walhalla Process
Sulfate and heavy metals precipitation and removal process by
Graver Co.
walking beam ﬂocculator
A mechanical ﬂocculation device whose mixing pad-
dles are attached to a horizontal beam that rocks back and forth to produce a
reciprocating motion.
Wallace & Tiernan
Former name of USFilter/Wallace & Tiernan.
walnut shell ﬁlter
A ﬁltration device that uses ground walnut shells as granular
ﬁlter media to remove hydrocarbons and other suspended solids from water.
WAO
See “wet air oxidation (WAO).”
warp
The vertical wire in woven wire mesh.
WAS
See “waste activated sludge (WAS).”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Wash Press
Screenings washer/press by Lakeside Equipment Corp.
Washpactor
Sewage screenings washing and compacting unit by Waste-Tech, Inc.
wash-water trough
The trough located above ﬁlter media used to sluice away
backwash water.
waste-activated sludge (WAS)
Excess activated sludge discharged from an acti-
vated sludge treatment process.
waste characterization
Identiﬁcation of chemical and microbiological constitu-
ents of a waste material.
waste feed
The continuous or intermittent ﬂow of wastes into an incinerator.
waste heat evaporator
An evaporator that uses the heat of a gas turbine, diesel
engine jacket water, or exhaust gas.
waste load allocation
The maximum load of pollutants each waste discharger is
allowed to release into a particular waterway.
Waste Management, Inc.
Former name of WMX Technologies, Inc.
waste minimization
Pollution control plan that includes both pollution source
reduction and environmentally sound recycling.
waste oil emulsion
A thick, viscous waste that results from a water-in-oil emulsion.
waste oils
Lubricating oils that have completed their intended use cycle and must
be treated and reused or receive proper disposal.
waste reduction
Using source reduction, recycling, or composting to prevent or
reduce waste generation.
waste stabilization pond
A pond receiving raw or partially treated wastewater in
which stabilization occurs.
Wastebuster II™
Biological wastewater treatment plant by HRI-Biotek.
Wastemaster™
Wastewater headworks treatment unit by WesTech Engineering
Inc.
Wastewarrior
Ultraﬁltration wastewater treatment system by Hyde Marine, Inc.
wastewater
Liquid or waterborne wastes polluted or fouled from household, com-
mercial, or industrial operations, along with any surface water, stormwater, or
groundwater inﬁltration.
water
A colorless, transparent liquid essential for all life which freezes as ice at
0°C (32°F) and vaporizes forming steam at 100°C (212°F). Water occurs
naturally on earth as rivers, lakes, and oceans, and falls from the clouds as
rain. Water’s chemical formula is H2O and it is a nonsymmetrically formed
molecule of two hydrogen atoms which form an angle of 104.5 degrees with
the oxygen atom lying between them.
water banking
The process of storing excess water as groundwater during wet
years for later extraction and use during dry cycles.
Water Blaze
Wastewater evaporator by Landa, Inc.
Water Boy®
Package water treatment plant by USFilter/Microﬂoc.
Water Buffalo™
Reverse osmosis unit by Mechanical Equipment Co., Inc.
Water Champ
Chemical induction unit by USFilter/Stranco.
water closet (WC)
A common term for “toilet.”
water demand
The water requirments for a particular purpose.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

water dilution volume (WDV)
The volume of water required to dilute radioactive
waste to a concentration that meets drinking water standards.
Water Eater
Wastewater evaporator by Equipment Manufacturing Corp.
water effect ratio (WER)
A test procedure that determines the capacity of site
water to mitigate metal toxicity by comparing the toxic endpoint of site water
to the toxic endpoint of laboratory water.
Water Factory 21
An Orange County, California treatment plant designed to pro-
duce high quality water from municipal wastewater for injection into aquifers,
creating a coastal barrier and preventing sea water intrusion of underground
water supplies.
water for injection (WFI)
Water puriﬁed to USP standards by distillation, ion
exchange, or other suitable process, containing no additives, and intended for
use as a solvent for preparation of parenteral solutions.
Water Free™
Grit and screenings gate by Tetra Process Technologies.
water hammer
Condition that may cause damage or rupture to a piping system
resulting from a rapid increase in pressure that occurs in a closed piping system
when the liquid velocity is suddenly changed.
water hyacinth
See “hyacinth.”
Water Maze®
Wastewater clariﬁer by Landa, Inc.
water meter
A device installed in a pipe that measures and registers the quantity
of water passing through it.
water pollution
The presence in water of enough harmful or objectionable mate-
rial to damage the water’s quality.
Water Pollution Control Corp.
Former name of Sanitaire Corp.
water purveyor
An agency or person that supplies water.
water reclamation
The restoration of wastewater to a state that will allow its
beneﬁcial reuse.
water recycling
Reclamation of efﬂuent generated by a given user for on-site
reuse by the same user.
water reuse
The beneﬁcial use of reclaimed water for purposes such as irrigation,
cooling, or washing.
water scarce
The condition existing in a country with annual, internal renewable
freshwater resources of less than 1000 cubic meters per capita per year.
water splitting
An electrically driven membrane process that separates ionic spe-
cies in solution through the use of a bipolar membrane that dissociates water
into hydrogen and hydroxyl ions. Also referred to as “bipolar membrane
electrodialysis.”
water stress
The condition existing in a country with total freshwater resources
of 1000 to 1600 cubic meters per capita per year with major problems in
drought years.
water supplier
One who owns or operates a public water system.
water supply system
The collection, treatment, storage, and distribution of pota-
ble water from source to consumer.
water table
The upper limit of the portion of the ground saturated with water.
Water Tech
Former equipment manufacturer acquired by Roberts Filter Group.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Water Tiger™
Rotary and static ﬁne screens by Komline-Sanderson Engineering
Corp.
water vapor
The gaseous form of water.
water-based disease
A disease caused by hosts that either live in water or require
water for part of their lifecycle, and are passed to humans when they are
ingested or come in contact with the skin.
Waterbetter®
Filter cartridges by Harmsco Filtration Products.
waterborne
Of, or related to, something that can be carried by water.
waterborne disease
A disease transmitted through a drinking water supply.
waterbox
The chamber at the inlet end of a condenser tubesheet.
waterﬂood
A method of secondary oil recovery in which water is injected into an
oil reservoir to force additional oil out of the formation into a producing well.
WaterKare
Dissolved air ﬂotation product line by Kemco Systems, Inc.
Waterloo System
Groundwater sampling and monitoring system by Solinst Canada
Ltd.
watermaker
A common term for a packaged, vapor compression thermal desali-
nation unit.
watershed
The land areas that drain into a surface waterbody.
watershed approach
A coordinated framework for environmental management
that addresses the highest priority problems within hydrologically deﬁned
geographic areas, taking into consideration both ground and surface water ﬂow.
water-soluble
The description of a material that dissolves in water.
WaterSweet™
Granular media used for removal of hydrogen sulﬁde from drinking
water by SultaTreat Co.
watertube boiler
Boiler in which the ﬂame and hot combustion gases ﬂow across
the outside of the tubes and water is circulated within the tubes.
water-washed disease
A disease that results from inadequate sanitation or contact
with contaminated water and can be prevented by washing with clean water.
Waterweb®
Mesh used in air scrubbers by Misonix, Inc.
waterwheel
A wheel driven by water ﬂowing into buckets or falling on vanes on
the periphery of the wheel.
waterworks
The system of reservoirs, treatment, and pumping by which a water
supply is obtained and distributed to a community.
Waukesha Pump
Former name of Watson Marlow, Inc.
Wave Oxidation®
Fluctuating aerobic and anaerobic biological wastewater treat-
ment system by Parkson Corp.
WaveOx®
Wastewater treatment process for biological nutrient removal by Parkson
Corp.
WBA
Weak-base anion exchanger.
WC
See “water closet (WC).”
WDV
See “water dilution volume (WDV).”
weak acid
A poorly ionized acid that dissociates very little and produces few
hydrogen ions in aqueous solution.
weak acid cation exchanger
Cation exchange products with functional groups
incapable of splitting neutral salts to form corresponding free acids.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

weak base anion exchanger
Anion exchange products with functional groups
incapable of splitting neutral salts to form corresponding free bases.
Wedge-Flow™
Wedge wire ﬁltration products by LEEM Filtration Products, Inc.
WedgePress
Belt ﬁlter press by the former Gray Engineering Co.
Wedgewater Filter Bed™
Gravity sludge dewatering ﬁlter bed by Gravity Flow
Systems, Inc.
Wedgewater Sieve
Static bar screen by Gravity Flow Systems, Inc.
wedgewire
General term to describe trapezoidal or v-shaped wire.
WEF
Water Environment Federation.
weft
The horizontal wire in woven wire mesh, also called the “shute” wire.
weighted composite sample
A composite sample where the sample amounts are
based on ﬂow rates at the time of collection, i.e., the higher the ﬂow, the larger
the portion of sample taken at that time.
weir
A bafﬂe over which water ﬂows.
weir loading
The rate of ﬂow out of a basin stated in terms of the volume of liquid
passing over a stated length of weir per unit of time.
weir overﬂow rate
A measurement of the volume of water ﬂowing over each unit
length of weir per day.
Weiss
In-vessel composting system by USFilter/Davis Process.
well
A bored, drilled, or driven shaft or hole whose depth is greater than the largest
surface dimension.
well monitoring
Measurement by on-site instruments or laboratory methods of
the quality of water in a well.
well plug
A watertight and gastight seal installed in a bore hole or well to prevent
movement of ﬂuids.
well screen
A slotted or perforated well casing that allows passage of water while
preventing solids from entering the well.
well water
Water from a hole bored, drilled, or otherwise constructed in the ground
to tap an aquifer.
Well Wizard®
Groundwater monitor and sampling device by QED Environmental
Systems, Inc.
Welles Products
Equipment product line acquired by USFilter/Aerator Products.
wellhead protection area
A protected surface and subsurface zone surrounding
a well or wellﬁeld supplying a public water system to keep contaminants from
reaching the well water.
Wemco®
Product line of Baker Hughes Process Systems.
Wemco Pump
Product line of Envirotech Pumpsystems.
WER
See “water effect ratio (WER).”
WESP
See “wet electrostatic precipitator (WESP).”
Westates Carbon
Carbon products and services by USFilter/Westates.
Westchar™
Activated carbon by Osmonics, Inc.
Westchlor®
Polyaluminum coagulants by Westwood Chemical Corp.
Western Filter Company
Former manufacturer acquired by Osmonics, Inc.
WestRO™
Reverse osmosis and membrane products by Osmonics, Inc.
WET
See “whole efﬂuent toxicity (WET).”
WET®
Product line of Waterlink Inc.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

wet air oxidation (WAO)
Process where sludge and compressed air are pumped
into a pressurized reactor and heated to oxidize the volatile solids without
vaporizing the liquid.
wet bulb temperature
The temperature reading taken from a thermometer with
a wetted wick surrounding its bulb.
wet electrostatic precipitator (WESP)
An electrostatic precipitator whose col-
lecting electrodes are rinsed with water to remove particulates.
wet scrubber
An air pollution control device used to remove particulates and
fumes from air by entraining the pollutants in a water spray.
wet steam
Steam containing water droplets.
wet weather ﬂow
The ﬂow in a combined sewer during snowmelt and rain events.
wet well
A chamber in which water or wastewater is collected and to which the
suction of a pump is connected.
Wetec™
Wet aeration installation system by Aeration Technologies, Inc.
wetlands
Surface areas including swamps, marshes, and bogs which are inundated
or saturated by groundwater frequently enough to support a prevalence of
vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.
wetlands treatment
A wastewater treatment system using the aquatic root system
of cattails, reeds, and similar plants to treat wastewater applied either above
or below the soil surface.
wetness index
The precipitation for a given year expressed as a ratio of the mean
annual precipitation.
wetted perimeter
The length of wetted contact area between a stream of ﬂowing
water and the channel that contains it.
WFI
See “water for injection (WFI).”
Wheeler
Sand ﬁlter underdrain by Roberts Filter Group.
Whirl-Flo®
Solids handling vortex pump by ITT A-C Pump.
Whirl-Wet-AG
Airborne dust collector by Tri-Mer Corp.
Whispair®
Rotary blower and gas pump product line by Dresser Industries/Roots
Division.
white goods
Large household appliances such as stoves, refrigerators, or washing
machines which are discarded as wastes.
white water
Filtrate from a paper- or board-forming machine, usually recycled
for density control.
Whitewater
Dissolved air ﬂotation system by Water Resources Group, Inc.
WhiteWater™
Low proﬁle air strippers by QED Environmental Systems, Inc.
WHM®
Bulk chemical handling products by USFilter/Zimpro.
WHO
World Health Organization.
whole efﬂuent toxicity (WET)
The aggregate toxic effect of an efﬂuent measured
directly by a toxicity test.
WHPP
Wellhead protection program.
Wiese-Flo®
Self-cleaning ﬁlter screen by USFilter/Headworks Products.
wildlife refuge
An area designated for the protection of wild animals, within
which hunting and ﬁshing are either prohibited or strictly controlled.
Willett Pump
Electro/hydraulic ram pump by USFilter/Dewatering Systems.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

William Green
Former screening equipment manufacturer acquired by Brackett
Geiger.
Willowtech®
Sludge mixer/blender by Ashbrook Corp.
windage emission
Emission of vapors resulting from wind blowing through a free-
vented tank and educting some of the saturated vapors.
windbreak
A row of trees planted on level land as protection against winds and
erosion.
Windjammer™
Brush aerator by United Industries, Inc.
windrow composting
A composting method where municipal wastewater solids
are arranged in long triangular-shaped piles, called windrows, which are
mechanically turned and remixed periodically.
Windrow-Mate
Compost odor control system by NuTech Environmental Corp.
Winklepress®
Belt ﬁlter press by Ashbrook Corp. (U.S.), and Gebr. Bellmer GmbH
(Europe).
Winkler titration
A standard iodometric titration method of determining the dis-
solved oxygen level of a water or wastewater.
wire-to-wire efﬁciency
The efﬁciency of a pump and motor together.
witching
See “dowsing.”
WLM
See “working level month (WLM).”
work
A force acting over a distance measured in joules or foot-pounds.
work exchanger
A mechanical energy recovery device where the energy of one
ﬂuid stream is transferred to another ﬂuid.
working level month (WLM)
A unit of measure used to determine cumulative
exposure to radon.
working load
An allowable recommended tensile load for chains used on convey-
ors, screens, or other applications of low relative speeds.
worm
A shank having at least one complete thread around the pitch surface.
worm gear
A gear with teeth cut on an angle to be driven by a worm; used to
connect nonparallel, nonintersecting shafts.
WPCF
Water Pollution Control Federation. Former name of “Water Environment
Federation (WEF).”
WPCP
Water pollution control plant.
WQA
Water Quality Act of 1987.
WQS
Water Quality Standard.
WRDA
Water Resources Development Act.
WRI
World Resources Institute.
Wring-Dry
Internally fed rotary ﬁne screen by Schlueter Co.
WSA™
Former name of BG-WSA, Inc.
WSF
Water soluble fraction.
WSRA
Wild and Scenic Rivers Act.
WSTA
Water Science and Technology Association.
WSTB
Water Sciences and Technology Board.
WTP
Water treatment plant.
WTS
Former name of product group integrated into USFilter/Industrial Wastewater
Systems.
WW
Wastewater.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

WWEMA
Water and Wastewater Equipment Manufacturers Association.
WWF
World Wildlife Fund.
WWTF
Wastewater treatment facility.
WWTP
Wastewater treatment plant.
Wyss®
Fine bubble diffuser by Parkson Corp.
X
X-20™
Thin ﬁlm composite reverse osmosis membrane by TriSep Corp.
XCELL™
Cell-less ﬁlter by USFilter/Davco.
xenobiotic
A description for any chemical compound that is foreign, and usually
harmful, to the body of a living organism or biosystem.
Xentra
Continuous emissions analyzer by Servomex Co.
xeric
An organism that requires very little moisture to sustain life.
xeriscape
A landscape design used in arid climates that utilizes native and drought-
tolerant plants in conjunction with water conservation techniques.
X-Flo™
Crossﬂow-type plastic trickling ﬁlter media by the former American
Surfpac Corp.
XLP™
Rotary positive blower by Dresser Industries/Roots Division.
XL-Plus®
Solid bowl centrifuge by Baker Process.
XOtherm™
Spray cooling system by Environmental Dynamics Inc.
XP
See “explosion proof (XP).”
X-Pruf™
Explosion proof portable submersible pump by Crane Pumps & Systems.
xQy
A design stream ﬂow condition that describes the lowest ﬂow that will occur
for (x) consecutive days not more than once every (y) years. See also “7Q10.”
XR-5®
Containment geomembrane lining by Seaman Corp.
X-ray ﬂuorescence
A technique used in the analysis of water-formed deposits and
heavy metals or corrosion products in water.
Xtractor™
Sludge removal process by USFilter/Davco.
xylene
The common name for dimethylbenzene, a volatile organic compound used
as a solvent and insecticide. Chemical formula is C6H4(CH3)2.
Y
yard waste
Grass clippings, leaves, and miscellaneous vegetative matter.
yellow cake
One of the ﬁnal precipates in uranium extraction.
Yellow Jacket™
Floating hydrocarbon detection device by QED Environmental
Systems, Inc.
yellow water
Water colored as a result of the presence of iron, also called “red
water.”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

yellow-boy
Iron oxide ﬂocculent usually observed as orange-yellow deposits in
surface streams with excess iron content.
yield
The amount of a material produced by a process or chemical reaction.
yield point
The stress at which a substance undergoes signiﬁcant change without
an increase in applied stress.
Z
Z Chlor™
Chlorine and sulﬁte measurement and control unit by Bailey-Fischer &
Porter.
ZD
See “zero discharge (ZD).”
zebra mussel
Freshwater mollusk that can foul water intake systems, treatment
plants, and piping by attaching itself to a solid structure, eventually restricting
ﬂow.
ZeeWeed®
Membrane bioreactor technology by Zenon Environmental, Inc.
Zenobox
Membrane ﬁltration system by Zenon Environmental, Inc.
Zenoﬂoc
Polymer control system for belt ﬁlter press by Zenon Environmental, Inc.
ZenoGem®
Membrane bioreactor treatment process for tertiary treated wastewater
by Zenon Environmental, Inc.
Zeo-Karb®
Sulfonated coal cation exchange process by USFilter/Warren.
Zeol™
Rotor concentrator for VOC abatement by Munters Zeol Corp.
zeolite
Minerals or synthetic resins that have ion exchange capabilities.
zeolite softening
Water softening process using a zeolite resin bed to accomplish
ion exchange.
Zeo-Rex®
Oxidizing ﬁlter for iron and manganese removal by USFilter/Warren.
Zephyr®
Cartridge-type air ﬁlter by Farr Co.
Zephyr™
Induced air ﬂotation system by Aeromix Systems, Inc.
zero discharge (ZD)
A facility that discharges no material to the environment.
zero liquid discharge (ZLD)
A facility that discharges no liquid efﬂuent to the
environment.
zero ODP
Zero ozone depletion potential.
zero order reaction
A reaction in which the rate of change is independent of the
concentration of the reactant.
zero population growth (ZPG)
The situation where the birthrate is constant and
equal to the death rate.
zero soft water
Water having less than 1.0 grain per gallon as calcium carbonate.
Zerofuel
Fluidized bed sludge incinerator by Seghers Better Technology USA.
zeta potential (ZP)
The voltage differential between the surface of the diffuse
layer surrounding a colloidal particle and the bulk liquid beyond.
Zetag®
Cationic polyelectrolytes by Ciba Specialty Chemicals.
Zeta-Pak
Cartridge ﬁlter by Alsop Engineering Co.
Zickert
Product line of Waterlink, Inc.
ZID
See “zone of initial dilution (ZID).”
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Zimmerman Process
Wet air oxidation process by USFilter/Zimpro.
Zimpress
Plate and frame sludge press by USFilter/Zimpro.
Zimpro Environmental
Former name of USFilter/Zimpro.
Zimpro Process
Thermal sludge conditioning process by USFilter/Zimpro.
ZLD
See “zero liquid discharge (ZLD).”
Z-list
OSHA’s tables of toxic and hazardous air contaminants.
Z-metal
Pearlitic malleable iron chain material by USFilter/Envirex.
ZOC
See “zone of contribution.”
ZOI
See “zone of incorporation.”
zone of aeration
The comparatively dry soil or rock located between the ground
surface and the top of the water table.
zone of contribution (ZOC)
The area surrounding a pumping well that includes
all areas that supply water to recharge the well.
zone of incorporation (ZOI)
The depth to which soil on a landfarm is plowed or
tilled to receive wastes.
zone of initial dilution (ZID)
The part of a lake or river where a discharge from
an outfall ﬁrst mixes with the receiving waters.
zone of saturation
The portion of the earth’s crust below the water table where
the pores are ﬁlled with water at greater than atmospheric pressure.
zooglea
A gelatinous matrix developed by growing bacteria associated with trick-
ling ﬁlter beds and activated sludge ﬂoc.
zooplankton
Small aquatic animals that possess little or no means of propulsion.
ZP
See “zeta potential (ZP).”
ZPG
See “zero population growth (ZPG).”
ZRL
Zero risk level.
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

MANUFACTURERS DIRECTORY
A.B. Marketech, Inc.
9708 N. Range Line Rd.
Mequon, WI 53092
Phone: 262-255-7448
Fax: 262-241-3443
A.O. Smith Engineered Products
2101 S. 21st St.
Parsons, KS 67357
Phone: 316-421-0200
Fax: 316-421-9122
www.tectank.com
A-C Compressor Corp.
401 E. South Island St.
Appleton, WI 54915
Phone: 920-738-3080
Fax: 920-738-3141
www.accompressor.com
Abanaki Corp.
17387 Munn Rd.
Chagrin Falls, OH 44022
Phone: 440-543-7400
Fax: 440-543-7404
www.abanaki.com
ABB Air Preheater, Inc.
P.O. Box 372
Wellsville, NY 14895
Phone: 716-593-2700
Fax: 716-593-2721
www.abb.com
ABB Raymond
650 Warrenville Rd.
Lisle, IL 60532
Phone: 630-971-2500
Fax: 630-971-1076
ABS Pumps, Inc.
140 Pond View Dr.
Meriden, CT 06450
Phone: 203-238-2700
Fax: 203-238-0738
www.abspumpsusa.com
AbTech Industries
4110 N. Scottsdale Rd., Ste. 235
Scottsdale, AZ 85251
Phone: 602-874-4000
Fax: 602-970-1665
Acrison, Inc.
20 Empire Blvd.
Moonachie, NJ 07074
Phone: 201-440-8300
Fax: 201-440-4939
www.acrison.com
ACS Industries, Inc.
14211 Industry Rd.
Houston, TX 77053
Phone: 713-434-0934
Fax: 713-433-6201
ADI Systems, Inc.
1133 Regent St., Ste. 300
Fredericton, NB E3B 3Z2
Phone: 506-452-9000
Fax: 506-459-3954
www.adi.ca
Advanced Microbial Systems
P.O. Box 540
Shakopee, MN 55379
Phone: 612-445-4251
Fax: 612-445-7233
www.amsmicrobes.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Advanced Polymer Systems
123 Saginaw Dr.
Redwood City, CA 94063
Phone: 650-366-2626
Fax: 650-365-6490
www.advancedpolymer.com
Advanced Sensor Devices, Inc.
430 Ferguson Dr.
Mountian View, CA 94043
Phone: 650-960-3007
Fax: 650-960-0127
Advanced Separation Technologies
5315 Great Oak Dr.
Lakeland, FL 33815
Phone: 941-687-4460
Fax: 941-687-9362
www.advsep.com
Advanced Structures, Inc.
200 Industrial Parkway
Escondido, OH 44024
Phone: 440-286-4116
Fax: 800-942-7659
www.pentairwater.com
Adwest Technologies, Inc.
1175 N. Van Horne Way
Anaheim, CA 92806-2506
Phone: 714-632-9801
Fax: 714-632-9812
www.adwestusa.com
Aeration Industries, Inc.
P.O. Box 59144
Minneapolis, MN 55459-0144
Phone: 952-448-6789
Fax: 952-448-7293
www.aireo2.com
Aeration Tehnologies, Inc.
P.O. Box 488
North Andover, MA 01845
Phone: 978-475-6385
Fax: 978-475-6387
www.aertec.com
Aero Tec Laboratories, Inc.
Spear Rd. Industrial Park
Ramsey, NJ 07446-1251
Phone: 201-825-1400
Fax: 201-825-1962
www.atlinc.com
Aeromix Systems, Inc.
2611 N. Second St.
Minneapolis, MN 55411-1634
Phone: 612-521-8519
Fax: 612-521-1455
www.aeromix.com
Aeropulse, Inc.
1746 Winchester Rd.
Bensalem, PA 19020
Phone: 215-245-7554
Fax: 215-245-7849
www.aerpulse.com
AFL Industries, Inc.
3661 West Blue Heron Blvd.
Riviera Beach, FL 33404
Phone: 561-844-5200
Fax: 561-844-5246
Ag Environmental Products LLC
9804 Pﬂumm Rd.
Lenexa, KS 66215
Phone: 913-599-6911
Fax: 913-599-2121
www.soygold.com
Ag-Chem Equipment Co.
5720 Smetana Dr.
Minnetonka, MN 55343-9688
Phone: 612-933-9006
Fax: 612-933-7432
www.agchem.com
Agar Corp.
1600 Townhurst
Houston, TX 77043
Phone: 713-464-4451
Fax: 713-464-7741
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Agency Environmental, Inc.
8362 Veterans Highway, Ste. 101
Millersville, MD 21108
Phone: 410-729-8490
Fax: 410-729-8492
Air Liquide America
5230 S. East Ave.
Countryside, IL 60525
Phone: 708-482-8400
Fax: 708-579-7702
Air Products & Chemicals, Inc.
7201 Hamilton Blvd.
Allentown, PA 18195
Phone: 610-481-4911
Fax: 610-481-5084
Air-O-Lator Corp.
8100 Paseo
Kansas City, MO 64131
Phone: 816-363-4242
Fax: 816-363-2322
www.airolator.com
Airmaster Aerator
P.O. Box 156
Wisner, LA 71378
Phone: 318-724-7626
Fax: 318-724-6528
www.airmasteraerator.com
AirSep Corp.
260 Creekside Dr.
Buffalo, NY 14228-2075
Phone: 716-691-0202
Fax: 716-691-0707
www.airsep.com
Airvac, Inc.
P.O. Box 528
Rochester, IN 46975
Phone: 219-223-3980
Fax: 219-223-5566
www.airvac.com
Alar Engineering Corp.
9651 W. 196th St.
Mokena, IL 60448
Phone: 708-479-6100
Fax: 708-479-9059
Albright & Wilson Americas
P.O. Box 4439
Glen Allen, VA 23058-4439
Phone: 804-968-6300
Fax: 804-968-6385
www.albright-wilson.com
Alfa Laval Separation, Inc.
955 Mearns Rd.
Warminster, PA 18974-0556
Phone: 215-443-4000
Fax: 215-443-4155
www.alfalaval.com
Alpine Technology, Inc.
1250 Capitol of Texas Hwy, 2-300
Austin, TX 78746
Phone: 512-329-2809
Fax: 512-328-4792
Alsop Engineering Co.
P.O. Box 3449
Kingston, NY 12402
Phone: 914-338-0466
Fax: 914-339-1063
Alzeta Corp.
2343 Calle del Mundo
Santa Clara, CA 95054
Phone: 408-727-8282
Fax: 408-727-9740
Ambient Technologies Inc. 
2999 N.E. 191 St., Ste. 407
Aventura, FL 33180
Phone: 305-937-0610
Fax: 305-937-2137
www.ide-tech.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

AMCEC, Inc.
2525 Cabot Dr., Ste. 205
Lisle, IL 60532
Phone: 630-577-0400
Fax: 630-577-0401
www.amcec.com
American Bio Tech, Inc.
3223 Harbor Dr.
St. Augustine, FL 32095
Phone: 904-825-1500
Fax: 904-825-1524
American International Chemical, Inc.
17 Strathmore Rd.
Natic, MA 01760
Phone: 508-655-5805
Fax: 508-655-0927
American Minerals, Inc.
901 E. Eighth Ave., Ste. 200
King of Prussia, PA 19406
Phone: 610-337-8030
Fax: 610-337-8033
www.ceramics.com/enviro-blend
American Products
1049 Southeast Holbrook Ct.
Port St. Lucie, FL 34952
Phone: 561-398-9881
Fax: 561-398-9840
www.americanproducts1.com
American Sigma, Inc.
P.O. Box 820
Medina, NY 14103
Phone: 716-798-5580
Fax: 716-798-5599
www.americansigma.com
AMETEK Drexelbrook
205 Keith Valley Rd.
Horsham, PA 19044
Phone: 215-674-1234
Fax: 215-674-2731
www.drexelbrook.com
Ametek Inc., Process & Analytical 
Division
150 Freeport Rd.
Pittsburgh, PA 15238
Phone: 412-828-9040
Fax: 412-826-0399
www.thermox.com
Ametek, PMT Products
820 Pennsylvania Blvd.
Feasterville, PA 19053-7886
Phone: 215-355-6900
Fax: 215-355-2937
www.ametekusg.com
AMETEK Rotron Bioﬁltration
75 North St.
Saugerties, NY 12477
Phone: 914-246-3711
Fax: 914-246-3802
www.rotrontmd.com
Amwell, Inc.
1740 Molitor Rd.
Aurora, IL 60505
Phone: 630-898-6900
Fax: 630-898-1647
Analytical Technology, Inc.
P.O. Box 879
Oaks, PA 19456-9969
Phone: 610-917-0991
Fax: 610-917-0992
www.analyticaltechnology.com
Anatel Corp.
2200 Central Ave.
Boulder, CO 80301
Phone: 303-442-5533
Fax: 303-447-8365
www.anatel.com
Andersen Instruments, Inc.
500 Technology Ct.
Smyrna, GA 30082-5210
Phone: 770-319-9999
Fax: 770-319-0336
www.anderseninstruments.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Andritz Sprout-Bauer S.A.
10 Ave. de Concyr
F-45071 Orleans Cedex 2, France 
Phone: 33-3851-5738
Fax: 33-3863-1565
Andritz-Ruthner, Inc.
1010 Commercial Blvd. S.
Arlington, TX 76017
Phone: 817-465-5611
Fax: 817-468-3961
www.andritz.com
Anthratech Western, Inc.
7260 12th St. SE
Calgary, Alberta, T2H 2S5
Phone: 403-255-7377
Fax: 403-255-3129
Applied Biochemists, Inc.
W175 N11163 Stonewood Dr.
Germantown, WI 53022
Phone: 262-255-4449
Fax: 262-255-4268
www.appliedbiochemists.com
Applied Process Technology, Inc.
35 Wellington
Conroe, TX 77034
Phone: 409-539-4099
Fax: 409-539-4089
www.centra-ﬂo.com
Applied Regenerative Technologies Co.
45 Park Place S.
Morristown, NJ 07960
Phone: 201-984-8811
Fax: 201-326-1845
Applied Spectometry
W226 N555G Eastmound Dr.
Waukesha, WI 53186
Phone: 414-896-2650
Fax: N/A
www.chemscan.com
APV Crepaco, Inc.
9525 Bryn Mawr Ave.
Rosemont, IL 60018
Phone: 847-678-4300
Fax: 847-678-4407
www.apv.com
Aqua Ben Corp.
1390 N. Manzanita St.
Orange, CA 92867
Phone: 714-771-6040
Fax: 714-771-1465
www.aquaben.com
Aqua Care Systems
9542 Hardpan Rd.
Angola, NY 14006
Phone: 716-549-2500
Fax: 716-549-3950
Aqua Magnetics International, Inc.
915-B Harbor Lake Dr.
Safety Harbor, FL 34695
Phone: 727-447-2575
Fax: 727-726-8888
Aqua Products, Inc.
25 Rutgers Ave.
Cedar Grove, NJ 07009
Phone: 973-857-2700
Fax: 973-857-8981
Aqua-Aerobic Systems, Inc.
P.O. Box 2026
Rockford, IL 61130-0026
Phone: 815-654-2501
Fax: 815-654-2508
www.aqua-aerobic.com
Aqua-Chem, Inc.
P.O. Box 421
Milwaukee, WI 53201
Phone: 414-359-0600
Fax: 414-577-2723
www.aqua-chem.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

AquaClear Technologies Corp.
1550 Harbor Bou, Ste. 130
West Sacramento, CA 95691
Phone: 916-372-6826
Fax: 916-372-6827
Aqualogic Inc.
30 Devine St.
North Haven, CT 06473
Phone: 203-248-8959
Fax: 203-288-4308
www.aqualogic.com
Aqualytics, Inc.
7 Powderhorn Dr.
Warren, NJ 07059-5191
Phone: 732-563-2800
Fax: 732-563-2816
www.aqualytics.com
AquaPro, Inc.
1573 Fairway View Dr. 
Birmingham, AL 35244
Phone: 205-988-5824
Aquarium Systems
8141 Tyler Blvd.
Mentor, OH 44060
Phone: 440-255-1997
Fax: 440-255-8994
Aquatrol Ferr-X Corp.
P.O. Box 531
Toms River, NJ 08754
Phone: 732-505-3100
Fax: 732-505-3038
AquaTurbo Systems
P.O. Box 189
Springdale, AR 72765
Phone: 501-927-1300
Fax: 501-927-0700
Arch Chemicals
1200 Lower River Rd.
Charleston, TN 37310
Phone: 423-780-2600
Fax: 877-321-2724
www.archwaterchemicals.com
Arlat, Inc.
6 Bram Ct.
Brampton, Ontario, Canada L6W 3R6
Phone: 905-457-1700
Fax: 905-457-1730
www.arlat.com
Artisan Industries, Inc.
73 Pond St.
Waltham, MA 02451
Phone: 781-893-6800
Fax: 781-647-0143
www.artisanind.com
Asahi America
P.O. Box 653
Malden, MA 02148-0005
Phone: 781-321-5409
Fax: 781-321-4421
www.asahi-america.com
Ashbrook Corp.
P.O. Box 16327
Houston, TX 77222
Phone: 281-449-0322
Fax: 281-449-1324
Ashland Chemical, Drew Industrial
One Drew Plaza
Boonton, NJ 07005
Phone: 973-236-7600
Fax: 973-263-4495
www.ashchem.com
Astraco Water Engineering
P.O. Box 52
8560 AB Balk, 
Phone: 31-(0)514-608765
Fax: 31-(0)514-608766
ATA Technologies Corp.
1240 Valley Belt Rd.
Cleveland, OH 44131
Phone: 216-459-1930
Fax: 216-459-1958
www.ata-technologies.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Atlantic Ultraviolet Corp.
375 Marcus Blvd.
Hauppauge, NY 11788
Phone: 516-273-0500
Fax: 516-273-0771
www.atlanticuv.com
Atlas Polar Co., Hydrorake Division
P.O. Box 160 Postal Station O
Toronto, Canada M4A 2N3
Phone: 416-751-7740
Fax: 416-751-6475
www.atlaspolar.com
Atlas-Stord, Inc.
309 Regional Rd. S.
Greensboro, NC 27409
Phone: 336-668-7727
Fax: 336-668-0537
www.atlas-stord.com
Auburn Systems LLC
8 Electronics Ave.
Danvers, MA 01923
Phone: 978-777-2460
Fax: 978-777-8820
www.auburnsys.com
Aurora Pump
800 Airport Rd.
Aurora, IL 60542-1494
Phone: 630-859-7000
Fax: 630-859-7060
www.pentairpump.com
Automatic Filters, Inc.
2672 S. La Cienega
Los Angeles, CA 90034
Phone: 310-839-2828
Fax: 310-839-6878
www.tekleen.com
Automation Products, Inc.
3030 Max Roy St.
Houston, TX 77008-9981
Phone: 713-869-0361
Fax: 713-869-7332
www.dynatrolusa.com
Avista Technologies
133 North Paciﬁc St., Ste. E
San Marcos, CA 92069
Phone: 760-744-0536
Fax: 760-744-0619
www.avistatech.com
AWI
P.O. Box 900488
Sandy, UT 84090-0488
Phone: 801-576-1930
Fax: 801-523-8450
Axsia Serck Baker, Inc.
8601 Jameel Ste. 190
Houston, TX 77040
Phone: 713-934-8900
Fax: 713-934-8688
www.axsia.com
Azur Environmental
2232 Rutherford Rd.
Carlsbad, CA 92008-8883
Phone: 760-438-8282
Fax: 760-438-2980
www.azurenv.com
B.F. Goodrich Co.
9911 Brecksville
Brecksville, OH 44141
Phone: 216-447-5000
Fax: 216-447-5250
Badger Meter, Inc.
P.O. Box 581390
Tulsa, OK 74158
Phone: 918-836-8411
Fax: 918-832-9962
Bailey Polyjet
P.O. Box 8070
Fresno, CA 93747
Phone: 559-252-4491
Fax: 559-453-9030
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Bailey-Fischer & Porter
125 E. County Line Rd.
Warminster, PA 18974
Phone: 215-674-6000
Fax: 215-674-7183
www.ebpa.com/bfp/
Baker Hughes Process Systems
14990 Yorktown Plaza
Houston, TX 77040
Phone: 713-934-4100
Fax: 713-934-4108
www.bakerhughes.com
Baker Process - Municipal Division
669 West 200 S.
Salt Lake City, UT 84101-1020
Phone: 801-526-2000
Fax: 801-526-2014
www.bakerhughes.com
Baker Process/Ketema
P.O. Box 1406
El Cajon, CA 92022
Phone: 619-449-0202
Fax: 619-449-0883
Baler Equipment Co.
P.O. Box 25150
Portland, OR 97225
Phone: 503-292-4118
Fax: 503-297-5991
www.baler-eqpt.com
Barnes Pumps, Inc.
P.O. Box 603
Piqua, OH 45356-0603
Phone: 419-774-1511
Fax: 419-774-1530
BASF
Carl Bosch Strasse 38
67056 Ludwigshafen, Germany 
Phone: 49-621-60-42258
Fax: 49-621-60-72944
BASYS Technologies
1345 Northland Dr.
Mendota Heights, MN 55120
Phone: 612-452-3300
Fax: 612-683-8888
www.basystech.com
Bayer Corp.
100 Bayer Rd.
Pittsburgh, PA 15205
Phone: 412-777-2000
Fax: 412-777-4109
www.bayerus.com
Beaird Industries, Inc.
601 Benton Kelly St.
Shreveport, LA 71106-7198
Phone: 318-865-6351
Fax: 318-868-1701
www.beairdindustries.com
BEKO Condensate Systems Corp.
4140 Tuller Rd.
Dublin, OH 43017
Phone: 614-798-5275
Fax: 614-798-5276
Bethlehem Corp.
25th & Lennox St.
Easton, PA 18045
Phone: 610-258-7111
Fax: 610-258-8154
BetzDearborn, Inc.
4636 Somerton Rd.
Trevose, PA 19053-6783
Phone: 215-355-3300
Fax: 215-953-5524
www.betzdearborn.com
BetzDearborn-Argo District
185 Bosstick Blvd.
San Marcos, CA 92069
Phone: 760-727-2620
Fax: 760-727-3380
www.argoscientiﬁc.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

BG-WSA, Inc.
2969 South Chase Ave.
Milwaukee, WI 53207
Phone: 414-481-4133
Fax: 414-481-4134
www.bgwsa.com
BIF
16490 Chillicothe Rd.
Chagrin Falls, OH 44023
Phone: 440-543-5885
Fax: 440-543-9128
www.bifwater.com
BioChem Technology, Inc.
100 Ross Rd., Ste. 201
King of Prussia, PA 19406
Phone: 610-768-9360
Fax: 610-768-9363
www.biochemtech.com
BioLab, Inc.
Tenax Rd., Trafford Park
Manchester, M17 1WT England
Phone: 44-161-875-3875
Fax: 44-161-875-3175
www.wateradditives.com
BioLab Inc.
P.O. Box 1489
Decatur, GA 30031-1489
Phone: 404-378-1761
Fax: 404-371-0373
www.wateradditives.com
Bioprime, Ltd.
14 N. Main St.
White River Junction, VT 05001
Phone: 802-291-6123
Fax: 802-291-6124
www.bioprime.com
Biorem Technologies, Inc.
7496 Wellington Rd.
Guelph, Ontario, Canada N1H 6H9
Phone: 519-767-9100
Fax: 519-767-1824
www.bioremtechnologies.com
BIOS International Corp.
10 Park Pl.
Butler, NJ 07405
Phone: 973-492-8400
Fax: 973-492-8270
www.biosint.com
Bioscience, Inc.
1550 Valley Center Pkwy, Ste. 140
Bethlehem, PA 18017
Phone: 610-974-9697
Fax: 610-691-2170
www.bioscienceinc.com
Biosystems, Inc.
651 S. Main
Middletown, CT 06481
Phone: 860-344-1079
Fax: 860-344-1068
www.biosystems.com
Biothane Corp.
2500 Broadway, Drawer 5
Camden, NJ 08104
Phone: 856-541-3500
Fax: 856-541-3366
www.biothane.com
Biothermica International, Inc.
3333 Cavendish Blvd. Ste. 440
Montreal, Canada H4B QM5
Phone: 514-488-3881
Fax: 514-488-3125
Biotrol
10300 Valley View Rd., Ste. 107
Eden Prairie, MN 55344
Phone: 612-942-8032
Fax: 612-942-8526
Bioway America
9003H Lincoln Dr. W.
Marlton, NJ 08053
Phone: 609-268-6845
Fax: 609-268-3482
www.bioway.net
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Blace Filtronics, Inc.
2310 E. 2nd St.
Vancouver, WA 98661
Phone: 360-750-7709
Fax: 360-750-7715
Blue-White Industries
14931 Chestnut St.
Westminster, CA 92683
Phone: 714-893-8529
Fax: 714-894-9492
www.bluwhite.com
BOC Gases
575 Mountain Ave.
Murray Hill, NJ 07974
Phone: 908-464-8100
Fax: 888-262-3298
www.boc.com
Boliden Intertrade, Inc.
3379 Peachtree, Ste. 300
Atlanta, GA 30326
Phone: 404-239-6700
Fax: 404-239-6701
Brackett Geiger
P.O. Box 210163
76151 Karlsruhe, Germany 
Phone: 49-721-5001-355
Fax: 49-721-5001-344
www.brackettgeiger.de
Brackett Geiger Ltd.
Severalls Lane
Colchester Essex, C04 4PD England
Phone: 44-1206-756600
Fax: 44-1206-756500
www.brackettgeiger.co.uk
Brackett Geiger USA, Inc.
1335 Regents Park Dr, Ste. 140
Houston, TX 77058
Phone: 281-480-7955
Fax: 281-480-8225
www.bgusa.com
Bran+Luebbe
1025 Busch Pkwy.
Buffalo Grove, IL 60089
Phone: 847-520-0700
Fax: 847-520-0855
www.bran-luebbe.com
Brandt Co.
P.O. Box 2327
Conroe, TX 77305-2327
Phone: 409-756-4800
Fax: 409-756-8102
Brentwood Industries, Inc.
P.O. Box 605
Reading, PA 19603
Phone: 610-374-5109
Fax: 610-376-6022
Browning-Ferris Industries, Inc.
P.O. Box 3151
Houston, TX 77253
Phone: 281-870-8100
Fax: 281-870-7000
www.bﬁ.com
Brunel Corp.
1304 Twin Oaks
Wichita Falls, TX 76302
Phone: 940-723-7800
Fax: 940-723-7888
BTG, Inc.
2815 Colonnades Ct.
Norcross, GA 30071
Phone: 770-209-6900
Fax: 770-447-1128
Buffalo Technologies, Inc.
P.O. Box 1041
Buffalo, NY 14240
Phone: 716-895-2100
Fax: 716-895-8263
www.buffalotechnologies.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Calciquest, Inc.
P.O. Box 1709
Belmont, NC 28012
Phone: 704-394-9868
Fax: 704-394-6784
www.calciquest.com
Calgon Carbon Corp.
P.O. Box 717
Pittsburgh, PA 15230-0717
Phone: 412-787-6700
Fax: 412-787-6713
www.calgoncarbon.com
Calgon Corp.
P.O. Box 1346
Pittsburgh, PA 15230
Phone: 412-777-8000
Fax: 412-777-8154
Capital Controls Co.
P.O. Box 211
Colmar, PA 18915
Phone: 215-997-4000
Fax: 215-997-4062
www.capitalcontrols.com
Carboline Co.
350 Hanley Industrial Ct.
St. Louis, MO 63144
Phone: 314-644-1000
Fax: 314-644-4617
www.carboline.com
Carbonite Filter Corp.
P.O. Box 1
Delano, PA 18220
Phone: 717-467-3350
Fax: 717-467-7272
Carus Chemical Co., Inc.
P.O. Box 599
Peru, IL 61354-0599
Phone: 815-223-1500
Fax: 815-224-6697
www.caruschem.com
CASS Water Engineering, Inc.
17671 Cowan, Ste. 150
Irvine, CA 92614-6031
Phone: 949-474-3933
Fax: 949-955-2021
www.sbrcass.com
Catalytic Combustion Corp.
709 21st Ave.
Bloomer, WI 54724
Phone: 715-568-2882
Fax: 715-568-2884
www.catalyticcombustion.com
Catalytic Products International
980 Ensell Rd.
Lake Zurich, IL 60047-1557
Phone: 847-438-0334
Fax: 847-438-0944
www.cpilink.com
CBI Walker, Inc.
601 W. 143rd St.
Plainﬁeld, IL 60544
Phone: 815-439-3100
Fax: 815-439-4010
www.chicago-bridge.com
Celgard LLC
13800 S. Lakes Dr.
Charlotte, NC 28273
Phone: 704-588-5310
Fax: 704-587-8585
www.liquicel.com
Celite Corp.
P.O. Box 519
Lampoc, CA 93438-0519
Phone: 805-735-7791
Fax: 805-735-5699
Centrisys Corp.
501 North Ave.
Libertyville, IL 60048-0441
Phone: 847-816-8210
Fax: 847-367-1787
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Chemineer, Inc.
P.O. Box 1123
Dayton, OH 45401
Phone: 937-454-3200
Fax: 937-454-3379
www.chemineer.com
Chemtrac Systems, Inc.
P.O. Box 921188
Norcross, GA 30092
Phone: 770-449-6233
Fax: 770-447-0889
www.chemtrac.com
Chemunex, Inc.
1 Deer Park Dr. Ste. H2
Monmouth Jct., NJ 08852
Phone: 732-329-1493
Fax: 732-329-1182
Cherrington Corp.
P.O. Box A
Fairfax, MN 55332
Phone: 507-426-7261
Fax: 507-426-7263
Chief Industries, Inc.
Box 2078
3942 W. Old Highway 30
Grand Isle, NE 68802-2078
Phone: 308-389-7296
Fax: 308-381-8475
www.chieﬁnd.com
Chlorinators, Inc.
1044 SE Dixie Cutoff Rd.
Stuart, FL 34994
Phone: 561-288-4854
Fax: 561-287-3238
www.regalchlorinators.com
Church & Dwight Co. Inc.
469 N. Harrison St.
Princeton, NJ 08543-5297
Phone: 609-497-7574
Fax: 609-497-7176
www.churchdwight.com
Ciba Specialty Chemicals
P.O. Box 820
Suffolk, VA 23434-0820
Phone: 757-538-3700
Fax: 757-538-3989
www.cibasc.com
Clack Corp.
P.O. Box 500
Windsor, WI 53598-0500
Phone: 608-846-3010
Fax: 608-846-2586
www.clackcorp.com
Claude Laval Corp.
1365 N. Clovis Ave.
Fresno, CA 93727
Phone: 559-255-1601
Fax: 559-255-8093
www.lakos-laval.com
Clear-Flo International
6224 Lakeland Ave. N. #108
Brooklyn Park, MN 55428-2937
Phone: 612-504-4554
Fax: 612-504-4553
www.clean-ﬂo.com
Cleaver-Brooks
P.O. Box 421
Milwaukee, WI 53201
Phone: 414-359-0600
Fax: 414-577-3185
www.aqua-chem.com
ClorTec
1077 Dell Ave., Ste. A
Campbell, CA 95008
Phone: 408-871-1300
Fax: 408-871-1314
www.clortec.com
CMI-Schneible Co.
P.O. Box 100
Holly, MI 48442
Phone: 248-634-8211
Fax: 248-634-2240
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

CMS Group, Inc.
140 Snow Blvd., Ste. 200
Concord Ontario, Canada L4K 4N9
Phone: 905-660-7580
Fax: 905-660-0243
www.rotordisk.com
Cochrane Inc.
P.O. Box 60191
King of Prussia, PA 19406
Phone: 610-265-5050
Fax: 610-265-5432
www.cochrane.com
Colloid Environmental Technologies Co.
1500 West Shure Dr.
Arlington Heights, IL 60004-1434
Phone: 847-392-5800
Fax: 847-577-5571
www.cetco.com
Composite Structures
P.O. Box 737
Aromas, CA 95004
Phone: 831-726-2644
Fax: 408-726-2609
www.accuraﬂo.com
Conservatek Industries, Inc.
498 Loop 336 E,
Conroe, TX 77305
Phone: 409-539-1747
Fax: 409-539-5355
www.conservatek.com
Conversion Systems, Inc.
1155 Business Center Dr.
Horsham, PA 19044
Phone: 215-956-5500
Fax: 215-956-5433
Cook Screen Technologies, Inc.
460 Hoover St. NE
Minneapolis, MN 55413
Phone: 612-617-4470
Fax: 612-379-3149
www.pramﬁltration
Coors Ceramics Co.
1100 Commerce Park Dr.
Oak Ridge, TN 37830
Phone: 423-481-8021
Fax: 423-481-0090
Copa Group
Crest Industrial Estate, Marden
Tonebridge, Kent, TN12 9QJ England
Phone: 162-2-832444
Fax: 162-2-831466
Corning, Inc.
45 Nagog Park
Acton, MA 01720
Phone: 978-635-2200
Fax: 978-635-2476
www.scienceproducts.corning.com
Corrpro Waterworks, Inc.
2421 Iorio St.
Union, NJ 07083-8105
Phone: 908-686-1770
Fax: 908-686-1704
Coster Engineering
P.O. Box 3407
Mankato, MN 56002
Phone: 507-625-6621
Fax: 507-625-5883
Crane Pumps & Systems
P.O. Box 603
Piqua, OH 45356
Phone: 937-615-3595
Fax: 937-773-7157
Cromaglass Corp.
P.O. Box 3215
Williamsport, PA 17701
Phone: 570-326-3396
Fax: 570-326-6426
Crompton & Knowles Colors, Inc.
P.O. Box 33188
Charlotte, NC 28233
Phone: 704-372-5890
Fax: 704-332-8785
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Cross Machine, Inc.
167 Glen Ave.
Berlin, NH 03570
Phone: 603-752-6111
Fax: 603-752-3825
CSM Worldwide/RaySolv
P.O. Box 207
Bound Brook, NJ 08805
Phone: 732-981-0500
Fax: 732-356-3629
www.csmworldwide.com
Culligan International Corp.
One Culligan Pkwy.
Northbrook, IL 60062
Phone: 847-205-6000
Fax: 847-205-6005
www.culligan.com
Cytec Industries, Inc.
Five Garret Mountain Plaza
West Paterson, NJ 07424
Phone: 973-357-3100
Fax: 973-357-3065
www.cytec.com
D.R. Sperry & Co.
112 North Grant St.
North Aurora, IL 60542
Phone: 630-892-4361
Fax: 630-892-1664
D&A Instrument Co.
40 Seton Rd.
Port Townsend, WA 98368
Phone: 360-385-0272
Fax: 360-385-0460
Dacar Chemical Co.
1007 McCartney St.
Pittsburgh, PA 15220
Phone: 412-921-3620
Fax: 412-921-4478
Danfoss/Instrumark
1124 Wrigley Way
Milpitas, CA 95035
Phone: 408-262-0717
Fax: 408-262-3610
David Brown Union Pumps Co.
4600 W. Dickman Rd.
Battle Creek, MI 49015-1098
Phone: 616-966-4600
Fax: 616-962-3534
www.unionpump.com
DBS Manufacturing, Inc.
5421 Hillside Dr.
Forest Park, GA 30297
Phone: 404-768-2131
Fax: 404-761-6360
www.dbsmfg.com
Dedert Corp.
2000 Governors Dr.
Olympia Fields, IL 60461-1074
Phone: 708-747-7000
Fax: 708-755-8815
www.dedert.com
Delta Chemical Corp.
2601 Cannery Ave.
Baltimore, MD 21226
Phone: 410-354-0100
Fax: 410-354-1021
Delta Cooling Towers, Inc.
P.O. Box 952
Fairﬁeld, NJ 07004-2970
Phone: 973-227-0300
Fax: 973-227-0458
www.deltacooling.com
Derrick Corp.
588 Duke Rd.
Buffalo, NY 14225
Phone: 716-683-9010
Fax: 716-683-4991
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

DesalCo Ltd
48 Par-la-Ville, Ste. 381
Hamilton HM 11, Bermuda 
Phone: 441-292-2060
Fax: 441-292-2024
www.desalco.bm
Dexsil Corp.
One Hamden Park Dr.
Hamden, CT 06517
Phone: 203-288-3509
Fax: 203-248-6523
DHV Water BV
P.O. Box 484
3800 AL Amersfoort, The Netherlands 
Phone: 31-33682200
Fax: 31-33682301
Diagenex, Inc.
288 Lindbergh Ave.
Livermore, CA 94550
Phone: 925-606-5600
www.diagenex.com
Dieterich Standard
P.O. Box 9000
Boulder, CO 80301
Phone: 303-530-9600
Fax: 303-530-7064
Diversiﬁed Remediation Controls, Inc.
21801 Industrial Blvd.
Rogers, MN 55374
Phone: 612-428-3000
Fax: 612-428-3660
Dontech, Inc.
76 Center Dr.
Gilberts, IL 60136
Phone: 847-428-8222
Fax: 847-428-6855
Douglas Engineering
1015 Shary Circle
Concord, CA 94518
Phone: 925-827-4100
Fax: 925-827-4999
www.douglaseng.com
Dow Chemical Co.
P.O. Box 1206
Midland, MI 48641-9940
Phone: 517-636-1000
Fax: 517-638-9783
www.dow.com/liquidseps
Dresser Industries/Roots Division
900 West Mount St.
Connersville, IN 47331
Phone: 765-827-9200
Fax: 765-825-7669
www.rootsblower.com
Duall Division, Met-Pro Corp.
1550 Industrial Dr.
Owosso, MI 48867
Phone: 517-725-8184
Fax: 517-725-8188
www.met-pro.com
Dürr Environmental, Inc.
P.O. Box 930459 
Wixom, MI 48393-0459
Phone: 248-668-5200
Fax: 248-926-6570
www.durrenvironmental.com
Dustex Corp.
P.O. Box 7368
Charlotte, NC 28241-7368
Phone: 704-588-2030
Fax: 704-588-2032
www.dustex.com
DWT-Engineering Oy
Raviraitti 3
23800 Laitila, Finland 
Phone: 358-(0)2-461-800
Fax: 358-(0)2-461-8400
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Dynal, Inc.
5 Delaware Dr.
Lake Success, NY 11042
Phone: 516-326-3270
Fax: 516-326-3298
Dynaphore, Inc.
2709 Willard Rd.
Richmond, VA 23294
Phone: 804-672-3464
Fax: 804-282-1325
E. Beaudrey & Co.
14 Boulevard Orano
75018 Paris, France 
Phone: 42-57-14-35
Fax: 42-64-74-62
E.I. Dupont De Nemours, Inc.
P.O. Box 6101
Newark, DE 19714-6101
Phone: 302-774-1011
Fax: 302-892-1705
E.S.G. Manufacturing, LLC
P.O. Box 431
Holden, LA 70744
Phone: 225-567-9200
Fax: 225-567-3091
www.pumpit.com
E-Cell Corp.
52 Royal Rd.
Guelph, Ontario, N1H 1G3
Phone: 519-836-2260
Fax: 519-836-0982
www.ecell.com
Eagle-Picher Minerals, Inc.
P.O. Box 12130
Reno, NV 89510
Phone: 775-824-7600
Fax: 775-824-7694
www.epcorp.com
Eaglebrook, Inc.
4801 Southwick Dr.
Matteson, IL 60443
Phone: 708-747-5038
Fax: 708-747-3278
www.eaglebrook.net
Earth Science Laboratories, Inc.
P.O. Box 5007
Bella Vista, AR 72714
Phone: 501-855-5800
Fax: 501-855-5806
www.earthsciencelabs.com
Eco Puriﬁcation Systems USA, Inc.
1450 South Rolling Rd.
Baltimore, MD 212227
Phone: 410-455-5770
Fax: 410-455-5777
www.eps.com
Ecolab Inc.
1345 Taney
North Kansas City, MO 64116
Phone: 816-842-0560
Fax: 816-842-6388
Ecolochem, Inc.
P.O. Box 12775
Norfolk, VA 23502
Phone: 757-855-9000
Fax: 757-855-1478
www.ecolochem.com
Ecoloquip Inc.
1657 Oak Tree Dr.
Houston, TX 77080
Phone: 713-849-1984
Fax: 713-827-9396
www.ecoloquip.com
Ecolotech Corp.
P.O. Box 1268
Flat Rock, NC 28731-1268
Phone: 828-692-2276
Fax: 828-692-2229
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Eden Equipment Co.
17552 Grifﬁn
Huntington Beach, CA 92647
Phone: 714-842-8181
Fax: 714-842-1284
EET Inc.
4710 Bellaire Blvd., Ste. 300
Houston, TX 77401
Phone: 713-662-0727
Fax: 713-662-2322
Eichrom Industries, Inc.
8205 South Cass, Ste. 111
Darien, IL 60561
Phone: 630-963-0320
Fax: 630-963-0381
Ejector Systems, Inc.
232 Westgate Dr.
Carol Stream, IL 60188
Phone: 630-668-5150
Fax: 630-668-6270
EKA Chemicals
1775 West Oak Commons Ct.
Marietta, GA 30062
Phone: 770-578-0858
Fax: 770-321-5865
www.ekachem.com
Ekokan
P.O. Box 5354
Cary, NC 27512
Phone: 919-469-3727
Fax: 919-467-0294
Elf Atochem North America, Inc.
2000 Market St.
Philadelphia, PA 19103
Phone: 215-419-7000
Fax: 215-419-5230
www.elf-atochem.com
EMI, Inc.
P.O. Box 912
Clinton, CT 06413
Phone: 860-669-1199
Fax: 860-669-7461
EncyNova International, Inc.
557 C Burbank St.
Broomﬁeld, CO 80020
Phone: 303-404-3583
Fax: 303-466-7105
Endress+Hauser
2350 Endress Pl.
Greenwood, IN 46143
Phone: 317-535-7138
Fax: 317-535-8498
www.endress
Enduro Composite Systems
1005 Bluemound Rd.
Fort Worth, TX 76131
Phone: 817-232-1127
Fax: 817-232-1582
Energy Recovery, Inc.
820 Greenbriar Circle, Ste. 24
Chesapeake, VA 23320
Phone: 757-420-8149
Fax: 757-523-7349
Engelhard Corp.
554 Engelhard Dr.
Seneca, SC 29678
Phone: 864-882-9841
Fax: 864-885-1374
Engineering Specialties, Inc.
P.O. Box 2960
Covington, LA 70434
Phone: 504-892-0071
Fax: 504-892-0474
Entoleter, Inc.
251 Welton St.
Hamden, CT 06517
Phone: 203-787-3575
Fax: 203-787-1492
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Enviro-Care Co.
1214 Shappert Dr.
Rockford, IL 61115
Phone: 815-282-9064
Fax: 815-282-4121
www.enviro-care.com
Enviroﬂow, Inc.
12181 Balls Ford Rd.
Manassas, VA 22110
Phone: 703-368-9067
Fax: 703-368-7336
Envirogen
4100 Quakerbridge Rd.
Lawrenceville, NJ 08648
Phone: 609-936-9300
Fax: 609-936-9221
Environetics, Inc.
1201 Commerce St.
Lockport, IL 60441
Phone: 815-838-8331
Fax: 815-838-8336
www.environeticsinc.com
Environment One Corp.
2773 Balltown Rd.
Niskayuna, NY 12309-1090
Phone: 518-346-6161
Fax: 518-346-6188
www.eone.com
Environmental Devices Corp.
80 Essex Hill
Haverhill, MA 01832
Phone: 978-521-1514
Fax: 978-521-1628
Environmental Dynamics Inc.
5601 Paris Rd.
Columbia, MO 65202-9399
Phone: 573-474-9456
Fax: 573-474-6988
www.wastewater.com
Enviropax, Inc.
P.O. Box 65039
Salt Lake City, UT 84165
Phone: 801-263-8880
Fax: 801-263-8898
Enviroquip, Inc.
P.O. Box 9069
Austin, TX 78728-8519
Phone: 512-834-6000
Fax: 512-834-6039
www.enviroquip.com
EnviroSystems Supply
735 Commerce Circle
Longwood, FL 32750
Phone: 407-767-8007
Fax: 407-767-2474
www.alenco.com
Envirotech Pumpsystems
P.O. Box 209
Salt Lake City, UT 84110-0209
Phone: 801-359-8731
Fax: 801-530-7531
EPG Companies, Inc.
P.O. Box 427
Rogers, MN 55374
Phone: 612-424-2613
Fax: 612-493-4812
Equipment Manufacturing Corp.
2615 Paciﬁc Park Dr.
Whittier, CA 90601
Phone: 562-908-7696
Fax: 562-908-7698
Etus, Inc.
1511 Kastner Pl.
Sanford, FL 32771
Phone: 407-321-7910
Fax: 407-321-3098
www.env-sol.com/etus
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Eutek Systems, Inc.
El Camino Ave., #100
Carmichael, CA 95608-4733
Phone: 916-972-9272
Fax: 916-972-9357
Everﬁlt Corp.
3167 Progress Circle
Mira Loma, CA 91752
Phone: 909-360-8380
Fax: 909-360-8384
Exceltec International Corp.
1110 Industrial Blvd.
Sugar Land, TX 77478
Phone: 281-240-6770
Fax: 281-240-6762
www.sanilec.com
F.B. Leopold Co., Inc.
227 S. Division St.
Zelienople, PA 16063
Phone: 724-452-6300
Fax: 724-452-1377
www.fbleopold.com
F.E. Myers Co.
1101 Myers Pkwy.
Ashland, OH 44805
Phone: 419-289-1144
Fax: 419-289-6658
www.pentairpump.com
Fairbanks Morse Pump Corp.
3601 Fairbanks Ave.
Kansas City, KS 66109-0999
Phone: 913-371-5000
Fax: 913-371-2272
www.pentairpump.com
Fairﬁeld Service Co.
240 Boone Ave.
Marion, OH 43302
Phone: 740-387-3335
Fax: 740-387-4869
www.fairﬁeldengineering.com
Falmouth Products
Box 541
Falmouth, MA 02541
Phone: 508-548-6686
Fax: 508-548-8144
Farmer Automatic of America, Inc.
P.O. Box 39
Register, GA 30452
Phone: 912-681-2763
Fax: 912-681-1096
www.farmerautomaticusa.com
Farr Co.
3501 Airport Rd.
Jonesboro, AR 72401
Phone: 870-933-8048
Fax: 800-222-6891
www.farrco.com
FE3, Inc.
P.O. Box 808
Celina, TX 75009
Phone: 972-382-2381
Fax: 972-382-3211
www.fe3.com
Fen-Tech Environmental, Inc.
4306 South Hwy. 377
Brownwood, TX 76801
Phone: 800-777-4512
Fax: 830-393-4092
Ferro Corp.
P.O. Box 389
East Rochester, NY 14445
Phone: 716-586-8770
Fax: 716-586-7154
Filter Products
25 Grants Mill Rd.
Wrentham, MA 02093
Phone: 508-384-0233
Fax: 508-384-0234
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Filter Specialists, Inc.
P.O. Box 735
Michigan City, IN 46361
Phone: 219-879-3307
Fax: 219-877-0632
www.fsiﬁlters.com
Filtra-Systems Hydromation
4000 Town Center, Ste. 100
Southﬁeld, MI 48075
Phone: 248-356-9090
Fax: 248-356-2818
Filtronics, Inc.
4000 Leaverton Ct.
Anaheim, CA 92807
Phone: 714-630-5040
Fax: 714-630-1160
Fisher Controls International, Inc.
P.O. Box 190
Marshalltown, IA 50158
Phone: 515-754-3000
Fax: 515-754-2830
Flo Trend Systems, Inc.
707 Lehman
Houston, TX 77018-1513
Phone: 713-699-0152
Fax: 713-699-8054
www.ﬂotrend.com
Flow Process Technologies, Inc.
11917 Windfern Rd.
Houston, TX 77064
Phone: 281-469-2777
Fax: 281-469-2232
Floway Pumps, Inc.
2494 S. Railroad Ave.
Fresno, CA 93706
Phone: 209-442-4000
Fax: 209-442-3098
Fluid Dynamics, Inc.
6595 Odell Place, Ste. E
Boulder, CO 80301-3316
Phone: 303-530-7300
Fax: 303-530-7754
Fluidyne Corp.
2816 West First St.
Cedar Falls, IA 50613
Phone: 319-266-9967
Fax: 319-277-6034
www.ﬂuidynecorp.com
FMC Corp., Hydrogen Peroxide 
Division
US Highway #1
Princeton, NJ 08543
Phone: 609-951-3122
Fax: 609-951-3668
Force Flow Equipment
1150-D Burnett Ave.
Concord, CA 94520
Phone: 925-686-6700
Fax: 925-686-6713
www.forceﬂow.com
Ford Hall Co., Inc.
P.O. Box 54312
Lexington, KY 40555
Phone: 606-624-3320
Fax: 606-624-3320
www.fordhall.com
Formulabs, Inc.
1710 Commerce Dr.
Piqua, OH 45356
Phone: 937-773-8933
Fax: 937-773-3055
Franklin Miller, Inc.
60 Okner Pkwy.
Livingston, NJ 07039
Phone: 973-535-9200
Fax: 973-535-6269
www.franklinmiller.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Futura Coatings, Inc.
9200 Latty Ave.
Hazelwood, MO 63042-2805
Phone: 314-521-4100
Fax: 314-521-7255
G.E.T. Industries, Inc.
P.O. Box 640
Brampton, Ontario, Canada L6V 2L6
Phone: 905-451-9900
Fax: 905-451-5376
www.grindhog.com
GA Industries, Inc.
9025 Marshall Rd.
Cranberry Township, PA 16046-3696
Phone: 724-776-1020
Fax: 724-776-1254
www.gaindustries.com
Gardner Denver Blower Division
100 Gardner Park
Peachtree City, GA 30209
Phone: 770-486-5655
Fax: 770-486-5629
www.gardnerdenver.com
Garland Manufacturing Co.
P.O. Box 538
Saco, ME 04072-0538
Phone: 207-283-3693
Fax: 207-283-4834
Gast Manufacturing, Inc.
P.O. Box 97
Benton Harbor, MI 49023
Phone: 616-926-6171
Fax: 616-925-8288
www.gastmfg.com
Gauld Equipment Sales Co.
P.O. Box 1129
Theodore, AL 36582
Phone: 334-653-8558
Fax: 334-653-0533
www.gauld.com
GDT Corp.
20805 N. 19th St.
Phoenix, AZ 85027
Phone: 623-587-8858
Fax: 623-587-1511
www.gdt-h2o.com
GE Reuter-Stokes
Edison Park, 8499 Darrow Rd.
Twinsburg, OH 44087-2398
Phone: 330-435-3755
Fax: 330-425-4045
Gebr. Bellmer GmbH
P.O. Box 1369
Niefern-Oschelbronn, D-75220
Germany
Phone: 072-33-740
Fax: 072-74-215
General Chemical Corp.
90 E. Halsey Rd.
Parsippany, NJ 07054
Phone: 973-515-0900
Fax: 973-515-4461
www.genchem.com
Geo-Chem Technologies, Inc.
57436 Gearharts Landing Rd.
Three Rivers, MI 49093
Phone: 616-244-5373
Fax: 616-244-5373
Geoenergy International Corp.
7617 South 180th St.
Kent, WA 98032
Phone: 425-251-0407
Fax: 425-251-0414
www.geoenergy.com
Geotech/ORS Environmental Systems
1441 West 46th Ave. #17
Denver, CO 80211
Phone: 303-433-7101
Fax: 303-477-1230
www.geotechenv.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Geschmay GmbH
P.O Box 460
D-73035 Goppingen, Germany 
Phone: 07161-604-0
Fax: 07161-604-105
www.geschmay.com
Girard Industries, Inc.
6531 N. Eldridge Pkwy.
Houston, TX 77041
Phone: 713-466-3100
Fax: 713-466-8050
GL&V/Dorr-Oliver, Inc.
612 Wheelers Farm Rd.
Milford, CT 06460-8719
Phone: 203-876-5400
Fax: 203-876-5432
www.dorr-oliver.com
Glegg Water Conditioning Co.
29 Royal Rd.
Guelph, Ontario, Canada N1H 1G2
Phone: 519-836-0500
Fax: 519-836-9373
www.glegg.com
GLI International
9020 W. Dean Rd.
Milwaukee, WI 53224
Phone: 414-355-3601
Fax: 414-355-8346
www.gliint.com
Global Technologies
8855 N. 55th St.
Milwaukee, WI 53223-2358
Phone: 414-365-6430
Fax: 414-365-6410
www.anguil.com
GNESYS, Inc.
3259 Whitebrook Dr., Ste. D100
Memphis, TN 38118
Phone: 901-794-2665
Fax: 901-794-1960
www.hydrasep.com
Goal Line Environmental Technologies
11141 Outlet Dr.
Knoxville, TN 37932
Phone: 423-671-4045
Fax: 423-671-4047
www.glet.com
Goodnature Products, Inc.
P.O. Box 866
Buffalo, NY 14240
Phone: 716-855-3325
Fax: 716-855-3328
Goodtech ASA
P.O. Box 429
N-1301 Sandvika, Norway 
Phone: 47-6755-1999
Fax: 47-6755-1990
www.goodtech.no
Goodwin Pumps of America
One Floodgate Rd.
Bridgeport, CT 08014
Phone: 609-467-3636
Fax: 609-467-4841
Gorman-Rupp Co.
305 Bowman St.
Mansﬁeld, OH 44901
Phone: 419-755-1011
Fax: 419-755-1251
www.gormanrupp.com
Graham Manufacturing Co.
20 Florence Ave.
Batavia, NY 14020
Phone: 716-343-2216
Fax: 716-343-1097
www.graham-mfg.com
Grande, Novac & Associates, Inc.
3532 Ashby
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H4R 2C1
Phone: 514-339-1131
Fax: 514-339-9720
www.gnainc.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Graver Co.
750 Walnut Ave.
Crawford, NJ 07016-3348
Phone: 908-653-4200
Fax: 908-653-4300
www.graver.com
Gravity Flow Systems, Inc.
9542 Hardpan Rd.
Angola, NY 14006
Phone: 716-549-2500
Fax: 716-549-6250
www.aquacarefsd.com
Great Lakes International, Inc.
1905 Kearny Ave.
Racine, WI 53403
Phone: 262-634-2386
Fax: 262-634-6259
Gundle Lining Systems, Inc.
19103 Gundle Rd.
Houston, TX 77073
Phone: 281-443-8564
Fax: 281-875-6010
www.gseworld.com
Guzzler Manufacturing, Inc.
575 N. 37th St.
Birmingham, AL 35222
Phone: 205-591-2477
Fax: 205-591-2495
Gyulavari Consulting Kft.
Post Ofﬁce Box 62
H-1399 Budapest, Hungary 
Phone: 36-1-318-5688
Fax: 36-1-137-1526
H.I.L. Technology, Inc.
94 Hutchins Dr.
Portland, ME 04102
Phone: 207-756-6200
Fax: 207-756-6212
www.hil-tech.com
H&H Eco Systems, Inc.
505 Evergreen Dr.
North Bonneville, WA 98639
Phone: 509-427-7353
Fax: 509-427-3627
Hach Co.
P.O. Box 389
Loveland, CO 80539-0389
Phone: 970-669-3050
Fax: 970-669-2932
www.hach.com
Hadley Industries
5900 West Fourth St.
Ludington, MI 49431
Phone: 231-845-0537
Fax: 231-843-3882
Hammonds
15760 W. Hardy #400
Houston, TX 77060
Phone: 281-820-5674
Fax: 281-847-1857
www.hammondscos.com
Hankin Environmental Services, Inc.
P.O. Box 935
Somerville, NJ 08876
Phone: 908-722-9595
Fax: 908-722-9514
Hans Huber GmbH
Postfach 63
D-92332 Berching, Germany 
Phone: 49-8462-2010
Fax: 49-8462-27103
www.huber.de
Hans Huber/Huber Technology
5825 Glenridge Dr. #3-101G
Atlanta, GA 30328
Phone: 404-250-3582
Fax: 404-250-3583
www.huber-technology.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Harmsco Filtration Products
P.O. Box 14066
North Palm Beach, FL 33408
Phone: 561-848-9628
Fax: 561-845-2474
www.harmsco.com
Harris Waste Management Group, Inc.
200 Clover Reach Dr.
Peachtree City, GA 30269
Phone: 770-631-7290
Fax: 770-631-7299
Haynes International, Inc.
1020 W. Park Ave.
Kokomo, IN 46904
Phone: 765-456-6000
Fax: 765-456-6905
Hayward Industrial Products, Inc.
Box 18
Elizabeth, NJ 07207
Phone: 908-351-5400
Fax: 908-351-7893
Hazleton Environmental, Inc.
125 Butler Dr.
Hazleton, PA 18201
Phone: 570-454-7515
Fax: 570-454-7520
www.hazletonenvr.com
Headworks, Inc.
9601 Katy Freeway, Ste. 470
Houston, TX 77024
Phone: 713-647-6667
Fax: 713-647-0999
Healy-Ruff Co.
2485 North Fairview Ave.
St. Paul, MN 55113
Phone: 651-633-7522
Fax: 651-633-2671
Heinkel Filtering Systems, Inc.
520 Sharptown Rd.
Swedesboro, NJ 08085
Phone: 856-467-3399
Fax: 856-467-1010
Heyl & Patterson, Inc.
P.O. Box 36
Pittsburgh, PA 15230-0036
Phone: 412-788-6900
Fax: 412-788-6913
HF Scientiﬁc, Inc.
3170 Metro Pkwy.
Ft. Myers, FL 33916-7597
Phone: 941-337-2116
Fax: 941-332-7643
www.hfscientiﬁc.com
Hi-Tech Environmental, Inc.
P.O. Box 360597
Birmingham, AL 35236
Phone: 205-987-8976
Fax: 205-987-8996
www.hi-techenv.com
Highland Tank & Manufacturing
1 Highland Rd.
Stoystown, PA 15563
Phone: 814-893-5701
Fax: 814-893-6126
www.highlandtank.com
Hindon Corp.
2055 Bee's Ferry Rd.
Charleston, NC 29414
Phone: 843-763-6616
Fax: 843-763-2338
Hinsilblon Laboratories
516-1 SE 47th Terrace
Cape Coral, FL 33904
Phone: 941-540-7766
Fax: 941-540-0076
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Hitachi Maxco, Ltd.
1630 Cobb International Rd.
Kennesaw, GA 30152
Phone: 770-424-9350
Fax: 770-424-9145
www.hitmax.com
Hitachi Metals America, Ltd.
2400 Westchester Ave.
Purchase, NY 10577
Phone: 914-694-9200
Fax: 914-694-9279
Hofﬂand Environmental Inc.
10391 Silver Springs Rd.
Conroe, TX 77303
Phone: 409-856-4515
Fax: 409-856-4589
Homa Pump Technology
18 Elmcroft
Stamford, CT 06902
Phone: 203-327-6365
Fax: 203-356-1064
Hosokawa Bepex Corp.
333 Taft St. NE
Minneapolis, MN 55413
Phone: 612-331-4370
Fax: 612-331-1046
www.bepex.com
Howe-Baker Engineers, Inc.
P.O. Box 956
Tyler, TX 75710
Phone: 903-597-0311
Fax: 903-597-8670
HRI-Biotek
203 S. First St., Ste. 100
Lufkin, TX 75901
Phone: 409-632-9945
Fax: 409-632-9948
www.hri-rig.com
Huber+Suhner AG
CH-8330 Pfafﬁkon, Switzerland 
Phone: 41-1952-2211
Fax: 41-1952-2552
www.hubersuhner.com
Hungerford & Terry, Inc.
P.O. Box 650
Clayton, NJ 08312
Phone: 609-881-3200
Fax: 609-881-6859
Huntington Environmental Systems, Inc.
707C West Algonquin Rd.
Schaumburg, IL 60005
Phone: 847-545-8800
Fax: 847-545-1946
www.Huntington1.com
Huron Tech Corp.
Box 189
Delco, NC 28436
Phone: 910-655-3845
Fax: 910-655-3892
Hychem, Inc.
10014 N. Dale Maybry Hwy.
Tampa, FL 33618
Phone: 813-963-6214
Fax: 813-960-0175
www.hychem.com
Hyde Marine, Inc.
28045 Ranney Pkwy.
Westlake, OH 44145
Phone: 440-871-8000
Fax: 440-871-8104
Hydranautics
401 Jones Rd.
Oceanside, CA 92054
Phone: 760-901-2500
Fax: 760-901-2578
www.membranes.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Hydro Gate Corp.
6101 North Dexter St.
Commerce City, CO 80022
Phone: 303-288-7873
Fax: 303-287-8531
www.hydrogate.com
Hydro-Flo Technologies, Inc.
205 E. Kehoe Blvd.
Carol Stream, IL 60188
Phone: 630-462-7550
Fax: 630-462-7728
www.hydroﬂotech.com
HydroCal, Inc.
22732 Granite Way, Ste. A
Laguna Hills, CA 92653
Phone: 949-455-0765
Fax: 949-455-0764
www.hydrocal.com
Hydrolab Corp.
8700 Cameron Rd., Ste. 100
Austin, TX 78754
Phone: 512-255-8841
Fax: 512-832-8838
Hydropress Wallander & Co., AB
P.O. Box 125
Lindome, SE-437 22, Sweden 
Phone: 46-31-995050
Fax: 46-31-995133
IDEXX Laboratories, Inc.
1 IDEXX Dr.
Westbrook, ME 04092
Phone: 207-856-0300
Fax: 207-856-0346
Idreco USA, Ltd.
3494 Progress Dr., Ste. B
Bensalem, PA 19020
Phone: 215-638-2111
Fax: 215-638-2114
www.idreco.com
ILC Dover, Inc.
One Moonwalker Rd.
Frederica, DE 19946
Phone: 302-335-3911
Fax: 302-335-1320
www.ilcdover.com
IN USA, Inc.
100 Crescent Rd., Unit 1B
Needham, MA 02194
Phone: 781-444-2929
Fax: 781-444-9229
www.inusaozone.com
In-Situ, Inc.
210 S. Third St.
Laramie, WY 82073
Phone: 307-742-8213
Fax: 307-721-7598
www.in-situ.com
Inchen USA, Inc.
1920 E. Hallandale Beach Blvd., 
Ste. 607
Hallandale, FL 33009
Phone: 954-456-7165
Fax: 954-455-8856
Industrial Analytics Corp.
1 Orchard Park Rd.
Madison, CT 06443
Phone: 203-245-0380
Fax: 203-245-3698
Industrial Fabrics Corp.
7160 Northland Circle
Minneapolis, MN 55428
Phone: 612-535-3220
www.ifcfabrics.com
Industrial Filter & Pump Mfg. Co.
5900 Ogden Ave.
Cicero, IL 60650-3888
Phone: 708-656-7800
Fax: 708-656-7816
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Inﬁlco Degremont, Inc.
P.O. Box 1390
Richmond, VA 23255-1390
Phone: 804-756-7600
Fax: 804-756-7645
www.inﬁlcodegremont.com
Integrated Environmental Solutions, Inc.
3787 Old Middleburg Rd., Ste. 3
Jacksonville, FL 33210
Phone: 904-778-1188
Fax: 904-778-0201
International Dioxide, Inc.
554 Ten Rod Rd.
N. Kingston, RI 02852-4220
Phone: 401-294-9575
Fax: 401-295-7108
International Filter Media
P.O. Box 216
Hazelton, PA 18201-0458
Phone: 570-459-1491
Fax: 570-455-7510
Invincible AirFlow Systems
P.O. Box 380
Baltic, OH 43804
Phone: 330-897-3200
Fax: 330-897-3400
www.invincibleair.com
Ionics, Inc.
65 Grove St.
Watertown, MA 02172
Phone: 617-926-2500
Fax: 617-926-4303
www.ionics.com
Ionics RCC
3006 Northup Way
Bellevue, WA 98004-1407
Phone: 425-828-2400
Fax: 425-828-0526
www.ionicsrcc.com
Isco, Inc.
P.O. Box 82531
Lincoln, NE 68501-2531
Phone: 402-464-0231
Fax: 402-465-3064
www.isco.com
ITT A-C Pump
1150 Tennessee Ave.
Cincinnati, OH 45229
Phone: 513-482-2500
Fax: 513-482-2569
www.ittacpump.com
ITT Flygt Corp.
P.O. Box 1004
Trumball, CT 06611-0943
Phone: 203-380-4700
Fax: 203-380-4705
www.ﬂygt.com
IX Services Co.
1102 Holly St.
Las Cruces, NM 88005
Phone: 505-526-2838
Fax: 505-526-2838
Jaeger Products, Inc.
1611 Peachleaf
Houston, TX 77039
Phone: 281-449-9500
Fax: 281-449-9400
www.jaeger.com
Jay R. Smith Mfg. Co.
P.O. Box 3237
Montgomery, AL 36109-0237
Phone: 334-277-8520
Fax: 334-272-7396
www.jrsmith.com
JBF Environmental Technology
18 Beach St.
Seymour, CT 06583
Phone: 203-888-7700
Fax: 203-888-7720
www.jbfenv.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

JBS Instruments
311 D St.
West Sacramento, CA 95605
Phone: 916-372-0534
Fax: 916-372-1624
JDV Equipment Corp.
216 Little Falls Rd., Unit 1
Cedar Falls, NJ 07009
Phone: 973-571-7110
Fax: 973-571-7112
Jeffrey Chain Corp.
2307 Maden Dr.
Morristown, TN 37813-2898
Phone: 423-586-1951
Fax: 423-581-2399
www.jeffreychain.com
Jet, Inc.
750 Alpha Dr.
Cleveland, OH 44143
Phone: 440-461-2000
Fax: 440-442-9008
John Meunier, Inc.
6290 Perinault
Montreal Quebec, Canada H4K 1K5
Phone: 514-334-7230
Fax: 514-334-5010
www.johnmeunier.com
John Zink Co.
P.O. Box 21220
Tulsa, OK 74121-1220
Phone: 918-234-1800
Fax: 918-234-1975
Jones MacCrea, Inc.
P.O. Box 6030
Syracuse, NY 13217-6030
Phone: 315-478-3119
Fax: 315-478-0802
JWC Environmental
290 Paularino Ave.
Costa Mesa, CA 92626
Phone: 949-833-3888
Fax: 949-833-8858
www.jwce.com
K-Tron North America
P.O. Box 888
Pitman, NJ 08071
Phone: 856-589-0500
Fax: 856-589-8113
www.ktron.com
Kady International
P.O. Box 847
Scarborough, ME 04070-0847
Phone: 207-883-4141
Fax: 207-883-8241
www.kadyinternational.com
Kason Corp.
67-71 East Willow St.
Milburn, NJ 07041-1416
Phone: 973-467-8140
Fax: 973-258-9533
www.kason.com
KCC Corrosion Control Co.
4010 Trey Rd.
Houston, TX 77084
Phone: 281-550-1199
Fax: 281-550-9097
www.kcccontrol.com
Kem-Tron
10404 Cash Rd.
Stafford, TX 77477
Phone: 281-261-5778
Fax: 281-499-4080
www.kemtron.com
Kemco Systems, Inc.
11500 47th St. N.
Clearwater, FL 33762
Phone: 727-573-2323
Fax: 727-573-2346
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Kemiron
316 Bartow Airport
Bartow, FL 33830
Phone: 863-533-5990
Fax: 863-533-7077
Kimre Inc.
P.O. Box 570846
Perrine, FL 33257-0846
Phone: 305-233-4249
Fax: 305-233-8687
Kinetico Engineered Systems, Inc.
P.O. Box 127
Newbury, OH 44065
Phone: 440-564-0111
Fax: 440-564-7696
www.kinetico.com
King Lee Technologies
8949 Kenamar Dr., Bldg. 107
San Diego, CA 92121-2453
Phone: 619-693-4062
Fax: 619-693-4917
www.kingleetech.com
Klenzoid, Inc.
P.O. Box 444
Wayne, PA 19087
Phone: 610-825-0218
Fax: 610-825-5390
Knapp Polly Pig, Inc.
1209 Hardy
Houston, TX 77020
Phone: 713-222-0146
Fax: 713-222-7403
www.pollypig.com
Knight Manufacturing Corp.
P.O. Box 167
Brodhead, WI 53520
Phone: 608-897-2131
Fax: 608-897-2561
www.knightmfg.com
Koch Membrane Systems, Inc.
850 Main St.
Wilmington, MA 01887-3388
Phone: 978-657-4250
Fax: 978-657-5208
www.kochmembrane.com
Koch-Otto York
P.O. Box 3100
Parsippany, NJ 07054
Phone: 973-299-9200
Fax: 973-299-9401
Koﬂo Corp.
309 Cary Point Rd.
Cary, IL 60013
Phone: 847-516-3700
Fax: 847-516-3724 
Komax Systems, Inc.
P.O. Box 1323
Wilmington, CA 90748-1323
Phone: 310-830-4320
Fax: 310-830-9826
www.komax.com
Komline-Sanderson Engineering Corp.
12 Holland Ave.
Peapack, NJ 07977-0257
Phone: 908-234-1000
Fax: 908-234-9487
www.komline.com
Krauss Maffei Corp.
7095 Industrial Rd.
Florence, KY 41042-6270
Phone: 606-283-0200
Fax: 606-283-1878
www.krauss-maffei.com
Krebs Engineers
5505 West Gillette Rd.
Tucson, AZ 85743
Phone: 520-744-8200
Fax: 520-744-8300
www.krebs.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

KriStar Enterprises
P.O. Box 7352
Santa Rosa, CA 95407
Phone: 707-524-2424
Fax: 707-524-8186
www.kristar.com
Krofta Engineering Corp.
P.O. Box 972
Lenox, MA 01240
Phone: 413-637-0740
Fax: 413-637-0768
www.krofta.com
Krüger A/S
Gladsaxevej 363
DK-2860 Soborg, Denmark 
Phone: 45-39-690222
Fax: 45-39-690806
www.kruger.dk
Krupp Thyssen Nirosta GmbH
Oberschlesienstr. 16
D-47807 Krefeld, Germany 
Phone: 49-21-5183-01
Fax: 49-21-5183-2022
www.nirosta.ce
Kvaerner Chemetics
1818 Cornwall Ave.
Vancouver, BC, Canada V6J 1C7
Phone: 604-734-1200
Fax: 604-734-0340
Kvaerner Eureka USA
17 Sawmill Way
Georgetown, MA 01833
Phone: 508-352-4487
Fax: 508-352-4417
Lakeside Equipment Corp.
P.O. Box 8448
Bartlett, IL 60103
Phone: 630-837-5640
Fax: 630-837-5647
www.lakeside-equipment.com
Lakeview Engineered Products, Inc.
2010 Lakeview Dr.
Fort Wayne, IN 46802
Phone: 219-432-3479
Fax: 219-432-6239
Land Combustion
2525-B Pearl Buck Rd.
Bristol, PA 19007
Phone: 215-781-0810
Fax: 215-781-0798
www.landinst.com
Landa, Inc.
4275 NW Paciﬁc Rim Blvd.
Camas, WA 98607
Phone: 360-833-9100
Fax: 360-833-9200
www.landa-inc.com
Landustrie Sneek BV
P.O. Box 199
8600 AD Sneek, The Netherlands
Phone: 31-515-486888
Fax: 31-515-412398
www.landustrie.nl
Lang Filter Media Co.
910 Sheraton Dr. #100
Mars, PA 16046
Phone: 724-779-3990
Fax: 724-779-3993
www.langﬁltermedia.com
Lantec Products, Inc.
5308 Derry Ave., Unit E
Agoura Hills, CA 91301
Phone: 818-707-2285
Fax: 818-707-9367
www.lantecp.com
Larox Inc.
9730 Patuxent Woods Dr.
Columbia, MD 21046
Phone: 410-381-3314
Fax: 410-381-4490
www.larox.ﬁ
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

LAS International 
3811 Lockport St.
Bismark, ND 58501
Phone: 701-222-8331
Fax: 701-222-2773
www.lasinternational.com
Layne Christensen, Ranney Division
801 W. Cherry St.
Sudbury, OH 43074
Phone: 740-965-2833
Fax: 740-965-2834
www.laynechristensen.com
LCI Corp.
P.O. Box 16348
Charlotte, NC 28297-9984
Phone: 704-394-8341
Fax: 704-393-8590
www.lcicorp.com
LEEM Filtration Products, Inc.
25 Arrow Rd.
Ramsey, NJ 07446
Phone: 201-236-4833
Fax: 201-236-2004
Lemna Corp.
1408 Northland Dr., Ste. 310
St. Paul, MN 55120-1013
Phone: 612-688-0836
Fax: 612-688-8813
www.lemna.com
Lighthouse Separation Systems, Inc.
P.O. Box 370
Dahlonega, GA 30533
Phone: 706-864-8644
Fax: 706-864-8677
www.lighthouseﬁlters.com
Lightnin
P.O. Box 1370
Rochester, NY 14603
Phone: 716-527-1623
Fax: 716-527-1720
Linde-KCA-Dresden GmbH
Schumannstrabe 21
D-39264 Dobritz, Germany 
Phone: 41-351-4560-207
Fax: 41-351-4560-272
www.linde.com
Liquid Dynamics Corp.
36W897 Dean St.
St. Charles, IL 60174
Phone: 630-513-8366
Fax: 630-513-6447
www.jetmix.com
Liquid Metronics, Inc.
8 Post Ofﬁce Sq.
Acton, MA 01720-3948
Phone: 978-263-9800
Fax: 978-264-9172
www.lmipumps.com
Liquid Waste Technology, Inc.
Box 250
Somerset, WI 54025
Phone: 715-247-5464
Fax: 715-247-3934
www.lwtpithog.com
Liquid-Solids Separation Corp.
P.O. Box 9
Northvale, NJ 07647
Phone: 201-784-1570
Fax: 201-784-1575
LIST, Inc.
42 Nagog Park
Acton, MA 01720
Phone: 978-635-9521
Fax: 978-635-0570
Longwood Engineering Co., Ltd.
Parkwood Mills, Longwood, 
Huddersﬁeld
West Yorkshire, HD3 4TP England
Phone: 0484-642011
Fax: 0484-642935
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Lotepro Corp.
115 Stevens Ave.
Valhalla, NY 10595
Phone: 914-749-5228
Fax: 914-747-3422
www.linde.com
Lowry Aeration Systems, Inc.
P.O. Box 1239
Blue Hill, ME 04614
Phone: 207-374-3502
Fax: 207-374-3503
www.lowryh2o.com
LSR Technologies, Inc.
898 Main St.
Acton, MA 01720
Phone: 978-635-0123
Fax: 978-635-0058
www.concentric.net
Lurgi Bamag GmbH
Wetzlarer Strabe 136
D-635510 Butzbach, Germany 
Phone: 49-60-33-839
Fax: 49-60-33-83-506
www.lurgi.com
M&W Industries, Inc.
16792 Talisman Lane #210
Huntington Beach, NC 27045
Phone: 910-969-9526
Fax: 910-969-2156
Markland Specialty Engineering Ltd.
48 Shaft Rd.
Rexdale Toronto Ontario, 
Canada M9W 4M2
Phone: 416-244-4980
Fax: 416-244-2287
www.sludgecontrols.com
Marolf, Inc.
4430 Erie Dr.
New Port Richey, FL 34652
Phone: 727-843-0681
Fax: 727-849-3272
Marsh-McBirney, Inc.
4539 Metropolitan Ct.
Frederick, MD 21701-8364
Phone: 301-874-5599
Fax: 301-874-2172
www.marsh-mcbirney.com
Martin Marietta Specialties, Inc.
P.O. Box 15470
Baltimore, MD 21220-0470
Phone: 410-780-5500
Fax: 410-780-5555
www.magspecialties.com
Matheson Gas Products
166 Keystone Dr.
Montgomeryville, PA 18936
Phone: 215-641-2700
Fax: 215-641-2714
www.mathesongas.com
Matrix Desalination, Inc.
3295 SW 11th Ave.
Fort Lauderdale, FL 33315
Phone: 954-524-5120
Fax: 954-524-5216
Matt-Son, Inc.
28W005 Industrial Ave.
Barrington, IL 60010
Phone: 847-382-7810
Fax: 847-382-5814
www.matt-son.com
Mazzei Injector Corp.
500 Rooster Dr.
Bakersﬁeld, CA 93307-9555
Phone: 661-363-6500
Fax: 661-363-7500
www.mazzei-injector.com
McCrometer, Inc.
3255 West Stetson Ave.
Hemet, CA 92545-7799
Phone: 909-652-6811
Fax: 909-652-3078
www.mccrometer.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

McGill Airclean Corp.
1779 Refugee Rd.
Columbus, OH 43207-2119
Phone: 614-443-0192
Fax: 614-445-8759
www.mcgillairclean.com
McLanahan Corp.
200 Wall St.
Hollidaysburg, PA 16648
Phone: 814-695-9807
Fax: 814-695-6684
McTighe Industries, Inc.
3405 S. Westport Ave.
Sioux Falls, SD 57106
Phone: 605-363-3407
Fax: 605-362-3494
www.mctighe.com
Mechanical Equipment Co., Inc.
861 Carondelet St.
New Orleans, LA 70130
Phone: 504-599-4000
Fax: 504-599-4100
www.meco.com
Medina Products Bioremediation 
Division
P.O. Box 309
Hondo, TX 78861
Phone: 830-426-3011
Fax: 830-426-2288
Megator Corp.
562 Alpha Dr.
Pittsburgh, PA 15238
Phone: 412-963-9200
Fax: 412-963-9214
Megtec Systems, Inc.
P.O. Box 5030
DePere, WI 54115-0030
Phone: 920-336-5715
Fax: 920-336-3404
www.megtec.com
Membrex, Inc.
155 Route 146 West
Fairﬁeld, NY 07004
Phone: 973-575-8388
Fax: 973-575-7011
www.membrex.com
Mer-Made Filter, Inc.
185 Le Grand Ave.
Northvale, NJ 07647
Phone: 201-784-3523
Fax: 201-784-1575
Mercer International, Inc.
P.O. Box 540
Mendham, NJ 07945
Phone: 973-543-9000
Fax: 973-543-4343
Meridian Diagnostics, Inc.
3741 River Hills Dr.
Cincinnati, OH 45244
Phone: 513-271-3700
Fax: 513-272-5432
Merrick Industries, Inc.
10 Arthur Dr.
Lynn Haven, FL 32444
Phone: 850-265-3611
Fax: 850-265-9768
Met-Pro Corp.
P.O. Box 144
Harleysville, PA 19438
Phone: 215-723-6751
Fax: 215-723-6758
www.met-pro.com
Meurer Industries, Inc.
15611 West 6th Ave.
Golden, CO 80401
Phone: 303-279-8431
Fax: 303-279-8429
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Micronair LLC
11259 Phillips Pkwy. Dr. E.
Jacksonville, FL 32256
Phone: 904-268-5457
Fax: 904-268-5597
www.micronairusa.com
MIE, Inc.
7 Oak Park
Bedford, MA 01730
Phone: 781-275-1919
Fax: 781-275-2121
www.mieinc.com
Millipore Corp.
80 Ashby Rd.
Bedford, MA 01730
Phone: 781-275-9200
Fax: 781-533-8878
Milltronics, Inc.
709 Stadium Dr. E.
Arlington, TX 76011-9870
Phone: 817-277-3543
Fax: 817-277-3894
www.milltronics.com
Milton Roy Co.
201 Ivyland Rd.
Ivyland, PA 18974-1706
Phone: 215-441-0800
Fax: 215-441-8620
www.miltonroy.com
Minntech Fibercor
14605 28th Ave. N.
Minneapolis, MN 55447
Phone: 612-553-3300
Fax: 612-553-3387
www.minntech.com
Miox Corp.
5500 Midway Park Pl. NE
Albuquerque, NM 87109
Phone: 505-343-0900
Fax: 505-343-0093
www.miox.com
Misonix, Inc.
1938 New Highway
Farmingdale, NY 11735
Phone: 631-694-9555
Fax: 631-694-9412
www.misonix.com
MixAir Technologies, Inc.
4712 68th Ave.
Kenosha, WI 53144
Phone: 262-657-6788
Fax: 262-657-8383
www.mixairtech.com
ModuTank, Inc.
41-04 35th Ave.
Long Island City, NY 11101
Phone: 718-392-1112
Fax: 718-786-1008
Molecular Analytics LLC
25 Loveton Circle, Box 1123
Sparks, MD 21152-1123
Phone: 410-472-2146
Fax: 410-472-2156
Monitek Technologies, Inc.
2021 Las Positas Ct., Ste. 145
Livermore, CA 94550
Phone: 925-243-0050
Fax: 925-243-0051
www.monitek.com
Monoﬂo
16503 Park Row
Houston, TX 77084
Phone: 281-599-4700
Fax: 281-599-4733
Monsanto Enviro-Chem Systems, Inc.
P.O. Box 14547
St. Louis, MO 63178
Phone: 314-275-5700
Fax: 314-275-5701
www.enviro-chem.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Mother Environmental Systems, Inc.
1124 Purina Dr.
Gainesville, GA 30501
Phone: 770-534-3118
Fax: 770-534-3117
www.mycelx.com
Moyno Industrial Products
P.O. Box 960
Springﬁeld, OH 45501
Phone: 937-327-3510
Fax: 937-327-3064
www.moyno.com
MPR Services, Inc.
1201 FM646
Dickinson, TX 77539-3022
Phone: 281-337-7424
Fax: 281-337-6534
www.mprserv.com
Mt. Fury Co., Inc.
1460 19th Ave., NW
Issaquah, WA 98027
Phone: 425-391-0747
Fax: 425-391-9708
Munters
P.O. Box 6428
Fort Myers, FL 33911
Phone: 941-936-1555
Fax: 941-936-6582
www.munters.com
Munters Zeol Corp.
P.O. Box 600
Amesbury, MA 01913
Phone: 978-241-1103
Fax: 978-241-1220
www.munterszeol.com
MWD Technologies Ltd.
111440 West Bernado
San Diego, CA 92127
Phone: 858-674-6902
Fax: 858-674-6903
N-Viro International Corp.
3450 West Central Ave., Ste. 328
Toledo, OH 43606
Phone: 419-535-6374
Fax: 419-535-7008
www.nviro.com
Nalco Chemical Co.
One Nalco Center
Naperville, IL 60566-1024
Phone: 630-305-1000
Fax: 630-305-2900
www.nalco.com
NAO Inc.
1284 E. Sedgley Ave.
Philadelphia, PA 19134
Phone: 215-743-5300
Fax: 215-743-3018
www.nao.com
National Fluid Separators, Inc.
827 Hanley Industrial Ct.
St. Louis, MO 63144-1402
Phone: 314-968-2838
Fax: 314-968-4773
www.mjind.com
National Seal Co.
1245 Corporate Blvd., Ste. 300
Aurora, IL 60504
Phone: 630-898-1161
Fax: 630-898-3461
Nature Plus, Inc.
52 Lakeview Ave.
New Canaan, CT 06840
Phone: 203-972-1100
Fax: 203-966-2200
NEFCO, Inc.
P.O. Box 30493
Palm Beach Gardens, FL 33420-0493
Phone: 561-775-9303
Fax: 561-775-6043
www.nefcoinc.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Neotronics of North America
P.O. Box 2100
Flowery Branch, GA 30542-2100
Phone: 770-967-2196
Fax: 770-967-1854
Neptune Chemical Pump Co.
P.O. Box 247
Lansdale, PA 19446
Phone: 215-699-8701
Fax: 215-699-0370
www.neptune1.com
Netzsch, Inc.
119 Pickering Way
Exton, PA 19341-1393
Phone: 610-363-8010
Fax: 610-363-0971
www.netzschusa.com
Neutraman, Inc.
2701 S. Coliseum Blvd., Ste. 1000
Fort Wayne, IN 46803
Phone: 219-422-5953
Fax: 219-422-5160
New Logic International
1295 67th St.
Emeryville, CA 94608
Phone: 510-655-7305
Fax: 510-655-7307
www.vsep.com
Newport Electronics
2229 S. Yale St.
Santa Ana, CA 92704
Phone: 714-540-4914
Fax: 714-546-3022
www.newportus.com
Niro, Inc.
9165 Rumsey Rd.
Colombia, MD 21045
Phone: 410-997-8700
Fax: 410-997-5021
www.niro.com
Nitrate Removal Technologies, LLC
1667 Cole Blvd., Ste. 400
Golden, CO 80401
Phone: 303-274-1426
Fax: 303-237-1103
Noggerath GmbH
Feldstrabe 2
D-31708 Ahmsen, Germany 
Phone: 49-5722-882-0
Fax: 49-5722-882-282
www.noggerath.de
Nopon Oy
Turvekuja 6
Helsinki, Finland 00700
Phone: 358-9-351-5700
Fax: 358-9-351-5620
www.nopon.ﬁ
Norair Engineering Corp.
337 Brightseat Rd., Ste. 200
Landover, MD 20785
Phone: 301-499-2202
Fax: 301-499-1342
Norchem Industries
18651 Graphic Ct.
Tinley Park, IL 60477
Phone: 708-802-9700
Fax: 708-802-9775
www.norchemindustries.com
Norit Americas, Inc.
1050 Crown Point Pkwy., Ste. 1500
Atlanta, GA 30338
Phone: 770-512-4610
Fax: 770-512-4622
www.norit.com
North East Environmental Products, Inc.
17 Technology Dr.
West Lebanon, NH 03784
Phone: 603-298-7061
Fax: 603-298-7063
www.neepsystems.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Northwest Cascade, Inc.
P.O. Box 73399
Puyallup, WA 98373
Phone: 253-848-2371
Fax: 253-848-2545
www.nwcascade.com
Norton Co.
P.O. Box 350
Akron, OH 44309-0350
Phone: 330-673-5860
Fax: 330-677-7245
Norton Performance Plastics
150 Dey Rd.
Wayne, NJ 07470
Phone: 973-696-4700
Fax: 973-628-5550
NRG, Inc.
P.O. Box 306
Ardmore, PA 19003-9998
Phone: 610-896-6850
Fax: 610-649-5083
NSF International
P.O. Box 130140
Ann Arbor, MI 48113-0140
Phone: 734-769-8010
Fax: 734-760-0109
www.nsf.org
NSW Corp.
530 Gregory Ave.
Roanoke, VA 24016
Phone: 540-981-0362
Fax: 540-345-8421
www.nswcorp.com
Nuove Energie s.r.l.
Via della Meccanica
23/25 Vicenza, Italy 
Phone: 0444-963453
Fax: 0444-960959
NuTech Environmental Corp.
5350 N. Washington St.
Denver, CO 80216-1951
Phone: 303-295-3702
Fax: 303-295-6145
www.nutechenvironmental.com
Odor Management, Inc.
18-4 E. Dundee Rd., Ste. 200
Barrington, IL 55427-9707
Phone: 847-304-9111
Fax: 847-304-0989
Olds Filtration Engineering, Inc.
Highway 98, 907 Halls Lane
Daphne, AL 36526-0970
Phone: 334-626-9492
Fax: 334-626-7988
www.oldsﬁltration.com
Omega Engineering, Inc.
P.O. Box 4047
Stamford, CT 06907-0047
Phone: 203-359-1660
Fax: 203-359-7700
www.omega.com
On-Demand Environmental Systems, 
Inc.
761 Coleman Ave.
San Jose, CA 95110
Phone: 408-287-7012
Fax: 408-287-7147
Oritex Corp.
5530 Ferguson Dr.
City of Commerce, CA 90022
Phone: 323-890-1588
Fax: 323-890-1591
Orival, Inc.
40 N. Van Brunt St.
Englewood, NJ 07631
Phone: 201-568-3311
Fax: 201-568-1916
www.orival.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Osmonics Desal
760 Shadowridge Dr.
Vista, CA 92083-7986
Phone: 760-598-3334
Fax: 760-598-3335
www.osmonics.com
Osmonics, Inc.
5951 Clearwater Dr.
Minnetonka, MN 55343-8995
Phone: 612-933-2277
Fax: 612-933-0141
www.osmonics.com
Osmosis Technology, Inc.
6900 Hemosa Circle
Buena Park, CA 90620
Phone: 714-670-9303
Fax: 714-670-9323
www.osmotik.com
Osprey Biotechnics
2530 B. Trailmate Dr.
Sarasota, FL 34243
Phone: 941-755-7770
Fax: 941-755-0626
Ozone Pure Water, Inc.
5330 Ashton Ct.
Sarasota, FL 34233
Phone: 941-923-8528
Fax: 941-923-8231
www.ozonepure.com
Ozonia North America
P.O. Box 455
Elmwood Park, NJ 07407
Phone: 201-794-3100
Fax: 201-794-3358
www.ozonia.com
Paciﬁc Keystone Technologies
P.O. Box 360
Black Diamond, WA 98010-0491
Phone: 360-886-1396
Fax: 360-886-2480
www.clearwaterworld.com
Paciﬁc Ozone Technology, Inc.
730 Concord Ave.
Brentwood, CA 94513
Phone: 925-634-7252
Fax: 925-634-7291
www.paciﬁcozone.com
PacTec, Inc.
P.O. Box 8069
Clinton, LA 70722
Phone: 225-683-8062
Fax: 225-683-8711
www.pactecinc.com
Pall Corp.
2200 Northern Blvd.
East Hills, NY 11548-1289
Phone: 516-484-5400
Fax: 516-484-6164
www.pall.com
Parkson Corp.
P.O. Box 408399
Fort Lauderdale, FL 33340-8399
Phone: 954-974-6610
Fax: 954-974-6182
www.parkson.com
Particle Measuring Systems, Inc.
5475 Airport Blvd.
Boulder, CO 80301
Phone: 303-443-7100
Fax: 303-449-6870
www.pmeasuring.com
Passavant-Roediger GmbH
Aarbergen
D-65322, Germany 
Phone: 49-6120-282791
Fax: 49-6120-282672
www.passavant-roediger.de
Patterson Candy International, Ltd.
21 The Mall,
Ealing London, W5 2PU England
Phone: 01-579-1311
Fax: 01-840-6180
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Patterson Pump Co.
P.O. Box 790
Toccoa, GA 30577
Phone: 706-886-2101
Fax: 706-886-0023
www.pattersonpumps.com
Paul Mueller Co.
P.O. Box 828
Springﬁeld, MO 65801-0828
Phone: 417-831-3000
Fax: 417-831-3528
www.muel.com
PBR Industries
143 Cortland St.
Lindenhurst, NY 11757
Phone: 516-226-2930
Fax: 516-226-3125
www.pbrind.com
PCI-Wedeco Environmental 
Technologies, Inc.
One Fairﬁeld Crescent
West Caldwell, NJ 07006
Phone: 973-575-7052
Fax: 973-575-8941
www.pci-wedeco.com
PennProcess Technologies, Inc.
P.O. Box 427
Plumsteadville, PA 18949-0427
Phone: 215-766-7766
Fax: 215-766-8290
www.pennprocess.com
Pepcon Systems, Inc.
3770 Howard Hughes Pkwy., Ste. 340
Las Vegas, NV 89109
Phone: 702-735-2324
Fax: 702-735-9456
PerkinElmer Instruments
761 Main Ave.
Norwalk, CT 06859
Phone: 203-762-4003
Fax: 203-761-5330
www.perkinelmer.com
Phelps Dodge Reﬁning Co.
P.O. Box 20001
El Paso, TX 79998
Phone: 915-775-8826
Fax: 915-775-8350
www.pdsales.com
Philadelphia Mixers
1221 E. Main
Palmyra, PA 17078
Phone: 717-838-1341
Fax: 717-832-8802
www.philamixers.com
Phipps & Bird
P.O. Box 27324
Richmond, VA 23261
Phone: 804-254-2737
Fax: 804-254-2955
www.phippsbird.com
Phoenix Process Equipment Co.
2402 Watterson Trail
Louisville, KY 40299
Phone: 502-499-6198
Fax: 502-499-1079
www.dewater.com
Pica USA, Inc.
432 McCormick Blvd.
Columbus, OH 43213
Phone: 614-864-8100
Fax: 614-864-9914
www.picausa.com
Pipeline Pigging Products, Inc.
P.O. Box 692005
Houston, TX 77269
Phone: 281-351-6688
Fax: 281-255-2385
www.pipepigs.com
Pitt-Des Moines, Inc.
3400 Grand Ave.
Pittsburgh, PA 15225
Phone: 412-331-3000
Fax: 412-331-3188
www.pdm.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Plasti-Fab, Inc.
P.O. Box 100
Tualatin, OR 97062-0100
Phone: 503-692-5460
Fax: 503-692-1145
www.plasti-fab.com
Pollution Control Systems, Inc.
5827 Happy Hollow Rd.
Milford, OH 45150
Phone: 513-831-1165
Fax: 513-965-4812
Polybac Corp.
3894 Courtney St.
Bethlehem, PA 18017
Phone: 610-867-7338
Fax: 610-861-0991
Polychem Corp.
P.O. Box 527
Phoenixville, PA 19460-0527
Phone: 610-935-0225
Fax: 610-935-7151
www.polychemcorp.com
Polydyne, Inc.
P.O. Box 351420
Toledo, OH 43635
Phone: 419-843-8066
Fax: 419-843-3081
www.polydynemso.com
PPG Industries, Inc.
1 PPG Pl.
Pittsburgh, PA 15272
Phone: 412-434-3131
Fax: 412-434-4578
www.ppg.com
PQ Corp.
P.O. Box 840 
Valley Forge, PA 19482
Phone: 610-651-4200
Fax: 610-251-5249
Praxair, Inc.
810 Jorie Blvd.
Oak Brook, IL 60521-2216
Phone: 708-572-7500
Fax: 708-572-7935
www.praxair.com
Praxair-Trailigaz Ozone Co.
11501 Goldcoast Dr.
Cincinnati, OH 45249-1623
Phone: 513-530-7702
Fax: 513-530-7711
www.ptoc.com
Premier Chemicals
7521 Engle Rd., Ste. 415
Middleburg Heights, OH 44130
Phone: 440-234-4600
Fax: 440-234-5772
www.premierchemicals.com
Pro Products Corp.
502 Incentive Dr.
Fort Wayne, IN 46825
Phone: 219-490-5970
Fax: 219-490-9431
www.redbgone.com
Pro-Ent, Inc.
P.O. Box 23611
Jacksonville, FL 32241
Phone: 904-737-3536
Fax: 904-737-3537
Pro-Equipment, Inc.
237 Wisconsin Ave.
Waukesha, WI 53186
Phone: 262-513-8801
Fax: 262-513-8897
www.proequipment.com
Probiotic Solutions
201 S. Roosevelt
Chandler, AZ 85226
Phone: 480-961-1220
Fax: 480-961-3501
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Process Combustion Corp.
5460 Horning Rd.
Pittsburgh, PA 15241
Phone: 412-655-0955
Fax: 412-650-5560
Product Level Control, Inc.
11929 Portland Ave. S.
Burnsville, MN 55337
Phone: 612-707-9101
Fax: 612-707-1075
www.productlevel.com
Professional Water Technologies, Inc.
1145 Industrial Ave., Ste. I
Escondido, CA 92029
Phone: 760-741-7404
Fax: 760-741-5645
www.pwtinc.com
ProGuard Filtration Systems
P.O. Box 678
Nowata, OK 74048
Phone: 918-273-2208
Fax: 918-273-2101
ProMinent Fluid Controls, Inc.
136 Industry Dr.
Pittsburgh, PA 15275
Phone: 412-787-2484
Fax: 412-787-0704
www.pfc-amer.com
PTI Advanced Filtration
2340 Eastman Ave.
Oxnard, CA 93030
Phone: 805-604-3400
Fax: 805-604-3401
www.pti-aﬁ.com
Pulsafeeder, Inc.
2883 Brighton Henrietta TL Rd.
Rochester, NY 14623
Phone: 716-292-8000
Fax: 716-424-5619
www.pulsa.com
Pump Engineering, Inc.
1004 W. Hurd Rd.
Monroe, MI 48161
Phone: 734-242-1772
Fax: 734-242-9777
Pumps Unlimited
19 Affonso Dr.
Carson City, NV 89706
Phone: 775-246-0800
Fax: 775-246-0847
Puraﬁl, Inc.
2654 Weaver Way
Doraville, GA 30340
Phone: 770-662-8545
Fax: 770-263-6922
www.puraﬁl.com
Purestream, Inc.
P.O. Box 68
Florence, KY 41042-0068
Phone: 606-371-9898
Fax: 606-371-3577
www.purestreaminc.com
Purolite Co.
150 Monument Rd., Bala Cynwyd
Philadelphia, PA 19004
Phone: 610-668-9090
Fax: 610-668-8139
www.purolite.com
QED Environmental Systems, Inc.
P.O. Box 3726
Ann Arbor, MI 48106-9897
Phone: 734-995-2547
Fax: 734-995-1170
www.qedenv.com
Quantum Technologies, Inc.
1632 Enterprise Pkwy.
Twinsburg, OH 44087
Phone: 330-425-7880
Fax: 330-425-0955
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

R.P. Adams Co., Inc.
P.O. Box 963
Buffalo, NY 14240-0963
Phone: 716-877-2608
Fax: 716-877-9385
www.rpadams.com
RDP Technologies, Inc.
2495 Blvd. of the Generals
Norristown, PA 19403-5236
Phone: 610-650-9900
Fax: 610-650-9070
www.rdptech.com
Recra Environmental
1576 Sweet Home Rd.
Amherst, NY 14228
Phone: 716-636-1550
Fax: 716-636-1598
Red Fox Environmental, Inc.
P.O. Box 53809
Lafayette, LA 70505
Phone: 337-235-2499
Fax: 337-235-2999
Red Valve Co., Inc.
700 N. Bell Ave.
Carnegie, PA 15106
Phone: 412-279-0044
Fax: 412-279-7878
www.redvalve.com
Reﬁnite Water Conditioning Co.
P.O. Box 11676
Rock Hill, SC 29731
Phone: 803-324-7600
Fax: 803-324-1116
Refractron Technologies Corp.
5750 Stuart Ave.
Newark, NJ 14513
Phone: 315-331-6222
Fax: 315-331-7254
www.refractron.com
Regenesis
1011 Calle Sombra
San Clemente, CA 92672
Phone: 949-366-8000
Fax: 949-366-8090
www.regenesis.com
Reheis, Inc.
235 Snyder Ave.
Berkely Heights, NJ 07922
Phone: 908-464-1500
Fax: 908-464-7726
REKO Industrial Equipment B.V.
Delta Industrieweg 36
3251 LX Stellendam, The Netherlands 
Phone: 31-187-492988
Fax: 31-187-492781
RGF O3 Systems, Inc.
3875 Fiscal Ct.
West Palm Beach, FL 33404
Phone: 561-848-3187
Fax: 561-848-2170
www.rgf.com
Ringlace Products, Inc.
9902 N.E. Glison St.
Portland, OR 97220
Phone: 503-251-1295
Fax: 503-256-7325
Roberts Filter Group
P.O. Box 167
Darby, PA 19023
Phone: 610-583-3131
Fax: 610-583-0117
www.robertsﬁltergroup.com
Rochem Environmental, Inc.
610 North Milby St.
Houston, TX 77003
Phone: 713-224-7626
Fax: 713-224-7627
www.rochem.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Rochester Midland
333 Hollenbeck St.
Rochester, NY 14621
Phone: 716-336-2200
Fax: 716-266-1606
www.rochestermidland.com
Rodney Hunt Co.
46 Mill St.
Orange, MA 01364-1268
Phone: 978-544-2511
Fax: 978-544-7204
www.rodneyhunt.com
Roediger Pittsburgh, Inc.
3812 Route 8
Allison Park, PA 15101
Phone: 412-487-6010
Fax: 412-487-6005
www.roediger.com
Rohm & Haas, Co.
5000 Richmond St.
Philadelphia, PA 19105
Phone: 215-537-4000
Fax: 215-537-4219
www.rohmhaas.com
Ronningen-Petter
9551 Shaver Rd.
Portage, MI 49081
Phone: 616-323-1313
Fax: 616-323-0065
Ropur AG
4142 Munchebstein 1
Switzerland 
Phone: 41-61-415-8710
Fax: 41-61-415-8720
Rosemount Analytical, Inc.
2400 Barranca Pkwy.
Irvine, CA 92606
Phone: 949-863-1181
Fax: 949-474-7250
Rosenmund
St. James Ct., Wilderspool Causeway
Warrington, Chesire, WA4 6PS England
Phone: 0925-52621
Fax: 0925-416790
Rosenmund, Inc.
9110 Forsyth Park Dr.
Charlotte, NC 28273
Phone: 704-587-0440
Fax: 704-588-6866
Roto-Sieve AB
Hjorthagsgatan 10
S-413 17, Goteborg, Sweden 
Phone: 031-427890
Fax: 031-422070
Rubber Millers, Inc.
709 S. Caton
Baltimore, MD 21229
Phone: 410-947-8400
Fax: 410-233-6537
Rupprecht & Patashnick Co., Inc.
25 Corporate Circle
Albany, NY 12203
Phone: 518-452-0065
Fax: 518-452-0067
www.rpco.com
S.P. Kinney Engineers, Inc.
P.O. Box 445
Carnegie, PA 15106-0445
Phone: 412-276-4600
Fax: 412-276-6890
S&G Enterprises, Inc.
N115 W1900 Edison Dr.
Germantown, WI 53022
Phone: 262-251-8300
Fax: 262-251-1616
www.ramﬂat.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

S&N Airoﬂo, Inc.
P.O. Drawer 1139
Greenwood, MS 38935-1139
Phone: 601-453-2588
Fax: 601-453-1991
www.airoﬂo.com
SAMI
940 Kulp Rd.
Pottstown, PA 19465
Phone: 610-495-6858
Fax: 610-495-0560
www.sami1.com
Sanitaire Corp.
9333 N. 49th St.
Brown Deer, WI 53223
Phone: 414-365-2200
Fax: 414-365-2210
www.sanitaire.com
Schlicher & Schuell
P.O. Box 2012
Keene, NH 03431
Phone: 603-352-3810
Fax: 603-357-3627
Schloss Engineered Equipment
10555 E. Dartmouth #230
Aurora, CO 80014
Phone: 303-695-4500
Fax: 303-695-4507
Schlueter Co.
P.O. Box 548
Janesville, WI 53547
Phone: 608-755-5455
Fax: 608-755-5450
Schreiber Corp.
100 Schreiber Dr.
Trussville, AL 35173
Phone: 205-655-7466
Fax: 205-655-7669
www.schreiber-water.com
Schreiber-Klaranlagen
Postfach 1580
30853 Langenhagen, Germany 
Phone: 0511-77990
Fax: 0511-7799220
SciCorp Systems, Inc.
274 Burton Ave. Ste. 203B
Barrie, Ontario, Canada L4N 5W4
Phone: 705-733-2626
Fax: 705-733-2618
www.scicorpbiologic.com
Science Application International Corp.
3240 Schoolhouse Rd.
Middletown, PA 17057
Phone: 717-944-5501
Fax: 717-944-4551
Scienco/FAST Systems
3240 N. Broadway
St. Louis, MO 63147-3515
Phone: 314-621-2536
Fax: 314-621-1952
Screening Systems International
P.O. Box 760
Slaughter, LA 70777
Phone: 225-654-3900
Fax: 225-654-3966
www.screeningsystems.com
Seaman Corp.
1000 Venture Blvd.
Wooster, OH 44691
Phone: 330-262-1111
Fax: 330-263-6950
www.seamancorp.com
Sefar America, Inc.
333 S. Highland Ave.
Briarcliff Manor, NY 10510
Phone: 914-941-7767
Fax: 914-762-8599
www.seafaramerica.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Seghers Better Technology USA
3114 Emery Circle
Austell, GA 30168
Phone: 770-739-4205
Fax: 770-739-0117
www.bettertechnology.com
Selecto, Inc.
5933 Peachtree Industrial Blvd.
Norcross, GA 30092
Phone: 770-448-2433
Fax: 770-448-5214
Semblex, Inc.
1635 W. Walnut
Springﬁeld, MO 65806-1643
Phone: 417-866-1035
Fax: 417-866-0235
Sentex Systems, Inc.
553 Broad Ave.
Ridgeﬁeld, NJ 07657
Phone: 201-945-3694
Fax: 201-941-6064
Serﬁlco, Ltd.
1777 Shermer Rd.
Northbrook, IL 60062-5360
Phone: 847-559-1777
Fax: 847-559-1995
www.serﬁlco.com
Sernagiotto Technologies
1903 Corona Ave.
Jasper, AL 35501
Phone: 205-221-3709
Fax: 205-221-5237
www.sernagiotto.it
Serpentix Conveyor Corp.
9085 Marshall Ct.
Westminster, CO 80030
Phone: 303-430-8427
Fax: 303-430-7337
www.serpentix.com
Servomex Co.
90 Kerry Pl.
Norwood, MA 02062
Phone: 781-769-7710
Fax: 781-769-2834
www.servomex.com
Shannon Chemical Corp.
P.O. Box 376
Malvern, PA 19355
Phone: 610-363-9090
Fax: 610-524-6050
www.shannonchem.com
Silbrico Corp.
6300 River Rd.
Hodgkins, IL 60525-4257
Phone: 708-354-3350
Fax: 708-354-6698
Simon-Hartley, Ltd.
Stoke-On-Trent
Staffordshire, ST4 7BH England
Phone: 0782-202300
Fax: 0782-260534
Smith & Loveless, Inc.
14040 Sante Fe Trail Dr.
Lenexa, KS 66215-1284
Phone: 913-888-5201
Fax: 913-888-2173
www.smithandloveless.com
Solidur Plastics Co.
200 Industrial Dr.
Delmont, PA 15626
Phone: 724-468-6868
Fax: 724-468-4044
Solinst Canada Ltd.
35 Todd Rd.
Georgetown, Ontario, L7G 4R8
Phone: 905-873-2255
Fax: 905-873-1992
www.solinst.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Solucorp Industries Corp.
250 W. Nyack Rd.
West Nyack, NY 10994
Phone: 914-623-2333
Fax: 914-623-4987
www.solucorpltd.com
Solvay America
3333 Richmond
Houston, TX 77098
Phone: 713-525-6000
Fax: 713-524-7887
www.solvay.com
Somat Corp.
855 Fox Chase
Coatesville, PA 19320
Phone: 610-384-7000
Fax: 610-380-8500
www.somatcorp.com
Spaulding Composites Co.
1300 S. Seventh St.
Dekalb, IL 60115
Phone: 815-758-8181
Fax: 815-758-1900
www.spauldingcom.com
Spencer Turbine Co.
600 Day Hill Rd.
Windsor, CT 06095
Phone: 860-688-8361
Fax: 860-688-0098
Sper Chemical Corp.
14770 62nd St.
Clearwater, FL 33760-2331
Phone: 727-535-9033
Fax: 727-530-0741
Spirac AB
Box 30033
200 61 Malmo, Sweden 
Phone: 46-(0)40-162020
Fax: 46-(0)40-153650
Spirac USA, Inc.
P.O. Box 3137
Peachtree City, GA 30269
Phone: 770-632-9833
Fax: 770-632-9838
www.spirac.se
SRE, Inc.
510 Franklin Ave.
Nutley, NJ 07110
Phone: 973-661-5192
Fax: 973-661-3713
www.sreinc.com
SRS Crisafulli, Inc.
P.O. Box 1051
Glendive, MT 59330-9985
Phone: 406-365-3393
Fax: 406-365-8088
www.crisafulli.com
SRS Industrial Engineering
362 S. Main
Clearﬁeld, UT 84015
Phone: 801-773-1311
Fax: 801-773-8608
Stahler GmbH
Muhlenhof 1
D-65589 Hadamar, Germany
Phone: 49-64-33-93000
Fax: 49-64-33-5960
Stancor Pump, Inc.
515 Fan Hill Rd.
Monroe, CT 06468
Phone: 203-268-7513
Fax: 203-268-7958
Stanley Pump & Equipment, Inc.
2525 South Clearbrook Dr.
Arlington Heights, IL 60005
Phone: 847-439-9200
Fax: 847-439-9388
www.stanleypump.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Star Systems, Inc.
P.O. Box 518
Timmonsville, SC 29161
Phone: 843-346-3101
Fax: 843-346-3736
www.hilliardcorp.com
Steel Tank Institute
570 Oakwood Rd.
Lake Zurich, IL 60047
Phone: 847-438-8265
Fax: 847-438-4509
www.steeltank.com
Sterling Fluid Systems (USA)
P.O. Box 460
Grand Island, NY 14072
Phone: 716-773-6450
Fax: 716-773-2330
www.sterlingﬂuidsystems.com
Sternson Ltd.
P.O. Box 1540
Brantford, Ontario, Canada N3T 5V6
Phone: 519-759-7570
Fax: 519-759-8962
Stevens Water Monitoring Systems
P.O. Box 40
Beaverton, OR 97075-0040
Phone: 503-646-9171
Fax: 503-526-1471
www.stevenswater.com
Stiles-Kem Divison, Met Pro Corp.
1570 Lakeside Dr.
Waukegan, IL 60085-8309
Phone: 847-689-1100
Fax: 847-689-9289
Stockhausen, Inc.
3408 Doyle St.
Greensboro, NC 27406
Phone: 910-333-3500
Fax: 910-333-3518
Stormceptor Corp.
600 Jefferson Plaza, Ste. 304
Rockville, MD 20852
Phone: 301-762-8361
Fax: 301-762-4190
www.csrstormceptor.com
StormTreat Systems, Inc.
3408 Doyle St.
Barnstable, MA 02630
Phone: 508-778-4449
Fax: 508-362-5335
Stormwater Management
2035 N.E. Colombia Blvd.
Portland, OR 97211
Phone: 503-240-9553
Fax: 503-240-9553
www.stormwatermgt.com
Strategic Diagnostics, Inc.
111 Pencader Dr.
Newark, DE 19702
Phone: 302-456-6789
Fax: 302-456-6782
www.sdix.com
Süd-Chemie Prototech Inc.
32 Fremont St.
Needham, MA 02194
Phone: 781-444-5188
Fax: 781-444-0130
www.prototechco.com
SulfaTreat Co.
17998 Chesterﬁeld Airport Rd., Ste. 215
Chesterﬁeld, MO 63005
Phone: 314-532-2189
Fax: 314-532-2764
www.sulfatreat.com
Sumitomo Machinery Corp.
4200 Holland Blvd.
Chesapeake, VA 23323
Phone: 757-485-3355
Fax: 757-487-3193
www.smcyclo.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Svedala Industries, Inc.
P.O. Box 15312
York, PA 17405-7312
Phone: 717-843-8671
Fax: 717-845-5154
SWECO Engineering Corp.
7120 New Bufﬁngton Rd.
Florence, KY 41042
Phone: 859-727-5147
Fax: 859-727-5122
www.sweco.com
Sybron Chemicals, Biochemical 
Division
111 Kesler Mill Rd.
Salem, VA 24153
Phone: 540-389-9361
Fax: 540-389-9364
www.sybronchemicals.com
Sybron Chemicals, Inc.
P.O. Box 66
Birmingham, NJ 08011
Phone: 609-893-1100
Fax: 609-894-8641
www.sybronchemicals.com
Synetix
2 Transam Plaza Dr., Ste. 230
Oak Brook Terrace, IL 60181
Phone: 630-268-6300
Fax: 630-268-9797
www.synetix.com
TAH Industries, Inc.
107 N. Gold Dr.
Robbinsville, NJ 08691
Phone: 609-259-9222
Fax: 609-259-0957
Tate Andale, Inc.
1941 Lansdowne Rd.
Baltimore, MD 21227-1789
Phone: 410-247-8700
Fax: 410-247-9672
Techniﬂo Systems
12300 Perry Highway
Wexford, PA 15090
Phone: 412-749-0600
Fax: 412-935-0777
Tecnetics Industries, Inc.
1811 Buerkle Rd.
St. Paul, MN 55110
Phone: 651-777-4780
Fax: 651-777-5582
www.tecweigh.com
Tellkamp Systems, Inc.
15523 Carmenita Rd.
Sante Fe Springs, CA 90670
Phone: 562-802-1621
Fax: 562-802-1303
www.tellkamp.com
Tenco Hydro, Inc.
4620 Forest Ave.
Brookﬁeld, IL 60513
Phone: 708-387-0700
Fax: 708-387-0732
Tetra Process Technologies
Park West One, Ste. 600
Pittsburgh, PA 15275
Phone: 412-788-8300
Fax: 412-788-8304
Tetratec
1741 Loretta Ave.
Feasterville, PA 19053
Phone: 215-355-7111
Fax: 215-355-6745
www.tetratex.com
Thermaco, Inc.
646 Greensboro St.
Asheboro, NC 27204
Phone: 336-629-4651
Fax: 336-626-5739
www.big-dipper.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Thermacon Enviro Systems, Inc.
1983 Marcus Ave.
Lake Success, NY 11042
Phone: 516-328-6600
Fax: 516-328-7988
www.thermacon.com
ThermaFab, Inc.
200 Rich Lex Dr.
Lexington, SC 29072
Phone: 803-794-2543
Fax: 803-796-0999
Thermal Black Clawson
605 Clark St.
Middletown, OH 45042
Phone: 513-424-7400
Fax: 513-424-1168
Thermatrix, Inc.
308 N. Peteres Rd.
Knoxville, TN 37922
Phone: 423-539-9603
Fax: 423-539-9643
www.thermatrix.com
Thermax, Ltd.
40440 Grand River
Novi, MI 48050
Phone: 248-474-3050
Fax: 248-474-5790
TIGG Corp.
Box 11661
Pittsburgh, PA 15228
Phone: 412-563-4300
Fax: 412-563-6155
TN Technologies, Inc.
P.O. Box 800
Round Rock, TX 78680-0800
Phone: 512-388-9100
Fax: 512-388-9200
www.tnksi.com
Tonka Equipment Co.
13305 Watertower Circle
Plymouth, MN 55441
Phone: 612-559-2837
Fax: 612-559-1979
www.tankwater.com
Toray Industries, Inc.
2-2, Nichonbashi-Muromachi, Chuo-Ku
Tokyo, 103 Japan 
Phone: 03-245-5607
Fax: 03-245-5555
Toyobo Co., Ltd.
2-8 Dojima Hama 2-chrome, Kita-ku
Osaka 530-8230, Japan 
Phone: 81-6-6348-3360
Fax: 81-6-6348-3418
www.toyobo.co.jp
Tri-Mer Corp.
P.O. Box 730
Owosso, MI 48867
Phone: 517-723-7838
Fax: 517-723-7844
www.tri-mer.com
TriSep Corp.
93 S. La Patera Ln.
Goleta, CA 93117
Phone: 805-964-8003
Fax: 805-964-1235
www.trisep.com
Triton Technologies
11917 FM 529
Houston, TX 77041
Phone: 713-937-0101
Fax: 713-937-1979
Trojan Technologies, Inc.
3020 Gore Rd.
London, Ontario, Canada N5V 4T7
Phone: 519-457-3400
Fax: 519-457-3030
www.trojanuv.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Trusty Cook, Inc.
10530 E. 59th St.
Indianapolis, IN 46236
Phone: 317-823-6821
Fax: 317-823-6822
www.trusty-cook.com
Turner Designs
845 W. Maude Ave.
Sunnyvale, CA 94086
Phone: 408-749-0994
Fax: 408-749-0998
www.turnerdesigns.com
Turnkey Solutions, Inc.
103 Godwin Ave.
Midland Park, NJ 07432-1813
Phone: 201-848-7676
Fax: 201-848-1643
Tuthill Pneumatics Group
P.O. Box 2877
Springﬁeld, MO 65801-2877
Phone: 417-865-8715
Fax: 417-865-2950
www.mdpneumatics.com
Tytronics, Inc.
25 Wiggins Ave.
Bedford, MA 01730-2323
Phone: 781-275-9660
Fax: 781-275-9665
www.tytronics.com
Ultra Additives, Inc.
460 Straight St.
Paterson, NJ 07501
Phone: 973-279-1306
Fax: 973-279-0602
Ultraﬂote Corp.
8558 Katy Freeway, Ste. 100
Houston, TX 77024
Phone: 713-461-2100
Fax: 713-461-2213
www.ultraﬂote.com
Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.
333 Pﬁngsten Rd.
Northbrook, IL 60062
Phone: 847-272-8800
Fax: 847-509-6219
www.ul.com
Unicel, Inc.
P.O. Box 15203
Baton Rouge, LA 70895
Phone: 225-753-7129
Fax: 225-753-7125
www.unicelinc.com
Uniﬁlt Corp.
P.O. Box 389
Zelienople, PA 16063-0389
Phone: 724-758-3833
Fax: 724-758-3870
www.uniﬁlt.com
Unimin Corp.
258 Elm St.
New Canaan, CT 06840
Phone: 203-966-8880
Fax: 203-966-3453
Unipure Corp.
1440 North Harbor, Ste. 125
Fullerton, CA 92835
Phone: 714-870-1578
Fax: 714-870-4576
www.unipure.com
Unisol
1810 W. Drake Dr. #103
Tempe, AZ 85283
Phone: 480-491-7145
Fax: 480-491-7185
www.unisol-biologics.com
United Industries, Inc.
P.O. Box 3838
Baton Rouge, LA 70821-3838
Phone: 225-292-5527
Fax: 225-293-1655
www.ui-inc.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Universal Process Equipment Co.
P.O. Box 338
Roosevelt, NJ 08555-0338
Phone: 609-443-4545
Fax: 609-259-0644
www.upe.com
USFilter Recovery Services
2430 Rose Pl.
Roseville, MN 55113
Phone: 651-638-1300
Fax: 651-633-5074
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Aerator Products
11765 Main St.
Roscoe, IL 61073
Phone: 815-623-2111
Fax: 815-623-6416
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Asdor
250 Royal Crest Ct.
Markham, Ontario, Canada L3R 3S1
Phone: 905-944-2828-836-7700
Fax: 905-474-1334
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Bekox
Pol.Ind. Santa Ana, C/El Electrodo, 52
Rivas Vaciamadrid, 28529
Phone: 34-91-660-4000
Fax: 34-91-666-7716
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Contra-Shear
CPO Box 1611
Auckland, New Zealand 
Phone: 64-9-818-6108
Fax: 64-9-818-6599
www.contra-shear.co.nz
USFilter/Control Systems
1239 Willow Lake Blvd.
Vadnais, MN 55110
Phone: 651-766-2700
Fax: 651-766-2701
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/CPC
441 Main St.
Sturbridge, MA 01566
Phone: 508-347-7344
Fax: 508-347-7049
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Davco
P.O. Box 1419
Thomasville, GA 31792
Phone: 912-226-5733
Fax: 912-228-0312
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Davis Process
2650 Tallevast Rd.
Sarasota, FL 34243
Phone: 941-355-2971
Fax: 941-351-4756
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Dewatering Systems
2155 112th Ave.
Holland, MI 49424-9604
Phone: 616-772-9011
Fax: 616-772-4516
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Diffused Air Products Group
8506 Beechmont Ave.
Cincinnati, OH 45255
Phone: 513-388-4100
Fax: 513-388-4111
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Electrocatalytic
2 Milltown Ct.
Union, NJ 07083
Phone: 908-851-6952
Fax: 908-851-6906
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Envirex
P.O. Box 1604
Waukesha, WI 53187
Phone: 262-541-0141
Fax: 262-541-4120
www.usﬁlter.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

USFilter/Filtration & Separation
2118 Greenspring Dr.
Timonium, MD 21093
Phone: 410-252-0800
Fax: 410-560-2857
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Gas Technologies
1501 E, Woodﬁeld Rd.
Schaumburg, IL 60173
Phone: 847-706-6900
Fax: 847-706-6996
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/General Filter
600 Arrasmith Trail
Ames, IA 50010
Phone: 515-232-4121
Fax: 515-232-2571
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Gutling
Postfach 1445
Fellbach, Germany 70704
Phone: 07-11-518550-0
Fax: 07-11-518550-100
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Headworks Products
100 Highpoint Dr.
Chalfont, PA 18914
Phone: 215-712-0280
Fax: 215-996-1136
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/HPD
2 West Main St.
Plainﬁeld, IL 60544
Phone: 815-436-3013
Fax: 815-436-3010
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Hubert
P.O. Box 29
8715 ZH Stavoren, The Netherlands 
Phone: 31-514-684444
Fax: 31-514-682198
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Industrial Wastewater Systems
181 Thorn Hill Rd.
Warrendale, PA 15086-7257
Phone: 724-772-0044
Fax: 724-772-1202
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Jet Tech
P.O. Box 13306
Edwardsville, KS 66113-0306
Phone: 913-422-7600
Fax: 913-422-7667
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Johnson Screens
P.O. Box 64118
St. Paul, MN 55164
Phone: 651-636-3900
Fax: 651-638-3132
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Krüger
401 Harrison Oaks Blvd., Ste. 100
Cary, NC 27513
Phone: 919-677-8310
Fax: 919-677-0082
http://KrugerWorld.com/
USFilter/Lowell
10 Technology Dr.
Lowell, MA 01581
Phone: 978-934-9349
Fax: 978-441-6025
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Memcor
2118 Greenspring Dr.
Timonium, MD 21093
Phone: 410-308-2947
Fax: 410-561-3017
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Microﬂoc
44 Main St.
Sturbridge, MA 01566
Phone: 508-347-7344
Fax: 508-347-7049
www.usﬁlter.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

USFilter/RJ Environmental
13100 Gregg St.
Poway, CA 92064
Phone: 858-486-8500
Fax: 858-486-8501
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Rockford
4669 Shepherd Trail
Rockford, IL 61103
Phone: 815-877-3041
Fax: 815-877-0172
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Rossmark
P.O. Box 109
7600 AC Almelo, The Netherlands 
Phone: 31-546-838000
Fax: 31-546-814141
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Schumacher Filters
P.O. Box 8040
Asheville, NC 28814
Phone: 828-252-9000
Fax: 828-253-7773
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Smogless
Via L. Mascheroni, 29
20145 Milan, Italy 
Phone: 02-48595-1
Fax: 02-48008417
USFilter/Stranco
P.O. Box 389
Bradley, IL 60915
Phone: 815-939-1265
Fax: 815-932-0674
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Wallace & Tiernan
1901 West Garden Rd.
Vineland, NJ 08360
Phone: 856-507-9000
Fax: 856-507-4125
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Whittier
12442 East Putnam St.
Whittier, CA 90602
Phone: 562-698-9414
Fax: 562-698-1960
www.usﬁlter.com
USFilter/Zimpro
301 W. Military Rd.
Rothschild, WI 54474
Phone: 715-359-7211
Fax: 715-355-3219
www.usﬁlter.com
UV Systems Technology, Inc.
2800 Ingleton Ave.
Burnaby, BC V5C 6G7
Phone: 604-451-1069
Fax: 604-451-1072
www.ultraguard.com
Val-Matic Valve & Manufacturing Corp.
905 Riverside Dr.
Elmhurst, IL 60126
Phone: 630-941-7600
Fax: 630-941-8042
www.valmatic.com
Vanton Pump & Equipment Corp.
201 Sweetland Ave.
Hillside, NJ 07205
Phone: 908-688-4216
Fax: 908-686-9314
www.vanton.com
Vara International
1201 19th Pl.
Vero Beach, FL 32960
Phone: 561-567-1320
Fax: 561-567-4108
Vaughan Co., Inc.
364 Monte Elma Rd.
Montesano, WA 98563
Phone: 360-249-4042
Fax: 360-249-6155
www.chopperpumps.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Verder, Inc.
P.O. Box 1329
West Chester, PA 19380
Phone: 610-429-4200
Fax: 610-429-1139
www.verderﬂex.com
Vibra Screw, Inc.
755 Union Blvd.
Totowa, NJ 07511
Phone: 973-256-7410
Fax: 973-256-7567
Vikoma International Ltd.
Propect Rd., Cowes
Isle of Wight PO31 7AD, England 
Phone: 44 (0)983 296021
Fax: 44 (0)983 299035
Vincent Corp.
P.O. Box 5747
Tampa, FL 33675
Phone: 813-248-2650
Fax: 813-247-7557
www.vincentcorp.com
VMI Inc.
1125 N. Maitlen Dr.
Cushing, OK 74023
Phone: 918-225-7000
Fax: 918-225-0333
www.vmi-dredges.com
Voith Sulzer
P.O. Box 688
Neenah, WI 54957
Phone: 920-722-7713
Fax: 920-725-8615
Vortechnics, Inc.
41 Evergreen Dr.
Portland, ME 04103-1067
Phone: 207-878-3662
Fax: 207-878-8507
www.vortechnics.com
Vortex Ventures
6611 Portwest Dr.
Houston, TX 77024
Phone: 713-869-2593
Fax: 713-869-2596
www.vortexventures.com
Vulcan Industries, Inc.
P.O. Box 390
Missouri Valley, IA 51555
Phone: 712-642-2755
Fax: 712-642-4256
www.vulcanindustries.com
Vulcan Performance Chemicals
P.O. 38015
Birmingham, AL 35238-5015
Phone: 205-298-3000
Fax: 205-298-2955
www.vul.com
W.L. Gore & Associates, Inc.
P.O. Box 1100
Elkton, MD 21922-1100
Phone: 410-392-3300
Fax: 410-398-6624
www.wlgore.com
Walker Process Equipment
840 N. Russell Ave.
Aurora, IL 60506
Phone: 630-892-7921
Fax: 630-892-7951
www.walker-process
Warren Rupp, Inc.
P.O. Box 1568
Mansﬁeld, OH 44901-1568
Phone: 419-524-8388
Fax: 419-522-7867
www.warrenrupp.com
Waste Water Systems, Inc.
4386 Lilburn Industrial Way
Lilburn, GA 30047
Phone: 770-921-0022
Fax: 770-564-0409
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Waste-Tech, Inc.
1931 Industrial Dr.
Libertyville, IL 60048-9738
Phone: 847-367-5150
Fax: 847-367-1787
Water and Power Technologies
P.O. Box 27836
Salt Lake City, UT 84127-0836
Phone: 801-974-5500
Fax: 801-973-9733
www.wpt.com
Water Resources Group, Inc.
P.O. Box 470
Auburn, AL 36831
Phone: 334-821-1135
Fax: 334-821-2451
Waterlink Biological Systems
630 Currant Rd.
Fall River, MA 02720-4732
Phone: 508-679-6770
Fax: 508-672-5779
www.waterlink.com
Waterlink Inc.
4100 Holiday St. N.W.
Canton, OH 44718-2532
Phone: 330-649-4000
Fax: 330-649-4008
www.waterlink.com
Waterlink Separations, Inc.
29850 N. Skokie Hwy.
Lake Bluff, IL 60044
Phone: 847-473-3700
Fax: 847-473-0477
www.waterlink.com
Waterlink/Aero-Mod Systems
7927 US Highway 24
Manhattan, KS 66502-4995
Phone: 785-537-4995
Fax: 785-537-0813
www.waterlink.com
Waterlink/Barnebey Sutcliffe
835 N. Cassady Ave.
Columbus, OH 43219
Phone: 614-258-9501
Fax: 614-258-3464
www.waterlink.com
Watson Marlow, Inc.
220 Ballardvale
Wilmington, MA 01887
Phone: 978-658-6168
Fax: 978-658-5558
www.watson-marlow.com
Weatherly
1100 Spring St., Ste. 800
Atlanta, GA 30309
Phone: 404-873-5030
Fax: 404-873-1303
www.weatherlyinc.com
Wescor, Inc.
459 S. Main St.
Logan, UT 84321
Phone: 435-753-7760
Fax: 435-753-6756
www.wescor.com
WesTech Engineering Inc.
P.O. Box 65068
Salt Lake City, UT 84115-0068
Phone: 801-265-1000
Fax: 801-265-1080
www.westech-inc.com
Western States Machine Co.
P.O. Box 327
Hamilton, OH 45012
Phone: 513-863-4758
Fax: 513-863-3846
www.westernstates.com
Westfalia Separator, Inc.
100 Fairway Ct.
Northvale, NJ 07647
Phone: 201-767-3900
Fax: 201-767-4399
www.westfaliaseparatorus.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC

Westport Environmental Systems
251 Forge Rd.
Westport, MA 02790-0217
Phone: 508-636-8811
Fax: 508-636-2088
www.wesenvsys.com
Westwood Chemical Corp.
46 Tower Dr.
Middletown, NY 10940
Phone: 914-692-6721
Fax: 914-695-1906
Wheelabrator Air Pollution Control, Inc.
441 Smithﬁeld St.
Pittsburgh, PA 15222-2292
Phone: 412-562-7300
Fax: 412-562-7254
www.wapc.com
Wheelabrator Water Technologies, Inc.
1110 Benﬁeld Blvd., Ste. B
Millersville, MD 21108
Phone: 410-729-1440
Fax: 410-729-0854
www.bio-gro.com
Wilﬂey Weber, Inc.
P.O. Box 2330
Denver, CO 80201
Phone: 303-779-1777
Fax: 303-779-1277
WRc Process Engineering
Aynho Rd., Adderbury, Banbury
Oxan, OX17 3NL England
Phone: 0295-812282
Fax: 0295-812283
WTW Measurement Systems, Inc.
3170 Metro Pkwy.
Fort Myers, FL 33916-7597
Phone: 941-337-7112
Fax: 941-337-2045
Wyssmont Co., Inc.
P.O. Box 1397
Fort Lee, NJ 07024
Phone: 201-947-4600
Fax: 201-947-0324
www.wyssmont.com
Yeomans Chicago Corp.
3905 Enterprise Ct.
Aurora, IL 60504
Phone: 630-236-5500
Fax: 630-235-5511
www.yccpump.com
Zellweger Analytics, Inc.
100 Park Ave.
League City, TX 77573
Phone: 281-316-7700
Fax: 281-316-7800
www.zelma.com
Zenon Environmental, Inc.
3239 Dundas St. W.
Oakville, Ontario, Canada L6M 4B3
Phone: 905-465-3030
Fax: 905-465-3050
www.zenonenv.com
ZMI/Portec Chemical Processing
P.O. Box 274
Sibley, IA 41249
Phone: 712-754-4661
Fax: 712-754-3607
www.zmichemical.com
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC


