Epics of Sumerian Kings

Writings from the Ancient World
Theodore J. Lewis, General Editor
Associate Editors
Billie Jean Collins
Jerrold S. Cooper
Edward L. Greenstein
Jo Ann Hackett
Richard Jasnow
Ronald J. Leprohon
C. L. Seow
Niek Veldhuis
Number 20
Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta
by Herman Vanstiphout
Edited by Jerrold S. Cooper

EPICS OF SUMERIAN KINGS
The Matter of Aratta
by
Herman Vanstiphout
Edited by
Jerrold S. Cooper
Society of Biblical Literature
Atlanta

Epics of Sumerian Kings: The Matter of Aratta
Copyright © 2003
Society of Biblical Literature
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and recording, or by means of
any information storage or retrieval system, except as may be expressly permitted by the 1976
Copyright Act or in writing from the publisher. Requests for permission should be addressed
in writing to the Rights and Permissions Office, Society of Biblical Literature, 825 Houston Mill
Road, Atlanta, GA 30329 USA. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Vanstiphout, H. L. J. (Herman L. J.)
Epics of Sumerian kings : the matter of Aratta / by Herman L. J. Vanstiphout ; edited
by Jerrold S. Cooper.
p. cm. —  (Writings from the ancient world ; no. 20)
Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 1-58983-083-0 (paper bdg. : alk. paper)
1. Epic poetry, Sumerian—Translations into English.  2. Epic poetry, Sumerian.  I. Cooper,
Jerrold S.  II. Title.  III. Series.
PJ4083 .V36 2003
899'.9510308—dc22
2003018255
11  10  09  08  07  06  05  04  03          5  4  3  2  1
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free, recycled paper 
conforming to ANSI/NISO Z39.48-1992 (R1997) and ISO 9706:1994 
standards for paper permanence.

Contents
Series Editor’s Foreword ..............................................................................vii
Abbreviations..................................................................................................ix
Explanation of Signs and Conventions ........................................................xi
Introduction ....................................................................................................1
General......................................................................................................1
The Stories ................................................................................................2
Time and Space........................................................................................4
Actors ........................................................................................................6
Intention and Message ............................................................................8
Structure and Style ..................................................................................9
The Literary Context ..............................................................................11
Texts, Authors, and Public ....................................................................13
Concluding Remarks ..............................................................................15
About This Book ....................................................................................15
I.
Enmerkar and Ensuhgirana....................................................................23
Introduction ............................................................................................23
Composite Text ......................................................................................28
Translation ..............................................................................................29
II.
Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta ..........................................................49
Introduction ............................................................................................49
Composite Text ......................................................................................56
Translation ..............................................................................................57
III. The Lugalbanda Poems..........................................................................97
Introduction ............................................................................................97
Lugalbanda in the Wilderness ..............................................................99
Introduction ....................................................................................99
Composite Text..............................................................................104
Translation......................................................................................105
The Return of Lugalbanda ..................................................................132
Introduction ..................................................................................132

Composite Text..............................................................................136
Translation......................................................................................137
Bibliography ................................................................................................167
Glossary........................................................................................................173
vi
Contents

Series Editor’s Foreword
Writings from the Ancient World is designed to provide up-to-date,
readable English translations of writings recovered from the ancient
Near East.
The series is intended to serve the interests of general readers, stu-
dents, and educators who wish to explore the ancient Near Eastern roots
of Western civilization or to compare these earliest written expressions of
human thought and activity with writings from other parts of the world. It
should also be useful to scholars in the humanities or social sciences who
need clear, reliable translations of ancient Near Eastern materials for com-
parative purposes. Specialists in particular areas of the ancient Near East
who need access to texts in the scripts and languages of other areas will
also find these translations helpful. Given the wide range of materials
translated in the series, different volumes will appeal to different interests.
However, these translations make available to all readers of English the
world’s earliest traditions as well as valuable sources of information on
daily life, history, religion, and the like in the preclassical world.
The translators of the various volumes in this series are specialists in
the particular languages and have based their work on the original
sources and the most recent research. In their translations they attempt to
convey as much as possible of the original texts in fluent, current English.
In the introductions, notes, glossaries, maps, and chronological tables,
they aim to provide the essential information for an appreciation of these
ancient documents.
The ancient Near East reached from Egypt to Iran and, for the pur-
poses of our volumes, ranged in time from the invention of writing (by
3000 B.C.E.) to the conquests of Alexander the Great (ca. 330 B.C.E.). The
cultures represented within these limits include especially Egyptian,
Sumerian, Babylonian, Assyrian, Hittite, Ugaritic, Aramean, Phoenician,
and Israelite. It is hoped that Writings from the Ancient World will eventu-
vii

ally produce translations from most of the many different genres attested
in these cultures: letters (official and private), myths, diplomatic docu-
ments, hymns, law collections, monumental inscriptions, tales, and
administrative records, to mention but a few.
Significant funding was made available by the Society of Biblical
Literature for the preparation of this volume. In addition, those involved in
preparing this volume have received financial and clerical assistance from
their respective institutions. Were it not for these expressions of confidence
in our work, the arduous tasks of preparation, translation, editing, and
publication could not have been accomplished or even undertaken. It is
the hope of all who have worked with the Writings from the Ancient World
series that our translations will open up new horizons and deepen the
humanity of all who read these volumes.
Theodore J. Lewis
The Johns Hopkins University
viii
Series Editor’s Foreword

Abbreviations
AAASH
Acta Antiqua Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae
AF
Altorientalische Forschungen
AfO
Archiv für Orientforschung
AOAT
Alter Orient und Altes Testament
AS
Acta Sumerologica
AS
Assyriological Studies
BASOR
Bulletin of the American Schools of Oriental Research
BBVO
Berliner Beiträge zum Vorderen Orient
BCSMS
Bulletin of the Canadian Society of Mesopotamian Studies
BO
Bibliotheca Orientalis
CANE
Civilizations of the Ancient Near East. Edited by Jack
Sasson. 4 vols. New York: Scribner, 1995.
COS
The Context of Scripture. Edited by W. W. Hallo and K. L.
Younger Jr. 3 vols. Leiden: Brill, 1997–2002.
EE
Enmerkar and Ensuhgirana
ELA
Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
ETCSL
Electronic Text Corpus of Sumerian Literature
HSS
Harvard Semitic Studies
JAOS
Journal of the American Oriental Society
JCS
Journal of Cuneiform Studies
JNES
Journal of Near Eastern Studies
LB I
Lugalbanda in the Wilderness
LB II
The Return of Lugalbanda
LOT
Library of Oriental Texts
NABU
Nouvelles assyriologiques brèves et utilitaires
OBO
Orbis biblicus et orientalis
OLA
Orientalia lovaniensia analecta
OLP
Orientalia lovaniensia periodica
Or
Orientalia
ix

RA
Revue d’Assyriologie et d’archéologie orientale
RHR
Revue de l’histoire des religions
RlA
Reallexikon der Assyriologie. Edited by Erich Ebeling et
al. Berlin: de Gruyter, 1928–.
UrET
Ur Excavations: Texts
WZJ
Wissenschaftliche Zeitschrift der Friedrich-Schiller-
Universität Jena
ZA
Zeitschrift für Assyriologie
x
Abbreviations

Explanation of Signs and Conventions
[   ]
Brackets enclose restorations.
[
]
Half-brackets enclose partially destroyed signs.
-ra2
Indices (subscript) are equivalent to sign numbers; they
have no phonetic relevance.
-buki
Determinatives (superscript) indicate semantic classes;
they are not to be read.
/h/
Velar unvoiced fricative, as in loch
/s/
Palatal fricative, as in shall
/gs/
Nasalized velar plosive, as in sing
X
An unidentified sign
...
A gap in the text or untranslatable word(s)
KESS
Capitals indicate that the reading of the sign in context is
unknown or uncertain.
<  >
Angle brackets enclose signs omitted by the scribe.
italics
An uncertain rendering in the translation
(   )
Parentheses enclose additions in the translation.
xi


Introduction
General
The “Matter of Aratta” is the somewhat anachronistic1 term used for a
group of four narrative poems2 in Sumerian, dealing with the various ways
in which King Enmerkar, the legendary ruler of Unug—the Sumerian name
for Uruk (biblical Erech, now Warka)—won supremacy over the faraway,
fabulous, and fabulously rich legendary city of Aratta. Together with the
Sumerian cycle of Gilgamesh tales,3 the Aratta stories constitute what may
be called, anachronistically again, the Gesta Urukaeorum—or the Legends
of the Kings of Uruk.4 These kings, who represent just two or three gen-
erations, appear in the Sumerian King List—an ideological document
probably drawn up in the eighteenth century B.C.E. and purporting to be
historical—as the second dynasty after the flood.
The four poems presented here hang together in more ways than
one. They share the same topic (the manifestation of the superiority of
Unug over Aratta); the same period of imagined time (the high-water
mark of Sumerian civilization as they saw it, expressed in the construc-
tion and adornment of the great city of Unug); the same space (Unug,
Aratta, and the wilderness between them); the same protagonists (Enmer-
kar, Lugalbanda, and the Lord of Aratta—and, in a peculiar way, the
goddess Inana); and, finally, roughly the same type of plot: Aratta is sub-
dued by nonmilitary means.
There is little doubt that the cycle originated in the Ur III period
(2112–2004 B.C.E.), but the actual form of the texts and the tablets them-
selves date almost exclusively5 from the Isin-Larsa period (2017–1763
B.C.E.) and are products of the scribal schools, predominantly those of
Nippur and Ur. Their state of preservation is generally6 excellent; as a
group they are better preserved than most other groups, such as the city
laments or the disputations. This may perhaps be interpreted as an indication
1

of the greater popularity of these texts, of greater care spent on them, or
of both.
The Stories
In all the stories the topic is the controversy between Unug and Aratta as
to which one is the true favorite of Inana. At least in one story, namely,
EE, the “favors of Inana” are expressed in sexual terms and are thus a
reflection of the ruler’s expected performance in the sacred marriage rite.7
Elsewhere it is merely a matter of Inana’s predilection for one city or the
other as her main seat. Taken together, these approaches illustrate the con-
cept that the ruler in a way is the city. In all cases the controversy is solved
by nonviolent means. However, these means are very different, and these
different means are the different stories.
Therefore, it is important to distinguish the basically identical frame-
work from the individual plots.
The framework is quite simple: one of the rulers challenges the other
to submit and admit that he (the challenger) is the first favorite and, con-
sequently, that his city is the greatest. This challenge takes the form of an
outright verbal challenge (in ELA and in EE) or a military campaign (in LB
I and LB II). A battle—of different kinds—ensues. This central part is then
the bulk of the poem. At the end the conflict is resolved, either through
the submission of Aratta (in EE and LB I + LB II) or through conciliation
(in ELA). The central part, therefore, is the identifying feature of the indi-
vidual stories. The central part is the true plot. These plots are as varied as
the framework is identical.
a. In ELA the controversy takes the form of a series of challenges and
counterchallenges. Three times the Lord of Aratta claims that he will sub-
mit to Unug only on the condition that Enmerkar, ruler of Unug, can
fulfill an impossible task. In fact, the technique is that of a contest of rid-
dles, albeit riddles with a material content. All these challenges and
solutions have to be carried to and fro between Unug and Aratta by a
messenger who is nimble of foot and competent of word. Since there are
three challenges and three counterchallenges that the messenger has to
carry from Unug to Aratta and back, and since the sequence starts from
Unug and ends in Aratta, simple mathematics ordains that he has to make
seven voyages in all, and over seven mountain ranges. Yet the outcome
is decided by a rainstorm, which breaks the drought that threatened
Aratta with famine. In view of this, and since Unug has meanwhile
proven its superiority, the enmity ends. Aratta submits to Unug’s superior
2
Epics of Sumerian Kings

powers, and on a footing of near equality both cities will henceforward
entertain friendly and, above all, productive trade relations.
b. EE is a different story. Here the Lord of Aratta claims superiority, since,
according to him, he is Inana’s favorite sexual partner. Enmerkar replies
and argues plausibly that he is mistaken. The controversy is not resolved.
Then appears a sorcerer of exotic origin who had had to flee his own city
and sought refuge in Aratta. He offers to bring Unug to heel with his evil
witchcraft. He bewitches the cattle, large and small, in Sumer so that all
life will come to an end. As a Sumerian countermeasure a wise woman
challenges the sorcerer to a competition in wizardry. Her (white) magic is
based upon the preservation of life and proves superior. The sorcerer for-
feits his own vital force, and thus life is restored to Sumer. The Lord of
Aratta admits his defeat.
c. As a story LB I and LB II must be taken together. Here Enmerkar
undertakes a military campaign to conquer Aratta so that he can use its
riches for the embellishment of Unug, particularly of Inana’s abode.
When the host of Unug is marching through the desolate mountainous
wilderness that separates the two states, Lugalbanda, who is the youngest
of the eight brothers commanding the army, falls ill and is left for dead
in a cavern. Through his prayers to the great luminaries his life is saved.
He also realizes—through a dream—that the gods, for whom he arranges
a sumptuous feast, apparently have elected him to a special status among
humankind. During what appears to be a cosmic battle between the
forces of light and the forces of darkness his exaltation to “holiness”8
seems to be confirmed. Yet he is still all alone in the wilderness, now in
the region dominated and protected by the Thunderbird. He tricks the
Thunderbird into granting him the power that he wishes for above
wealth, comfort, and military prowess: that of magic speed. Thus he sud-
denly reappears among his comrades, whose siege of Aratta has
remained unsuccessful thus far. Enmerkar needs a messenger to travel
back to Unug in order to invoke Inana’s help—and this as soon as pos-
sible. Lugalbanda makes the journey in a single day. Inana tells him that
a magic ritual can overcome Aratta. Unug is victorious.
It is quite clear that there is a problem here. Is this the same story told
three times and in different ways, or do we have three different stories,
somewhat mechanically forced into a single framework? The short answer
is, of course, that both readings apply at the same time, for it is obvious
that the problem of superiority posited in the identical framework is
solved—with an identical outcome—in three different ways. Thus, one
might say that the framework common to the three stories is somewhat
Introduction
3

4
Epics of Sumerian Kings
abstract. On the other hand, the three different plots also are abstract to
some degree. In ELA we find three impossible riddles or tasks, a scheme
nearly ubiquitous in folk tales. In EE the plot consists mainly of a magical
contest. In LB I and LB II the plot takes the form of the election of the
least-likely person and his elevation to the level of most importance in the
development of the story.
A closer look reveals that this fusion of framework and plotting has
been handled with great deftness. First, the seams between framework and
plot are almost invisible in all three cases. Second and more important, the
plots, notwithstanding their somewhat abstract structure, are welded into
the framework as to their substance. The tasks in ELA are not gratuitous or
incidental: they derive from the form the framework takes (the grain task
and the famine in Aratta, the scepter as a token of overlordship, the cham-
pion’s fight as a symbol for the controversy as such and as harbinger of
the solution). In EE the bewitching of Sumer’s livestock and the magical
contest are to be connected with the sexual overtones of the first round in
the contest, which is purely verbal, since both motifs are expressive of the
vital force. In LB the abstract scheme of the youngest and weakest who
becomes the greatest is used to make him into a superhuman messenger9
and thereby the savior-hero of his people.10 There can be no doubt that
these poems have been constructed with great care and consummate skill.
Time and Space
All the stories make a point of setting the happenings in a definite period:
the glorious reign of Enmerkar of Unug. According to the Sumerian King
List,11 the dynasty to which he belongs was the second one after the flood,
and thus it antedated the presumed composition of our texts by at least
some seven thousand years.12 But more important is the additional notice
in that same document: the entry explicitly says that he is “the one who
built Unug.”13 The stories themselves point this out in their introductory
parts and even in the substance of the story (in ELA) or in some important
passages (Enmerkar’s plea to Inana at the end of LB II). Thus the stories
are set in the greatest of heroic times, when the city was first built. This
amounts to saying that, as far as they were concerned, this is where their
history starts: ab urbe condita (“since the city was founded”; to the Roman
historians, this was the point in time where their history, and consequently
all relevant history, began).14 On the other hand, as will be discussed below,
the poems show no sense of time perspective: the times of Enmerkar are
in many ways pretty much identical to the times of the conception of the
stories,15 yet the passage describing the invention of writing (including its
basic economic rationale) suggests remote antiquity.

Introduction
5
As to real time, as presented in the narratives, the three stories
diverge. Obviously, the series of seven journeys undertaken by
Enmerkar’s messenger in ELA, not to mention the caravan transporting
Unug’s wheat to Aratta, must have taken some appreciable time, and the
episode of manufacturing a scepter according to Aratta’s requirements is
said to have taken a very long time—but this is debatable.16 In EE also
one must reckon with some time for the bewitching of Unug’s cattle to
take effect. On the other hand, both magic episodes happen very quickly;
particularly the final one (i.e., the wizardry contest) is presented as being
instantaneous, so that there is a marked distinction between real time and
narrated time. Most interesting in this respect is the use of time in the
Lugalbanda stories. The relation of the campaign starts off sedately and in
strictly linear time, but then Lugalbanda’s tribulations, as revealed by a
close reading of the text, take only three days (two nights) to elevate the
hero from the deepest misery, indeed from the jaws of death, to the
heights of his status as savior.17 The practical effect of Lugalbanda’s exal-
tation to sainthood consists of impossible speed anyway: in a single day
he travels from Aratta to Unug. Yet the situation of the army encircling
Aratta specifically mentions that a long time has passed. Instead of regard-
ing this as narrative clumsiness one might interpret the contradiction as
pointing to an important difference between “natural” time and “super-
natural” time. After all, the hero’s wanderings take place in a region that
is not bound by the rules of physics. These regions may therefore be
regarded as another kind of space also, and time seems to be relative to
the kind of space one inhabits—and vice versa.
Space as such is obviously an important consideration in the develop-
ment of the stories. The two points of reference, or the two poles, are
Unug, which stands for Sumer as a whole, being the known world, and
Aratta, which stands for unknown and fabulous wealth. Unug we know,
and contrary to the gist of the stories it was already a rich and vast metrop-
olis perhaps even a millennium before the events related in the stories
were supposed to have taken place. In fact, it is still there. Aratta, on the
other, hand eludes us. There is significant modern literature as to its pos-
sible location; the consensus seems to be that is was a region somewhere
in central Iran and had an important role in the lapis lazuli trade.18 Yet for
the understanding of our stories this seems totally irrelevant. Aratta belongs
to what Michalowski felicitously called mental geography19 and will never
be found on any “real” map. It is known outside the cycle, but the rela-
tionship of the rare and stray mentions of Aratta, if any, to the cycle is
limited to the use of the term to indicate anything that is proverbially rich
or sumptuous—and unknown. The same consideration applies to the inter-
vening wilderness: although the stories give some points of reference to
actual places,20 these seem to be irrelevant to the story as such. The point

is much more that it is a dangerous and—in the Lugalbanda stories—a
mysterious and even haunted region. This wilderness, moreover, is defined
as a mountain area. At considerable odds with the real knowledge most
probably available to (and from) merchants and travelers, the mountains
are consistently seen and presented as a conceptual non-Sumer. At most
one could say that the references to “real” places point to a knowledge—
or memory—of Iran as a source for precious stones and metals and of the
rugged terrain one has to cross in order to arrive there.21
The action space as a literary feature is also illuminating. In ELA and EE
the action keeps switching from Unug to Aratta and back, and thus it illus-
trates, or is caused by, the basic contest character of these two pieces. In
LB I and LB II, however, we have a strictly linear move from Unug to Aratta
and back to Unug,22 on the one hand, and Lugalbanda’s sojourn in the
wilderness, on the other. It appears that this latter space is more important
than the former one, since it makes Lugalbanda into what he is. Again, this
spatial dimension is as supernatural as is the temporal one. As noted above,
Lugalbanda seems to have stepped out of this world for three otherworldly
days before returning to the world we and his companions know.
Actors
The main actors in the cycle are Enmerkar, Lugalbanda, and the Lord of
Aratta. The first two appear in the Sumerian King List as rulers of Unug.
While Lugalbanda23 was the recipient of a cult, especially in Nippur, from
the Ur III period right through the Old Babylonian period (i.e., right
through about 1600 B.C.E.), his only literary survival outside the cycle is
found in a few royal hymns and a few mentions in the Gilgamesh epic.24
To be sure, there is a very old25 text describing how Lugalbanda won his
wife Ninsun, but this story is not reflected in our cycle. Enmerkar,26 how-
ever, had more of a literary afterlife. He is mentioned in one of the legends
of the Kings of Akkad,27 in a mythical story about Adapa,28 and in a so-
called chronicle of the earliest times.29 Furthermore, there is a still
enigmatic composition apparently dealing with Enmerkar’s construction of
a house for Inana.30 Obviously we know nothing at all about the Lord of
Aratta; his name is mentioned only in EE. In fact, the framework common
to all compositions recognizes only Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta as
protagonists: the Lugalbanda poems taken together are precisely about his
evolution into the saintly intermediary necessary for the solution of the
controversy. As such he is functionally, albeit in abstract terms, identical to
the messenger in ELA.31
This brings us to a second group of lesser actors: in all poems there
are some intermediaries. First there is the messenger in ELA and in EE,
6
Epics of Sumerian Kings

Introduction
7
whose role is taken over by Lugalbanda in LB I and II. Except for Lugal-
banda the role of the messenger is secondary though necessary. In EE
there are several other second-rank actors who, as it were, fight the rulers’
battle by proxy: the sorcerer from Hamazu and the wise woman Sagburu.
Still, in ELA the UR figures, whether man or dog, are also proxies for both
rulers. Of still lesser importance are the chancellors and the herdsmen in
EE: these merely effectuate or/and comment upon the proceedings. Also
the gods, conspicuously modest in their actions, have a function to some
degree,32 but the stories are not about them.
There are, of course, two general and important exceptions. First, in the
Lugalbanda poems, the hero is almost constantly in close contact with the
gods and other supernatural beings, the foremost being Anzud,33 but there
are also the spirits of light-and-darkness.34 Each of these personages has a
clearly defined role to play. The great luminaries save Lugalbanda’s life; the
god of dreams reveals Lugalbanda’s holy status; the gods are feasted by
Lugalbanda; Anzud enters into a close connection with Lugalbanda and
grants him the critical power of superhuman speed; a precise evaluation of
the role of the Jinni still eludes us. But all this is in harmony with the dif-
ference, which in this case is also a prime example of a différance, between
the Lugalbanda epic(s) and the rest of the cycle. As a story, the Lugalbanda
poem is, as it were, the received storyline turned inside out: all attention is
given to the saintly mediator. This can be seen in a pedestrian manner by
comparing the number of verses dealing with him against those that do not.
But the end of LB II makes it clear that Lugalbanda, not Enmerkar, is still
the main actor even when the story turns back to the framework.
Second, and finally, there is the matter of the status of Inana. In all the
stories she is prominently present. But in what way is she an actor? In ELA
and EE she appears to be in the first instance the instigator of the contro-
versy. Her preference for one of the two contestants may be expressed
openly at the beginning of the story, either in a declaration by Enmerkar
(in EE35) or by her own advice to him (in ELA36). However, the point is
that the opponent does not accept this for a fact, and Inana only grants the
victory to Unug after the story has run its course—and Enmerkar has thus
proved his supremacy. In other words, Enmerkar will have to sing for his
supper. The same motif—Inana as the instigator of the conflict—is also
used in LB II: Enmerkar’s repeated passionate plea to Inana,37 which inci-
dentally is the important message Lugalbanda has to bring to Unug, harks
back to the same apparent indecision or fickleness of Inana. This is only
to be expected: somewhat contradictory inconstancy is one of the constant
features of the goddess. But all this implies that Inana is at the same time
the prize of the contest: to the victor belongs the favor of Inana. Lastly, she
is also an active participant in the contest: in ELA she spurs Enmerkar on,
and in LB II she decides the outcome. Yet in LB I she appears to be only

one of the three great luminaries (Sun, Moon, and Venus) who save the
hero’s life, and there is nothing to set her apart from the sun or the moon.
As always, Inana is hard to define. It should be noted that this sophisti-
cated and variegated treatment of Inana is based first and foremost on her
“character” as known from a multitude of sources.38 But it is just as impor-
tant to keep in mind that the main temple in Unug, the Eana, is Inana’s
abode. In this way the final outcome of the struggle enhances Unug’s
glory, of which the splendors of the Eana will be the material expression.
Also, Inana’s final preference for Unug justifies Unug’s subjection, albeit by
“peaceful” means, of Aratta. Being one of Inana’s domains—a point that is
made repeatedly in the poems—it is but right that Aratta must submit to
the domination by Unug, Inana’s main seat.
Intention and Message
An explicitly stated aim of the poems is to praise the glorious past of the
House of Unug and thereby of Sumer as a whole. In order to do this the
pieces all insist on the fact that the result of the controversy everywhere
consists in Inana’s predilection for Enmerkar and Unug. That is why the
construction and adornment of the Eana, Inana’s abode, plays such a
prominent part. At the same time, the texts unmistakably have in mind the
glory of the Ur III state. This is most clearly seen in the famous “Spell of
Nudimmud,”39 which gives a thumbnail sketch of the extent and structure
of that state as well as of its ambitions and self-image. Nor is this cause for
surprise: the ruling dynasty of the Ur III state traced its origin to Utu-hegal,
king of Unug, whose brother (?) Ur-namma founded the House of Ur and
the state of Ur in 2112 B.C.E.40 The ideological reasoning involved runs
somewhat like this: in the remote times of the glorious rulers of Unug the
foundations were laid for Sumer’s preeminence among nations—and this
preeminence persists in the present Ur III state.
Yet this preeminence is not a mere matter of military force or divine
favor.41 It is based upon the qualities and properties of Sumerian culture.
In other words: Unug/Sumer’s supremacy is based on its superiority in
some important aspects, and this may be seen as the message of the
poems. In this respect the solutions to the riddles in ELA are enlightening.
These solutions are not merely clever; they are at the same time arguments
of substance. Thus the invention of trade, which concludes ELA, is based
upon Sumer’s abundant wheat crops with the attendant technology (the
first impossible task), its high technology resulting in the fashioning of the
scepter from an artificial material (the second task), and the high standard
of its textile industry (the last task). These three technological advances
represent Unug’s favorable position in the balance of trade: in this way
8
Epics of Sumerian Kings

they can have at their disposal the “raw material” (precious stones and met-
als) Aratta has to offer. But there is more: by the globalization of the use
of their language (the Spell of Nudimmud!) and by the invention of writ-
ing42 they also control this international trade.43 But there is also a moral
or ethical aspect to Sumer’s superiority. In EE Inana’s preference for
Enmerkar may at first sight seem simply an instance of her unmotivated
sexual choice. Yet the story links it with the victory of life-giving suste-
nance over the dark forces that threaten the food supply of Sumer.44 In
addition, there is a distinct possibility that the wise woman Sagburu is none
other than Inana in disguise. In the Lugalbanda poems we also meet with
an ethical consideration of sorts, for Lugalbanda’s development into the
savior hero of his people, that is, of Unug, has brought him into close com-
munion with the gods and supernatural powers. Moreover, his tribulations
take him into uncharted waters and even into the realm of the myriads of
stars. All this prepares him for his role as the mediator between the earthly
sphere of Unug and the divine sphere of Inana, so that Unug is enabled to
overcome the foreign power. What is more, during his travels through the
most exotic and dangerous places one can imagine he rediscovers and
redefines himself as a human being of a superhuman and divinely pro-
tected status who can work wondrous things for his people—in short, a
savior-saint.45 All this is in aid of effectuating and securing Unug’s position
of supremacy over the “uncivilized” regions.46
Therefore it is perhaps not really extravagant to state that the intention
and message of the cycle is to illustrate that Sumer has a right of
supremacy over all foreign countries. In this context it is relevant to quote
one of the Middle French heroic poems: Jehan Bodel claims that the pur-
pose of his work, or indeed of the whole genre he is using, and which he
calls the matere de France, is to show that:
La coronne de France doit estre si avant,
Que tout autre roi doivent estre a li apendant
De la loi chrestienne qui en dieu sont creant.47
(The crown of France shall be so eminent that all other Christian kings
that believe in god must be subordinate to it)
The ultimate intention of our cycle is precisely that: the poems illustrate
Unug/Sumer’s manifest destiny, a destiny that started with Enmerkar’s con-
struction and embellishment of Unug.
Structure and Style
To my mind one of the strongest points of classical Sumerian poetry
is its strong grasp of formal structures.48 As to substance our poems are
Introduction
9

10
Epics of Sumerian Kings
variations upon a single theme. But also structurally they are variations
upon a common formula. The abstract framework already illustrates this,
yet the structures of the individual poems are far more subtle than that.
Thus in ELA the middle part, ostensibly merely a series of voyages carry-
ing the riddles and their solutions forth and back, is itself framed by two
passages creating the conditions enabling trade: the common use of a sin-
gle administrative language, which happens to be Sumerian, and the
invention of writing. In addition, the outcome is finally decided not by the
straightforward solution to the third riddle; instead, the final contest
between the champions is interrupted by the ex machina appearance of
the god of rain and storms who creates the circumstances in which the
happy solution to the quarrel can take place. Quite apart from the impor-
tant cultural significance of Enmerkar’s clever solutions,49 the handling of
the challenges is subtly different. In the first challenge Aratta is to hand
over its riches; in return Aratta asks for Unug’s wheat; in the second chal-
lenge Aratta is required to accept Unug’s scepter, but Aratta will do so
only on an impossible condition; in the third exchange both powers must
agree to await the outcome of a contest of champions. This subtle play
runs the gamut of the formal possibilities immanent in the mere formula
of riddle-and-solution. In EE the contest is at first stated verbally, and the
outcome depends in a way on one’s belief in one of the two sides. But
then the value of both contestants’ claims is put to the test. In the first
attack (the sorcerer’s spell) Aratta seems to be the victor, but when the
two powers really confront each other the outcome is no longer in doubt.
Here again we have a play on formal possibilities inherent in a contest.
In the Lugalbanda poems, finally, the system of an outer framework of
controversy encompassing a series of possible solutions is imploded or
turned inside out. Formally the matter of mediation is reduced to the mere
finding of the appropriate messenger, while in ELA seven voyages by the
messenger were necessary. However, the development of the unlikely
Lugalbanda into the preordained messenger and savior now becomes the
kernel of the sequence of poems. No riddles have to be solved; no con-
test is to be fought by middlemen; the tale is about the development of
an unlikely candidate into a savior and about the necessity of a savior fig-
ure to solve the controversy. This is obvious from the fact that in the last
episode, namely, Inana’s solution to the problem, we see only Inana and
Lugalbanda, and the implied return journey of Lugalbanda to Enmerkar in
order to act upon the goddess’ advice is not even mentioned.
As is well nigh universal in narrative poetry, the style of the poems is
a mixture of several registers. Thus we find hymnic or appellation50 pas-
sages not only at the beginning of the poems, where they are expected,51
but also at several appropriate points within the development of the sto-
ries. There are purely narrative passages in all poems, but sometimes, as

in the rendering of the messenger’s seven voyages in ELA or in the two
bouts of witchcraft in EE, these are somewhat formulaic. In the Lugalbanda
poems “pure” narration predominates. Series of speeches, and sometimes
even dialogue, are prominent, especially in ELA. A special feature of the
Lugalbanda poems consists of relatively isolated passages of medium
length (about ten to fifteen verses) that are explanatory to a situation or a
motif just described or announced. Repetitions abound; the principle of
spoken messages to be carried by a messenger gives much scope to
straight repetition of blocks of speech, but here also there is much subtlety:
where one might expect straight repetition, as in the seven voyages of the
messenger over the same terrain, we find instead a somewhat artificial
series of variations. There is much use of imagery of all sorts.52 As far as
we can judge, language use is supple and not really outlandish; there are
few scribal conundrums. Within the confines of stylistic or generic base
rules—which we hardly understand at this moment in time—the language
seems fairly “natural” for poetic Sumerian. All these aspects need much fur-
ther study; one can only hope that the present publication may act as an
incentive for doing just that.
The Literary Context
Especially when compared to the overwhelming mass of hymns and odes,
whether “divine” or “royal” or both, the amount of narrative poetry in stan-
dard Sumerian seems rather modest. Yet if one takes into account the
length of individual pieces, the modesty of the contribution of narrative
poetry to the bulk of the literature as we know it53 appears to be only rel-
ative. As a group, the narrative pieces take second place only to the city
laments54 as regards their individual length. Even so, the pieces we recog-
nize as narrative can be divided into three subgroups.55 First there are
narratives about the gods.56 In general one can say that in these pieces,
often called “myths,” the narrative content and even nature is often slight.
Even when there is a dominant narrative content, this is often swamped by
hymnal or reflective passages that tend to leave a clear stylistic imprint on
the piece; furthermore, the poems are often highly formulaic and static
rather than dynamic.57 As a second group we have the Gilgamesh poems,58
which obviously are also part of the Gesta Urukaeorum. It is probably
highly relevant, but provisionally unexplained, that this group is much less
structured, less well represented in the school curriculum, and with a pat-
tern of distribution (about which more later on) different from that of the
Aratta cycle. The third group is our material.
As noted above, the relationship with the divine narratives is but slight,
mainly on account of the peculiar construction system(s) dominating the
Introduction
11

12
Epics of Sumerian Kings
latter, and perhaps also because generally speaking they tend to deal
with a single topic, mostly an aspect of the organization of the world.
There are also important differences between the Matter of Aratta and
the cycle of Gilgamesh. First, the Gilgamesh stories are serial,59 while the
matter of Aratta consists of a single topic told in three radically different
ways. Second, however close the respective heroes are in dynastic
terms, they are vastly different otherwise. Enmerkar is the ideal ruler
representing the state of Unug and its supremacy from the beginning;
Lugalbanda becomes the saintly savior who enables Enmerkar to fulfill
this role. On the other hand, the Gilgamesh stories taken as a whole
could be read as treating the king’s development into an ideal ruler. The
different stories mark the sequence of important stages in this develop-
ment, up to and including the pomp and circumstance of the state burial
that enhances the regal stature of the hero but also insists upon his
retaining a kind of superior position in the underworld.60 The Death of
Gilgamesh, unthinkable in the Matter of Aratta, also stresses the force of
the dynastic principle and the responsibility of any ruler for his prede-
cessors. Though this might be interpreted as an instance of the
identification of ruler and state, it is vastly different from that motif in
our poems.
Some formal and substantial features of our texts may also be related
to comparable features in the royal odes.61 The problem is, on the one
hand, that there is no up-to-date treatment of this bulky mass of mostly ad
hoc literary products62 and, on the other, that these hymnic or odelike pas-
sages, except the introductory paragraphs, are generally63 welded into the
storyline and but seldom have an independent status.
A kind of text that is explicitly mentioned by the poems themselves is
the disputation.64 One of the poems claims in its final lines65 that the poem
is a disputation. The Spell of Nudimmud in ELA claims that the purpose of
the spread of Sumerian over the known world is that this will enable the
lords, princes, and kings to hold disputations.66 Indeed, the tripartite struc-
ture underlying and defining ELA and EE, and even the Lugalbanda poems
if taken as a unit, is identical to the basic structure of all the disputations.
These poems67 always consist of three parts: (1) posing the question or lay-
ing down the challenge; (2) the dispute itself, consisting of a series68 of
verbal arguments and counterarguments by both contenders; and (3) the
verdict spoken by a god. Modern scholars sometimes take this identifica-
tion too seriously. The facts remain that our poems are basically narratives,
not verbal wrangling,69 that the outcome is not the result of an arbitrary
(aesthetic?) decision by a god, that in the catalogues of the school curricu-
lum the two groups are kept well apart, and, finally, that the victory of
Unug over Aratta depends on actions, not words. Still, the hint at a quali-
fication as a “disputation” is there.

Texts, Authors, and Public
The conundrum at the end of the previous section can best be approached
in relation to broader questions. Who composed these narratives? Why did
they do this, and for whom? There is little or no doubt that the poems are
the product of the scribal education in the schools, as is the bulk of stan-
dard Sumerian literature. This is not to say that they, and other
compositions, were necessarily composed by scribes. But their acceptance,
public reception, and tradition seem to have been mainly a matter of the
schools—whatever the reasons for their initial conception. What is more,
they belong to the core of the Nippur literary curriculum.70 This is abun-
dantly clear from the material itself, in the material sense. We know the
poems from an ordered variety of tablets. These come overwhelmingly
from the Nippur eduba 71 and in smaller numbers from Ur. Their distri-
bution is that of the core material: in nearly all cases we have a few
complete editions on large multicolumn (five to six columns per side) sin-
gle tablets; a few more complete editions composed of multicolumn (three
to four columns per side) editions of half or one third of the text; many
single column extract tablets (imgida). The writing is almost always
small, regular, and careful. There are few mistakes. There are but few alter-
native spellings and readings. Obvious exercise tablets belonging to the
earlier phases of education are conspicuously absent. Furthermore, all four
poems are represented in the curricular catalogs, mostly as a group.72 It
follows that the pieces were meant for the scholars themselves and repre-
sented the final and highest step in their scribal education. It also follows
that these poems, as is also the case with the other members of the core
curriculum, were not studied for life, but for schooling, as the Latin saying
went, non vitae, sed scholae discimus.73
Is this the complete answer? This can be disputed. The message74 is
highly charged with an ideological content of historical and national pride.
The legendary rulers have made Unug/Sumer preeminent among the
nations and have laid the foundation, materially and ethically, for its
supremacy. The reasons advanced for this superiority, technologically as
well as ethically and perhaps even theologically (the support of the gods;
the attitude of Inana), may reflect an ideal situation, but they are clearly
derived from the actual or supposed situation that obtained during the glo-
rious Ur III period. Since the princes of the Ur III state derive their fame
and glory from the House of Unug, we may surmise a function of these
pieces in the entourage of the royal court as well. This is less strange than
it may look at first sight, for we know of king SSulgi’s (2094–2047 B.C.E.)
pride and lively interest in scribal education. The unabated interest of later
kings, particularly Issme-Dagan and Lipit-Esstar (1953–1935 and 1934–1924
B.C.E.) of Isin, in the schools may add an additional argument. In their time
Introduction
13

Babylonia was no longer the (supposed) mighty united state of Ur III. It is
reasonable to assume that they are harking back to the Ur III period, which
itself took the time of the legendary hero-kings of Unug as its shining
model and beacon.
But how are we to envisage the role of our poems at the royal court?
There is almost no evidence that the rulers (and their entourage) could
actually read, although a case could be made for precisely SSulgi, Issme-
dagan and Lipit-Esstar. Here the implied and overt link of our narrative
poems to the dispute poems may provide an indirect solution. At least
one of the dispute poems, the Debate between Ewe and Wheat,75 is pre-
sented on all levels as happening at the occasion of a banquet, which
incidentally seems to be taking place simultaneously among the gods in
heaven and among humanity on earth. Although precise indications are
lacking, it is not impossible that this debate, and others, was actually
performed, with different speakers for different parts, during a festive
occasion. By the same token it seems not absolutely improbable that our
poems also knew some sort of performance.76 The relatively restricted
number of “actors” needed, the sometimes high-flying rhetoric, the
manipulated changes of scenery, the many opportunities for fancy stage-
craft—these are all features that speak for just such a possibility.77 Still,
one capital difficulty remains: How many in the audience would have
been able to understand this sometimes euphuistic Sumerian and to
remain spellbound by it for so long? Of course, there are possible ways
of countering this objection as well. First, one could suppose a perform-
ance only or mainly for an audience of scribes, even within the school
or school district—if there ever was such a thing. In early modern Europe
the school was a great producer of school drama, mainly in Latin, but not
restricted to that language, as the splendid case of Purcell’s Dido and
Aeneas shows. Why would this not be possible in Old Babylonian times?
Another possible answer might be that the texts we have represent a sec-
ondary, canonized, and perhaps poeticized libretto for a performance
that was livelier, more spontaneous, more dependent on stage action,
trickery, and mime, and less verbose. This would imply that the texts
developed from a somewhat loose and dynamic basic frame text that
could be changed, embroidered, and improvised upon into a fixed, con-
gealed reading text. European medieval drama, particularly in the realm
of low comedy and satire, abounds with instances of just such a devel-
opment, and it should be noted that this partly grew out of
“performances” with different “speakers” or parts of texts that were not
especially dramatic in the technical sense. Yet, although the same rea-
soning applies with even greater force to the debate poems, the main
stumbling block remains firmly in place: Who would have understood
and appreciated such a performance?
14
Epics of Sumerian Kings

Concluding Remarks
It can no longer be doubted that the Sumerians, after giving humankind the
most precious technological and cognitive tool ever invented, namely, writ-
ing, by that token gave us the first highly articulated system of literature.
The poems translated here, as we have them, are some four thousand years
old, and they still impress us with their clever and agile structure, with their
consummate mastery of a highly stylized and poeticized language that was
already obsolete if not extinct when they were composed, with their lively
and multifaceted stylistic tactics, with their deft handling of many-layered
imagery, and with their sheer exuberance in rhetoric.
Moreover, their main emphasis may perhaps still be of great importance
for us, even after more than four millennia. For all their cultural pretensions
and their avowed aspiration to world domination, there is hardly any sign
of xenophobia in these tales. Military glory is spurned and even somewhat
ridiculed in at least two of the poems.78 Instead, the emphasis is on cul-
tural and technical prowess, expressed as the highest form of intelligence
and, of course, including writing. Furthermore, they overtly prefer their
dominant position to be based on peaceful coexistence, even friendly rela-
tions with the outer world, to brute strength. Their ethical principles are
founded in respect for and the fostering of the vital forces as such and in
all their aspects.79 Their attitude to the gods is practical and far from naïve.
Whatever they achieve, they achieve by their own intellect and craftsman-
ship, whereas the gods at most give their moral support. Even when one
of their culture heroes, the saintly Lugalbanda, is nearly assimilated to the
superhuman level, he too reaches this high and sacred status mainly
through his own insight into what is possible, courage and adroitness in
overcoming hardship, cleverness in social relationship, and openness
toward even the most outlandish creatures.80
The kind of world and society they have envisaged in these poems, in
an obviously idealized way, is therefore indeed a kind of fairy-tale, pas-
toral universe.81 Their assumption is that their domination of that world
will be beneficial to all and that statecraft and rulership should be used to
that end.
About This Book
The Sumerian texts are presented here as composite or eclectic texts.
This means that the variations between manuscripts—in most cases not
very important anyway—are not reflected in this presentation. Neither
does the resulting text show a preference for one (group of) manuscript(s)
over the others. The principle has been to adopt the best reading, which
Introduction
15

is not necessarily the most representative. This implies that the choice is of
necessity somewhat subjective and personal. In this respect I should stress
that my text lays no claim to diplomatic completeness or exactitude.82 My
text is based upon my own manuscripts, themselves based on hand copies
of all texts that have been published and on autopsy of all the material in
the Babylonian Collection of the University of Pennsylvania Museum and
in the British Museum. Therefore I wish to express my gratitude to the
keepers and curators of both museums, who were very helpful. Particular
thanks must go to Professor Dr. A. W. Sjöberg and the staff of the Tablet
Room in Philadelphia for their extraordinary hospitality, unstinting gen-
erosity in allowing me to use unpublished material, and, most of all, their
constant good cheer and acerbic wit. Those of my manuscript text recon-
structions that were more or less complete were sent in an early stage to
Dr. Jeremy Black for the Oxford site ETCSL,83 which has in turn been of
great help in writing the present book. Every Sumerologist owes thanks to
ETCSL, but in this case special thanks are due: I could not have written the
present pages without it.
In my translations I have tried to steer a middle course between philo-
logical meticulousness84 and readability. Still, I thought that fluency in
English should not always preponderate over attempts to approach as
closely as possible what the Sumerian text actually says. I must leave the
reader to decide to what extent these attempts have been successful. As to
explanatory notes, I have tried to keep them to a minimum—without much
success, some may think. But here I must plead that the texts are so rich
and our understanding still so limited that in most cases I felt the text
would suffer without some explanation.
The layout of the Sumerian texts and translations is, of course, not to
be found on the tablets. It is merely my personal attempt to divide the texts
into their constituent parts as I think they should be understood. 
Finally, I am very much indebted to Bendt Alster and Jeremy Black,
who took the trouble to read my manuscript and sent me an impressive
number of corrections, objections, and suggestions—some of which I even
adopted—and to Jerry Cooper for his painstaking yet tolerant and gentle
editing of the manuscript.
Notes
1 Anachronistic, since the term clearly derives from Medieval European custom
of dividing epic poetry in the “matters” of France, Greece and Rome, Britain/
Brittany, and Araby. See lines 6–7 of Jehan Bodel’s introduction to his Chanson des
Saisnes:
N’en sont que trois materes a nul home entendant:
De France et de Bretagne et de Romme la grant.
16
Epics of Sumerian Kings

(There are but three subject matters that anyone knows of: that of France,
of Britain, and of great Rome.)
2 Identified here by the sigla ELA (Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta), EE
(Enmerkar and Ensuhgirana), LB I (Lugalbanda in the Wilderness), and LB II (The
Return of Lugalbanda). Both the sigla and the titles are modern. In Mesopotamian
literature compositions are identified by their incipits only.
3 These can be consulted now most easily in George 1999: 141–208 or more fully
in Frayne apud Foster 2001: 99–154; Vanstiphout 2002a: 159–229.
4 There is a counterpart, predominantly in Akkadian, for the kings of Akkad as
well; see now the splendid edition in Westenholz 1997.
5 Intriguing and important exceptions are the very late bilingual versions of LB II.
6 The exception is LB I, particularly the latter third of the poem. However, our
understanding of this part of the poem is still weak, so that the relatively poor
preservation of this part as presented here may have more to do with our lack of
competence than with gaps in the text.
7 The “sacred marriage rite” assumes that the city rulers had to reconfirm the
bond between their city and heaven every year at the occasion of the New Year
festival by means of ritualized intercourse with the city goddess. There are no indi-
cations of this practice outside of literary compositions. See Kramer 1969; Renger
1972–75; Cooper 1972–75.
8 See Vanstiphout 2002b.
9 Linking him to the very important messenger in ELA.
10 This scheme underlies many fairy tales but is found also in many tales about
traditional “national” heroes: Joseph, of course, but also quite a large proportion of
saints’ lives. See Vanstiphout 2002b.
11 This is a so-called historiographic document, drawn up during the Isin-Larsa
period (2017–1763 B.C.E.) or possibly during the Ur III period (2112–2004 B.C.E.).
It lists all the ruling houses with their capitals, their rulers, and the years of their
reigns “since Kingdom descended from Heaven”; the important caesura is the
flood. See Jacobsen 1939; Michalowski 1983; and now Glassner 1993: passim and
137–42.
12 According to the reckoning of the King List. Of course, the King List is not a
source for third-millennium history, but neither are our poems, and it is more than
probable that the authors of our poems may have shared the preconceptions, meth-
ods, and biases of the King List. After all, both our poems and the King List were
part of the school curriculum.
13 It should be noted that the Gilgamesh traditions from early on also insist on
Gilgamesh’s building activities in Unug. It is interesting that these traditions
nowhere say that Gilgamesh built Unug: he built its stupendous ramparts;
Enmerkar had built the city.
14 This point will engage our attention again; see the section on “Intention and
Message.”
15 The best example is the episode of the “Spell of Nudimmud” in ELA.
16 See ELA lines 429–432.
17 As far as I am aware, this is the first time in the history of literature that some-
one who is doomed to die reappears on the third day in order effectively to
manifest himself as the savior of his people.
Introduction
17

18 See, e.g., Cohen 1973: 55–61; Hansman 1978; Majidzadeh 1976 and 1982; and
Wilcke 1969: 39 (who notes correctly that the precise location cannot be found and
thus should not be sought).
19 Michalowski 1988. In this case “poetical” or “mythical” is perhaps an even bet-
ter adjective.
20 For which see Cohen 1973: 41–61; Wilcke 1969: 29–40. See also Sauren 1974.
21 On these points see Black 2002; Michalowski 1988.
22 Lugalbanda’s final journey, which implies but does not mention as such his
return to Enmerkar with the saving advice from Inana.
23 The major facts about Lugalbanda, together with a fine presentation of the two
Lugalbanda poems, can be found in Wilcke 1987. See also Wilcke 1969: 49–54.
24 In the Sumerian cycle of the Gilgamesh stories Lugalbanda is mentioned as
Gilgamesh’s father. In the Akkadian epic Lugalbanda is called Gilgamesh’s (per-
sonal) god.
25 Possibly dating to ca. 2500 B.C.E.
26 For Enmerkar, see Weissbach 1934; Wilcke 1969: 41–48.
27 See Westenholz 1997: 294–95.
28 See Foster 1993: 435.
29 See Grayson 1970: 147.
30 Kramer 1990.
31 And in a lesser way in the first episode of EE.
32 Thus Enki renders valuable support to Enmerkar in ELA: by his spell and by
his wisdom, which provides Enmerkar with the solutions to some of the riddles.
33 The reading of the name of this supernatural bird is still a matter of contro-
versy among specialists. In our stories it is written consistently as IM.DUGUD
“heavy (storm) cloud,” so that “Thunderbird” seems an adequate translation. Still,
the consensus is now that it was read as Anzud—with no known etymology or
explanation. In reading Anzud I bow to the collective wisdom and arguments of
the majority, but I remain convinced that the scribes were thinking of a heavy storm
cloud every time they wrote the signs.
34 These “spirits” are ill-defined creatures of the otherworld that haunt the desert
and other lonely places. Yet they can also penetrate into the civilized world, prefer-
ably in the lonely streets at night. They are neutral in that they can be “good” or
“bad.” In many ways they are reminiscent of the Jinni of Arab popular tradition.
35 Lines 78–113.
36 Lines 69–104.
37 Lines 294–321 = 360–387.
38 See Vanstiphout 1984 and now Bahrani 2001: 148–50, 155–60.
39 See ELA lines 135–155 and Vanstiphout 1994.
40 See Jacobsen 1939: 120–23; see also Glassner 1993: 94–85, 113–33.
41 A piece that presents the preeminence of the Ur III state—or Sumer—as being
ordained by the gods is the myth (?) How Enki Ordered the World, for which see
now Vanstiphout 1997.
42 We now know that writing was indeed invented for commercial and adminis-
trative purposes and that this happened in Unug. For the invention of writing as
told in ELA, see Vanstiphout 1990 with earlier literature and now Glassner 2000:
21–44.
18
Epics of Sumerian Kings

43 In fact, the mechanics of the invention of trade as described in ELA are eerily
predictive of the present-day commercial attitude of the technologically advanced
countries vis-à-vis the third world.
44 The sorcerer has cut off the milk yield, one of the two staple foods in Sumer.
Sagburu’s magic animals feed on the sorcerer’s animals, and the sorcerer’s own life
force is used to restore the life force of Sumer.
45 Albeit with much less emphasis on semidivine and supernatural status,
Gilgamesh’s evolution toward wisdom and insight and moral probity is to a certain
degree parallel to that of Lugalbanda.
46 It is striking that the expressed self-image of many of the nineteenth-century
explorers—many of whom were of a highly “ethical” persuasion—has an unmis-
takable similarity to Lugalbanda’s self-esteem. Also, ultimately the explorers’ heroic
adventures have led to a comparable control of these wild and mysterious foreign
parts by their respective nations.
47 See above, note 1. These lines follow almost immediately the couplet quoted
there.
48 Fine examples are Gilgamesh and Aka (see Vanstiphout 1986) and the Nippur
Lament (see Tinney 1996; Vanstiphout 1983b).
49 See the preceding section.
50 By “appellation” I mean pieces addressed to a person or an entity (gods, kings,
temples, cities, etc.) in praise, prayer, and/or appeal.
51 One might find that the absence of such a hymnic passage at the beginning
of LB II constitutes an additional argument for regarding the two poems as a unit.
52 Black 1998 is an excellent and much-needed analysis of one group of images.
His example needs to be followed up.
53 The best succinct overview of the Sumerian literary system is Michalowski 1995.
54 For this group see Green 1978 and 1984; Kramer 1940; Michalowski 1989;
Tinney 1996.
55 I make abstraction of the small number of short tales that are either jocular or
exemplary (or both). For some examples, see Alster 1975a; 1975b: 90–96; 1993;
Civil 1974.
56 For an overview, see Jacobsen 1987; Vanstiphout 1998a.
57 Of course there are exceptions, such as the delightful Enlil and Ninlil II (see
Civil 1983), the baroque Enki and Ninhursag (see Attinger 1984), or the enigmatic
Marriage of Martu (see most recently Klein 1996; Vanstiphout 2000).
58 See above, note 3.
59 As we know now, the tablets themselves indicate this.
60 While it is obvious that the death and funeral of Gilgamesh stood as a model
for the death and funeral of Enkidu in the later tradition, I would suggest a close
investigation of the relationship between the Death of Gilgamesh and the Death of
Ur-Namma. See Veldhuis 2001; Flückiger-Hawker 1999 (especially 93–182).
61 I insist on a difference—on all points—between “hymn” and “ode.” To be sure
there is a significant number of pieces that straddle the dividing line. But to my
mind a hymn, which is sung to a divine entity or attribute (such as a temple), is
basically an appraising statement of unchangeable and eternal values an sich,
while an ode is a descriptive list of points on which the actual ruler has scored
within this value system.
Introduction
19

62 Flückiger-Hawker 1999: 68–91 provides a good starting point. It is interesting
that only a few odes made it into the school curriculum. Was the selection based
upon the relative fame of the rulers involved, or upon the literary qualities of the
pieces themselves, or on both?
63 Generally, but there are exceptions. See, e.g., ELA lines 180–186, though even
this passage can be read as an introduction to the challenge that follows.
64 See provisionally Vanstiphout 1990b and 1992b for an attempt at a definition
and description of this type of text.
65 EE lines 281–282. These final lines are often referred to as doxologies. This is
not an apt characterization. In this case, as in true-type disputations, these lines are
part of the composition, since they represent the final result.
66 ELA lines 147–149. One might interpret this as a self-reference to the perceived
typology of the text, thereby reinforcing the “doxology” of EE.
67 A sample of these texts can be found in Vanstiphout 1996a.
68 Minimally three speeches.
69 In fact, only the first episode in EE might somehow qualify as a disputation.
However, the argument, which is simply a matter of yea or nay, would probably
be unacceptable in a “true” debate poem, since there is hardly any progression in
logic or argued rebuttal of evidence.
70 For this curriculum see Vanstiphout 1995b and 2003; Veldhuis 1997: 12–80; and
now Tinney 1998 and forthcoming.
71 To be taken in the conceptual sense. There is as yet no evidence for a mate-
rial eduba.
72 In the Philadelphia catalog (see Kramer 1942): LB I as entry 38, LB II as 39,
EE as 40, and ELA as 48. In the Louvre catalog (Kramer 1942; Bernhardt and Kramer
1956–57) we find LB I as entry 22, LB II as 23, ELA as 24, and EE as 25. In the Ur
catalog (see Kramer 1961; Hallo 1966; Charpin 1986) LB I is entry 37, LB II is 39,
and ELA is 40.
73 Thus the Roman philosopher Seneca. It is usually quoted the other way
around, but Seneca actually wrote it this way—as the observation of a regrettable
fact.
74 See above, Intention and Message.
75 See Alster and Vanstiphout 1987; Vanstiphout 1992a.
76 This was actually proposed in some detail by Sauren 1972.
77 In fact, a scenic performance might explain a somewhat bothersome difficulty:
the nonrepetition of Inana’s decisive advice in LB II. While the repetition of
speeches may be used to drive home the respective intentions or to capitalize on
flights of choice rhetoric, the actualization of Inana’s advice here ends the story and
resolves the controversy. In all respects the story is now over, and a repetition
would be merely tedious instead of ending with a fine climax.
78 In EE: the sorcerer’s vain promises; in LB II: the inability of the Unug troops
to conquer Aratta.
79 Including overt and enjoyable sexuality; see the first interchange between the
contestants in EE but also the sequel of the story.
80 Although his attitude toward his own kind is less than frank, but that was the
condition; as is the case with most saints, he stands apart from common humanity
precisely because of his sanctity.
20
Epics of Sumerian Kings

81 In the sense as defined by William Empson (1935). Another piece that shows
this attitude is How Enki Ordered the World (see Vanstiphout 1997).
82 In this respect one should keep in mind that, diplomatically speaking, com-
pleteness and exactitude are far from being synonyms.
83 See the introductions to the individual poems for the exact web sites.
84 To my mind it is important to note that “translations” that pretend to incorpo-
rate every single grammatical feature of the Sumerian are (1) impossible and (2) no
translations, without mentioning that they usually are based on an idiosyncratic
view of grammar, Sumerian or otherwise.
Introduction
21


Enmerkar and Ensuhgirana
Introduction
With about 280 lines, this tale is the shortest of the cycle. It is peculiar
in several respects: the lord of Aratta takes the initiative for the conflict,
and the substance and the prize of the contest are said to be the sexual
favors of Inana. This contest takes the form of a competition in wizardry
and is fought by proxy.
1. In the days when Enmerkar rules over the splendid and awesome city
of Unug, the lord of Aratta, Ensuhgirana by name, claiming to be the
recipient of Inana’s favors, demands Enmerkar’s submission to Aratta.
Enmerkar refuses, pointing out that it is obvious that he himself is Inana’s
true and constant lover. The lord of Aratta apparently admits that he has
been beaten in this part of the game, but, although criticized by his own
people, he in turn refuses to submit to Unug. A sorcerer from Hamazi
offers his services to break the stalemate: he claims to be able to bring
Unug to submission. The lord of Aratta accepts the offer. The wizard trav-
els to the city of Eress, where he casts a spell on the cattle of the goddess
Nisaba. They stop giving milk, and there is famine in Sumer. A cowherd
and a shepherd implore the sun god, who sends a wise woman.1 She
catches up with the wizard on the banks of the Euphrates. They start a
competition in magic. Five times the wizard throws fish spawn in the river
and draws out an animal; five times the wise woman draws out another
animal, which catches the wizard’s animal and presumably eats it. Then
the wise woman accuses the wizard of black magic, since his magic is
draining away the life force of Sumer. He admits that he has been beaten
at his own game and pleads for his life. She refuses, takes away his vital
force, and thus reenlivens the city of Eress. Upon hearing this, the lord of
Aratta admits defeat and submits to Enmerkar.
I
23

2. The text is structured as follows:
I.
The Setting
[A]
Introduction, consisting of
(1) Hymn glorifying Unug’s splendor
1–13
(2) Godlike Enmerkar then ruled over Unug.
14–21
II.
The Rulers’ Contest
[B]
Aratta’s challenge
(1) Inana is mine, and my feast is sumptuous.
22–39
(2) The messenger’s voyage to Unug
40–51
(3) The message is delivered.
52–69
(56–69 = 25–38)
[C]
Enmerkar’s answer
(1) Ode to Enmerkar
70–76
(2) Inana shares my bed!
77–90
(78–81//27–30)
(3) Inana truly favors me!
91–113
(108–113//33–38)
[D]
The lord of Aratta admits defeat but will not submit.
(1) What can I still do?
114–127
(2) Reproaches by the assembly of Aratta
128–132
(3) Even so, I will not submit.
133–134
III.
The Bewitching of Sumer
[E]
The Sorcerer
(1) Now there was this sorcerer...
135–138
(2) The sorcerer’s proposal to the chancellor
139–149 
(3) The chancellor’s proposal to the Lord
150–162
(153–162 = 140–149)
(4) The proposal is accepted.
163–169
[F]
Black Magic
(1) The cows stop giving milk.
170–184
(2) The goats stop giving milk.
185–197 
(= 172–184)
(3) Hunger among the cattle
198–205
(4) Despondency in the city
206–210
(5) The shepherds plead to the sun god.
211–221
IV.
The Magic Contest
[G]
The wise woman is sent.
222–227
24
Epics of Sumerian Kings

[H]
The Contest 
(1) Five parallel quatrains
228–248
(2) The accusation
249–254
(3) The plea
255–263
(4) The verdict: black magic is a capital sin!
264–273
V.
The Conclusion
[I]
The lord of Aratta submits.
274–280
[J]
Praise be to Nisaba!
281–283
3. The poem is well organized into three major episodes preceded by the
setting and followed by the conclusion. The three major episodes are three
different forms of contest, and the organizing principle does not consist of
some overarching structural design, such as we find in other members of
the cycle, but rather takes the form of a sometimes clever and imaginative
use of kinds of repetition.
The basic structure starts with a straight challenge-and-response
sequence that depends heavily on a series of close repetitions: 25–38 = 56–
69; 27–30 = 58–61 = 78–81 (with reversal); 31–32 = 62–63 = 81–90 (with
expansion); 33–38 = 64–69 = 108–113 (with counterargument). In this first
bout Enmerkar is the victor. The bewitching of Sumer constitutes Aratta’s
second attempt. This is also highly repetitious in that the chancellor’s
proposal is identical to the sorcerer’s proposal (153–162 = 140–149) and
the envoûtement 2 scene is identical for the large and small cattle
(172–184 = 185–197). Aratta, or the sorcerer, seems to have won. The
final magic contest now pits the wise woman against the sorcerer; it is a
fine example of what one might call “formulaic repetition”: in the five
quatrains (228–249) the first verses are identical, while in verses 2, 3, and
4 only the animals change.
In fact, these three confrontations, represented by three different
types of repetition, are the kernel and structure of the poem, which can
be represented simply as: (1) arguments at a distance (messenger!),
won by Enmerkar; (2) witchcraft, won by Aratta; and (3) magic contest,
won by the wise woman.
Apart from this elegant exercise in the different modes of repetition,
there are a few more formal and/or stylistic observations to be made.
First, the story moves on in a rather straight line and at a fast pace; in
doing this it also shows many changes of location that are indicated
only slightly: the two palaces and, one imagines, the bridal chambers
therein; the court of Aratta; the byres of Eress; the city of Unug; and the
banks of the Euphrates. This series of different locations is not strictly
coextensive with the development of the plot: thus sections [B] and [C]
Enmerkar and Ensuhgirana
25

are placed in different but interchangeable locations; the court of Aratta
straddles sections [D] and [E]; section [F] moves from Eress to Unug.
Second, the motif of the messenger, important in [B] and [C], seems to
be taken over from ELA, which may explain the totally superfluous and
indeed substantially unexplainable line 77. But from then on, the text
takes a totally different direction, in which two (or even three, when
including the chancellor) proxies carry the story. It is probably mean-
ingful that these two proxies come from outside of the story, as it were:
the sorcerer is a fugitive from Hamazu, and Sagburu has to be “sent
for.” Third, the first two sections are heavily dependent upon ELA in
structure and expression (see lines 40–51, 53–55, and possibly also the
somewhat damaged 70–76). But line 97 is an unmistakable reference to
LB II lines 70–89, and lines 100–104 are more than reminiscent of
Enmerkar’s plea to Inana in LB II lines 308–318, where line 315 also
refers back to the earlier episode. On the other hand, the passage lines
14–19 seems stylistically more akin to the sometimes “cosmic” intro-
ductions found, for example, in Enki and Ninhursaga,3 Enlil and Ninlil,4
or Gilgamess, Enkidu, and the Underworld5—but also found in the intro-
duction to LB I. In other words, further study may well show that our
poem is later than the other poems in the cycle.6 Finally, the abundance
of proper names, which serves no observable function, remains unex-
plained, although one may perhaps relate it to the list of different
animal species mentioned in the magic contest7—and, of course, it is
strange that the Arrattans have Sumerian names.
4. As to the contents it seems obvious that in this poem the confrontation
between Unug and Aratta is expressed in terms of sexuality (Inana’s
favors) and food supply. The former occurs also in ELA, in a way, but here
it is treated in a much more outspoken way and is combined somewhat
with the theme of food supply (lines 33–38 = 64–69). The latter is promi-
nent in the rest of the poem. The land’s life force is threatened in the
bewitching of Sumer because cows and goats withhold their milk. This is
truly black magic. However, the contest is also on this topic: the animals
created by Sagburu take all the sorcerer’s animals as their food. It may not
be immediately obvious, but this is the countermeasure to the black magic
because it symbolically restores Sumer’s feeding abilities. This is white
magic, and the text is explicit that the sorcerer’s sin was the taking away
of Sumer’s life force. This life force is to be restored by the immolation of
the sorcerer himself. 
This seems to imply that the burden of this poem is that Sumer is supe-
rior not only because its ruler has a better claim to Inana’s favors but also
because Sumer is devoted to maintain the vital force against the forces of
evil. Therefore, Sumer is also morally superior to Aratta.
26
Epics of Sumerian Kings

5. To date we possess thirty-six separate tablets/fragments belonging to
this composition; joining has reduced this number to thirty-one. There is
one fragment of unknown provenance, but all the others come from
Nippur. There is no complete edition on one tablet; instead, the number
of two-column tablets is about the same as that of the single-column tablets
(imgidas). There are no evident exercise tablets or extracts smaller than
an imgida of about thirty lines per side. Yet one of the better preserved
two-column tablets stops suddenly in coloumn ii of the obverse, at line 54.
The rest is anepigraphic. Further epigraphical study and autopsy of the
tablets is needed to determine whether the two-column tablets and possi-
bly the imgidas can be arranged into series.
6. After a short notice by Kramer and Jacobsen in 1953,8 the text was edited
in an exemplary way by Adele Berlin (Berlin 1979). The review by
Hermann Behrens (1983–84) is important for the reconstruction of the text,
that by Wolfgang Heimpel (1981) for a much-needed hand copy of a
nearly perfect two-column tablet. For a modern translation, one may con-
sult Vanstiphout 1998a (68–83).
Enmerkar and Ensuhgirana
27

Enmerkar and En-suhgir-ana
Composite Text
I. THE SETTING
A.
INTRODUCTION
1
sig4 kur-ssuba-ta ed2-a9
kul-aba4ki iriki an ki-da mu2-a
unugki-ga mu-bi dtir-an-na-gin7
an-ne2 us2-sa-bi si-muss3 gun3-a
5
an-na gub-ba-bi ud-sakar gibil na-nam
me gal-[gal] nam-nun-na du3-a
kur sikil-la ud dug3-ga ki gsar-ra
iti6-gin7 kalam-ma ed2-a
ud zalag-gin7 kalam-ma si sa2
10
ab2-ur3 ab2-sarx(NE)-gin7 he-nun-ta ed2-a
unugki-ga ka-tar-ra-bi kur-ra ba-tegs3
me-lam2-bi kug-me-a zid-da-am3
arattaki-a tug2-gin7 ba-e-dul gada-gin7 ba-e-bur2
ud-ba ud en-na-am3 gsi6 barag-ga-am3 dutu lugal-am3
15
sukkal en arattaki-ka sukkal an-sig7-ga-ri-a mu-ni he2-en-na-nam
sukkal en-me-er-kar2 en kul-aba4ki-ke4 nam-en-na-tum2-ma mu-ni
en ri2 e-ne nun ri2 e-ne
en gsi6-ri2 e-ne nun gsi6-ri2 e-ne
en gsi6-gsi6-ri2 e-ne nun gsi6-gsi6-ri2 e-ne
20
lu2 digsir-sse3 tu-ud e-ne
lu2 digsir-sse3 pa ed2 e-ne
II. THE RULERS’ CONTEST
B.
ARATTA’S CHALLENGE
en unugki-ga en kul-aba4ki-ra ur5-bi a-da-min3 na-e-de3
en arattaki en-suh-gir11-an-na-ke4
igi-bi igi unugki-se3 kigs2-gi4-a-ar inim mu-na-ni-ib2-be2
25
e-ne gsa2-a-ra gu2 ha-ma-an-gsa2-gsa2 gsissssudun4 ha-ma-ab-il2-e
ud-da gu2 ma-an-gsar gu2 na-ma-an-gsar u3 e-ne u3 gsa2-e
[e-ne] dinana-da e2-gsar8-a-ka hu-mu-da-an-til3
28
Epics of Sumerian Kings

Enmerkar and Ensuhgirana
Translation
I. THE SETTING
A.
INTRODUCTION
O Brickwork rising up from the pristine mountain;10
O Kulab, city that reaches from heaven to earth;
O Unug, whose fame is like the rainbow11—
It reaches unto the sky with a dazzling sheen;
Like the new moon it stands against the sky.
It was built in princely fashion, gifted with all the great powers.
As the pristine12 mountain it was founded on a day of bliss;
As the moonlight rising over the Land,13
As bright sunshine radiating over the Land,
As a cow with calf, a pregnant cow, it appears in opulence!
Unug’s glory reaches unto the highlands,
And its awesome sheen, which is truly like that of refined silver,
Covers even Aratta like cloth, spreads over it like linen.
In those times—day was lord, night was prince, and the sun was
king14—
The chancellor of the lord of Aratta was Chancellor Ansigaria by name;15
The chancellor of Enmerkar, the lord of Kulab, was called Namenatuma.
Now that one was lord, that one was prince!16
He was lord, that one night; he was prince, that one night;
But that (other) one was lord those many nights; he was prince those
many nights—
He was a man born to be god,
And he really looked a god!
II. THE RULERS’ CONTEST
B.
ARATTA’S CHALLENGE
It was with this lord of Unug and Kulab that Ensuhgirana had this
contest.17
Ensuhgirana, the lord of Aratta, 
Was the first to speak to a messenger about Unug:
“He must submit to me, he must bear my yoke! 
“If he submits to me well and truly, then, for him and me this means: 
“He may live with Inana in the Egara, 
Enmerkar and Ensuhgirana
29
1
5
10
15
20
25

[gsa2]-[e] dinana-da e2-za-gin3 arattaki-ka hu-mu-da-an-til3-e-en
gsisnu2 girin-a-ka hu-mu-un-de3-nu2
30
sse-er-kan2 dug4 u3 dug3 ku-ku-de3 hu-mu-de3-nu2-en
e-ne dinana-da gsi6-a ma-mu2-da igi hu-mu-ni-in-du8
gsa2-e dinana-da gsir3 babbar-ra-na inim mu-da-bal-e
e-ne kur-gi4mussen sse he2-bi2-ib2-gu7-e
gsa2-e kur-gimussen sse ba-ra-bi2-ib2-gu7-e
35
gsa2-e kur-gi4mussen nunuz-bi gsir3-lam-ma amar-[bi GSAR la2-e]
di4-di4-bi utul2-mu-se3 gal-gal ssen mah-[mu-sse3]
kur-gi4mussen ki-a ba-ra-ab-tak4-[a-bi]
ensi2 kur-ra-ke4 gu2 mu-un-gsar-[re-ess-a] mu-da-an-gu7-[u3-ne]
en-me-er-kar2-ra ur5-gin7 inim mu-na-ab-[be2]
40
kigs2-gi4-a du-ni sseg9-bar-ra-am3 im2-mi-da-ni ssur2-du3mussen-am3
ud-dam i3-ed2 an-u2-sa11-an-na-am3 i3-gi4-gi4
buru5mussen ud-zal-le-da-gin7 gaba ki zag im-gub
buru5mussen gsi6-sa9-gin7 kur-ssag4-ge im-si
gsisillar-gin7 zag im-gub-gub-be2
45
dssakkan-gin7 hur-sags-gsa2
dur3ur3 uru16 gal-gin7 kussu i3-tag-tag-ge
dur3ur3 sal-la kass4-e kigs2-gsa2 du-ru-uss bur2
ur-mah a-ssag4-ga ud-zal-la mur-ma-ra mu-un-ssa4
ur-bar-ra sila4 ssu ti-a-gin7 ul4-ul-e im-gsin
50
ki tur-tur-bi [mu]-un-gsin-na-a DUL3-a mu-na-ab-si
ki gal-gal-[bi] mu-un-gsin-na-a bulug-ga mu-na-ab-be2
en-ra [gsi6-par4] kug-ga-ni-sse3 im-ma-ssi-in-ku4-ku4
52a20 en-me-er-kar2 <ki> kug-kug-ga-ni-sse3 im-ma-ssi-in-ku4-ku4
za-e-se3 lugal-mu mu-e-ssi-in-gi4-gi4
en arattaki en-suh-gir11-an-na-ke4 mu-e-ssi-in-gi4-gi4
Enmerkar
54a21 lugal-zu dug4-ga-ni nam-mu tah-a-ni nam-mu
54b
en-suh-gir11-an-na-ke4 dug4-<ga>-ni nam-mu tah-a-ni nam-mu
Messenger
54c
lugal-mu a-na bi2-in-dug4 a-na bi-in-tah-am3
54d
en-suh-gir11-an-na-ke4 a-na bi2-in-dug4 a-na bi2-in-tah-am3
55
lugal-mu na-ab-be2-a
e-ne gsa2-a-ra gu2 ha-ma-an-gsa2-gsa2 gsissssudun4 ha-ma-ab-il2-e
ud-da gu2 ma-an-gsar gu2 [na-ma-an-gsar u3 e]-[ne] u3 gsa2-e
e-ne dinana-da [e2-gar8]-[a-ka] [hu-mu-da]-an-til3
30
Epics of Sumerian Kings

“But I shall live with Inana in the Ezagina of Aratta. 
“He may lie with her on a flowery18 bed, 
“But I shall lie in sweet slumber with her on a bejeweled couch.19
“He may meet with Inana in his dreams at night, 
“But I shall converse with Inana between her gleaming legs! 
“He may fatten the geese with barley; 
“I shall certainly fatten no geese with barley.
“No, I shall collect their eggs and goslings in a basket—
“The small ones for my pot, the large ones for my kettle—
“Whatever is left of the geese, 
“The rulers of the highland that have submitted to me shall partake
of that with me!”22
Thus he spoke to Enmerkar.
The messenger runs like a wild boar, flies like a falcon.
Leaving at daybreak, he returns at dusk; 
Like the swarming birds at dawn, he traverses the open country; 
Like the swarming birds at night, he penetrates into the heart of the
highland.
As the throw-stick, he runs at the side.
Like SSakkan-of-the-hills,
Like a big strong donkey he gallops;
Like a slender donkey, eager to run, he races on.
He roars like the lion at dawn in the fields;
He speeds like the wolf that has caught a lamb.
The small places he passed by he filled with reverence for him;
The large places he passed by he made speak to him respectfully.
He entered into the presence of Lord Enmerkar in his holy Gipar,
He entered into the presence of Enmerkar in his most holy place and
spoke: 
“To you my king has sent me;
“To you the lord of Aratta, Ensuhgirana, has sent me.”
Enmerkar
“What is your king’s word to me; what is his message to me? 
“What is Ensuhgirana’s word to me; what is his message to me?”23
Messenger
“This is my king’s word; this is his message;
“This is Ensuhgirana’s word; this is his message:
“Thus my king spoke:
“‘He must submit to me; he must bear my yoke! 
“‘If he submits to me well and truly, then, for him and me this means: 
“‘He may live with Inana in the Egara, 
Enmerkar and Ensuhgirana
31
30
35
40
45
50
52a
54a
54b
54c
54d
55

gsa2-e dinana-da e2-za-gin3 [arattaki-ka hu-mu]-da-an-til3-en
60
gsisnu2 girin-a-ka hu-mu-un-[de3-nu2]
sse-er-kan2 dug4 u3 dug3 ku-ku-da [hu-mu-de3-nu2-en]
e-ne dinana-da gsi6-a [ma-mu2]-[da igi hu-mu-ni-in-du8]
gsa2-e dinana-da gsir3 babbar-ra-na inim [mu-da-bal-e]
e-ne kur-gi4mussen sse he2-bi2-[ib2-gu7-e]
65
gsa2-e kur-gi4mussen sse ba-ra-bi2-[ib2-gu7-e]
gsa2-e kur-gi4mussen nunuz-bi gsir3-lam-[ma amar-bi GSAR la2-e]
di4-di4-bi utul2-mu-se3 gal-gal ssen mah-mu-sse3
kur-gi4mussen ki-a ba-ra-ab-tak4-bi
[ensi2 kur-ra gu2] [mu]-[un]-gsar-re-ess-am3 [mu-da]-gu7-u3-ne
C.
ENMERKAR’S ANSWER
70
en unugki-ga [X] si?-mus3-bi X-da gsisszi-gan-bi-im
[...] gsisrab ssu ri-bi
[...] ki us2-sa-a-ba
sur2-[du3]mussen an-na dal-e-da-bi gu mussen-na-bi-[im]
[sig4] [e2] gal arattaki-ka sur-sur mah he2-[...]-[im?]
75
[...] [gal]-gal arattaki-[a  nam] [...] mah-bi-im
[...] ba?-DU-a-as [...]-gsal2
[im]-gin7 ssu bi2-in-ra im-gin7 igi i-ni-in-bar
[e-ne] dinana-da e2 za-gin3 aratta-ka hu-mu-da-an-til3
gsa2-e [X] [an]-ta ki-a gub-ba-ni hu-mu-da-an-til3-en
80
sse-er-kan2-na dug4 u3 dug3 ku-ku-da hu-mu-un-de3-nu2-en
gsa2-e gsisnu2 gi-rin dinana-ka u2 za-gin3 barag-ga-a-ba
egsir-bi-sse3 ug-am3 sags-bi-sse3 pirigs-am3
ug-e pirigs im-sar-re
pirigs-e ug [im]-sar-re
85
ug-e pirigs im-[sar]-re-da-bi
pirigs-e ug im-[sar]-re-da-bi
ud nu-um-zal gsi6-[u3-na] nu-ru-gu2
gsa2-e dinana-da kaskal danna [X]-[am3] ssu hu-mu-un-da-[nigsin]
dutu suh kug-gsa2 igi nu-mu-un-[bar]
90
gsi6-par4 kug-gsa2 ba-e-ssi-in-[ku4-ku4]
den-lil2-le aga zid [gsidru] [...]
dnin-urta dumu den-lil2-la2-ke4
gsis kussummu-da-gin7 ur2 [mu-un-tal2]-[tal2]
da-ru-ru nin9 den-lil2-la2-ke4
95
ubur zid-da-ni ma-an-la2 ubur gub2-bu-[ni ma-an-la2]
es3 gal-se3 ed3-de3-da-mu-ne
32
Epics of Sumerian Kings

“‘But I shall live with Inana in the Ezagina of Aratta.
“‘He may lie with her on a flowery bed, 
“‘But I shall lie in sweet slumber with her on a bejeweled couch. 
“‘He may meet with Inana in his dreams at night,
“‘But I shall converse with Inana between her gleaming legs!
“‘He may fatten the geese with barley;
“‘I shall certainly fatten no geese with barley;
“‘No, I shall collect their eggs and goslings in a basket—
“‘The small ones for my pot, the large ones for my kettle—
“‘Whatever is left of the geese,
“‘The rulers of the highland that have submitted to me shall partake
of that with me!’”
C.
ENMERKAR’S ANSWER
The lord of Unug ... he is their quant, he is their rudder;24
... he is the neck-stock that restrains them;  
... to the place whereon it rests. 
He is their falcon hovering in the skies; he is also their bird net. 
The brickwork of the great temple of Aratta ...
... in Aratta ... great
...
bring (?) ...
He patted clay into a clay-tablet; he examined it as a clay tablet:25
“He may live with Inana in the Ezagina of Aratta, 
“But I live with her when she descends from heaven to earth! 
“He may lie with her in sweet slumber on a bejeweled couch,
“But I lie in Inana’s flowery bed strewn with glistening plants. 
“At its back there is an ug -lion; at its front there is a pirigs -lion; 
“The ug -lion chases the pirigs -lion; 
“The pirigs -lion chases the ug -lion. 
“The ug -lion is forever chasing the pirigs -lion, 
“And the pirigs -lion is forever chasing the ug -lion.26
“And so day does not dawn, night does not pass.
“I roam with Inana for the whole journey of [...] leagues.
“Utu does not set eyes on my holy crown
“Once she has entered my holy Gipar!27
“For Enlil gave me the true crown and scepter;
“Ninurta, Enlil’s son,
“Held me on his lap28 as the frame holds the water skin.
“Aruru, Enlil’s sister,
“Laid me on her right breast, laid me on her left breast.
“When I go up to the great shrine, 
Enmerkar and Ensuhgirana
33
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95

nu-gig-e anzudmussen amar-ra-gin7 [ur5 mu]-[ssa4]
min3-kam-ma-sse3 ed3-de3-da-mu-ne
uz amar-ra nu-me-en-na sseg11 mu-un-[gi4]
100
iriki tu-da-ni-ta NE im-ta-[...]
iriki du3-gin7 iriki na-me ba-ra-dim2
dinana unugki-ga he2-en-til3 arattaki-ass a-na-me-a-bi
sig4 kul-aba4ki-ka he2-en-til3 kur me sikil-sse3 a-na-am3 ab-ak-e
mu 5-am3 mu 10-am3 arattaki-ass ba-ra-gsin
105
ud arattaki-ass in-ga-an-du-a-ba
kug gal nin e2-an-na-ke4
ad-bi mu-un-da-gi4-a-ass inim-bi mu-un-zu-a-ass arattaki-ass ba-ra-gsin
e-ne nu-tuku-da-am3 kur-gi4mussen sse ba-ra-bi2-ib2-gu7-e
gsa2-e kur-gi4mussen sse he2-bi2-ib2-gu7-e
110
gsa2-e kur-gi4mussen nunuz-bi gsir3-lam-ma amar-bi GSAR la2-e
di4-di4-bi utul2-mu-se3 gal-gal ssen mah-mu-sse3
kur-gi4mussen ki-a ba-ra-ab-tak4-a-bi
ensi2 ki-en-gi-ra gu2 mu-un-gsar-re-ess-a mu-da-gu7-e-ne
D.
THE LORD OF ARATTA ADMITS DEFEAT BUT WILL NOT SUBMIT
kigs2-gi4-a en-me-er-kar2 en-suh-gir11-an-na-ke4
115
gsi6-par4 kug ki kug-kug-ga-ni-sse3
ki kug-kug-ga ba-da-an-KU-a DAGSAL-bi ba-na-tegs3
en-suh-gir11-an-na-ke4 a2 ags2-gsa2 gu3 ba-an-de2 inim im-kigs2-kigs2-e
isib lu2-mah gudu4 gsir3-sig19-ga gsi6-par4-ra til2-la
gu2-X mu-ni-in-gsar ssag4 mu-da-ab-kuss2-u3
120
a-na ga-an-na-ab-be2 a-na ga-an-na-ab-be2
en unugki-ga en kul-aba4ki-ra a-na ga-an-na-ab-be2
[gud]-da-ni gud-mu-da [lirum?] im-da-ab-zi
gud unugki-ga-ke4 a2 bi2-ib-gsar
lu2-ni lu2-mu-da usu im-da-ab-ra2
125
lu2 unugki-ga-ke4 a2 bi2-ib-gsar
ur-ra-ni ur-mu-da usu im-da-ab-ra
ur unugki-ga-ke4 KA.NI ba-ab-gsar
unkin-gsar-ra si sa2-na mu-un-na-ni-ib-gi4-gi4
za-e-me-en unugki-ga-sse3 dub-sags-ta
130
nigs2 gal-gal en-me-er-kar2-ra kigs2-gi4-a-ass mu-un-gi4
en-me-er-kar2 la-ba-du3-e-en za-e-me-en ba-e-du3-e-en
zi gi4-ba ssag4-zu nigs2 na-me na-an-tum3 en-na ba-e-zu-zu
34
Epics of Sumerian Kings

“The nu-gig cries out like Anzud to his chick;29
“And when I go there again,
“She coos like a young bird, though she is not.
“She will not depart from the city of her birth!
“Never was a city built so well as Unug!
“Inana lives in Unug; as for Aratta, what of it?
“She dwells in brick-built Kulab; the mount of the lustrous powers,
what can it do?
“For five, ten years she will not go to Aratta!
“Because about her going to Aratta
“The great saintly mistress of the Eana 
“Consulted with me; I know her decision: she will not go to Aratta!
“He who has nothing cannot fatten geese with barley,
“But I can surely fatten the geese with barley!
“Also, I will collect the eggs and goslings of the geese in a basket— 
“The small ones for my pot, the large ones for my kettle—
“Of whatever is left of the geese,
“The rulers of Sumer that have submitted to me shall partake of that
with me!”
D.
THE LORD OF ARATTA ADMITS DEFEAT BUT WILL NOT SUBMIT
The messenger of Enmerkar reached Ensuhgirana,
In his holy Gipar, his most holy place,
The most holy place where he sat, and its dais.
Ensuhgirana asked for advice, searched for a reply.
The iss ib, lumah, gudu, and girsiga living in the Gipar,30
He summoned and consulted them.
“What shall I say to him? What shall I say to him? 
“What shall I say to the lord of Unug, the lord of Kulab? 
“His bull stood up to fight my bull, 
“And the bull of Unug has won. 
“His man wrestled with my man,
“And the man of Unug was stronger. 
“His dog wrestled with my dog,
“And the dog of Unug bested him.”31
The convened assembly answered him straightforwardly: 
“You were the first to send to Unug
“Big words as a message for Enmerkar!
“You cannot best Enmerkar; you yourself will be bested !
“Give in! Your ambition will bring you nought; when will you realize
that ?”
Enmerkar and Ensuhgirana
35
100
105
110
115
120
125
130

En-suhgir-ana
iri-mu dul he2-a gsa2-e ssika-bi he2-me-en
en unugki-ga en kul-aba4ki-ra gu2 ba-ra-na-an-gsa2-gsa2
III. THE BEWITCHING OF SUMER
E.
THE SORCERER
135
mass-mass dim2-ma-ni dumu ha-ma-zu-ke4
ur-gsir3-nun-na dim2-ma-ni dumu ha-ma-zu-ke4
ha-ma-zu hul-a-ta arattaki-ass bal-a
e2-gsi6-par4 nam-mass-mass-e da?-ga?-na na-mu-un-KU
sukkal an-sig7-ga-ri-a gu3 mu-un-na-de2-e
140
lugal-mu ad-da gal-gal iriki-ke4-ne
[libir-ra uss] [ki] gsar-ra-ke4-ne
[...]-X-ka a-na-ass-am3 nu-um-gsa2-gsa2-ne ad nu-um-gi4-gi4-ne
[gsa2-e id2] unugki-ga-ke4 ga-am3-ba-al
[itima] arattaki-ka gu2 ga-mu-ni-ib2-gsar
145
[inim unug]ki-ga-ke4 KAxX um-mi-in-tag
[erin2 gal-mu sig]-ta igi-nim-sse3 ab-ta kur gsiserin-sse3
igi-nim-[ta kur] ssim gsisserin-na-sse3 gu2 ga-mu-ni-ib-gsar
unugki-ge nigs2-gur11 ni2-ba-ke4 gsissma2 [he2]-em-da-gid2-de3
gsisma2 he2-em-da-la2-e e2-za-gin3 arattaki-sse3
150
sukkal an-sig7-ga-ri-a iri?-na mu-ni-zig3 kissi4-na mu-ni-ssub
[X] lu2 [...] an-sig7-ga-ri-a na-mu-ni-[X-KA]-X
[...] X-e? nu-uss-ma-ab-X-[X]
lugal-mu ad-da gal-gal iriki-ke4-[ne]
libir-ra uss ki gsar-ra-ke4-ne
155
[ki sukkal] e2-gal-la a-na-ass-am3 [nu-um-gsa2-gsa2-ne] ad nu-um-[gi4-gi4-ne]
gsa2-e id2 unugki-ga-ke4 ga-am3-ba-al
[itima] arattaki-ka gu2 ga-mu-ni-ib-gsar
inim unugki-ga-ke4 KAxX um-mi-in-tag
erin2 gal-mu sig-ta igi-nim-sse3 ab-ta kur gsisserin-sse3
160
igi-nim-sse3 kur sim gsisserin-na-sse3 gu2 ga-mu-ni-ib-gsar
unugki-ga nigs2-ga ni2-ba-ke4 gsissma2 he2-em-da-gid2-de3
gsisma2 he2-em-da-la2-e e2-za-gin3 arattaki-sse3
36
Epics of Sumerian Kings

En-suhgir-ana
“My city may become a mound of ruins, and I a potsherd in it, 
“Yet never will I submit to the lord of Unug and Kulab!” 
III. THE BEWITCHING OF SUMER
E.
THE SORCERER
Now there was a sorcerer whose witchcraft was that of the
Hamazites,32
Urgirnuna by name, whose witchcraft was that of the Hamazites:
Hamazu having been destroyed, he had crossed over to Aratta,
Where he now practiced his sorcery in the inner chambers of the
Egipara.
He spoke to the chancellor Ansigaria:
“My Lord, why is it that the great elders of the city,
“The founding fathers of yore,
“No longer respect the chancellor’s rank, no longer give sound advice?
“As for myself, I would make Unug dig canals;
“I would make it submit at the shrine of Aratta!
“Once the decision about Unug has been taken,
“I would make them all submit to my great armies, from south to north,
from ocean to cedar mountain,
“From the north to the fragrant cedar mountain!33
“Unug shall ferry its own produce by boat.
“The boats shall tie up at the Ezagina of Aratta!”
Chancellor Ansigaria rose up in his city; he ...
... Ansigaria ...
... should he not ...
“My Lord, why is it that the great elders of the city,
“The founding fathers of yore,
“No longer respect the chancellor’s rank, no longer give sound advice?
“As for myself, I would make Unug dig canals;
“I would make it submit at the shrine of Aratta!
“Once the decision about Unug has been taken,
“I would make them all submit to my great armies, from south to north,
from ocean to cedar mountain,
“From the north to the fragrant cedar mountain!
“Unug shall ferry its own produce by boat;
“The boats shall tie up at the Ezagina of Aratta!”
Enmerkar and Ensuhgirana
37
135
140
145
150
155
160

en-ra hul2-la-gin7 im-ma-na-ni-ib-gsar
5 ma-na kug-sig17 mu-na-ab-ssum2-mu
165
5 ma-na kug-babbar mu-na-ab-ssum2-mu
u2 nir-<gsal2> gu7 ba-bi mu-na-ab-be2
a nir-<gsal2> nags ba-bi mu-na-ab-be2
ud nam-ra-ass lu2-bi ak-am3
zi-zu nigs2-gsa2 a-la ssu-zu he2-gsal2 mu-na-ab-be2
F.
BLACK MAGIC
170
mass-mass engar numun sags-gsa2-ke4
eress2ki iriki dnisaba-sse3 gsir3 im-ma-ab-gub-be2-en
[e2-tur3]-ra e2 ab2 dur2-ru-na-ass ba-tegs3
ab2-[e] tur3-ra sags mu-da-ab-sig3
ab2-e inim bi2-in-dug4 lu2-ulu3-gin7 inim mu-da-ab-bal-e
175
ab2 i3-zu a-ba-a i3-gu7-e ga-zu a-ba-a i3-na8-na8
The cow
i3-mu i3-gu7-e dnisaba-ke4
[ga]-mu i3-na8-na8 dnisaba-ke4
[ga-ar3-mu] suh10 kug galam dug4-ga
unu6 gal [unu6 dnisaba-ke4 me-te-a-ass im-mi-ib-gsal2]
180
[i3-mu] [tur3 kug]-ta en-na-ga-mu-de6-a-ass
ga-mu [amass] kug-ta en-na-ga-mu-de6-a-ass
u3-sun2 zid dnisaba dumu sags den-lil2-la2-ke4 lu2 nu-um-mi-in-zi-zi
The sorcerer
ab2 i3-zu si-muss3-zu-sse3 ga-zu murgu-[zu-sse3]
ab2 i3-bi si-muss3-bi-sse3 ba-ab-[BU] ga-bi murgu-bi-sse3 ba-ab-BU gsir3 [...]
185
amass kug amass dnisaba-sse3 ba-[tegs3]
[ud5-de3] amas-a sags mu-da-ab-[sig3]
ud5-de3 inim bi2-in-dug4 lu2-[lu7]-gin7 inim mu-un-da-ab-bal-[e]
[ud5] i3-zu a-ba-a i3-gu7-e ga-zu a-ba-a [i3-na8]-[na8]
The goat
i3-mu i3-gu7-e dnisaba-ke4
190
ga-mu i3-na8-na8 dnisaba-ke4
ga-ar3-mu suh10 kug galam dug4-ga
unu6 gal unu6 dnisaba-ke4 me-te-a-ass im-mi-ib-gsal2
38
Epics of Sumerian Kings

This was so very pleasing to the lord
That he gave him five minas of gold
And five minas of silver.
He told him that his ration would be the finest food to eat
And the best beverages to drink.
“When those people will have been made into war booty,
“Your life will be (full of) possessions and enjoyment; your hand will
touch prosperity!” he promised him.
F.
BLACK MAGIC
The sorcerer, having planted the first seed,
Wended his way to Eress, the city of Nisaba.
He arrived at the byre, the place where the cows live.
The cow in the byre trembled before him.
He made the cow speak so that it conversed with him as if it were
human:
“O cow, who will eat your cream? Who will drink your milk?”
The cow
“Nisaba will eat my cream;
“Nisaba will drink my milk;
“And my cheese, the well-ripened shining crown,
“Will be properly served in the great dining hall, the dining hall of
Nisaba.
“For unless my cream has been brought from this splendid byre,
“Unless my milk has been brought from this splendid pen,
“Faithful cow Nisaba, Enlil’s oldest daughter, cannot institute the levy.”34
The sorcerer
“Cow, your cream to your glistening horn, your milk to your back!”35
And so the cow’s cream was pulled back into its glistening horn, and
its milk retreated into its back.
He arrived at the splendid pen, the pen of Nisaba.
The goat in the pen trembled before him.
He made the goat speak, so that it conversed with him as if it were
human:
“O goat, who will eat your cream? Who will drink your milk?”
The goat
“Nisaba will eat my cream;
“Nisaba will drink my milk;
“And my cheese, the well-ripened shining crown,
“Will be properly served in the great dining hall, the dining hall of
Nisaba.
Enmerkar and Ensuhgirana
39
165
170
175
180
185
190

i3-mu tur3 kug-ta en-na-ga-mu-un-de6-a-ass
ga-mu amass [kug-ta] en-na-ga-mu-un-de6-a-ass
195
u3-sun2 zid dnisaba dumu-sags den-lil2-la2-ke4 lu2 nu-um-mi-in-zi-zi
The sorcerer
ud5 i3-zu si-muss3-zu-sse3 ga-zu murgu-zu-sse3
ud5 i3-bi si-muss3-bi-sse3 ba-ab-BU ga-bi murgu-bi-sse3 ba-ab-ed2
ud-bi-a tur3 amas-a e2-si-ga ba-ab-du7 nigs2 ha-lam-ma ba-ab-ak
agan ab2-ka ga nu-un-gsal2 amar-e ud [bi2-in]-su2
200
amar tur-bi ssag4-su3-ga mu-un-gsal2 er2 [gig i3-se8-se8]
agan ud5-ka ga nu-un-[gsal2 mass2-e ud bi2-in-ssu2]
mass2 ud5-da-bi ssag4 ka-tab-[ba ba-an-nu2] zi-bi mi-ni-[...]
ab2-e amar-bi-sse3 inim gig [bi-ib2-be2] 
ud5-de3 mass2-bi mu-na-ab-[...]
205
dugssakir3 kug-ga si-si-ig x [...] ssag4-su3-ga mu-un-gsal2 ssag4 ka-[tab ...
nu2]
ud-bi-a tur3 amas-a e2 si-ga ba-ab-dug4 nigs2-ha-lam-ma ba-ab-ak
unud-de3 esgiri ssu-na bi2-in-tak4 igi-ni i3-sig3-ge
sipad-de3 sibir zag-ga-na bi2-in-la2 er2 gig i3-se8-se8
kab-bar tur amass tur3-se3 la-ba-X gsir3 kur2 ba-ra-an-dab5
210
ga-il2-bi ad-gal-sse3 nu-mu-ed3 sila kur2 ba-ra-an-dab5
[unud] sipad dnisaba-ke4-ne
dumu tu-da ama dili-me-ess
tur3 amas-a a2 ed2-a-me-ess
1-kam-ma mass2-gu-la mu-ni he2-en-na-nam
215
2-kam-ma ur-edin-na mu-ni he2-en-na-nam
2-na-ne-ne ka2 mah igi dutu ed2-a ki u6-di kalam-ma
sahar-hub2-sahar-hub2-ba ba-an-dur2-ru-ne-ess dutu an-ta i-im-gi4-gi4-ne
mass-mass-e lu2 arattaki-ka e2-tur3-ra mu-un-kur9
e2-tur3-ra gara2 ba-an-kal amar tur la-ba-an-ri-ri
220
tur3 amas nigs2-gig-bi bi2-ak i3 ga ba-e-ni-kal bi2-in-la2
[...] X-bi i3-sub-ssub nigs2-ha-lam-ma ba-ab-ak
IV. THE MAGIC CONTEST
G.
THE WISE WOMAN IS SENT
[...] KA-bi ba-an-na-tegs3
[...] gsal2-la-am3 igi mu-un-na-nigsin2
40
Epics of Sumerian Kings

“For unless my cream has been brought from this splendid byre,
“Unless my milk has been brought from this splendid pen,
“Faithful cow Nisaba, Enlil’s oldest daughter, cannot institute the levy.” 
The sorcerer
“Goat, your cream to your glistening horn, your milk to your back!”
And so the goat’s cream was pulled back into its glistening horn, and
its milk retreated into its back.
Thereupon pen and byre became a silent house, a ruin.36
There was no milk in the cow’s udders; the calves’ days darkened;
The young calf was hungry and mooed heart-rendingly.
There was no milk in the goat’s udders; the kids’ days darkened;
Both kid and goat lay down starving; their lives ...
Bitterly the cow spoke to its calf,
And the goat commiserated with its kid.
The holy churn remained empty; ... was hungry and lay starving.
Surely on that day pen and byre had become a silent house, a ruin.
The drover dropped his staff, his eyes vacant in shock;
The shepherd fastened his crook at his side, weeping bitterly;
The shepherd boy no longer frequented pen or byre; he went else-
where;
The milkman no longer cried out loudly; he went elsewhere.
Now there were a cowherd and a shepherd of Nisaba;
Sons of one mother
And reared in pen and byre they were.
Massgula was the name of the former,
Uredina of the latter.
At the great gate facing the rising sun, the marvel of the Land,
Both of them crouched in the dust and implored Utu in the sky:
“This sorcerer, a man from Aratta, broke into the pens.
“In the pens he caused a shortage of milk: even the calves do not get
any.
“In pen and byre he brought misery: he made scarce cream and milk.
“He cast their doom, caused their devastation.”
IV. THE MAGIC CONTEST
G.
THE WISE WOMAN IS SENT
... approached ...
...
what was put before her (?) she (?) inspected.
Enmerkar and Ensuhgirana
41
195
200
205
210
215
220

[...] eress2ki [...]-X-an-gur
225
[gu2] [id2]buranun-na id2 NA? mah? KA gsal2-la id2 digsir-re-e-ne
[iriki nam]-tar-ra an den-lil2-la2 [...] gsir3 bi2-in-gub
um-ma sags-bur-ru ssu [mu-un-na-an]-[...]
H.
THE CONTEST
[2-na-ne-ne agargara id2-da i-ni-in-ssub]-[bu-uss]
[mass-mass-e suhurku6 gal a-ta] im-ta-an-[ed2] 
230
um-ma sags-bur-ru [hu-ri2]-inmussen a-ta im-ta-an-[ed2] 
hu-ri2-inmussen-e suhurku6 gal in-kar hur-sags-se3 ba-[an-kur9] 
2-kam-ma-ass agargara id2-da i-ni-in-ssub-bu-uss
mass-mass-e u8 sila4-bi a-ta im-ta-an-[ed2] 
um-ma sags-bur-ru ur-bar-ra a-ta im-ta-an-[ed2]
235
ur-bar-ra [u8 sila4!-bi] in-kar edin dagsal-sse3 ba-an-ur3
3-kam-ma-ass agargara id2-da i-ni-in-ssub-bu-uss
mass-mass-e ab2 amar-bi a-ta im-ta-an-ed2
um-ma sags-bur-ru ur-mah-e a-ta im-ta-an-ed2
ur-mah-e ab2 amar-bi in-kar gsiss-gi-sse3 ba-an-kur9
240
4-kam-ma-as agargara id2-da i-ni-in-ssub-bu-uss
mass-mass-e sseg9 sseg9-bar-e a-ta im-ta-an-ed2
um-ma sags-bur-ru nemur hur-sags-gsa2 a-ta im-ta-an-ed2
nemur-e sseg9 sseg9-bar-e in-kar hur-sags-se3 ba-an-kur9
5-kam-ma-ass agargara id2-da i-ni-in-ssub-bu-uss
245
mass-mass-e amar mass-da3 a-ta im-ta-an-ed2
um-ma sags-bur-ru ur-ssub5 ur-nim-e a-ta im-ta-an-ed2
ur-ssub5 ur-nim-ma amar mass-da3 in-kar gsisstir-tir-sse3 ba-an-kur9
mass-mass-e igi-ni ba-ku10-ku10 dim2-ma-ni ba-suh3
um-ma sags-bur-ru gu3 mu-na-de2-e
250
mass-mass nam-mass-mass-zu he2-gsal2 dim2-ma-zu me-a
a-na-gin7-nam eress2ki iri dnisaba-sse3
iriki nam tar-ra an den-lil2-la2
iriki ul iri ki ags2 dnin-lil2-la2
nam-mass-mass ak-de3 a-gin7 im-da-gsin-ne-en
255
[mass]-mass-e mu-un-na-ni-ib-gi4-gi4
nu-zu-a-mu-ne i-im-gsin-ne-en
nam-gur4-ra-zu i3-zu nam-ba-an-sis-e-de3-en
ssu kir4-na i-ni-in-gsal2 ssud3 mu-un-na-an-ra2-ass
42
Epics of Sumerian Kings

... to Eress she (?) went,
(Which lies) on the bank of the Euphrates, the mighty river, the river
of the gods.
She went to the city whose fate was fixed by An and Enlil;
Wise Woman Sagburu ... her hand upon him.
H.
THE CONTEST
Both threw fish spawn37 into the river.
The sorcerer drew out a big carp, but
Wise Woman Sagburu drew out an eagle.
The eagle caught the big carp and fled to the mountains.
Again they threw fish spawn into the river.
The sorcerer drew out a ewe with lamb, but
Wise Woman Sagburu drew out a wolf.
The wolf caught the ewe with lamb and dragged them to the open plain.
A third time they threw fish spawn into the river.
The sorcerer drew out a cow with calf, but
Wise Woman Sagburu drew out a lion.
The lion caught the cow with calf and took them to the reed-marsh.
A fourth time they threw fish spawn into the river.
The sorcerer drew out an ibex and a wild sheep, but
Wise Woman Sagburu drew out a mountain lion.
The mountain lion caught the ibex and the wild sheep and dragged
them to the mountains.
A fifth time they threw fish spawn into the river.
The sorcerer drew out a young gazelle, but
Wise Woman Sagburu drew out a tiger and a NIM -lion.
The tiger and the NIM -lion caught the young gazelle and dragged it
to the woods.
The sorcerer’s face darkened, and his mind was in turmoil.
Then Wise Woman Sagburu spoke to him:
“O sorcerer, for all your magic lore, do you not understand anything?
“How could you go to Eress, the city of Nisaba,
“The city whose fate was fixed by An and Enlil,
“The primeval city, the city well loved by Ninlil,
“In order to work your evil magic? How did you dare?”
The sorcerer replied:
“I went there without knowing what I did; 
“Now I acknowledge your authority—please do not be angry!”
He did obeisance; he pleaded with her:
Enmerkar and Ensuhgirana
43
225
230
235
240
245
250
255

ssu ba-mu-u8 nin-mu ssu ba-mu-u8
260
silim-ma-bi iriki-mu-sse3 ga-gsin
arattaki kur me sikil-la-sse3 zi-mu ga-ba-ssi-de6
nam-mah-zu kur-kur-ra ga-bi2-ib-zu 
arattaki kur me sikil-la-ka ka-tar-zu ga-si-il
um-ma sags-bur-ru mu-un-na-ni-ib-gi4-gi4
265
tur3 amas-a nigs2-gig-ga bi2-ak i3 ga ba-e-ni-kal
gsisbanssur an-bar7 gsisbanssur kigs2-[nim kigs2]-sig mu-e-su3
kigs2-sig unu6 gal-la i3 ga ba-e-ku5 nigs2-gig-bi X-DU
nam-tag-zu i3 ga [... igi] nu-mu-e-tum3
dnanna lugal [X amass-a]? MU X ga ba-e-ssum2-mu
270
nir-da i3-gsa2-gsa2 [zi nu-mu]-ra-ab-ssum2-mu
um-ma sags-bur-ru mass-mass-e unken-ni inim-ma-ni mu-ni-in-sig3
ssaga-a-ni gu2 id2buranun-na-[ka] i-ni-in-ssub
zi nam-til3-la ba-da-an-kar iriki-ni eress2ki-sse3 ba-e-gur
V. THE CONCLUSION
I.
THE LORD OF ARATTA SUBMITS
en-suh-gir11-an-na-ke4 inim-bi gsiss ba-an-tuku-a-ta
275
en-me-er-kar2-ra lu2 mu-un-ssi-in-gi4-gi4
za-e-me-en en ki ags2 dinana-me-en dili-zu-ne mah-me-en
dinana-ke4 ur2 kug-ga-ni-sse3 zid-de3-ess [mu-un-pad3-de3-en ki ags2-
gsa2]-ni-me-en
sig-ta igi-nim-sse3 en gal-bi za-e-me-en gsa2-e us2-sa-zu-me-en
a ri-a-ta gaba-ri-zu nu-me-en sses-gal za-e-me-en
280
gsa2-e nu-mu-da-sa2-e-en ud da-ri2-se3
J.
PRAISE BE TO NISABA
en-me-er-kar2 en-suh-gir11-an-na a-da-min3 dug4-ga
en-me-er-kar2 en-suh-gir11-an-na diri-ga-a-ba
dnisaba zag-mi2
44
Epics of Sumerian Kings

“Let me go, oh sister, let me go!
“Let me return safely to my city!
“Let me go back unharmed to Aratta, the mountain of the inviolate
powers!
“I will proclaim your greatness in all countries;
“I will sing your praise in Aratta, the mountain of the inviolate powers!”
Wise Woman Sagburu replied to him:
“In pen and byre you brought misery; you made scarce cream and milk.
“You abolished lunch, breakfast, and dinner meals.
“You cut off cream and milk from the supper in the great hall; misery...
“Your sin of withholding cream and milk cannot be overlooked!
“King Nanna granted everlasting milk ... in the byre;
“Therefore your sin is a capital offense: I cannot grant you life!”
Wise Woman Sagburu confirmed her statutory verdict on the sorcerer;
She threw down her victim on the bank of the Euphrates,
Took away his vital force38 and returned this to her city Eress.
V. THE CONCLUSION
I.
THE LORD OF ARATTA SUBMITS
When Ensuhgirana had heard this
He sent to Enmerkar:
“You are indeed the beloved of Inana; you alone are the greatest;
“Inana has truly chosen you for her holy loins; you are her lover;
“From the west to the east you are the great lord, and I humbly follow.
“From your conception onward I was never your equal; you are sen-
ior;
“I can never match you!”
J.
PRAISE BE TO NISABA
In the contest between Enmerkar and Ensuhgirana,
Because Enmerkar was greater than Ensuhgirana,
Praise be to Nisaba!
Enmerkar and Ensuhgirana
45
260
265
270
275
280

Notes
1 At the end of Enmerkar and the lord of Aratta there also appears a wise woman
(lines 588–594), but there she seems to be Inana in disguise.
2 An envoûtement is a spell that works by the force of the spoken word alone.
3 See Attinger 1984.
4 See Behrens 1978.
5 See provisionally ETCSL: www-etcsl.orient.ox.ac.uk/section1/b1824.htm.
6 Other types of text may also have played a role: lines 198–210 might easily be
found in any of the city laments.
7 Proper names and names of animals belonged to the scribal fodder of an ear-
lier stage in schooling.
8 Kramer and Jacobsen 1953.
9 One manuscript notes on the edge of the tablet gi 4-ba (= incipit) sig 4 muss 3
za-gin 3-t[a e 3-a].
10 One manuscript reads the opening line as “O Brickwork rising up from the
shimmering plain” (see note 9 above). This alternative reading might have been an
appropriate opening line in its own right: the huge tell still rises abruptly and
imposingly above the surrounding plain that, though heavily silted, shimmers in the
summer and even autumn heat. On the other hand, the “pristine mountain” seems
somewhat awkward here, although it is taken up again in line 7.
11 An allusion to Inana; the rainbow is one of her symbols or properties.
12 The Sumerian term used here (sikil) is difficult to translate. It seems to com-
bine the meanings “pristine, unblemished, inviolate, holy,” and it is therefore hard,
if not misleading, to try to translate it consistently.
13 The notion of “Land” is central to Mesopotamian thought; it stands for the coun-
try, state, nation, and even “civilized region” of what they understood as Sumer.
Furthermore, it is expressed consistently with a single Sumerian term, kalam.
14 Expressions comparable to lines 14 and 18–19 occur elsewhere as an indi-
cation of a time long past. Note that the sun (i.e., the god Utu) is named as king
and that Enmerkar is regularly called “son of the sun.” This notion is amplified in
lines 17–21.
15 “Chancellor,” though an anachronism, seems more apt as a translation of the
Sumerian term sukkal than the orientalizing “vizier” from Arabic Waazir. We have
no idea of the reason for the explicit identification—by name—of the two oppos-
ing officials. Their presence and their identification have little or no significance in
the development of the story.
16 Lines 17–21 are not perfectly clear, partly due to their formulaic character. The
translation assumes that Ensuhgirana is meant in lines 17–18 and Enmerkar in lines
19–21. But other variations on the play with “that one ... that one”—where we
would probably say “this one … that one”—are perfectly possible. The “nights”
refer to the subsequent passage about lovemaking.
17 The term used here, adaman(dug 4-ga), literally means “verbal contest,
quarrel, dispute.” It is the technical term for the academic poetical debates that
formed an important part of the training in Sumerian rhetoric (even eloquence?).
18 The term used here for the bed (gsissnu 2 girin-a) is well known from
sacred marriage texts. It is sometimes translated neutrally as “splendid,” but
46
Epics of Sumerian Kings

“flowery” or “blossoming” seems to be much nearer the mark, as seems clear from
the opposition between lines 29 and 30. It can be defended that it is also a trans-
parent metaphor for Inana’s vulva.
19 Lines 29–30, repeated as lines 60–61, are an extremely subtle couplet.
Ostensibly, the opposition is between the primitive couch Enmerkar can offer and
a richly adorned bed offered by Ensuhgirana. Yet in the corresponding passage
80–86, it is the “primitive couch” whose adornment is described in detail—and
with a highly significant twist.
20 This line is in only one manuscript.
21 Not all manuscripts have these four lines.
22 The passage 33–38, repeated as 64–69 and corresponding to 108–113, is still
imperfectly understood. The motif may be akin to the killing of the goose that lays
golden eggs, in that the lord of Aratta improvidently proposes a potlatch-like exu-
berance, while Enmerkar is so careful—and rich—that he can raise and consume
geese and goslings.
23 This couplet, a stock phrase introducing the speech reported by a messenger,
also occurs elsewhere in the cycle.
24 “Their” refers to the people of Unug.
25 This line is totally out of place here. The motif of the tablet has no meaning
or function at all in this text. Still, the line appears in three manuscripts! Is it an
intrusion borrowed from the famous invention of writing in Enmerkar and the Lord
of Aratta? If so, it might be a clue to a perceived “order” in which the pieces of the
cycle have to be read.
26 See above, notes 16–17. The “flowery bed strewn with glistening plants” turns
out to be a hardly impenetrable metaphor or image of Inana’s vulva, while the lions
(male and female?) in their unending chase stand for—or are—the lovers in their
unending love-play, as confirmed by the following line.
27 The night of lovemaking will not end!
28 This is, of course, literally “cradling.”
29 A reference to the first episode in The Return of Lugalbanda. But also again a
hardly hidden expression of Inana’s cries of desire and delight when Enmerkar
enters the great shrine, which here may also stand for her sexual parts.
30 The iss ib, lumah, and gudu are kinds of priests; the girsiga are temple
or palace attendants.
31 Refers to the passage in Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta where the fight
between the two dogs represents the final challenge. The parallel between lu 2,
which undoubtedly means “man” in lines 124–125, and ur in lines 126–127 may
indicate that ur has to be understood as “champion” after all.
32 Hamazi/u is a city lying to the northeast of Babylonia, east of Kirkuk.
33 The geography seems to be based on a triangle: from the southern plains
(sig ) to the Zagros highlands (igi-nim), from the Persian Gulf (ab ) to the
Lebanon (cedar mountain), from igi-nim to the Lebanon. By implication this
encloses the known world.
34 Nisaba as goddess of writing is also and by that token the goddess of admin-
istration and bureaucracy. When she starves, civilization will starve. This is a stark
expression of their realization of the fact that writing ultimately must serve the
administration of civilized life.
Enmerkar and Ensuhgirana
47

35 The “back (side)” seems adequate, since it can stand for belly or hindquarter.
The horns (si-muss ) are more difficult. Perhaps the idea is that the milk is sent
back into the cow’s/goat’s body as far as it can go and away from udder and sub-
sequently milk pail.
36 Lines like this abound in the genre of the city laments, where the cities and
the whole of Sumer are consistently presented as a byre that has been abandoned
by its personnel and livestock. In fact, the whole passage might well appear in a
lament—but in this instance it is to be taken literally.
37 Fish spawn, Sumerian a g a rg a r a (lit. “disseminated semen”), is used by
both magicians to create a series of animals. The animals created by Sagburu are
consistently bigger and stronger than those created by the sorcerer. But the real
emphasis of the magical contest is that the animals created by Sagburu use the oth-
ers as food. The principle of providing food, which had been put to a stop by the
sorcerer’s first activity, is here shown to be stronger than its opposite. In other
words, white magic has conquered black magic. Note also that the text shows here
a clever bilingual pun or, perhaps better, a play on signs. The cuneiform sign for
the Sumerian word agargara can be read more simply and much more gener-
ally as NUN ; the Akkadian, and almost generally Semitic, word for “fish” is nunu.
38 Since he had threatened the life force of Eress/Sumer.
48
Epics of Sumerian Kings

Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
Introduction
Most Sumerologists will agree that this relatively long composition
(about 640 lines) is probably the finest piece of poetic storytelling ever
produced by the Old Babylonian authors. The general theme of the
cycle, namely, the rivalry between Unug/Sumer and Aratta, is presented
here at first sight as a mere contest in cleverness. Yet there are several
layers of meaning defining both the central narrative strategy and the
obvious symbolism.
1. The story seems deceptively simple. Enmerkar, king of Unug, wants to
embellish his city and the whole of Sumer with precious metals and stones,
goods that are not to be found in Sumer but only in the fabulously wealthy
city Aratta, which lies behind the mountains. Since trade does not as yet
exist, he asks the goddess Inana what he should do: Inana is the goddess
of Aratta as well. She favors Enmerkar and advises him to send a messen-
ger with a challenge to Aratta, requisitioning what he wants and enforcing
his claim by stating that she favors him. He does so, but the (unnamed)
lord of Aratta refuses, claiming that Inana is his goddess as well and that
anyway his mountain city is an impregnable fastness. Still, he is willing to
enter into a contest with Enmerkar in order to see whose side Inana is
really on. This results in a counterchallenge that takes the form of an
unsolvable riddle: if Enmerkar succeeds in carting grain to Aratta in open
nets instead of bags, he might reconsider. Enmerkar finds a solution: he
uses sprouting barley to close the interstices of the nets so that no grain is
spilled. Sending off the grain, he repeats his challenge. This time the lord
of Aratta asks him to bring him a scepter made of no existing material.
Enmerkar solves this riddle as well: he prepares a gluelike plastic sub-
stance that he pours into a hollow reed; after this mass has hardened,
II
49

which takes a long time, he breaks away the reed mould and sends off the
scepter with a renewed challenge. Finally, the lord of Aratta requests a dog
of no known color to fight his own dog. Enmerkar again finds a solution:
he weaves a cloth of no known color. When this is sent off to Aratta the
messenger complains that the message has become too long and difficult
for him to remember and reproduce. Thereupon Enmerkar invents writ-
ing—which throws the lord of Aratta in despair. At this point Isskur, the god
of storm and rain, intervenes, and the famine and drought that was scourg-
ing Aratta at the time is over. The fight between the two dogs now appears
as part of a festival. Inana reappears, confirms her predilection for
Enmerkar, but also tells him to institute peaceful trade with Aratta from
now on.
2. Arranged according to the several episodes and subparagraphs, the
story looks somewhat like this:
I.
The Argument
[A]
General introduction, subdivided into:
(1) Short hymn to Unug
1–5
(2) Unug’s wealth/absence of trade
6–27
(3) Inana favors Unug.
28–32
[B]
Reason for and origin of the conflict: Enmerkar’s plea
and Inana’s answer
(1) Introduction to Enmerkar’s plea
33–37
(2) Enmerkar’s plea: have Aratta deliver its riches!
38–64
(3) Introduction to Inana’s reply
65–68
(4) Inana’s reply: Send a messenger!
69–79
(5) Inana’s reply: Aratta shall submit!
80–95
(= 49–64)
(6) Inana’s reply: Praise to you, Enmerkar!
96–104
II.
The Contest
[C]
Enmerkar’s first challenge
(1) Marching orders to the messenger
105–113
(106–112 = 71–78)
(2) Enmerkar’s threat
114–133
(3) The Spell of Nudimmud
134–155
[D]
First voyage: Unug to Aratta
(1) Go now, messenger!
156–159
(2) The voyage
160–174
(164–169 = 73–78)
50
Epics of Sumerian Kings

[E]
Delivering the first challenge
(1) Opening formulae
175–178
(2) My king is supreme!
179–186
(3) Enmerkar’s threat
187–207
(= 115–135)
(4) I shall carry back your (submissive) answer!
208–217
[F]
Aratta’s reply; first counterchallenge
(1) Aratta shall not submit!
218–226
(2) Messenger: Inana has taken Unug’s part!
227–235
(3) Aratta and Unug shall have a contest!
236–261
(4) Beware of Aratta’s forces!
262–277
(5) Counterchallenge: deliver grain in nets!
278–293
[G]
Second voyage: Aratta to Unug
294–298
[H]
Solution and second challenge
(1) Enmerkar’s reaction
299–307
(2) Ritual (and prayer?)
308–316
(3) Nisaba’s solution: soaking the wheat
317–336
(4) Second challenge: a scepter to match mine!
337–346
[I]
Third voyage: Unug to Aratta
347–351
[J]
Delivering the second challenge
(1) Arrival in Aratta
352–375
(2) Opening formulae
376–380
(3) Hand over a scepter like mine!
381–388
(= 340–345)
[K]
Aratta’s reply: second counterchallenge
(1) Aratta’s anxiety
389–396
(2) Counterchallenge: an impossible scepter
397–411
[L]
Fourth voyage: Aratta to Unug
412–416
[M]
Enmerkar’s solution: a manmade substance
417–434
[N]
Fifth voyage: Unug to Aratta
435–437
[O]
Third counterchallenge
(1) Aratta’s despondence
438–453
(2) Counterchallenge: a dog of no known color
454–461
Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
51

[P]
Sixth voyage: Aratta to Unug
462–467
[Q]
Final challenge
(1) Solution: a cloth of no known color
468–476
(2) Final challenge
477–496
(486–489 = 115–117)
(3) Enmerkar invents writing.
497–506
[R]
Seventh voyage: Unug to Aratta
507–510
[S]
Aratta’s reaction
(1) Opening formulae
511–517
(2) Repetition of the challenge; tablet
518–535
(3) Aratta’s reaction: he cannot read.
536–541
III.
The Resolution
[T]
The final confrontation
(1) Isskur sends rain; wheat begins to grow in Aratta.
542–555
(2) Inana has saved Aratta!
556–568
(3) Now let the champions fight!
569–580...? 1
[U]
The argument resolved
(1) Inana pleases Dumuzid.
584–587
(2) Inana orders Enmerkar to institute trade.
588–625
(3) Inana’s final counsel
626–6362
3. This representation is thought to show the strong sense of structure,
balance, and composition pervading this poem. An analysis of the struc-
tural features cannot be undertaken here, but many of them are obvious
at first reading. The poem can be neatly divided into three parts, of which
the first and the last are roughly equal in size. The argument (lines
1–104) as a unit is balanced by the resolution (lines 542–636+). What is
more, these are the only sections in which Inana has a major part. The
resolution does indeed resolve the argument in that now trade is
invented, and thus Enmerkar is enabled to fulfill his ambitions. The con-
test (lines 105–541) takes up most of the poem and is itself divided into
twice three parts consisting of an initial challenge followed by three
counterchallenges—or riddles—and their solutions. This works out as a
series of seven voyages that, as the texts says, have to cross seven moun-
tain ranges. On the other hand, this game of numbers and parallel
situations is handled with consummate skill. Word-for-word repetitions do
occur, but they are mostly highly functional in that they generally empha-
size basic elements of the opening argument or Enmerkar’s original threat
52
Epics of Sumerian Kings

(see, e.g,. 49–64//80–95; 71–78//106–112; 115–135//187–207//486–489).
In a literary environment that abounds in repetitions, it is striking that
here precisely those narrative situations that would easily lead to auto-
matic repetition—that is, the messenger’s seven voyages—are
differentiated, even somewhat artificially.3 The text also shows a pen-
chant for cross-reference that goes beyond the expected instances of
fulfillment—or not—of earlier expectations. The most important instance
of this technique is also very subtle. A major part of Enmerkar’s first chal-
lenge is the famous spell of Nudimmud, which is seemingly not very
much to the point in its immediate context. Indeed, when the messenger
delivers this first challenge, the spell is not repeated as such; it is merely
noted that it has to be spoken. Many of us now agree that the burden of
this spell is that in an ideal world of peace and bliss, which Enmerkar is
striving for, only Sumerian will be spoken.4 It often escapes attention that
the episode of Enmerkar’s last challenge—in fact, merely a stronger
assertion of his original challenge—contains a neat parallel of sorts.
Enmerkar’s invention of writing seems somewhat out of place here: the
message is far shorter than the first one. But on the other hand, the
invention of writing—explicitly cuneiform writing—complements the
notion of Sumerian as the international language, as was already put in
the spell of Nudimmud. Within the cultural ambience of the group of
poems edited here, the eduba, it was clear to everyone that knowing
and using Sumerian was equivalent to knowing how to write, and vice
versa. This subtle cross-reference thus becomes yet another structural
element holding the story together.
4. One of the most intriguing features of this text is partly formal and
partly substantial. At first glance it seems that the rivalry for sanctioned
superiority, which lies at the base of all the Aratta poems, is resolved here
by the simple expedient of a well-known folktale motif: that of the riddle
to which no solution seems possible. These “riddles” have a tendency to
appear in threes. On a purely formal level, this does seem to be the case
here, although I hasten to add that I know of no other examples from
Sumerian literature. Yet the riddles themselves, and even more so their
solutions, show three other levels of significance.
First, there is the matter of the materials required. In the first case, the
gold and precious stones are ultimately exchanged for Unug’s wealth in
grain. This is indeed what both parties want: Enmerkar needs the luxury
goods; Aratta, in the throes of a famine, needs food. In the second
instance, the proposed exchange of scepters does not actually take place,
but Enmerkar succeeds in manufacturing the required item. Third, the
episode of the dogs can hardly be called an exchange, but again Enmer-
kar succeeds against the expectations of Aratta. Thus, the truly relevant
Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
53

substances are found only in the first exchange, which is taken up again
at the end of the story.
Second, there is the symbolic meaning of the required objects. For
Enmerkar the precious goods are necessary because of his responsibility
for his city, which he wants to embellish as it should be. For Aratta grain
is absolutely crucial at this point in time, and thus it also belongs to the
responsibility of the lord of Aratta.5 The scepter episode, on the other
hand, is an overt allusion to the thorny matter of overlordship. The fight
between the dogs6 is probably a somewhat proleptic indication of the fes-
tivities accompanying the peaceful solution of the conflict.
There is also the manner in which Enmerkar solves the riddles. His
first solution is a trick, but the point is that he is so conversant with the
technology of wheat production that he can come up with this solution.
The second instance is again a feat of technology: the very first manmade
substance in history. And the third solution comes, somewhat unfairly
one may think, from textile technology. So within one story we have not
only references to the three main export products of Sumer—namely,
wheat, manufactures, and textile—but also and perhaps mainly to the
technological superiority of Sumer over the mere owners of raw though
precious materials.
Thus one can see that the reason for Enmerkar’s victory in this battle
of wits lies not only in Enmerkar’s superior intelligence and cleverness but
also in the substance of the solutions he brings to the seemingly impossi-
ble tasks. All three have to do with technology and with the three most
important export articles Sumer can produce.
Finally, to cap it all, this superiority that becomes evident as the story
unfolds is further enhanced by the fourth and perhaps most important feat
of technology. This consists of the introduction of Sumerian and cuneiform
as the necessary means of administration, bookkeeping, and, finally, trade,
the lack of which stands at the origin of the conflict. The overriding impor-
tance is clearly exemplified by the ingenious trick of presenting this motif
in two parts—the Spell of Nudimmud and the Invention of Writing—which
elegantly encompass the doubly threefold series of impossible tasks and
their solution. Thus large-scale trade is seen to depend on writing, which
simply implies Sumerian. And indeed, the very first cuneiform documents,
without doubt written in Sumerian, are what we now call administrative
and economic in nature. The scribes who are responsible for this text not
only coined a term concordant with “cuneiform” (see line 540). They also
hinted at the indubitable fact that writing was invented for economic, not
intellectual, reasons.
5. The composite text presented here is based upon all the twenty-seven
tablets and fragments known at the present time.7 The material comes
54
Epics of Sumerian Kings

predominantly from Nippur: twenty-three pieces out of twenty-seven.
The Nippur material certainly shows two complete editions. One is a
beautiful and well-preserved large tablet with six columns of about fifty
lines per side, and another, of which we have only the right half, had
sixty to sixty-five lines per column and five columns per side. There are
at least nine partial editions on two-column tablets. Further study must
decide whether these are parts of “complete editions” on sequences of
two or three tablets, but it is striking that the first half or first third of the
poem predominates on these tablets. There are seven good examples of
imgidas (i.e., one column extracts); the rest of the fragments must
remain undecided for the moment. Two largish one-column extracts
were found in Ur; one imgida comes from Kish, and finally there is a
fragment of a two-column tablet of unknown provenance8 in Berlin.
6. The poem was first published in its (then) entirety in Kramer 1952,
which was a remarkable achievement for its time. The reworking by Jestin
(1957) is still useful in places. Cohen (1973), an unpublished dissertation,
added much to the material, the reading, and the interpretation. Relevant
recent translations are Jacobsen 1987 and Vanstiphout 1998 (84–112).
Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
55

Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
Composite Text
I. THE ARGUMENT
A.
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
1
iri gud huss AN.TESS2 ni2 gal gur3-ru
[kul]-[ab4]ki bad3 [...]
gaba ud-da ki nam tar-[re-da]
unugki kur-gal ssag4 [...]
5
kigs2-sig unu2 gal an-[na] [...]
ud ri-a nam ba-[tar-ra-ba]
unugki kul-ab4ki e2-[an]-[na] [...]
sags il2-la nun gal-e-ne [mi]-[ni-...]
he2-gsal2 a estub gsal2
10
ssegx(IM.A) sse gu-nu gsal2
unugki kul-ab4ki-a ib-da-an-tab
kur dilmunki [(...)] X in-nu
e2-an-na unugki-e kul-ab4ki-a-ka ki us2-sa-a
gsi6-par4 kug dinana-ke4
15
sig4 kul-ab4ki-ke4 kug ki-in-dar-ra-gin7 pa ed2 ak-am3
[...] X X X nu-il2 bala nu-ak-e
[...nu]-il2 nam-ga-rass nu-ak-e
[kug-sig17 kug]-babbar urud nagga na4lagab za-gin3-na
[na4 hur-sags-gsa2] [kur]-bi-ta tess2-bi nu-mu-un-ed3-de3
20
[...][ezen]-ma a nu-un-tu5!
[...] nu-mu-un-dur2-ru
[...] ud bi2-in-[zal] 
[...]
[...]
25
[...gun3]-gun3
[...] ki kug X [... na4za]-gin3 duru5-am3
[ssag4]-[bi] gsismes babbar-gin7 gurun il2-la sig7-ga-am3
dinana-ra en arattaki-ke4
sags men kug-sig17-ga mu-na-ni-in-gsal2
30
en kul-ab4ki-a-gin7 nu-mu-na-sag9
arattaki es3 e2-an-na gsi6-par4 ki kug-gin7
kug dinana-ra sig4 kul-ab4ki-gin7 nu-mu-un-na-du3
56
Epics of Sumerian Kings

Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
Translation
I. THE ARGUMENT
A.
GENERAL INTRODUCTION
O city, fierce bull radiating force and awe,
[O Kulab], rampart [of the Land],
Breastwork of9 the storm, where the destinies are ever fixed,
O Unug, great mountain in the heart of...,
There the evening meal of An’s abode [is ever set.]
In days of yore, when the destinies were fixed,
The Great Princes10 granted Unug-Kulab’s Eana
Head-lifting pride.
Opulence, carp floods11
And rains that bring forth dappled wheat
Abounded in Unug-Kulab.
The land Dilmun12 did not yet exist,
When the Eana of Unug-Kulab was already well-founded,
And the Gipar of Holy Inana
And Kulab, the Brickwork, glinted like silver in the lode.
[...] was not yet imported; there was no trading;
[...] was not exported; there was no commerce.
[Gold], silver, copper, tin, blocks of lapis lazuli,
[The mountain ores,] were not yet brought down from the highlands.
[...] there was no bathing for the festivals;
[...] were not sitting
[...] time passed
[...]
[...]
[...] was brightly colored;
[...] the holy place was [replete with] polished lapis lazuli;
Its interior was beautiful like the silvery MES -tree in fruit.
For Inana did the lord of Aratta
Don his golden crown and diadem,
But he did not please her as well as did the lord of Kulab,
For nothing even resembling the shrine Eana, or the Gipar, the holy
place,13
Did Aratta ever build for Holy Inana, unlike brickwork Kulab!
Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
57
1
5
10
15
20
25
30

B.
REASON FOR AND ORIGIN OF THE CONFLICT: ENMERKAR’S PLEA AND INANA’S
ANSWER
ud-ba en ssag4-ge pad3-da dinana-ke4
kur suba-ta ssag4 kug-ge pad3-da dinana-ke4
35
en-me-er-kar2 dumu dutu-ke4
nin9-a-ni nin kurku2 dug3-ga
kug dinana-ra u3-gul mu-un-na-gsa2-gsa2
nin9-mu arattaki unugki-se3
kug-sig17 kug-babbar ha-ma-an-galam-e
40
na4za-gin3 duru5 lagab-ta [...]
sud-ra2-ags2 na4za-gin3 [ duru5] [...] X
unugki-ga kur kug [...] X X du3
e2 an-ta [ed3-da ki]-gub-ba-za
[arattaki ess3] e2-an-na he2-en-du3
45
[gsi6]-par4 kug-ga [dur2] gsar-ra-za
ssag4-bi arattaki ha-ma-an-galam-e
gsa2-e ssag4-ba amar za-gin3-na gu2? ga-mu-ni-[...]-la2
arattaki [unug]-[ki-sse3] gsiss ha-ma-[gsa2-gsa2]
nam-lu2-u18-lu arattaki-[ke4]
50
na4 hur-sags-gsa2 [kur]-[bi] ha-ma-ab-ed3
es3 gal ha-ma-du3-e unu2 gal ha-ma-gsa2-gsa2
unu2 gal [unu2] [digsir-re-e-ne-ke4 pa] ed2 [ha]-ma-ab-ak-e
me-mu kul-ab4ki-[a] si ha-ma-ni-ib-sa2-e
abzu kur kug-gin7 ha-ma-ab-mu2-mu2
55
eridugki hur-sags-gin7 ha-ma-ab-sikil-e
es3 abzu kug ki-in-dar-ra-gin7 pa ed2 ha-ma-ab-ak-e
gsa2-e abzu-ta zag-mi2 dug4-ga-mu-ne
eridugki-ta me de6-a-mu-ne
nam-en-na men ess3 bar-gin7 sig7-ga-mu-ne
60
unugki kul-ab4ki-a sags men kug gsal2-la-mu-ne
[PA.A] ess3 gal-la-ke4 gsi6-par4-ra hu-mu-un-tum2-mu
[PA.A] gsi6-par4-ra-ke4 es3 gal-la hu-mu-un-tum2-mu
[nam]- [lu2]-ulu3 u6 dug3-ge-ess hu-mu-un-e
[d][utu] igi hul2-la he2-em-ssi-bar-bar-re
65
[ud-bi]-a giri17-zal an kug-ga nin kur-ra igi gsal2
in-nin9 dama-ussumgal-an-na ssim-zid-da-ni
58
Epics of Sumerian Kings

B.
REASON FOR AND ORIGIN OF THE CONFLICT: ENMERKAR’S PLEA AND
INANA’S ANSWER
In those days did the lord, whom Inana chose in her heart,
Whom Inana from her shining mountain chose in her holy heart,
Enmerkar, son of the Sun,
Address a plea to his sister, the Lady who grants wishes;
He addressed a loud plea to Holy Inana:
“My sister, let Aratta for Unug
“Artfully work gold and silver for my sake!
“[Let them cut for my sake] polished lapis lazuli from its block;
“[Let them work for my sake] the translucent smooth lapis lazuli;
“[Let them] build [for my sake] the holy mountain in Unug!
“A temple [descended] from heaven—your place of worship,
“The shrine Eana—let [Aratta] build that!
“The holy Gipar, your dwelling,
“Let Aratta artfully adorn its inner chamber for my sake
“So that I, the beaming youth, may embrace you therein!
“Let Aratta submit to Unug!
“Let the people of Aratta
“Bring down for me the stones of their hills and mountains
“And build for me the great shrine, erect for me the great abode!
“For my sake, let them make illustrious the great abode, the abode of
the gods!
“Let thus my power14 become evident in Kulab;
“Let the Abzu flourish like the holy mountain,
“Let Eridug scintillate like the hill ranges,
“For my sake, let them make shrine Abzu illustrious like silver in the
lode!
“When I then sing in praise from the Abzu,
“When I then bring back the power from Eridug,
“When I am then dressed with the crown of lordship like a pure
shrine,
“When I then don the holy crown of Unug-Kulab,
“May then the [mace-bearers ?]15 of the great shrine escort me to the
Gipar,
“And may the [mace-bearers ?] of the Gipar escort me to the great shrine.
“The people will applaud and admire me,
“And the Sun will behold me with benevolence!”
Thereupon the splendor in the sacred sky, the Lady who watches
over the highland,
The divine Lady who embellishes herself for Ama-ussumgalana,16
Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
59
35
40
45
50
55
60
65

dinana nin kur-kur-ra-ke4
en-me-er-kar2 dumu dutu-ra gu3 mu-na-de2-e
en-me-er-kar2 gsa2-nu na ga-e-ri na-ri-mu he2-e-dab5
70
inim ga-ra-ab-dug4 gsizzal he2-si-ak
kigs2-gi4-a inim zu zag-sse tuku erin2-ta u3-ba-e-re-pad3
inim gal dinana gal zu inim-ma-ke4 me-a hu-mu-na-ab-tumu3
hur-sags zubi-sse3 he2-bi2-in-ed3-de3
hur-sags zubi-ta he2-em-ma-da-ra-ed3-de3
75
ssusinki-e kur an-ssa4-anki-a-sse3
pess2 tur-gin7 kiri3 ssu hu-mu-na-ab-gsal2
hur-sags gal-gal ni2-ba lu-a
sahar-ra hu-mu-na-da-gur4-gur4-e
arattaki unugki-se3 gu2 gsiss <ha>-ma-gsa2-gsa2
80
nam-lu2-ulu3 arattaki-ke4
na4 hur-sags-gsa2 kur-bi um-ta-ab-ed3
es3 gal ha-ra-du3-e unu2 gal ha-ra-gsa2-gsa2
unu2 gal unu2 digsir-re-e-ne-ke4 pa ed2 ha-ra-ab-ak-e
me-zu kul-ab4ki-a si ha-ra-ni-ib2-sa2-e
85
abzu kur kug-gin7 ha-ra-ab-mu2-mu2
eridugki hur-sags-gin7 ha-ra-ab-sikil-e
es3 abzu kug ki-<in>-dar-ra-gin7 pa ed2 ha-ra-ab-ak-e
za-e abzu-ta zag-mi2 dug4-ga-zu-ne
eridugki-ta me de6-a-[zu-ne]
90
nam-en men-na ess3 bar-[gin7 sig7-ga]-zu-ne
unugki-e kul-ab4ki-a sags [men] [kug gsal2-la]-zu-ne
PA.A ess3 gal-la-ke4 gsi6-par4-ra hu-mu-e-tum2-mu
[PA.A] gsi6-par4-ra-ke4 es3 gal-la hu-mu-e-tum2-mu
[nam-lu2-ulu3] u6 dug3-ge-ess he2-mu-e-e
95
dutu igi hul2-la he2-mu-e-ssi-bar-bar-re
[nam]-lu2-ulu3 arattaki-ke4
[X] NE ud ssu2-uss-ta um-[ta]-ab-il2-ke4-ess
[X] NE ud te-en-e um-ma-[tegs3]-e-ta
ki ddumu-zid-da u8 mass2 sila4?-ni lu-a
100
a kalag-ga a-ssag4 ddumu-zid-da-ka
udu kur-ra-gin7 dug3 ha-ra-ni-ib-gsar
gaba kug-gsa2-a ud-gin7 ed2-i3
60
Epics of Sumerian Kings

Inana, mistress of all the lands,
Thus spoke to Enmerkar, son of the Sun:
“Come Enmerkar, I shall advise you—let my advice be heeded!—
“I shall speak a word—let it be heard!
“Having chosen among the troops a messenger, clever of speech and
hardy,
“Where and to whom shall he carry the grave word of word-wise Inana?
“He shall carry it up into the Zubi range;
“He shall carry it down from the Zubi range.
“SSusin and the land of Anssan
“Will salute her17 humbly, like small mice.
“In the great mountain ranges the teeming multitudes
“Will grovel in the dust before her.
“Aratta shall submit to Unug!
“When the people of Aratta
“Have brought down the stones of their hills and mountains
“And built for you the great shrine, erected for you the great abode,
“For your sake, let them make illustrious the great abode, the abode
of the gods!
“Let thus your power become evident in Kulab;
“Let the Abzu flourish for you like the holy mountain,
“Let Eridug scintillate for you like the hill ranges,
“For your sake, let them make shrine Abzu illustrious like silver in the
lode!
“When you then sing in praise from the Abzu,
“When you then bring back the power from Eridug,
“When you are then dressed with the crown of lordship like a pure
shrine,
“When you then don the holy crown of Unug-Kulab,
“May then the mace-bearers ? of the great shrine escort you to the Gipar,
“And may the mace-bearers ? of the Gipar escort you to the great shrine.
“The people will applaud and admire you,
“And the Sun will behold you with benevolence!”
“The people of Aratta
“Having carried [their burdens ?] all day,
“[...] when the cool of the evening has come,
“At the place of Dumuzid, where teem the ewes and kids and lambs,
“Yea, in the Akalag meadows, those of Dumuzid,
“They will come flocking to you like so many mountain sheep!
“Now, rise like the Sun over my holy bosom,
Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
61
70
75
80
85
90
95
100

zi-pa-ags2-gsa2 nigs2-mus3-bi he2-me-en
za-ra en-me-er-kar2 dumu dutu zag-mi2
II. THE CONTEST
C.
ENMERKAR’S FIRST CHALLENGE
105
en-e inim kug dinana-ka-sse3 sags-KESS2 ba-ssi-in-ak 
kigs2-gi4-a inim zu zag-sse [tuku erin2-ta] ba-ra-an-pad3
inim gal dinana gal zu inim-ma-ke4 me-a mu-na-ab-tum3
hur-sags zubi-ka he2-bi2-in-ed3-de3-en
hur-sags zubi-ta he2-em-ma-da-ra-an-ed3-de3-en
110
ssusinki-e [kur] [an]-ssa4-anki-a-ke4
pess2 tur-gin7 kiri3 ssu hu-mu-na-ab-gsal2
hur-sags gal-gal ni2-ba lu-a
sahar-ra hu-mu-na-da-gur4-gur4-e
kigs2-gi4-a en arattaki-ra u3-na-dug4 u3-na-de3-tah
115
iri-bi ir7-sagsmussen-gin7 gsiss-bi-ta na-an-na-ra-ab-dal-en
mussen-gin7 gud3 us2-sa-bi-a nam-bi2-ib-dal-en
ganba gsal2-la-gin7 na-an-si-ig-en
iri gul-gul-lu-gin7 sahar nam-bi2-ib-ha-za-en
arattaki a2-dam den-ki-ke4 nam ba-an-kud
120
[ki bi2]-in-gul-la-gin7 ki nam-ga-bi2-ib-gul-en
egsir-bi dinana ba-ssi-in-zig3
gu3 im-[mi-in-ra sseg11 im]-mi-in-gi4
kuss7 bi2-[in-su-a-gin7] kuss7 nam-ga-bi2-ib-su-su
kug-sig17 [u3-tud-da]-ba kussLU.UB2+LU.UB2-sir a-ba-ni-in-ak
125
kug me-a sahar-ba zag u3-ba-ni-in-us2
kug sags-PA-[sse3] u3-mu-un-dim2-dim2
ansse kur-kur-ra-ke4 barag um-mi-in-la2-la2
gsa2-e-sse3-am3 den-lil2 ban3-da ki-en-gi-ra-ke4
en dnu-dim2-mud ssag4 kug-ge pad3-da
130
kur me sikil-la-ke4 ha-ma-du3-e
gsistaskarin-gin7 hi-li ha-ma-ab-ak-e
dutu e2-nun-ta ed2-a-gin7 si-muss2 ha-ma-ab-gun3-gun3
zag-du8-zag-du8-bi uri3 ha-ma-mul-e
e2-nun- e2-nun-ba ssir3 kug nam-ssub tuku-a-ba
62
Epics of Sumerian Kings

“For you are the jewel on my chest!
“Praise to you, O Enmerkar, son of the Sun!”
II. THE CONTEST
C.
ENMERKAR’S FIRST CHALLENGE
The lord gave heed to the word of Inana;
He chose [among the troops] a messenger, clever of speech and hardy;
[Enmerkar spoke] to his messenger [...]:
“Where and to whom shall you carry the grave word of word-wise Inana?
“You shall carry it up into the Zubi range;
“You shall carry it down from the Zubi range.
“SSusin and the land of Anssan
“Will salute her humbly, like small mice.
“In the great mountain ranges the teeming multitudes
“Will grovel in the dust before her.
“Messenger, speak to the lord of Aratta, and say to him:
“Beware lest I make (the people of Aratta) flee from their city like a
dove from its tree,
“Lest I make them fly away like a bird from its permanent nest,
“Lest I put a price on them as on mere merchandise,
“Lest I make Aratta gather dust as does a devastated city,
“Lest, like as when Enki has cursed a settlement
“And utterly destroyed it, I too destroy Aratta,
“Lest like the sweeping devastation, in whose wake Inana rose
“Shrieking and yelling aloud,
“I too make a sweeping devastation there!
“Therefore,18 Aratta, having packed gold nuggets in leather sacks,
“And packed them tight with gold dust,
“And wrapped the precious metals in bales,
“And loaded mountain asses with the crates,
“Must build for me, the young Enlil of Sumer,
“Chosen by Nudimmud in his sacred heart,
“A mountain of lustrous powers!
“Let them make it sumptuous with boxwood!
“Let them make its horns shine like the Sun coming forth from its
chamber!
“Let them make its doorposts sparkle brightly!’
“In its (Aratta’s) chambers you must also chant to him this holy
song, this spell:
Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
63
105
106a
110
115
120
125
130

135
nam-ssub dnu-dim2-mud-da-kam e-ne-ra dug4-mu-na-ab
ud-ba muss nu-gsal2-am3 gsiri2 nu-gsal2-am3
kir4 nu-gsal2-am3 ur-mah nu-gsal2-am3
ur-gir15 ur-bar-ra nu-gsal2-am3
ni2 tegs3-gsa2 su zi-zi-i nu-gsal2-am3
140
lu2-ulu3lu gaba ssu gsar nu-tuku
ud-ba kur ssuburki ha-ma-ziki
eme ha-mun ki-en-gi kur gal me nam-nun-na-ka
ki-uri kur me-te gsal2-la 
kur mar-tu u2-sal-la nu2-a
145
an-ki nigsin2-na un sags sig10-ga
den-lil2-ra eme 1-am3 he2-en-na-da-ab-dug4
ud-ba a-da en a-da nun a-da lugal-la
den-ki a-da en a-da nun a-da lugal-la
a-da en-e a-da nun-e a-da lugal-la
150
den-ki en he2-gsal2-la en dug4-ga zid-da
en gsestug2-ga igi gsal2 kalam-ma-ke4
mas-su digsir-re-e-ne-ke4
gsestug2-ge pad3-da en eridugki-ga-ke4
ka-ba eme i3-kur2 en-na mi-ni-in-gsar-ra
155
eme nam-lu2-ulu3 1 i3-me-[am2]
D.
FIRST VOYAGE: UNUG TO ARATTA
2-kam-ma-sse3 en-e kigs2-gi4-a kur-se3 du-ur2
arattaki-ass inim mu-na-ab-tah-e
kigs2-gi4-a gi6-u3-na-ka im 1-gin7 sseg3-gsa2
an-bar7-gan2-ka im-du8-gin7 zig3-ga
160
kigs2-gi4-a inim lugal-la-na-ke4 sags-KESS2 ba-ssi-in-ak
gi6-u3-na-ka mul-am3 im-gsin
an-bar7-gan2-ka dutu an-na-ta mu-un-de3-gsin
inim gal dinana gi zu2-lum-ma DU me-a mu-na-ab-tumu3
hur-sags zubi-sse3 bi2-in-ed3-de3
165
hur-sags zubi-ta im-ma-da-ra-ab-ed3-de3
ssusinki-e kur an-ssa4-anki-a-sse3
pess2 tur-[gin7] kiri3 ssu mu-na-ab-gsal2
hur-sags gal-gal ni2-ba lu-a
sahar-ra mu-na-da-gur4-gur4
170
hur-sags 5 hur-sags 6 hur-sags 7-e im-me-re-bal-bal
64
Epics of Sumerian Kings

“It is the spell of Nudimmud!19
“One day there will be no snake, no scorpion,
“There will be no hyena, nor lion,
“There will be neither (wild) dog nor wolf,
“And thus there will be neither fear nor trembling,
“For man will then have no enemy.
“On that day the lands of SSubur and Hamazi,
“As well as twin-tongued Sumer—great mound of the power of lord-
ship—
“Together with Akkad—the mound that has all that is befitting—
“And even the land Martu, resting in green pastures,
“Yea, the whole world of well-ruled people,20
“Will be able to speak to Enlil in one language!
“For on that day, for the debates21 between lords and princes and
kings
“Shall Enki, for the debates between lords and princes and kings,
“For the debates between lords and princes and kings,
“Shall Enki, Lord of abundance, Lord of steadfast decisions,
“Lord of wisdom and knowledge in the Land,
“Expert of the gods,
“Chosen for wisdom, Lord of Eridug,
“Change the tongues in their mouth, as many as he once placed there,
“And the speech of mankind shall be truly one!’”
D.
FIRST VOYAGE: UNUG TO ARATTA
Furthermore, the lord gave these instructions to the messenger
Who was to go to the highlands, to Aratta:
“Messenger, at night, run swiftly as the south wind;
“At daybreak, rise like the dew!”
The messenger heeded the words of his king.
At night he journeyed by starlight;
By day he traveled with the sun in the sky.
Whither and to whom should he carry the grave word of word-wise
Inana?
He carried it up into the Zubi range;
He carried it down from the Zubi range.
SSusin and the land of Anssan
Saluted her humbly, like small mice.
In the great mountain ranges the teeming multitudes
Groveled in the dust before her.
Five, six, seven mountain ranges he crossed,22
Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
65
135
140
145
150
155
160
165
170

[igi mu-un]- [il2] arattaki-ass ba-tegs3
[kisal] [aratta]ki-ka gsiri3 hul2-la mi-ni-in-gub
nam-nir-gsal2 lugal-a-na mu-un-zu
bur2-ra-bi inim ssag4-ga-na bi2-ib2-be2
E.
DELIVERING THE FIRST CHALLENGE
175
kigs2-gi4-a en arattaki-ra mu-na-ab-bal-e
a-a-zu lugal-mu mu-e-ssi-in-gi4-in-nam
en unugki-ga en kul-ab4ki-a-ke4 mu-e-ssi-in-gi4-nam
Lord of Aratta
lugal-za dug4-ga-ni nam-mu tah-a-ni nam-mu
Messenger
lugal-mu a-na bi2-in-dug4 a-na bi2-in-tah-am3
180
lugal-mu u3-tud-da-ni-ta nam-en-na tum2-ma
en unugki-ga muss sags-kal ki-en-gi-ra til3-la kur zid2-gin7 ma5-ma5
tarah-mass kur bad3-da a2 nun gsal2
ssilam-za mass nagsa kug-ga umbin sud2-sud2-e
ab2 zid-da kur ssag4-ga tud-da
185
en-me-er-kar2 dumu dutu-ke4 mu-e-ssi-in-gi4-nam
lugal-mu na-ab-be2-a
iri-ni ir7-sagsmussen-gin7 gsiss-bi-ta na-na?-[ra-ab]-dag-e
mussen-gin7 gud3 us2-sa-bi-a nam-bi2-ib2-hu-luh-e
ganba gsal2-la-gin7 na-an-si-ge-en
190
iri gul-gul-la-gin7 sahar na-an-bi2-[ib-ha-za]-en
arattaki a2-dam den-ki-ke4 nam ba-an-kud
ki bi2-in-gul-la-gin7 ki nam-ga-bi2-ib-gul-en
egsir-bi dinana ba-ssi-in-zig3
gu3 im-mi-in-ra sseg11 im-mi-in-gi4
195
kuss7 bi2-in-su-a-gin7 kuss7 na-an-ga-bi2-ib-su-su-un
kug-sig17 u3-tud-da-ba kussLU.UB+LU.UB2-sir a-ba-ni-in-ak
kug me-a sahar-ba zag u3-ba-ni-in- us2
kug sags-PA-sse3 u3-mu-un-dim2-dim2
ansse kur-kur-ra-ke4 barag um-mi-in-la2-la2
200
gsa2-e-sse3-am3 den-lil2 ban3-da ki-en-gi-ra-ke4
en dnu-dim2-mud-e ssag4 kug-ge pad3-da
kur me sikil-la-ke4 ha-ma-du3-e
gsistaskarin-gin7 hi-li ha-ma-ab-ak
dutu e2-nun-ta ed2-a-gin7 si-muss2 ha-ma-ab-gun3-gun3
66
Epics of Sumerian Kings

And when he lifted his eyes, he had arrived in Aratta.
Overjoyed he stepped into the courtyard of Aratta
And proclaimed the glory of his king.
Openly he spoke the words (that he had remembered) in his heart.23
E.
DELIVERING THE FIRST CHALLENGE
The messenger spoke thus to the lord of Aratta:
“Your father, my king, has sent me to you;
“The lord of Unug and Kulab has sent me to you!”
Lord of Aratta
“What is it to me what your king spoke, what he said?”
Messenger
“This is what my king spoke, what he said:
“My king was destined for overlordship since his birth;
“He is lord of Unug, the sagkal -snake living in Sumer yet grinding
the highland to flour;
“He is the stag of the highlands, with great antlers;
“He is the buffalo, the deer trampling with its hooves the holy soapwort;
“He is the one the true cow bore in the heart of the highlands.
“He is Enmerkar, son of the Sun, and has sent me to you.
“This is what my king has spoken:
“‘Beware lest I make (the people/Aratta) flee from their city like
a dove from its tree,
“‘Lest I make them fly away like a bird from its permanent nest,
“‘Lest I put a price on them as on mere merchandise,
“‘Lest I make Aratta gather dust as does a devastated city,
“‘Lest, like when Enki has cursed a settlement
“‘And utterly destroyed it, I too destroy Aratta,
“‘Lest like the sweeping devastation, in whose wake Inana rose
“‘Shrieking and yelling aloud,
“‘I too make a sweeping devastation there!
“‘Therefore, Aratta, having packed gold nuggets in leather sacks,
“‘And packed them tight with gold dust,
“‘And wrapped the precious metals in bales,
“‘And loaded mountain asses with the crates,
“‘Must build for me, the young Enlil of Sumer,
“‘Chosen by Nudimmud in his sacred heart,
“‘A mountain of lustrous powers!
“‘Let them make it sumptuous with boxwood!
“‘Let them make its horns shine like the Sun coming forth from its
chamber!
Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
67
175
180
185
190
195
200

205
zag-du8-zag-du8-ba uri3 ha-ma-mul-e
e2-nun-e2-nun-ba ssir3 kug nam-ssub tuku-a-ba
[nam-ssub] dnu-dim2-mud-ke4 gsa2-ra dug4-[mu]-[na-ab]
a-na ma-ab-be2-en-na-bi u3-mu-[e-dug4]
a ru-a su6 na4za-gin3 [KESS2]-da-[ar]
210
ab2 kal-la-ga-ni kur me sikil-la-ka [tud-da-ar]
sahar arattaki-ka a2 ed2-[a-ar]
ubur ab2 zid-da ga gu7-[a-ar]
kul-ab4ki kur me gal-gal-la-ka nam-nun-na tum2-ma
en-me-er-kar2 dumu dutu-ra
215
inim-bi ess3 e2-an-na-ka inim dug3 ga-na-ab-dug4
gsi6-par4 gsismes gibil-gin7 gurun il2-la-na
lugal-mu en kul-ab4ki-ra ssu-a ga-mu-na-ab-gi4
F.
ARATTA’S REPLY; FIRST COUNTERCHALLENGE
ur5-gin7 hu-mu-na-ab-be2-a-ka
kigs2-gi4-a lugal-zu en kul-ab4ki-a-ra u3-na-dug4 u3-na-de3-tah
220
gsa2-e-me-en en ssu sikil-la tum2-ma
gsisrab mah an-na nin an-ki-ke4
in-nin9 me ssar2-ra kug dinana-ke4
arattaki kur me sikil-la-sse3 hu-mu-un-de6-en
kur-ra gsisig gal-gin7 igi-ba bi2-in-tab-en
225
arattaki unugki-se3 gu2 a-gin7 i3-gsa2-gsa2
arattaki unugki sse3 gu2 gsa2-gsa2 nu-gsal2 e-ne-ra dug4-mu-na-ab
ur5-gin7 hu-mu-na-ab-be2-a-ka
kigs2-gi4-a en arattaki-ra mu-na-ni-ib-gi4-gi4
nin gal an-na me huss-a u5-a
230
hur-sags kur suba-ka dur2 gsar-ra
barag kur ssuba-ka sse-er-ka-an dug4-ga
en lugal-mu ssubur-a-ni-im
digsir nin e2-an-na-ka mu-un-di-ni-ib-kur9-re-ess
en arattaki gu2 ki-sse3 ba-ni-in-gsal2
235
sig4 kul-ab4ki-a-ka ur5-gin7 hu-mu-na-ab-be2
ud-bi-a en-e ssag4 mu-un-sig3 zi mu-un-ir-ir
gaba-ri nu-mu-da-gsal2 gaba-ri i3-kin-kin
gsiri3 ni2-te-a-na-ka igi lib-ba bi2-in-du8-ru gaba-ri i3-pad3-de3
gaba-ri in-pad3 gu3 im-ta-an-ed2
240
kigs2-gi4-a inim-ma gaba-ri-bi
68
Epics of Sumerian Kings

“‘Let them make its doorposts sparkle brightly!’
“‘In its chambers, the holy song, the spell,
“‘Chant to him for me the spell of Nudimmud!’24
“Now, when you will have replied to me whatever you want,
“To the scion of the one with the gleaming beard,
“To him whom his mighty cow bore on the hill of the lustrous power,
“To him who grew up on the soil of Aratta,25
“To him who was suckled by the teat of the true cow,
“To him, suited for office in Kulab, mountain of the great powers,
“To Enmerkar, son of the Sun,
“I will speak that word as glad tidings in the shrine Eana.
“In his Gipar, bearing fruit like a young MES -tree,
“I shall repeat it to my king, the lord of Kulab.”
F.
ARATTA’S REPLY; FIRST COUNTERCHALLENGE
When he had spoken in this vein <the lord of Aratta replied:>
“Messenger, address your king, the lord of Kulab, and say to him:
“‘It is I, being the lord proper for the lustrations,
“‘I, whom the great neck-stock of heaven, the Queen of Heaven and
Earth,
“‘The goddess of the myriad powers, Holy Inana
“‘Brought to Aratta, the mountain of the inviolate powers;
“‘I whom she made block the entrance to the highlands as a great door!
“‘Why then should Aratta submit to Unug?
“‘There can be no submission of Aratta to Unug! Tell him that!’”26
When he had spoken in this vein
The messenger replied to the lord of Aratta:
“This great Queen of Heaven who drives the fearsome powers,
“Who dwells on the peaks of the bright mountains,
“Who thus embellishes the bright mountain dais27—
“It was my lord and king, her servant,
“Who had her installed as the divine Queen of the Eana!
“‘O lord, Aratta shall bow in deep submission!’
“This she has promised in brick-built Kulab!”
Thereupon the lord’s mood became dark and troubled.
He had no rejoinder; he kept searching for a rejoinder,
Staring at his feet with sad eyes, seeking a rejoinder.
Finally he found a rejoinder and cried out.
The rejoinder to the message
Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
69
205
210
215
220
225
230
235
240

gud-gin7 gu3-nun mu-un-di-ni-ib-be2
kigs2-[gi4-a] lugal-zu en kul-ab4ki-a-ra u3-na-dug4 u3-na-de3-tah
hur-sags gal gsismes an-da mu2-a
ur2-bi-sse3 sa-par4-am3 pa-bi gsiss-bur2-am3
245
buru5 umbin-bi anzudmussen hu-ri2-inmussen-na
KESS2-da [d]inana-[ka] ssar2 dug4-ge gilim-ma
umbin hu-ri2-inmussen-bi u3-mun kur2-ra kur ssuba-da ed3-da
arattaki er2 [se8-se8 ...]
a bal-bal-am3 zid2 dub-dub-ba-am3
250
kur-ra siskur a-ra-zu-a kiri3 ssu gsal2-la-am3
lu2 5 nu-me-a lu2 10 nu-me-a
unugki zig3-ga hur-sags zubi-sse3 sags a-gin7 i3-gsa2-gsa2
lugal-zu gsistukul-gsa2 sags ha-ba-an-ssum2
gsa2-e a-da-min3-na sags [ga-ba]-an-ssum2
255
a-da-min3 nu-um-zu tess2 [nu]-[um]-gu7
gud-de3 [gud] a2!-gsal2-bi [nu-um]-zu
[a-da]-[min3] um-zu tess2 um-[gu7]
[gud]-[de3] gud a2!-gsal2-bi um-[zu]
[e]-[ne] a-da-min3 mi-ni-in-tak4-tak4-an
260
[...]-[gin7] nigs2 lu2 nu-sig10-ge
[e]-ne in-ga-mu-ni-in-tak4-tak4-an
[2-kam]-ma-sse3 kigs2-gi4-a inim mu-ra-be2-en
[...] de2-a ssa-ra-ab-galam-e-en DU-a he2-mu-e-ssi-dib
[e2]-an-na pirigs ssu-ba nu2-a
265
ssag4-bi-ta gud gu3 nun di-dam
gsi6-par4 gsismes gibil-gin7 gurun il2-la-na
lugal-zu en kul-ab4ki-a-ra ssu-a gi4-mu-na-ab
hur-sags ur-sags sukud si-ga-am3
an-usan-na dutu e2-bi-sse3 du-gin7
270
igi-bi-ta uss2 la2-la2-e-gin7
dnanna si-un3-na mah-a-gin7
sags-ki-bi me-lam2 gsal2-la-gin7
gsis-gin7 kur-kur-ra gilim-ba-gin7
sags muss3 arattaki-ke4
275
dlama sag9-ga kur me sikil-la-sse3
ud-da arattaki aga kug an-na-gin7 si mu-na-an-sa2
gsa2-e ud-ba nam-mah-mu ga-an-zu
sse barag-ga nam-mu-un-si-si-ig-ge mar-e nam-me-e
sse-bi kur-kur-ra nam-il2-e
280
erin2-na mu-un-kud nam-mu-un-gsa2-gsa2
sse sa-al-kad5-e u3-mu-ni-in-si-si
ansse barag la2-e um-mi-in-la2
70
Epics of Sumerian Kings

He bellowed it loudly like a bull to the messenger:
“Messenger, to your king, lord of Kulab, speak and say:
“This great mountain range is a MES -tree grown high into the skies;
“Its roots are a net, its branches a snare;
“It is a bird whose talons are like those of the Anzud-eagle!
“This barrier of Inana is perfectly impenetrable;
“Its eagle talons make the bright mountains run with enemy blood.
“In Aratta there may be weeping [and hunger ...],
“But water is being poured, flour is being sprinkled;28
“In the highlands sacrifices and prayers are reverently offered.
“With only five or ten men,29
“How could the levy of Unug march against the Zubi mountain?
“Your king may be eager to confront me with arms,
“But I am eager for another kind of contest.
“He who does not understand this contest shall not prevail,30
“Just like a bull that does not know the strength of the other bull;
“But he who understands this contest shall prevail,
“Just like a bull that perceives the strength of the other bull.
“Dare he refuse this contest
“Like [...], something no one can match?
“Dare he refuse this contest?’
“Another thing I will tell you, O messenger;
“[I will] spell it out in careful terms ... so that you can grasp it.31
“In the Eana, to the lion crouching there on its paws,
“To the bull bellowing there,
“In his Gipar, bearing fruit like a young MES -tree,
“To your king, the lord of Kulab, repeat this:
“‘This mountain range is a warrior, tall and fierce:
“‘Like Utu wending his way home in the evening,
“‘It is as if blood is dripping from his face.
“‘Like Nanna, majestic in the high heaven,
“‘It is as if his brow carries a terrible sheen!32
“‘It is like an impenetrable wood in the mountains.
“‘Since she of the crown of Aratta,33
“‘The benevolent guardian of the mountain of the inviolate powers,
“‘Will warrant Aratta the holy crown of heaven,
“‘I shall surely proclaim my preeminence!
“‘Now, he may not pour grain into bags, nor into carts;
“‘He may not have that grain portaged over the mountains;
“‘He may not have it collected by work parties.34
“‘If he were able to pour grain into nets
“‘And load these nets on pack-asses
Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
71
245
250
255
260
265
270
275
280

ansse bala-e da-bi-a a-ba-an-sig10
tukum-bi kisal arattaki-ka gur7-se3 mu-dub-be2
285
i3-ge-en am3-dub-be2 gur7-a hi-li-bi
kur-kur-ra izi gsar-ra-bi a2-dam me-te-bi
bad3 7-e sse-er-ka-an dug4-ga
nin ur-sags me3-a tum2-ma
dinana ur-sags me3 sahar-ra-ke4 sags esemen dinana di-dam
290
i3-ge-en arattaki ur adda sar-gin7 ssu-ta im-ta-ri
gsa2-e ud-ba ssa-ba-na-gam-e-de3-en
e-ne nam-mah-a-ni ssi-im-ma-an-zu-zu-un
iri-gin7 nam-tur-gsa2 gu2 ssi-im-ma-gsa2-gsa2-an e-ne-ra dug4-mu-na-ab
G.
SECOND VOYAGE: ARATTA TO UNUG
ur5-gin7 hu-mu-na-ab-be2-a-ka
295
kigs2-gi4-a en arattaki-ke4
ka-ni-gin7 inim ka-na ba-an-sig10
sun2-gin7 hass2-a-na mu-un-gur
nim sahar-ra-gin7 tir ud zal-le-na mu-un-gsin
H.
SOLUTION AND SECOND CHALLENGE
sig4 kul-ab4ki-a-ka gsiri3 hul2-la mu-ni-in-gub
300
kisal mah-e kisal gu2-en-na-ka kigs2-gi4-a i-ib2-bur2
lugal-a-ni-ir en kul-aba4[ki]-[ra]
ka-ni-gin7 ssu mu-na-an-gi4
gud-gin7 gu3 mu-na-an-sig10
gud ri-ri-gin7 gsestug2 mu-na-an-[gsa2-gsa2]
305
lugal-e zag zid-da-ni NE im-mi-in-[tuss]
zag gub3-bu-ni im-ma-ni-in-gi4
i3-ge-en arattaki gsalga ssum2-ma im-ma-zu im-me
ud im-zal dutu im-ta-ed2-a-ra
dutu kalam-ma-ka sags bi2-ib-il2
310
lugal-e id2idigna id2buranun-bi-da im-ma-da-an-tab
id2buranun-na id2idigna-da im-ma-da-an-tab
bur gal-gal an-ne2 ba-su8-su8-ug
bur tur-tur sila4 u2-sim dur2-gin7 zag-bi-a im-ma-an-us2
72
Epics of Sumerian Kings

“‘With remounts at their side,
“‘And if he were able to pile it up in the courtyard of Aratta—
“‘Truly, if he were able to pile it up in this manner, then the joy of
the grain-pile,
“‘The torch of the mountains, the emblem of the settlements,
“‘The ornament of the seven walls,
“‘The heroic mistress fit for battle,
“‘Inana, the heroine of the battleground who makes the troop dance
her dance,35
“‘Will then truly have cast out Aratta as a carrion-eating dog!
“‘Only then shall I kneel before him,
“‘Since only then will he have proven his preeminence,
“‘And, like the city, only then shall I concede my inferiority!’ Tell him
that!”
G.
SECOND VOYAGE: ARATTA TO UNUG
When he had spoken to him in this vein,
The lord of Aratta made the messenger
Repeat the message as he himself had spoken it.36
The messenger turned, as the wild cow does on its haunches;
Like the sandfly he sped forward in the cool of the morning.
H.
SOLUTION AND SECOND CHALLENGE
Joyfully he stepped into Kulab, the Brickwork.
The messenger sped to the great courtyard, the courtyard of the
throne-room.
To his king, the lord of Kulab,
He repeated (the message) word for word.
He bellowed like a bull,
And Enmerkar listened to him like the ox-driver.
The king bade him sit at his right side ...
And turned his left side to him.
“Does Aratta truly understand this proposal it made?” he said.
When day broke, to the rising Sun,
The Sun of the Land37 raised his head.
The king joined Tigris with Euphrates
And Euphrates with Tigris.38
Large jars were put out in the open,
And small vases were placed against their sides, like lambs lying in
the grass;
Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
73
285
290
295
300
305
310

bur i-gi8 an-na da-bi-a ba-su8-ug
315
lugal-e ess-da kug-sig17-ga-ke4
en-me-er-kar2 dumu dutu-ke4 dug3 mu-un-ba9-ba9-re7
ud-bi-a dub i-gi8 IM me-a gi-gag unkin-na
alan kug-sig17-ga ud dug3-ga tud-da
dnanibgal sig7-ga KAxLI sikil mu2?-da
320
dnisaba nin gsesstug2 dagsal-la-ke4
e2 GSESSTUG2.dNISABA kug-ga-ni gsal2 mu-na-an-tak4
e2-gal an-na-ka kur9-ra-ni gsestug2 mu-un-gsa2-gsa2
en-e e2-nun mah-a-ni gsal2 ba-an-tak4
gsisli2-id-ga mah-a-ni ki [ba]-[an]-us2
325
lugal-e sse-ta sse libir-ra-ni ssu ba-ra-an-[bal]
munu4 ki-ssar2-ra a ba-ni-in-[si]
nundum-bi u2hirinhu-ri2-in AN [X]-su3-ge
sa-al-kad5-e igi im-mi-in-tur-tur
sse gur7 ka i-ni-in-si zu2 buru5mussen-e bi2-in-tah
330
ansse barag la2-e um-mi-in-la2
ansse bala-e da-bi-a ba-an-sig10
lugal en gsesstug2 dagsal-la-ke4
en unugki-ga en kul-ab4ki-ke4
har-ra-an arattaki-ke4 si bi2-in-sa2
335
nam-lu2-ulu3 kissi6 ki-in-dar-ra-gin7
arattaki-ass ni2-ba mu-un-sub2-be2-ess
en-e kigs2-gi4-a kur-se3 du-ur2
arattaki-ass inim mu-na-ab-tah-e
kigs2-gi4-a en arattaki-ra u3-na-dug4 u3-na-de3-tah
340
gsidru-gsa2 ur2-bi me nam-nun-na-ka
pa-bi kul-ab4ki-a an-dul3-ess i3-ak
pa mul-mul-la-bi ess3 e2-an-na-ke4
kug dinana-ke4 ni2 im-ssi-ib-te-en-te
gsidru um-ta-an-kid7 hu-mu-un-da-gsal2
345
na4gug gsis dili na4za-gin3 gsiss dili-gin7 ssu-ni-a hu-mu-un-gsal2
en arattaki-ke4 igi-mu-sse3 hu-mu-un-tum2 e-ne-ra dug4-mu-na-ab
I.
THIRD VOYAGE: UNUG TO ARATTA
ur5-gin7 hu-mu-na-ab-be2-a-ka
kigs2-gi4-a arattaki-ass du-ni
sahar kaskal-la gsiri3-ni mu-un-si
74
Epics of Sumerian Kings

Shining jars were stood in the open next to them.
The king himself placed the golden e ss da -vessels;
Enmerkar himself, the son of the Sun, placed them wide apart.
Thereupon the shining tablet of clay, the sharpened reed of the
assembly,39
The golden statue fashioned on a blissful day,
Fair Nanibgal, grown up to lustrous luxuriance,
Nisaba, the Lady of broad understanding,40
Opened for him her holy house of wisdom.
Entering the heavenly palace, he paid attention;
The lord opened up his lofty storehouse
And fixed his lidga-measure in the earth.
The king separated the old grain from the (other) grain;
Greenmalt he soaked all through;
Its sprouts ... grew long like the hirin -plant,
And so he reduced the meshes of the nets.
He filled the nets with grain for the piles, and added some for the
locust’s tooth;
He loaded it on pack-asses,
And placed remounts at their side.
The king, the lord of broad understanding,
The lord of Unug, the lord of Kulab,
Set them on the road to Aratta.
The people, (numerous) like ants from their crevices,
He made go to Aratta by themselves.
To the messenger who was to go to the highlands,
To Aratta, the lord added these instructions:
“Messenger, speak to the lord of Aratta and say:
“My scepter’s base is the power of overlordship;
“Its crown provides a protective shadow for Kulab;
“Under its starlike branches in the shrine Eana
“Holy Inana finds her cool refreshment.
“If he can cut a scepter from it, let him hold it in his hand;41
“Let him hold it in his hand like a string of carnelian and lapis lazuli
beads;
“Let the lord of Aratta bring that to me! Tell him that!”
I.
THIRD VOYAGE: UNUG TO ARATTA
After Enmerkar had spoken to him in this vein,
The messenger, on his way to Aratta,
Plunged his feet in the dust of the road.
Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
75
315
320
325
330
335
340
345

350
na4 tur-tur hur-sags-gsa2-ke4 suh3-sah4 mu-un-da-ab-za
usumgal edin-na-ba kigs2-gsa2-gin7 gaba-ri nu-mu-ni-in-tuku
J.
DELIVERING THE SECOND CHALLENGE
kigs2-gi4-a arattaki-ass um-ma-tegs3-a-ra
nam-lu2-ulu3 arattaki-ke4
ansse barag la2-e u6 di-de3 im-ma-su8-su8-ge-ess
355
kigs2-gi4-a kisal arattaki-ka
sse gur7 ka bi2-in-si zu2 buru5mussen-e bi2-in-tah
ssegx (IM.A) an-na ud gsal2-la-gin7
arattaki he2-gsal2-la i3-du3
digsir dur2-bi-a ba-da-ab-gi4-a-[gin7]
360
arattaki ssa3-gsar-ra-ni am3-la2-[la2]
nam-lu2-ulu3 arattaki-[ke4]
munu4 a si-ga-na a-ssag4 mu-ni-[ib-X]
[egsir ]-ba ra2-gaba ssa3-tam [...]
[X] ki a tak4-ba [...]
365
X [X] X [...]
dumu-[dumu] arattaki [gsestug2] [...]
arattaki-ass inim mu-un-bur2
ur5-da arattaki-a ssu-[ta] [...]
370
en unugki-ga-ra ssu-ni i-im-[...]
Citizens of Aratta?
me-en-de3 su3-ga lul-la-[bi]-[sse3]
en kul-ab4ki-a-ra na4gug [lul]-[la-me-a] ga-mu-na-dur2-ru-ne-en-de3-en
ab-ba-ab-ba inim zu-ne
ssu tess2-a bi2-ib-ri-[ess] zag e2-gar8-e bi2-ib-us2[-ess]
375
en-ra e2-sikil-bi hu-mu-un-gsa2-gsa2-[e-ne]
[(X) X] [kin] gsidru -ni DU.DU ssag4 e2-[gal]-[la ...]
[bur2-ra-bi inim ssag4-ga]-na bi2-[ib-be2]
[a-a-zu lugal- mu] mu-e-ssi-[in]-[gi4-in-nam]
[en-me-er]-[kar2] dumu dutu-[ke4] mu-e-ssi-in-gi4-in-nam
Lord of Aratta
380
lugal-zu dug4-ga-ni nam-mu tah-[a]-ni [nam]-mu
Messenger
lugal- mu a-na [bi2-in]-dug4 a-na [bi2-in-tah]-[am3]
gsidru-gsa2 ur2-bi me [nam]-nun-[na-ka]
pa-bi kul-ab4ki-a [an-dul3]-ess i3-ak
pa mul-mul-[la-bi] ess3 e2-an-na-[ke4]
385
kug dinana-ke4 ni2 im-ssi-ib-te-en-te
76
Epics of Sumerian Kings

He made the pebbles rattle down the hills;
As if he were a dragon prowling the desert, there was no stopping him.
J.
DELIVERING THE SECOND CHALLENGE
When the messenger had reached Aratta,
The people of Aratta
Came running to wonder at the pack-asses.
In the courtyard of Aratta
The messenger piled up the heaps of wheat, adding some for the
tooth of the locust.
As if caused by rain and sun from heaven,42
Aratta was now full of wealth.
As gods returning to their dwellings43
Aratta’s hunger was stilled.
The people of Aratta
[Covered ] the fields with his water-soaked greenmalt.
After that, couriers and merchants [...]
[...] ... [...]
... [...]
The citizens of Aratta paid attention [...]
He revealed the matter to Aratta.
Thus, in Aratta, from his hand [...]
To the lord of Unug44 he [...] his hand.
Citizens of Aratta?
“As for us, in our sharpest hunger,
In our dire famine, let us prostrate ourselves to the lord of Kulab!”
The word-wise elders
Were wringing their hands, leaning against the wall.
To the lord they proferred their treasure chests.45
[...] ... his scepter ... in the midst of the palace [...]
[Openly] he spoke [the words he had learnt by heart]:
“[Your father, my king], sent me to you;
“Enmerkar, son of the Sun, sent me to you!”
Lord of Aratta
“What is it to me what your king spoke, what he said?”
Messenger
“This is what my king spoke, what he said:
“‘My scepter’s base is the power of overlordship;
“‘Its crown provides a protective shadow for Kulab;
“‘Under its starlike branches in the shrine Eana
“‘Holy Inana finds her cool refreshment.
Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
77
350
355
360
365
370
375
380
385

gsidru um-ta-an-kid7 hu-mu-[un-da]-gsal2
na4gug gsis dili na4za-gin3 gsiss dili-gin7 ssu-ni-a hu-mu-un-gsal2
en arattaki-ke4 igi-mu-sse3 hu-mu-un-tum2 gsa2-a-ra ha-ma-an- dug4
K.
ARATTA’S REPLY: SECOND COUNTERCHALLENGE
ur5-gin7 hu-mu-na-ab-be2-a-ka
390
nam-bi-sse3 itima!-a KA ba-an-kur9 ssag4 ka-tab-ba ba-an-nu2
ud im-zal inim im-ssar2-sar2
inim ka-sse3 nu-gsar-ra im-me
inim-ma sse ansse gu7-a-gin7 gsir3 mi-ni-ib-nigsin-e
i3-ne-sse3 lu2 lu2-u3-ra a-na na-an-dug4
395
lu2 lu2-ra ASS a-na na-an-tah
lu2 lu2-ra in-na-ab-be2-a ur5 he2-en-na-nam-ma-am3
kigs2-gi4-a lugal-zu en kul-ab4ki-ra [u3]-na-a-dug4 u3-na-de3-tah
gsidru gsis nam-me mu gsiss na-an-sse21-se21
X [X] ssu -na um-ma-ni-in-gsar igi um-ssi-bar-bar
400
gsisildag2 nam-me gsisssim-gig nam-me
gsiserin nam-me gsisssu-ur2-me nam-me
gsisha-ssu-ur2 [nam-me gsissnimbar] [nam]-me
gsisesi nam-me [gsisza-ba-lum nam-me]
gsisasal-lam gsisgigir-ra nam-me
405
gsiskid-da gsiskuss-usan3-na nam-me
kug-sig17 nam-me urud nam-me
kug me-a zid kug-babbar nam-me
na4gug nam-me na4za-gin3 nam-me
gsidru um-ta-an-kid7 hu-mu-un-da-gsal2
410
na4gug gsis dili na4za-gin3 gsiss dili-gin7 ssu-ni-a hu-mu-un-gsal2
en kul-ab4ki-a-ke4 igi-mu sse3 hu-mu-un-tum2 e-ne-ra dug4-mu-na-ab
L.
FOURTH VOYAGE: ARATTA TO UNUG
ur5-gin7 hu-mu-na-ab-be2-a-ka
kigs2-gi4-a dur2ur3 si gigir ku5-ra2-gin7 ka si-il-la mu-un-gsin
ansse edin-na par2-rim4-ma kass4 di-gin7 kussu i3-tag-tag-ge
415
ka-ni im-a bi2-ib-zi-zi-zi
udu suluhu udu [ssur2]-ba du7-du7-gin7 dug3 us2 1 mu-un-dab5
78
Epics of Sumerian Kings

“‘If he can cut a scepter from it, let him hold it in his hand;46
“‘Let him hold it in his hand like a string of carnelian and lapis lazuli
beads;
“‘Let the lord of Aratta bring that to me!’ Tell him that!”
K.
ARATTA’S REPLY: SECOND COUNTERCHALLENGE
This having been said,
(The lord of Aratta), because of this, entered his cella and lay there
fasting.
When day broke he was raving;
He spoke gibberish;
He was stumbling around in words like a feeding donkey in wheat.47
Now, what could the one say to the other?
What could the one say in addition to the other?
What the one said to the other, it was thus:
“Messenger, speak to your king and tell him:
“A scepter, not of wood, nor with the name of wood48
“When ... it is taken in hand and inspected,
“Not ildag-wood, nor ss imgig -wood,
“Nor cedar, nor cypress,
“Nor ha ss ur, nor palm,
“Nor hardwood, nor zabalum ,
“Nor poplar as in a chariot,
“Nor worked reed as in whip handles,
“Nor gold, nor copper,
“Nor genuine refined silver, nor silver,
“Nor carnelian, nor lapis lazuli—
“If he can cut a scepter from such a substance, let him show it;
“Let him hold it in his hand like a string of carnelian and lapis lazuli
beads;
“Let the lord of Kulab bring that to me! Tell him that!”
L.
FOURTH VOYAGE: ARATTA TO UNUG
When he had spoken in this vein
The messenger rushed off braying like a colt cut loose from the chariot’s
harness;
He raced like an onager running on dried-out soil,
Filling his mouth with wind;
He made a straight track, like the long-tufted sheep furiously butting
(other) sheep.
Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
79
390
395
400
405
410
415

M.
ENMERKAR’S SOLUTION: A MANMADE SUBSTANCE
sig4 kul-ab4ki-a-ka gsir3 hul2 mi-ni-in-gub
lugal-a-ni en kul-ab4ki-a-ra
inim-inim-ma mu-na-ra-si-si
420
en-me-er-kar2-ra den-ki-ke4 gsestug2 mu-na-[an]-sum2
en-e agrig mah-a-[ni] a2 ba-da-[an]-ags2
e2-ni? [...]
lugal-e [munsub ] [...]ssu ba-ra-an-ti
mu-un-dul-gin7 [ssu ] bi2-[in-gur-gur] igi bi2-[in]-gsa2!-gsa2!
425
na4na KA.KA ssim-gin7 [zu2] [ba-ni]-[in]-ra
gi su-lim-ma-ka i3-gin7 mu-ni-in-de2
ud-ta gsissu-sse3 am3-ed2-e
gsissu-ta ud-sse3 am3-ed2-e
mu 5-am3 mu 10-am3 ba-zal-[la]-ri
430
gi su-lim-ma gigs4-gin7 bi2-in-gaz
en-e igi hul2-la im-ssi-in-bar
i3-li i3-li kur ssuba-a-ka sig3-ga i-ni-in-de2
en-e kigs2-gi4-a kur-se3 du-ur2
gsidru ssu-na mu-un-na-gsa2-gsa2
N.
FIFTH VOYAGE: UNUG TO ARATTA
435
kigs2-gi4-a arattaki-ass du-a-ni
u5mussen-gin7 hur-sags-gsa2 nim-gin7 sahar [nigsin]-a
HI.SUHURku6-gin7 kur ur3-ur3-ru-[da]-ni arattaki-ass [ba]-tegs3
O.
THIRD COUNTERCHALLENGE
kisal arattaki-ka gsiri3 hul2-la mi-ni-in-gub
gsidru TE SI NA mu-un-gub
440
ssu kigs2 si bi2-in-sa2 a kigs2 [bi2-ib]-ak-e
en arattaki-ke4 gsidru-ta igi tab-ba
itima-ka ki-tuss kug-ga-ni-a ni2 im-kar2-kar2-ka
en-e ssa3-tam-a-ni-ir gu3 mu-na-de2-e
arattaki u8 [sag2]-[gin7] he2-em kaskal-bi [kur] [ki]-bal he2-em
445
mah arattaki kug dinana-ke4
en kul-ab4ki-ra mu-na-an-ssum2-ma-ta
lu2 kigs2-gi4-a mu-un-gi4-a-ni
dutu ed2-de3 inim dugud pa ed2-de3
a-da-al kug dinana-ke4 igi me-ssi-kar2-kar2
80
Epics of Sumerian Kings

M.
ENMERKAR’S SOLUTION: A MANMADE SUBSTANCE
Joyfully he stepped into Kulab, the Brickwork.
To his king, the lord of Kulab,
He repeated the message word for word.
Enki now granted insight to Enmerkar.49
The lord gave orders to his chief steward.
[In] his house [...]
The king took a hairy hide [...]
As if wrapping (something in it), he rolled it up and looked at it.
With a pestle he pounded it like a herb
And poured (the mass) into a gleaming reed.
From the sunlight he brought it into the shadow,
And from the shadow he brought it into the sunlight.
Five, maybe ten years50 passed,
And then he split the gleaming reed with an axe.
The lord looked at it with pleasure
And poured on its mass fine oil, oil from the bright mountains.
In the hands of the messenger who was to travel to the mountains
The lord then placed the scepter.
N.
FIFTH VOYAGE: UNUG TO ARATTA
The messenger’s race to Aratta
Was like the U-bird(’s flight) over the hills, like a fly(’s dashing) over
the dust.
He darted over the highland like a swimming carp and reached Aratta.
O.
THIRD COUNTERCHALLENGE
Joyfully he stepped into the courtyard of Aratta
And put the scepter in his ...
He polished the scepter and washed it.
The lord of Aratta was blinded by the scepter;
In his cella, his sacred room, undone by fear
The lord cried out to his ss atam-official:
“Verily, Aratta is like scattered ewes: its road is now that of the rebel
lands!51
“Holy Inana now has given over
“Mighty Aratta to the lord of Kulab,
“Since upon this man, who sent his messenger
“To make the grave message as clear as sunlight,
“Holy Inana now seems to be looking with favor!
Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
81
420
425
430
435
440
445

450
arattaki-a lul-e me-a he2-en-de3-dib-e
al me-da-ass ssu al-zil2-zil2-i-a
me-en-de3 su3-ga lul-la-bi-sse3
en kul-ab4ki-ra na4gug lul-la-me-a mu-na-dur2-ru-ne-en-de3-en
en arattaki-ke4 kigs2-gi4-a-ar
455
inim-ma dub mah-gin7 ssu mu-na-an-sig10
kigs2-gi4-a lugal-zu en kul-ab4ki-a-ra u3-na-dug4 u3-na-de3-tah
ur na-an-gig2-ge ur na-an-babbar-re
ur na-an-si4-e ur na-an-dara4-e
ur na-an-sig7-sig7-ge ur na-an-gun3-gun3gu2 ur hu-mu-ra-ab-ssum2-mu
460
ur-mu ur-ra-ni a-da-min3 he2-em-da-e
a2-gsal2 he2-zu e-ne-ra dug4-mu-na-ab
P.
SIXTH VOYAGE: ARATTA TO UNUG
ur5-gin7 hu-mu-na-ab-be2-a-ka
kigs2-gi4-a u2-lum-a-lam mu-un-gsin
sig4 kul-ab4ki-ke4 egsir sig10-ga-gin7 inim [mu]-un-gi4
465
ud5!-gin7 ka gaba kur-ra-ka igi mi-ni-ib-il2-il2-i
mir! mah ul4-ul4-ta zig3-ga-gin7 e2 me MIN3 mu-un-ta-la2-la2
[X X X X]-ka sags mi-ni-in-il2
Q.
FINAL CHALLENGE
[...]arattaki -a-ke4 [...]
ki-tuss-a-ni-ta a mah [ed2-a-gin7 mu-un-na-ab]-be2
470
kigs2-gi4-a en [aratta]ki-ra u3-na-dug4 u3-na-de3-tah
tug2 na-an-gig2-ge tug2 na-an-babbar-re
tug2 na-an-si4-e tug2 na-an-dara4-e
tug2 na-an-sig7-sig7-ge tug2 na-an-gun3-gun3gu2 tug2 ga-mu-na-ab-
ssum2-<<mu>>
ur-mu gu2-da gsal2 den-lil2- la2 ur su ga-mu-na-tak4
475
ur-mu ur-ra-ni a-da-min3 he2-em-di-e
a2-gsal2 he2-zu-zu e-ne-ra dug4-mu-na-ab
2-kam-ma-sse3 u3-na-dug4 u3-na-de3-tah
en3-tukum-se3 lul-da LI-a he2-ni-ib-dib-e
iri-na udu-gin7 igi-ni hu-mu-un-su8-ub
480
e-ne sipad-bi-gin7 egsir-bi he2-em-us2-e
du-a-ni kur kug na4za-gin3-na
gi nigs2-dub-ba-gin7 gu2 hu-mu-na-ab-gsar
kug-sig17 kug-babbar sud-ra2-ags2-bi
82
Epics of Sumerian Kings

“This misery of Aratta, where shall it lead us?
“For how long shall the yoke-rope have to be our lot?
“Must we, because of this dire famine,
“crawl before the lord of Kulab in our stark hunger?”
The lord of Aratta then entrusted to the messenger
A message, important like a tablet.52
“Messenger, speak to your king, lord of Kulab, and say:
“A dog that is not black, a dog that is not white,
“A dog that is not brown, a dog that is not red,
“A dog that is not yellow, a dog that is not pied—such a dog he must
give you!
“My dog will wrangle with his dog,
“So that the stronger one be known! Tell him that!”53
P.
SIXTH VOYAGE: ARATTA TO UNUG
(The lord) having spoken to him in this vein,
The messenger set off in all haste.
Brickwork Kulab answered like a ....
Like a goat on the mountain slopes he lifted his eyes;
like a huge MIR snake coming out of the fields he...;
In ... he lifted his head.
Q.
FINAL CHALLENGE
[The lord of ] of Aratta54...;
From his throne he spoke to him [like a raging torrent:]
“Messenger, when you speak to the lord of Aratta, say this:
“A cloth that is not black, a cloth that is not white,
“A cloth that is not brown, a cloth that is not red,
“A cloth that is not yellow, a cloth that is not pied—such a cloth I will
give him!
“My dog is embraced by Enlil; this dog I will send to him.
“My dog will wrangle with his dog
“So that the stronger one be known. Tell him that!
“Second, when you speak to him, say also this:
“He must now stop prevaricating55 and come to a decision.
“Those of his city shall walk before him like sheep,
“And he, like a shepherd, shall follow them.
“At his coming, the holy mound of lapis lazuli
“Shall humble itself before him like a crushed reed.
“They shall amass shining gold and silver
Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
83
450
455
460
465
470
475
480

dinana nin e2-an-na-ra
485
kisal aratta[ki]- [ka] gur7-se3 hu-mu-un-dub-dub-bu
3-kam-ma-[sse3] u3-na-dug4 u3-na-de3-tah
iri-ni ir7-sagsmussen-gin7 gsiss-bi-ta na-an-tar-ta-ta-an
[...]-[gin7] na-an-dub2-be2-en
[ganba gsal2-la]-[gin7] na-an-si-ig-en
490
[...] lil2-e nam-mi-ni-in-dib-be2-en
du-a-ni na4 hur-sags-gsa2 ssu u3-mu-ni-in-ti
es3 gal eridugki abzu e2-nun ha-ma-du3-e
a-sal-bar-bi im-ssu2-ra-ke4 ssu [ha]-[ma-ni]-ib-tag-ge
gsissu-bi kalam-[ma ha-ma]-ni-ib-la2-la2-e
495
inim dug4-ga-ni [...]-ssar2?-a-ka
gsiskim-a-ni [e-ne-ra] dug4-mu-na-ab
ud-ba en? [...]-[ka]-am3
[...] barag-ga dur2 gsar-ra numun nun-na-ke4-ne
[X X] diss-a mu2-a
500
dug4-ga-ni [mah]-am3 ssag4-bi su-su-a-am3
kigs2-gi4-a ka-ni dugud ssu nu-mu-un-da-an-gi4-gi4
bar kigs2-gi4-a ka-ni dugud ssu nu-mu-un-da-an-gi4-gi4-da-ka
en kul-ab4ki-a-ke4 im-e ssu bi2-in-ra inim dub-gin7 [bi2-in]-gub
ud-bi-ta inim im-ma gub-bu nu-ub-ta-gsal2-la
505
i3-ne-sse3 dutu ud ne-a ur5 he2-en-na-nam-ma-am3
en kul-ab4ki-a-ke4 [inim] [dub-gin7] [bi2]-in-gub ur5 [he2]-[en-na]-nam-ma
R.
SEVENTH VOYAGE: UNUG TO ARATTA
kigs2-gi4-a mussen-gin7 a2 dub2 i3-ak-e
ur-bar-ra mass2-e us2-sa-gin7 guru5-uss i3-bur2-bur2-re
hur-sags 5 hur-sags 6 hur-sags 7-e im-me-re-bal-bal
510
igi mu-un-il2 arattaki-ass ba-tegs3
S.
ARATTA’S REACTION
kisal arattaki-ka gsiri3 hul2-la mi-ni-in-gub
nam-nir-gsal2 lugal-a-na mu-un-zu
bur2-ra-bi inim ssag4-ga-na bi2-ib2-be2
kigs2-gi4-a en arattaki-ra mu-na-ab-bal-e
515
a-a-zu lugal-[mu] mu-e-ssi-in-gi4-in-nam
en unugki-[ga en] kul-ab4ki-a-ke4 mu-[e-ssi]-in-gi4-in-nam
84
Epics of Sumerian Kings

“For Inana of the Eana
“In the courtyard of Aratta in great piles.
“Third, when you speak to him, say also this:
“Beware lest I make (the people/Aratta) flee from their city like a
dove from its tree,
“Lest I make them fly away like [a bird from its permanent nest],
“Lest I put a price on them [as on mere merchandise],
“[Lest I make] the wind carry them away!
“At his coming, when he holds the precious stones of the hills,
“He must build for me the shrines of Eridug, Abzu, and Enun;
“He must adorn for me its architrave with a slip of clay;
“He must make it spread its shadow over the Land for me!
“When he speaks ...
“Tell him this as a sign for him!”
Thereupon the lord ...
... on the throne dais, on the throne, the noble seed of princes,
... grown all alone.
His speech was very grand, its meaning very deep;
The messenger’s mouth was too heavy; he could not repeat it. 
Because the messenger’s mouth was too heavy, and he could not
repeat it,
The lord of Kulab patted some clay and put the words on it as on a
tablet.
Before that day, there had been no putting words on clay;
But now, when the sun rose on that day—so it was:
The lord of Kulab had put words as on a tablet—so it was!
R.
SEVENTH VOYAGE: UNUG TO ARATTA
The messenger was like a bird flapping its wings.
Raging like a wolf chasing a kid
He crossed five, six, seven mountain ranges.
Lifting his head, he had reached Aratta.
S.
ARATTA’S REACTION
Joyfully he stepped into the courtyard of Aratta
And proclaimed the preeminence of his king.
He spoke out what was in his heart
And transmitted it to the lord of Aratta:
“Your father, my king, has sent me;
“The lord of Unug and Kulab has sent me.”
Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
85
485
490
495
500
505
510
515

Lord of Aratta
lugal-zu [dug4]-[ga-ni] nam-mu tah-a-ni nam-mu
Messenger
lugal-mu [a-na bi2]-[in]-dug4 a-na bi2-in-tah-am3
lugal-mu [gsismes] gal dumu den-lil2-la2-ke4
520
gsis-bi [an-ki]-da mu2-a
[pa]-[bi an]-ne2 us2-sa-am3
[ur2-bi ki-a] gub-ba-bi
nam-en nam-lugal-la pa ed2 ak-a
en-me-er-kar2 dumu dutu-ke4 im ma-an-ssum2
525
en arattaki ke4 im igi u3-ni-bar ssag4 inim-ma u3-bi2-zu
a-na ma-ab-be2-en-na-bi u3-mu-e-dug4
a ru-a su6 na4za-gin3 KESS2-da-ar
ab2 kal-la-ga-ni kur me sikil-la-ka tud-da-ar
sahar unugki-ka[sic]56 a2 ed2-a-ar
530
ubur ab2 zid-da-ka ga gu7-a-ar
kul-ab4ki kur me gal-gal-la-ka nam-en-na tum2-ma-ar
en-me-er-kar2 dumu dutu-ra
inim-bi ess3 e2-an-na-ka inim dug3 ga-mu-na-ab-dug4
gsi6-par4 gsismes gibil-gin7-gin7 gurun il2-la-na
535
lugal-mu en kul-ab4ki-ra ssu-a ga-mu-na-ab-gi4
ur5-gin7 hu-mu-na-ab-be2-a-ka
en arattaki-ke4 kigs2-gi4-a-ar
imSU.RIN.NA-ni ssu ba-ssi-in-ti
en arattaki-ke4 im-ma igi i-ni-in-bar
540
inim dug4-ga gag-am3 sags-ki mi-re2-da-am3
en arattaki-ke4 imSSU.RIN.NA-ni igi im-bar-bar-re
III. THE RESOLUTION
T.
THE FINAL CONFRONTATION
ud-ba en men nam-en-na tum2-ma dumu den-lil2-la2-ke4
diskur an-ki-a gu3 nun-bi di-dam
ud du7-du7 ug gal-la ki-[X X]-ka nam-mi-ni-in-gub
545
kur-kur [...][mu-un]-tuk4-tuk4-e
hur-sags [... mu]- [un]-da-pess11-pess11-e
ni2 [me]-lam2? [X X] gaba-na gsal2-la-bi
hur-sags giri17-zal-la gu3 mi-ni-in-il2
arattaki bar ud-bi ssag4 hur-sags-gsa2-ka
550
gig ni2-bi mu2-a gu2 ni2-bi an-ga-mu2-a
86
Epics of Sumerian Kings

Lord of Aratta
“What is it to me what your king spoke, what he said?”
Messenger
“This is what my king spoke, what he said:
“My King is a tall MES -tree, the son of Enlil.
“This tree has grown so tall that it links heaven and earth;
“Its crown reaches heaven;
“Its roots are set fast in the earth.
“He who has manifested lordship and kingship,
“Enmerkar, son of the Sun, gave me this tablet.
“O lord of Aratta, when you have read this tablet, learned the gist of
the message,
“When you will have replied to me whatever you want,
“To the scion of the one with the gleaming beard,
“To him whom the mighty cow bore on the hill of the lustrous power,
“To him who grew up on the soil of Aratta,
“To him who was suckled by the teat of the true cow,
“To him, suited for office in Kulab, mountain of the great powers,
“To Enmerkar, son of the Sun,
“I will speak that word as glad tidings in the shrine Eana.
“In his Gipar, bearing fruit like a young MES -tree,
“I shall repeat it to my king, the lord of Kulab.”
This having been said,
The lord of Arratta took from the messenger
The tablet (and held it) next to a brazier.
The lord of Aratta inspected the tablet.
The spoken words were mere wedges57—his brow darkened.
The lord of Aratta kept looking at the tablet (in the light of) the brazier.
III. THE RESOLUTION
T.
THE FINAL CONFRONTATION
At that moment the lord worthy of the holy crown, the son of Enlil
Iskur thundered in heaven and on earth.
A storm he caused, raging like a great lion.
He made the highlands quake,
He shook the hillsides.
The awesome radiance ... of his breast ...
He made the highland,
Aratta’s parched flank in the midst of the mountains, raise its voice in joy.
Wheat began growing of its own accord, and so did chickpeas;
Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
87
520
525
530
535
540
545
550

gig ni2-bi mu2-a gur7 [X (X)]-ka
en arattaki-ra mu-na-ni-in-[ku4]-[ku4]
kisal arattaki-a-ka igi-ni-sse3 i-im-dub?
en arattaki-ke4 gig-e igi bi2-in-du8
555
kigs2-gi4-a igi sig3-sig3-a-ni mu-un-ssi-ib-UR2xTAK4.UR2xTAK4-e
en arattaki-ke4 kigs2-gi4-a-ar gu3 mu-un-na-de2-e
mah-bi dinana nin kur-kur-ra-ke4
iri-ni arattaki ssu li-bi2-in-dag unugki-e la-ba-an-KA
e2-za-gin3-na-ka-ni ssu li-bi2-in-dag ess3 e2-an-na-ka la-ba-an-dug4
560
kur me sikil-la-ka ssu li-bi2-in-dag sig4 kul-ab4ki-a-ke4 la-ba-an-dug4
gsisnu2 sse-er-kan2 dug4 ssu li-bi2-in-dag gsissnu2 gi-rin-na la-ba-an-dug4
en-ra ssu sikil-la-ka-ni ssu li-bi2-in-dag en unugki-ga en kul-ab4ki-a-ra 
la-ba-an-dug4
arattaki zid-da gub3-bu-ba
dinana nin kur-kur-ra-ke4
565
a mah ed2-a-gin7 mu-un-na-nigsin
lu2-bi-ne lu2 lu2-ta dar-a
lu2 ddumu-zid-de3 lu2-ta ed2-a-me-ess
inim kug dinana ki-bi-sse3 gsar-gsar-me-ess
ur igi-gsal2-la [DA].A.SAR ddumu-zid-da he2-si-im-nigsin
570
[ul4 gsa2-nam-ma] dumu ur4-[...]
[igi] a-ma-ru-ka gub-ba-me-ess
egsir a-ma-ru ba-ur3-ra-ta
dinana nin kur-kur-ra-ke4
nam-gal ki-ags2 ddumu-zid-da-ke4
575
a nam-til3-la-ka mu-un-ne-sud-sud
gu2 kalam-ma-ka gsis mu-un-ne-en-gsal2
ur igi-gsal2-la du-a-ni
tug2sagsssu gun3-a ugu-na i-im-ssu2
tug2 pirigs-pirigs-[ga2] zag mu-ni-in-KESS2
580
[X] il2-[la] X su? mi-ni-in-du8-[X]- [am3]
[...]-te-na mi-ni-in-dug4
[...] nin [...][ba]-an-PAdi
[...]-a-ni
U.
THE ARGUMENT RESOLVED
[...] dinana
585
en3-du-ni dama-ussumgal-an-na nitalam-a-na ba-dug3
ud-bi-ta gsestug2 kug [gsestug2] [kug] ddumu-zid-da-ke4
88
Epics of Sumerian Kings

The wheat grown of its own accord, into the granary of ...
They brought for the lord of Aratta,
And before him they heaped it up in the courtyard of Aratta.
The lord of Aratta looked at the wheat;
The messenger looked amazed, he  ...
The lord of Aratta cried to the messenger:
“In her majesty has Inana, Lady of all the countries,
“Not yet abandoned Aratta to surrender it to Unug!
“Nor did she abandon her Ezagina to surrender it to the Eana;
“Nor did she abandon the mountain of the shining powers to surren-
der it to Kulab, the Brickwork;
“Nor did she abandon her sweet bed to surrender it to the flowery bed;58
“Nor did she abandon the purity of her lord to surrender it to the lord
of Unug and Kulab!
“(On the contrary), the right and left flanks of Aratta—
“Inana, Lady of all the countries,
“Protects them when the mighty flood is rising!
“Its people are distinct from other people;
“They are a nation Dumuzid selected among the other nations,
“One that firmly establishes the holy word of Inana!
“So let now the Wise Dog and the ... of Dumuzid lock on to each other.
“Quick, come, [my] young ...!”
“They were steadfast before the flood.
“After the flood had swept over,
“Inana, Lady of all the countries,
“Out of her great love for Dumuzid,
“Sprinkled the water of life over them,
“And subjected the Land to them!”59
The Wise Dog, when he came,
Had covered his head with a pied head cloth
And wrapped his body in a lion skin
...
...
...
...
U.
THE ARGUMENT RESOLVED
Inana ...
Her song pleased Ama-ussumgalana, her husband,
And since that day, for the holy ear, the ear of Dumuzid,
Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
89
555
560
565
570
575
580
585

ssu mu-ni-in-du7 ssir3 mu-[ni]-[in]-dug4 inim mu-ni-in-zu
um-ma kur me sikil-sse3 du-a-ni
ki-sikil ud-da-na til-la-gin7 im-ma-na-ta-ed2
590
ssim-zid-da igi-na mu-un-gun3
[tug2] babbar-ra zag mu-ni-in-KESS2
[aga] zid-da iti6-gin7 mu-un-ed2
[X] X X sags si ba-ni-in-sa2
[nitalam]-a-ni en-me-er-kar2 barag-ge4 mu-un-da-ab-si
595
[...] um-mi-in-zi-zi
[ga-nam] im-da-lu-lu arattaki-ass u8-da sila4-bi
[ga-nam im]-da-lu-lu arattaki-ass ud5-da mass2-bi
[ga-nam im]-da-lu-lu arattaki-ass ab2-da amar-bi
[ga-nam] [im]-da-lu-lu arattaki-ass eme5 dur3ur2 im2 gig2-ga-<bi>
600
arattaki-a na-an-da-be2-a
[gur7-se3] he2-em-dub-dub gu2 he2-em-gsar-gsar
[he2]-[gsal2] za-a he2-gsal2-zu
[...] en arattaki-ra u3-mu-ni-in-ak
[...]X X X-ra he2-en-[X (X)]
605
[...] mu-un-di-ni-ib-X-e
[...] mu-un-ta-ed2
[...] si mu-un-na-ab-sa2
Three lines missing.
[...] me-te-ass [...]-gsal2
[...]X SI i-lu ssag4-[ga ...] X
[...]-ni-a he2-gsal2-zu nagga [...]
[...]den-lil2-le sags-ess mu-ri-in-rig7 [X]-[la]-la-gsa2 he2-zu-zu
615
[...]kar2 a-a-ni nu-lam-lam a nu-un-de2
den-[lil2] [lugal] [kur]-kur-ra-ke4 hu-mu-un-kar2?-re ni2-ba
ess2-gar3 [im]-ma-an-du3-a-gin7
nam-lu2-u18-[lu] arattaki-a-ke4
kug-sig17 kug na4[za]-gin3 bala ak-de3 es2-gar3 X (X) X
620
lu2 gurun kug-sig17 gurun gsiss gub-bu-de3
gsipess3 gsesstin-ba nigs2-ta ub4-ba-gin7 gur7 gal-sse3 [u3]-mu-un-dub
na4za-gin3 duru5 ur2-ba mu-un-bur2-re-ne
giusub pa-ba mu-un-ta-bal-e-ne
dinana nin e2-an-na-ra
625
kisal e2-an-naki-ka gur7-se3 mu-un-dub-bu-ne
90
Epics of Sumerian Kings

Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
91
She perfects it, singing the song and teaching the words.60
The Wise Woman,61 when she came to the mountain of the shin-
ing Powers,
Went up to him like a maiden whose period is at an end;
She painted her eyes with kohl,
She donned a dazzling white robe,
She made the true crown sparkle like moonlight,
She arranged [her tresses ?] on her head;
She sat her [spouse] Enmerkar on the throne with her (and spoke):
“When you have raised ...
“[Verily,] for Aratta ewes and their lambs shall multiply;
“[Verily,] for Aratta goats and their kids shall multiply;
“[Verily, for Aratta ] cows and their calves shall multiply;
“[Verily, for Aratta] donkey mares and their swift foals shall multiply!
“Since in Aratta they will now agree,
“They will heap up ... in piles
“The abundance that is truly yours.
“When you have instituted [trade] with the lord of Aratta,
“He will [...]
“He did [...]
“He came forth [...]
“He set right [...]
“[...]
“[...]
“[...]
“[...] what is fitting [...]
“[...] the ilu -song of the heart [...]
“[...] your abundance in his [...] is tin [...]
“[...] Enlil has granted you; my [luxuriousness] be known!
“[...] his father was not fertile, produced no semen.62
“Enlil, King of all countries,
“Has now established this execution of the tasks:
“The people of Aratta
“Have as their task the trading of gold and lapis lazuli
“And the fashioning of golden fruits and fruity bushes
“Laden with figs and grapes...;
they shall heap up these fruits in
great piles;
“They shall dig out flawless lapis lazuli in lumps;
“They shall remove the crowns of the sweet reeds,
“And for Inana, Lady of the Eana,
“They shall heap them up in piles in the courtyard of the Eana.
590
595
600
605
610
615
620
625

lugal-mu gsa2-nu na ga-e-ri na-ri-mu he2-e-dab5
inim ga-ra-ab-dug4 gsizzal he2-e-ak
lu2 x [BI? e] kur-kur-ra un-e u3-[un]-pad3
[nam-lu2]-[ulu3] arattaki-[ke4]
630
[X]-me-sse3 i-im-da he2-em-me-ne
gsa2-e gu2-e-ta du-a-mu-ne
[nam-lugal]-mu nin mul-mul-e ma-an-ssum2
dgsestin-an-na [...]
iri-ba lil2 [...]
635
ezen nu-mu-[...]
ud-ssu2-uss nam-[...]
About six lines missing
92
Epics of Sumerian Kings

“Now, my king, I shall advise you: heed my counsel;
“I shall speak a word: listen!
“Having chosen a man from a foreign country,
“The people of Aratta
“Shall say: ‘[...]’
“When I go from here [to there ?],
“My kingship the starry Lady gave me,
“Gesstinana [...]”
In that city [...]
Festivals were not [...]
Daily [...]
About six lines missing
Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
93
630
635
Notes
1 There is a lacuna of about five lines at this point.
2 Five or six lines are missing.
3 See Vanstiphout 1992c.
4 See Vanstiphout 1994.
5 There is a Sumerian proverb that illustrates the prime importance of grain:
“Whosoever possesses gold, or silver, or cattle, or sheep / shall wait at the gate of
him who possesses grain.” This proverb is used as the argument for the conclusive
verdict—in favor of grain—at the end of the Disputation between Ewe and Grain
(Alster and Vanstiphout 1987: 30–31 and 39).
6 The text is not yet absolutely clear at this point.
7 For an indication of the sigla, provenance, and publication (if any) of the tablets,
see the Oxford web site: www-etcsl.orient.ox.ac.uk/section1/b1823.htm.
8 In all probability this fragment comes from Nippur.
9 Or perhaps better “against.”
10 An epithet for the great gods.
11 “Carp flood” is a traditional poetic term for agricultural abundance.
12 Dilmun, the present island Bahrain, is used here as a symbol for foreign trade,
the major topic of this poem.
13 The Gipar is to be taken as Inana’s private room, or bower, in the Eana.
14 “Power” translates the untranslatable Sumerian term ME, whose meaning is
somewhat akin to “quintessence.” In the present context, it seems to denote some-
thing like charisma or karma or baraka—an attribute reserved for gods and kings.
15 Highly uncertain. The Sumerian term is PA.A, and PA can be read as gsidru
“staff, scepter.” From the context, a meaning like palanquin seems also possible.
16 Another name for Inana’s spouse Dumuzid.
17 Inana, whose word the messenger is carrying.
18 I.e., “to avoid this, this is what Aratta must do.”
19 The interpretation of the Spell of Nudimmud is still in dispute. An alternative
reading, which puts it in the past, not in the (immediate) future, is not impossible.

Grammar and philology could bear such a reading. Yet the style of the episode and
certainly its meaning and function in the story argue strongly for my interpretation.
Putting it in the past cannot be of any use in the development of the narrative.
Reference to the future—as one expects from a spell—can and does, since it makes
a very neat and sophisticated pendant to Enmerkar’s invention of cuneiform, which
accompanies the last challenge.
20 “The whole world of well-ruled people” refers to the imagined or ideological
state of Ur III Sumer, described in its different provinces, to wit SSubur and Hamazi
(north and east), Sumer and Akkad (center), and Martu (west).
21 The Sumerian word for debate, adaman duga, is also the term for formal
school disputations. It also occurs as a qualification in the last lines of Enmerkar
and Ensuhgirana. This has led some scholars to classify both that poem and
Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta as disputations. I do not think that there are suf-
ficient grounds for this.
22 The threefold series of challenges and replies going to and fro between Unug
and Aratta works out naturally at a total of seven journeys, since the series starts at
Unug but ends in Aratta and is not merely a sequence of challenge-and-response:
the responses carry their own challenges. The messenger also has to travel over
seven mountain ranges. This is a fine instance of the very sophisticated interpreta-
tion or reuse of a common folktale technique.
23 The messenger has had to learn the message by heart. At the occasion of the
ultimate message from Enmerkar this will cause a problem. Enmerkar will find a
highly appropriate solution.
24 Presumably the messenger now recites the spell of Nudimmud, but somewhat
unexpectedly the spell itself is not repeated.
25 Unclear. Why should Enmerkar have been born on the soil of Aratta?
26 Note that the lord of Aratta’s answer does not reply to the challenge as such,
nor does the spell of Nudimmud seem to have had any effect.
27 The mountains are here represented as a throne, which is “embellished” by
Inana when she sits on it.
28 Traditional “sacrifices” accompanying an entreaty or appeal to the gods.
29 This traditional way of expressing a small number or a short time always puts
the smaller number before the larger one, somewhat against our expectation.
30 That is, the lord of Aratta is willing to join battle only in a new kind of con-
test: a contest of cleverness. In doing so, he is laying down the rules (the negative
conditions in lines 279–280). If his antagonist is unable to fulfill these conditions—
“or cannot fathom the meaning of the contest”—he will lose, just like a fighting bull
that does not reckon with the strength of its opponent.
31 The second time the oral means of communication is highlighted.
32 Both similes are about the aspect of the mountains’ bare flanks reflecting the
blood-red light of the westering sun and the pale sheen of the moon.
33 I.e., Inana.
34 I.e., he may not collect the wheat en route from Unug to Aratta.
35 Battle is called “the dance of Inana.”
36 Here and in line 302 we find again an insistence on the spoken word as the
only means of communication.
37 Enmerkar, who elsewhere is called “son of the Sun.”
94
Epics of Sumerian Kings

38 This is, of course, a stupendous operation. Is Enmerkar collecting a vast
amount of water? If so, to what purpose? The passage remains unclear and physi-
cally impossible: it is very hard to connect the Euphrates to the Tigris when based
in Uruk.
39 For the first time the notion of a tablet is introduced. This will finally lead up
to the solution of the communication problem much later on. Here the tablet only
figures as a rather involved epithet of Nisaba, goddess of both wheat and writing.
The reader is warned.
40 Nisaba is identical to Nanibgal.
41 The meaning is not altogether clear. Does it mean: “if he can make a scepter
like this”? The broader meaning, however, is clear: if the Lord of Aratta should sur-
render his scepter—however he came by it—to Enmerkar, he would thereby accept
Enmerkar’s superiority! It is quite possible that Enmerkar’s “scepter” is in fact the
holy MES -tree of Unug. Enmerkar then seems to offer a small piece of the tree to
the lord of Aratta so that he may share in its authority under the superior rule of
Unug. The lord of Aratta counters this by agreeing to accepts Unug’s overlordship
only if an impossible scepter is given to him.
42 I.e., by the normal succession of the seasons, implying sowing and reaping.
43 After having been feasted?
44 Thus the text. A mistake for Aratta? Owing to the state of preservation (bro-
ken passage; only one manuscript), the matter cannot as yet be decided.
45 Perhaps an indication of the outcome of the whole story, which is the institu-
tion of trade. Do the elders offer their treasure hoards in return for Enmerkar’s
unexpected supply of wheat?
46 See above, note 39.
47 A fine simile, making clever use of the fact that grain has just arrived in Aratta.
48 The section GS IS (wood) of the great lexical list ur 5-ra hubullu contains a
number of entries beginning with the GS ISS sign but that designate objects that are
strictly speaking not made out of wood. It is probable that the meaning here is that
a clever use of the lexical lists as a solution to the riddle is not allowed.
49 Enki appears here in his customary role as the helper of heroes—and in this
case as the god of technique as well as understanding.
50 It is uncertain but not impossible that a period of ten years is really intended.
The Sumerian word mu can also mean “time(s).” The process apparently involves
braying and macerating hides and pouring the bone-glue into a hollow reed to let
it set and harden. This may have taken considerable time, but ten years seems
excessive. Still, this is undoubtedly the first instance of a manmade substance in
human history.
51 The image is that of a city vanquished and destroyed by barbarians. Its pop-
ulace is then taken away to the foreign countries.
52 As the text unfolds, the references to Enmerkar’s great invention become
clearer and clearer.
53 There is much literature about these lines but little doubt that ur here does
indeed mean “dog.” An almost identical passage occurs in the animal section of the
lexical list ur 5-ra hubullu.
54 This is certainly a mistake for Unug.
55 The text has a term that implies subterfuge.
Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta
95

56 Scribal mistake. Must be aratta ki-ka.
57 This reading has been challenged on the grounds that Sumerian gag “nail,
wedge” is not the technical term for cuneiform signs or their elements. But that is
just the point. How is the lord of Aratta supposed to have known this?
58 An allusion to the opening challenge of the poem Enmerkar and Ensuhgirana.
59 The “them” is very ambiguous, as is much of this passage.
60 Could this be a reference to the poem itself? The colophon is missing, so we
do not know to which divine patron it was dedicated.
61 Although the term used here (um-ma) means “mother” or “old woman,” the
reference is in all probability to Inana herself. The function of a mother/old woman
as a wise woman is well nigh universal.
62 The passage remains frustratingly unclear. Does line 615 refer to the lord of
Aratta (being, of course, the father in question)? In that case, is then the “man from
a foreign country” Enmerkar, who is now elected by the people of Aratta as their
own “man” (“the man from X” can mean “the king of X”)?
96
Epics of Sumerian Kings

The Lugalbanda Poems
Introduction
There can be but little doubt that the two poems that have Lugalbanda
as their hero belong together. Neither of them is a complete story without
the other. In the broadest outline the complete story runs somewhat like this.
I. Lugalbanda in the Wilderness
Enmerkar of Unug wants to conquer Aratta. During the march,
Lugalbanda (his son?1) falls mortally ill and is abandoned in a cave in the
mountains. He prays to the great luminaries, who save his life. Being all
alone, he reinvents fire, cooking, and baking. He captures a wild bull and
a wild goat. Acting on a portentous dream, he sacrifices these animals to
the great fods. A band of spirits2 arrives. The hero masters them with the
help of Utu. There seems to follow a battle between the forces of light and
the forces of darkness. The former seem to win this battle.
II. The Return of Lugalbanda
Lugalbanda is now stranded in the highlands. He decides to go and
look for the Anzud bird, who rules over that region. He feasts Anzud’s
chick so well that it is stuffed with food and probably asleep when its par-
ents return from foraging; therefore, it does not answer their call. The
frightened parents are very happy when Lugalbanda appears and tells
them what has happened. Anzud rewards him with the gift of superhuman
speed. He returns to his companions, who are laying siege to Aratta. To
force a decision, Enmerkar sends Lugalbanda back to Unug in order to ask
for Inana’s advice. In a single day Lugalbanda reaches Unug, and Inana
gives her advice. Aratta seemingly submits peacefully.
III
97

The main arguments—or evidence—for regarding these two poems as
a single story may be summarized as follows.3
First, there is the general framework. The campaign that Enmerkar
undertakes against Aratta stops being the main story line at about line 132
of the first part (Lugalbanda in the Wilderness), when Lugalbanda’s broth-
ers abandon him in the mountains, and only resurfaces seamlessly, and as
miraculously as Lugalbanda himself, at line 220 of the second part (The
Return of Lugalbanda). In addition, it is made clear that campaign would
have remained inconclusive at best but for the reappearance of
Lugalbanda. On another level one may also point to the fact that Enmerkar
seems to be the main hero at the outset of the first part but that he plays
a role again only after Lugalbanda has come back and that from that point
onward Enmerkar and Lugalbanda share the position of protagonist. It is
important to note that indeed Lugalbanda will enforce Unug’s victory—but
that he does so in the service of Enmerkar. His major contribution consists
in being an incredibly effective messenger, but the message he is to carry
is Enmerkar’s. Thus it is easily seen that the larger part of Lugalbanda’s
adventures or, perhaps better, tribulations in the two poems together form
the middle part of a larger single story, which begins with LB I line 1 and
only ends with LB II line 417.
There is also a consideration of formal matter. Lugalbanda in the
Wilderness starts with an introductory passage of almost twenty lines tak-
ing us back to the days long past, when Unug was ruled by the glorious
King Enmerkar. The Return of Lugalbanda starts without any introduction,
simply stating that Lugalbanda is lost in the highlands. While it is regret-
table that we still lack the final verses of Lugalbanda in the Wilderness, the
text that we have—still poorly understood, alas—gives no indication that
we are drawing to a conclusive ending. In other words, the first part seems
to have no ending, and the second part has no beginning. While it is true
that there are some texts that start in medias res, they are very rare, and in
the whole of the epic corpus we know of only one example.4
Third, there is the matter of contents. As stated above, the final part of
Lugalbanda in the Wilderness is still poorly understood, but what goes on
between line 133 and certainly 394 describes not merely Lugalbanda’s sur-
vival; it describes also how he acquires the special protection of the gods
and therewith his special status, which may be compared to that of a sav-
ior saint.5 This sanctity in the sense of divine election and protection,
coupled with immunity to even supernatural dangers (the demonic forces
at the end of LB I; Anzud) straddles both parts and finally leads to the
acquisition of superhuman—but secret—powers. These in turn are neces-
sary for the unfolding of the plot and the resolution of the difficulties
Enmerkar—in the “outer plot”—is experiencing. In other words, everything
hangs together, but only if we see the poems as a narrative unit.
98
Epics of Sumerian Kings

In the fourth instance, it is striking that both poems make heavy use
of a specific stylistic device. There are four passages in part I6 that, signif-
icant as they may be, are mere descriptions interrupting the flow of
narration, and they occur at crucial points. The same device is found in
part II at least four times.7 There are also other major stylistic points that
indicate the unity of both parts.8 Furthermore, there are many other fea-
tures, substantial as well as structural and textual, that hold the two poems
together. This should be studied in detail, if only to understand the poems
better. Here we give only a few examples. First, the introduction to LB I
mentions the glorious days when Enmerkar ruled over Unug; the same
theme forms the introduction to Enmerkar’s message in LB II. Second, the
motif of the victuals (or the viaticum) left by the companions for the pre-
sumably dying Lugalbanda (LB I lines 85–115) is not only repeated, in a
way, by the feast the hero sets before the great gods (LB I lines 371–394),
but it is taken up again in LB II in the form of the way in which the hero
regales Anzud’s young (LB II lines 50–62). Third, the way in which
Lugalbanda is abandoned by his companions in LB I is mirrored by the
way in which the hero refuses any fellow-traveler on his second heroic
journey in LB II. Fourth, while the central part of the story—Lugalbanda
alone—is a movement from abandonment to reunion, the “outer frame” is
a movement from Unug to Aratta in LB I, and vice versa in LB II.9
Yet, be all that as it may, there remains the fact that the two parts are
consistently presented by the ancients themselves as two poems—but
always as a pair.10 Therefore, the situation seems to be this: the two parts
were regarded as two closely linked installments of one long story, ele-
gantly held together by an outer framework (the campaign against Aratta
and Enmerkar’s tribulations and ultimate deliverance by the help of the
savior saint Lugalbanda). The two parts are then more specifically about
Lugalbanda proper. In LB I we see his evolution from an abandoned weak-
ling to the savior of his people, in close alliance with the gods and the
powers of light against the powers of darkness. LB II describes the man-
ner in which he acquires the superhuman qualities with which he brings
the difficulties, and the full story, to a successful ending.
Lugalbanda in the Wilderness
Introduction
From the viewpoint of the unified outer framework, the first poem
contains two parts. The first part deals with Enmerkar’s campaign against
Aratta, which will be taken up again in The Return of Lugalbanda. The sec-
ond part, which starts at line 140, is exclusively about Lugalbanda.
Lugalbanda in the Wilderness
99

In detail we see Enmerkar calling up his troops for an unmotivated
campaign against Aratta and the start of this campaign. While the army is
marching on, Lugalbanda falls ill in a desolate spot in the mountains. His
companions leave him well-provisioned but uncertain of his chances of
survival. Lugalbanda’s further adventures are apparently presented as
three successive night-and-day periods. Lugalbanda prays to the great
luminaries (the setting sun, the evening star, the moon, and the rising
sun); they save his life. Being left all by himself he (re)invents fire-mak-
ing, cooking, and trapping; he captures a wild buffalo and some goats.
In an ominous dream he is told to sacrifice these animals—and foretold
of his special status. The next day he prepares a banquet for the great
gods. In the evening (?) there arrives a band of spirits of the night. This
poorly understood passage has been interpreted as a cosmic battle
between the forces of darkness and the forces of light. These spirits
(cosmic forces?) are presented as being both good and evil. A difficult
section (lines 422–441) probably describes the exaltation of Lugalbanda
as a “herald of heaven,” but some of these lines may refer to the sun god
himself and are as such subject to further study, as is the whole of the
text starting from line 395; however, since the close relationship between
the sun god and the heroic kings of Unug pervades the Aratta cycle as
well as the Gilgamesh cycle, and since the central part of the double
story consists of a graduated ascent to exaltation, culminating in
Lugalbanda’s manifestation as the holy savior of his people in the latter
half of LB II, the hesitations about Lugalbanda’s status may well be inten-
tional: at every step he becomes a bit more exalted—or Sun-like. A
multitude of stars, called the favorites of Inana, comes out, and it is pos-
sible that battle ensues. Then the sun rises. Possibly the battle ends with
“a clear sky and numerous stars.” The end is lost.
2. Arranged according to its discrete episodes, the story looks like this:
I.
The Campaign against Aratta
[A]
Introduction: in the good old days of Enmerkar...
1–19
[B]
Enmerkar calls up the army.
(1) Enmerkar’s decision
20–23
(2) The call-up
24–34
(3) Enmerkar at the head of the troops
35–41
[C]
The campaign
(1) The march
42–58
(2) The command
59–74
100
Epics of Sumerian Kings

II.
Lugalbanda’s Illness and Recovery
[D]
Illness
(1) Lugalbanda falls ill.
75–84
(2) The provisions left for him
85–115
(3) At the door of death
116–120
(4) The companions abandon him.
121–140
(5) He suffers.
141–147
[E]
Recovery (First night and day)
(1) Prayer to the setting sun
148–172
(2) Prayer to the evening star
173–200
(3) Prayer to the moon
201–227
(4) Prayer to the rising sun
228–263
(5) The water of life/fire/cooking
264–299
(6) Trapping
300–325
[F]
Dream and Banquet (Second night and day)
(1) Sleep and ominous dream
326–360
(2) Fulfillment of the dream
361–370
(3) Banquet for the gods
371–394
III.
Cosmic Battle (?)
[G]
The spirits arrive.
395–421
[H]
Lugalbanda’s exaltation
422–441
[I]
The battle?/Inana’s battle array?
442–483
[J]
The sun reappears
484–499
3. The text of this first part of the adventures of Lugalbanda falls naturally
into three parts. First, there is the outer framework, which has Enmerkar
as its protagonist. Then we have the well-articulated series of episodes in
which Lugalbanda falls ill, is saved from death by the gods, recovers and
reinvents the necessities of life, is elected for sainthood, and in gratitude
sets a banquet before the gods, who apparently accept him as being close
to them. Finally, he seems to have to endure a last ordeal during a nightly
battle between the spirits of darkness and the spirits of light. This part is
still poorly understood, but at the end the forces of light seem to triumph,
and the interpretation lies near that the hero is purified or sanctified even
further by this cosmic trial. The very end has still not been recovered. It is
striking that the whole episode seems to take three nights: the night of
Lugalbanda’s illness, the following night when he gets the dream11 that will
Lugalbanda in the Wilderness
101

change not only his life but also his very nature, and the last night wherein
the cosmic battle seems to be fought. Thus the hero is well and truly pre-
pared for his future role as savior by his complete resurrection on the third
day. Particularly the middle part (i.e., Lugalbanda’s illness, recovery, and
acculturation) is a fine piece of writing, replete with cultural pointers as
well as with subsurface reflections on the essence of culture versus nature
and the singular position of the hero as a middleman between those two.
It is ironic that Lugalbanda’s very existence, now and for all the future,
depends on his liminal position between two essences or two worlds. As
to style there are a number of marked departures from straight storytelling.
Most striking are, of course, the descriptive/explanatory passages about
sleep and dream (lines 326–360). In addition, the series of four prayers
(lines 148–263) is a piece of retardation with a decidedly rhythmical char-
acter. But the most conspicuous feature is that, apart from the first panel
of the outer framework (lines 1–74), the story is exclusively about
Lugalbanda. Enmerkar, the companions, Unug, or Aratta are not even men-
tioned from line 141 onward.
4. The story then tells us of the various stages of trial and purification,
which will lead to Lugalbanda’s sainthood and his role as a savior.12 First
there is his lowly status among his companions (line 71). Second, there
is his weakness, illness and deprivation (lines 75–84), which is allayed
somewhat by the provisions his companions leave for him. But these gifts
can be interpreted just as well as a viaticum, or a funeral meal. The motif
of the meal pervades the stories. There are these provisions, left by his
comrades; there is the meal he prepares for the gods; and there is the
feasting of the young of Anzud in the second part. In fact, in that second
part the poet saw fit to note expressly that on his miraculous journey
back to Unug the hero does not want to take any provisions with him.
Third, there is his piety, beautifully expressed in the series of prayers that
follow the journeys of the great luminaries across the skies. Fourth, there
is his renewed confidence in himself: he reinvents the basic necessities
for survival. Fifth, there is his calling to sainthood in the form of the
dream. Sixth, there is the feast he prepares for the gods,13 thus enhanc-
ing his association with them. Seventh and finally, there is his apparent
presence among the stars,14 where the battle is fought between light and
darkness. Thus the whole first part may be seen as one great rite de pas-
sage from a weakling to a saint. The second part will be devoted to his
acquiring the necessary special powers he needs for effectively saving his
people from ruin.
5. The material consists of sixty-four tablets of fragments.15 Joining reduces
this number to perhaps nine “big” editions and no less than forty-three
102
Epics of Sumerian Kings

single-column tablets (imgidas). At present it is unclear whether there
were one, two, or three complete editions on a single tablet. There are five
fragments of editions of the first half on three-column tablets; curiously, the
second half is lacking in this format. There is one piece of a two-column
tablet that apparently divided the text over three such tablets, which rep-
resents tablet I of such a series. There is no material for tablets II or III.
The imgidas are, as usual, uneven in length: they vary from twenty-five
to forty-five lines per face. The material is overwhelmingly from Nippur.
All the fragments of multicolumn tablets are Nippur. Among the imgidas
there is one piece from Ur and five whose provenance is unknown or in
doubt.
6. Parts of the text have been edited provisionally by Cohen (1973: intro-
duction), Wilcke (1969: introduction), and Hallo (1983: lines 256–376);
there is also a provisional translation in Vanstiphout (1998a: lines 114–129;
1998b: lines 322–365). There is no complete edition.
Lugalbanda in the Wilderness
103

Lugalbanda in the Wilderness
Composite Text
I. THE CAMPAIGN AGAINST ARATTA
A.
INTRODUCTION: IN THE GOOD OLD DAYS OF ENMERKAR...
1
[ud ul an ki-ta ba9-ra2-a-ba]
[...] [ul] -e muss3 [kess2]-da ...]
[...] [ul?] buru14 ul-e sse [KAxX]-[X]-a-ba
[... ...] [ba]-dub-ba ki ba-sur-ra-a-ba
5
[... ...] [ba]-ru2-a-ba mu ba-sar-ra-a-ba
[...] [eg2] pa5-re ssu-luh ak-a-ba
[...] [AD]-gin7 X pu2 si sa2-sa2-a-ba
[id2][buranun] id2 [he2]-gsal2-la unugki-ga-[ke4] [ki] [in]-dar-ra-a-ba
[... ...] NUN BI? TAB du3-a-ba
10
[... ...] [ha]-la UL TAB gsar-ra-ba
[... ...] an kug-ga-ke4 in-zi-zi-ra-a-ba
X [nam]-[en] nam-lugal-la-ke4 unugki-ga-ke4 [(X) pa]-ed2 bi2-in-ak
ssibir? [enkara?] kul-ab4ki-ke4 [me3] sags il2-la-ba
me3 essemen dinana-ke4
15
sags gig2 zi su3-ud-[ba] mi-ni-ib-dug3-ge-ess-ba
in-ti-in-ti-ba [zag-ess]-zag-ess-ba
mass2 kur-ra umbin kigs2-kigs2-ba
tarah kur-ra asskud sag9-sag9-ba
en-me-er-kar2 dumu du-tu-ra mu-na-ssum2-mu-uss-ba
B.
ENMERKAR CALLS UP THE ARMY
20
ud-ba lugal-e iriki-sse3 gsissmi-tum na-gsa2-gsa2
en-me-er-kar2 dumu dutu-ra
arattaki kur me sikil-la-sse3 har-ra-an zu na-an-gsa2-gsa2
ki-bal gul-gul-de3 na-an-gsin
en-[e iri]-a-ni zig3-ga14 ba-ni-gsar
25
nigsir kur-kur-ra si gu3 ba-ni-ra
unug[ki] zig3-ga lugal zu ba-ra-ed2-e
kul-ab4ki zig3-ga en-me-kar2-ra he2-us2-e
unugki zig3-ga-bi a-ma-<ru>-kam
kul-ab4ki zig3-ga-bi an dugsu gsar-ra
104
Epics of Sumerian Kings

Lugalbanda in the Wilderness
Translation
I. THE CAMPAIGN AGAINST ARATTA
A.
INTRODUCTION: IN THE GOOD OLD DAYS OF ENMERKAR...
[In the days long past, when heaven was sundered from earth],16
[In the days] long past, [when] all needs [were provided for ],
[In the days] long past, [when] after the first harvest barley [was
eaten],
[When boundaries] were laid out, when plots were measured out,
[When marker stones] were put up and inscribed with their names,
[When] levees and canals were scoured,
[When] wells were sunk straight as [...],
[When] the bed of the Euphrates, Unug’s bountiful river, was cut in
the earth,
[When ...] was built,
[When ...] was put in place,
[When] Holy An took away [...],
[When] the offices of lord and king of Unug were made brilliantly
manifest,
then the scepter and staff of Kulab were held high in battle
—in battle, which is Inana’s game—,
Then the Black-headed17 were long-lived and satisfied
In their ways and within their means;
Then mountain goats with pounding hooves,
Mountain stags with glorious antlers,
Were (constantly) presented to Enmerkar, son of the Sun.
B.
ENMERKAR CALLS UP THE ARMY
In those days the king set his mace18 toward a city;
Enmerkar, the son of the Sun,
Conceived a campaign against Aratta, the mound of the inviolate
powers.
He would go and destroy the rebel land.
The lord called up his citizenry;
The herald sounded the horn in all countries;
The levy of Unug marched out with the all-wise king;
The levy of Kulab followed Enmerkar.
The levy of Unug was a flood;
The levy of Kulab was a storm cloud.
Lugalbanda in the Wilderness
105
1
5
10
15
20
25

30
muru9-gin7 ki he2-us2-sa-ba
[sahar] pess-pess-bi an-e mu-un-ssi-ib-us2
buru4-dugudmussen numun sags-se3 zi-zi-i-gin7
lu2-ulu3 zu-ne na-an-ni-pad3-de3
sses sses-a-ne gisskim na-an-gsa2-gsa2
35
[lugal]-bi sags-ba du-a-ni
[lu2 ssu-nir] erin2-na-ka di-dam
[en]-[me-er-kar2] [sags-ba] du-a-ni
[lu2] [... ...]-[ka] di-dam
[BIR?] X X X [...] [ki? sig10]-ga-ke4
40
hur-sags sug nunus gu2 [nu?]-gun3-e
gu2 nida-e gu2 me-er-me-er-re-da
C.
THE CAMPAIGN
zid du ssag4 kuss2-u3 den-lil2-la2-ke4
kul-ab4ki nigsin2-na-bi im-ma-an-kar-ess-ba
[...] [kur]-ra-ke4 u8-gin7 ba-an-gur-ru-uss
45
[... ...] [zi-ga] gaba hur-sags-gsa2-ke4 am-gin7 dug3 bi2-in-gsal2-[le]
[... ...] zag-sse3 i3-kigs2-e har-ra-an i3-zu-ne
[... ... ...] X i3-kigs2-e ud-5-am3 ba-zal
[ud 6-kam-ma]-ka a mu-un-[tu5-tu5]-uss
X [... ...] ud 7-kam-ma kur-ra ba-an-sun5-ne-ess
50
in-ti-in-ti-a bal-bal-[e]-da-bi
a-gsi6 uru16 ambar muss gab gab2 ru-ru-gu2
en-bi ulu3-a u5-a-ni
dumu dutu kug me-a zid 
an-ta ki-gal-sse3 gub-ba-am3
55
nigs2-babbar2-ra sags mu-na-mu2-mu2
ti zu2 nim-gin7 mu-na-gsir2-gsir2-re
[a2]-na SSEN.KAK zabar-ra uri3-na mu-na-mul-lu
SEN.KAK-ta ur ad6 gu7-a-gin7 galam mu-na-ta-ed2
ud-bi-a 7 he2-na-me-ess 7 he2-na-me-ess
60
di4-di4-la2 PESS.TUR.ZID kul-ab4ki 7 he2-na-me-ess
7-bi-ne durass-e tud-da ssilam ga gu7-me-ess
ur-sags-me-ess ki-en-gi-ra sig7-me-ess a-la-ba nun-na-me-ess
gsisbanssur an-na-ke4 a2 ed2-a-me-ess
7-bi-ne ugula-a-ke4-ess ugula-a-me-ess
65
nu-banda3-a-ke4-ess nu-banda3-a-me-ess
106
Epics of Sumerian Kings

Hugging the earth like a heavy fog
Their thick dust reached to heaven.
As to rooks rising to the early sowing
He called to his people;
From fellow to fellow, the sign was passed on.
Their king’s marching at their head
Was [encouragement to] the men [...] of the army;
Enmerkar’s marching at their head
Was [encouragement to] the men [...] of the army.
[...]
[...]
To make the emmer-wheat grow abundantly.
C.
THE CAMPAIGN
When the righteous comforter of Enlil’s heart
Had thus called up all Kulab,
They wended their way as do the ewes on [the slopes] of the moun-
tains,
And like bulls they trampled over the high [...] of the foothills.
He sought for [...] to the border, so that they would know the way;
He sought for [...]. Five days went by.
[On the sixth day] they bathed,
[...] and on the seventh day19 they entered the mountains.
Their crossing of the pathways
Was a huge flood rising upstream to a lake [...].
Their lord, riding a storm,
The son of the Sun, the true refined silver
That came down from heaven to earth—
His head shines brightly;
Barbed arrows flash forth from him as lightning;
The bronze battle-axe, his coat-of-arms, glitters at his side;
On that axe there appears, artfully made, a dog devouring a corpse.20
Seven they were, seven they were;21
Seven were the young lads born in Kulab.
Urass had born these seven; the Wild Cow had suckled them with milk.
They were heroes, the handsomest in Sumer and princely in their
prime.
They grew up at An’s high table.
These seven were lieutenants of companies,
They were captains of regiments,
Lugalbanda in the Wilderness
107
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
65

ssagina-a-ke4-ess ssagina-a-me-ess
ugula lu2 300 300-ta-a-me-ess
nu-banda3 lu2 600 600-ta-a-me-ess
ssagina erin2 ssar2-sar2-sar2-sar2-sar2-sar2-sar2 7-ta-me-ess
70
en-ra KA.KESS2 igi-bar-ra-ka-na mu-na-sug2-sug2-ge-ess
lugal-ban3-da 8-kam-ma-ne-ne
ERIN2+KISSIM5 KAxLI a luh-luh-ha-bi
si dug4-dug4-ga-bi ba-ra-ab-ed2
gsis tag-ga lugal-la-ke4 ba-da-ab-du8 un-da ba-da-gsin
II. LUGALBANDA’S ILLNESS AND RECOVERY
D.
ILLNESS
75
kaskal mu-un-sa9 kaskal mu-un-sa9-ba
ki-bi-a tu-ra mu-na-tegs3 sags gig mu-na-tegs3
muss sags-bi gi-TUN3-ra-gin7 e-ne dag i3-si-il-e
mass-da3 gsis bur2-ra dab5-ba-din7 ka sahar-ra bi2-us2
ssu-ni dab5-ba nu-mu-da-an-gi4-gi4
80
gsiri3-ni gu2-ba nu-mu-da-an-gsa2-gsa2
lugal zig3-ga ssu nu-mu-na-an-gsal2
kur gal-e muru9-e ki he2-us2-sa-a-ba
unugki he2-en-tum2-mu-de3 tum2-mu nu-ub-zu
kul-ab4ki he2-en-[tum2-mu]-de3 tum2-[mu] [la]-ba-ni-zu-zu
85
kur-ra ki sed10-bi [zu2-ra-ah i3tuku]
ki kum2-ma-[bi i3-tum4-tum4] [... ...]
za-ra-ah [ma]-[...] ga ah [la] [... ...]
nigs2-barag2 gud3-gin7 [mu]-na-sig10-[ge]-[ne]
zu2-lum gsispess3 ga-ar3-ga-ar3-ra [...]
90
ninda gu7-gu7 nigs2-lu2-tu-ra i3-gu7-[u3]-ne
kid-da zu2-lum-ma-ka e2 ba-ni-in-du3-du3-uss
i3 hi-a tur3-ra ga-ar3 luh-ha amass-a
i3 nunuz te nunuz te-a sseg6-gsa2
gsisbanssur ki kug ki kal-kal-la-ass sig10-ge5-gin7 mu-na-ab-gub-bu-ne
95
dida nags lal3 zu2-lum-ma-ta ssar2-ra
ku-bu-ul-lum i3-nun-ta E.KU
igi gsisbanssur-ra-ka si ba-ni-in-sa2-sa2-e-es
108
Epics of Sumerian Kings

They were generals of brigades,
Lieutenants of three hundred men each,
Captains of six hundred men each,
Generals of seven ss ar 22 of men each.
These served their lord as his elite troops.
Lugalbanda was the eighth of them.
[...]was washed in water.
He went forward in modest silence;
He loosened the [...] of the king, and marched out with the troops.
II. LUGALBANDA’S ILLNESS AND RECOVERY
D.
ILLNESS
When they had covered half the way, marched half the way,
An illness befell him there; an affliction of the head befell him.
Like a snake dragged out by the head with a (split) reed, his body was
jerking;
Like a gazelle caught in a snare he was biting the dust.
His stricken hand could not return a grip;
His palsied feet he could no longer set down firmly.
Neither the king nor the levy could put out a (helping) hand to
him.
In the high mountains, hovering over the earth like a dust cloud,23
they said:
“He must be brought back to Unug!”—but they did not know how;
“He must be brought back to Kulab!”—but they did not know how
to carry him.
In this cold spot in the mountains (his) teeth were chattering,
So they brought him to a warm place [...].
Supplies they [...]
They made him a bower like a bird’s nest.
Dates, figs, and assorted cheeses [...],
Sweetmeats such as ailing people should eat,
They put in palm baskets and so made him a home.
All kinds of fat from the cow pen, fresh cheese from the sheepfold,
Cold eggs in oil, cold hard-boiled eggs,
All this they set out for him as if laying the table for the holy and pre-
cious place.24
Strong beer, mixed with date syrup,
Bread loaves with butter ... ...
They arranged for him on top of the table.
Lugalbanda in the Wilderness
109
70
75
80
85
90
95

kussmass-li-um-e nigs2-si-sa2-e
kussA.GSA2.LA2-e nigs2-sa2-dug4-dug4-ga
100
ssess-a-ne-ne ku-li-ne-ne
nigs2-gur11 gsisma2 ki-buru14 ba-al-la-gin7
sags-gsa2-ni-sse3 hur-ru-um kur-ra-ka mu-ni-in-gsar-re-ne
kussummud-[da]-ne-ne a NAM nu-um-ta-X [...]
kass gig2 kurun ziz2 babbar
105
gesstin na8-na8 gu2 me-ze2 dug3-ga-am3
sags-gsa2-ni-sse3 hur-ru-um kur-ra-[ka] gsiss kussummud-da-gin7 ur2-ba hu-
mu-tal2-tal2
i3 ssim-gig-ga i3 zi da i3 ssim GA i3 ligidba i3 sags-bi gan-da
si-dug4 sur-ra-ke4 mu-na-ak-ess
sags-gsa2-ni-sse3 hur-ru-um kur-ra-ka mu-ni-ib-la2-e-ne
110
urudha-zi-in-na-ni kug-bi nagga
hur-sags zubi-ta ssu-a bal-a
sags-gsa2-ni-sse3 im-ssi-ib-ru-gu2-ne
gsir2 ur2-ra-ka-ni an-bar-sug4-ga-am3
hur-sags gig2-ta ssu-a bal-a
115
ti-ni-ta im-da-ab-sur-ru-ne
igi-ni pa5 mu a-ta dirig-dirig-ga-e
kug dlugal-ban3-da ba-an-di-ni-ib-bad-bad-de3
nundum-a-na gsisig bar kug dutu gu2-bi ba-an-gi4
sses-a-ne-ne nu-mu-un-ne-ba-e
120
gu2-ni un-zig3-ge-ess zi nu-um-me
sses-a-ne-ne ku-li-ne-ne
ni2-bi-a ad mi-ni-ib-gi4-gi4-ne
ud ssess-me dutu [gsis]nu2-a-gin7 mu-zi-zi-a
digsir nigs2 mu-ni-ra-a-ni bar-ta im-da-gub
125
ne un-gu7 ne un-[nag]
gsiri3-ni gsiri3 ki us2-sa ba-an-tah
gar3-gar3 kur-ra-ke4 [he2]-en-tum2-mu-de3 sig4 kul-ab4ki-sse3
[u3] tukum-bi dutu sses-me
ki kug ki kal-kal-la-ass gu3 im-ma-an-de2
130
gsiss-ge-ge-en-na-ka-na ki-us2! he2-en-da-dah
ud me-en-de3 arattaki-ta i3-re7- me-en-de3-en
ad6 ssess-me sig4 kul-ab4ki-se3 ga-ba-ni-ib-kur9-re-en-de3-en
ab2 kug dnanna sag2 dug4-ga-gin7
gud ab2-ba nam-sumun-ba ssurum-ma tag4-a-gin7
110
Epics of Sumerian Kings

Leather satchels (full of) provisions,
Leather bags (full of) victuals—
His brothers and companions
As if unloading a freighter at harvest time
Placed all that by his head in the mountain cave.25
Water [...] from their water skins [...]
Dark beer, liquor, white beer,
Heavy wine, pleasing to the palate—
They displayed all that by his head in the mountain cave on a water-
skin stand.
Incense oil, [...] oil, aromatic oil, ligidba oil, and the choicest oils
They mixed in pots, and deep in the cave
They suspended them by his head in the mountain cave.
His axe, whose precious metal is tin,
Which was imported from the Zubi Mountains,26
They planted by his head.
His side arm of iron,
Which was imported from the Black Mountains,
They tied to his breast.
His eyes—ditches overflowing with water—
Holy Lugalbanda keeps open, staring at them.27
But the door of his lips, like the door of Holy Sun,28 he kept closed.
He opened it not to his brothers.
They lifted up his neck: there was no breath.
His brothers and companions
Then took counsel together:
“Should our brother rise, like the Sun,29 from his bed,
“Surely (this is a sign that) the god who smote him will have left.
“When he will have eaten and drunk
“His feet will become stable on the earth again
“And carry him over the high mountain places, back to Kulab, the
Brickwork.
“But if the Sun should call our brother
“To the holy precious place,
“All strength of his limbs will stay here.
“When we then later return from Aratta,
“We shall have to bring back our brother’s corpse to Kulab, the
Brickwork.”
As do the migrating cows of Holy Nanna30
When they leave a decrepit breeding bull in the cow-pen,
Lugalbanda in the Wilderness
111
100
105
110
115
120
125
130

135
ssess-a-ne-ne ku-li-ne-ne
kug dlugal-ban3-da hur-ru-um kur-ra mu-ni-ib-tag4-a-ass
ir2 diss-e a-nir diss-e
ir2-e nigs2-sag4-ne-ssa4-ka
ssag4 sig3-ge i-si-iss gsa2-gsa2-de3
140
ssess-gal-ssess-gal dlugal-ban3-da kur-ra ba-an-sun5-ne-ess
ud-ba lugal-ban3-da tu-ra-am3 ud 2-am3 i-ni-in-zal
ud 2-am3 ud mass-am3 ba-an-tah
dutu e2-a-ni-sse3 igi-ni gsa2-gsa2-gin7
mass-ansse surum3-se3 sags il2-i-gin7
145
ud ssu-nigsin2 a2 ud-te-en-na-ra
i3-gin7 su-na mu-na-hal-ha
tu-ra-na nu-um-ta-ab-ed3-de3
E.
RECOVERY (FIRST NIGHT AND DAY)
dutu-ra an-sse3 igi he2-em-ssi-ib-il2-ia-ke4
a-a tud-da-na-gin7 ir2 ba-ssi-in-pad3
150
ssu sag9-sag9-ga-ni hur-ru-um kur-ra-kam mu-na-ab-zi-zi-zi-i
dutu silim ga-ra-ab-dug4 nam-ba-tu-tu-de3-en 
ur-sags dumu dnin-gal silim ga-ra-ab-dug4 nam-ba-tu-tu-de3
dutu ssess-mu-ne-ka kur-ra mu-un-ed3-de3
a-a hur-ru-um kur-ra ki ssur ki-ka nam-ba-tu-tu-de3
155
ki ama nu-gub-ba a-a nu-gub-ba
zu-a nu-gub-ba kal-la nu-gub-ba
ama-mu a dumu-mu nu-um-me
sses-mu a ssess-mu nu-um-me
usar ama-mu e2-a kur9-ra-na ir2-mu nu-sse8-se8
160
digsir ama digsir a-a ul-sug3-ge-ess-a-ta 
digsir nam-usar-ke4 lu2 ba-ra-an-ed3-de3 im-me-a
ur nu-zu hul-a lu2 nu-zu huss-am3
kaskal nu-zu gab kur-ra-ka
dutu lu2 nu-zu lu2 hul rib-ba-am3
165
a-gin7 ki-lul-la nam-ma-e
sse-gin7 sahar ssess-a nam-ba-da-gu7-e
gsesspu-gin7 edin ki nu-zu-gsa2 nam-ba-e-de3-sub-bu-de3-en
mu in-na ssess-mu-ne-ka nam-ba-an-ku4-ku4-de3-en
su-lum-mar du10-sa-mu-ne-ka nam-ba-an- ku4-ku4-de3-en
112
Epics of Sumerian Kings

His brothers and companions
Abandoned Holy Lugalbanda in the mountain cave.
In tears and sighs,
In tears and wailing,
In grief and weeping
Lugalbanda’s older brothers took to the mountains again.
Lugalbanda lay ill for two days,
And half a day was added to those two days.
Then, when the Sun was already looking toward home,
When the animals lifted their heads toward their cow-pens,
At the end of the day, the cool of the evening
Flowed over his flesh like balm—
But his illness had not yet gone.
E.
RECOVERY (FIRST NIGHT AND DAY)
He lifted his eyes to the Sun in the sky,
Wept to him as to his bodily father.
In the mountain cave he raised his fair hands, praying:
“Sun, I salute you! Let me no longer be ill!
“Hero, Ningal’s son, I salute you! Let me no longer be ill!
“Sun, my brothers are now ascending the mountains—
“O father, let me not stay ill in the mountain cave, the most dismal
place on earth!
“A place where there is no mother nor father,
“Nor an acquaintance, nor a loved one!
“My mother is not here to say: ‘Woe! My child!’;
“My brother is not here to say: ‘Woe! My brother!’;
“My mother’s neighbor who frequents our house is not here to wail
for me.
“If mother god and father god were standing here,
“The god of neighborliness would say: ‘This man should not perish!’
“A dog unknown to anyone is sad; a man unknown to anyone is
dreadful.
“And here, on this unknown road at the edge of the mountains,
“O Sun, there now is such a man unknown by anyone: this is unbear-
able!
“Let me not be poured away like water in this dismal place;
“Let me not yet eat bitter dust instead of barley;31
“Let me not be thrown away like a throwstick in the desolate plain!
“Let not my name be scorned by my brothers;
“Let me not be made into a jest among my comrades;
Lugalbanda in the Wilderness
113
135
140
145
150
155
160
165

170
dim3-ma-gin7 kur-ra muss3 nam-ba-an-tum2-mu
dutu ir2-na ssu ba-an-ssi-in-ti 
zi-ssag4-gsal2-la-ni hur-ru-um kur-ra-ka mu-ni-ib-e11-de3
uku2-e NE.NE gsa2-gsa2-da essemen dug3-ga-am3
kar-kid ess2-dam-sse3 ed2-da ki-nu2 dug3-dug3-ge-da
175
uku2-e nigs2-gu7-da-ni
dinana dumu dsuen-na-ke4
gud-gin7 kalam-ma sags mu-na-il2
me-lam4-ma-ni kug dssara2-gin7
muss3-a-ni hur-ru-um kur-ra-ka ud mu-un-na-gsa2-gsa2
180
dinana-ra an-sse3 igi he2-en-ssi-ib-il2-i-a-ka 
a-a tud-da-na-gin7 ir2 ba-an-ssi-in-pad3
ssu sag9-sag9-ga-ni hur-ru-um kur-ra-ka [mu]-na-zi-zi-i-zi
dinana e2-mu he2-me-a iriki-mu he2-me-a 
iri ama-mu tud-da kul-ab5ki [...]
185
muss-gin7 kankal-mu he2-me-[a]
gsiri2-gin7 ki-in-dar-mu [he2]-[me-a]
un gal-gal-la-mu-ne ma-ra-[an]-[...]
nin gal-gal-la-mu-ne ma-ra-[an]-[...]
a-[a] [...] [e2]-an-na-sse3 ma-[...]
190
damaged
KA.NI KA.NI KA SI im-me
na4 tur-tur-bi na4 gi-rin hi-li-ba
an-ta na4 sags-kal-e ki-ta IRIxX.IRIxX-e
akkil-bi-ta issi za-bu-e
195
gu3-bi-ta sur gsal2 tak4-e
a2-ur2 kur ha-ssu-ur2-ra-ke4 muss nam-ba-an-tum2-mu
dinana ir2-na ssu ba-an-ssi-in-ti
zi-ssag4-gsal2-la dutu u3-sa2-gin7 ba-an-ku
ssag4 hul2-la dinana-ke4 tug2-gin7 mu-un-dul-dul
200
i-gi4-in-zu sila gibil sig4 kul-ab4ki-sse3 na-gin
gud-de3 tu7 gig2-ga gu7-da
mul amar kug en-nu-un-sse3 am3-si-ri
mul ud zal-le-da-ke4 an-e im-sar-re
ud babbar-re gsi6-a bi2-ib-bur2-re
205
dsuen ud-sakar-e silim dug4-ga
a-a dnanna dutu ed2-a-ra si sa2 mu-na-an-ssum
en giri17-zal men-na tum2-ma
dsuen dumu ki ags2-gsa2 den-lil2-la2
digsir si-un3-na me-te-ass bi2-ib-gsal2
114
Epics of Sumerian Kings

“Let me not come to my end in the mountains like a fool!”
The Sun accepted his tears;
He sent down his encouragement into the mountain cave.
She whose playing is sweet even to the poor,32
The harlot who goes out to the tavern, who makes the bedroom a
delight,
Who is food for the needy,
Inana, daughter of Suen,
Raised her head up to him like the bull of the Land.
Her radiance, shining like that of Holy SSara,33
Her bright face lit up the mountain cave.
Lugalbanda lifted his eyes to Inana in the sky,
Wept to her as to his bodily father.
In the mountain cave he raised his fair hands (praying):
“Inana, if only this were my home, my city!
“If only this were Kulab, the city where my mother bore me [...]!
“If only this were even as the wasteland is to a snake!34
“If only this were even as the crevice is to a scorpion!
“My mighty people [...] me/I [...]
“My great ladies [...] me/I [...]
“[...] to the Eana ...
“[...]
“...
“Its small stones, shining stones in their splendor;
“On top, sagkal stones, below [...]
“From its clamor in the Zabu region,
“From its voice [...] open!
“Let my body not perish in the Cypress Mountains!”
Inana accepted his tears.
With her encouragement she made him sleep like the slumbering Sun;
She covered him with solace 35 as with a woolen cloth.
Then, as if ... she went back to Kulab, the Brickwork.
The bull that devours the mass of darkness,
The star “Holy Calf” then took up his watch.36
He shines in the skies as (brightly as) the star that announces the day;
He spreads bright light in the night.
Suen, addressed as the new moon,
Father Nanna, who gives direction to the rising Sun,
The glorious Lord whom his crown37 befits,
Suen, beloved son of Enlil—
This god reached the zenith, his glorious token.
Lugalbanda in the Wilderness
115
170
175
180
185
190
195
200
205

210
me-lam4-ma-ni kug dssara2-gin7
muss3-a-ni hur-ru-um kur-ra-ka ud mu-na-gsa2-gsa2
dsuen-ra an-sse3 igi he2-en-ssi-ib-il2-i-a-ka
a-a tud-da-na-gin7 ir2 ba-an-ssi-in-pad3
ssu sag9-sag9-ga-ni hur-ru-um kur-ra-ka mu-na-zi-zi-zi-i
215
lugal an sud-ra2 nu-mu-ra-tegs3-gse26-da 
dsuen an sud-ra2 nu-mu-ra-tegs3-gse26-da
lugal-e nigs2-si-sa2-e ki ags2 nigs2-erim2-e hul gig
dsuen-e nigs2-si-sa2-e ki ags2 nigs2-erim2-e hul gig 
nigs2-si-sa2-e ssag4 hul2-la si-sa2-bi ssa-ra-da-a-de6
220
gsissasal di-hi gal-am3 u3-luh-bi ssa-ra-mu2-mu2
nigs2-si-sa2-e KA.KESS2-bi e-du8-u3
nigs2-erim2 KA.KESS2-bi nu-e-du8
nigs2-erim2-e sags-bi um-DU.DU egsir-bi-sse3 IM bi2-ib-tum3
ud ssag4-zu i-im-il2-i-am3
225
nigs2-erim2-e muss ze2 gur5-e-gin7 [uss11]-zu ssi-im-ri-e
dsuen-e [ir2]-na ssu ba-an-ssi-in-ti nam-ti mu-na-ssum2
gsiri3-ni gsiri3 ki us2-sa ba-an-tah
min3-kam-ma-sse3 gud babbar an-ur2-ta ed2-a
gud ha-ssu-ur2-ra nam-e-a ak-e
230
kussgur21ur3-ra ki-us2-sa igi tab unkin-na
kussgur21ur3-ra e2 nigs2-gur11-ta ed2 igi tab gsurus-a
[ssul] dutu si muss3 kug-ga-na an-ta mu-ta-la2
kug dlugal-ban3-da hur-ru-um kur-ra-[ka] mu-na-ssum 
[d][udug] sag9-ga-ni an-ta im-ta-la2
235
dlama sag9-ga-ni egsir-a-na ba-e-gin
digsir nigs2 mu-ra-ni bar-ta ba-gub
dutu-ra an-sse3 igi he2-en-ssi-ib-il2-ia-ka
a-a tud-da-ni-gin7 er2 ba-an-ssi-in-pad3
ssu sag9-sag9-ga-ni hur-ru-um kur-ra-ka mu-na-zi-zi-i-zi
240
d[utu] sipad kalam-ma a-a sags gig2-ga
nu2-a-zu-ne un ssi-mu-e-da-nu2
ssul dutu zi-zi-da-zu-ne un ssi-mu-e-da-zi-zi-i
dutu za-e-da nu-me-a
mussen-e gu nu-DU sags LU2xKAR2-se3 nu-di
245
lu2 dili du-ur2 ssess-tab-ba-ni-me-en
dutu lu2 2 du 3-kam-ma-bi za-e-eme-en
ulul la2 gsissigi-tab-ba-ni-me-en
uku2-re lu2 lul-e lu2 tug2 nu-tuku-e
gaba ud-da-zu tug2zulumbi kug-gin7 ssa-mu4-mu4
250
e2 ur5-ra tug2 siki babbar bar-ba im-dul
116
Epics of Sumerian Kings

His halo was like that of Holy SSara,
His face brought light into the mountain cave.
Lugalbanda lifted his eyes to Suen in the sky,
Wept to him as to his bodily father;
In the mountain cave he raised his fair hands (praying):
“King whom one cannot reach in the distant sky,
“Suen, whom one cannot reach in the distant sky,
“King, lover of justice, hater of evil,
“Suen, lover of justice, hater of evil,
“Justice satisfies 38 your joyful heart.
“The poplar, the great staff, is a scepter for you!
“You loosen the fetters of the righteous,
“But you do not loosen the shackles of the bad!
“In chasing away the origin of evil, you also drive off its effect.39
“When your heart rises (in anger),
“You spit poison at evil like a venomous snake!”
Suen accepted his tears and gave him life
And made his feet stand up again.
And then the bright bull rose again from the horizon,
The bull that abides between the cypresses,
The firmly standing shield admired by the assembly,
The shield from the treasury admired by the troops.
Youthful Sun shot his holy brilliant rays down from heaven
And gave them to Holy Lugalbanda in the mountain cave.
His (Lugalbanda’s) protecting spirit hovered in front of him;
His guardian angel walked behind him.
The god who had smitten him went away.40
To the Sun in heaven he lifted his eyes and
Wept to him as to his own father.
In the mountain cave he raised his fair hands (praying):
“O Sun, shepherd of the Land, father of the Black-headed,
“When you go to sleep, all people go to sleep with you;
“Ever youthful Sun, when you rise, all people rise with you!
“O Sun, without you
“No bird is ever netted, no slave is ever caught.
“To him who walks alone you are the companion,
“O Sun, and you are the third of those who travel in pairs;
“You are the helmet of him who holds the reins.
“The poor, the destitute, the naked—
“Your sunshine clothes them like a woolen robe,
“And like a white woolen cloth it covers even the slaves!
Lugalbanda in the Wilderness
117
210
215
220
225
230
235
240
245
250

ab-ba-ab-ba gu2 tuku-gin7
bur-ssu-ma-e-ne gaba ud-da-zu
a-ar3 ud ul-li2-a-ass ssi-im-dug3-dug3-ge-ne
gaba ud-da-zu i3-gin rib-ba-am3
255
am gal-gal-e dug3 am3-mi-gsal2
nigs2 DUR2-ba kass3 nigs2 DI i3-ib-sur-ra
ur-sags dumu dnin-gal-la bur2-bur2 babbar ssi-mu-e-ssi-ib-za
[ki]-ba lu2 lu2 gud su8-ba-ke4
X [du8]-a-ni X X X [...]
260
[ssess ssess-a-ni-a] ba-ssi-in-la2
[apin]-a-ni ki-a2-ba-ka am3-mi-ni-in-gub-gub-bu
i-lu-zu dug3-ga dug3-ga-am3 an-e mu-un-ssi-ib-us2
ur-sags dumu dnin-gal-ka me-tess am3-i-i-ne
kug [lugal]-ban3-da hur-ru-um kur-ra-[ta] im-ma-da-ra-ta-ed2
265
ud-bi-a zid du ssag4 kuss2-u3 den-lil2-la2-ka u2 nam-til3-la i-im-tud
id2 hal-hal-la ama hur-sag-gsa2-ke4 a nam-til3-la im-tum3
u2 nam-til3-la-ka zu2 nam-mi-in-gub
a nam-til3-la-ka UM nam-mi-in-rig7
u2 nam-til3-la-ka zu2 he2-em-gub-bu-a-aka
270
a nam-til3-la UM he2-em-rig7-a-ka
gu2-e-ta umbin diss-a-ni ki mu-un-dab5-dab5
ki-bi-ta ansse kur-kur-ra-gin7 am3-GUL-e
dur3ur3 AS.DU-e dssakkan2-na-ke4 hur-sags i3-[si-il]-[le]
dur3ur3 uru16 gal-gin7 kussum i3-tag-tag-ge
275
dur3ur3 sal-la kass-e kigs2-gsa2-am3 kass im-mi-dar-dar
gsi6-bi-ta ud-te-en-[sse3] na-gin
hur-sags ssag4 sig dsuen-ne-ka kass mi-ni-ib-kar-kar-re
diss-a-ni-im lu2 igi nigsin lu2 nu-mu-un-da-bar-re
kussmass-li-um-e nigs2 si sa2-e
280
kussA.GSA2.LA2-e nigs2 sa2 dug4-dug4-ga
ssess-a-ne-ne ku-li-ne-ne
a sed10-gin7 ninda ki-a mu-un-da-an-du8-uss-am3
kug dlugal-ban3-da hur-ru-um kur-ra-ta im-ma-ra-an-il2-il2
gu2 ne-mur-[ra]-ka ba-an-sse21
285
gsisbunigs2 X [NE] a bi2 in-ra
igi-ni-sse3 mu-un-ta-gsar-ra mu-un-si-[il]
[NA4 SUR] ssu im-ma-an-ti X
tess2-bi he2-em-ra-ra-a-[ta]
u3-dub2 dar-dar-ra gu2 edin-e ba-ni-in-[nu2]
290
na4zu2 sal-la izi bi2-in-[...]
118
Epics of Sumerian Kings

“Old rich men
“And poor old women alike praise your sunshine
“Sweetly until their final days!
“Your sunshine is as powerful as any balm;
“It even comforts the great wild bulls.
“...
“Hero, son of Ningal, you spread sheen and brilliance
“Wherever people and cattle dwell.
“[...]
“Brother [...] his brother;
“He places his plow in the proper place.41
“Your praise, rising up to heaven, is sweet!
“Hero, son of Ningal, they praise you as you deserve!
Holy Lugalbanda came out of the mountain cave.
Thereupon the fertile one,42 who appeases Enlil’s heart, begot the plant
of life;
The rolling river, the mother of the hills, brought down the water of
life.
Lugalbanda nibbled at the plant of life;
He sipped of the water of life.
When he had nibbled at the plant of life
And sipped of the water of life,
From the slope he put one hoof43 on the ground:
And from that place he speeds like the mountain ass;
Like a wild ass of SSakkan he races over the hills;
Like a large and powerful ass he charges;
Like a slender ass, eager to run,44 he bounds along.
From nightfall until the cool of the evening he keeps running
Through the hills; alone in the moonlight he races on.
He is all alone; however much he looks around, nobody is to be seen.
The things that had been stocked in the packs,
That had been kept in the leather satchels,
That his brothers and companions,
With fresh water, used for baking bread in the open45—
Holy Lugalbanda brought all that out of the mountain cave
And put it among the embers.46
He filled a bucket with water
And crumbled in it what he had in front of him.
He took hold of some flints
And struck them together.
He had placed charcoal47 in an open space on the ground;
The fine flint made a spark
Lugalbanda in the Wilderness
119
255
260
265
270
275
280
285
290

izi-bi ssag4 sig-ga ud-gin7 mu-na-an-[ed2]
ninda gug2 du8 nu-zu imtinur nu-zu
ne-mur 7-ta ninda gi-izi-ess-ta-a ba-ra-an-du8
ninda ni2-bi-a en-na am3-segs6-segs6
295
gi ssul-hi kur-ra ur2-ba mi-ni-in-bu-bu pa-ba mi-ni-in-suh-suh
gu2-en gug2-ga-ka PAD.UD-sse3 KA ba-ni-in-KESS2-KESS2
ninda gug2 du8 nu-zu imtinur nu-zu
ne-mur 7-ta ninda gi-izi-ess-ta ba-ra-an-du8
[lal3] zu2-lum-ma nigs2 ku7-ku7-da hi-li ba-ni-in-du8-du8
300
am su4 am sig7 am si gur3-gur3
am ssag4 sig-ga nam-a-a ak
am su4-su4 hur-sags ki sikil-la akkil-bi kigs2-gsa2
u3-ur5-re ssim-gig sse-am3 i3-tukur2-re
gsis ha-ssu-ur2-ra U2.NUMUN2.BUR i3-ma5-ma5
305
pa gsisssse-nu U2.KI.KAL-gin7 u2 kiri4-ba mu-un-si-im-me
a id2 hal-hal-la-ka i-im-na8-na8-ne
u2i-li-in-nu-uss u2 sikil kur-ra-ka bu-lu-uh3 mu-un-si-il-si-il-le
am su4 am kur-ra u2-a sub2-ba-bi
diss-am3 [du10]-ba-na im-ma-ra-an-dab5
310
gsissse-du10 kur-ra ur2-ba mi-ni-in-bu-bu pa-ba mi-ni-in-suh-suh
gsisi-ri9-na-bi u2A.GUG4 gid2-da a-ssag4-ga-ke4
kug dlugal-ban3-da gsiri2-ta ba-ra-an-ssab
am su4 am kur-ra saman-e bi2-in-la2
mass su4 mass-ud5 [mass sa]la2 mass sa KESS2.KESS2 sa mass gu2-ed2-gu2-ed2
315
u3-ur5-re ssim-gig sse-am3 i3-tukur2-re
gsis ha-ssu-ur2-ra U2.NUMUN2.BUR-gin7 i3-ma5-ma5
pa gsissse-nu U2.KI.KAL-gin7 u2 kiri4-[ba] mu-un-si-im-me
a id2 hal-hal-la-ka i-im-na8-na8-ne
u2i-li-in-nu-uss u2 sikil kur-ra-ka bu-[lu-uh3] mu-un-si-il-si-il-le
320
mass su4 [mas]-[ud5] u2-a sub2-[ba]-bi
2-am3 [du10-ba]-na im-ma-ra-an-dab5
<gsissse-du10 kur-ra ur2-ba mi-ni-in-bu-bu pa-ba mi-ni-in-suh-suh>
gsisi-ri9-na-bi u2A.GUG4 gid2-da a-ssag4-ga-ke4
kug dlugal-ban3-da gsiri2-ta ba-ra-an-ssab
325
mass2 su4 mass2-ud5 mass2 2-abi HUR.GAM-sse3 bi2-in-[la2] 
120
Epics of Sumerian Kings

And soon the first flame flared up over the wasteland like sunlight.
He had never learnt to bake bread; he did not know what an oven is;
Yet with just seven embers he baked gizi-ess ta bread.
While the bread was baking,
He pulled out mountain ss ulhi-reeds, roots and all, and stripping off
the leaves
Packed the loaves into daily rations.
Not knowing how to bake bread, not knowing what an oven is,
With just seven embers he had baked gizi-ess ta bread,
Which he then garnished with dates and sweet syrup.
Now there was a brown buffalo, a sleek buffalo tossing its horns;
This hungry buffalo, lying down,
Was calling and bellowing to the brown buffaloes of the hills, the
pure place.
This animal chews myrtle like grain,48
Grinds the bark of the cypresses like halfa-grass,
Sniffs at the foliage of the ss enu -tree like grass,
Drinks the water of the rolling streams,
And belches from the soapwort, the pure plant of the highlands.
While the brown buffaloes of the highlands were thus browsing
among the verdure,
Lugalbanda caught one in a trap.
He pulled up a mountain juniper and stripped off its branches;
Its roots, which are like the tallest rushes in the meadows,
Holy Lugalbanda cut off with a knife.
He tethered the brown buffalo, the highland buffalo with them.
The brown goat and the nanny goat—flea-bitten goats, lousy goats,
goats covered in sores—
Are also like this. They too chew myrtle like grain,
Grind the bark of the cypresses like halfa-grass,
Sniff with their noses at the foliage of the ss enu -tree like grass,
Drink the water of the rolling streams,
And belch from soapwort, the pure plant of the highlands.
While the brown goat and the nanny goat were thus browsing among
the verdure,
He caught them both in a trap.
He pulled up a mountain juniper and stripped off its branches;
Its roots, which are like the tallest rushes in the meadows,
Holy Lugalbanda cut off with a knife.
Both these goats, the brown goat and the nanny goat, he shackled with
them.
Lugalbanda in the Wilderness
121
295
300
305
310
315
320
325

F.
DREAM AND BANQUET (SECOND NIGHT AND DAY)
diss-a-ni lu2 igi nigsin nu-mu-un-da-ab-bar-re
lugal-ra u3-sa2-ge sa2 nam-ga-mu-ni-ib-dug4
u3-sa2-ge kur nam-du2-ga-ke4
KU.KUR galam-ma-gin7 ssu e2-gar8-gin7 gul-la
330
ssu-bi galam-am3 gsiri3-bi galam-am3
nigs2 igi-bi-ta lal3 ssu2-su2-e
igi-bi-ta [lal3] dirig-dirig-ga-e
ugula nu-zu-e nu-banda3 nu-zu-e
nigs2 ur-sags-ra a2 gsal2-la2-e
335
gsisda-ha-ssa dnin-ka-si-ka-ke4
dlugal-ban3-da u3-sa2-ge sa2 nam-ga-mu-ni-ib-dug4
u2i-li-in-nu-uss u2 sikil kur-ra-ka ki-nu2-gsar-sse3 mu-un-gsar
tug2zulumhi-e mu-un-dag gada babbar bi2-in-bur2
e2-ur5-ra a tu5-tu5 nu-gsal2-la ki-bi-sse3 sa2 im-dug4
340
lugal u3-sa2-ge la-ba-an-nu2-a ma-mu2-de3 ba-nu2
ma-mu2-da gsisig-e nu-gi4-e za-ra nu-gi4-e
lul-da lul di-da zid-da zid di-dam
lu2 hul2-hul2-le-de3 lu2 ssir3-sir3-re-de3
gipisan kad5 digsir-re-e-ne-kam
345
unu2 igi sag9 dnin-lil2-la2-kam
ad gi4-gi4 dinana-kam
ga-bi2-ib2-lu-lu nam-lu2-ulu3-ka gu3 lu2 nu-til3-la
dza-an-gar3-ra digsir ma-[mu2-da]-ke4
dlugal-ban3-da ni2-te-ni gud-[gin7] [...]-[ssa4]
350
amar ab2-ssilam-ma-gin7 gu3-nun [im-me]
am su4-e gsa2-a-ra a-ba-a ma-ra-ab-[TAG]-[...]
i3-li2-udu-bi gsa2-a-ra a-ba-a ma-ra-ab-zal-X-e
uruduha-zi-in-gsa2 kug-bi nagga ssu im-[ma]-[(X)]-[tigs4]
gsiri2 ur2-ra-gsa2 an-bar-sug4-am3 im-ma-da-X [X]
355
am su4 am kur-ra-ke4 lu2-gsesspu2-gin7 ga-am3-[ma-DU.DU] 
[lu2]-lirum-[gin7] ga-am3-si-gam-gam
lipiss-bi he2-em-ta-ab-zig3 dutu ed2-a-ra u3-mu-na-gsar
mass2 su4 mass2-ud5 mass2 2-a-bi sags-du-bi sse-gin7 um-[ta-a]-dub
us-bi si-dug4-ga um-ma-ni-in-de2-de2
ir edin-na DU.DU-a-bi
360
muss ul4 kur-ra-ke4 si-im he2-em-ssi-ak-de3
dlugal-ban3-da i-im-zi ma-mu2-da im-bu-lu-uh3 u3-sa2-ga-am3
122
Epics of Sumerian Kings

F.
DREAM AND BANQUET (SECOND NIGHT AND DAY)
Still he was all alone; however much he looked around, nobody
was to be seen.
Sleep then overwhelmed the king.
Sleep is the realm of darkness;
It is a towering flood; like the hand that demolishes a brick wall
Its hand is overpowering, its foot is overpowering;
It covers all that it finds before it like syrup;
It overflows all that it finds before it like runny honey;49
It knows no lieutenant, no captain,
Yet it strengthens the warrior.
By means of Ninkasi’s wooden cask50
Sleep finally overcame Lugalbanda.
He patted down soapwort, the pure herb of the highland, as a bed,
Spread out a linen garment, unfolded a linen sheet;
There being no convenience for bathing, he prepared one there.
But the king lay not down to sleep: he lay down to a dream!
Dream—a door cannot hold it back, nor can the pivot;
To the liar it speaks lies, to the truthful the truth;51
It may make one happy or sad
But it remains the closed tablet-basket of the gods.
It is the bridal chamber of fair Ninlil
But also the counsellor of Inana.52
The multiplier of humankind, the voice of one not alive,53
Zangara, god of dreams,
In person bellowed to Lugalbanda like a bull;
Like the heifer to the mother-cow he lowed:
“The brown buffalo, who will slaughter it for me?
“Who will melt its fat for me?
“He must carry my axe, whose metal is tin;
“He must wield my dagger of iron;
“Like a bullfighter he must take on the brown buffalo, the highland
buffalo; like a wrestler he must subdue it.54
“Its strength will leave it. When he sacrifices it before the rising Sun
“He must also crush the heads of both the brown goat and the nanny
goat like barleycorns.
“When he has poured out their blood in the pit
“So that the smell wafts over the plain,
“The alert snakes of the highlands will sniff it.”55
Lugalbanda awoke—it had been a dream; he shivered—he had
slept.56
Lugalbanda in the Wilderness
123
330
335
340
345
350
355
360

igi-ni ssu bi2-in-kigs2 nigs2-me-gsar sug4-ga-am3
uruduha-zi-in-na-ni kug-bi nagga ssu im-ma-an-tigs4
gsiri2 ur2-ra-ka-ni an-bar-sug4-am3 im-ma-da-SUH?
365
am su4 am kur-ra-ke4 lu2-gsesspu2-gin7 ga-am3-ma-DU.DU lu2-lirum-
ma-gin7 im-ma-ssi-gam
lipiss-bi im-ta-an-zig3 dutu ed2-a-ra mu-na-an-gsar
mass2 su4 mass2-ud5 mass2 2-a-bi sags-du-bi sse-gin7 im-ta-an-dub
us-bi si-dug4-ga im-ma-ni-in-de2-de2
ir-bi edin-na DU.DU-a-bi
370
muss ul4 kur-ra-ke4 si-im im-ssi-ak-de3
dutu nam-ta-ed2-ass X [...]
lugal-ban3-da mu den-lil2-le zi [...]
an den-lil2 <den-ki> dnin-hur-sags-gsa2-ke4
si-dug4-ta gsisbun-na im-ma-ni-in-dur2-ru
375
kur-ra ki-gsar-ra mu-un-ak-a
gsisbun ba-ni-in-gsar ne-sags ba-ni-in-de2
kass gig2 kurun ziz2 babbar
gesstin na8-na8 gu2 me-ze2 dug3-ga
edin-na a ssed10 ki-sse3 im-ma-ni-in-de2-de2
380
uzu mass su4-ke4 gsiri2 bi2-in-ak
ur5 nigs2-gig2 izi im-mi-ni-in-si
na izi sig9-ga-gin7 i-bi2-[bi] bi2-in-mu2
i-gi4-in-zu ddumu-zid ir dug3-[ga] amass-a kur9-ra-a
nigs2 ssu dug4-ga lugal-ban3-da
385
an den-lil2 den-ki dnin-hur-sags-gsa2-ke4 dug3-ga-bi mu-un-gu7-uss
a2 sikil-la ki dadag-ga-bi
barag dsuen-na kug-gin7 mi-ni-in-ri
[barag] dutu barag dsuen-na-ka igi-nim-sse3 ba-du3
barag 2-a-bi KA [SU] za-gin3 dinana-ka sse-er-ka-an ba-ni-in-dug4
390
dsuen-e GSIS DA SSU KA NI57
a2-an-kar2 a ba?-an-tu5-tu5
iri an-na a tu5-a-ni
gu2-en gug2-ga-ka me-te-ass bi2-ib-gsar
X X [zi den-ki a-a digsir-re-e-ne an-da-ak-ak-ess]
III. COSMIC BATTLE (?)
G.
THE SPIRITS ARRIVE
395
an gsal2 tak4-a X [mu-un-dib2-ba nam SU BAR] DUR.SAR in-gsal2-le-ess
X X BU MASS DUR.SAR-gin7 sags [SSU?] mu-ni-in-gsal2?-le?-ess?
124
Epics of Sumerian Kings

He rubbed his eyes: it had been gruesome.
He took hold of his axe, whose metal is tin;
He wielded his dagger of iron;
Like a bullfighter he took on the brown buffalo, the highland buffalo;
like a wrestler he subdued it.
Its strength left it. He sacrificed it before the rising Sun.
He crushed the heads of both the brown goat and the nanny goat like
barleycorns.
He poured out their blood in the pit
So that the smell wafted over the plain;
The alert snakes of the highlands sniffed it.
At the rising of the Sun
Lugalbanda, invoking the name of Enlil,
Made An, Enlil, Enki, and Ninhursag
Sit down for a banquet at the slaughtering pit,
The place in the highlands he had prepared.
The banquet was set, the libations poured out;
Dark beer, strong drinks, white beer,
Wine, drinks pleasing to the palate,
He poured out over the plain as a libation.
He cut the meat of the brown goats
And roasted the dark livers;
Like incense put on the fire, he let the smoke rise.
As if Dumuzid himself had brought the tastiest bits from the cattle-pen,
So the food prepared by Lugalbanda
Was eaten with relish by An, Enlil, Enki, and Ninhursag.
He prepared the place like that gleaming place of pure strength,
The holy altar of Suen.58
An altar for Utu and for Suen he built on top;
These two altars he decorated with lapis lazuli of Inana.
Suen bathed his side-weapon,59
The a-ankara weapon.
Having lustrated this heavenly city,
He set out all the breads properly.
They made [... for/to ?] ... Enki, father of the gods.
III. COSMIC BATTLE (?)
G.
THE SPIRITS ARRIVE
The heaven having been opened, now there came [...];60
They are [...]
Lugalbanda in the Wilderness
125
365
370
375
380
385
390
395

gsispess3 sse-er-gu hi-li bur-ra-gin7
a2-ne-ne-a mu-un-de3-la2-la2
mass-da3 kas4 kar-re dsuen-na-me-ess
400
nigs2-ur2*-limmu* sag9-sag9 dnin-lil2-la2-me-ess
diskur-ra a2-tah-a-ni-me-ess
gu dub2-bu-me-ess sse dub2-bu-me-ess
mass2-ansse gsis-hass ak-a-me-ess
ki-bal hul gig dsuen-na-sse3 ud-de3 DU.DU-e-me-ess
405
lu2 ud-de3 DU.DU-e e-ne-ne he2-en-na-me-ess
ud gid2-da ud ssu4-se3 im-mi-ib-nu2-u3-ne
gsi6 lugud2-da e2? DU3? ba mu-[ni-ib-TU.TU] [...]
ud gid2-da gsi6 lugud2-da-[dam gsiss-nu2]-a mi-ni-ib-[nu2-u3-ne]
ud [ga] LAM? nigs2 giri17-zal [im]-ma-ab-ssum2-mu-ne
410
[gsi6]-u3-na muss3 za-gin3 im-[ssi]-ib-ssir3-re-de3-ne
si-si-ig simmussen-simmussen dutu-ka ur2-ba ssu mi-ni-in-TE
e2-e2-a i-im-ku4-ku4-ne
e-sir2-e-sir2-ra gu2 mu-un-gid2-gid2-i-ne
ga-ab-dug4 inim dug4-ga-ab ssu-a ga-bi2-ib2-gi4-me-ess
415
ama-ra kigs2 dug4-ga nin gal-ra inim gi4-a
[da] gsis-nu2-da-ka ki-nu2 ak-a
X si-ga-[a?] sags gsis ra-ra
[X] gig2-gig2-ga zuh-ha-a-ba
[X] gsisig gsisbanssur nam-lu2-ulu3-ta ba-ta-an-ed2
420
[...] X su-a mi-ni-ib-bal-e-ne
[tess?]-bi za-ra-za-ra KA mu-ne-KESS2
H.
LUGALBANDA’S EXALTATION
[ur?]-sags us gid2-da lu2-se3 [nu2-nu2] X
dutu uss gid2-da lu2-se3 [nu2-nu2-u3]-a 
ur-sags ssul dutu inim! zid-da-kam
425
ssir3? zu KA [X]-[a?] ssag4 inim-ma-zu-a
an [ki] [X] [gi] KA inim-ma-bi si um-mi-in-sa2
[ka? inim-ma] X DI ssul dutu-kam
da-nun-na digsir gal-gal-e-ne nu-mu-un-zu-uss-a?
ud ri-ta [(X)] dutu UNU den-lil2-la2
430
nam-nigsir gal an-na [X X] mu-na-an-ssum
[DI?] kur-kur-ra [X X] mu-na-an-tah
PA SI TE X [...] digsir-re-e-ne-ke4
ab-ba iri gal-[zu] [X X] [ed2?] AB gal an kug-ga
an [ki] [X] [gi] KA [inim?-ma?]-bi si im-mi-in-sa2-ta
435
[ka] inim-ma-ke4 [si]- [sa2] [ssul] d[utu]-kam
[d]a-nun-na digsir gal-gal-[e-ne] nu-mu-[un-zu]-uss-a
126
Epics of Sumerian Kings

As if with strings of figs, dripping with lusciousness,
Their arms are laden.
They are gazelles of Suen, running and fleeing;
They are the finest creatures of Ninlil;
They are the helpers of Isskur.
They heap up flax; they pile up grain;
They are wild animals on the rampage;
Like a tempest, they batter the rebel lands, hateful to Suen;
Indeed, they batter like a storm; such are they!
Every day they lie asleep for the whole length of the day,
But during the short night they enter the built-up houses.
During the long day and the short night they lie in beds.61
By day [...]; they promise luxury;
At night they chant over the gleaming plain.
They touch off the breezes, the swallows of the Sun.
House after house they enter;
Street after street they haunt.
They jabber constantly, and still they prompt: “Talk to us!”
They seek words with the mother, they answer back to the great Lady.
They nestle at the bedside;
They smite the [strong and the] weak.
Having stolen the dark ...
They take away the [...], doors, and tables from humankind.
They change [...] ...
They shackle together the door-pivots.
H.
LUGALBANDA’S EXALTATION
The hero is now shining on the whole length of that man;62
The Sun is now shining upon the whole length of that man.
Youthful hero Utu of the true word
... who understands the meaning,
Having directed its incantation in heaven and on earth... .
The incantation ... of the youth Utu,
Which even the Anuna, the great gods, do not know,
From that time, Utu, the ... of Enlil
Granted to him (Lugalbanda) the great office of herald of heaven,
And he added the ... jurisdiction over all the countries,
And the ... of the gods.
The wise elders of the city ...
After in heaven and on earth ... its incantation was directed,
The incantation directed by youthful Sun,
Which even the Anuna, the great gods, do not know,
Lugalbanda in the Wilderness
127
400
405
410
415
420
425
430
435

X kug BAD.BAD-e-ne-kam me3? kug? X [...] X X [...]
X X X sags ssu ak? nu-mu-su-[bu]-[X X]-ne
BAD am [X] [da] BAD si? X [...]
440
BAD.[BAD] X X NIGSIN2 gu2 ba?-ab?-[...]
egsir [X] X ssu ni2-ba gi4-gi4 [...]
I.
THE BATTLE?/INANA’S BATTLE ARRAY?
dutu-ra den-lil2-la2 digsir ki-mah-a [...]
su6 mu2 dumu dnin-gal-la mu-na-da-[an]-ku4-ku4
dsuen X X mu-na-an-ssum-mu-uss ssen mu-na-ab-tah-e-me-ess
445
nam kur-kur-ra-ke4 ssu?-ne-a mu-un-na-ni-in-gi-ne2-me-ess
gsi6-u3-na-ka ssah gig2 mu-un-zu-uss
an-bar7-gana2-ka dutu-ur2 ka inim-ma-ka-ni igi-[sse3] [X]-bi mu-un-da-gsal2
an-na [ssir3 zu] igi-ni X mu-un-gsal2
dUDUG? nin MU X X digsir nu-mu-un-da-sa2
450
[nigs2 X]-ne-ne igi-ne-ne-[kam]
an den-lil2 X X dinana digsir [mu-un-ne]-en-[kur9]
X X ra [mu] [...] sa ssar2-ra mu-un-zu-uss
[DA] X DU.DU [AH] DA X nu-KESS2 gir5-gir5-re-de3 igi bi2-in-du8-ru-us
[KA SSESS] nigs2 SESS mul-la-ba ab-lal3-ta mu-un-ne-RU2
455
gsisig [kur ssuba] gsiss-gan kur ssuba
mi-tum [X] X dKAL.KAL an-na
har-ra-[an] [X X] X [NUN?] dinana U GA lil2-ta ed2-a
gsistaskarin X X kur ssuba-ta ed2-a
AN X X AN kug-sig17 ban3-da
460
ma X [X] X [LU AN] [X X X] me3 ba-sug2-ge-ess
me3 X [...] X ra-gin7
ssag4 [...] X dinana ess2 za-gin3 [mi-ni]-ib-sar-sar-e-ne
lu2 ssag4 dinana sag9-ge-me-ess me3 ba-sug2-ge-ess
me3 izi-gsar-bi 14-me-ess nu-ga-mu-rib-[ba-me]-ess
465
gsi6 sa9-a e2 sags gsar-ra [ssu?] [...]
gsi6 u3-na-ka izi-gin7 mu-un-sar-sar-re-de3-ess
KA.KESS2-da nim-gin7 mu-un-na-gsir2-gsir2-re-de3-ess
MIR ssag4 sig10-ga me3-ka
a mah ed2-a-gin7 gu2 nu mi-ni-ib-be2
470
lu2 ssag4 dinana sag9-ge-me-ess me3 ba-sug2-ge-ess
izi-gsar me3 7-me-es nu-ga-mu-rib-ba-me-ess
an sig7-ga men sags il2-la-gin7 ul-la ba-an-sug2-ge-[ess]
sags-ki-ne-ne igi-ne-ne an-usan2 sig7-ga-me-ess
gsestug2-ne-ne gsisma2 X [...]-la2-me-ess
475
KA-ne-ne ssah gsiss-gi nam-a-a ak-me-ess
ka me3-ka gub-ba-ne-ne
128
Epics of Sumerian Kings

...
...
...
...
...
I.
THE BATTLE?/INANA’S BATTLE ARRAY?
Into the presence of the Sun, the Enlil god of the grave, ...
Of the bearded son of Ningal they are allowed to enter.
To Suen they give ... and add battle;
The fate of the foreign countries they enforce with their force.
At midnight, they know the black wild boar;
At noon his incantation is set up before the Sun;
In heaven your song is set up before him.
... no god can rival ...
Their ... , which are before them.
They enter before An, Enlil, [...], and Inana, the gods;
They know ...
They watch ...
They ... from the window ...
The door of the shining mountain, the lock of the shining mountain,
The mace ... of KAL.KAL of heaven,
The road ... Inana ... gone with the wind;
The boxwood ... growing out of the shining mountain
... golden and fierce
... they stand;
Like ...
They chase ... Inana from the gleaming shrine;
They are favored by Inana’s heart, steadfast in battle,63
They are the fourteen torches of battle, which are ...
At midnight they ...
At the dead of night they dart about like wildfire;
In a band they flash together like lightning;
In the most violent ... heart of battle
Roaring loudly like the rising of the mighty flood.
They are favored by Inana’s heart, steadfast in battle,
They are the seven64 torches of battle, which are ...
They stand joyfully as she dons the crown under the clear sky;
Their foreheads and eyes light up the evening;
Their ears ... a boat;
Their mouths are wild boars resting in the reed thicket;
They stand in the thick of battle;
Lugalbanda in the Wilderness
129
440
445
450
455
460
465
470
475

zi-ssag4-gsal2-bi [sags DU3] sig3-ge-ne
zi-ir-bi ud ru te [gsa2 ke4 ki mu-un]-ne-hul?-uss
lu2 ssag4 dinana sag9-ge-me-ess me3 ba-sug2-ge-ess
480
dnin-tud an-na ssar2-ssar2-me-ess
zi an-na ssu bi2-in-du8-uss
ssita3 kug mul-mul zag an ki-sse3 mu-un-ne-de3-gsal2
dnin-TAB.KU.LIBIR mu-un-ne-de3-gsal2
J.
THE SUN REAPPEARS
mul ud zal-le-da-ke4 an-[na mul] mu-un-ne-ur4!-re!
485
dutu gsa2-nun-ta ed2-a-ni
ssita3 kug an-na-ke4 si mu-un-na-ab-sa2
digsir si-sa2 nita2-da nu2-a
digsir erim2 du ssag4 nigs2-erim2 gsal2
digsir X X SSAR2.SSAR2-me-ess
490
e-ne-ne-ne dnanna-gin7 dutu-gin7 dinana me ninnu-gin7
an ki zag-ba gsis mu-un-ni-kam
nigs2-erim2 dug4-ga ensi-bi-me-ess
nigs2-a2-zig3-ga igi du8-bi-me-ess
[X] [mu]-un-e11* ssu mah mu-un-e11*
495
[HA? nu?] mu-un-e11* bur-ssum-ma ba-e11* 
an sig7-ga-am3 mul ssar2-ra bi2-in-e11*-X
mas-sum* gsis-bur2-gin7 bal-e-de3 mul gsissgigir bi2-in-e11* 
gsiserin duru5 kur ha-ssu-ur2-ra-ke4 ki [...]-[un]-ak
an-ur2 an-pa sa-par3 [...]
Unknown number of lines missing
130
Epics of Sumerian Kings

Their life force is ... ;
...
They are favored by Inana’s heart, steadfast in battle;
They are (made) numerous by Nintud of heaven;
The life of heaven they hold.
The holy starry battle-mace she carries to the confines of heaven and
earth;
Yea, divine nin.TABKULIBIR carries it!
J.
THE SUN REAPPEARS
The star that makes the day go by flares up in the sky;
The Sun, appearing from his chamber,
Readies the holy battle-mace of the sky,
The righteous god who lies with a man.65
They are evil gods with sinful hearts;
They are ... gods.
Like Nanna, like the Sun, like Inana of the fifty powers,
They are the door of the edge of heaven and earth;
They are the interpreters of evil words;
They are the spies of righteousness.66
... rose67 ... rose
... rose, the matriarch68 made (them) rise.
(In) a clear sky the numerous stars rose;
The Sieve,69 to turn over like a trap, the Chariot70 rose.
Fresh cedars in the cypress mountains ...
A battle net from horizon to zenith ...
Unknown number of lines missing
Lugalbanda in the Wilderness
131
480
485
490
495

132
Epics of Sumerian Kings
The Return of Lugalbanda
Introduction
1. The second part of Lugalbanda’s adventures starts after the cosmic battle
between the forces of light and the spirits of darkness, the battle that the
hero has survived and that has sanctified him further.71 He is now stranded
at the edge of the inhabited world, a mysterious region in the highlands
under the rule of the gigantic thunderbird Anzud. The hero decides to
invoke the bird’s help in returning to his comrades. While the bird and his
wife are away foraging, Lugalbanda treats Anzud’s young very kindly, ply-
ing it with food and all kinds of luxury, so that it probably falls asleep.
When Anzud returns he is upset at not hearing his young’s usual answer-
ing call. Lugalbanda comes forward and shows how well he has treated
the fledgling. Anzud, wanting to reward the hero, tempts him with wealth,
power, and high status. Lugalbanda refuses all gifts and instead asks for
miraculous speed. This being granted, he suddenly alights in the midst of
his amazed companions. Meanwhile, the siege of Aratta, which was begun
in the first half of the story, has proven unsuccessful. Enmerkar asks for a
runner to travel back to Inana in Unug and to ask for her help. Only
Lugalbanda volunteers, but he insists on traveling alone. His companions
try to dissuade him but to no avail. After a wondrously swift journey (he
arrives in the Eana before the evening meal has been served!) he puts
Enmerkar’s request to Inana. Her reply consists in prescribing a magical
cure: a magic fish must be caught; then all will end well, with war no
longer necessary. Aratta is praised for its abundant wealth.
2. The text can be broken down into three discrete main parts, and in
coherent episodes, as follows:
I.
Lugalbanda and Anzud
[A]
Lugalbanda’s stratagem
(1) Lugalbanda’s loneliness; his plan
1–14
(2) The Ninkasi interlude
15–27
(3) Description of Anzud’s dwelling
28–49
(4) Lugalbanda takes care of the young bird.
50–62
[B]
The meeting with Anzud
(1) Anzud returns; his fears
63–89
(2) Anzud’s joy and gratitude
90–110
(3) Lugalbanda praise and supplication to Anzud
111–131
(4) Anzud’s offers; Lugalbanda’s refusals
132–166
(5) Lugalbanda’s request: miraculous speed
167–202
(168–183 = 185–200)

The Return of Lugalbanda
133
II.
Lugalbanda’s Return to His Brothers
[C]
Effects of the return
(1) The journey; Anzud advises secrecy.
203–219
(2) Effects of Lugalbanda’s return
220–250
(3) Discomfiture of Enmerkar’s campaign
251–266
III.
The Solution
[D]
Problem solving
(1) Enmerkar requests a runner.
268–289
(2) Enmerkar’s message to Inana
290–321
(3) Lugalbanda insists on going all alone.
322–337
[E]
The ultimate message
(4) His journey and arrival in Unug
338–349
(5) He delivers Enmerkar’s message.
350–387
(360–87=294–321)
(6) Inana’s reply: catch the magic fish!
388–412
IV.
Epilogue
Praise to Aratta and Lugalbanda!
413–417
3. It is obvious that the text consists of two main parts: the Anzud episode
and the journey to Unug. It is also obvious that the second follows from
the first. The interlude, consisting of the hero’s return to his comrades, has
two functions: first, it is the realization of Lugalbanda’s specific wish; sec-
ond, it harkens back to Lugalbanda’s tribulations in the first part in overt
terms. The end is peculiar: the solution to Enmerkar’s problem is given to
Lugalbanda by Inana—but the text omits the journey back to Aratta, the
repetition of the message, and Enmerkar’s acting upon it. These things are
merely implied, since the epilogue sings the praise of Aratta. In fact, the
poem uses straight repetition only sparingly. On a small scale there is the
episode describing Anzud’s fears at not finding his young (lines 70–77),
where the repetition is cleverly used to bring about an effect of climax. On
a larger scale there is the (usual) repetition of Enmerkar’s message to Inana
(lines 294–320 = 359–386); as mentioned above, the omission of the repe-
tition of Inana’s answer is highly unusual. There are also a few instances
of “formula repetition,” by which I mean a series of statements that while
not being identical as to contents are so in style. Lines 70–77 show this tac-
tic as well; the best example is the “temptation scene” in which Anzud
wants to reward Lugalbanda with lavish gifts (lines 135–157). Lastly, this
second installment of the story also shows some instances of longish
descriptive or explanatory matter that is not necessarily germane to the
main story line—a device that was also used in the first part. As such we

134
Epics of Sumerian Kings
can point to the Nin-kasi paragraph (lines 15–22) but also to the descrip-
tion of Anzud (lines 115–124), Unug’s camp before Aratta (lines 255–265),
and the state of Unug before Enmerkar started to renovate it (lines
294–299//360–365).
4. This second poem represents the final stage and apogee of
Lugalbanda’s development into the (saintly) savior of his nation.72 This
happens in several stages, all of them recognizable in traditional saints’
lives. First, there is the meeting with a potentially dangerous creature. The
hero by means of subterfuge, but which takes the form of an act of char-
ity, gains the unfailing gratitude and support of this creature. In fact,
Lugalbanda’s luxurious treatment of the young of Anzud duplicates in a
way the feast that he had offered the gods in the first poem. Lugalbanda’s
reward is somewhat negotiated, in that he spurns worldly power, riches,
and success but asks instead for the one thing that is necessary to him: the
ability to rejoin his people. The fact that this selfsame property of miracu-
lous speed will later be used to act as the savior of his people cannot as
yet be foreseen, but it is there nevertheless. Also, this gift makes the hero
somewhat akin to the Thunderbird itself, since Lugalbanda will now be
able to travel as fast as the bird. The notion that he must keep silent about
his newly acquired miraculous power is a motif one often meets in saints’
lives: by their sainthood and their wondrous powers they and they alone
are able to work miracles, and so from the moment when they obtain saint-
hood they are forever set apart from the common people. The disbelief
and indeed mistrust of his brothers is also a theme often met in saints’ lives:
it takes dire circumstances before the skeptical people will admit that they
are in the presence of sanctity. However, soon Lugalbanda claims that he
is the one to save his people from their impossible predicament—and this
without unveiling what his strange power is and how he got it. It is prob-
ably important that his miraculous speed impresses even Inana, who
immediately treats him more or less as an equal, or at least as someone
who is fit to associate with higher powers such as herself. That the story is
turned inside out is illustrated by the fact that the story ends with Inana
advising Lugalbanda about what Enmerkar should do. The return to
Enmerkar and the realization of the advice is not even mentioned.
Lugalbanda, not Enmerkar, is the hero of both poems. The outer frame and
the inner plot have been blended into a whole, and they come together in
the person of Lugalbanda.
5. The text is known at present from fifty-five tablets and/or fragments
thereof.73 There were at least five recensions containing the whole com-
position on one tablet, with three or four columns per side. Two of these
are well preserved and give us an almost complete text. Eleven exemplars

The Return of Lugalbanda
135
are recensions on two or three tablets, which may well represent volumes
1 and 2 (and 3) of a complete edition. The proper sequence of such series
will have to be decided by further epigraphic study. As expected, the first
part of the composition is better represented than the latter part. The rest
of the material consists of single-column tablets containing from thirty to
fifty lines per side. There are no obvious “early exercise” tablets, although
a small number of extract tablets74—all of them fragmentary—are executed
with much less care than the rest. Only seven pieces come from outside
Nippur. Kish is represented by two partial editions on two-column tablets.
Ur has one such edition. The provenance of an extract tablet in the Louvre
is unknown, but it is possibly also from Kish. All this material, from Nippur
or not, is Old Babylonian. The most exciting pieces, however, are not,
since they are from the British Museum K collections found at Nineveh: we
have two extracts and one larger edition. These are bilingual, which is
highly important on two counts. First, they are proof that the high literary
tradition of the Old Babylonian curriculum was preserved until well into
the first millennium. Second, they bothered to translate them, which
implies an interest at some level in the texts as literature.
6. The first and well-nigh complete edition of the text is Wilcke 1969,
which after more than three decades is still a model of the craft. Important
material was added in Falkowitz 1983. Later translations are Römer and
Edzard 1993 and Black 1998: 58–64. One might also consult Vanstiphout
1998a: 130–46.

The Return of Lugalbanda
Composite Text
I. LUGALBANDA AND ANZUD
A.
LUGALBANDA’S STRATAGEM
1
lugal-ban3-da kur ki su3-ra2 gsa2-la ba-ni-in-dag
isi za-buki-a nir ba-ni-in-gsal2
ama nu-mu-un-da-an-ti na nu-mu-un-ri-ri 
a-a nu-mu-un-da-an-ti inim nu-mu-un-di-ni-ib-be2
5
zu-a kal-la-ni nu-mu-un-da-an-ti
lu2 inim ssag4-ga-na-ke4 inim nu-um-mi-ib2-sig10-sig10-ge
ssag4 ni2-te-na-ka inim am3-mi-ib2-sig10-ge
mussen nam-me-te-a ba-ni-in-ak
anzudmussen nam-me-te-a ba-ni-in-ak
10
dam-a-ni-da gu2-da ba-ni-in-la2
dam anzudmussen-de3 dumu anzudmussen-de3
gsisbun-na um-ma-ni-in-dur2-ru-un
an-ne2 nin-gu2-en-na-ka
hur-sags-gsa2-ni-ta um-ma-da-an-ri
15
munus tuku-tuku ama-ra me-te gsal2
dnin-ka-si tuku-tuku ama-ra me-te gsal2
na4gakkul-a-ni na4za-gin3 dur5-ru
gilam-sa2-a-ni kug-me kug-sig17
kass-a gub-ba-a-ni nigs2-giri17-zal
20
kass-ta tuss-a-ni mud5-me-gsar-ra
sagi-a kass sa2-sa2-da-ni DU.DU nu-kuss2-u3
dnin-ka-si gsisbunigs zag-ga-ta ib2?-ba-ta
gsesstin ne-sags-gsa2-mu me-te-a-ass he2-em-mi-ib-gsal2
mussen kass nags-gsa2 ul ti-a
25
anzudmussen kass nags-gsa2 ul ti-a
ki unugki ba-gsin-na ha-ma-an-pad3-de3
anzudmussen-de3 har-ra-an sses-mu-ne-ka he2-em-mi-ib-sig10-sig10-ge
ud-ba giri17-zal gsis hu-ri2-in den-ki-ke4
hur-sags na4gug igi-gun3 dinana-ka
30
ugu-ba u18-ru-gin7 ki he2-us2-sa-ba
a-ru-gin7 siki la2-la2-a-ba
kur-ra gsissu-bi ki-mah-ba
tug2-gin7 i-im-dul gada-gin7 i-im-bur2
gsisi-ri9-na-bi muss sags-kal-gin7
35
id2 ka 7 dutu-ka ssag4-ba mu-un-sse21-sse21
136
Epics of Sumerian Kings

The Return of Lugalbanda
Translation
I. LUGALBANDA AND ANZUD
A.
LUGALBANDA’S STRATAGEM
Lugalbanda is stranded in the farthest highlands
Ever since he ventured into the Zabu region.
No mother is with him to give him advice;
No father is with him to speak to him;
No valued acquaintance is with him,
No trusted person he can consult.
Therefore he speaks to himself:75
“I shall treat the bird as befits him;
“I shall treat Anzud as befits him,
“And I shall embrace his wife.
“Anzud’s wife and child
“I shall seat at a banquet.
“An shall fetch me Ninguenaka
“from her hilly country.
“And that knowing woman, her mother’s pride,
“Ninkasi, that knowing woman, her mother’s pride—
“Her brewing vat is of gleaming lapis lazuli;
“Her cask is of refined silver and gold;
“When she stands by the beer, there is joy;
“When she sits down after (drawing) the beer, there is applause;
“Untiringly Ninkasi the cup-bearer mixes drinks and serves them
“From the kegs at her side and on her lap—
“That Ninkasi shall surely help me to serve fine and fitting drinks!
“When the bird has drunk the beer he will be happy;
“When Anzud has drunk the beer he will be happy,
“And he will find me the place where Unug went.
“Anzud will put me on the track of my brothers!”
Now there was a splendid eagle-tree of Enki;76
On top of the many-hued carnelian hill of Inana
It stood—fixed in the earth like a tower it was
And scraggly like an A.RU.77
Its shade covers the highest peaks in the highlands
Like a cloth, spreads over them like a linen sheet.
Its roots, like sagkal -snakes,
Repose in the Sun’s seven-mouthed river.
The Return of Lugalbanda
137
1
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

da-da-ba ha-ssu-ur2 nu-zu kur-ra-ka
muss nu-un-sul-sul gsir2 nu-sa-sa
ssag4-ba buru5-azmussen-e
gud3 im-ma-ni-ib-us2 nunus-bi ba-ab-gsar
40
da-da-ba mussen anzudmussen-de3
gud3 im-ma-ni-ib-gsar amar-bi ba-e-sseg11
gsis-bi gsis-li gsis gsistaskarin-na-kam
mussen-e pa mul-mul-la-bi an-dul3-se3 ba-ab-ak
mussen-e a2 ud zal-le-da-ka ni2 un-gid2
45
anzudmussen-de3 dutu ed2-a-ra sseg11 un-gi4
sseg11 gi4-bi-sse3 kur-ra lu5-lu5-bi-a ki mu-un-ra-ra-ra
umbin kussu2ku6-e hu-ri2-inmussen-na-kam
ni2-bi-ta am-e kur ur2-se3 ni2-bi im-sar-re
tarah-e kur-bi-sse3 zi-bi im-sar-re
50
lugal-ban3-da gal in-zu gal in-ga-an-tum2-mu
ninda mu-ud-gi digsir-re-e-ne-ke4
sags-sig10-ga-ba sags-sig10 ba-an-tah
ninda gi-ze-ess-ta-ba lal3 ba-an-du8-du8 lal3 ba-an-tah-tah
amar-gud3 amar anzudmussen-da-ka igi-bi-sse3 mu-un-gsar
55
amar-e uzusul2 bi2-in-gu7 uzui3-udu bi2-in-pess5
ninda-i3-de2-a ka-bi-sse3 sa2 bi2-in-dug4
amar anzudmussen-da-ka gud3-ba mi-ni-sseg11
igi-bi ssim-bi-zid-da mi-ni-gun3
sags-ba gsiserin bar6-bar6 bi2-in-du3-du3
60
mu-du-li-a ssu gur-gur-ra-bi sags-bi-sse3 mu-un-gsar
gud3 anzudmussen-da-ka ba-ra-zig3
ha-ssu-ur2-ra nu-zu kur-ra-ka ki-gub mu-un-na-ak-en
B.
THE MEETING WITH ANZUD
ud-ba mussen-e am kur-ra-ka gu2 mi-ni-ib-gur-gur
anzudmussen-de3 am kur-ra-ka gu2 mi-ni-ib-gur-gur
65
am ti-la ssu-bi-sse3 i-im-la2
am ug5-ga gu2-ba i-im-la2
a 10! gur!-am3 ze2!-bi mu-un-de2
mussen zag diss am3-ma-da-lu-ga
anzudmussen zag diss am3-ma-da-lu-ga
70
mussen-e gud3-bi-sse3 sseg11 un-gi4
70a
anzudmussen-de gud3-bi-sse3 sseg11 un-gi4
amar-bi gud3-bi-ta inim nu-um-ma-ni-ib-gi4
2-kam-ma-sse3 mussen-e gud3-bi-sse3 sseg11 un-gi4
amar-bi gud3-bi-ta inim nu-um-ma-ni-ib-gi4
138
Epics of Sumerian Kings

Nearby in this highland that knows no cypress,78
Where no snake slithers, no scorpion scurries—
In the midst thereof only the buru-az bird
Builds its nest and lays its eggs.
There the bird Anzud
Had made his nest and settled his young.
The nest was made of juniper and boxwood:
The bird had woven their bright twigs into a shade.
At daybreak, when the bird stretches himself,
At sunrise, when Anzud cries out,
The earth in the Lulubi Mountains shakes at his cry.
He has shark’s teeth and eagle claws;
In terror of him buffaloes79 scatter into the foothills;
Stags flee into their mountains.
Lugalbanda, being clever and cunning,
Added to the sweetmeats fit for gods80
The choicest ingredients.
Into the gizi-ess ta dough he kneaded honey, adding it steadily.
Then he set (the cake) before the nestling, the young of Anzud.
He gave the young salted meat to eat, fed it on sheep’s fat;
He set out more cakes at its beak.
Then he put the young of Anzud back in its nest,
Painted its eyes with kohl,
Dabbed its head with cedar scent,
And set out spicy sausages at its head.
He then withdrew from Anzud’s nest
And waited for him81 in the highland that knows no cypress.
B.
THE MEETING WITH ANZUD
Just then the bird was herding the highland buffaloes,
Anzud was herding the highland buffaloes.
He held a live buffalo in his talons
And carried a dead buffalo on his shoulders.
He spit bile like gallons of water.
The bird circled around once,
Anzud circled around once.
When the bird called out to his nest,
When Anzud called out to his nest,
His fledgling did not call back from the nest.
When the bird called out to his nest again,
His fledgling did not call back from the nest.
The Return of Lugalbanda
139
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
70a

ud na-an-ga-ma mussen-e gud3-bi-sse3 sseg11 un-gi4
75
amar-bi gud3-bi-ta inim ba-ni-ib-gi4-gi4
i3-ne-sse3 mussen-e gud3-bi-sse3 sseg11 un-gi4
amar-bi gud3-bi-ta inim nu-um-ma-ni-ib-gi4
mussen-e a-nir i-im-gsar an-e ba-tegs3
dam-bi u8 bi2-in-dug4 engur-ra ba-tegs3
80
mussen-e u8 dug4-ga-bi-sse3
dam-bi a-nir gsar-ra-bi-sse3
da-nun-na digsir hur-sags-gsa2
kissi8-gin7 ki-in-dar-ra ba-an-di-ni-ib-kur9-re-ess-am3
mussen-e dam-bi-ir gu3 am3-ma-de2-e
85
anzudmussen-de3 dam-bi-ir gu3 am3-ma-de2-e
gud3-mu-ta tur3 gal dnanna-gin7 ni2 huss he2-em-da-ri
pirigs kur-ra tess2-bi du7-du7-gin7 su-zi he2-em-du8-du8
amar-mu gud3-ba a-ba-a ba-ra-ab-tum3
anzudmussen gud3-ba a-ba-a ba-ra-ab-tum3
90
mussen-e gud3-bi-sse3 he2-em-ma-tegs3-gsa2-da-ka
anzudmussen-de3 gud3-bi-sse3 he2-em-ma-tegs3-gsa2-da-ka
ki digsir til3-la-gin7 im-ak giri17-zal im-du8-du8
amar-bi gud3-bi-a i-im-sseg11
igi-bi ssim-zid-da mu-un-gun3
95
sags-ba gsiserin bar6-bar6 mu-un-du3-du3
mu-du-li-a ssu gur-gur-ra-bi sags-bi-sse3 mu-un-gsar
mussen-e ni2-bi silim-e-sse3 iri in-ga-am3-me
anzudmussen-de3 ni2-bi silim-e-sse3 iri in-ga-am3-me
id2 hal-hal-la nun nam tar-re-bi-me-en
100
zid du ssag4 kuss2-u3 den-lil2-la2-ka gsissigi-tab-bi-me-en
a-a-mu den-lil2-le mu-un-de6-en
kur-ra gsisig gal-gin7 igi-ba bi2-in-tab-en
nam u3-mu-tar a-ba-a ssu mi-ni-ib-bal-e
inim u3-bi2-dug4 a-ba-a ib2-ta-bal-e
105
lu2 gud3-gsa2 ne-en ba-e-a-ak-a
digsir he2-me-en inim ga-mu-ra-ab-dug4
ku-li-gsa2 nam-ba-e-ni-kur9-re-en
lu2-ulu3 he2-me-en nam ga-mu-ri-ib-tar
kur-re gaba ssu gsar nam-mu-ri-in-tuku-un
110
mes anzudmussen-de3 a2 ssum2-ma he2-me-en
lugal-ban3-da ni2 diss-ta hul2-la diss-ta
ni2 diss ssag4 hul2-la diss-ta
mussen-e mi2 iri im-me
140
Epics of Sumerian Kings

Up until then, whenever the bird called out to his nest
His fledgling had always called back from the nest,
But now, when the bird called out to his nest,
His fledgling did not call back from the nest.
The bird shrieked in grief; the cry rose up to heaven;
His wife cried out “Woe!”; the cry descended into the Abzu.
The bird with his cry of “Woe!”
His wife with her cry of grief
Made the Anuna, the gods of the hills,
Crawl into crevices like ants.
The bird spoke to his wife,
Anzud spoke to his wife:
“My nest, vast like the cattle-pen of Nanna,82 spells disaster!
“As if mountain lions are advancing, it spreads fear!
“Who stole my fledgling from its nest?
“Who stole (young) Anzud from his nest?”
But when the bird came near to his nest,
When Anzud came near to his nest,
It seemed to him like a divine dwelling, so brilliantly it was adorned.
The fledgling was lying in the nest,
Its eyes painted with kohl,
Its head sprinkled with cedar scent,
And a roll of salted meat set out at its head.
The bird rejoiced in his good fortune;
Anzud rejoiced in his good fortune:
“I am the Prince who decides the destiny of the rolling rivers;
“I am the helmet of the fertile one who soothes Enlil’s heart.
“My father Enlil brought me here;
“He made me bar the entrance to the highland like a great door.
“A fate decided by me—who can alter that?
“A decree uttered by me—who can change that?
“Whoever you are who has done this to my nest,
“If you are a god, I want to talk to you;
“I will let you enter in amity!
“If you are a man, I will decide your fate;
“I shall not suffer you to have a rival in the highlands;
“‘Hero-made-strong-by-Anzud’ you(r name) shall be!”83
Lugalbanda, partly in awe, partly in joy,
Partly in awe, partly in great joy,
Praises the bird,
The Return of Lugalbanda
141
75
80
85
90
95
100
105
110

anzudmussen-de3 mi2 iri im-me
115
mussen ssu-ur2 sig7 nigsin5-a tud-da
anzudmussen ssu-ur2 sig7 nigsin5-a tud-da
sug-a a tu5-tu5-zu-a a-ne dug4-dug4
pa-bil2-ga-zu nun hal-hal-la-ke4
an ssu-zu-sse3 mu-un-gsar ki gsiri3-zu-sse3 mu-un-gsar
120
pa-zu an-na sa am3-ssi-im-la2-la2-en nu-mu-[...]
ki-sse3 umbin-zu am kur-ra ssilam kur-ra gsisses2-ad!-am3 ba-nu2
murgu-zu dub sar-sar-re-me-en
ti-ti-zu dnirah dar-a-me-en
ssag4-su3-zu kiri6 sig7-ga u6-e gub-ba-me-en
125
ssa-dug4-ga-ta zi-mu mu-ri-de6 zag-mu mu-ri-us2
dam-zu ama-mu he2-am3 bi2-in-dug4
za-e ad-da-mu he2-me-en bi2-in-dug4
di4-di4-la2-zu-ne sses-mu-ne-ka nam-ba-e-ni-in-ku4-ku4
ssa-dug4-ga-ta ha-ssu-ur2-ra nu-zu kur-ra-ka ki-gub mu-ra-ak-e
130
dam-zu silim-gsa2 he2-mu-e-da-gub
silim-mu ga-mu-ra-dug4 nam tar-ra-mu ga-mu-ra-ab-[bur2]-ra-a
mussen-e ni2-bi mu-un-na-ra-ba-e ul mu-un-ssi-ak-e
anzudmussen-de3 ni2-bi mu-un-na-ra-ba-e ul mu-un-ssi-ak-e
anzudmussen-de3 kug lugal-ban3-da-ar gu3 mu-na-de2-e
135
gsa2-nu lugal-ban3-da-mu
gsisma2 kug-gin7 gsisma2 sse-gin7
gsisma2 gsishasshur bal-bal-e-gin7
gsisma2 ukuss2-a an-dul3 ak-a-gin7
gsisma2 ki buru14 hi-li du8-du8-a-gin7
140
sig4 kul-ab4ki-sse3 sags il2-la gsin-na
lugal-ban3-da lu2 numun-e ki ags2-am3 ssu nu-um-<ma>-gid2-de3
dssara2 dumu ki ags2 dinana-gin7
ti zu2-zu-a ud-gin7 ed2-i3
GIL.AK iti6-gin7 ed2-i3
145
ti zu2 lu2 ra-ra-bi muss ssag4-tur3 he2-e
ku6 urududur10-ra-gin7 tu6 kud he2-e
ad urududur10-ra-gin7 nigs2-KESS2 he2-ak-e
lugal-ban3-da lu2 numun-e ki ags2-am3 ssu nu-um-ma-gid2-de3
dnin-urta dumu den-lil2-la2-ke4
150
tug2sagsssu pirigs me3-a ugu-za he2-eb-dul
LUM? BU TUKU kur gal-la gaba nu-gi4 gaba-za he2-eb-tab
kur-ra sa u3 NE2 KA sa USS [...]
iri im-ssi-du-u5 ki X [...]
142
Epics of Sumerian Kings

Praises Anzud.
“O bird with the sparkling eyes, born in this region,
“O Anzud with the sparkling eyes, born in this region,
“You frolic as you bathe in the pools.
“Your father, Prince of all domains,
“Placed heaven at your hands and earth at your feet.
“Your wingspan is a net stretched across the sky; it cannot [...]
“On the earth your talons are a trap laid for the bulls and cows of the
highland;
“Your spine is straight enough to write tablets;84
“Your breast is Nirah parting the waters;
“As to your back you are a verdant garden, a wonder to behold.
“Yesterday I put my life in your hands, entrusted my being to you.
“Saying ‘May your wife become my mother,’
“And saying ‘May you become my father!’
“I shall treat your little ones as my brothers.
“Since yesterday I have waited in the highland that knows no cypress.
“Your wife is included in my salutations;
“My salutations to you! Now I would like you to decide my fate.”
The bird spoke, being pleased with him;
Anzud spoke, being pleased with him;
Anzud spoke to Lugalbanda:
“Well now, Lugalbanda,
“Like a ship full of precious metal, a ship full of grain,
“A ship delivering the apple harvest,
“A ship piled up with cucumbers, so high that it casts shade,
“A ship laden lavishly at the harvest fields—
“Return proudly in this manner to the brickwork of Kulab!”
But Lugalbanda, who loves his descendants, would not accept.
“Like SSara, the beloved son of Inana,
“Shoot forth your barbed darts like sunbeams;
“Shoot forth your reed arrows like moonrays.
“Let your barbed darts be a horned viper to those they hit;
“Let them cut with magic power, as one cuts fish with a cleaver;
“May they be bound together like logs hewn with the axe!”85
But Lugalbanda, who loves his descendants, would not accept.
“May Ninurta, Enlil’s son,
“Set the helmet ‘Lion of Battle’86 on your head;
“May he put the breastplate ‘In the Great Highland No Retreat!’ on
your breast!
“May he give you [...] the battle-net [...] in the highland;
“And when you march against a city, may he [...]!”
The Return of Lugalbanda
143
115
120
125
130
135
140
145
150

lugal-ban3-da lu2 numun-e ki [ags2-am3 ssu nu]-[um]-ma-[gid2]-[de3]
155
he2-gsal2 dugssakir kug ddumu-zid-da-[ka-ka]
i3-bi ki-ssar2-ra-ke4 ssa-ra-X [...]
gara2-bi ki-ssar2-ra-ke4 ssa-ra-X [...]
lugal-ban3-da lu2 numun-e ki ags2-am3 ssu nu-um-ma-gid2-de3
ki-ibmussen ki-ibmussen egsur-ra sug gid2-i-gin7 inim-ma [mu]-[na]-ni-ib-gi4
160
mussen-e gsesstug2 mu-un-ssi-gsa2-ar
anzudmussen-de3 kug lugal-ban3-da-ar gu3 mu-na-de2-e
gsa2-nu lugal-ban3-da-mu
inim ssag4-ga sig10-ge ur5-gim-ma-am3
gud erim2 du-us2-a sig10-ge5-dam
165
ansse dug3 guz-za har-ra-an si sa2 dab5-be2-dam inim-inim ma-gub ga-
ri-gub
nam tar-ra ssag4-ge gur7-a-zu ga2-e ga-mu-ri-ib-tar
kug lugal-ban3-da mu-na-ni-ib-gi4-gi4
zag-sse-gsa2 kas4 he2-gsal2 nam-ba-kuss2-u3-de3-en
a2-gsa2-a lirum he2-gsal2
170
a2-mu ga-sud-sud a2-mu na-an-gig-ge
ud-gin7 du dinana-gin7
ud 7-e ud diskur-ra-gin7
izi-gin7 ga-il2 nim-gin7 ga-gsir2
igi du8-a bar-ra-gsa2 ga-gsin
175
igi il2-la-gsa2 gsiri3-mu ga-ab-gub
ssag4-ge gur7-gsa2 an-ta ga-ab-gi4
ki sag4-mu na-an-ga-ma-ab-be2-a kusse-sir2-[mu] ga-du8
dutu iri-mu kul-ab4ki-sse3 am3-ku4-ku4-de3-ne-a 
lu2 as2 dug4-ga-mu nam-ba-e-ssi-hul2-e-en 
180
lu2 du14 mu2-a-mu he2-du-mu nam-me 
alan-zu gsis-dim2-ba um-mi-dim2 u6-e gub-ba-me-en 
mu-zu ki-en-gi-ra pa ed2 ha-bi2-ak 
e2 digsir gal-gal-e-ne-ka me-te-ass bi2-[ib]-gsal2
anzudmussen-de3 kug lugal-ban3-da -ra [gu3] [mu-na]-de2-e 
185
za3-sse-za kas4 he2-gsal2 nam-[ba-kuss2-u3-de3]-[en]
a2-zu-a lirum [he2-gsal2]
a2-zu sud-sud-a a2-[zu na-an-gig-ge]
ud-gin7 du d[inana-gin7]
ud 7 d[isskur-ra]-[gin7]
190
izi-gin7 il2-la nim-gin7 gsir2-a
144
Epics of Sumerian Kings

But Lugalbanda, who loves his descendants, would not accept.
“The bounty of the churn of Holy Dumuzid,
“Whose fat is the fat of the whole world, may it also [...];
“Its milk is the milk of the whole world; may it also [...].”
But Lugalbanda, who loves his descendants, would not accept.
Like the kib bird, the sweetwater kib bird flying over the swamp, he
answers.87
The bird listens to him.
Anzud then spoke to Lugalbanda:
“Well now, my Lugalbanda,
“May it88 then be as your own heart wishes!
“A willful plowing ox must be kept on the track;
“A braying donkey must be kept on the straight path—I will grant
your wish!89
“I will decide your destiny according to your own desire!”
Holy Lugalbanda replied:
“May the strength of running abound in my thighs, so that I never tire.
“Let there be power in my arms;
“May my arms stretch wide, may my force not weaken.
“Traveling like the Sun, like Inana,
“Like the seven storms of Isskur,
“May I leap like the flame, jump like lightning!
“I want to be able to go wherever I choose,
“Set my feet wherever I cast my eyes,
“Arrive wherever my heart prompts me,
“And loosen my sandals only where my heart tells me!
“If the Sun allows me to reach my city Kulab,
“May those who despise me not rejoice!
“May those who have a quarrel with me not say, ‘Come on then!’
“Then I shall have the sculptors make statues of you, a wonder to
behold!
“Your name shall be revered throughout Sumer,
“And the statues will become an emblem in every great temple!”90
Anzud replied to Holy Lugalbanda:
“The strength of running shall abound in your thighs, so that you never
tire.
“There shall be power in your arms;
“Your arms shall stretch wide, your force shall not weaken.
“Traveling like the Sun, like Inana,
“Like the seven storms of Isskur,
“You shall leap like the flame, jump like lightning!
The Return of Lugalbanda
145
155
160
165
170
175
180
185
190

igi du8-a bar-ra-za gsin-na
igi il2-la-za gsiri3-zu gub-bi2-ib
ssag4-ge gur7-a-zu an-ta gi4-bi2
ki sag4-zu na-an-ga-ra-ab-be2-e-a kusse-sir2-zu du8-a
195
dutu iri-zu kul-ab4ki-sse3 am3-ku4-ku4-de3-en-na-a
lu2 as2 dug4-ga-zu nam-ba-e-ssi-hul2-le-en
lu2 du14 mu2-a-zu he2-du-zu nam-me
[alan]-mu gsis-dim2-ba um-mi-dim2 u6-e um-mi-gub
[mu]-mu ki-en-gi-ra pa ed2 ba-ni-ak
200
[e2][digsir] gal-gal-e-ne-ka me-te-ass im-mi-ib-gsal2
[X] X kusse-sir2-gin2 ni2-ba hu-mu-ra-an-dub2-dub2-be-ess
[X] id2buranun-na pa5 ubur-gin7 gsiri3-zu pa4-pa4 mi2 am3-me
II. LUGALBANDA’S RETURN TO HIS BROTHERS
C.
EFFECTS OF THE RETURN
[ninda] kaskal-la-ka-ni nu-um-ka-ass
gsistukul-a-ni diss-bi ssu im-ma-an-ti
205
anzudmussen an-ta i3-gsin
lugal-ban3-da ki-ta i3-gsin
[mussen-e an]-ta igi mi-ni-in-il2 erin2-e igi bi2-in-du8-ru
[lugal]-[ban3]-da ki-ta igi mi-ni-in-il2 sahar erin2-e du8-a igi bi2-in-du8-ru
mussen-e kug lugal-ban3-da-ar gu3 mu-na-de2-e
210
gsa2-nu lugal-ban3-da-mu
na ga-e-ri na-ri-mu he2-e-dab5
inim ga-ra-ab-dug4 gsizzal he2-em-ssi-ak
gu3 i-ri-de2-a nam i-ri-tar-ra
ku-li-zu-ne-er nam-mu-ni-ib-be2-en
215
ssess-zu-ne-er pa nam-bi2-ib-ed2-en
sag9-ga hul ssag4-ga gsal2-la ur5 he2-na-nam-ma
gsa2-e gud3-mu-se3 he2-me-en za-e erin2-zu he2-me-en
mussen-e gud3-bi-sse3 ssu am3-ma-nigsin
lugal-ban3-da ki sses-a-ne-ne-sse3 gsiri3 im-ma-gub-be2
220
u5mussen gsiss-gi kug-ta ed2-a-gin7
la-ha-ma abzu-ta re7-e-gin7
lu2 an-ta ki-a gub-ba-gin7
lugal-ban3-da ka KESS2 gsar-ra sses-a-ne-ne-ka murub4-ba ba-an-gub?
sses-a-ne-ne gu3 ba-ab-ra-ra-ra-[as] [X] erin2-e gu3 ab-ra-ra-ass
225
ssess-a-ne-ne ku-li-ne-ne
en3 tar-re im-mi-in-kus2-u3-ne
gsa2-nu lugal-ban3-da-mu za-e gsal2-la-zu-ne
146
Epics of Sumerian Kings

“You shall be able to go wherever you choose,
“Set your feet wherever you cast your eyes,
“Arrive wherever your heart prompts you,
“And loosen your sandals only where your heart tells you!
“If the Sun allows you to reach your city Kulab,
“Those who despise you shall not rejoice!
“Those who have a quarrel with you shall not say, ‘Come on then!’
“Have the sculptors make statues of me, a wonder to behold!
“My name shall be revered throughout Sumer,
“And my statues will become an emblem in every great temple!
“Of themselves [the rough places] shall become [plain] as a street for you!
“The [width] of the Euphrates shall be but an irrigation ditch to your feet!”
II. LUGALBANDA’S RETURN TO HIS BROTHERS
C.
EFFECTS OF THE RETURN
The travel provisions he had not eaten,
And his weapons, one by one, he took in hand.
Anzud flew above, in the air,
And Lugalbanda ran below, on the earth.91
Looking from above [the bird] spied the troops;
Looking from below Lugalbanda saw the dust raised by the troops.
The bird told Lugalbanda:
“Now, then, my Lugalbanda,
“I will give you some advice—heed it!
“I will tell you something—listen!
“What I promised you, the destiny I fixed for you,
“Do not tell that to your companions,
“Do not make it known to your brothers!
“Good fortune causes bad feelings—so it has ever been!
“Now I am for my nest; you go to your troops!”
And the bird turned around to his nest
As Lugalbanda set out for the place where his brothers were.
Like the U- bird rising from the holy reed thicket,
Like a lahama-spirit shooting up from the Abzu,
Like one landing on earth from heaven,
Lugalbanda suddenly stepped into the midst of the troop of his brothers.
His brothers started to chatter, the troop began to babble.
His brothers and companions
Weary him with questions:
“Well now, Lugalbanda, (how is it that) you are here again?
The Return of Lugalbanda
147
195
200
205
210
215
220
225

lu2 me3-a gsis ra-gin7 erin2-e he2-en-tak4-nam
i3 dug3-a tur3-ra ba-ra-mu-un-gu7
230
ga luh-ha amass-a ba-ra-mu-un-gu7
hur-sags gal lu2 dili nu-du-u3-da
lu2-bi lu2-ra nu-gi4-gi4-da a-gin7 im-da-du-de3-en
2-kam-ma-sse3 ssess-a-ne-ne ku-li-ne-ne
en3 tar-re im-mi-in-kus2-u3-ne
235
id2 kur-ra ama he2-nun-na-ra
pess10-pess10-bi pess10-ta sur-ra-am3
a-bi a-gin7 mu-e-nags a-gin7 mu-e-bal-e
kug lugal-ban3-da mu-un-na-ni-ib-gi4-gi4
id2 kur-ra ama he2-nun-na-ra
240
pess10-pess10-bi pess10-ta sur-ra-am3
zag-sse-gsa2 ki um-ma-ni-us2 a kussummud-gin7 u3-mu-nags
ur-bar-ra-gin7 gum3-ga-am3 mi-ni-za u2-sal i3-gu7-en 
tu-gur4mussen-gin7 ki im-ri-ri-ge-en i-li-a-nu-um kur-ra i3-gu7-[en]
lugal-ban3-da sses-a-ne-ne ku-li-ne-ne
245
inim in-ne-en-dug4-ga ssag4-ga-ne-ne-a ba-an-ssub-bu-uss
i-gi4-in-zu buru5mussen-e ud gid2-da tess2-bi KESS2-da-gin7
gu2-ni gu2-da im-da-la2-e-ne ne mu-un-su-su-ub
amar gam3-gam3mussen gud3-ba tuss-a-gin7
mu-ni-ib-gu7-u3-ne mu-ni-ib-na8-na8-ne
250
kug lugal-ban3-da tu-ra-ni mu-un-ta-ab-ed3-ne
ud-ba unugki-ga lu2 dili-gin7 egsir-bi-ir bi2-ib-us2
muss zar-ra-gin7 hur-sags-ta im-me-re-bal-bal
iri danna 1-am3 am3-da-gsal2-la-ba
dim-dim-e arattaki-ka
255
unugki kul-ab4ki-bi ur2 ba-an-dun-dun
iri-ta gi-bar-bar-re im-gin7 im-ssegs3
im-dug-ge im mu-a gsin-na-gin7
bad3 arattaki-ka gu3-nun-bi im-me
ud ba-zal-zal iti ba-sud-sud mu ama-bi-ir ba-gi4
260
buru14 sig7-ga an-na ba-e-a-ed3-de3
a-ssag4-ga igi ba-ab-hul ni2 su-e bi2-ib-us2
im-dug-ge im mu-a gsin-na-gin7
kaskal-la ki ba-ni-ib2-u2-us2
gsisU2.GSIR2 kur-ra-ke4 ka ba-ni-ib2-KESS2
265
ussumgal tess2-bi mu-un-tag-tag-ge
lu2 iri-sse3 du-u3 nu-um-zu
kul-ab4ki-sse3 du-u3 sags nu-mu-da-ab-ssum2-mu 
148
Epics of Sumerian Kings

“The troop had left you like one fallen in battle;
“You were no longer eating the good fat of the herd;
“You were no longer eating the fresh cheese from the fold!
“From the high hills where no one can walk alone,
“Whence no one can return to humankind, how did you come back?”
And again his brothers and companions
Weary him with questions:
“The highland streams, though mothers of plenty,
“Have very steep banks.
“How did you drink, how did you draw (water)?”
Holy Lugalbanda replied:
“The highland streams, though mothers of plenty,
“Have very steep banks.
“Lying on my side, I drank as from the water skin;92
“I growled like the wolf, I grazed the water-meadows;
“I pecked the earth like the wood-pigeon, I ate wild acorns.”
Lugalbanda’s brothers and companions
Accepted the words he had spoken to them.
As small birds flocking together all day
They embrace and kiss him.
As if he were a gamgam -chick in its nest
They feed him and give him to drink.
Thus they drove away the illness of Holy Lugalbanda.93
Then they again followed (the host of) Unug as one man;94
They wound their way over the hill like a snake over a grain pile.
When the city (Aratta) was but one league distant,
By the watchtowers of Aratta,95
Unug and Kulab pitched camp.
From the city javelins were raining down as from a cloud;
Slingstones, numerous as the raindrops falling in a whole year,
Were whizzing down from the wall of Aratta.
Days went by and lenghtened into months; a whole year passed.
The harvest grew yellow beneath the skies.
Worrying, they looked at the fields; they grew uneasy.
Slingstones, numerous as the raindrops falling in a whole year,
Kept falling on the roads.
Mountain thorns hemmed them in,
Dragons 96 closed up on them;
Nobody knew how to get back to the city;
Nobody could hasten back to Kulab.
The Return of Lugalbanda
149
230
235
240
245
250
255
260
265

III. THE SOLUTION
D.
PROBLEM SOLVING
ssag4-ba en-me-er-kar2 dumu dutu-ke4
ni2 ba-ni-in-te zi ba-ni-in-ir za-pa-ags2-bi ba-ni-in-BAD 
270
lu2 iri-sse3 mu-un-gi4-gi4-a ki mu-ssi-kigs2-kigs2
kul-ab4ki-sse3 mu-un-gi4-gi4-a ki mu-ssi-kigs2-kigs2
lu2 iri-sse3 gsa2-e ga-gsin nu-mu-un-na-ab-be2
kul-ab4ki-sse3 gsa2-e ga-gsin nu-[mu]-[un-na-ab]-[be2]
ugnim kur-kur-ra-ka [mu]-[un-ed2]
275 lu2 iri-sse3 gsa2-e ga-gsin nu-mu-[na]-[ab- be2]
kul-ab4ki-sse3 gsa2-e ga-gsin nu-mu-na-[ab]-[ be2]
ka-KESS2 igi bar-ra-ka mu-un-ed2
lu2 iri-sse3 gsa2-e ga-gsin nu-mu-na-ab- be2
kul-ab4ki-sse3 gsa2-e ga-gsin [nu]-[mu-na-ab- be2] 
280
2-kam-ma-sse3 ugnim kur-kur-ra-ka mu-un-ed2
lu2 iri-sse3 gsa2-e ga-gsin nu-mu-na-ab-be2
kul-ab4ki-sse3 gsa2-e ga-gsin nu-[mu]-[na-ab- be2]
ka-KESS2 igi bar-ra-ka mu-un-ed2
lugal-ban3-da dili-ni un-gsa2 mu-na-an-zi gu3 mu-na-de2-e
285
lugal-mu gsa2-e iri-sse3 ga-gsin lu2 nam-mu-da-an-du
kul-ab4ki-sse3 dili-mu-ne ga-gsin lu2 nam-mu-da-an-du
Enmerkar
ud-da iri-sse3 i3-du-un lu2 nu-mu-e-da-du-u3
ud-da kul-ab4ki-sse3 i3-du-un lu2 nu-mu-e-da-du-u3
zi an-na zi ki-a i3-pad3 me gal-gal kul-ab4ki-a ssu-zu ba-ra-ba-ra-ed2
290
unkin gsar-ra si sa2-a-na
ssag4 e2-gal-la kur gal-gin7 ki he2-us2-a-ba
en-me-er-kar2 dumu dutu-ke4
eme sig dinana ba-ni-in-gu7
ki ud-ba nin9 e5-mu kug dinana-ke4
295
kur ssuba?-ta ssag4 kug-ga-ni-a he2-em-ma-ni-pad3-de3-en
sig4 kul-ab4ki-se3 he2-em-[ma-ni]-in-kur9-re-en
unugki-e sug he2-me-am3 a he2-em-de2-a
bar2-rim4 he2-me-am3 gsissasal he2-mu2-a
gsis-gi he2-me-am3 gi-uss2 gi-henbur he2-<mu2-a>
300
den-ki lugal eridugki-ga-ke4
gi-uss2-bi ha-ma-an-ze2 a-bi ha-ma-an-uss2
mu ninnu-uss hu-mu-du3 mu ninnu-uss hu-mu-di
ki-en-gi ki-uri nigsin2-na-a-ba
150
Epics of Sumerian Kings

III. THE SOLUTION
D.
PROBLEM SOLVING
In their midst Enmerkar, son of the Sun,
Grew anxious and despondent by the unceasing noise.97
He sought someone to travel back to the city,
He sought someone to travel back to Kulab,
But no one said, “I will travel back to the city!”
No one said, “I will travel back to Kulab!”
He went to the foreign troops,
But no one said, “I will travel back to the city!”
No one said, “I will travel back to Kulab!”
He went to the guides’98 regiment,
But no one said, “I will travel back to the city!”
No one said “I will travel back to Kulab!”
Again he went to the foreign troops,
But no one said “I will travel back to the city!”;
No one said, “I will travel back to Kulab!”99
As he went again to the guides’ regiment,
Only Lugalbanda among the throng stood up and said:
“My king, I will go to the city, but no one may come with me!
“I alone will go to Kulab, no one may come with me!”
Enmerkar
“When you go to the city no one shall go with you!
“When you go to Kulab no one shall go with you!”
He (Lugalbanda) swore by the life of heaven and earth: “The powers
of Kulab shall not elude you!”
Standing straight before the gathered assembly
In the palace 100 that rests on earth as a tall mountain
Enmerkar, son of the Sun,
Spoke harsh words to Inana:
“Once upon a time my noble sister, Holy Inana,
“From her bright mountain chose me in her holy heart
“And made me enter Kulab, the Brickwork.
“Unug then was a mere marsh, oozing water.
“Where there was dry land Euphrates poplars grew.101
“Where there was a reed thicket old and young reeds grew together.
“Enki, king of Eridug,
“Made me tear out the old reeds and made me drain the water.
“Fifty years I was building, fifty years I was working.
“So now, if eventually in all of Sumer and Akkad
The Return of Lugalbanda
151
270
275
280
285
290
295
300

mar-tu lu2 sse nu-zu hu-mu-zig3
305
bad3 unugki-ga gu mussen-na-gin7 edin-na he2-ni-la2-la2
i-da-al-la-ba ki-gsal2-la-ba hi-li-mu ba-til
ab2ssilam amar-bi la2-a-gin7 erin2-mu mu-da-la2
dumu ama-ni-ir hul gig-ga iri-ta ed2-a-gin7
nin9 e5-mu kug dinana-ke4
310 sig4 kul-ab4ki-sse3 ssu ma-ra-an-dag
ud-da iri-ni ki ha-ba-an-ags2 gsa2-a-ra hul ha-ba-an-gig
iri gsa2-da a-na-ass am3-da-la2-e
ud-da iri-ni hul ha-ba-an-gig gsa2-a-ra ki ha-ba-an-ags2
gsa2-e iri-da a-na-ass am3-da-la2-e-en
315
nu-gig-ge anzudmussen amar-ra-gin7
ni2 te-a-ni sag2 um-ma-an-di!
bar kug-ga-ni-a um-ma-an-ssub-be2-en
sig4 kul-ab4ki-se3 he2-em-ma-ni-in-kur9-en
gsisgid2-da-mu ud ne ba-an-de6
320
kussE.IB2.UR2-mu ud ne e-ne ba-an-zur-zur-re
nin9 e5-mu kug dinana-ra ur5-gin7 dug4-mu-na-ab
kug lugal-ban3-da e2-gal-ta im-ma-da-ra-ta-ed2
sses-a-ne-ne ku-li-ne-ne
ur gir5 ur-ra kur9-ra-gin7 hu-un-ha mu-un-ssi-ib-za-na-ass
325
dur3 gir5 dur3-a kur9-ra-gin7 galam mu-un-na-ta-ed2
companions
en-ra unugki-se3 gi4-mu-un-ssi-ib
en-me-er-kar2 dumu dutu-ra
Lugalbanda
kul-ab4ki-sse3 dili-mu-ne ga-gsin lu2 nam-mu-da-du a-gin7 mu-un-ne-dug4
companions
me-na-am3 dili-zu-ne kaskal-e sags ba-ra-mu-ri-ib-us2
330
dudug sag9-ga-me nam-ba-e-de3-gub-ba
dlama sag9-ga-me nam-ba-e-de3-gsin-na
ki-gub-ba-me-a nam-ba-e-de3-gub-bu-nam
ki-tuss-a-me-a nam-ba-e-de3-tuss-u3-nam
sahar gsir i3-me-a gsiri3 nam-ba-e-de3-us2-e
335
hur-sags gal lu2 dili nu-du-u3-dam
lu2-bi lu2-ra nu-gi4-gi4-da ba-ra-gi4-gi4-nam
Lugalbanda
ud zal-le in-zu-ta ki-gal-la ba-ra-da-ni-in-sug2-ge-en-za-na
152
Epics of Sumerian Kings

“The Martu, who know no grain,102 should rise up,
“There stands the wall of Unug, extended across the desert like a bird
net!
“But here, in this place, my power103 seems to be finished!
“My troops are bound to me as a calf to its mother.
“Yet, like a child that hates its mother and leaves the city
“My noble sister, Holy Inana,
“Has run back to Kulab, the Brickwork!
“Could she love her city, yet hate me?
“She should link the city to me!
“Could she hate her city, yet love me?
“She should link the city to me!104
“Should the nu-gig 105—as happened to the Anzud chick—
“Reject me in person
“And abandon me by keeping to her holy chamber,
“Let her at least bring me back to Kulab, the Brickwork!
“Only on that day my spear shall be laid aside;
“On that day my shield shall be broken!106
“Speak thus to my noble sister, Holy Inana!”
Thereupon Holy Lugalbanda left the palace.
His brothers and companions
Barked to him as to a strange dog trying to enter the pack,
while he (Lugalbanda) was prancing proudly like a donkey-foal trying
to enter the herd.
companions
“Send someone else to Unug for the lord,
“For Enmerkar, son of the Sun!”
Lugalbanda
“I alone will go to Kulab; no one may come with me!” he said.
companions
“Why do you insist on traveling this road all alone?
“If our guardian angel does not go with you,
“If our benevolent spirit does not march with you,107
“You will never again stand here with us;
“You will never again sit here with us;108
“You will never again set your feet on the earth with us!
“From the high hills where no one can walk alone,
“Whence no one can return to humankind, you cannot return!”
Lugalbanda
“I know that time flies; there is none of you who can keep up with me
traveling over the broad earth!”
The Return of Lugalbanda
153
305
310
315
320
325
330
335

E.
THE ULTIMATE MESSAGE
lugal-ban3-da ssag4 gu3 di sses-a-ne-ne-ta
ssag4 sig3 ku-li-ne-ne-ta
340
ninda kaskal-la-ka-ni nu-um-ka-ass
gsistukul-a-ni diss-bi diss-bi ssu im-ma-an-ti
kur ur2-ra kur bad3-da ma-du-um-e
zag an-ssa4-na-ta sags an-ssa4-anki-na-sse3
hur-sags 5 hur- sags 6 hur-sags 7 im-me-re-bal-bal
345
gsi6-sa9-a gsisbanssur kug dinana-ke4 nu-um-ma-tegs3-a-ass
sig4 kul-ab4ki-se3 gsiri3 hul2-la mi-ni-in-gub
nin-a-ni kug dinana-ke4
ssa3-da-ga-na mu-na-an-tuss
i3-gur2 ki-a mu-na-ab-za
350
su8-ba dama-ussumgal-an-na mu-na-ssi-bar-gin7
kug lugal-ban3-da igi mu-na-ssi-bar-re
dumu-na en dssara mu-na-de2-a-gin7
kug lugal-ban3-da gu3 mu-un-na-da-de2-e
gsa2-nu lugal-ban3-da -mu
355
iri-ta a2 ags2-gsa2 a-na-ass mu-e-de6
arattaki dili-zu-ne a-gin7 im-da-gsin-ne-en
kug lugal-ban3-da mu-na-ni-ib-gi4-gi4
sses-zu a-na bi2-in-dug4 a-na bi2-in-tah
en-me-er-kar2 dumu dutu-ke4 a-na bi2-in-dug4 a-na bi2-in-tah
360
ki ud-ba nin9 e5-mu kug dinana-ke4
kur suba?-ta ssag4 kug-ga-ni-a he2-em-ma-ni-pad3-de3
sig4 kul-ab4ki-se3 he2-em-ma-ni-in-kur9-re-en
unugki-e sug he2-me-am3 a he2-em-de2-a
bar2-rim4 he2-me-am3 gsissasal he2-mu2-a
365
gsiss-gi he2-me-am3 gi-uss2 gi-henbur he2-mu2-a
den-ki lugal eridugki-ga-ke4
gi-uss2-bi ha-ma-an-ze2 a-bi ha-ma-an-uss2
mu ninnu-uss hu-mu-du3 mu ninnu-uss hu-mu-di
ki-en-gi ki-uri nigsin2-na-a-ba
370
mar-tu lu2 sse nu-zu hu-mu-zig3
bad3 unugki-ga gu mussen-na-gin7 edin-na he2-ni-la2-la2
i-da-la-ba ki-gsal2-la-ba hi-li-mu ba-til
ab2ssilam amar-bi la2-a-gin7 erin2-mu mu-da-la2
dumu ama-ni-[ir] hul gig-ga iri-ta ed2-a-gin7
154
Epics of Sumerian Kings

E.
THE ULTIMATE MESSAGE
Lugalbanda, in spite of the pounding hearts of his brothers,
In spite of the dejection of his companions,
Took no provisions for the journey;
He only took his weapons, one by one.
From the foot of the highlands, through the mountain ranges, to the
plains,
From the far border of Anssan to the upland of Anssan
He crossed five, six, seven mountain ranges.
That same night, before they had even brought in the evening meal
for Holy Inana,
He stepped joyfully into Kulab, the Brickwork!
His lady, Holy Inana,
Was sitting there on her cushion.
He bowed and prostrated himself before her.
As she is wont to look at Ama-ussumgalana,109 the shepherd,
She looked upon Holy Lugalbanda;
As she is wont to speak to her son SSara,
She spoke to Holy Lugalbanda:
“Well now, my Lugalbanda,
“Why do you bring news from the city?
“Why did you come from Aratta, all by yourself?”
Holy Lugalbanda replied:
“Your brother, this is what he said, what he spoke;
“This is what Enmerkar, son of the Sun, said, what he spoke:
“‘Once upon a time my noble sister, Holy Inana,
“‘from her bright mountain chose me in her holy heart,
“‘and made me enter Kulab, the Brickwork.
“‘Unug then was a mere marsh, oozing water.
“‘Where there was dry land Euphrates poplars grew.
“‘Where there was a reed thicket old and young reeds grew toge-
ther.
“‘Enki, king of Eridug,
“‘Made me tear out the old reeds and made me drain the water.
“‘Fifty years I was building, fifty years I was working.
“‘So now, if eventually in all of Sumer and Akkad
“‘The Martu, who know no grain, should rise up,
“‘There stands the wall of Unug, extended across the desert like a bird net!
“‘But here, in this place, my power seems to be finished!
“‘My troops are bound to me as a calf to its mother.
“‘Yet, like a child that hates its mother and leaves the city
The Return of Lugalbanda
155
340
345
350
355
360
365
370

375
nin9 e5-mu kug dinana-ke4
sig4 kul-ab4ki-se3 ssu ma-ra-an-dag
ud-da iri-ni ki ha-ba-an-ags2 gsa2-a-ra hul ha-ba-an-gig
iri gsa2-da a-na-ass am3-da-la2-e
ud-da iri-ni hul ha-ba-an-gig gsa2-a-ra ki ha-ba-an-ags2
380
gsa2-a iri-da a-na-ass am3-da-la2-e-en
nu-gig-ge anzudmussen amar-ra-gin7
ni2 te-a-ni sag2 um-ma-an-di!
bar kug-ga-ni-a um-ma-an-ssub-be2-en
sig4 kul-ab4ki-se3 he2-em-ma-ni-in-kur9-re-en
385
gsisgid2-da-mu ud ne ba-an-de6
kussE.IB2.UR2-mu ud ne e-ne ba-an-zur-zur-re
nin9 e5-mu kug dinana-ra ur5-gin7 dug4-mu-na-ab
kug dinana-ke4 mu-na-ni-ib-gi4-gi4
i3-ne-sse3 id2 ssen-na id2 a ssen-na-ka
390
id2 kussummud za-gin3 dinana-ke4
kun-ba pess10-pess10-ba u2-sal-u2-sal-ba
suhur-massku6-e u2 lal3 i3-gu7-e
kigs2-turku6-e u2i-li-a-nu-um kur-ra i3-gu7-e
GSIS.SSESSku6 digsir suhur-mass2ku6-a-ke4
395
ssag4-ba a-ne hul2-la mu-un-e kun-bi mu-un-sud-e
kun ssika ri-ba gi-uss2 ki kug-ga im-mi-ib2-us2-e
gsisssinig ma-da a-na-me-a-bi
ambar-bi-a a ib2-na8-na8
dili-bi i3-du3 dili-bi i3-du3
400
gsisssinig-e bar-ta dili-bi i3-du3
en-me-<er>-kar2 dumu dutu-ke4
gsisssinig-bi un-sig3 gsisbunigs-se3 un-dim2
gi-uss2 ki kug-ga ur2-ba mi-ni-bu ssu im-ma-an-ti
GSIS.SSESSku6 digsir suhur-mass2ku6-a-ke4 ssag4-ba u3-ba-ra-ed2-a
405
ku6-bi un-dab5 un-ssegs6 un-sud
a2-an-kar2 a2 me3 dinana-ka u3-bi2-in-gu7
erin2-na-ni ssu-bi he2-en-di-ni-ib-sud-sud
zi aratta-ka engur-ra he2-ni-in-til
iri kug dim2-bi kug-dim2 u3-bi2-in-dab5
410
za dim2-ma-bi za-dim2 u3-bi2-in-dab5
iri-da u3-gibil-la2 um-ma-an-di-ni-ib-gsar-gsar
arattaki agarin4-agarin4-ba ssu hu-mu-na-nigsin
156
Epics of Sumerian Kings

“‘My noble sister, Holy Inana,
“‘Has run back to Kulab, the Brickwork!
“‘Could she love her city, yet hate me?
“‘She should link the city to me!
“‘Could she hate her city, yet love me?
“‘She should link the city to me!
“‘Should the nu-gig —as happened to the Anzud chick—
“‘Reject me in person
“‘And abandon me by keeping to her holy chamber,
“‘Let her at least bring me back to Kulab, the Brickwork!
“‘Only on that day my spear shall be laid aside;
“‘On that day my shield shall be broken!
“‘Speak thus to my noble sister, Holy Inana!’”
Holy Inana replied to him:
“Now then, at the end of the clear river, of the clear watercourse,
“Of the river that is the gleaming water skin of Inana,
“Where at the banks and in the water meadows
“The suhur-mass fish eats the honey herb,
“The kin-tur fish eats wild acorns,
“There the GS IS .SS ESS fish, the god of all suhur-mass fish,
“Is playing happily and darting about,
“Touching with its scaly tail the old reeds in that holy place.
“Tamarisks, many of them,
“Draw water from that pool.
“One stands alone, one stands alone;110
“One tamarisk stands there all alone, beside (the pool).
“Now, when Enmerkar, son of the Sun,
“Has cut that tamarisk and made a bucket from it,
“He must tear out the old reeds of that holy place and take them
away.
“When he has thus chased the GS ISS .SS ESS fish, god of all suhur-mass
fish, from (that pool),
“Caught it, cooked it, and served it
“And so fed the a-ankara, Inana’s battle strength,
“Then his army shall succeed;
“Then he will be able to end the life force Aratta draws from the sub-
terranean waters!
“If he then carries off from the city its worked metal and its smiths,
“If he carries off its worked stones and its jewelers,
“If he renovates and resettles the city,
“All the moulds of Aratta shall be his forever!”
The Return of Lugalbanda
157
375
380
385
390
395
400
405
410

IV. EPILOGUE
arattaki zag-ed2-bi na4za-gin3 dur5-ru-am3
bad3-bi sig4 sags-zi-bi huss-am3
415
im-bi im nagga
kur ha-ssu-ur2-ra-ta im-kid2-a
kug lugal-ban3-da zag-mi2
158
Epics of Sumerian Kings

The Return of Lugalbanda
159
IV. EPILOGUE
Aratta’s battlements are of greenish lapis lazuli;
Its wall and its towering brickwork are bright red;
Its bricks are of tinstone
Excavated in the hills where the cypress grows!
Praise be to Holy Lugalbanda!
415
Notes
1 The text is not explicit on this point, nor on the point whether the “seven
heroes” (LB I lines 59–71) are really Lugalbanda’s brothers.
2 The text is difficult. It is not clear whether they are good spirits or bad
demons—or both.
3 The main reason for doing so is that there is still some hesitation on this point
in the relevant scholarly literature. A secondary but equally legitimate reason is that
the “one-story thesis” enlightens the structure of both poems as we have them,
while the “two-stories thesis” has serious drawbacks precisely on this point.
4 Gilgamesh and Aka. See Katz 1993.
5 See Vanstiphout 1996b and 2002b for Lugalbanda as the archetype of the
Christian saints.
6 To wit, lines 300–307//314–319 (the sacrificial animals); 327–334 (sleep);
341–347 (dream); 395–421 (the ghosts).
7 Lines 15–22 (Ninkasi); 115–124 (Anzud); 255–265 (Unug’s camp before Aratta);
294–299 (Unug before Enmerkar started to build). The latter is repeated as 360–365.
Note that the first such passage in LB I (see previous note) is repeated, as is the last
one in LB II. Close reading reveals that the composer has a penchant for explana-
tory verse anyway, and many more examples of this technique may be found.
8 See Black 1998, passim.
9 In fact, this may be the poetical reason why Lugalbanda’s return, with Inana’s
solution, to Enmerkar and the army laying siege to Aratta is not mentioned at all in
the text.
10 See the catalog texts (20 n. 72 above) and Vanstiphout 2003: 19–26.
11 For the dream passage, see Vanstiphout 1998b.
12 See Vanstiphout 2002b for a treatment in detail.
13 In this respect he may be compared to Zid-udsudra/Ut-napisstim after he had
weathered an even greater crisis.
14 It is interesting to note that that other great cosmic traveler, Dante, ends his
three books with the words le stelle.
15 The ETCSL site www-etcsl.orient.ox.ac.uk/section1/b1821.htm gives particu-
lars and indications of publication, but many fragments are still unpublished.
Wilcke 1987 may also be consulted for the manuscripts. Hallo 1983 gives a good
but partial analysis of the material.
16 Only the Lugalbanda story opens with a “cosmogonical” introduction. Such
introductions, which should not be taken too seriously as cosmogony, occur else-
where, such as in a few mythological and heroic narratives and some disputations.

There seems to be no strong or even explicit relationship between them and the
type of text they introduce. If one insists, the rationale in this case may have been
to emphasize the venerable age of the House of Unug.
17 “Black-headed” is a common epithet for “Sumerians.” The expression
undoubtedly derives from the ideological imagery, which represents humanity as a
flock of sheep—that are black-headed to this day—under the care and protection
of their divine and royal pastor bonus.
18 “Setting the mace toward” means “to intend to conquer.”
19 The number seven recurs in most of the cycle. In ELA there are seven jour-
neys to be made by the messenger, who has to cross seven mountain ranges.
20 We know of a large number of undoubtedly ceremonial bronze weapons
adorned with images of wild animals. A number of them seem to be falsifications,
and provenance is but rarely assured. The general opinion is that—if genuine—
they come from Luristan, i.e., the part of the Zagros Mountains to the northeast of
Mesopotamia, which happens to be the general direction of Enmerkar’s campaign.
Even so, they appear to be considerably later than our poems.
21 See above, note 19.
22 The ss ar is the number 36,000—or infinity, since the sign is originally a full
circle.
23 It is not altogether clear what or who is “hovering over the earth”: the moun-
tains or the Urukean army?
24 “The holy and precious place” is a common euphemism for the grave.
25 This whole passage should consistently be read simultaneously on two lev-
els: that of the food left by the companions so that Lugalbanda will be able to
survive, and that of a rich assemblage of burial gifts. Even the references to trav-
eling provisions are ambiguous, for the possibility, even probability, exists that
Lugalbanda will soon have to undertake the most difficult ultimate journey: to the
underworld.
26 The Zubi Mountains and the Black Mountains (line 114) are to be sought due
east from Unug, in the trans-Tigridian southern end of the Zagros Range. Note the
use of “imported,” Sumerian ssu-a bal-a. Since ELA explicitly states that trading
(bala) did not yet exist, this qualification—if not a mere oversight—would seem
to imply that, in the minds of author(s) and public, the three stories represent three
separate and different attempts by Enmerkar to impose his supremacy over Aratta.
This can be argued from the contents of the stories as well: in EE and ELA an ulti-
matum is used, in LB a military campaign. However, since the shock and awe of
Enmerkar’s invasion turns out to be a damp squib, all three attempts depend on
cleverness, magic, and, wittingly or unwittingly, a little help from Enmerkar’s divine
friends. Also, if the stories are meant to be separate and different, can we put them
in chronological order?
27 Perhaps because he fears that he will never again be able to use these pre-
cious weapons.
28 The simile is not clear to me. In any case, the opposition between “open” and
“closed” is intended.
29 Or “at sunrise.” But “like the sun” may be defended as meaning “as the sun
will surely do tomorrow,” hinting at the sun’s constant protection of the heroic
rulers of Unug, such as Gilgamesh.
160
Epics of Sumerian Kings

The Lugalbanda Poems
161
30 The “cows of Nanna,” the moon god, might well be an expression for the stars
in general or even for the Milky Way—which term could ultimately depend upon
this usage, at least if they recognized the Milky Way as stars. Their “migrating”
probably points to the movement of the stars.
31 An allusion to the common notion that dust is the only food available in the
underworld.
32 Inana, whose name is only mentioned as such in line 176, is presented here
in her role of provider of sexual delight, for the delectation of which no great
riches are necessary. Her “playing” usually denotes war, but here it must mean
sex.
33 SSara is Inana’s son. Note that the radiance (or halo) of Inana as the evening
star is thought to be her face.
34 Snakes and scorpions, lowly and despicable though they are, have at least a
home, be it mere wasteland or a crevice in the earth. Lugalbanda has nothing.
35 Literally “a satisfied heart.”
36 It is not clear why Nanna or Suen (his name in Akkadian) should be called
here “Holy Calf” (amar kug). The preceding verse calls him “bull,” and in line
133 he is presented as tending the heavenly herds. The only divine “calf” of any
special significance is Amar-Utu-ka, better known as Marduk. Perhaps the name
of the third king of the Ur III dynasty, Amar-Suen, is of relevance here.
37 Nanna’s “crown” is the crescent, which in Mesopotamia lies down as it still
does on the early mosques.
38 Literally “sets straight.”
39 The text has “head” for origin and “back” for effects. It is somewhat strange
that Nanna is presented here as the guarantor of justice, an office that otherwise
belongs to Utu.
40 See above, line 123.
41 Unclear to me.
42 As suggested ingeniously by Jerry Cooper (private communication), the
Sumerian term zid-du, usually translated “righteous one,” is probably the fertile
soil, bringing forth the plant of life. That Sumerian zid can mean “productive, fer-
tile” in various contexts has been suggested before. See below, LB II, lines 99–100,
where the zid-du and the rolling rivers are said to be under the protection of Anzud.
In contrast to the magical plant in the Gilgamesh epic, this plant is truly and literally
the “plant of life.” The food and water of life also appear—in a very important
way—in the Akkadian Adapa story.
43 “Hoof” (umbin ) is used in anticipation of the similes in the next lines.
44 “Fit for racing” might also be considered.
45 Instead of baking it in an oven.
46 Probably these “embers” are the dead coals left over from the brothers’ fire,
which he now reignites. This might explain why he has only seven pieces of coal,
as is said in line 293.
47 Although a different term is used, this coal is apparently a synonym of the
embers of line 284.
48 I regard lines 303–307 as an explanatory notice inserted into the story and
breaking or diverging from the narrative thread. This stylistic device seems typical
for the poet of both Lugalbanda stories.

49 Actually, Sumerian uses the same term (lal 3) for “runny honey” and “(date)
syrup,” whence the freedom I have taken in translating.
50 Ninkasi is the goddess of beer. The contents of her cask put Lugalbanda to sleep.
51 The point being made here seems to be that, contrary to the venerable tech-
nique or “science” of oneirocriticism, one cannot put one’s complete trust in a
dream. For this dream sequence, see Vanstiphout 1998b.
52 The contrast between lines 345 and 346 seems to be that dreams can be as
sedate and staid as Ninlil, the matron goddess who watches over orderly family life,
but also as wild and violent as Inana’s destructive sexuality.
53 This verse is not very clear. Does Zangara speak in a ghostly voice? And why
should he be the multiplier of humankind?
54 Perhaps an allusion to the episode of the Bull of Heaven in the Gilgamesh sto-
ries. For “bullfighter” the text uses a term with the general meaning of athlete.
55 One may well ask why. Perhaps this is an allusion to the flood episode in the
Gilgamesh epic, where the gods sniff the scent of Ut-napisstim’s sacrifice and gather
above it like flies. The snakes might then be either an intentionally obscure term
for the gods or a straight lie. See lines 371–375.
56 This double expression occurs also elsewhere. To our understanding the verbs
“to wake up” and “to shiver” are linked to the wrong nouns, namely, “dream” and
“sleep.” Is this intended as a deliberate and artful chiasm?
57 Read perhaps gs issss u-da-ka-ni?
58 The meaning of this reference, perhaps to an existing place, escapes us.
59 Reading gs issss u-da-ka-ni for GI SS DA SS U KA NI. Still, the term as such
is unknown.
60 From this verse onward the text is hard to understand, although the Sumerian
is not especially abstruse. It needs much more study.
61 This verse seems to contradict the preceding couplet.
62 Lines 422–423 are still somewhat uncertain. The proposed translation of the
lines was inspired by a remark of Jerry Cooper. First, “that man” is taken to be
Lugalbanda; “shining upon” stands for what is literally “lying upon, covering”; the
“whole length” is literally “the long length.” The terms uss and gid2 are known as
terms used in measuring real estate.  Therefore an alternative, but less attractive, ren-
dering might be “The hero, whose breadth and length lies upon everybody,”
alluding to the notion that the sunshine envelops the whole body.  However, there
is here the distinct possibility of punning.  As noted above (note 42 to line 265), the
term zid, used in the line that immediately follows, can mean “true, loyal” but also
“fertile.”  Since uss can also be read as giss3 “penis,” and nu2 is one of the common
expressions for coitus, the pun, questionable in taste as it is, seems unavoidable.
So a third possible rendering would be “The hero, whose long penis ‘sleeps with’
that man.”  However, this does not seem to be very informative in context. 
63 Again, line 463 seems to contradict line 462.
64 Why only seven here, as against fourteen in line 464?
65 Rather than regarding the “holy battle-mace of the sky” as personified (and
homosexual), the sentence might mean that the divine weapon/righteous god lies
next to a man at night in order to protect him. 
66 Does this mean that they inform the gods of the evil words of others and that
they are thus spying for righteousness?
162
Epics of Sumerian Kings

67 In lines 494–497 the reading of the verbs as e 11 is a conjecture for the incom-
prehensible zu-ub 3 of the manuscript, which is in need of collation. In addition,
the reading mas-sum is a conjecture for MASS .TE . In any case the passage is
about stars and constellations.
68 “Matriarch” (bur-ss um-ma) is an epithet of Inana, who here seems to cause
the stars and constellations to rise.
69 A constellation.
70 A constellation.
71 See already the introduction to the Lugalbanda poems and to LB I.
72 This theme is treated in some detail in Vanstiphout 2002b.
73 See the Oxford on-line presentation www-etcsl.orient.ox.ac.uk/section1/
b1822.htm for the full list of tablets/fragments. The number is not absolute: some
of the fragments join others.
74 These are the fragments with a 3N-T siglum.
75 Literally “to his own heart/mind.”
76 Perhaps this reference to the “splendid tree” is a hidden announcement of the
“single tree” or the “tree standing alone” occurring at the very end of the poem
(lines 397–402 below). The motif of the single tree appears elsewhere, such as in
the tale about Inana and SSukaletuda. The best-known instance is the tree that
Gilgamesh felled and used to make furniture for Inana, and subsequently his own
playthings, in the first part of Gilgamesh, Enkidu, and the Netherworld. Note that
here this tree is inhabited by eagle-like Anzud and that in Gilgamesh, Enkidu, and
the Netherworld the tree is inhabited by an eagle and Lilith. This also happens in
a way in the folktale about SSamssum al-Jabbar (see Vanstiphout 2000), while in the
Addadian Etana story the single tree of the central fable houses an eagle and a
snake. Another important “single tree” is, of course, the giant cedar Gilgamesh and
Enkidu brought back from the cedar forest.
77 A.RU is unknown as to reading and meaning. It is possible that it is an
Akkadian loanword: aru is a term for the foliage of the palm tree. However, a palm
tree seems out of place in this mountain region. Still, the term could refer to foliage.
78 I.e., “ where the cypress does not grow,” meaning that this is above the ordi-
nary tree line. Only the eagle-tree grows there.
79 It is not clear precisely which species is meant here. There were three distinct
species in Mesopotamia: the wild bull, or aurochs (am [bull] or sun 2 [cow] in
Sumerian; bos primigenius), the bison (kusarikku in Akkadian), which was proba-
bly already extinct in historic times but is well known from art, and the water
buffalo, which still lives in the southern marshes.
80 A clear allusion to the sumptuous meal that Lugalbanda had prepared for the
gods in the first part of the story.
81 I.e., Anzud.
82 The “cattle-pen of Nanna” is a kenning for the sky, where Nanna tends his cat-
tle, which are the stars, as is mentioned in the first part of the story. It is tempting
to speculate that this image is at the origin of our “Milky Way.”
83 Granting a name that ensures a fortunate destiny seems otherwise to be the
privilege of the gods. It is the topic of the short story Enlil and Namzitarra (see Civil
1974). Note that many kings bore names of this kind.
84 The precise meaning of this line escapes me. Could it be “as straight as a stylus”?
The Lugalbanda Poems
163

85 I.e., may they fly so thickly that they are like a bundle of logs tied together.
86 As in medieval romance, weapons of great heroes and/or gods sometimes
bear names and can even have lives of their own.
87 We do not know what Lugalbanda answers. Is his answer a simple refusal?
88 I.e., your destiny.
89 The relevance of these two obviously proverbial statements is not altogether
clear to me. Perhaps they simply mean that Anzud consents to be guided by
Lugalbanda in the matter.
90 There are a number of early temple friezes—a monumental one at Al-Ubaid—
and smaller wall plaquettes representing Anzud.
91 One is tempted to interpret this couplet as meaning that Lugalbanda has some-
how become the shadow of Anzud, which travels over the ground with the same
speed as Anzud in the air.
92 Lugalbanda’s “explanation” is, of course, nonsense.
93 What illness is this? Lugalbanda has long since been healed.
94 At which point in the campaign has Lugalbanda reappeared? The following
lines seem to imply that the army of Unug is only just beginning to invest Aratta
and that the siege remains fruitless for a whole year (line 262).
95 It is possible that these “watchtowers” refer to small and temporary structures
erected in the outlying fields to protect them from predatory animals (or humans).
96 The Sumerian term is uss umgal, which has no precise translation since it
seems to be a mythical animal, perhaps somewhat like the much later mushussssu
of Babylon’s Isstar gate. Jacobsen translates—elegantly—as “basilisk.”
97 Presumably of the javelins and slingstones raining down on the besieging
army.
98 Literally “the regiment of the open-eyed.” The term has also been understood
as meaning “elite troops.”
99 The motif of the repeated demand for help or approval occurs elsewhere. See
Gilgamesh and Aka and Gilgamesh and Huwawa—and Thucydides’ description of
Alcibiades’ Sicilian venture!
100 This is what the text says. Enmerkar’s palace is in Unug/Kulab; at this point
Enmerkar is still laying siege to Aratta. Is “palace” merely a somewhat grand term
for Enmerkar’s headquarters in the field?
101 They still do.
102 The expression “who know no grain” refers to the lack of civilization on the
part of the Martu bedouins. It occurs as part of the catalogue of their uncivilized
ways in the Curse of Agade (see Cooper 1983) and in the Marriage of Martu (see
Klein 1996).
103 Here, as elsewhere when referring to a personal attribute, “power” (Sumerian
me ) might best be understood as charisma or karma or baraka.
104 The argument seems to be that Inana has always loved Enmerkar, and she
has always loved her city. So why does she treat Enmerkar like this? “To link” can
best be taken as “to identify,” although I cannot offer any philological underpin-
ning.
105 I.e., Inana. The reference is to the opening episode of the story, where the
young Anzud has been left alone by his parents.
106 This means probably “to lay down arms.”
164
Epics of Sumerian Kings

107 It is possible that by the “guardian angel” and the “protective spirit” the esprit
de corps of the troop, or the band of brothers, is meant.
108 The coupled verbs “to stand” and “to sit down” are used elsewhere
(Gilgamesh and Aka; see Katz 1993) as an expression for life in the services.
109 Another name for Dumuzid, the lover and spouse of Inana.
110 See above, note 76.
The Lugalbanda Poems
165


Bibliography
Alster, Bendt. 1973. “An Aspect of ‘Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta.’” RA
67:101–10.
———. 1975a. “Paradoxical Proverbs and Satire in Sumerian Literature.” JCS
27:201–30.
———. 1975b. Studies in Sumerian Proverbs. Copenhagen Studies in
Assyriology 3. Copenhagen: Akademisk Forlag.
———. 1976. “Early Patterns in Mesopotamian Literature.” Pages 13–24 in
Kramer Anniversary Volume: Cuneiform Studies in Honor of Samuel
Noah Kramer. Edited by Barry L. Eichler, with the assistance of Jane W.
Heimerdinger and Åke W. Sjöberg. AOAT 25. Kevelaer: Butzon &
Bercker.
———. 1983. “Dilmun, Bahrain, and the Alleged Paradise in Sumerian
Myth and Literature.” Pages 39–74 in Dilmun: New Studies in the
Archaeology and Early History of Bahrain. Edited by Daniel T. Potts.
BBVO 2. Berlin: Reimer.
———. 1990. “Lugalbanda and the Early Epic Tradition in Mesopotamia.”
Pages 59–72 in Lingering over Words: Studies in Ancient Near Eastern
Literature in Honor of William L. Moran. Edited by Tzvi Abusch, John
Huehnergard, and Piotr Steinkeller. HSS 37. Atlanta: Scholars Press.
———. 1991. “Two Sumerian Short tales Reconsidered.” ZA 82:186–201.
———. 1993. “The Sumerian Folktale of the Three Ox-Drivers from Adab.”
JCS 43–45:27–38.
———. 1995. “Epic Tales from Ancient Sumer: Enmerkar, Lugalbanda, and
Other Cunning Heroes.” CANE 4:2315–26.
Alster, Bendt, and Herman L. J. Vanstiphout. 1987. “Lahar and Ashnan: Pre-
sentation and Analysis of a Sumerian Disputation.” AS 9:1–43.
Attinger, Pascal. 1984. “Enki et Nin-hursaga.” ZA 74:1–52.
Bahrani, Zainab. 2001. Women of Babylon. Gender and Representation in
Mesopotamia. London: Routledge.
167

Behrens, Hermann. 1978. Enlil und Ninlil: Ein sumerischer Mythos aus Nip-
pur. Studia Pohl: Series Maior 8. Rome: Biblical Institute Press.
———. 1983–84. Review of Adele Berlin, Enmerkar and Ensuhkeshdanna:
A Sumerian Narrative Poem. AfO 29–30:98–103.
Berlin, Adele. 1979. Enmerkar and Ensuhkeshdanna: A Sumerian Narrative
Poem. Occasional Publications of the Babylonian Fund 2. Philadelphia:
University Museum.
Bernhardt, Inez, and Samuel Noah Kramer. 1956–57. “Götter-Hymnen und
Kult-Gesänge der Sumerer auf zwei Keilschrift-‘Katalogen’ in der Hil-
precht-Sammlung.” WZJ 6:389–95.
Black, Jeremy. 1996. “The Imagery of Birds in Sumerian Poetry.” Pages
23–46 in Mesopotamian Poetic Language: Sumerian and Akkadian.
Edited by Marianna E. Vogelzang and Herman L. J. Vanstiphout.
Cuneiform Monographs 6. Proceedings of the Groningen Group for
the Study of Mesopotamian Literature 2. Groningen: Styx.
———. 1998. Reading Sumerian Poetry. Athlone Publications in Egyptol-
ogy and Ancient Near Eastern Studies. London: Athlone.
———. 2002. “The Sumerians in Their Landscape.” Pages 41–61 in Riches
Hidden in Secret Places: Ancient Near Eastern Studies in Memory of
Thorkild Jacobsen. Edited by Tzvi Abusch. Winona Lake, Ind. Eisen-
brauns.
Charpin, Dominique. 1986. Pages 455–58 in idem, Le clergé d’Ur au siècle
d’Hammurabi: (XIXe–XVIIIe siècles av. J.-C.). Genève: Librairie Droz.
Civil, Miguel. 1974. “Enlil and Namzitarra.” AfO 25:65–71.
———. 1983. “Enlil and Nin-lil: The Marriage of Sud.” JAOS 103:43–66.
Cohen, Sol. 1973. “Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta.” Ph.D. diss., Univer-
sity of Pennsylvania.
Cooper, Jerrold S. 1972–75. “Heilige Hochzeit. B. Archäologisch.” RlA
4:259–69.
———. 1983. The Curse of Agade. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
———. 1997. “The Incipit of Enmerkar and Ensuhkesdana.” NABU 118.
Edzard, Dietz Otto. 1994. “Sumerian Epic: Epic or Fairy Tale?” BCSMS
27:7–14.
Empson, William. 1935. Some Versions of Pastoral. London: Chatto & Win-
dus.
Falkowitz, Robert S. 1983. “Notes on ‘Lugalbanda and Enmerkar.’” JAOS
103:103–11.
Flückiger-Hawker, Esther. 1999. Urnamma of Ur in Sumerian Literary Tra-
dition. OBO 166. Fribourg: Universitätsverlag; Göttingen: Vandenhoeck
& Ruprecht.
Foster, Benjamin R. 1993. Before the Muses: An Anthology of Akkadian Lit-
erature. Bethesda, Md.: CDL.
———. 2001. The Epic of Gilgamesh. New York: Norton.
168
Epics of Sumerian Kings

George, Andrew. 1999. The Epic of Gilgamesh: A New Translation. New
York: Barnes & Noble.
Glassner, Jean-Jacques. 1993. Chroniques mésopotamiennes. Paris: Les belles
lettres.
———. 2000. Écrire à Sumer: L’invention du cunéiforme. Univers his-
torique. Paris: Seuil.
Grayson, A. K. 1970. Assyrian and Babylonian Chronicles. Texts from
Cuneiform Sources 5. Locust Valley, N.Y.: Augustin.
Green, Margaret W. 1978. “The Eridu Lament.” JCS 30:127–67.
———. 1984. “The Uruk Lament.” JAOS 104:253–79.
Gurney, Oliver E. 1977. “A Note on the Babel of Tongues.” AfO 25:170–71.
Hallo, W. W. 1966. Review of UrET 6/1. JCS 20:89–93.
———. 1983. “Lugalbanda Excavated.” JAOS 103:165–80.
Hansman, J. 1978. “The Question of Aratta.” JNES 37:331–36.
Heimpel, Wolfgang. 1981. Adele Berlin, Enmerkar and Ensuhkeshdanna: A
Sumerian Narrative Poem. JAOS 101:404–7.
Jacobsen, Thorkild. 1939. The Sumerian King List. AS 11. Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press.
———. 1987. The Harps That Once. . . : Sumerian Poetry in Translation.
New Haven: Yale University Press.
———. 1992. “The Spell of Nudimmud.” Pages 403–416 in Sha’arei Tal-
mon: Studies in the Bible, Qumran, and the Ancient Near East
Presented to Shemaryahu Talmon. Edited by Michael Fishbane and
Emanuel Tov. Winona Lake, Ind.: Eisenbrauns.
———. 1997. “Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta.” COS 1.170:547–50.
Jestin, Raymond-Riec. 1957. “Le poème d’En-me-er-kar.” RHR 151:145–220.
Katz, Dina. 1993. Gilgamesh and Akka. LOT 1. Groningen: Styx.
Klein, Jacob. 1971. Review of Claus Wilcke, Das Lugalbandaepos. JAOS
91:295–99.
———. 1996. “The Marriage of Martu: The Urbanization of the ‘Barbaric’
Nomads.” Michmanim 9:83–96.
Komoróczy, Geza. 1975. “Zur Ätiologie der Schrifterfindung im Enmerkar-
Epos.” AF 3:19–24.
Kramer, Samuel Noah. 1940. Lamentation over the Destruction of Ur. AS 12.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
———. 1942. “The Oldest Literary Catalogue: A Sumerian List of Literary
Compositions Compiled about 2000 B.C.” BASOR 88:10–19.
———. 1943. “Man’s Golden Age: A Sumerian Parallel to Genesis XI.1.”
JAOS 63:191–94.
———. 1952. Enmerkar and the Lord of Aratta: A Sumerian Tale of Iraq
and Iran. Museum Monographs. Philadelphia: University Museum,
University of Pennsylvania.
———. 1961. “New Literary Catalogue from Ur.” RA 55:169–76.
Bibliography
169

———. 1968. “The Babel of Tongues: A Sumerian Version.” JAOS 88:108–11.
———. 1969. The Sacred Marriage Rite: Aspects of Faith, Myth and Ritual
in Ancient Sumer. Bloomington: University of Indiana Press.
———. 1990. “The ‘Barnett’ Enmerkar Tablet: A New Sumerian Dialect (?).”
Pages 7–25 in De la Babylonie à la Syrie, en passant par Mari:
Mélanges offerts à Monsieur J.-R. Kupper à l’occasion de son 70e
anniversaire. Edited by. Ö. Tunca. Liège: Université de Liège.
Kramer, Samuel Noah, and Thorkild Jacobsen. 1953. “Enmerkar and
Ensukusssirana.” Or NS 23:232–34.
Majidzadeh, Y. 1976. “The Land of Aratta.” JNES 35:137–44.
———. 1982. “Lapis Lazuli and the Great Khorasan Road.” Paléorient
8:56–69.
Michalowski, Piotr. 1983. “History As Charter: Some Observations on the
Sumerian King List.” JAOS 103:237–48.
———. 1988. “Mental Maps and Ideology: Observations on Subartu.”
Pages 129–56 in The Origins of Cities in Dry-Farming Syria and
Mesopotamia in the Third Millennium B.C. Edited by. Harvey Weiss.
Guilford: Four Quarters.
———. 1989. The Lamentation over the Destruction of Sumer and Ur.
Winona Lake, Ind.: Eisenbrauns: .
———. 1995. “Sumerian Literature: An Overview.” CANE 4:2279–91.
———. 1999. “Commemoration, Writing, and Genre in Ancient Meso-
potamia.” Pages 69–90 in The Limits of Historiography: Genre and
Narrative in Ancient Historical Texts. Edited by Christina Shuttleworth
Kraus. Leiden: Brill.
Renger, Johannes. 1972–75. “Heilige Hochzeit. A. Philologisch.” RlA 4:251–59.
Römer, Willem H. Ph. 1981. Review of Adele Berlin, Enmerkar and Ensuh-
keshdanna: A Sumerian Narrative Poem. BO 38:338–343.
Römer, Willem H. Ph., and Dietz Otto Edzard. 1993. Pages 507–39 in
Mythen und Epen 1. Vol. 3.3 of Texte aus der Umwelt des Alten Testa-
ments. Edited by Otto Kaiser. Gütersloh: Mohn.
Roth, Martha. 1983. “The Slave and the Scoundrel: CBS 10467, A Sumerian
Morality Tale?” JAOS 103:275–82.
Sauren, Herbert. 1972. “Les épopées sumériennes et le théâtre classique.”
OLP 3:35–47.
———. 1974. “Der Weg nach Aratta: Zur tieferen Erschliessung der
sumerischen Literatur.” AAASH 22:137–44.
Tinney, Steve. 1996. The Nippur Lament: Royal Rhetoric and Divine Legiti-
mation in the Reign of Issme-Dagan of Isin (1953–1935 B.C.).
Occasional Publications of the Samuel Noah Kramer Fund 16. Philadel-
phia: Samuel Noah Kramer Fund.
———. 1998. “On the Curricular Setting of Sumerian Literature” Iraq 61:
159–72.
170
Epics of Sumerian Kings

———. Forthcoming. “A Literary Temple Archive from Nippur.” OLP.
Van Dijk, J. J. A. 1970. “La ‘confusion des langues’: Note sur le lexique et
sur la morphologie d’Enmerkar, 147–155.” Or NS 39:302–10.
Vanstiphout, Herman L. J. 1987. “Joins Proposed in Sumerian Literary Com-
positions.” NABU 87.
———. 1983a. “Problems in the ‘Matter of Aratta.’” Iraq 45:35–42.
———. 1983b. “Een Sumerische Stadsklacht uit de Oudbabylonische Peri-
ode. Turmenuna, of de Nippurklacht.” Pages 330–41 in Schrijvend
Verleden: Documenten uit het Oude Nabije Oosten vertaald en
Toegelicht. Edited by K. R. Veenhof. Leiden: Ex Oriente Lux.
———. 1984. “Inana/Ishtar As a Figure of Controversy.” Pages 225–38 in
Struggles of Gods: Papers of the Groningen Work Group for the Study of
the History of Religions. Edited by Hans Klippenberg. Religion and Rea-
son 13. Berlin: de Gruyter.
———. 1986. “Towards a Reading of ‘Gilgamesh and Agga.’ Part II: Con-
struction.” OLP 17:33–50.
———. 1990a. “Enmerkar’s Invention of Writing Revisited.” Pages 515–24
in DUMU-E2-DUB-BA-A: Studies in Honor of Åke W. Sjöberg. Edited by
Hermann Behrens, Darlene Loding, and Martha T. Roth. Occasional Pub-
lications of the Babylonian Fund 11. Philadelphia: University Museum.
———. 1990b. “The Mesopotamian Debate Poems. A General Presentation
(Part I).” AS 12:271–318.
———. 1992a. “The Banquet Scene in the Sumerian Debate Poems.” Res
Orientales 4:37–63.
———. 1992b. “The Mesopotamian Debate Poems. A General Presenta-
tion. Part II: The Subject.” AS 14:339–67.
———. 1992c. “Repetition and Structure in the Aratta Cycle.” Pages
247–264 in Mesopotamian Epic Literature: Oral or Aural? Edited by
Marianna E. Vogelzang and Herman L. J. Vanstiphout. Lewiston, N.Y.:
Mellen.
———. 1994. “Another Attempt at the ‘Spell of Nudimmud.’” RA 88: 135–54.
———. 1995a. “The Matter of Aratta: An Overview.” OLP 26:5–20.
———. 1995b. “On the Old Babylonian Edubba.” Pages 3–16 in Centres of
Learning: Learning and Location in Pre-modern Europe and the Near
East. Edited by Jan Willem Drijvers and Alasdair A. MacDonald. Brill’s
Studies in Intellectual History. Leiden: Brill.
———. 1996a. “Disputations.” COS 1.180–183:575–88.
———. 1996b. “De Heilige Lugalbanda.” Phoenix 42.1:35–53.
———. 1997. “Why Did Enki Organize the World?” Pages 117–34 in
Sumerian Gods and Their Representations. Edited by I. L. Finkel and
M. J. Geller. Groningen: Styx.
———. 1998a. Helden en goden van Sumer: Een keuze uit de heroïsche en
mythologische dichtkunst van het Oude Mesopotamië. Nijmegen: SUN.
Bibliography
171

———. 1998b. “Reflections on the Dream of Lugalbanda: A Typological
and Interpretative Analysis of LH 322–365.” Pages 397–412 in Intellec-
tual Life of the Ancient Near East: Papers Presented at the 43rd
Rencontre Assyriologique Internationale, Prague, July 1–5, 1996.
Edited by Jirí Prosecky´. Prague: Oriental Institute.
———. 2000. “A Meeting of Cultures? Rethinking the ‘Marriage of Martu.’”
Pages 461–74 in Languages and Cultures in Contact: At the Crossroads
of Civilisations in the Syro-Mesopotamian Realm. Edited by K. Van Ler-
berghe and G. Voet. OLA 96. Leuven: Peeters.
———. 2002a. Het Epos van Gilgamess. Nijmegen: SUN.
———. 2002b. “Sanctus Lugalbanda.” Pages 259–89 in Riches Hidden in
Secret Places: Ancient Near Eastern Studies in Memory of Thorkild
Jacobsen. Edited by Tzvi Abusch. Winona Lake, Ind. Eisenbrauns.
———. 2003. “The Old Babylonian Literary Canon: Structure, Function and
Intention.” Pages 1–28 in Cultural Repertoires: Structure, Function,
and Dynamics. Edited by G. Dorleijn and Herman L. J. Vanstiphout.
Groningen Studies in Cultural Change 3. Leuven: Peeters.
Veldhuis, Niek. 1997. “Elementary Education in Nippur: The Lists of Trees
and Wooden Objects.” Diss., Rijksuniversiteit Groningen.
———. 2001. “The Solution of the Dream: A New Interpretation of Bil-
games’ Death.” JCS 53:133–48.
Westenholz, Joan Goodnick. 1997. Legends of the Kings of Akkade: The
Texts. Mesopotamian Civilizations 7. Winona Lake, Ind.: Eisenbrauns:.
Weissbach, F. 1934. “Enmekar.” RlA 2:395.
Wilcke, Claus. 1969. Das Lugalbandaepos. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
———. 1987. “Lugalbanda.” RlA 7:117–32.
Zólyomi, Gábor. 1995. “Speaking Cow or Mooing Sorcerer? A Note on
Enmerkar and Ensuhkeshdanna l. 173–4 (186–7).” NABU 3.
172
Epics of Sumerian Kings

Glossary
The following glossary provides information on geographical names,
divine names, proper names, and Sumerian terms used within this volume.
A greater-than sign (>) indicates a cross-reference to another listing in the
glossary; capitals are used when an exact reading is unknown or in doubt.
a-ankara. Unidentified weapon of >Inana.
Abzu. Sweet-water “ocean” beneath the earth; abode and realm of >Enki.
Akalag. An otherwise unknown region called the “meadows of >Dumuzid”;
apparently very good pastureland.
Akkad. Northern part of Babylonia.
Ama-u¡umgalana. Name or epithet of >Dumuzid.
An. Supreme god. City god of >Unug, together with >Inana.
An¡an. Region in southwestern Iran; stage on the road to >Aratta in ELA
and LB II.
Anuna. Collective name for the great gods.
Ansigaria. Chancellor of >Aratta in EE.
Anzud. Lion-faced mythical bird; guardian of the mountain ranges
between >Sumer and >Aratta. See also IM.DUGUD.
Aratta. Unknown, probably mythical, city supposedly situated beyond the
Zagros Range to the east of >Sumer; known only from literary references,
where it is consistently said to be under the aegis of >Inana.
A.RU. Reading and meaning unknown. Possibly it is the Akkadian word
aru “leaf (of the date palm).”
Aruru. One of the great gods; goddess of childbirth.
buru-az. Precise meaning unknown; a kind of bird.
Dilmun. Present-day island of Bahrain; over long periods the main tran-
shipment area for Mesopotamian maritime trade; in other traditions the
place where culture originated.
173

Dumuzid. Shepherd god; legendary ruler over >Unug; lover and husband
of >Inana, later betrayed by her. See also Ama-ussumgalana.
Eana. Main temple (of >Inana) in >Unug.
Egara. Palace of >Enmerkar in EE.
Egipara. See Gipar.
Enki. God of wisdom, cleverness, and technical invention; city god of
>Eridug.
Enlil. Chairman/leader of the divine government.
Ensuhgirana. Lord of >Aratta in EE.
Enun. A shrine in >Eridug.
Ere¡. City in the neighborhood of >Unug, dedicated to >Nisaba.
Eridug. City in the extreme south of >Sumer, then at the edge of the
Persian Gulf; city of >Enki.
e¡da. A type of metal containers for liquids.
Euphrates. Westernmost of the Twin Rivers; >Unug is on the Euphrates.
Ezagina. Palace of >Ensuhgirana in EE.
gamgam. A kind of domestic fowl; possibly chicken or guinea-fowl.
Ge¡tinana. Goddess of wine.
Gipar. Room (bridal chamber?) in the >Egara at >Unug and the >Ezagina
at >Aratta; also >Egipara.
girin. Grass, herbs, flowers.
girsiga. Temple servant; low-ranking priest.
GI⁄.±E⁄. Exact reading unknown. A kind of fish, possibly mythical.
gizi-e¡ta. A kind of dough; possibly pastry dough.
Hamazi/u. Unknown city to the northeast of >Sumer.
ha¡ur. A type of tree, probably related to cedar and cypress.
hirin. A plant with long sprouts.
ildag. A type of wood.
ilu. A type of song.
IM.DUGUD. Spelling consistently used in our poems for >Anzud.
Although there is a broad consensus that the sign complex(es) used for
writing this name should be read as Anzud, I am convinced that in these
poems IM.DUGUD (“heavy cloud, storm cloud” and therefore with the
determinative [mu ss en] indicating a bird, “Thunderbird”) is what the
scribes intended us to “read” or “understand” also, as an underlying
metaphorical reading.
Inana. Goddess of war, strife, and sexual love; city goddess of >Unug and
>Aratta.
i¡ib. Purification priest.
I¡kur. God of storm and rain.
kalam. The term for “Land,” meaning civilized country, state, nation, and
ultimately Sumer.
KAL.KAL. A term in LB I line 456; reading and meaning unknown.
174
Epics of Sumerian Kings

kib. A waterfowl.
kin-tur. Unidentified kind of fish; it seems to feed on acorns!
Kulab. Often mentioned together with >Unug as twin cities. Probably
originally a part (temple quarter?) of Unug.
lahama. Protective spirits coming up from the >Abzu.
lidga. A type of container used as a liquid measure.
ligidba. Balm, oil.
Lugalbanda. Son of >Enmerkar. Hero of LB I and LB II.
Lulubi. Mountain range; part of the southern Zagros, in front of >Anssan;
possibly nearly identical to >Zabu.
lumah. Ecstatic.
Martu. (Semi)nomadic tribes living in the Syrian Desert along the middle
reaches of the >Euphrates; also their eponymous god.
Ma¡gula. Shepherd of >Nisaba in EE.
MES. Exact reading unknown; unidentified kind of tree.
gudu. High-ranking priest.
Namenatuma. Chancellor of >Unug in EE.
Nanna. Moon god.
NIM. Kind of lion.
Ningal. Wife of >Nanna.
Ninguenaka. See Ninkasi.
Ninhursag. Goddess of birthing and of the hills.
Ninkasi. Goddess of beer; also known (in LB II) as >Ninguenaka.
Ninlil. Wife of >Enlil.
NinTABKULIBIR. Otherwise unknown divinity who wields the sideral
battle-mace in LB I.
Nintud. Goddess of birth. Identical to >Aruru and sometimes to
>Ninhursaga.
Ninurta. God of warfare and husbandry.
Nirah. A snake god.
Nisaba. Goddess of grain, administration, and writing.
Nudimmud. Name/epithet of >Enki.
nu-gig. Sacred prostitute.
piri≠. A kind of lion.
Sagburu. Wise Woman (or good fairy?) in EE.
sagkal. (1) A kind of snake; precise meaning unknown; (2) a kind of stone.
Suen. Akkadian name for >Nanna.
suhur-ma¡. Unidentified kind of fish.
Sumer. Southern part of Babylonia.
⁄akkan. God of the animals of the plains.
¡ar. “Legion”; actually the number 36,000.
⁄ara. Son of >Inana.
¡atam. An official, usually responsible for trade.
Glossary
175

¡enu. An unidentified tree of which the leaves are browsed by buffaloes
and goats.
¡imgig. A type of wood, apparently aromatic.
⁄ubur. Region to the north and northeast of Babylonia.
¡ulhi. A kind of reed of which the leaves apparently are used for pack-
ing.
⁄u¡in. Region in southwestern Iran; between the Zagros and >Anssan. Its
central city was Susa.
Tigris. Easternmost of the Twin Rivers.
U. Precise reading uncertain; a marsh bird, possibly the pelican.
ug. A kind of lion.
Unug. >Sumerian name of the city otherwise known as Uruk, situated in
the south of >Sumer; capital city of >Sumer in the period referred to in the
stories translated here; ruled by Enmerkar. >Inana is the effective city god-
dess.
Ura¡. Goddess; in some traditions the wife >An; mother of >Nisaba.
Uredina. Shepherd of >Nisaba in EE.
Urgirnuna. The evil sorcerer in EE.
Utu. Sun god.
zabalum. A type of fir.
Zabu. Mountain region in the southern Zagros; see Lulubi; Zubi.
Zangara. God of dreams.
Zubi. Probably identical to >Zabu.
176
Epics of Sumerian Kings

