Epilogue: Bringing to the Boil
In a world of ambitious mathematicians, each vying to become the new
Archimedes, Evangelista Torricelli, born in Faenza, Italy, in , was
determined to out-Archimedes them all. The one book he published in his
short life (he died at age thirty-nine) is the Geometrical Works, a series of
mathematical marvels, some reproducing results from Archimedes, some
extending the spirit of Archimedes by measuring new curved ﬁgures.
Torricelli may have been the ﬁrst to measure the area of the cycloid, a ﬁgure
originally proposed by Galileo. (The seventeenth century was full of
Archimedes-like challenges; unlike in the third century , such challenges
tended to generate many responses, with many ensuing ﬁghts over prior-
ity.) He invented and measured his own – paradoxical – ﬁgure. Consider a
hyperbola, one of its asymptotes, and some perpendicular to that asymptote
cutting the hyperbola. The three taken together deﬁne an inﬁnitely long
ﬁgure that is widest at its base (the perpendicular) and keeps narrowing –
without ever reaching the zero width of a point – as it moves away from that
base. Rotate this ﬁgure around the asymptote, and you get an inﬁnitely long
solid, shaped rather like an inﬁnitely long, curved funnel. Torricelli mea-
sured the volume of this inﬁnite solid – which turned out to be, incredibly,
ﬁnite. Inﬁnite surface, ﬁnite volume! A new Archimedes, right there!
When they met in , Galileo took an immediate liking to Torricelli,
who stayed on as a member of Galileo’s household in the master’s last days.
Indeed, when Galileo died the year after, Torricelli was asked to stay in
Florence as the new court mathematician. Two years later, Geometrical
Works was published, and for the remaining three years of his life,
Torricelli was recognized as one of Europe’s leading mathematicians.
Only a single book published, but this was still the age of the intellectual
tournament. What mattered most was the letters, exchanged between
mathematicians, copied and recopied by hand. Archimedes changed his-
tory through a series of letters sent from Syracuse to Alexandria; Torricelli
would change history through a single letter sent from Florence to Rome.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

We keep going back to Florence, to Galileo. And here is yet another
puzzle, another challenge: Why does the water not budge? Pumps, after all,
could deliver water out of wells. They did so by creating a column of water
rising above the surface of the well, and when the top of the column was
tall enough, one could reach it and let the water spill sideways and so
collect it. But here’s the problem: engineers in Florence noted that such
columns of water were limited in height to about ten yards. Try any taller,
and the water would not budge, or the column might “break.” Thus, wells
could be used only up to a certain depth. A practical problem, posed to
Galileo by practical engineers, but also a good Archimedean question
because it involves the behavior of liquids. Surely an Archimedes mathe-
matician – freed of Aristotle’s false philosophy – could solve this?
Galileo’s ﬁrst eﬀorts were more anti-Aristotelian than Archimedean.
(His core idea had merit but was slightly beside the point: Aristotle,
so Galileo, was wrong in claiming that vacuum does not exist – so far,
so good – and vacuum, so again Galileo, exerts a certain force that is capable
of attracting water, the force limited to the height of ten meters. This is no
longer so good!) Torricelli had a better and more Archimedean account,
which he sent in a letter to his colleague in Rome, Michelangelo Ricci
(who then proceeded to copy and share the letter), on June , :
We live immersed at the bottom of a sea of elemental air, which by
experiment undoubtedly has weight, and so much weight that the densest
air in the neighborhood of the surface of the earth weighs about one four-
hundredth part of the weight of water.
The physical breakthrough is the recognition that air, in its place, has
positive weight (this would not be evident because one’s ﬁrst observation
– which even Galileo could not bring himself to deny – is that air’s tendency
is to move upward or, at the very least, to stay still, suggesting a negative or
zero weight). Once this recognition is achieved, air becomes akin to water,
and the mechanism of On Floating Bodies directly applies, which Torricelli
immediately conﬁrms by sharing a marvel (what we would think of as an
experiment). Take a narrow but sturdy glass tube with a single opening –
preferably, at least a meter long – and ﬁll it up with the heaviest liquid you
can get, which is mercury; have a big bowl, also ﬁlled with mercury, at hand.
(To have access to all of this, better be a court mathematician; Archimedes,
we recall – or so it was told – weighed silver and gold.) With your ﬁnger
pressed on the open end of the tube, immerse it in the bowl and turn it so
W. F. Magie, A Source-Book in Physics (Cambridge, : Harvard University Press, ), p. .
Epilogue: Bringing to the Boil

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

that it now stands upside down, with your ﬁnger at the bottom (prepare to
feel a good amount of pressure on your ﬁnger; it’s perhaps best to ask a
friend to do this for you). Now remove your ﬁnger.
The mercury level at the tube goes down, obviously: this is a liquid, after
all, and we know from Archimedes that liquids become stable only when
they are level. And so, we should expect the mercury to descend entirely
into the bowl. Not so! It goes down a little and then budges no further – a
stable column of mercury (we would say, seventy-six centimeters tall) that
prefers to stay inside the tube, even while it is completely free to descend.
The liquid achieves stability in an uneven position!
Think of it in the terms of Archimedes’s On Floating Bodies, and the
explanation is obvious: the mercury achieves stability when its adjacent
surfaces are equally pressured from above. Once we realize that the air has
weight and so exerts pressure, it becomes obvious that the column of
mercury should remain precisely at the height at which the weight of the
mercury is equal to the weight of a column of air of the same width. (It
does remain signiﬁcant, then, that the top of the tube, in this marvel, holds
a weightless vacuum, but it is not the vacuum that keeps the mercury up,
but rather – with a nice paradoxical twist – it is the surrounding air.)
AIR
PRESSURE
AIR
PRESSURE
MERCURY
LEVEL
ZERO
PRESSURE
Figure 

Epilogue: Bringing to the Boil
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

The logic of the water pump is now self-evident. The weight of ambient
air is about the same as a column of seventy-six centimeters of mercury,
and this is also the weight of about ten meters of water. The only function
of the mercury, in fact, is to allow one to do everything within easy human
grasp: the mercury does nothing that the water in the pump did not do
already. But exercised within human grasp, the marvel is more impressive,
and it spread across Europe like quicksilver. The thought quickly suggested
itself that if air was rare on mountaintops (as was long suspected), the level
of the mercury found there should be lower. Pascal, the French mathe-
matician, repeated the marvel at diﬀerent elevations: the level of the
mercury fell down as one kept climbing up. Perhaps the word marvel is
no longer ﬁtting: the ancient-like marvel, replicated, becomes the modern
experiment, in yet another of those vanishing tricks where repeating the
past somehow changes its meaning. Pascal, then, invented the barometer.
That the atmosphere has weight – and that Archimedes’s hydrostatics
applied to it – was no longer in any real doubt. It was , Torricelli
was already dead, and he had already set in motion the main trajectory of
modern history.
What follows is well known. Armed with the double realization that
() gases have weight and exert pressures, and () the production of void
(or, perhaps, near-void) is a practical possibility, many authors extend the
theory, and practice, of the pressure of gases. Several variations on a
particular design were even found, beginning in the late seventeenth
century, to be of practical use. Boil water and let the steam ﬁll a chamber
whose top is a movable piston. Allow a little cold water into the same
chamber, and as the steam quickly condenses, the chamber becomes nearly
empty. This means that the air above now exerts an enormous pressure
down on the piston that, as a consequence, moves down violently. Engage
that piston to a beam, and you can use the violent downward motion of
the piston to lift up a weight. (This is all rather like an upside-down
trebuchet.) Eventually this was known as the “Newcomen engine”
(Figure ), ﬁrst put to use in a British coal mine in (although,
to repeat, designs of this type were circulating between authors and
engineers for decades, now). The weight lifted by this ﬁrst Newcomen
engine – in this ﬁrst application and for many decades to come – was
water, pumped out to drain the mine. The machine, at this stage, still
belongs in the ﬁeld from which it emerged, of water technology.
Newcomen’s design was crude, as it were, the most direct application of
Torricelli’s marvel. There are many ineﬃciencies in the design, particularly
because of the rapid alternation of heat and cold in its main chamber.
Epilogue: Bringing to the Boil

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Improvements were gradually proposed and made, and ultimately, a
mathematically trained Scottish engineer, James Watt, introduced a vari-
ation on the same design: keep the main chamber at a ﬁxed temperature
and create a mechanism that makes the steam escape regularly – through
the same forces of gas pressure – into a separate condenser. In retrospect,
this was the way to do this. The new machine – what we now know simply
as the “steam engine” – produced considerably more power, and it was
quickly recognized that this power could be harnessed to any device
requiring force. There was no need to keep on just pumping mines. And
so the steam engine – no longer a hydraulic tool but, instead, a universal
source of energy – launched Britain, and then the entire planet, on the
course to exponential, technologically driven growth (unfortunately, at
least for its ﬁrst quarter millennium, one based on fossil fuels).
This brings us to the question of the place of Greek mathematics in
world history. The industrial revolution is the pivot separating the way
things were, in the past, from the way they are now. So it is signiﬁcant to
note the very real through line: from Archimedes to Torricelli, to
Newcomen, to Watt. It is tempting to propose a counterfactual history
where Archimedes dies not as an old man, in the Second Punic War, but as
a young man, in the ﬁrst. He never writes anything; the second generation
of Greek mathematics never takes oﬀ; there is no On Floating Bodies for
Commandino to republish in Latin, to inspire Galileo and Torricelli; no
letter to Ricci; Pascal gets excited by other things. There is no burst of
atmospheric-pressure designs in the late seventeenth century and, of
course, no application to the mines and so nothing to provoke Watt’s
curiosity. And then, our counterfactual continues: Britain, in the nine-
teenth century, is largely similar to what it has been in the eighteenth and
what the Netherlands were in the seventeenth – a remarkably sophisticated
and eﬀective commercial state, maximizing the potential of the premodern
economies without making the decisive break into modern technologies.
As such counterfactuals go, I would contend that this is a fairly reason-
able one, but its one main drawback is its emphasis on the speciﬁc route
leading from Archimedes’s On Floating Bodies, via Commandino and
Galileo, to the particular event of Torricelli’s letter to Ricci. This letter is
as important of a single event as one can think of in the history of science,
but it is still just a single event, and there were plenty of others throughout
the seventeenth century. There were even independent reﬂections and
experiments concerning the atmosphere and the void, and in general, there
was, throughout the century, lots of theoretical and experimental reﬂection
upon nature, of a scale unprecedented in previous history.

Epilogue: Bringing to the Boil
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

A ferment of creativity, not an isolated line of transmission. Indeed, the
steam engine does not depend on any speciﬁc result obtained by Greek
mathematicians (my argument is that it is ultimately inspired by an analogy
to an Archimedean result; beyond this analogy, all it takes, to make the
engine, is ingenuity). Surely other paths can be envisaged? There used to
be a time when British scholars, in particular, emphasized Watt’s identity
as an engineer – rather than a scientist – and saw in the industrial
revolution the reﬂection of a very wide rise in craft creativity and industrial
organization, speciﬁc to Britain of the time. In this telling of the industrial
revolution, science is almost irrelevant. Such an account is especially
attractive if one is interested primarily in the question, Why Britain?
Because, after all, the scientiﬁc revolution was a European event – taking
Figure 
Newcomen steam engine. Encyclopaedia Britannica/Universal Images
Group/Getty Images.
Epilogue: Bringing to the Boil

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

place in the network encompassing Torun, Copenhagen, Prague, Florence,
Leiden, Paris, and also Cambridge – whereas the industrial revolution was
almost entirely a British event. Thus, asking, Why Britain? almost forces
one to say: “Not because of science.” (And surely the answer to that
question has to do with other contingencies: speciﬁc social and political
arrangements, empire, coal.) But this merely serves to show that the
question, Why Britain? is, for many purposes, too insular. It was in
Britain that the water ﬁnally came to the boil, steam ﬁnally rose. But what
heated the water, almost all the way up – covering ninety-ﬁve of the one
hundred degrees – was European science.
Scholars nowadays tend to acknowledge that the industrial revolution
happened in an eighteenth century completely deﬁned by the experience
of the scientiﬁc revolution. Watt was not some tinkerer. Thanks to his
good mathematical understanding, he was employed as a mathematical
instrument maker at the University of Glasgow. The teaching of natural
philosophy in Glasgow involved scientiﬁc demonstrations, including the
working of a small model of a Newcomen engine. Watt was asked to repair
that model, and it was there – engaged with the study of a philosophical
instrument – that Watt conceived of his improvements. If tinkering it was,
it took place not at the mine face but at the university’s course of
mathematically inspired philosophy. This observation can be multiplied
many times over: the many tinkerers and inventors of the industrial
revolution breathed the air of the scientiﬁc revolution, either through their
own education or through their contacts in the wider society of the
scientiﬁc enlightenment. And in this way, the scientiﬁc revolution was,
after all, speciﬁcally British. It was Newton’s land; throughout the
Enlightenment, Europe as a whole would become Newtonian. Britain,
more than most.
And so, it bears repeating – as noted in the ﬁnal chapter of this book –
that the same counterfactual, told for Newton’s Principia, is quite robust.
Remove Greek mathematics. All it would take is a set of ﬁres, strategically
spread throughout the seventh century , burning perhaps a hundred
manuscripts or so (all that one then had of Greek mathematics?) – before
Arab Sultans began to seek their translations, before Byzantine scholars
began to restock their libraries.
Muslims and Christians, throughout the Middle Ages, would still
recover Greek philosophy (and might be intrigued by the tiny reports of
Greek science preserved there). But where would Newton’s Principia come
from? You cannot have a universal law of gravity without the combination
of Galileo’s parabola and Kepler’s ellipse, and you will have neither

Epilogue: Bringing to the Boil
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

without the conic sections, which the Middle Ages would never have come
up with on their own. We know this because no one else ever came up with
conic sections. And at an even more basic level, although there would be
lots of cosmological reﬂection and metaphysics, there would be no
Copernicus. No one would have constructed geometrical models and
calculated tables based on them without the particular Ptolemaic synthesis
of Babylon and Greece. We know this because no one else ever came up
with anything like this independently.
Perhaps, if all you do is remove On Floating Bodies, you might still end
up with Watt. But if you remove the entirety of Greek mathematics, you
certainly cannot get Newton’s Principia. It is extremely hard to conceive of
what form the intellectual ferment of Europe in the seventeenth century
then takes. But it should be borne in mind that throughout the same
generations as those of the scientiﬁc revolution, European minds were
ﬁxed upon such questions as the nature of the Eucharist and of predesti-
nation, no less and even more than they were ﬁxed on the nature of gases
and projectiles. A more purely metaphysical and theological seventeenth
century is completely conceivable. Without Greek mathematics, no one
would have been particularly interested in reading the book of nature in
the language of mathematics. Europeans might well have been content to
go on reading the book of God, instead. Horses, harnessed to water-lifting
machines, would continue to march in circles, right at the mouth of the
coal mine, no one suspecting that a great secret – the one that could have
spared all those horses – was lost forever, a thousand years before, by the
ﬁre that consumed Archimedes’s codex.
Historical causation is not a matter of absolutes. Perhaps, had there been
no Greek mathematics, aliens could have intervened to provide humans
with the steam engine. Or perhaps, had there been no Greek mathematics,
someone else in the centuries between Archimedes and Copernicus would
have invented something analogous to it instead. Historical causation, to
repeat, is not a matter of absolutes but of probabilities. The probability of
aliens handing humans the steam engine is very small indeed. The prob-
ability of someone else, in the centuries between Archimedes and
Copernicus, inventing something analogous to Greek mathematics is
deﬁnitely higher. But I think that the narrative of this book makes clear
that this, too, would not be very likely. Greek mathematics emerged under
quite speciﬁc conditions – Greek democracy and its debates and emphasis
on persuasion and proof; the encounter of science and philosophy in the
generation of Archytas; the moment of autonomous science in the gener-
ation of Archimedes. The historical combination giving rise to the
Epilogue: Bringing to the Boil

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

invention of Greek mathematics is precarious, and it is for a reason that
this particular invention is not replicated elsewhere. The probability, then,
is that without the seeds of Greek mathematics – the seeds sown by
Archytas and Archimedes – the scientiﬁc revolution, hence the industrial
revolution, would have been, at the very least, signiﬁcantly delayed.
There are many legitimate questions to ask about why the industrial
revolution happened. As noted, many scholars in the past were especially
interested in the speciﬁc question of why it took place in Britain: this
particular contingency shaped much of the history of the long nineteenth
century and beyond. There are plenty of other questions to be asked, at
diﬀerent levels of speciﬁcity, looking at diﬀerent historical parameters. For
certain purposes, it is interesting to understand even more speciﬁc ques-
tions – for instance, why did Boulton and Watt end up setting shop in
Birmingham of all places (this, too, has important consequences for the
history of the British Isles). The causal thread pursued here, looking back
from the industrial revolution to the scientiﬁc revolution and then to
Greek mathematics, is in part an answer to a much wider question: why
the industrial revolution took place in the Mediterranean region of the
world. This means, in practice, that I suggest a rather obvious answer to
Needham’s question (noted on p. ). Europe, rather than India or
China, produced the scientiﬁc revolution because, unlike the other
major civilizations, Europe had the resources of Greek mathematics.
This seems as safe of a causal statement as one could ever hope to make
in intellectual history.
This, however, does not touch on the more diﬃcult question as to why
the scientiﬁc revolution took place in Europe and not in the Islamic world.
For this, perhaps two observations – both noted earlier – matter most.
() The European scientiﬁc renaissance was part of a broader literary
renaissance, and it was much more natural in a Latin-speaking world,
whose literary canon was formed in Greco-Roman antiquity, than in the
Arab- or Persian-speaking worlds, whose literary canons were distinct.
() Europe, for reasons explained best by Scheidel, always possessed a
more pluralistic system, with massive consequences for the possibility
of a renaissance to begin and then take hold. (In particular, it was less
dependent on the institution of the court, which, at the crucial moment, in
the Islamic world, seems almost to have lost interest in science.) But to be
fair, this particular question – why Europe and not Islam – is not easily
answered by a “History of Greek Mathematics.” It was here that Europe
and Islam most neatly converged, after all.

Epilogue: Bringing to the Boil
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

In fact, it is perhaps better to concentrate on a diﬀerent question
altogether. When we note that Watt’s steam engine became functional
in Birmingham in , this may give rise, as noted, to a series of
concentric questions, each legitimate in its own way: Why Birmingham?
Why Britain? Why Europe? Why the Greater Mediterranean? And the
narrative of this book here answers best, I suggest, the last and widest one.
But to conclude, I want to recall another, no less interesting question:
Why ? At ﬁrst glance, this appears like a tough question for my book:
is a full two millennia later than Archimedes! But in fact, it is this
question that the narrative of this epilogue, speciﬁcally, answers best. Watt’s
engine became functional in because Newcomen’s engine was
deployed in , in turn because Torricelli’s letter directed scientists to
look for atmospheric eﬀects, starting in , ﬁnally because Archimedes’s
On Floating Bodies became available through Commandino’s translation in
. And more broadly: there was a scientiﬁc renaissance, in the strict
sense, throughout the sixteenth century, as the ancient works became
available again. This gave rise, throughout the seventeenth century, to what
is known as the scientiﬁc revolution, which, in the eighteenth century, made
the industrial revolution possible. Once again: perhaps a diﬀerent route
might have presented itself, otherwise. But as it were, it was the sixteenth
century that started us on our route to where we are now. And we can see, at
the end of this history, that it did so, above all, through its rediscovery
of Archimedes.
Epilogue: Bringing to the Boil

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108982801.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

